Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


XI 


T  H  E 


3j|ijtr<rtr(rlit 


akiftt»^U 


SERMONS  PREACHED  AND  REVISED 


BV 


C.    H.    SPURGEON, 


DURING  THE  YEAR  1879. 


VOL.  xxv;-. 


•  •     • 

•  • »   t 


•     •  •  • 


» '    •    » 


London : 

PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  4,  PATERNOSTER  BU1L1)IN(;S. 


ENTERED   AT   STATIONERS     HALL, 

1880. 


the:  KEW  YORK 

PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

8109.00 

ASIOR,  LENOX  AND 
TILDE.N  FOUNDATIONS 

R  J916  L 


LONDON : 

I'ABDMOBE  AND  ALAfiAflTEB,  STEAM  PRINTEBS, 

LITTLE   BSTTAIN,   B.C. 


•  •  •     • 

«        •   ••• 

•  •  *     • 

•  ■  •  •   *  •  • 


•  •  • 


•  -•' 


•  •  •  •  •  • 
•  •     •  • 

•  •    •• •  • 


A 


TO 

THE  ONE  GOD  OF  HEAVEN  AND  EARTIT, 
/  IN 

THE     TRINITY    OF    HIS    SACRED    PERSONS, 

BE  ALL   HONOUR   AND  GLORY, 

WORLD  WITHOUT  END, 

AMEN. 

TO  THE  GLORIOUS  FATHER,  AS  THE  COVENANT  GOD 

OF  ISRAEL ; 

TO  THE  GRACIOUS  SON,  THE  REDEEMER  OF  HIS  PEOPLE; 

TO  THE  HOLY  GHOST,  THE  AUTHOR  OF 
SANCTIFICATION  ; 

BE  EVERLASTING  PRAISE  FOR  THAT  GOSPEL  OF  THE 

FREE  GRACE  OF  GOD 


•       ■'        - 


-       •*       rf     V 


HEREIN  PROCLAIMED  UNTjQ  MEN. 


• 

'         ••• 

•     • 

•      «      • 

•  •• 

9     # 

• 

•   t 

•    •     • 

'     • 

•  a 

'• 

•            ■ 

•  • 

•  ••   • 

•  f 

*   * 

•   • 

» 

•             • 

• 

•  •  •• 

• 

•      ■ 

• 

•         ••• 

• 

•     • 

•  •« 

'": : 

• 

«•  ■  •     • 

,•• 

• 

•     •  •     • 

•    • 

« 

•  ••  •     • 

>  • 

• 

• 

•     •  ■     • 

• 

•••  • 

•  •  • 

•»•   •  • 

• 

• 

•  -•• 

■ 

-»•  ■  •• 

•       « 

4 

•  "    • 

•  • 

k       1 

.•         •.- 

•  • 

•       1 

•      •  • 

•  •  • 

•  •  •     • 

• 

•     •    • 

•       • •    •  *• 

•    »   •!■ 

CONTENTS. 


No. 


1,451 


r  "  This  Year  Also  " 

**  This  year  also.*' — Luke  xiii.  8. 

The  GoYenant  Pleaded 

"Have  respect  unto  the  covenant." — Psalm  Ixxiv.  20. 

f  The  Sick  Man  Left  Behind     ...  

«  But  Trophimus  have  I  left  at  Miletum  sick."— 2  Timothy  iv.  20. 

The  Rider  on  the  White  Horse  and  the  Annies  with  Him 

"  And  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white  horse ;  and  he  that 
■at  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True,  and  in  righteousness  he 
doth  judge  and  make  war.  llis  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  on  his 
1,452  \  ^^^  yrwe  many  crowns ;  and  he  had  a  name  written,  that  no  man  knew, 
but  he  himself.  And  he  was  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood :  and 
his  name  is  called  The  Word  of  God.  And  the  armies  which  were  in 
heaven  followed  him  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and 
clean.  And  out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp  sword,  that  with  it  he  should 
smite  the  nations :  and  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron :  and  he 
treadeth  the  wine-press  of  the  fierceness  and  wrath  of  Almighty  God. 
And  he  hath  on  his  vesture  and  on  his  thigh  a  name  written,  KING  OF 
KINGS,  AND  LORD  OF  LORDS."— Revelation  xix.  11— 1«. 

1,453  Eternal  Faithfnlness  Unaffected  by  Hnman  Unbelief     ... 

**  If  we  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself." — 
2  Timothy  ii.  13. 

^  The  Empty  Seat 

**  David*s  place  was  empty." — 1  Samuel  xx.  27. 


1,454 


The  Poor  Man's  Prayer 

**  Remember  me,  0  Lord,  with  the  favour  that  thou  bearest  unto  thy 
people :  0  visit  me  with  thy  salvation ;  that  I  may  see  see  the  good  of 
thy  chosen,  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  gladness  of  thy  nation,  that  I  may 
glory  with  thine  inheritance.'* — Psalm  cvi.  4,  5. 

1.455  Every  Man's  Necessity      

"  Ye  must  be  bom  again.'* — John  iii.  7. 

1.456  Peace:  a  Fact  and  a  Feeling         

'* Therefore  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through 
our  Xiord  Jesus  Chriut." — Romans  v.  1. 


Page 
1 


5 


13 


1 


25 


37 


41 


49 


61 


TI 


CONTENTS. 


N(.. 


1,457  i 


The  Numbered  People 

**  According  to  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they  were  numbered  by 
the  hand  of  Moees,  ever>*  one  according  to  his  service,  and  according;  to 
hifi  burden :  thus  were  they  numbered  of  hiro,  n«  the  Lord  commanded! 
Moses." — Numbers  iv.  41». 


Pagf 
7a 


Seekers  Directed  and  Encouraged  

*'  And  ye  shall  seek  me,  and  find  me,  when  ye  shaU  search  for  me  with 
^  all  your  heart." — Jeremiah  xxix.  LS. 


i  4 


1,458  A  Sermon  upon  One  Nothing  by  another  Nothing 

"  Though  I  be  nothing-"— 2  Corinthians  xii.  11. 


85 


(  Satan's  Punctuality,  Power,  and  Purpose 


1,459  i 


"  Then  cometh  the  devil,  and  taketh  away  the  word  out  of  their  heartei, 
lest  they  should  believe  and  be  saved." — T^uke  viii.  1*2. 

The  Dual  Nature  and  the  Duel  Within  

"  But  I  see  another  law  in  my  members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my 
mind,  and  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  my 
membors." — Romans  vii.  23. 


97 


101 


1,46(1  The  Meat  and  Drink  of  the  New  Nature 

*^  For  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood  is  dnnk  iiideecL" — John 
vi.  o^ 

The  Seren  Sneezes         

*'  The  child  sneezed  seven  times."— 2  Kiu^  iv.  .'>l. 


101^ 


121 


1,4C1  ' 


Eyes  Opened       

**  And  God  opened  her  eyes." — Genesis  xxL  11'. 


i2?r> 


1,462  The  Yoke  Removed  and  the  Lord  Revealed 


13ii 


^  They  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  when  I  have  broken  the  bauds  of 
their  yoke.'' — Ezekiel  xxxiy.  27. 


The  Boes  and  the  Hinds  145^ 

*'  By  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field." — Solomon's  Song  ii.  7. 


1,463  j  The  Rising  Sun 

i        *^  But  you  that  fear  my  name  shall  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise  with 
healing  in  bis  wings ;  and  ye  shall  go  forth,  and  grow  up  as  calves  of 
f  stall*'— Malachi  iv.  2. 


141> 


N 


CONTENTS.  vii 

Ka  Page 

A  Befreshing  Promise 157 

I  will  water  it  every  moment." — Isaiah  xxvii.  o. 


u 


The  Son  Glorified  bj  the  Father  and  the  Father  Glori- 
1,464  j  fiedbytheSon        1G3 

'*  These  words  spake  Jesus,  and  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  said, 
1,465    I    Father,  the  hour  is  come ;  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may  glorify 
thee," — John  xvii.  1. 

The  Royal  Prerogative 171 

**  See  now  that  I,  even  I,  am  ho,  and  there  is  no  god  with  me ;  I  kill, 
and  I  make  alive ;  I  wound,  and  I  heal." — Deuteronomy  xxxii.  30. 

1,466  The  Three  Whats 181 

**  The  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  enlightened ;  that  ye  may  know 
what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  in- 
heritance in  the  saints,  and  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power 
to  US-ward  who  believe,  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power, 
which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  set 
him  at  his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places." — Ephesians  i.  18 — 20. 

f  The  Oil  and  the  Vessels 193 

^'  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  vessels  were  full,  that  she  said  unto 
her  son,  Bring  mc  yet  a  vessel.  And  he  said  unto  her,  There  is  not  a 
vessel  more.    And  the  oil  stayed." — 2  Kings  iv.  6. 


1,467 


Two  Sorts  of  Hearers 197 

**  But  be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers  only,  deceiving  your 
own  selves.  For  if  any  be  a  hearer  of  the  word,  and  not  a  doer,  he  is 
like  unto  a  man  beholding  his  natural  face  in  a  glass :  For  he  beholdeth 
himself  and  goeth  his  way,  and  straightway  forgetteth  what  manner  of 
man  he  was.  But  whoso  looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  and  con- 
tinueth  therein,  he  being  not  a  foi-getful  hearer,  but  a  doer  of  the  work, 
this  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed.** — James  L  22 — 25 

1.468  The  Philosophy  and  Propriety  of  Abundant  Praise         ...       205 

«>  They  shall  abundantly  utter  the  memory  of  thy  great  goodnesB,  and 
Bhall  fling  of  thy  righteousness." — Psalm  cxlv.  7. 

1.469  Prayer  Perfnmed  with  Praise        217 

"  In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your 
requests  be  made  known  unto  God." — Fhilippians  iv.  6. 

1.470  A  Question  for  Heart-Hearted  Hearers 221^ 

**  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock  ?  will  one  plough  there  with  oxen  ?  " — 
Amos  vi.  12. 

1.471  Concealing  the  Words  of  God       ..      241 

'*  I  have  not  concealed  the  words  of  the  Holy  One." — Job  vi.  10. 

1.472  The  Glory,  Unity,  and  Triumph  of  the  Church 253 

'*  And  the  glory  which  thou  gavest  me  I  have  given  them ;  that  they 
may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one:  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may 
be  made  perfect  in  one ;  and  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent 
me,  and  hast  loved  them  as  thou  hast  loved  me." — John  xvii.  22-3. 


via  CONTENTS. 

No.  Page 

1.473  Forts  Demolished  and  Priaoners  Taken 265 

^^  Casting  down  imaginations,  and  every  high  thing  that  exaltoth  itself 
against  the  knowledge  of  Gk>d,  and  bringing  into  captivity  every  thought 
to  the  obedience  of  Christ** — 2  Corinthiiins  x.  5. 

1.474  The  Middle  Passage  277 

-*  0  Lord,  I  hftve  heard  thy  speech,  and  was  afraid ;  0  Lord,  revive  thy 
work  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known ;  in 
wrath  remember  mercy/' — Habakkuk  iii.  2. 

1.475  Crowning  Blessings  ascribed  to  Ood        ..      289 

**  Thon  crownest  the  year  with  thy  goodness.*' — Psalm  Ixv.  11. 

1.476  Jesns  the  Jndge      301 

'^  And  he  commanded  us  to  preach  unto  the  people,  and  to  testify  that 
it  is  he  which  was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the  Judge  of  quick  and  d^d.'* — 
Acts  X.  42. 

1.477  Jesns  Admired  in  them  that  Believe        313 

^'  When  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in 
all  them  that  believe  (because  our  testimony  among  you  was  believed)  in 
that  day.**— >2  Thessalonians  L  10. 

1.478  Greater  things  yet.    Who  shall  see  them  ?  325 

*^  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Because  I  said  unto  thee,  I  saw 
thee  under  the  fig  tree,  believest  thou  ?  thou  shalt  see  greater  things  than 
these.  And  he  saith  unto  him,  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  Hereafter  ye 
shall  see  heaven  open,  and  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending  upon 
the  Son  of  man.*' — John  i.  50,  51. 

1.479  The  Work  of  Grace  the  Warrant  for  Obedience 837 

^  He  that  made  me  whole,  the  same  said  unto  me,  Take  up  thy  bed  and 
walk.** — John  v.  11. 

1.480  Constant,  Instant,  Expectant        349 

^*  Continuing  instant  in  prayer.** — ^Bomans  xii.  12. 

1.481  The  Red  Heifer      •        361 

*'  For  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprink- 
ling the  unclean,  sanctifleth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh :  how  much  more 
shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself 
without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the 
living  God?**— Hebrews  ix.  18, 14. 

1.482  Onr  Change  of  Masters      373 

"  Being  then  made  free  from  sin,  ye  became  the  servants  of  righteous- 
ness.**— Romans  vi  18. 

1.483  The  Present  Crisis 885 

*'  I  will  go  and  [return  to  my  place,  till  they  acknowledge  their  o£fence, 
and  seek  my  face :  in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  early.** — ^Hosea  v.  15. 

'"r  Motto  •••        ...         ...         ...        ...         ...         ...       397 

With  good  will  doing  service,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men.'* — 


lesians  vi.  i . 


I 


CONTENTS.  ix 

No.  Page 

1.485  The  Withered  Hand  409 

^*  And,  beholdf'there  was  a  man  which  had  liis  baud  withered  ,  .  .  . 
Then  saith  he  to  the  man.  Stretch  forth  thine  hand.  And  he  stretched  it 
forth ;  and  it  was  restored  whole,  like  as  the  other." — Matthew  xii.  10, 13. 

1.486  The  Shame  and  Spitting  f 421 

"  I  gave  my  hack  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  phicked  off 
the  hair :  I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting." — Isaiah  L  6. 

1.487  The  Prophet  like  nnto  Moses        433 

**The  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  Prophet  from  the  midst  of 
thee,  of  thy  brethren,  like  unto  me:  nnto  him  ye  shall  hearken;  accoidiog 
to  all  that  thou  desiredst  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  Horeb  in  the  day  of  the 
assembly,  saying,  Let  mo  not  hear  again  the  voice  of  the  Lord  my  God, 
neither  let  me  see  this  great  fire  any  more,  that  I  die  not  And  the  Lord 
said  unto  me,  They  have  well  spoken  that  which  th(>y  have  spoken.  I  will 
raise  them  up  a  Prophet  from  among  their  brethren,  like  unto  thee,  and 
win  put  my  words  in  his  mouth;  and  he  shall  speak  unto  tliem  all  that 
I  shall  command  him.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whosoever  will  not 
hearken  unto  my  words  which  he  shall  speak  in  my  name,  I  will  re<|uire  it 
of  him." — Deuteronomy  xviii.  15—19. 

1.488  More  and  More,  or  Less  and  Less 445 

*'  For  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more 
abundance:  but  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken  away  even 
that  he  hath.*'- Matthew  xiii.  12. 

1.489  The  Plagne  of  the  Heart 457 

^  What  prayer  and  supplication  soever  be  made  by  any  man,  or  by  all 
thy  people  Israel,  which  shall  know  every  man  the  plague  of  his  own  heart, 
and  spread  forth  his  hands  towards  this  house :  then  hear  thou  in  heaven 
thy  dwelling  place,  and  foi^v«,  and  do,  and  give  to  every  man  according 
to  his  ways,  whose  heart  thou  knowest;  (for  thou,  even  thou  only, 
knowest  the  hearts  of  all  the  children  of  men ;)  that  they  may  fear  thee 
an  the  days  that  they  live  in  the  land  which  thou  gavest  unto  our  fathers.** 
—1  Kings  viii.  38—40. 

1.490  Contention  Ended  and  Grace  Reigning 469 

"For  I  will  not  contend  for  ever,  neither  will  I  be  always  wroth;  for 
the  spirits  should  fail  before  me,  and  the  souls  which  I  have  made.  For 
the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  was  I  wroth,  and  smote  him :  I  hid  me, 
and  was  wroth,  and  he  went  on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart.  I  have 
seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him :  I  will  lead  him  also,  and  restore  comforts 
unto  him  and  to  his  mourners."  —Isaiah  Ivii.  16 — IK 

1.491  Remember  Lot's  Wife        481 

^^Bemomber  Lot*s  wife.*' — Luke  xvii.  32. 

1.492  The  First  Note  of  My  Song  493 

"Who  forgiveth  aU  thine  iniquities."— Psalm  ciii.  8. 

1.493  The  Glory  of  God  in  the  Face  of  Jesus  Christ     505 

**For  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  hath 
shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of 
God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ'*— 2  Corinthians  iv.  0. 


X  CONTENTS. 

No.  Page 

1.494  The  Oae  Foandation         517 

**  For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus 
ChriflL" — 1  Connthians  iii.  11. 

1.495  The  King-Priest 529 

**  He  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne ;  and  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his 
throne :  and  the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both." — Zechariah 
vil3. 

1.496  Among  Lions  541 

*^My  soul  is  among  lions." — Psalm  Ivii.  4. 

1.497  Self-righteonsness, — a  Smonldering  Heap  of  Rubbish    ...       553 

'^  Which  say,  Stand  by  thyself,  come  not  near  to  me;  for  I  am  holier 
than  thou.  These  are  a  smoke  in  my  nose,  a  fire  that  bometh  all  the 
day."— Isaiah  Ixy.  5. 

1.498  Mistrust  of  God  deplored  and  denounced  565 

"  How  long  will  it  be  ere  they  believe  me  ?" — Numbers  xiv.  11. 

1.499  The  Teaching  of  the  Foot-washing  577 

*^  Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  his  hands,  and 
that  he  was  come  from  God,  and  went  to  God ;  he  riseth  from  supper,  and 
laid  aside  his  garments ;  and  took  a  towel,  and  girded  himself.  After  that 
he  poureth  water  into  a  bason,  and  began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and 
to  wipe  them  with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was  girded." — John  xiii.  3 — 5. 

1.500  Number  1,500,  or  Lifting  up  the  Brazen  Serpent  ...       589 

"  And  Moses  made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  put  it  upon  a  pole,  and  it  came 
to  pass,  that  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent 
of  brass,  he  lived." — Numbers  xxi.  9. 

1.501  Refuges  of  Lies  and  what  will  become  of  them 601 

''  Judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet : 
and  the  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of  lies,  and  the  waters  shall  over- 
flow the  hiding  place.*' — Isaiah  xxviii.  17. 

1.502  Satan  in  a  Rage      613 

"■  Woe^  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  and  of  the  sea !  for  the  devU  is 
come  down  unto  you,  having  great  wrath,  because  he  knoweth  that  he 
hath  bat  a  short  time." — Bevelation  xii.  12. 

1.503  How  to  Read  the  Bible      625 

*'  Have  ye  not  read  ? Have  ye  not  read  ? If  ye  had 

known  what  this  meaneth."— Matthew  xii.  3 — 7. 


CONTENTS. 


Na 

1,504  The  DromedarieB 

**  Jodah  and  Israal  were  many,  u  the  sand  which  it  by  the  sea  in  mul- 
titade,  eating  and  drinking,  and  making  merry.  And  Solomon  reigned 
over  all  kingdoms  from  the  river  unto  the  land  of  the  Philiatinea,  and  unto 
the  border  of  Egypt :  they  brought  presenta,  and  aerved  Solomon  all  the 
days  of  his  life.  And  Solomon^s  provision  for  one  day  was  thirty  measures 
of  fine  flour,  and  threescore  measures  of  meal.  Ten  fat  oxen,  and  twenty 
oxen  ont  of  the  pastures,  and  an  hundred  sheep,  besides  harts,  aud  roebucks, 
and  fallowdeer,  and  fatted  fowl.  For  he  had  dominion  over  all  the  region 
on  this  side  the  river,  from  Tiphsah  even  to  Aziah,  over  all  the  kings  on 
this  side  the  river :  and  he  had  peace  on  all  sides  round  about  him.  And 
Judah  and  Israel  dwelt  safely,  every  man  under  his  vine  and  under  his 
fig-tree,  from  Dan  even  to  Beer-sheeba,,  all  the  days  of  Solomon.  And 
Solomon  had  forty  thousand  stalls  of  horses  for  his  chariots,  and  twelve 
thousand  horsemen.  And  those  oiBoers  provided  victual  for  King  Solomon, 
and  for  all  that  came  unto  King  Solomon's  table,  every  man  in  his  month  : 
they  lacked  nothing.  Barley  also  and  straw  for  the  horses  and  drome- 
daries brought  they  uuto  the  place  where  the  officers  were,  every  man 
according  to  his  charge."—!  Kings  iv.  20—28. 


Pago 

637 


1,505  Prayer  to  God  in  Troable  an  Acceptable  Sacrifice 


••• 


"  And  call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble ;  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thon 
Shalt  gknrify  me."-  Psalm  I.  15. 


1,508  The  PhiloBophy  of  Promise 


••  • 


"New  things  do  I  declare :  before  they  spring  forth  I  tell  yon  of  them.*' 
Isaiah  xUL  9. 


649 


1.506  Choice  Comfort  for  a  Young  Believer      661 

**  The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  ooncemeth  me ;  thy  meroy,  O  Lord, 
endureth  for  ever:  forsake  not  the  works  of  thine  own  hands.** — Psalm 
cxxxviii.  8. 

1.507  Sonl  Saving  Oar  One  Basiness 673 

'*  I  am  made  all  things  to  ali  men,  that  I  might  by  all  means  save  some.** 
— I  Coriuthians  ix.  22. 


685 


1,509  ^ 


The  Best  of  All  Sights 

"But  we  see  Jesus.** — Hebrews  ii.  9. 

The  Hanger-Bite  

*^  His  strength  shall  be  hunger-bitten.'*-^ob  zviii.  12. 


697 


702    ^ 


INDEX    OF    SCRIPTURE   TEXTS. 


VOLUME    XXV. 


•  •  •  •  •< 


t  •  •  •  • 


•  •  •  •  * 


GENESIS. 
Chap.  &  Vcrae 

aAIc    X tf     •■•         •••         •••         ••«        •••         *** 

NUMBEUS. 

iv.  49 
xiv.  11  ... 

A^I.     «*  ••.  •••  •••  .••  "■• 

DEUTEIIONOMY. 

xviii.  l»i-19 

xxxii.  3U        

I.  SAMUEL. 

•2^x.  27    ••     •••     ••' 

I.  KINGS. 

iv.  20-28        •••     •«•     •»•     • 

viii.  38-40      ... 

II.  KINGS. 

IV.  Ct        •••  •••  •••  •••  •••  ••• 

iv.  34      «<•     •••     •••     •••     

JOB. 

xviii.  12 

vi.  10     ...     ■••     

PSALMS. 

I.  15 

Ivii.  4  ... 
Ixv.  11  ... 
Ixxiv.  20 

<!111.  *j       •••       •••       •••       ••• 

cvi.  4,  6 

cxxxviii.  8    

cxlv.  7 

SOLOMON'S  SONG, 
ii.  7 

ISAIAH. 

XXVll.  iJ • 

xxviii.  17 
xlii.  9 
1.  6  ... 

Ivii.  1<»-18     ... 

Ixv,  o     ...     ...     • 

JEREMIAH. 

XXIX.  X.I •     ...     *•■     ...     ••• 

^  EZEKIEL. 

xxxiv.  *7       ...      ...      •••      •••     ••• 

llOSEA. 

V.  lo        ...      ...      *••      •••      **■      '** 

AMOS. 

VI.  x^      ..•      •••      •••      •••      "*•      ••• 

HABAKKUK. 


Piige 
125 


73 

589 


433 
171 


...     ... 

•  .*     • .  • 
...     ... 


I.  a*.  •••  ••.  ••• 


«.• 


■ «•  ••* 


»  .    .  .  .  4 


II.  .  .< 


. 


».  ...  ...  ... 


37 


037 
457 

193 
121 


702 
241 


649 
.541 
289 
.'i 
493 
41 
661 
205 


145 

157 
(>01 
685 
421 
469 
553 

mm 

i  4 

133 

386 
229 
277 


ZECHAUIAH. 
Chap.  &  Vcme. 
vi.  13 


!••  *    •• 


•   •  •  •   ■    • 


»   •  ■   < 


•  ■••  •••  •• 


MALACHL 
MATTHEW. 

XII*  O* i     •■•        •••        •••        «••        ••• 

X 1 1  •    J. U|   X«i  ■•«        •■•        •■• 

*  *  *  *      1  o 

Xllla      1  *rf       •••  ■••  ««•  «••  *■• 

LUKE. 

Vlllc      1  arf         •••  ••■  •••  •••  ••* 

•  *  •    o 

jLllla  O       •••      ■••      •••      •••      ••• 

?CV11»    %Mm  •••  •••  •••  •••  ••• 

JOHN. 

1  •     O  Vf     iJlft»a  ■••  •■•  *••  ••* 

**  *       mm 

III.  4 

V.  11 

vi.  55 

...   ^  ^ 
XIII.  .J' o...     •*•     ...      ...     ••.      .. 

XVll.  1      ...       ••.       ...      ..*      «..      .. 

XVll.  £<t^  A*t     «•■       ...       ...       ...       •• 

ACTS. 

X.  4^  ...       ...        •••         .<       ...       *• 

ROMANS. 

..X...         •..        ...        ...        ...         ...        .. 

VI.  lo        ,..       .•■       ...       ..•       •*•       *• 

Vtl.    Xi<i         ,,a  ...  ...  ...  ••*  .. 

Xll.  \Zi    ..•     ...     ...     ••«     ...     .. 

I.  CORINTHIANS, 
iii.  11 
ix.  22 

II.  CORINTHIANS, 
iv.  6 
x.  5 
xii.  11    ... 

EPHESIANS. 

1,  lo"*"  >••     ...     ...     ...     •«.     •• 

\1.    I  ...       ...       ...       ...       ...       .. 

PHILIPPLA.NS. 

I V.  o        ...     ...     ...     ...     .*•     >. 

II.  THESSALONIANS. 

1.  Ill       *••     ...     ...     ...     ...     •• 

n.  TIMOTECY. 

II  .lo        ...      •..      ...      ...      ...      * 

IV.  ASj       ..•       ...       ...       •••       ...       !• 

HEBREWS, 
ii.  9 
ix.  13,  14       .. 

JAMES. 

1.     X_'a..J     •••  ...  •..  ••.  •• 

REVELATION. 

xii.  12    .. 
xix.  11-16 


•••         •••         ••«  •••  •••  •• 


•  •  •  •• 


•••  ■••         •••  •< 

•  •  ■  •  I 


I  •  •  *  t 


»  «  •         •  I 


I  •  ■  •  •  •  •  • 


••  ■«•  ■••         •••  ••* 


•«•  ■••  •••  •• 


I  •         «  •  « 


•  ••  •  • 

•  •  •  •  ■ 


Paffe 
529 


149 

025 
409 
44.> 


97 

1 

4S1 


325 
49 
337 
109 
577 
163 
253 

.301 

01 
378 
101 
349 

517 
673 

505 
265 

85 

181 
397 

217 

313 

25 
13 

097 
301 

197 

013 
17 


JAKVABT  31. 187£. 


Price  6d- 


Mm  %^^ 

fttlpii 

oomAnaNg 

BI C.  H. 


'^/i 


i. 


OONTENTB 

,,.,       ("THIS  TEAR  ALSO." 
».  1,461—  I  ^gg  COVENANT  PLEADED. 
,  .r«      I  THE  SICK  MAN  LEFT   BEHIND. 
l.*o^—  I  THE  HIDER  ON  THE  WHITE  HORSE. 
1 458—    ETERNAL     FAITUFUI.NESS    UNAFFECTED     BY 

HUMAN  UNBELIEF. 
,  „,      1  THE  EMPTY   BEAT. 
l,46t—  i  jjjE   POOR   HAN'S  PRAYER. 
1  456 EVERT   MAN'S  NECtSSI'lT. 


PAHVOBZ  ft  AL&BA8TXB,  4,  Patoniorter  Bnildingi, 


ftDVTSTfTISKM'' 


500.000    SAMPLE    PACKETS 

^^  *  (Bach  mflLdnt  »•  m>ke  a  Cap)  ol  thli  ^^ 

""■"    CHOCOLATE  POWDER 

Utonitinil  EiUUtiM  if  IMl, 

And  TfaovMiid*  annownrfiic  tt,pw»'»ri"t  ft  to  bt  an- 

eqiuUcd  In  qnaUtr  ud  noaOaiMe. 

It  li  Baoommended  b7  tbe  7wnill7>  ^^^•. 

One  Cap  oi  Trenty  made  in  One  Junnte. 

MllK  OM  SUOAB  SOT  BSOOIBSD. 
Sold  by  all  Oroocn,  One  BhUUng  per  PamA. 

By  Her  Hi^eBly'i  Boyal  letten  Patent 

Gonuneiml  Steam  Mills.  London. 

LAMPLOUQH'S 

.  'PYRETIC  SALINE 

I.  fennd  Dre-emlnentlr  beneflolkl  in  prerentiiiK  ■nd  onring  gXALL  POZ>  tv  FloUriab 
InfteontUnK  and  'Vltaliiliig  the  Blood.  Anv  peraon  who  hai  alread;  Uili  oomplalBt 
■hmld  Uke  it,  and  be  kapt  tn  a  oool  and  darkened  room,  to  prevent  its  leaTliv  MT 

^^raNESa,  HKADAOHB,  Mid  KATISBA,  u*  In  mart  (Hit  ImaMiUaW;  nlbna  to  taUns  •  tt» 
— J^llnTwmblirDtiBldinter.  TtaU ou  b*  npoMd onn or  twlog Id  tn hmin, » BHiitd.^  _ 
S£A  VoAon.— It  !•  »  ^"1  Tiliubl*  MoampuilnMDt,  ud  ilwitlil  on  no  aooonnt  b.  iiauilM.  a 
^""tmmS^ G&raTITDTIOHS, idVhw rli. to TftiitM noretlaD.,  iDdtgHttmi, ud ■rqvUooa 
iiiMl^SCilnstabML  Hw ■>•  aMaln«l of  the ProprUtor, 

H.  T.n  MPLOOQg.  Consoltliig  OlMmUt.  U3,  B^bom,  K(X, 

Biicond  Door  Item  Hatloaqardwi.  London,  ml  ot all  r«pniiUM»Oh«ii^«W. 

SYMINGTON'S 

PEA    FLOUR, 

Ftr  Sonpi,  ft... in  Id.,  U.,  4d.,  and  «d.  FMtata;  ul  U. 
U.  Sd.,  ud  la.  Ttu. 

PEA  SOUP,  8e*Mned  and  ElaTonrad,  in  Id.,  2d,  and  Sd.  Paok.te ;  and  I*.  Tina. 
EQTPTIAlf    FOOD,  extenilTel;  ued  in  prefarsnoe  to  auj  other  at    SmedlBT^ 

HrlU'BpMbtolrM.WIihnwirt,  lltloak  BmH,  PtrtTthim  Jn  Tini,  li.  p«r1b. 
ARABS'  OOFt'EE,  in  Oblong  TinVllb.,  1  lb.,  and  i  Ih,  2a  per  lb. 
F.ATEHT  COFFEES,  in  Tin*,  lib.,  ^  lb.  and  Jib.,  li.,  laid,  and  la  Sd.  per  lb. 

W.    STHINQTON    ft    Co., 
.Ttc^dan  St«aiB  HIll^  Harket  HaiboravKb.  Batall— 18,  Lndgjate  HiU.  London 

Pouasaing  kU  the  Propertisa  of  the  Flneat  Arrow-root. 

BROWN  AND  POISON'S  CORN  FLODR 

Haa  Twenty  Years'  World-wide  Reputation. 

^vy  Genuine  Packet  bewi  tha  fu-dmile  lignAtnrH  of  tht  Ktkan, 


PATENT 

HIOH-PRKSSOBB    8TBAM 

FBSFABBD 


^o^jtlitmi  ^viimcsidt  futptt. 


"THIS  YEAR  ALSO." 


t 


FOtt  THE  NEW  YEAR.      FrOM  THE  SICK  CHAMBER  OP 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


•<  This  year  alio."— Luke  xiii.  & 

At  the  opening  of  another  year^  and  at  the  commencement  of  another 
Tobime  of  sermons,  we  earnestly  desire  to  ntter  the  word  of  exhortation : 
bat  ths,  at  this  present,  the  preacher  is  a  prisoner,  and  must  speak  from 
his  jnllow  instead  of  his  pulpit.  Let  not  the  few  words  which  we  can 
pat  together  oome  with  diminished  power  from  a  sick  man,  for  the 
mofliket  fired  by  a  wounded  soldier  sends  forth  the  bullet  with  none  the 
less  force.  Our  desire  la  to  speak  with  living  words,  or  not  at  alL  He 
who  enables  ns  to  sit  up  and  oom^se  these  trembling  sentences  is  en- 
treated to  clothe  them  with  his  Spirit,  that  they  may  be  according  to  his 
own  mind. 

Tbe  interceding  vine-dresscr  pleaded  for  the  fruitless  fig-tree,  ''let  it 
alone  this  year  aUo"  dating  as  it  were  a  year  from  the  time  wherein 
lie  spoke.  Trees  and  fruitbearing  plants  have  a  natural  measure* 
nient  for  tlieir  lives :  evidently  a  year  came  to  its  close  when  it  was 
dme  to  seek  fruit  on  the  fig-tree»  and  another  jqslt  conmienced  when  the 
vinc-dresser  began  again  his  digging  and  pruning  work.  Men  are  such 
boRon  things  that  their  fruitage  marl^  no  certain  periods,  and  it 
beoooieB  needful  to  make  artificial  divisions  of  time  for  them ;  there 
seems  to  be  no  set  period  for  man's  spiritual  harvest  or  vintage,  or  if 
there  be,  the  sheaves  and  the  clusters  come  not  in  their  season,  and 
henoe  we  have  to  say  one  to  another, — "  This  shall  be  the  beginning  of 
a  new  vear."  Be  it  so,  then.  Let  us  congratulate  each  other  upon 
seeiiig  the  dawn  of  *'  this  year  also,"  and  let  us  unitedly  pray  that  we 
TOBj  enter  npon  it,  continue  in  it,  and  oome  to  its  close  under  the  un- 
ftiliog  blessing  of  the  Lord  to  whom  all  years  belong. 

I.  Hie  beginning  of  a  new  year  suggests  a  retrospect.  Let  ns  take 
it,  deliberately  and  honestly.  "TTitayear  also:" — then  there  had  been 
fmner  years  of  grace.  The  dresser  of  the  vineyard  was  not  for  the  first 
tiia»  aware  of  the  fig-tree's  &ilure,  neither  had  the  owner  come  for  the  first 
thia  aeeldng  figs  in  vain.  God,  who  gives  us  "  this  year  also,"  lias  given 
as^liitts  before  it;  his  sparing  mercyis  no  novelty,  his  patience  has  already 
No.  1,451. 


2  METROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

been  taxed  by  our  proyocations.  First  came  our  youthful  years,  when 
eren  a  little  fruit  unto  God  is  peculiarly  sweet  to  him.  How  did  we  spend 
them  ?  Did  our  strength  run  all  into  wild  wood  and  wanton  branch  ?  If 
80,  we  may  well  bewail  that  wasted  vigour,  that  life  misspent,  that 
sin  exceedingly  multiplied.  He  who  saw  us  misuse  those  golden  months 
of  youth  nevertheless  affords  us  "  this  year  also,"  and  we  should  enter  upon 
it  with  a  holy  jealousy,  lest  what  of  strength  and  ai'dour  may  be  left  to 
us  should  be  allowed  to  run  away  into  the  same  wasteful  courses 
as  aforetime.  Upon  the  heels  of  our  youthful  years  came  those 
of  early  manhood^  when  we  began  to  muster  a  household,  and  to  become 
as  a  tree  fixed  in  its  place ;  then  also  fruit  would  have  been  precions. 
Did  we  bear  any  ?  Did  we  present  unto  the  Lord  a  basket  of 
summer  fruit?  bid  we  offer  him  the  firstling  of  our  strength?  If 
we  did  so,  we  may  well  adore  the  grace  which  so  early  saved  us ;  but 
if  not,  the  past  chides  us,  and,  lifting  an  admonitory  finger,  it  warns  ns 
not  to  let  "  this  year  also  "  follow  the  way  of  the  rest  of  our  lives.  He 
who  has  wasted  youth  and  the  morning  of  manhood  has  surely  had 
enough  of  fooling  :  the  time  past  may  well  suffice  him  to  have  wrought 
the  will  of  the  flesh :  it  will  be  a  superfluity  of  naughtiness  to  suffer  ''  this 
year  also  "  to  be  trodden  down  in  the  service  of  sin.  Many  of  us  are  now 
in  the  pnm^j^^f/"^,  and  our  years  already  spent  ai'e  not  few.  Have  we 
still  need  to  confess  that  our  years  are  eaten  up  by  the  grasshoppr  and 
the  canker-worm?  Have  we  reached  the  half-way  house,  and' still  know 
not  whither  we  are  going  ?  Are  we  fools  at  forty  ?  Are  we  half  a 
century  old  by  the  calendar  and  yet  far  off  from  years  of  discretion  ?  Alas, 
great  God,  that  there  should  be  men  past  this  age  who  are  still  without 
knowledge !  Unsaved  at  sixty,  unregenerate  at  seventy,  unawakened  at 
eighty,  unrenewed  at  ninety !  These  are  each  and  all  startling.  Yet^ 
peradventure,  they  will  each  one  fall  upon  ears  which  they  should  make 
to  tingle,  but  they  mil  hear  them  as  though  they  heard  them  not.  Con- 
tinuance in  evil  breeds  callousness  of  heart,  and  when  the  soul  has  long 
been  sleeping  in  indifference  it  is  hard  to  arouse  it  from  the  deadly 
slumber. 

The  sound  of  the  words  "  this  year  also  "  makes  some  of  us  remember 
years  of  great  me^'cy,  sparkling  and  flashing  with  delight.  Were  those 
years  laid  at  the  Lord's  feet  ?  They  were  coniparable  to  the  silver  bells 
upon  the  horses — were  they  "  holiness  unto  the  Lord  "  ?  If  not,  how  shall 
we  answer  for  it  if  **  this  year  also"  should  be  musical  with  merry  mercy 
and  yet  be  spent  in  the  ways  of  carelessness  ?  The  same  words  recall  to 
some  of  us  our  years  of  sharp  affliction  when  we  were,  indeed,  digged  about 
and  dunged.  How  went  those  years  ?  God  was  doing  great  things  for 
us,  exercising  careful  and  expensive  husbandry,  caring  for  us  with  ex- 
ceeding great  and  wise  care,---did  we  render  according  to  the  benefit 
received  ?  Did  we  rise  from  the  bed  more  patient  and  gentle,  weaned 
from  the  world,  and  welded  to  Christ  ?  Did  we  bring  forth  clusters  to 
reward  the  dresser  of  the  vineyard  ?  Ijet  us  not  refuse  these  questions 
of  self-examination,  for  it  may  be  this  is  to  be  another  of  these  years  of 
captivity,  another  season  of  the  furnace  and  the  fining-pot  The  Lord 
grant  that  the  coming  tribulation  may  take  more  chaff  out  of  us  than  any 
of  its  predecessors,  and  leave  the  wheat  cleaner  and  better. 

The  new  year  also  reminds  us  of  qpportuniiies  for  usefuhiess^  which 


"iHia  Y£AB  ALSO/'  $ 

hare  come  and  gone,  and  ot  unfulfilled  resolutions  which  have  blossomod 
oalj  to  &de ;  sluill  '^  this  year  also ''  be  as  those  which  have  gone  before  ? 
May  wc  not  hope  for  grace  to  advance  upon  ^cc  already  gained,  and 
shonid  we  not  seek  for  power  to  turn  our  poor  sickly  promises  into  robust 
action  ? 

Looking  back  on  the  past  we  lament  the  follies  by  which  we  would  not 
willingly  be  held  captive  "  this  year  also,"  and  we  adore  the  forgiving 
iQcrcy,  the  preserving  providence,  the  boundless  liberality,  the  divine 
lore,  of  which  we  hope  to  be  partakers  "  this  year  also." 

11.  If  the  preacher  could  tnink  freely  he  could  wherry  the  text  at  his 
pleasure  in  many  directions,  but  he  is  feeble,  and  so  must  let  it  drive  witU 
tiic  current  which  bears  it  on  to  a  second  consideration  :  the  text  men- 
tions A  MERCY.  It  was  in  great  goodness  that  the  tree  which  cumbered 
Uic  soil  was  allowed  to  stand  for  another  year,  and  prolonged  life  should 
always  be  regarded  as  a  boon  of  mercy.  We  must  view  *^  this  year 
also"  as  a  grant  from  infinite  grace.  It  is  wrong  to  speak  as  if  we  cared 
DoUiing  for  life,  and  looked  upon  our  being  here  as  an  evil  or  a  punish- 
ment; we  are  here  ''this  year  also'*  as  the  result  of  love's  pleadings,  and 
in  j)nrsuance  of  love's  designs. 

riie  wicked  man  should  count  that  the  Lord's  longsuffering  points  to 
his  salvation,  and  he  should  permit  the  cords  of  love  to  draw  him  to  it.  O 
tljat  the  lloly  Spirit  would  make  the  blasphemer,  the  Sabbath-breaker, 
and  the  openly  vicious  to  feel  what  a  wonder  it  is  that  tlieir  lives  are  pro- 
longed "  this  year  dso  " !  Are  they  spared  to  curse,  and  riot,  and  defy  tlieir 
Maker?  Shall  this  be  the  only  fruit  of  patient  mercy?  The  proci-as- 
tinator  who  has  put  off  the  messenger  of  heaven  with  his  delays  and  half 
promises,  ought  he  not  to  wonder  that  he  is  allowed  to  see  ''this  year  also  "  ? 
How  is  it  that  the  Lord  has  borne  with  him  and  put  up  with  his  vacilla- 
tions and  hesitations?  Is  this  year  of  grace  to  be  spent  in  the  same 
manner  ?  Transient  impressions,  hasty  resolves,  and  speedy  apostasies — 
arc  these  to  be  the  weary  story  over  and  over  again  ?  The  startled  con- 
science, the  tyrant  passion,  the  smothered  emotion !  Are  these  to  be  the 
tokens  of  yet  another  year  ?  May  God  forbid  that  any  one  of  us  should 
hesitate  and  delay  through  "  this  year  also."  Infinite  pity  holds  back  the 
axe  of  justice,  shall  it  be  insulted  by  the  repetition  of  the  sins  which  caused 
the  uplifting  of  the  instrument  of  wrath  ?  What  can  be  more  tantalizing 
to  the  heart  of  goodness  than  indecision  ?  Well  might  the  Lord's  prophet 
become  impatient  and  cry,  "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions?" 
Well  mav  God  himself  push  for  a  decision  and  demand  an  immediate 
reply.  O  undecided  soul,  ^ilt  thou  swing  much  longer  between  heaven 
aud  hell,  and  act  as  if  it  were  hard  to  choose  between  the  slavery  of  Satan 
and  the  liberty  of  the  Great  Father's  home  of  love  ?  "This  year  also  "  mlt 
thou  sport  in  defiance  of  justice,  and  pervert  the  generosity  of  mercy  into 
alicence  for  still  further  rebellion  ?  "This  year  also  "  must  divine  love  be 
made  an  occasion  for  continued  sin  ?  0  do  not  act  so  basely,  so  contrary 
to  every  noble  instinct,  so  injuriously  to  thine  own  best  interests. 

The  believer  is  kept  out  of  heaven  *'  this  year  also  "  in  love,  and  not  in 
anger.  There  are  some  for  whose  sake  it  is  needful  he  should  abide  in 
the  flesh,  some  to  be  helped  by  him  on  their  heavenward  way,  and  others 
to  be  led  to  the  Sedeemer's  feet  by  his  instruction.  The  heaven  of 
numj  saints  is  not  yet  prepared  for  them,  because  their  nearest  companions 


4  HETROPOLITAH  TABEHNACLE  PITLPIT. 

liave  not  yet  arrived,  and  their  spiritual  children  have  not  yet  gathercdt 
in  glory  in  sufficient  number  to  give  them  a  thoroughly  heavenljr 
welcome :  they  must  wait  "  this  year  also  "  that  their  rest  may  be  the 
more  glorious,  and  that  the  sheaves  which  they  will  bring  with  them 
ma^  afford  them  greater  joy.  Surely,  for  the  sake  of  souls,  for  the 
delight  of  glorifying  our  Lord,  and  for  the  increase  of  the  jewels  of  oar 
crown,  we  may  be  glad  to  wait  below  '*  this  year  also."  This  is  a  ii-idc 
field,  but  we  may  not  linger  in  it,  for  our  space  is  little,  and  our  strength 
is  even  lees. 

III.  Our  last  feeble  utterance  shall  remind  you  that  the  expression, 
*'  This  year  also,"  i>iplies  a  limit.  The  vine-dresser  asked  no  longer  a 
reprieve  than  one  year.  If  his  digging  and  manuring  should  not  thea 
prove  successful  he  would  plead  no  more,  but  the  tree  should  fall.  Eveu 
when  Jesus  is  the  pleader,  the  reouest  of  mercy  has  its  bounds  and  times. 
It  is  not  for  ever  that  we  shall  be  let  alone,  and  allowed  to  cumber  the 
ground ;  if  we  will  not  repent  we  must  perish,  if  we  will  not  be  benefited 
by  the  spade  we  must  fall  by  the  axe. 

There  will  oome  a  last  year  to  each  one  of  us :  therefore  let  each  one 
say  to  himself— Is  this  my  last?  If  it  should  be  the  last  with  the 
preacher,  he  would  gird  up  his  loins  to  deliver  the  Lord's  message  with 
all  his  soul,  and  bid  his  rellow-men  be  reconciled  to  God.  Dear  friend, 
is  "  this  year  also  "  to  be  your  last?  Are  you  ready  to  see  the  curtain  riso 
upon  eternity  ?  Are  you  now  prepared  to  hear  the  midnight  cry,  and  to 
enter  into  the  marriafi;e  supper  ?  The  judgment  and  all  that  wiU  follow 
upon  it  are  most  surely  the  neritage  of  every  living  man,  blessed  are  they 
who  by  £&ith  in  Jesus  arc  able  to  &ce  the  bar  of  Qod  without  a  thought 
of  terror. 

If  we  live  to  be  counted  among  the  oldest  inhabitants  we  must  depart 
at  last :  there  must  be  an  end,  and  the  voice  must  be  heard — "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  this  year  thou  dialt  die."  So  many  have  gone  before  us, 
and  are  going  every  hour,  that  no  man  should  need  any  other  tmnietito 
wmiy  and  yet  man  is  so  eager  to  forget  his  own  mortality,  and  thereby 
to  forfeit  his  hopei?  of  bliss,  that  we  cannot  too  often  bring  it  before 
the  mind's  eye.  0  mortal  man,  bethink  thee !  Prepare  to  meet  thy 
God ;  for  thou  must  meet  him.  Seek  the  Saviour,  yea,  seek  him  ere 
another  sun  sinks  to  his  rest. 

Once  more, "  this  year  also,"  and  it  may  be  for  this  year  only,  the  cross  is 
uplifted  as  the  pharos  of  the  world,  the  one  light  to  which  no  eye  can 
look  in  vain.  Oh  that  millions  would  look  that  way  and  live.  Soon  the 
Lord  Jesus  will  come  a  second  time,  and  then  the  blaze  of  his  throne  will 
supplant  the  mild  radiance  of  his  cross  :  tlie  Judge  will  be  seen  rather 
than  the  Redeemer.  Now  he  saves,  but  then  he  will  destroy.  Let  us 
hear  his  voice  at  tliis  moment.  He  hath  limited  a  day,  let  us  be  eager 
to  avail  ourselves  of  the  gracious  season.  Let  ns  believe  in  Jesus  this 
day,  seeing  it  may  be  our  last.  These  are  the  pleadings  of  one  who 
now  falls  back  on  his  pillow  in  very  weakness.  Hear  them  for  your 
souls'  sakes  and  live. 


^«t^flp«Iitan  i^attmatlc  ftdpit. 


THE  COVENANT  PLEADED. 


%  $mm\ 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    TUB    lOBTllOFOLITAN    TABEUNACLE,    NEWIKGTON. 


*' Have  reapeefc  unto  the  covenant." — ^Psalm  Izziv.  20. 

Hb  will  succeed  in  prayer  who  understands  the  science  of  pleading  with 
God.  **  Pat  me  in  remembrance :  let  ns  plead  together,  is  a  divine 
commands  "  Gome  now,  let  ns  reason  together  "  is  a  sacred  invitation. 
'*  Bring  forth  yonr  strong  reasons,  saith  the  Lord/'  is  a  condescending 
direction  as  to  the  way  of  becoming  Tictorions  in  supplication.  Plead- 
ing is  mrestling :  arguments  are  the  grips,  the  feint^  the  throes,  the 
straggles  with  which  we  hold  and  yanquish  the  corenant  angel.  The 
humme  statement  of  our  wants  is  not  withont  its  value,  but  to  be  able 
to  give  reasons  and  argaments  why  God  should  hear  us  is  to  offer 
potent,  prevalent  prayer.  Among  all  the  ai^uments  that  can  be  used  in 
pleading  with  God,  perhaps  there  is  none  stronger  than  this — *^  Have 
respect  unto  the  covenant."  Like  Goliath's  sword,  we  may  say  of  it, 
"  There  is  none  like  it."  If  we  have  God's  word  for  a  thing  we  may 
well  pray,  *'  Do  as  thou  hast  said,  for  as  a  good  man  only  needs  to  be 
reminded  of  his  own  word  in  order  to  be  brought  to  keep  it,  even  so  is 
it  with  our  &ithful  God  ;  he  only  needs  that  for  these  things  we  put 
him  in  remembrance  to  do  them  for  us."  If  he  has  gi?en  us  more  than 
his  word,  namely,  his  covenant,  his  solemn  compact,  we  may  then  with 
the  greatest  composure  of  spirit  cry  to  him, ''  Have  respect  unto  tlie 
covenant,"  and  then  we  may  both  hope  and  quietly  wait  for  his  salvation. 
I  need  not  tell  you,  for  you  are,  I  trust,  well-grounded  in  that 
matter,  that  the  covenant  here  spoken  of  is  the  covenant  of  grace. 
There  is  a  covenant  which  we  could  not  plead  in  prayer,  the  covenant 
of  works,  a  covenant  which  destroys  us,  for  we  have  broken  it.  Our 
first  fkther  sinned,  and  the  coyenant  was  broken ;  we  have  continued 
in  his  perverseness,  and  that  covenant  condemns  ns.  Bv  the  covenant 
of  works  can  none  of  us  be  justified,  for  we  continue  still  to  break  our 
portion  of  it,  and  to  bring  upon  ourselves  wrath  to  the  uttermost. 
The  Lord  hath  made  a  new  covenant  with  the  second  Adam,  our 
federal  head,  Jesus  Christ  our  I^ord,— a  covenant  without  conditions, 
except  such  conditions  as  Christ  has  ahready  fulfilled,  a  covenant, 
ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  which  now  consists  of  promises  only, 
which  run  after  this  fashion-—''  I  will  be  to  them  a  God,  and  they  shall 
be  to  me  a  people":  ''A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  them,  and  a rieht 
spirit  will  1  put  within  them  ":  **  From  all  their  transgressions  wifl  I 


I 

I  ^  MKTROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

I  cleanse  them  ** : — a  coyeuant,  I  say,  which  had  once  conditions  in  it,  alT 

of  which  oar  Lord  Jesus  fulfilled  when  he  finished  transgreasioBy  made 
an  end  of  sin,  and  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness ;  and  now  th& 
covenant  is  all  of  promise,  and  consists  of  infallible  and  etental  Aalls 
and  wills,  which  shall  abide  the  same  for  ever. 

We  shall  talk  of  the  text  thus.  What  is  meant  by  the  plea  befirens — 
''Have  respect  unto  the  covenant"?    Then  we  will  think  a  little  of 
whence  it  deiives  its  farce :  thirdly,  we  will  consider  h^w  and  when  we 
may  plead  it :  and  we  will  close  by  noticing  what  are  the  practical  infer^ 
CTicesfrom  it, 

I.  Let  us  begin  by  this— What  is  meant  by  the  plea  "  Have 
respect  unto  the  covenant"  ?  It  means  this,  does  it  not  ?  ** Fulfil  thy 
covenant,  0  (jod :  let  it  not  be  a  dead  letter.  Thou  hast  said  this  and 
that ;  now  do  as  thou  hast  said.  Thou  hast  been  pleased  by  solemn 
sanction  of  oath  and  blood  to  make  this  covenant  with  thy  people. 
Now  be  pleased  to  keep  it.  Hast  thou  said,  and  wilt  thou  not  do  it  ? 
We  are  |>ersuaded  of  thy  faithfulness,  let  our  eyes  behold  thy  covenant 
engagements  fulfilled. 

It  means  again, ''  Fulfil  all  the  prmnises  of  thy  covenant,"  for  indeed 
all  the  promises  are  now  in  the  covenant.  They  are  all  yea  and  amen 
in  Christ  Jesus,  to  the  glory  of  God  by  us ;  and  I  may  say  withont 
being  unscriptural  that  the  covenant  contains  within  its  sacred  charter 
every  gracious  word  that  has  come  from  the  Most  High,  either  by  the 
mouth  of  prophets  or  apostles,  or  by  the  h'ps  of  Jesus  Christ  himself* 
The  meaning  in  this  case  would  be — **  Lord,  keep  thy  promises  conceming^ 
thy  people.  We  are  in  want :  now,  0  Lord,  fulfil  thy  premise  that  we 
shall  not  want  any  good  thing.  Hero  is  another  of  thy  promises  r 
*  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee.'  We  are 
in  rivers  of  trouble.  Be  with  ns  now.  Redeem  thy  promises  to  thy 
servants.  Let  them  not  stand  on  the  book  as  letters  that  mock  ns^ 
but  prove  that  thou  didst  mean  what  thou  didst  write  and  say,  and 
let  us  see  that  thou  hast  power  and  will  to  make  every  jot  and  tittle 
good  of  all  thou  hast  spoken.  For  hast  thou  not  said,  *  Heaven  and 
earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  word  shall  not  pass  away '?  Oh  then  have 
respect  untx)  the  promises  of  thy  covenant." 

In  the  connection  of  our  text  thero  is  no  doubt  that  the  suppliant 
meant,  "  0  Lord,  prevent  anything  from  turning  aside  thy  promises.'* 
The  church  was  then  in  a  very  terrible  state.  The  temple  was  bumt^ 
and  the  assemblage  broken  np,  the  worship  of  God  had  ceased,  and  idola- 
trous emblems  stcnod  even  in  the  holy  place  whero  onoe  the  glory  of  Ood 
shone  forth.  The  plea  is,  "  Do  not  suffer  the  power  of  the  enemy  to  be 
so  great  as  to  frustrate  thy  purposes,  or  to  make  thy  premises  void." 
So  may  we  pray — **  0  Lord,  do  not  snffer  me  to  enduro  such  temptation 
that  I  shall  fall.  Do  not  suffer  such  iJHiction  to  come  upon  me  that  I 
shall  be  destroyed ;  for  hast  thou  not  promised  that  no  temptation 
shall  happen  to  us  but  such  as  we  are  able  to  bear,  and  that  with  the 
temptation  there  shall  be  a  way  of  escape  ?  Now  have  respect  unto 
thy  covenant,  and  so  order  thy  providence  that  nothing  idiaU  happen  to 
us  contrary  to  that  divine  agreement." 

And  it  means  also,  *'  So  order  everything  around  us  that  the  covenant 
may  be  fulfilled.    Is  thy  church  low  ?  .  Eaise  up  again  in  her  midst 


THB  COTXNAHT  PLEADED.  7 

men  who  preach  the  gospel  with  power,  who  shall  bo  the  means  of  her 
vplifUng.  Creator  of  men,  Master  of  human  hearts,  thou  who  canst 
circamcise  human  h'pa  to  speak  thy  word  with  power,  do  this,  and  let  thy 
coTenant  with  thy  church  that  thou  wilt  never  leave  her  be  fulfilled* 
The  kings  of  the  earth  are  in  thy  hand.  All  events  are  controlled  by 
thee.  Thoa  orderest  all  thiugs,  from  the  minute  to  the  immense. 
Nothing,  however  small,  is  too  small  for  thy  purpose :  nothing,  however 
great,  is  too  great  for  thy  rule.  Manage  everything  so  that  m  the  cud 
each  promise  of  thy  covenant  shall  be  fulfilled  to  all  thy  chosen  people.'* 

That,  I  think,  is  the  meaning  of  the  plea,  "  Have  respect  unto  the 
covenant."  Keep  it  and  see  it  kept.  Fulfil  the  promise,  and  prevent 
thy  foes  from  doing  evil  to  thy  children.    Precious  plea,  assuredly. 

II.  And  now  let  us  see  whence  it  derives  its  forck.  *'  Have 
respect  unto  the  covenant." 

It  derives  its  force,  first,  from  the  veraciiy  of  God.  If  it  be  a 
covenant  of  man's  making  we  expect  a  man  to  keep  it ;  and  a  man  who 
does  not  keep  his  covenant  is  not  esteemed  amongst  his  fellows.  If 
a  man  has  given  his  word,  that  word  is  his  bond.  If  a  thing  be  solemnly 
signed  and  sealed  it  becomes  even  more  binding,  and  he  that  would  run 
hiKrk  fiom  a  covenant  would  be  thought  to  have  forfeited  his  character 
among  men.  God  forbid  that  we  should  ever  think  the  Most  High 
could  be  false  to  his  word.  It  is  not  possible.  He  can  do  all  thing& 
except  this — ^he  cannot  lie ;  it  is  not  possible  that  he  should  ever  be 
untrue.  He  cannot  even  change :  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are 
without  repentance.  He  will  not  alter  the  thing  that  hath  gone  out  of 
his  lips.  When  then  we  come  before  God  in  prayer  for  a  covenant  mercy 
we  have  his  truthfulness  to  support  us.  ''  0  God,  thou  must  do  this. 
Tlion  art  a  sovereign :  thou  canst  do  as  thou  wilt,  but  thou  hast  bound 
thyself  by  bonds  that  hold  thy  majesty ;  thou  hast  said  it,  and  it  is  not 
possible  that  thou  shouldst  go  back  from  thine  own  word."  How  strong 
our  faith  ought  to  be  when  we  have  God's  truth  to  lean  upon.  AVhat 
dishonour  we  do  to  our  God  by  our  weak  faith ;  for  it  is  virtually  a 
suspicion  of  the  fidelity  of  OTur  covenant  God. 

Next,  to  support  us  in  using  this  plea  wc  have  God's  ^ost^  jealousy 
for  his  honour.  He  has  told  us  himself  that  he  is  a  jealous  God ;  his. 
name  is  jealousy ;  he  has  great  respect  unto  his  honour  among  the  sons 
of  men.  Hence  Ihis  was  Moses's  plea — ^*  What  will  the  enemy  say  ? 
And  what  wilt  thou  do  unto  thy  greatname  ?"  Now,  if  God's  covenant 
could  be  trifled  with,  and  if  it  could  be  proved  that  he  had  not  kept  the 
promise  that  he  made  to  his  creatures,  it  would  not  only  be  a  dreadful 
thing  for  us,  but  it  would  bring  grievous  dishonour  upon  his  name  ^ 
and  that  shall  never  be.  God  is  too  pure  and  holy,  and  he  is  withal 
too  honourable  ever  to  run  back  from  the  word  that  he  has  given  to  his 
servants.  If  I  feel  that  my  feet  have  almost  gone  I  may  still  be  assured 
that  he  will  not  suffer  me  wholly  to  perish,  else  were  his  honour  stained, 
for  he  hath  said,  '^  They  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them 
sut  of  my  hand.''  He  might  give  me  up  to  mine  enemies  so  far  as 
my  deserts  are  concerned,  for  I  deserve  to  be  destroyed  by  them — ^but 
then  his  honour  is  engaged  to  save  the  meanest  of  his  people,  and  he 
bas  said,  *'  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life."  He  will  not,  therefore,  for 
his  honour's  sake,  suffer  me  to  bo  the  prey  of  the  adversary ;  but  will 


8  METROFOUTAK  TABEBKACLS  PtTLPIT, 

preserve  me,  even  me,  unto  the  day  of  his  appearing.    Here  is  good 
foothold  for  faith. 

The  next  refleotion  that  should  greatly  strengthen  usis  ihs  venerable 
character  of  the  covenant.  This  covenant  was  no  transaction  of  yesterday  i 
or  ever  the  earth  was  this  covenant  was  made.  We  may  not  speak 
of  first  or  last  with  God,  bnt  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men  the 
covenant  of  grace  is  God's  first  thought*  Though  wo  usually  put 
the  covenant  of  works  first  in  order  of  time  as  revealed,  yet  in  very  deed 
the  covenant  of  grace  is  the  older  of  the  two.  God's  people  were  not 
chosen  yesterday,  but  before  the  foundations  of  the  world  ;  and  the  Lamb 
slain  to  ratify  that  covenant,  though  slain  eighteen  hundred  years  ago, 
was  in  the  divine  purpose  slain  from  before  the  foundations  of  the  world. 
It  is  an  ancient  covenant :  there  is  nothing  so  ancient.  It  is  to  God 
a  covenant  which  he  holds  in  high  esteem.  It  is  not  one  of  his  light 
thoughts,  not  one  of  those  thoughts  which  lead  him  to  create  the 
morning  dew  that  melts  ere  the  day  has  run  its  course,  or  to  make  the 
clouds  that  light  up  the  setting  sun  with  glory  but  which  soon  have 
lost  their  radiance;  but  it  is  one  of  his  great  thoughts,  yea,  it  is  his. 
eternal  thought,  the  thought  out  of  his  own  inmost  soul — this  covenant 
of  grace.  And  because  it  is  so  ancient,  and  to  God  a  matter  so  im* 
portant,  when  we  come  to  him  with  this  plea  in  our  mouths  we  must 
not  think  of  being  staggered  by  unbelief,  but  may  open  our  mouths 
wide,  for  he  will  assnr^ly  fill  them.  Here  is  thy  covenant,  0  God^ 
which  of  thy  own  spontaneous  sovereign  will  thou  didst  ordain  of  old, 
a  covenant  in  which  thy  very  heart  is  laid  bare,  and  thy  love  which  is 
thyself  is  manifested.  0  God,  have  respect  unto  it,  and  do  as  thoa 
hast  said,  and  fulfil  thy  promise  to  thy  people. 

Nor  is  this  all.  It  is  but  the  beginning.  In  one  sermon  I  should 
not  have  time  to  show  you  all  the  reasons  that  give  force  to  the  plea ; 
but  here  is  one.  The  covenant  has  upon  it  a  solemn  endoreefuent^  There 
was  the  stamp  of  God's  own  word — that  is  enough.  The  very  word  that 
created  the  universe  is  the  woi*d  that  spake  the  covenant.  But,  as  if 
that  were  not  sufficient,  seeing  we  are  unbelieving,  God  has  added  to  it  his 
oath,  and  because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  has  sworn  by  him- 
self. It  were  blasphemy  to  dream  that  the  Eternal  could  be  perjured, 
and  he  has  set  his  oath  to  his  covenant,  in  order  that,  by  two  immutable 
things  wherein  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  he  «iight  give  to  the 
heirs  of  grace  strong  consolation. 

But  more,  that  venerable  covenant  thus  confiimed  by  oath  was  sealed 
With  blood.  Jesus  died  to  ratify  it.  His  heart's  blood  bedewed  that  Magna 
Charta  of  the  grace  of  God  to  his  people.  It  is  a  covenant  now  which 
God  the  just  must  keep.  Jesus  has  fulfilled  our  side  of  it — ^has  exe- 
cuted to  the  letter  all  the  demands  of  God  upon  man.  Our  Surety  and  our 
Sobstituto  has  at  once  kept  the  law  and  suffered  all  that  was  due  by  his 
people  on  account  of  their  breach  of  it ;  and  now  shall  not  the  Lord  be 
true  and  the  everlasting  Father  be  faithful  to  his  own  Son  ?  How  can 
he  refuse  to  his  Son  the  joy  which  he  set  before  him  and  the  reward 
which  he  promised  him  ?  ''  He  shall  see  his  seed  :  he  shall  see  of  the 
travail  of  his  soul  and  shall  be  satisfied."  My  soul,  the  faithfulness 
of  God  to  his  covenant  is  not  so  much  a  matter  between  thee  and  God 
as   between  Christ  and  God,   for  now  it  so  stands — Christ  as  their 


THE  COV£NAirr  FLE^VDBD.  9 

representative  puts  in  his  claim  before  the  throne  of  infinite  justice  for 
the  salvation  of  every  soul  for  whom  he  shed  his  bloody  and  he  mnst 
have  what  he  has  purchased.  Oh  what  confidence  is  here  !  The  rights 
of  the  Bon,  blcndea  with  the  love  and  the  veracity  of  the  Father,  makes 
the  covenant  to  be  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure. 

Moreover,  remember,  and  I  will  not  detain  you  much  longer  with 
this,  that  np  till  now  nothing  in  the  covenant  has  ever  failed.  The 
Lord  has  been  tried  by  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  of  his  people, 
and  they  have  been  in  trying  emergencies  and  serious  difiicultics  ;  but 
it  has  never  been  reported  in  the  gates  of  Zion  that  the  promise  has 
become  naught,  neither  have  any  said  that  the  covenant  is  null  and 
void.  Ask  ye  those  before  you  who  passed  through  deeper  waters  than 
yourselves.  Ask  the  martyrs  who  gave  their  lives  up  for  their  Master, 
*'  Waa  he  with  them  to  the  end  ? "  The  placid  smiles  upon  their 
countenances  while  enduring  the  most  painful  death  were  evident  testi* 
monies  that  God  is  true.  Their  joyous  songs,  the  clapping  of  their 
hands  amidst  the  fire,  and  their  exultation  even  on  the  rack,  or  when 
rotting  in  some  loathsome  dungeon — all  these  have  proved  how  faithfnl 
the  Lord  has  been. 

And  have  you  not  heard  with  your  own  ears  the  testimony  of  God's 
dying  people  ?  They  were  in  conditions  in  which  they  could  not  have 
been  sustained  by  mere  imagination,  nor  buoyed  up  by  frenzy,  and  ^ct 
they  have  been  as  joyful  as  if  their  dying  day  had  been  their  woddmg 
day.  Death  is  too  solemn  a  matter  for  a  man  to  play  a  masquerade  there. 
But  what  did  your  wife  say  in  death  ?  or  your  mother  now  with  God  ? 
or  what  your  child,  who  had  learnt  the  Saviour's  love  ?  Can  you  not 
recall  their  testimonies  even  now  ?  I  think  I  hear  some  of  them,  and 
amongst  the  things  of  earth  that  are  like  to  the  joys  of  heaven,  I  think 
this  is  one  of  the  foremost, — ^the  joy  of  departed  saints  when  they 
already  hear  the  voices  of  angels  hovering  near,  and  turn  round  and 
tell  us  in  broken  language  of  the  joys  that  are  bursting  in  upon  them — 
their  sight  blinded  by  the  excess  of  brightness,  and  then*  hearts  ravished 
with  the  bliss  that  floods  them.  Oh  it  has  been  sweet  to  see  the  saints 
depart! 

I  mention  these  things  now,  not  merely  to  refresh  your  memories, 
but  to  establish  your  faith  in  God.  Ho  has  been  true  so  man^  times 
and  false  never,  and  shall  we  now  expeiicnce  any  difficulty  in  resting  on 
lus  covenant  ?  No,  by  all  these  many  years  in  which  tne  faitlifulness 
of  God  has  been  put  to  the  test,  and  has  never  failed,  let  us  be  confident 
that  he  will  still  regard  us,  and  let  us  pray  boldly, — "  Have  respect 
unto  the  covenant."  For,  mark  you,  as  it  has  been  in  the  begimiing, 
it  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be,  world  without  end.  It  shall  be  to  the  last 
saint  as  it  was  with  the  first.  The  testimony  of  the  last  soldier  of  the 
host  shall  be,  "  Not  one  good  thing  hath  failed  of  all  that  the  Lord 
God  hath  promised." 

Only  one  more  reflection  here.  Om*  God  has  taught  many  of  us  to 
trust  in  his  name.  We  were  long  in  learning  the  lesson,  and  nothing 
but  Omnipotence  could  have  made  us  willing  to  walk  by  faith,  and  not 
by  sight ;  but  with  much  patience  the  Lord  has  brought  us  at  lust  to 
have  no  reliance  but  on  nimself,  and  now  we  are  depending  on  his 
faithfulness  and  his  truth.    Is  that  thy  case,  brother  ?    What  then  ? 


10  H£T£OPOLITAK  TABERKACLfi  PULPIT. 

Thinkest  thou  that  God  has  giyen  thee  this  faith  to  mock  thee  ?    Be- 
lieTest  thou  that  he  has  taught  thee  to  tnist  in  his  name,  and  thus  far 
has  brought  thee  to  put  thee  to  shame  ?    Has  his  Holj  Spirit  given 
thee  con^dence  in  a  he?  and  has  he  wrought  in  thee  faith  in  a  fiction? 
God  forbid !     Our  God  is  no  demon  who  would  dehght  in  the  miseiy 
which  a  groundless  confidence  would  bo  sure  to  bring  to  us.    If  thou 
hast  faith,  he  gave  it  to  thee,  and  he  that  gave  it  to  thee  knows  his 
own  gift,  and  will  honour  it.    He  was  never  false  yet,  even  to  the 
feeblest  &ith,  and  if  thy  faith  is  great,  thou  shalt  find  him  greater 
than  thy  faith,  even  when  thy  faith  is  at  its  greatest ;  therefore  be  of 
good  cheer.    The  fact  that  thou  believest  should  encourage  thee  to  say, 
**  Now,  0  Lord,  I  have  come  to  rest  upon  thee,  canst  thou  fail  me  ?    1, 
a  poor  worm,  know  no  confidence  but  thy  dear  name,  wilt  thou  forsake 
me?    I  have  no  refuge  but  thy  wounds,  0  Jesus,  no  hope  but  in  thy 
atoning  sacrifice,  no  light  but  in  thy  light :  canst  thou  cast  me  off?'* 
It  is  not  possible  that  the  Lord  shoula  cast  off  one  who  thus  trusts  him. 
Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have  com- 
passion on  the  son  of  her  womb?    Can  any  of  us  forget  our  children 
when  they  fondly  trust  us  in  the  days  of  their  weakness?   No,  the  Lord 
is  no  monster :  he  is  tender  and  full  of  compassion,  faithful  and  true ; 
and  Jesus  is  a  friend  which  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother.    Tlie  very 
fact  that  he  has  given  us  faith  in  his  covenant  should  help  us  to  plead, — 
**  Have  respect  unto  the  covenant." 

III.    Having  thus  shown  you,  dear  friends,  the  meaning  of  the  plea, 
and  whence  it  derives  its  force,  we  will  now  pause  a  minute  and  observe 

HOW  AND  WHEN  THAT  OOYENANT  MAY  BE  PLEADED. 

First,  it  may  be  pleaded  under  a  sense  of  sm — when  the  soul  feels  its 
guiltiness.  Let  me  read  to  you  the  words  of  our  apostle,  in  the  eighth 
chapter  of  the  Hebrews,  where  he  is  speaking  of  this  oovenanc  at  the 
tenth  verse.  ''For  this  is  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with  the 
house  of  Israel  after  those  da^s,  saith  the  Lord ;  I  will  put  my  laws  into 
their  mind,  and  write  them  m  their  hearts :  and  I  will  be  to  them  a 
God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  a  people.  And  they  shiJl  not  teach  every 
man  his  neighbour,  and  every  man  his  brother,  saying,  Know  the 
Lord :  for  all  shall  know  me,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest.  For  I  will 
be  merciful  to  their  unrighteousness,  and  their  sins  and  their  iniquities 
will  I  remember  no  more."  Now,  dear  hearer,  suppose  that  thou  art 
under  a  sense  of  sin;  something  has  revived  in  thee  a  recollection  of 
past  guilt,  or  it  may  be  that  thou  hast  sadly  stumbled  this  very  day, 
and  Satan  whispers,  ''Thou  wilt  surely  be  destroyed,  for  thou  hast 
sinned."  Now  go  to  the  great  Father,  and  open  this  page,  putting  thy 
finger  on  tliat  twelfth  verse,  and  say, "  Lord,  thou  hast  in  infinite,  bound- 
less, inconceivable  mercy  entered  into  covenant  with  me,  a  poor  sinner, 
seeing  I  believe  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  now  I  beseech  thee  have 
respect  unto  thy  covenant.  Thou  hast  said,  /  tvill  be  merciful  to  their 
nnrighieousmss  :-^0  God  be  merciful  to  mine.  Their  sifts  and  their 
iniquities  mil  I retnember  no  more:  Lord,  remember  no  more  my  sins : 
forget  for  ever  my  iniquity."  That  is  the  way  to  use  the  covenant : 
when  under  a  sense  of  sin,  run  to  that  clause  which  meets  your  case. 

But  suppose,  beloved  brother  or  sister,  you  are  labouring  to  overcome 
ifiward  corruption,  with  intense  desire  that  holiness  should  be  wrought 


TH8  COVENAITT  PLBADBD.  11 

in  yon.  Tlien  read  the  coTenant  again  as  yon  find  it  in  the  thirty-first 
chapter  of  Jeremiah  at  the  thirty-third  Terse.  It  is  the  same  oovenant, 
only  we  are  reading  another  version  of  it.  ''  This  shall  be  the  covenant 
that  I  will  make  with  the  house  of  Israel ;  after  those  days,  saith  the 
Lordy  I  will  pnt  my  law  in  their  inward  parts,  and  write  it  in  their 
hearts."  Now,  can  yon  not  plead  that  and  say,  ^'  Lord,  thy  command- 
ments npon  stone  are  holy,  bnt  I  forget  them,  and  break  them ;  but,  0 
my  God,  write  them  on  the  fleshy  tablets  of  my  heart.  Come  now  and 
make  me  holy ;  transform  me  ;  write  thy  will  upon  my  very  soul,  that 
I  may  live  it  out,  and  from  the  warm  impulses  of  my  heart  serve  thee 
as  thou  wonldst  be  served.  Have  respect  unto  thy  covenant  and  sanctify 
thy  servant" 

Or  suppose  you  desire  to  be  upheld  under  atnmg  temptalion,  lest  yon 
should  go  back  and  return  to  your  old  ways.  Take  the  covenant  as 
yon  find  it  in  Jeremiah  at  the  thirty-second  chapter  at  the  fortieth 
verse.  Note  these  verses  aifi  learn  them  by  heart,  for  they  may  be  a  great 
help  to  von  some  of  these  days.  Read  the  fortieth  verse  of  the  thirty- 
second  chapter  of  Jeremiah.  ''And  I  will  make  an  everlasting  cove- 
nant with  them,  that  I  will  not  turn  away  from  them,  to  do  them  good ; 
but  I  will  put  my  fear  in  their  hearts,  that  they  shall  not  depart  from 
me."  Now  go  and  say, ''  0  Lord,  I  am  almost  gone,  and  they  tell 
me  I  shall  finally  fall,  but  0,  my  Lord  and  Master,  there  stands  thy 
word.  Put  thy  fear  in  my  heart  and  fulfil  thy  promise,  that  I  sliall  not 
depart  from  thee."    This  is  the  sure  road  to  final  perseverance. 

Thus  I  might  take  yon  through  all  the  various  needs  of  God's  people, 
and  show  that  in  seeking  to  have  them  supplied  they  may  fitly  cry, 
"  Have  respect  unto  the  covenant."  For  instance,  suppose  you  were 
in  great  distress  of  mind  and  needed  comfort,  you  could  go  to  him 
with  that  covenant  promise,  ''As  a  mother  comforteth  her  children, 
even  so  will  I  comfort  thee,— out  of  Zion  will  I  comfort  thee."  Go  to 
him  with  that  and  say,  "Lord,  comfort  thy  servant."  Or  if  there 
should  happen  to  be  a  trouble  upon  us,  not  for  yourselves,  but  for  the 
church ;  how  sweet  it  is  to  ^o  to  the  Lord  and  say,  "  Thy  covenant  runs 
thus — *  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  her.'  0  Lord,  it 
seems  as  though  they  would  prevail.  Interpose  thy  strength  and  save 
thy  church."  If  it  ever  should  happen  that  you  are  looking  for  the 
conversion  of  the  ungodly,  and  desiring  to  see  sinners  saved,  and  the 
world  seems  so  dark,  look  at  our  text  again — the  whole  verse — "  Have 
re^)ect  unto  the  covenant,  for  the  dark  places  of  the  earth  are  full  of 
the  habitations  of  cruelty,"  to  which  you  may  add,  "  but  thou  hast 
said  that  thy  glory  shall  cover  the  earth,  and  that  all  flesh  shall  see  the 
salvation  of  God.  Lord,  have  respect  unto  thy  covenant.  Help  our 
missionaries,  speed  thy  gospel,  bid  the  the  mighty  angel  fly  through 
the  midst  of  heaven  to  preach  the  everlasting  gospel  to  every  creature. 
Why,  it  is  a  grand  missionary  prayer.  "  Have  respect  unto  the  covenant." 
Beloved,  it  is  a  two-edged  sword,  to  be  used  in  all  conditions  of  strife,  and 
it  is  a  holy  balm  of  Gilead,  that  will  heal  in  all  conditions  of  suffering. 

IV.  jAjid  so  I  close  with  this  lost  question,  What  abb  the  prac- 
TiCAii  iVFEBENCeB  FROM  ALL  THIS  ?  "  Have  rcspcct  unto  the 
covenant."  Why,  that  if  we  ask  God  to  have  respect  unto  it  we  ought 
to  have  xeepect  unto  it  ourselves,  and  in  this  way. 


12  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

Have  a  grahful  respect  for  if.  Bless  the  Lord  that  he  over  con- 
•descended  to  enter  into  covenant  with  you.  What  oonld  he  see  in  you 
-even  to  give  you  a  promise,  much  more  to  make  a  covenant  with  you  ? 
Blessed  be  his  dear  name,  this  is  the  sweet  theme  of  our  hymns  ou 
^arth,  and  shall  be  the  subject  of  our  songs  in  heaven. 

Next,  have  a  believing  respect  for  it.  If  it  is  God's  covenant,  do  not 
-dishonour  it.  It  stands  sure.  Why  do  yon  stagger  at  it  through  un- 
belief? 

"  His  every  work  of  grace  is  strong 
As  that  which  built  the  skies  ; 
The  voice  that  rolls  the  stars  along 
Speuks  all  the  promises.** 

Next,  Jutve  a  jogftil  respect  for  it.  Wake  your  harps,  and  join  in 
praise  with  David :  "  Although  my  house  be  not  so  with  God,  yet 
hath  he  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant."  Here  is  enouteh  to 
make  a  heaven  in  our  hearts  while  yet  we  are  below — the  Lord  hatli 
entered  into  a  covenant  of  grace  and  peace  with  us,  and  he  will  bless  as 
for  ever. 

Then  Juive  a  jealous  respect  fm-  it.  Never  suffer  the  covenant  of  works 
to  be  mixed  with  it.  Hate  that  preaching — I  say  not  less  than 
that — ^hate  that  preaching  which  does  not  discriminate  between  the 
<x)venant  of  works  and  the  covenant  of  grace,  for  it  is  deadly  preaching 
and  damning  preaching.  You  must  always  have  a  straight,  clear  line 
here  between  what  is  of  man  and  what  is  of  God,  for  cursed  is  he  that 
trusteth  in  man  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm ;  and  if  you  have  begun  with 
the  Spiric  under  this  covenant  do  not  think  of  being  made  perfect 
in  the  flesh  under  another  covenant.  Be  ye  holy  under  the  precepts  of 
the  heavenly  Father;  but  be  ye  not  legal  under  the  taskmaster's  lash. 
Return  not  to  the  bondage  of  the  law,  for  ye  are  not  under  law,  bnt. 
under  grace.  "^ 

IjfjAtXy,  have  a  practical  respect  for  it.  Let  all  see  that  the  covenant 
of  grace,  while  it  is  your  reliance,  is  also  your  delight  Be  ready  to 
speak  of  it  to  others.  Be  ready  to  show  that  the  effect  of  its  grace  upon 
you  is  one  that  is  worthy  of  God,  since  it  has  a  purifying  effect  upon 
your  life.  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself  even  as  he 
is  pure.  Have  respect  unto  the  covenant  by  walking  as  such  people 
should  who  can  say  that  God  is  to  them  a  God,  and  they  arc  to  \im.  a 
people.  The  covenant  says,  ''From  all  their  idols  will  I  cleanse  them." 
Don't  love  idols  then.  The  covenant  says,  "  I  will  sprinkle  pure  water 
iipou  them,  and  they  shall  be  clean."  Be  ye  clean  then,  ye  covenanted 
ones,  and  may  the  Lord  preserve  you  and  make  his  covenant  to  be 
your  boast  on  earth  and  your  song  for  ever  in  heaven.  Oh  that  the 
Lord  may  bring  us  into  the  bonds  of  his  covenant,  and  give  us  a  simple 
faith  in  his  dear  Son,  for  that  is  the  mark  of  the  covenanted  ones. 
Ameu  and  Amen. 


Portion  of  Scriituue  read  before  Sermon'- Psalm  Ixxiv. 


Hviixs  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book." — ^287,  228,  742. 


Peti[j>$otit»n  i^atrernade  §ttp. 


THE  SICK  MAN  LEFT  BEHIND. 


FROM  THE  SICK  ROOM  OF  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

January  12THy  1879. 


*<  Bat  Troplumm  hftTe  I  left  at  Miletam  aic1r."— 2  Timothy  ir.  20. 

These  are  among  the  last  words  of  Paul  the  Apostle,  for  we  find  them 
in  the  doaing  verses  of  the  last  of  his  epistles.  The  chapter  reminds  us 
of  a  dying  man's  final  adien  to  his  best  beloved  friend,  m  the  course  of 
which  he  calls  to  mind  the  associates  of  his  life.  Among  his  memories 
of  love  we  find  Paul  reooUectiug  Trophimas,  who  had  fre^juently  shared 
^ith  him  the  perils  of  rivers  and  perils  of  robbers  which  so  laigdj 
attended  the  apostle's  career.  He  had  left  the  good  man  ill  at 
Miletam,  and  as  Timothy  at  Ephesas  was  within  an  easy  journey 
of  him,  there  was  no  need  to  add  a  hint  that  he  would  visit  him,  for 
he  would  be  sure  to  do  it  The  love  of  Jesus  works  in  the  hearts  of  his 
disciples  great  tenderness  and  unity.  The  overflow  of  our  Lord's  great 
Boal  has  saturated  all  his  true  followers  with  brotherly  aflfection :  bemuse 
Jesus  has  loved  Paul,  Paul  loves  Timothy,  and  llmothy  must  needs 
love  Trophimus.  From  this  love  there  arises  communion  of  feeling,  so 
that  in  sympathy  they  share  each  other's  joys  and  grieiis.  When  one 
member  rejoices  the  body  rejoices,  and  when  one  member  suficrs  the 
whole  body  suffers  with  it.  Trophimus  is  sick,  and  Paul  cannot  forget 
him,  though  he  himself  expects  m  a  few  weeks  to  die  a  martyr's  death ; 
neither  would  he  have  Timothy  ignorant  of  the  feet,  though  twice  within 
a  few  verses  he  hurries  him  to  come  to  Rome,  saying,  "  Do  thy  diligence 
to  come  shortly  unto  me."  If  Timothv  could  not  personally  visit 
the  sick  friend,  yet  it  was  well  that  he  should  know  of  his  affliction, 
for  he  would  then  remember  him  in  his  prayers.  '^  Beloved,  let  us 
love  one  another,  for  love  is  of  GkKL"  Let  us  remember  those  who 
are  one  with  us  in  Christ,  and  especially  let  us  bear  on  our  hearts 
all  those  who  aro  afflicted  in  mind,  body,  or  estate.  If  we  have  had 
to  leave  Trophimus  at  Miletum,  or  at  Brighton,  or  at  Yentnor,  let  us 
leave  our  heart's  love  with  him ;  and  if  we  hear  that  another  Trophimus 
lies  sick  not  far  from  our  own  abode,  let  us  accept  the  information  as  in 
itself  a  sufficient  summons  to  minister  to  the  afflicted  friend.  May 
holy  sympathy  pervade  all  our  souls,  for,  however  active  and  zealous  we 
niay  be,  we  have  not  yet  reached  a  perfect  character  unless  we  are  full  of 
compassion,  tender-hearted,  and  considerate  of  the  sorrowful,  for  this  is 
the  mind  of  Christ 
No.  1,452. 


14  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Simple  aa  the  statement  of  our  text  certainly  is,  it  is  foimd  in  an  in- 
spired book,  and  it  ifi  therefore  more  than  an  ordinanr  note  in  a  common 
letter.  Like  another  verse  of  the  same  chapter,  "  The  cloke  that  I  loft 
at  Troas  with  Carpus,  when  thou  comest,  bring  with  thee,  and  the  books, 
but  especially  the  parchments,"  has  been  judged  to  be  beneath  the  dig- 
nity of  inspiratum,  oat  we  think  not  so.  The  God  who  counts  the  hairs 
of  our  heads  in  providence  may  well  mention  his  sick  servant  on  the 
page  of  inspiration.  Instead  of  caritling  at  the  littleness  of  the  recorded 
fact,  let  us  admire  *'  the  love  of  the  Spirit"  who,  while  he  lifts  Ezekiel  and 
Daniel  above  the  sph^^s,  and  raises  the  language  of  David  and  Isaiah 
to  the  utmost  pitch  of  poetry  and  eloquence,  yet  deigns  to  breathe  in 
such  a  line  as  this, — "  Trophmus  have  I  left  at  MUetvm  sick,** 

Can  we  leam  anything  more  from  this  plain  line  of  aj^stolic  penman- 
ship ?  Let  us  see.  If  the  same  divine  Spirit  who  inspired  it  will  shine 
upon  it  we  shall  not  read  it  in  vain. 

I.    From  the  feet  that  Paul  left  Trophimus  at  Miletum  sick  we  learn 

that  IT  IS  THE  WILL  OF    GOD    THAT  SOME  GOOD  MEN  SHOULD  BE  IN 

ILL  HEALTH.  Whatever  the  malady  may  have  been  which  aflFected  Tro- 
phimuB,  Paul  could  certainly  have  healed  him  if  the  divine  Spirit  had 
permitted  the  use  of  his  miraculous  powers  to  that  end.  He  had  raised 
up  Eutychus  from  death,  and  he  had  given  the  use  of  his  Umbe  to  the 
cripple  at  Lystra ;  we  feel,  therefore,  fully  assured  that  had  God  allowed 
the  apostle  so  to  use  his  healing  energy,  Trophimus  would  have  left 
his  bed,  and  continued  his  journey  to  Rome.  Not  so,  however,  had 
the  Lord  willed;  the  good  fruit-bearing  vine  must  be  pruned,  and 
Trophimus  must  suffer :  there  were  ends  to  be  answered  by  his  weakness 
which  could  not  be  compassed  by  his  health.  Instantaneous  restoration 
could  have  been  given,  but  it  was  withheld  under  divine  direction. 

This  doctrine  Ucuh  us  away  front  the  vain  idea  of  ehatice,  AYe  are  not 
wounded  by  arrows  shot  at  a  venture,  but  we  smart  by  the  determinate 
counsel  of  heaven.  An  overruling  hand  is  everywhere  present,  preventing 
or  permitting  ill,  and  no  one  shaft  of  disease  is  ever  let  fly  by  stealth 
from  the  bow  of  death.  If  some  one  must  be  ill  it  was  a  wise  providence 
which  selected  Trophimus,  for  it  was  better  for  him  to  be  ill  than  Titus, 
or  Tychicus,  or  Timothy.  It  was  well,  too,  tiiat  he  happened  to  be  ill  at 
Miletum  near  to  his  own  native  city,  Ephesus.  We  cannot  always  see 
the  hand  of  God  in  providence,  but  we  may  be  always  sure  that  it  is 
there.  If  not  a  qparrow  li^hteth  on  the  ^und  without  onr  Father, 
surely  not  a  child  of  the  divine  femily  is  laid  low  without  his  sacred  will. 
Chance  is  a  heathenish  idea,  which  cannot  Hve  in  the  presence  of  an 
everywhere  present,  living,  and  working  God.  Away  with  it  from  every 
Christian  mind !  It  is  alike  dishonouring  to  the  Lord  and  grievous  to 
ourselves. 

This  aUo  delivers  tis  from  regarding  affliction  as  being  always  brought 
vpon  nien  by  their  personal  sin.  Many  a  sickness  has  been  the  direct 
result  of  intemperance,  or  some  other  form  of  wickedness ;  but  here  is  a 
worthy,  well-approved  brother  laid  aside  and  left  on  the  road  through  a 
malady  for  which  he  is  not  blamed  in  any  measure.  It  is  too  common 
nowadays  for  men  to  be  of  a  hard  and  cruel  spirit,  and  ascribe  the  illnesses 
oven  of  those  who  are  true  children  of  God  to  some  fault  in  their  habits 
of  life.    We  wonder  how  they  would  like  to  be  dealt  with  in  this  manner 


THB  BICK  HAS  LEFT  BBHIKD.  15 

if  ibej  were  suffering,  and  conld  wash  their  hands  in  innocency  in  re- 
ierenoe  to  their  daily  lives.    In  our  Lord's  day  they  told  him,  "  Lord,  he 
whom  thoa  loTest  is  sick  " ;  and  Solomon  long  before  that  time  wrote— 
"  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  correcteth ;  eren  as  a  fkther  the  son  in  whom 
he  delighteth."    This  was  much  better,  more  hnmane,  and  more  tmthfal 
speech  than  the  frozen  philosophy  of  modem  times  which  traces  each 
man's  sickness  to  his  own  violation  of  natural  law,  and,  instead  of 
pouring  in  the  bahn  of  consolation,  pours  out  the  sulphuric  acid  of 
slaaderons  insinuation.    Jjet  the  aiBicted  examine  lumseu  to  see  if  the 
rod  be  not  sent  to  correct  some  secret  evil,  and  let  him  diligently  con- 
sider wherein  he  may  amend ;  but  far  be  it  fix)m  us  to  stand  at  his 
bedside  like  judges  or  lictors,  and  look  upon  our  friend  as  an  offender  as 
well  as  a  sufferer.    Such  brutality  may  be  left  to  the  philosophers,  it 
would  ill  become  the  sons  of  God.    We  may  not  think  a  shade  the  less 
of  Trophimus  because  he  is  sick  at  Miletum ;  he  is  probably  a  &r  better 
man  than  any  of  us,  and  perhaps  for  that  very  reason  he  is  more  tried. 
There  is  gold  in  him  which  pays  for  putting  into  the  crucible ;  he  bears 
such  rich  fruit  that  he  is  wortn  pruning ;  he  is  a  diamond  of  so  pure  a 
water  that  he  will  repay  the  lapidary's  toil.    This  may  not  be  quite  so 
true  of  any  of  us,  and,  therefore,  we  escape  his  sharper  trials.    Let  us, 
as  James  saith,  ''count  them  happy  that  endure,"  and,  like  David,  say, 
**  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  chastenest,  0  Lord,  and  teachest  him 
oat  of  thy  law."    What  saith  the  Scriptures — "  For  whom  the  Lord 
loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scoureeth  every  son  whom  he  reoeiveth.    If 
ye  endure  chastening,  Ood  d^ueth  with  you  as  with  sons ;  for  what 
son  is  he  whom  the  &ther  chasteneth  not  ?"    Lazarus  of  Bethany,  Dor- 
casy  Epi4>hroditus,  and  Trophimus  are  a  few  of  that  great  host  of  sick 
folk  whom  the  Lord  loves  in  their  siclmesses,  for  whom  the  promise  was 
written,  ''The  Lord  wiU  strengthen  him  upon  the  bed  of  languishing : 
thoo  wilt  make  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness." 

II.  We  have  only  strength  and  space  for  mere  hints,  and  so  we 
notice,  secondly,  that  good  men  hay  bb  laid  aside  when  thbt  seem 
TO  BB  xosi  KBEDED,  as  Trophimus  was  when  the  aged  apostle  had  but 
a  scanty  escort^  and  requirea  his  aid.  Paul  wanted  him  badly  enough 
soon  aner  he  had  been  obliged  to  leave  him  at  Miletum,  for  he  writes 
sorrowfully,  "  Demas  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved  this  present  world, 
and  is  departed  unto  Thessalonica ;  Crescens  to  Oalatia,  Titus  unto 
Dalmatia.  Only  Luke  is  with  me."  "  And  l^chicus  have  I  sent  to 
Ephesus."  How  glad  he  would  have  been  of  Trophimus,  for  we  see  how 
he  b^  Timothv  to  come  with  all  speed,  and  to  bring  Mark  with  him, 
whose  service  ne  greatly  needed.  Yet  not  even  for  Paul's  sake  can 
l^phimus  be  sud&nly  raised  up  :  his  Lord  sees  it  to  be  needful  that 
be  snould  feel  the  heat  of  the  furnace,  and  into  the  crucible  he  must  so. 
We  think  that  the  church  cannot  spare  the  earnest  minister,  the  inde- 
fiktigable  missionary,  the  foithful  deacon,  the  tender  teacher ;  but  God 
thi^th  not  so.  No  one  is  indispensable  in  the  household  of  God.  He 
can  do  his  own  work  not  only  without  Trophimus,  but  even  without 
Paul.  Yea,  we  go  farther ;  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  work  of  the 
Lord  is  quickenea  by  the  decease  of  one  upon  whom  it  seemed  to  depend. 
When  a  Droad,  far-Bpre«ding  tree  is  cut  down,  many  smaller  trees  which 
were  dwaifed  and  stunted  while  it  stood  suddenly  shoot  up  into  vigorous 


16  METROFOLITAH  TABSRKAOLE  PULPIT. 

[Efrowth ;  even  so^  one  good  roan  may  do  much,  aad  yet  when  he  is  removed 
others  may  do  more.  Temporary  illnesses  of  great  workem  may  call  to 
the  front  those  who  would  else,  from  Tory  modesty,  have  remained  in  the 
rear,  and  the  result  may  be  a  great  gain. 

Poor  Troptnmns  had  in  his  healthier  days  been  the  innooent  canse  of 
bringing  Paul  into  a  world  of  trouble,  for  we  read  in  Acts  xxi.  27,  that  a 
tumult  was  made  by  the  Jews,  because  they  imagined  that  Paul  had 
brought  Trophimos  into  the  temple,  and  so  had  defiled  it.    Now,  when 
ho  could  have  been  of  serrice,  he  ia  sick,  and  no  donbt  it  was  a  great 
grief  to  him  that  it  should  be  so :  yet  for  him,  as  oftentimes  for  us, 
there  was  no  altcmatire  but  to  submit  himself  under  the  hand  of  God, 
and  feel  that  the  Lord  is  always  right.    Why  do  we  not  yield  at  once  ? 
Why  do  we  champ  the  bit  and  paw  the  ground,  restless  to  be  on  the 
road?    If  our  Lord  bids  us  stand  still,  can  we  not  be  qniet?    Active 
spirits  are  apt  to  become  restive  spirits  when  under  the  restraiuin*^ 
hand ;  energy  soon  sours  into  rebellion,  and  wc  qnarrel  with  Ood  because 
we  are  not  allowed  to  glorify  him  in  our  own  way — a  foolish  form  of 
contest,  which  at  bottom  means  that  we  have  a  will  of  our  own,  and 
will  only  serve  God  upon  condition  of  having  it  indnlged.    Ikcthren, 
he  who  writes  these  lines  knows  what  he  writes,  and  this  is  the  verdict 
of  his  experience : — God's  work  needs  us  &r  less  than  we  imagine,  and 
God  would  have  us  aware  of  this  fact,  for  he  wiU  not  give  his  glory  to 
human  instruments  any  more  than  he  will  allow  his  praise  to  be  bestowed 
on  graven  images. 

in.  Oar  text  clearly  shows  ns  that  good  ubs  would  have  the 
Lord's  work  oo  on  whatkvbr  bboomxs  of  them. 

Paul  did  not  desert  Trophimus,  but  left  him,.becaii6e  a  higher  call  sum- 
moned him  to  Borne.  Tropbimus  we  may  be  sure  did  not  wish  to  delay 
the  great  a{K)8tlc,  but  was  content  to  be  left.  No  doubt  they  Ix>th  felt 
the  separation,  but  like  true  soldiers  of  Glirist  they  endnred  liardness 
and  for  the  sake  of  the  cause  parted  company  for  a  while. 

it  would  be  a  great  grief  to  a  tnie-lieaitod  worker  if  he  knew  that 
any  fellow-labourer  slackened  his  pace  for  his  sake.  The  sick  in  an  army 
of  an  earthly  monardi  are  necessarily  an  impediment,  but  it  need  not  be 
80  in  the  army  of  the  King  of  kings.  Spintnal  sicloiess  is  a  sore  hind- 
rauce,  but  sickness  of  body  should  not  delay  tlie  host.  If  we  cannot 
preach  we  can  pray ;  if  one  work  is  out  of  our  reach  we  can  try  another, 
and  if  we  can  do  nothing  our  inability  should  serve  as  a  call  to  the 
vigorous  to  be  doing  all  the  more.  Trophimus  is  sick,  then  let  Timothy 
be  the  more  energetic.  Trophimus  cannot  attend  the  apostle,  then  let 
Timothy  be  the  more  diligent  to  come  before  winter.  Thus,  by  acting 
as  an  incentive,  the  lack  of  one  man's  service  may  produce  tenfold  more 
in  others  who  are  roused  to  extra  exertions. 

Brethren,  it  will  be  the  sweetest  alleviation  to  the  pains  of  a  sick  pastor 
if  he  sees  you  each  and  all  nerved  to  special  diligence ;  his  enforced  rest 
will  be  the  better  enjoyed  if  he  knows  that  the  Church  of  God  is  not  a 
sufferer  because  of  it ;  and  his  whole  mind  and  spirit  will  minister  to 
the  health  of  his  body  if  he  sees  the  fruit  of  the  Spurit  of  God  in  you  all, 
keeping  you  faithful  and  zealous.   Will  you  not  see  to  this  for  Jesus'  soke  ? 


p;eti[0pHten  Sl^ahrnacfe  §ulpt, 


THE  BIDBE  ON  THE  WHITE  HORSE  AND 

THE  ARMIES  WITH  HIM. 


%   I 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NBWINGTON, 


"  And  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white  horse ;  and  he  that  sat  npon  him 
V2B  called  Faithfxil  and  Trne,  and  in  righteoQanesB  he  doth  judge  and  make  war. 
His  eyee  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  <m  his  head  were  many  crowns  ;  and  he  had  a 
came  written,  that  no  man  knew,  hat  he  himiell  And  he  was  clothed  with  a 
Testore  dipped  in  blood :  and  his  name  is  called  The  Word  of  Qod,  And  the  armies 
which  were  in  heaven  followed  him  npon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white 
&nd  clean*  And  ont  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  eharp  sword,  that  with  it  he  should  smite 
the  nations :  and  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron :  and  he  treadeth  the  wine- 
press of  the  fierceness  and  wrath  of  Almif<:hty  God.  And  he  bath  on  his  vestnre 
and  on  his  thigh  a  name  written,  KING  OF  KINGS,  AND  LORD  OF 
LORDS."— Eevelation  xix.  11—16. 

Thb  beloved  John  was,  above  all  other  men,  femiHar  with  the  humble 
Saviorr.  He  bad  leaned  his  head  npon  his  bosom,  and  better  knew  than 
any  other  of  the  apostles  the  painful  beatings  of  his  Lord's  sorrowful  heart. 
Never  from  his  mind  conld  be  effaced  the  likeness  of  Christ,  the  visage 
more  marred  than  that  of  any  man.  He  had  seen  the  dear  sufferer  on  that 
dreadfal  night,  when  he  was  covered  with  gory  sweat  in  Gethsemane ;  he 
had  seen  him  after  he  had  been  buffeted  and  scourged  in  Herod's  palace 
and  Pilate's  hall ;  he  had  even  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  and  seen 
his  divine  Master  in  the  extreme  agonies  of  death ;  and  therefore  the 
tender,  affectionate  heart  of  John  would  never  permit  his  Master's  suffer- 
ing imBge  to  fade  from  his  memory.  Truly,  if  he  had  spoken  to  us  in 
vision — in  symbolic  terms — concerning  what  he  had  seen  of  his  Lord 
and  Master  here  below,  he  would  have  described  him  as  a  footman  going 
forth  to  the  fight  done,  with  no  armies  following  him,  for  all  his  dis^ 
dples  forsook  him  and  fled ;  himself  wearing  no  glittering  armour,  but 
with  his  garments  dipped  in  blood  and  with  his  face  smeared  with  shame. 
He  would  have  told  yon  how  the  solitary  champion  fought  alone  amid 
the  dust  and  smother  of  the  battle,  and  how  he  lell,  and  bit  thediist,  so 
that  his  foe  set  his  foot  upon  him,  and  for  a  moment  rejoiced  over  him. 
He  would  have  told  yon  how  he  leaped  again  from  the  gra^e,  and  trod 
down  his  adversaries,  and  led  captivity  captive.    Such  would  have  been. 


18  METROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULFIT. 

only  in  far  nobler  terms,  John's  description  of  his  first  sight  of  hia 
wrestling  warrior  Lord. 

But  now  in  the  passage  before  ns  a  door  was  opened  in  heaven,  and 
that  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  saw  what  else  he  had  never  seen — what 
else  he  had  never  imagined.  He  saw  the  same  warrior  Lord,  but  after 
quite  another  fashion.  If  John  had  continued  to  look  with  the  eve  of 
sense  at  Christ  and  his  followers  even  to  this  day,  and  had  viewed  the 
battle  as  it  is  to  be  seen  in  history  upon  earth,  he  would  have  said  that 
he  saw  the  same  despised  and  rejected  One  at  the  head  of  a  band 
equally  despised  and  rejected,  leading  them  to  prison  and  to  death. 
He  would  have  told  yon  how  to  this  very  day  the  banner  of  the  gospel  is 
borne  aloft  amid  smoke  and  dust,  and  Christ  crucified  is  proclaimed  amid 
contention  and  ridicule.  He  would  have  drawn  in  black  colours  the 
scene  of  the  battle,  the  great  battle  which  is  raging  among  the  sons 
of  men  at  this  very  hour.  But  now  a  door  was  opened  in  heaven,  and 
John  saw  the  scene  as  Ood  sees  it.  He  looked  upon  it  from  heaven's 
point  of  view,  and  saw  the  conflict  between  good  and  evil,  between  Christ 
and  Satan,  between  truth  and  error ;  saw  it  in  heaven's  own  clear  view, 
and  he  then  wrote  the  vision  that  we  also  might  see  it.  Oh,  if  we  are 
sharers  in  this  conflict,  if  we  are  following  the  liamb  whithersoever  he 
goeth,  if  we  are  pledged  to  the  truth  and  to  the  right,  if  we  are  sworn 
to  the  precious  olooa  of  atonement,  and  to  the  grand  doctrines  of  the 
gospel,  it  will  do  us  good  and  stir  our  blood  to  stand  on  one  of  the 
^rene  hill-tops  of  heaven,  above  the  mists  of  earth,  and  look  upon 
ihe  battle  which  rages  still  upon  the  earth,  and  will  rage  on  till  Arma- 
geddon shall  conclude  the  war.  If  we  can  behold  the  scene,  God 
strengthening  our  eyes,  it  may  strengthen  our  hands  for  the  conflict, 
our  hearts  for  the  fray. 

When  the  door  was  opened  in  heaven,  the  first  thing  that  the  seer 
of  Patmos  noticed  was  mir  Captain:  let  ns  look  at  him,  first.  After- 
wards he  saw  hia  followers;  and  then  he  marked  the  mode  of  tvixrfare^ 
and  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  gteat  defeat  of  the  foe. 

I.    First,  then,  JoHir  saw  cub  Captain,  the  King  of  kings. 

Let  us  notice  his  glorious  state.  He  says,  '*1  saw,  and  behold  a  white 
liorse ;  and  he  that  sat  upon  him."  Whilst  Jesus  was  here,  as  we  have 
already  said,  he  was  a  foot-soldier ;  he  had  to  plunge  knee-deep  through 
mire  and  dirt,  and  walk  as  wearily  as  any  of  the  rest  of  the  warrior  com- 
pany ;  but  now  that  he  has  ascended,  though  he  continues  still  to  fight, 
it  is  in  another  fashion.  Of  course,  the  terms  are  symbolical,  and  none 
will  take  them  literally ;  but  our  Lord  is  here  described  as  sitting  upon 
a  gallant  steed,  chargmg  his  foes  upon  a  snow-white  horse.  This  means 
that  Christ  is  honaured  now.  He  is  no  weary,  dusty,  fainting  footman 
now,  I  warrant  you.  Time  was  when  Solomon  said  that  he  saw  servants 
upon  horses  and  princes  walking  in  the  dust :  and  so  it  was  with  Christ : 
Pilate  and  Herod  rode  the  high  horse,  and  Jesus  must  walk  in  pain  and 
dishonour.  But  now,  like  a  greater  Mordecai,  he  rides  on  the  Kind's 
horse,  for  this  is  the  man  whom  the  King  delighteth  to  honour.  In 
royal  state  our  Jesus  goeth  forth  to  war,  not  as  a  common  soldier,  but 
as  a  glorious  prince,  royally  mounted. 

By  a  horse  is  denoted,  not  only  honour,  but  power.  To  the  Jews  the 
employment  of  the  horse  in  wari'are  was  unusual,  so  that  when  it  was 


THB  BIDHK  OH  THE  WHITH  H0B8B.  19 

vacd  faj  their  adversaries  they  impated  to  it  great  force.  Jesiis  Christ 
has  a  mighty  power  to-daj,  a  power  which  none  can  measure.  He  was 
cradfied  in  weakness,  bat  where  is  the  weakness  now?  He  gave  his 
hands  to  the  nail,  and  his  feet  to  be  fastened  to  the  wood,  but  he  does 
90  no  longer.  Now  has  he  mounted  on  the  horse  of  his  exceeding  great 
power,  and  he  raleth  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  none  can  stay  his 
band,  or  pat  him  to  dishononr,  or  diq)ate  his  will.  0  yoa  that  love  him, 
feast  yonr  eyes  npon  him  this  day.  It  is  not  for  me  to  speak ;  to  do 
80  were  bat  to  hold  a  candle  to  the  sun ;  but  gaae  upon  him  for  yoar- 
sdves,  and  let  your  eyes  be  satiated  with  the  image,  as  you  see  him, 
onoe  despused  and  rejected,  now  taking  to  himself  his  great  power. 

Here  is  symbolised  swifkiess,  too.  Ghrist  must  walk  when  he  was 
here,  and  go  from  city  to  dty,  scarcely  getting  through  them  all  till  his 
time  was  accomplished ;  but  now  his  word  runneth  very  swiftly.  He 
has  but  to  will  it  and  the  voice  of  his  gospel  is  heard  to  the  utmost  ends 
of  the  earth ;  their  line  is  gone  out  through  all  the  earth,  and  their  words 
to  the  end  of  the  world,  llverywhere  is  the  gospel  preached,  if  it  be  but 
far  a  testimonv  against  them,  and  to-day  is  fulfilled  before  your  eyes 
the  words  of  tne  prophet  Zechariah,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  visited 
his  flock,  the  house  of  Judah,  and  hath  made  them  as  his  goodly  horse 
in  the  battle,  and  they  shall  fight  because  the  Lord  is  with  them." 

The  colour  of  the  horse  is  meant  to  denote  victory.  The  Roman  con* 
qoeror,  when  he  enjoyed  a  triumph,  on  returning  from  a  campaign,  rode 
up  the  Via  Sacra  on  a  white  horse,  and  the  Romans  crowded  to  the 
hooae-tops  to  gaze  upon  the  hero  as  he  exhibited  his  spoils.  Now  Jesus 
Christ  is  admired  of  aneels  and  elect  spirits,  who  throng  the  windows  of 
heaven  to  gaae  upon  him  who  is  glorified  by  his  Father.  There  is  a 
palehorae,  and  his  name  that  sits  on  him  is  Death,  and  there  is  a  horse 
red  witii  blood,  and  yet  another  black  with  judgment ;  but  his  is  a  white 
horse,  significant  of  comfort  and  of  joy  to  all  that  Imow  and  love  him. 
He  oomes  to  fight,  but  the  fight  is  for  peace ;  he  comes  to  smite,  but  it 
is  to  smite  his  people's  enemies ;  ho  comes  as  a  conqueror,  but  it  is  as  a 
delivering  conqueror  who  scattereth  flowers  and  roses  where  he  rides, 
Ixeaking  only  the  oppressor,  but  blessing  the  citizens  whom  he  emanci- 
pates. 

Again,  I  say,  I  scarcely  like  to  speak  npon  this  theme ;  it  seems  too 
great  for  me,  but  I  would  bid  the  saints  of  God  who  have  wept  at  Geth- 
semane  now  lilt  up  their  eyes  and  smile  as  they  see  that  same  Redeemer 
who  once  lay  groveUing  beneath  the  olive  trees  now  riding  on  the  white 
horse.  Your  Lord  at  this  moment  is  no  more  despised,  but  all  the  glory 
that  heaven  itself  can  devise  is  lavished  upon  him. 

John  looked  into  the  open  vault  of  heaven,  and  he  had  time,  not  only 
to  see  the  horse,  but  to  mark  the  character  of  him  that  sat  upon  it. 
He  says  that  he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True.  By 
this  you  may  know  your  Lord.  He  has  been  a  faithful  and  true  Mend 
to  you.  O  soldiers  of  the  cross,  when  has  he  ever  deceived  you  ?  When 
has  he  fiEiiled  you,  or  forgotten  you?  Faithful?  Ah,  that  he  is, 
&iUifnl  to  every  word  that  he  has  spoken.  And  true  ?  Do  yon  not 
recognise  him,  for  is  he  not  the  truth — ^the  very  truth  of  God  ?  Has  he 
not  kept  every  promise  that  he  has  made  you,  and  have  you  not 
foond  nis  teachings  to  be  everlastingly  settled  upon  divine  veracity  ? 


20  METROPOLITAN  TABERKAGLB  PULPIT. 

And  faithful  and  true  has  he  been  to  the  great  Father.  The  work  he 
undertook  to  do  he  has  accompliflhed.  He  has  in  nothing  drawn 
hack  from  the  covenant  engagements  under  which  he  laid  himself  of  old. 
He  stood  as  the  surety  of  his  people,  and  he  has  been  foithfid  and 
true  to  that  smarting  suretyship.  He  came  to  be  the  deliverer  of  his 
elect,  and  he  has  wrought  the  deliverance.  He  has  not  turned  either  to 
the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  but  he  has  been  faitliful  and  true  to  every 
pledge  which  he  gave  to  his  Father  for  the  deliverance  of  his  chosen.  Ay, 
and  even  his  enemies,  though  they  give  him  many  a  black  word,  cannot 
say  that  he  is  not  fidthful  and  true.  He  has  not  played  false,  even 
to  the  basest  devil  in  hell,  nor  has  he  deceived,  in  any  respect,  the 
basest  man  that  lives.  Nor  will  he,  for  when  the  day  comes  to  keep 
his  word  of  terror,  he  will  make  the  penalty  tally  to  every  syllable 
of  the  threatening,  and  mete  out  vengeance  with  a  line  and  judgment 
with  a  plummet,  and  even  his  adversaries,  though  they  shall  for  ever 
rue  the  fEu^t,  shall  confess  that  his  name  is  Faiuifhl  and  True.  They 
called  him  many  ill  names  when  he  was  here,  they  said  he  had  a  devil 
and  was  mad ;  but  now  it  is  acknowledged  that  his  name  is  Faithful 
and  True.  We  acknowledge  it  with  intense  delight,  and  are  glad  to  think 
that  he  leads  the  troops  of  heaven  to  the  fight. 

John  still  looked,  and  as  he  gazed  with  opened  eye  he  mai4ced  ihe  moih 
of  action  and  of  warfare  which  the  champion  employed,  for  ho  says,  "  In 
righteousness  he  doth  judge  and  make  war."  Jesus  is  the  only  king  who 
always  wars  in  this  fetshion.  There  have  been  brilliant  exceptions  to  the 
general  rule,  but  war  is  usually  as  deceitful  as  it  is  bloody,  and  the  words 
of  diplomatists  are  a  mass  of  lies.  It  seems  impo^ble  that  men  should 
deliberate  about  peace  and  war  without  straightway  forgetting  the  mean- 
ing of  words  and  the  bonds  of  honesty.  War  still  seems  to  be  a  piece  of 
business  in  which  tnith  would  be  out  of  place ;  it  is  a  matter  so  accursed 
that  falsehood  is  there  most  at  home,  ana  ri^teousness  quits  the  plain. 
But  as  for  our  King,  it  is  in  ri^teoosness  that  he  doth  judge  and  make 
war.  Christ's  kingdom  needs  no  deception :  tiie  plainest  speech  and  the 
clearest  truth — these  are  the  weapons  of  our  warfare.  The  Jesuitical 
craft  which  speaks  not  what  it  means,  the  priestcraft  which  undermines 
the  faith  of  men  in  God  to  teach  them  faith  in  their  fellow  men,  the 
faJsehood  which  docs  not  teach  a  doctrine  at  the  first  but  gradually 
insinuates  it  into  feeble  minds,  the  craft  which  creeps  into  houses  and 
leads  astray  silly  women,  who  are  in  bondage  to  their  lusts — this  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  "  In  righteousness  doth  he 
judge  and  make  war."  He  bids  his  campions  come  forth  with  nothing 
but  his  word,  and  speak  that  word  fistithfoJly,  as  they  receive  it,  whether 
men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear.  He  tells  his  people,  wherever 
they  are,  to  live  righteously,  soberly,  and  in  all  integrity,  and  he  himself 
shakes  off,  as  a  man  shakes  off  a  viper  from  his  hand,  anything  that  is 
unrighteous,  everything  that  is  contrary  to  truth  and  holiness.  This  is 
our  champion,  and  I  warrant  you  are  right  glad  that  he  sits  on  the 
white  horse,  and  has  the  upper  hand.  Since  he  fights  after  this  fiishion, 
the  more  of  such  warfare  the  better  for  mankind. 

John,  gazing  still  into  the  open  door,  saw  a  little — ^not  much — of  the 
person  of  his  blessed  Master.  And,  of  course,  he  looked,  first,  into  thoee 
eyes,  those  dear  eyes  which  had  so  oft  been  filled  with  tears,  and  that  at 


X2UB  RWSSL  oar  .XHfi  <VfiITfi  uouss.  21 

the  hit  ireic  ev&n  red  witb  weeping.  Johu  gaoed  into  them,  or  wished 
to  doBOyboi  hehadtoooverhisownejreSyfortli^weKedazsled.  He  says, 
*'  His  eyes  were  aa  a  flame  of  fire."  Think  of  yoor  Master  on  the  wlutc 
faoiae  with  aach  ejes  as  these  to-mght.  Whyare  they  like  flames  of  fire? 
WEy,  firat^  to  diaoem  the  fiecrats  of  all  hearts.  There  aie  no  secr&ts 
here  that  Christ  does  not  see.  There  is  no  lewd  thought,  tliere  is 
no  unbelieving  aoepticism,  that  Ohiast  does  not  read.  There  is  no 
bypocrisy,  no  formalism^  no  deQeit»  that  he  does  not  scan  as  easily  as 
a  man  r^ub  a  nage  in  a  book.  His  eyes  are  like  a  flame  of  fire  to  rend 
OS  through  and  through,  and  know  us  to  our  inmost  soul.  Oh,  ^l^ink  of 
this,  and  if  ye  have  on^t  of  deoeit  tremble  beibre  him  in  whose  spirit 
there  is  no  guile.  Those  eyes  like  a  flange  of  fire  belong  to  our  Ohain- 
pion  that  he  may  understand  all  the  plots  and  orafta  of  all  oar  foes.  We 
are  sometimes  alanned;  we  say  that  tlie  machinations  of  Rome  are  very 
deep,  and  that  the  plots  of  infidelity  dive  xery  low.  But  what  mattereth 
it  ?  His  eyes  are  like  a  flame  of  fire :  he  knows  what  they  are  at.  He 
will  confound  their  politios,  he  willeiqiose  their  knavish  tricks,  and  still 
lead  on  his  host  conquering  and  to  eonoiiec  I^et  us  never  fioar  while  he 
is  on  the  white  hone  with  such  eyes  as  iiis. 

It  was  natural  that  John  should  oarry  his  glance  from  the  eyes  to  the 
brow ;  and  as  be  looked  at  our  chnupion  on  tiie  white  horse  he  saw  tliat 
on  his  head  were  many  crowns.  The  last  be  had  seen  tbrae  was  a  crown 
of  thorns ;  but  that  was  gone»  and  iu  the  place  of  the  one  crown  of  the 
briars  of  the  eartli  he  saw  many  crowns  of  the  jewds  of  heaven.  There 
rests  the  crown  of  creation,  for  this  Word  made  heaven  and  earth :  the 
crown  of  providence,  for  this  man  now  rules  the  nations  with  a  rod  of 
iron:  the  crown  of  graoe^  &r  it  is  from  bis  ro^al  hand  that  blessings  arc 
bestowed:  the  crovn  of  the  church,  for  be  it  known  to  dl  men  that 
there  is  no  head  of  the  church  but  Christ,  and  woe  unto  those  who  steal 
the  title.  He  is  bead  over  all  things  to  his  churoh,  and  king  in  the 
midst  of  her.  Yes,  on  his  head  are  many  crowns,  placed  there  by  iudi- 
vidual  souls  that  he  has  saved.  We  have  each  one  tried  to  crown  him 
in  our  poor  way,  and  we  will  do  so  as  long  as  we  live.  All  power  ia 
given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  tha^ore  well  may  multi- 
tudes of  diadems  fillet  that  august  brow  which  once  was  belted  witli 
thorns.  Glory  be  unto  thee,  0  Son  of  God  I  Onr  hearts  adoi'c  thee 
to-night  as  we  contemplate  thee  on  thy  white  horse. 

Looking  at  him  still,  Johu  saw  one  thing  more,  namely,  his  veslure. 
He  says  that  his  vesture  was  dipped  in  blood.  Oh,  but  this  is  the 
grandest  thought  about  our  Master  wherever  he  may  be,  that  he  is  ever 
a  red  man  wearing  the  bloody  garment.  As  the  atoniug  sacrifice  he  is  at 
his  best.  We  love  him  as  we  see  the  white  lily  of  his  perfect  nature,  but 
the  rose  of  Sharon  is  the  flower  for  us,  for  its  sweet  perfume  breathes  life 
to  our  fainting  souls.  Yes,  he  bled,  and  this  is  the  greatest  thing  we 
can  say  of  liiui.  His  life  was  glorious,  but  his  death  transcends  it.  A 
living  Christ,  a  reigning  Chnat — ^we  are  charmed  as  we  think  of  this ; 
but  oh,  the  bleeding  Christ,  the  bleeding  Glurist  for  me  I  As  the  blood 
is  the  life,  so  is  his  blood  life  to  us — tlie  Life  of  the  gospel,  the  life  of  our 
hopes :  and  one  delights  to  think  of  him  that,  though  he  rides  tlie  white 
hursc,  lie  has  never  stript  off  the  bloody  shirt  in  which  he  won  our 
redemption.    He  looks  Uke  a  Lamb  that  has  been  slain,  and  wears  his 


22  KETROPOLITAK  TABERKACLB  PULPIT. 

priesthood  still.  Whenever  he  goes  oat  to  conquer  it  is  with  this  harness 
on,  this  vesture  dipped  in  blood.  Oh,  preach  him,  ye  his  servants,  preach 
him  in  his  blood-ied  vesture.  Ye  shall  never  see  souls  saved  if  ye 
portray  him  in  any  other  kind  of  coat.  Ye  take  his  own  garment  fix>m 
him,  and  put  on  tnat  of  another,  and  ye  pretend  that  ye  are  making  lum 
more  illustrious  as  ye  put  on  him  a  scarlet  robe ;  but  his  own  blood  is 
his  beauty  and  his  triumph.  Let  him  come  before  us  in  that,  and  our 
hearts  shall  crown  him  with  loudest  acclaim* 

One  other  thing  John  saw,  and  that  was  his  nams.  But  here  he 
seems  to  contradict  himself.  He  says  that  he  had  a  name  which  no  man 
Imoweth ;  yet  he  says  that  his  name  was  the  Word  of  €k>d.  Oh,  but  it 
is  all  true ;  for  in  such  a  one  as  our  Master  there  must  be  paradoxes. 
No  man  knoweth  his  name.  None  of  you  know  all  his  natare.  His 
love  passes  vour  knowledge ;  his  goodness,  his  majesty,  his  humiliation, 
bis  glory,  all  these  transcend  your  ken.  You  cannot  know  kim.  Oh, 
the  depths !  If  you  plunge  deepest  into  the  mystery  of  the  incarnate 
God  you  can  never  reach  tlie  bottom  of  it.  ''No  man  knoweth  the  Son 
but  the  Father."  And  yet  you  do  know  his  name,  f<^you  know  that  he 
is  "the  Word  of  God,"  And  what  means  that?  Wny,  when  a  man 
would  show  himself,  he  speaks.  ''Speak,"  said  the  philosopher,  "that 
I  may  see  yon."  A  man  s  speech  is  the  embodiment  of  his  thought. 
You  know  his  thought  when  you  hear  his  word,  if  he  be  a  truth- 
speaking  man.  Now,  Christ  is  God's  word.  That  is  his  heart,  spoken 
out  to  you.  His  inmost  thoughts  of  love  are  printed  in  great  capital  letters, 
and  set  before  you  in  the  living,  loving,  bleeding,  dying  person  of  the 
incarnate  Son  of  God.  Thus  i&  he  called  the  Wora  of  Gdo,  and  in  that 
capacity  it  becomes  us  to  delight  ourselves  exceedingly  in  him,  and  tc 
exult  because  he  is  now  riding  triumphantly  upon  his  white  horse. 

II.  Thus  have  I  bidden  you  gaze  at  what  John  saw.  Time  chides 
me,  however,  and  I  can  only  ask  you  next,  if  you  have  seen  the  brightest 
One  of  all  upon  the  white  horse,  just  to  look  at  his  followers.  "  The 
armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  him  upon  white  horses." 

See,  then,  that  Christ  has  a  great  follotoing — ^not  one  armv,  but 
"  armies,"  whole  hosts  of  them — ^numbers  that  cannot  be  counted.  My 
Lord  is  not  the  chief  of  a  small  band,  but  he  has  a  great  host.  There  be 
some  who  think  that  all  Christ's  followers  go  to  their  little  Bethel,  and  so 
they  all  sit  down  on  the  top  of  their  own  Mount  Zion,  and  sweetty  bless 
the  Lord  who  shuts  out  the  rest  of  mankind.  But  I  tell  you  your  little 
Bethel  would  not  make  a  stable  for  the  horses  of  his  lieutenants.  He 
has  great  armies  following  him,  for  a  countless  number  out  of  every 
people  and  nation  and  tongne  has  he  redeemed  with  his  most  precious 
blood. 

And  these  that  follow  him,  you  notice,  are  all  mounted^  They  followed 
him  on  white  horses.  They  are  mounted  on  the  same  sort  of  horses  as 
himself,  for  they  fare  as  he  &res :  when  he  walks,  they  must  walk ;  when 
he  bears  a  cross,  they  must  carry  crosses,  too ;  but  if  ever  he  gets  a 
crown,  he  cries,  "They  shall  be  crowned,  too."  If  ever  he  gets  on 
horseback,  he  will  have  his  saints  on  horseback  with  him,  for  it  is  not 
like  him  that  he  should  ride  and  they  should  walk.  Bemember  Alex- 
ander, and  how  he  kept  up  the  spirit  of  his  soldiers.  Whene\xr  the 
troops  were  thirsty,  Alexanaer  would  not  drink ;  and  when  they  inarched 


THB  filDBB  <»r  THE  WHITE  HORSE.  23 

on  foot,  Alexander  footed  ik  vtiih  them.  So  is  it  with  our  Master — ^he 
has  been  marcblDg  here  in  the  rough  ways  with  ns,  aud  he  will  let  ua 
ride  in  the  ^lory-ways  with  him  when  the  time  shall  come. 

The  anmes  of  Christ  followed  him  on  white  horses.  Look  ye  a 
little  steadily  at  these  white  horses,  for  I  want  yon  to  obserre  the 
annonr  of  their  riden.  OromwelFs  men  wore  at  their  side  long  iron 
scabbards,  in  which  they  oarried  swords,  which  oftentimes  they  wiped 
across  the  manes  of  tbsir  hones,  when  they  were  red  with  blood.  A 
dreadfbl  story  that  to  read,  brare  as  were  those  Ironsides.  But  if  you 
look  at  these  troops  theie  is  not  a  sword  amongst  them.  Not  a  scabbard 
duigles ;  not  a  pieoe  of  metal  flashes  back  the  sonlight  Neither  helmet 
nor  cniiass  is  there,  nra:  does  there  seem  to  be  a  pistol  at  the  holster. 
They  are  not  armed  with  lance  or  pike,  and  yet  they  are  riding  forth 
to  war.  Do  you  want  te  know  the  armour  of  that  war?  I  will  tell  you. 
Thej  are  clothed  in  white  linen,  white  and  dean.  Strange  battle  array 
this !  And  yet  this  is  how  they  conquer,  and  how  yon  must  conquer, 
too.  This  is  both  armour  and  weapon.  Holiness  is  our  sword  and 
our  shield.  This  is  pike  and  gun.  If  we  but  live  as  Christ  lives  and 
f:>Uow  him,  we  shaU  conquer,  for  no  sword  can  come  at  him  that 
lives  to  Ood,— cince,  should  it  slay  his  body,  it  cannot  touch  his  soul : 
he  lives  and  con(]|ners  still.  Think  of  this,  and  never  ask  for  any  other 
harness  but  this  m  the  day  of  battle. 

Yet  I  have  said  they  were  all  on  horses,  which  shows  you  that  the 
sainte  of  God  have  a  strength  that  they  sometimes  forget.  You  know 
not  that  you  ride  on  a  horse,  0  child  of  Qod ;  but  there  is  a  supreme  in- 
visible power  which  helps  you  in  contending  for  Christ  and  for  Us  truth. 
You  are  nrightier  than  you  know  of,  and  you  are  riding  more  swiftly 
to  the  battle  and  more  rapidly  over  the  heads  of  your  foes  than  ever  you 
dream.  When  a  door  shall  be  opened  in  heaven  to  you,  and  you 
get  to  the  battle's  end,  you  will  say,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  I,  too,  rode  on 
a  white  horse.  I,  too,  conquered  when  I  thought  I  was  defeated.  I, 
too,  by  simple  obedience  to  his  will,  and  keeping  the  &ith,  and  walking 
in  his  truth,  have  been  more  than  conqueror  through  him  that  loved  me." 

And  is  not  this  a  grand  sight,  this  man — this  bomiy  man,  as  RuUier- 
ford  calls  him— on  his  white  horse,  and  all  these  bright  ones  following 
after  him  in  all  their  glorious  array. 

III.  And  now  we  must  close,  for  the  bell  has  tolled  just  now  to  show 
that  the  hour  is  up, 'but  we  cannot  end  till  we  have  spoken  of  thk 
WiJiFAEK  What  is  this  warfare?  There  cannot  be  war  without  a 
sword,  yet  if  you  look  all  along  the  ranks  of  the  white-robed  armies 
there  is  not  a  sword  amongst  them  all.  Who  carries  the  sword? 
There  is  one  who  bears  it  for  them  all.  It  is  he,  the  King,  who  comes  to 
marshal  us.  He  bears  a  sword.  But  where?  It  is  in  his  mouth! 
Strange  place  I  A  sword  in  his  mouth.  Yet  this  is  the  only  sword 
my  Lord  and  Master  wields.  Mahomet  subdued  men  with  the  scimetar, 
but  Christ  subdues  men  with  the  gospel.  We  have  but  to  tell  out  the 
glad  tidings  of  the  love  of  God,  for  this  is  the  swoi*d  of  Christ  with 
which  he  smites  the  nations.  Be  his  mouths,  my  brethren;  be  his 
mouths,  my  sisters.  Tell  to  your  children  in  your  Sunday-school 
classes,  tell  to  the  poor  in  the  comers  of  the  streets,  tell  by  your  little 
printed  pamphleto  if  you  cannot  by  your  voices,  all  the  story  of  how  he 


24  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLB  PULPIT. 

loved  US  and  f^Ye  himself  for  iis,  for  this  is  the  sword  of  our  warfare, 
it  goeth  forth  from  the  mouth  of  Christ.  Let  us  be  content  to  fight  wiUi 
this  and  nothing  else. 

But  for  those  who  will  not  yield  to  it  our  Leader  has  a  hand  as  weU 
as  a  tongue,  and  he  says  that  he  will  rule  the  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron ; 
and  if  you  will  read  history  through  you  will  find  that  all  nations  that 
reject  the  gospel  have  to  suffer  for  it.  I  select  one  instance.  The  gospel 
came  to  Spain  years  ago,  and  multitudes  of  the  nobility  were  converted ; 
but  they  had  their  aido-da-fiSy  and  burnt  the  saints,  and  the  accursed 
Inquisition  stamped  out  the  gospel  in  Spain  ;  and  to  this  day  the  nation 
cannot  rise.  It  will,  I  trust,  by  God's  forgiving  men^ ;  but  for  centurie8 
she  that  ruled  the  nations  and  covered  the  deep  with  her  armadas  has 
been  sitting  grovelling  in  lier  poverty  and  sloth,  for  Christ  has  ruled  her 
with  a  rod  of  iron,  ana  so  will  he  rule  all  nations  that  reject  the  testimony 
of  his  mouth.  If  the  sword  of  his  mouth  be  not  heeded,  then  cometh 
the  last  of  this  dread  warfare — and  may  God  grant  that  we  may  never 
know  it— when  his  foot  shall  do  it,  for  he  treadeth  the  winepress  of  the 
fierceness  and  wrath  of  Almighty  Gk>d.  Ah,  what  a  crush  must  that  be 
which  will  come  upon  the  clusters  of  Gomorrah  from  the  foot  which  once 
was  nailed  to  the  tree.  Who  stamped  that  sinner's  soul  and  crushed  it 
down  ?  Was  he  an  angry  angel  with  a  sword  of  fire  ?  It  was  the  Christ 
of  God,  the  man  of  love  ;  rejected  and  despised.  Fiercer  than  a  lion  on 
his  prey  is  love  when  once  provoked.  AMien  love  turns  to  jealousy  its 
fires  are  like  coals  of  juniper,  which  have  a  violent  flame.  Beware, 
ye  despisers,  lest  ye  continue  to  despise.  Submit  to  the  sword  of  his 
mouth,  lest  ye  be  smitten  by  his  hand.  Be  wise  when  once  his  hand 
begins  to  smite  you  lest  you  have  to  feel  his  foot,  for  it  is  all  over  then. 

May  you  and  I  have  a  white  horse  each  with  which  to  follow  Christ. 
But  we  never  shall,  unless  we  are  his  followers  here.  We  must  put  ou 
the  snow-white  garments  now.  Here  they  are  ready  for  you.  The 
righteousness  of  Christ  will  be  given  to  an^  man  who  accepts  him  and 
believes  on  him ;  and  when  your  snow-white  garments  once  are  on,  he 
will  give  you  the  horse  of  his  sacred  strength,  and  you,  even  you,  following 
in  the  track  of  your  gallant  leader,  shall  ride  on  shoutiug  ''  Victory, 
victory,  victory,  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  The  Loni  bless  you. 
for  Jesus's  sake.    Ameu. 


P0RTIO2S  OP  SCBIPTURE  READ  BEFORE  SeRMON — RcVClation  XViif. 

21 — 24  ;  and  Revelation  xix. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—45,  824,  851. 


^eii[0|artt!m:  i^ab^rmtde  fttt)^ 


ETEBNAL    FAITHFULNESS    UNAFFECTED    BY 

HUMAN    UNBELIEF. 


%  ^mm 


BELITEBED  BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    TnS  METBOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE^  NEWIKGTOK. 


*'  If  we  beUere  not^  yet  he  abideth  fiuthfal :  he  cannot  deny  himself." 

2  Timothy  ii.  13. 

This  is  one  of  the  five  faithful  sayings  which  the  aposUe  mentions.  All 
those  fidthful  sayings  are  weighty  and  important.  I  snppose  that  they 
may  hare  come  into  the  possession  of  the  chnrch  by  having  been  nttered 
bj  some  of  those  prophets  who  were  raised  up  to  cherish  the  infancy  of 
the  church,  such  as  Agabus,  and  the  daughters  of  Philip,  and  others. 
These  may  have  been  some  of  their  more  remarkable  sayings  which  laid 
hold  upon  the  minds  of  good  men,  were  quoted  by  the  preachers  and 
teadiers,  and  so  became  current  throughout  the  church.  Such  golden 
sayings  were  minted  into*  proverbs,  and  passed  from  hand  to  hand,  en- 
riching all  who  received  them :  to  the  saints  they  became  ''familiar  in 
their  mouths  as  household  words,"  and  were  specially  named  faithful  or 
true  sayings.  No  doubt  the  apostle  Paul  gave  his  endorsement  to  many 
of  these  holy  proverbs,  but  five  of  them  he  has  encased  in  the  amber  of 
mspiration,  and  handed  down  for  our  special  note.  Perhaps  it  may  in- 
terest vou  to  notice  them  as  they  occur.  The  first  one,  the  best  one, 
probably,  is  in  the  First  Epistle  of  Timothy,  first  chapter,  and  the  fif- 
tenOi  verse,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation, 
that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners ;  of  whom  I  am 
chief."  I  can  suppose  that  the  good  news  was  frequentlv  conveyed  by 
hmnble-minded  Cmistians  to  the  outside  world  in  that  short  and  com- 
pact form — ^"  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,"  so  that 
it  was  commonly  known  to  be  a  saying  among  Christians.  It  was  the 
way  in  which  those  who  could  not  preach  a  sermon,  and,  perhaps,  could 
scarcely  compose  a  sentence  for  themselves,  learned  the  pith  ana  marrow 
of  the  gospel,  and  had  it  by  them  in  a  concise  and  simple  form  for 
instructing  otikers.  Converts  were  in  the  habit  of  telling  this  to  their 
heathen  Mends  and  acquaintances  wherever  they  went,  that  so  they 
No.  1>458. 


26  KETROPOLITAN  TABERKACIiE  PULPIT. 

mlgbt  know  what  Jqbqs  Christ  had  come  to  do,  aad  might  be  led  to 
beheve  on  his  name.  The  next  faithful  or  trae  saying  is  in  the  Firsfc 
Epistle  of  Timothy,  the  third  chapter,  and  the  first  verse.  "  This  is  a 
true  saying,  If  a  man  desire  the  office  of  a  bishop,  he  desireth  a  good 
work."  Any  man  who  desireth  to  oversee  the  church  of  God,  and  to  be 
in  the  midst  of  the  people  as  a  shepherd,  desireth  a  good  work.  He 
will  bring  upon  himself  great  anxiety,  labour,  and  travail,  but  the  work 
is  honourable,  and  has  so  large  a  spiritual  reward  that  a  man  is  wise  to 
choose  it,  and  to  give  his  whole  life  to  it.  Another  of  these  faithful 
sayings  will  be  found  in  the  First  Epistle  of  Timothy,  the  fourth  chapter, 
and  the  eighth  verse,  for  so  the  woras  run,  "  For  bodily  exercise  profiteth 
little :  but  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  promise  of  the 
life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come.  This  is  a  faithful  saying 
and  worthy  of  all  acceptation.  For  therefore  we  both  labour  and  suffer 
reproach,  because  we  trust  in  the  living  God,  who  is  the  Saviour  of  all 
men,  specially  of  those  that  believe."  Godliness  hath  the  profit  of  this 
life  and  the  next,  and  therefore  godly  men  are  content  to  suffer,  b^i^nse 
they  expect  and  do  receive  an  abundant  blessing  as  the  result  thereof  at 
the  hands  of  God.  Such  a  proverb  as  this  was  greatly  needed  in  persecuting 
times,  and  it  is  valuable  still  in  these  greedy  days,  when  men  find  godli- 
ness a  hindrance  to  their  hasty  snatching  at  wealth,  and  therefore  turn 
aside  unto  ways  of  dishonesty  and  falsehood.  The  next  is  the  one  which 
constitutes  onr  text.  We  will  not,  therefore,  read  it  again  till  we  come 
to  handle  it.  But  the  fifth  is  in  Titus,  the  third  chapter,  and  the  eighth 
x&cse,  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  these  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm 
constantly,  that  they  which  have  believed  in  God  might  be  careful  to 
maintain  good  works.  These  things  are  good  and  profitable  imto  men." 
That  those  who  believe  in  Jesus  should  manifest  the  holy  character  of 
their  faith  by  their  lives  is  another  one  of  these  faithful  sayings,  which 
comes  with  all  the  greater  force  from  Paul  because  he  above  all  men  was 
fi'ee  from  any  suspicion  of  legality,  or  tlie  putting  of  human  merit  into 
the  place  of  the  grace  of  God  which  is  received  by  faith. 

And  now,  coming  to  the  faithful  saying  before  us,  it  may  not  strike 
you  at  first,  but  scholarly  men  have  observed  that  the  eleventh,  twelfth, 
and  thirteenth  verses  assume  the  form  of  a  hymn.  The  llebrL^v  hjmnss 
were  written  in  parallelisms,  not,  of  course,  in  rhymes ;  and  thcoC  three 
verses  are  thought  to  have  been  one  of  the  oldest  of  Christian  hymns. 

*'  It  ia  a  faithful  saving  : 
For  if  we  be  dead  with  Lim,  we  sliall  also  live  with  him  : 
If  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him  : 
If  we  deny  him,  he  also  will  deny  us  : 
If  we  believe  not,  vet  be  abideth  faithful  : 
He  cannot  deny  hmiself.'* 

This  is  a  miniature  psalm — one  of  those  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual 
songs  with  which  the  saints  of  God  were  wont  to  edify  one  another. 

I  am  sure  this  last  part  of  this  brief  hymn  is  well  worthy  to  be  re- 
garded as  a  faithful  saying  among  ourselves.  Brethren,  we  may  often 
mention  it;  we  may  frequently  quote  it;  we  may  roll  it  under  our  tongue 
as  a  sweet  morsel;  we  may  pass  it  from  one  to  another  as  a  classic 
saying  of  Christian  wisdom — "If  we  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth 
faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself.'' 


BTEBNAL  FAITHFULKEB8  UNAFFECTED  BY  HUMAN  UNBEIJEF.     27 

In  handling  it  at  this  time  I  would  divide  it  into  two  folded  parts* 
The  first  double  portion  is,  the  sad  possibility,  with  the  consoling  assurance, 
"If  we  believe  not,"— sad  possibility:  "yet  he  abideth  faithful,"— 
consoling  assurance.  The  second  part  of  our  subject  is  the  glorious  imr 
possihiUlyf  and  the  sweet  inference  thai  we  may  draw  from  it.  The 
glorious  impossibili^  is, — "  He  cannot  deny  himself,"  and  the  inference 
we  draw  firom  it  is  the  obverse  or  converse  of  our  text — If  we  believe,  he 
id>idetii  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself. 

I.  To  begin,  then,  with  the  sad  possibility,  and  the  consoling 
ASSURANCE — "  If  we  bcHeve  not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful." 

I  must  take  the  sad  possibility  first, — *'  if  we  believe  not,"  and  I  shall 
read  this  en>ression  as  though,  first  of  all,  it  concerned  the  world  in 
yeneralj  for  I  think  it  may  so  be  furly  read.  If  we  believe  not — if  man- 
kind believe  not,  if  the  race  believe  not,  if  the  various  classes  of  men 
believe  not — yet  he  abideth  fiuthful.  The  rulers  believe  not,  and  there 
are  some  that  make  this  a  very  great  point.  They  said  concerning  Jesus, 
^'Have  any  of  the  rulers  believed  on  him?"  If  Lord  So-and-so  hears 
the  preacher  there  must  be  something  in  what  he  says.  Englishmen  are 
wonderfully  impressed  with  the  judgment  of  a  duke  or  an  earl,  and  even 
with  that  of  titled  folk  of  lower  degree.  If  any  of  the  rulers  believe  in 
him,  who  among  worshippers  of  rank  would  raise  a  question  ?  Is  it  pub- 
lished under  authority  ?  jDo  the  great  ones  subscribe  to  it?  "Oh,  then," 
says  one,  'Mt  must  be  good,  and  it  must  be  true."  Now,  I  venture  to 
say  that  all  history  proves  that  the  truth  has  very  seldom  been 
accepted  by  the  rulers  of  this  world,  and  that  for  the  most  part  the 
poorest  of  the  poor  have  been  more  able  to  perceive  the  truth  than  the 
greatest  of  the  great  have  ever  been.  There  would  have  been  no 
Christianity  in  the  world  at  the  present  moment  if  it  had  not  found  a 
dielter  in  workshops  and  in  cottages.  It  has  flourished  amongst  the  des- 
pised poor  when  it  has  been  scouted  by  the  great  ones  of  the  earth. 
Well,  sirs,  if  we  believe  not — that  is,  if  our  greatest  men,  if  our 
senators  and  magistrates,  princes  and  potentates,  believe  not — ^it  does  not 
aflfoct  the  truth  of  God  in  the  smallest  conceivable  degree — "yet  he 
abideth  &ithfo]." 

Many,  however,  think  it  more  important  to  know  on  which  side  (he 
leaders  of  thought  are  enlisted,  and  there  are  certain  persons  who  are  not 
elected  to  that  particular  ofiice  by  popular  vote,  who  nevertheless  take  it 
upon  themselves  to  consider  that  they  are  dictators  in  the  republic  of 
opinion.  They  are  advanced  men  and  iex  ahead  of  the  old  school  of 
divines.  Some  of  us  think  that  they  are  advancing  in  the  direction  of 
going  backwards,  and  that  they  are  putting  ignorant  gness-work  into  the 
room  of  proved  doctrine  and  solid,  experimental,  ^riptural  teaching. 
Still,  as  in  their  own  opinion  they  are  our  superiors,  and  pioneer  the  way 
of  progress,  we  will  for  a  moment  think  of  them  as  such.  Now,  in  our 
Lord's  day,  the  advanced  thinkers  were  not  on  his  side  at  all ;  they  were 
all  against  him,  and  after  he  had  departed,  the  gravest  peril  of  the  church 
of  God  arose  fit)m  the  advanced  thought  of  the  period.  The  Gnostics,  and 
other  Grecian  thinkers,  came  forward,  and  they  threw  their  philosophica 
mud  into  the  pure  stream  of  the  gospel  till  there  was  no  plain  statement 
which  was  not  rendered  mythical,  mystical,  confused,  and  clouded,  so  that 
only  the  initiated  could  possibly  understand  it.    The  gospel  of  Jesus 


28  METROPOLITAN  TABBUNACLB  PUIiPIT. 

Christ  was  meant  to  be  the  plainest  truth  that  ever  shone  npon  the  sons  of 
men.  It  was  meant  to  be  legible  in  its  own  light  by  the  young,  the 
nnleamed,  and  the  simple  ;  but  the  advanced  thinkers  took  the  gospel, 
and  twisted  it,  colourea  it,  adorned  it,  and  bedaubed  it  till  by  the  time  it 
came  through  their  various  processes  you  would  not  have  known  it  to  be 
the  same  thing  at  all ;  and,  in  fact,  Paul  said  that  it  was  not  the  same 
thing,  for  he  called  it  "  another  gospel,"  and  then  he  corrected  himself,  and 
said  it  was  not  another:  "But  there  be  some,"  said  he,  "that  trouble 
you."  However,  we  need  not  care  because  of  these  wise  men,  for  if  they 
believe  not,  but  becloud  the  gospel,  yet  God  abideth  faithful.  If  over 
there  in  the  groves  where  Socrates  and  Plato  gathered  disciples  by  their 
philosophy,  if  over  there,  I  say,  there  should  not  be  found  a  single  philo- 
sopher who  believes  in  God,  so  much  the  worse  for  the  philosophers,  but 
it  does  not  affect  the  gospel  or  our  faith  in  it :  if  they  believe  not,  he 
abideth  faithful.  If  Paul  at  the  Areopagus  gets  no  sympathy  except 
from  two  or  three,  and  in  fiict  they  have  only  asked  him  there  to  **  hear 
what  this  babbler  saith,"  and  though  they  all  as  they  go  home  say  that 
Paul  is  beside  himself,  and  mad,  and  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods,  yet 
Paul  is  right,  and  the  Lord  abideth  faithful. 

Yes,  and  I  venture  to  enlarge  this  thought  a  little  more.  If  the  rulers 
do  not  believe,  and  if  the  philosophical  minds  do  not  beUeve,  and  if  in 
addition  to  this  public  opinion,  so  called,  rejects  it,  yet  the  gospel  is  still 
the  same  eternal  truth.  Public  opinion  is  not  the  test  and  gauge  of 
truth,  for  it  has  continually  altered,  and  it  will  continue  to  alter.  The 
aggregate  thinking  of  fallible  men  is  less  than  nothing  when  set  against 
the  one  solitary  mind  of  God,  who  is  infallible,  as  ho  reveals  it  to  us  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  words  of  truth  in  the  Scriptures.  But  some  think 
that  the  old  gospel  cannot  be  right,  because,  you  see,  everybody  says 
that  it  is  out  of  date  and  wrong.  That  is  one  reason  for  being  the  more 
sure  that  it  is  right,  for  the  world  lieth  in  the  wicked  one,  and  its  judg- 
ment is  under  his  sway.  What  are  multitudes  when  they  are  all  under 
the  influence  of  the  father  of  lies  ?  The  gi'andest  majority  in  the  world 
is  a  minority  of  one  when  that  man  is  on  God's  side.  Count  heads,  do 
you  ?  Well,  count  by  the  millions,  if  you  like,  but  I  shall  rather  weigh 
than  count ;  and  if  I  speak  the  truth  of  God,  I  have  more  weight  on 
my  side  than  can  be  found  in  a  million  who  believe  not.  I  wish  we  all 
partook  of  the  sphrit  of  Athaimsius  when  he  said,  defending  the  deity  of 
his  great  Master,  "  I,  Athanasius,  against  the  world."  You  must  learn 
to  stand  alone.  When  you  know  that  you  have  a  grip  of  revealed 
truth  you  may  not  set  all  the  judgments  of  men  in  comparison  with  the 
eternal  and  infallible  judgment  of  the  mighty  God.  No,  though  we 
believe  not,  that  is,  the  mass  of  us  and  nations  of  us,  '*  yet  he  abideth 
faithful :  he  cannot  deny  liimself." 

I  want  to  ask  your  thoughtful  attention  to  one  consideration  here. 
Have  you  not  often  heard  it  said  that  ministers  ought  to  be  abreast  of 
the  times,  that  theology  should  bo  always  toned  and  varied  so  as  to  suit 
the  advanced  thought  of  the  wonderful  i)criod  in  which  we  live?  And 
as  this  is  a  time  when  infidelity  appeal's  to  be  in  the  veiy  air,  we  are  told 
that  we  ought  to  sympathize  with  it  very  earnestly  and  heartily,  for  it 
is  a  form  of  straggling  for  the  hght  which  we  ought  to  encourage.  Now, 
this  is  another  sort  of  talk  from  what  I  hear  from  the  apostle  Paul.    He 


STEBXAL  FAITHPtJLKESS  UNAFFECTED  BY  HUMAN  UNBELIEF.      29 

has  no  sympathy  vrith  it.  He  put  his  foot  on  it.  "  Let  God  be  trae  and 
every  man  a  liar  " — ^thafc  is  the  style  in  which  he  speaks.  As  to  going  in 
to  study  the  philosophies  in  order  to  tune  the  gospel  to  their  note,  he 
says,  "  I  determined  not  to  know  anything  among  you  save  Jesus  Christ 
and  him  crucified."  When  he  finds  that  this  style  of  doctrine  does  not 
please  the  Jew,  and  that  it  is  to  him  a  stumbling-block,  and  that  it  does 
not  please  the  Greek,  but  makes  him  sneer  and  call  it  foolishness,  does 
the  apostle,  therefore,  say,  "  Come  hither,  dear  Jewish  friend.  I  have 
a  way  of  putting  this  which  will  show  you  that  I  do  not  quite  mean  what 
you  thought  I  did.  I  used  the  word  "cross  "  in  a  certain  sense  not  at  ^ 
objectionable  to  Judaism"?  Does  he  gently  whisper,  "  Come  to  me,  my 
learned  Greek  Mend,  and  I  will  show  you  that  your  philosophers  and  I 
mean  the  same  thing "  ?  Not  a  bit  of  it ;  but  he  stands  f^t  and  firm 
to  Christ  crucified  and  salvation  by  his  blood,  as,  by  God's  grace,  I  trust 
we  are  resolved  to  do.  Though  we  believe  not-— that  is,  though  the  whole 
world  believe  not — ^yet  God  s  gospel,  is  not  to  be  altered  to  suit  human 
whims  and  fimcies,  but  in  all  its  angularity  and  singularity,  in  all  its 
divine  authority,  unpared,  uncut,  wrought  out  as  a  whole,  it  is  still  to  be 
proclaimed,  for  '^  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself." 

Now,  having  spoken  of  our  text  as  referring  to  the  world  in  general,  it 
is,  perhaps,  a  more  sorrowful  business  to  look  at  it  as  referring  to  the 
visible  church  in  particular.  The  apostle  says, "  Though  we  believe  not," 
and  surely  he  must  mean  fhe  visible  church  of  Ood, 

And  does  the  church  of  God  ever  fall  into  such  a  state  that  we  may 
say  of  it,  "It  believes  not"?  Yes,  the  visible  church  has  many  and 
many  a  time  fearfully  turned  aside.  Go  back  for  a  type  of  it  to  the 
wilderness.  The  children  of  Israel  were  brought  up  out  of  Egypt  with 
a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm,  and  they  were  fed  in  the  wilder- 
ness wi^  angels'  food,  and  made  to  drink  of  water  from  the  rock ;  but 
they  were  continually  doubting  their  God. 

•*  Now  they  beliere  hia  word 

While  rocks  with  rivers  flow  ; 
Anon  with  sin  they  grieve  the  Lord, 
And  judgments  lay  them  low.*' 

But  what  happened  ?  Did  God  depart  firom  his  purpose  to  give  the  land 
that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  ?  Did  he 
break  up  the  covenant  and  gi'ow  weary  of  it?  No;  but  Abraham's 
seed  inherited  the  land,  and  they  dwelt  therein  every  man  under  his  own 
vine  and  fig-tree.  Though  the  visible  people  of  God  rejected  him  full 
often,  so  that  for  their  imbelief  they  died  in  the  wilderness,  yet  he 
remained  faithful :  he  did  not,  he  could  not,  deny  himself.  Well,  now, 
it  comes  to  pass  sometimes,  according  to  this  type,  that  the  visible 
church  of  Goa  apostatizes  from  the  truth  of  God.  The  doctrines  of 
grace,  the  truths  of  tlie  gow)el  are  obscured,  beclouded,  scarcely  preached, 
preached  with  gaudy  words,  or  hid  behind  ceremonies  and  rites,  and 
all  sorts  of  things.  And  what  happens?  Are  the  foundation  truths 
removed?  Is  the  etenial  verity  reversed?  Has  God  recalled  his  pro- 
mise ?    Oh  no.    "He  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself." 

Alas !  the  church  of  God  seems  to  lose  sometimes  her  faith  in  prayer. 
Her  pleadiug  assemblies  become  scant.    Her  prayer  for  men's  conversion 


80  HSTBOPOIilTAir  TABSBHAOLE  PULPIT. 

18  scarcely  raised.    Few  come  together  to  sapplicate  the  liord  and  besiege 
the  mercy-seat.    Bat  what  then  ?    Does  God  change  ?    Does  he  forsake 
his  cause?    Oh, no:  ''He  abideth  faithful:  he  cannot  deny  himself." 
At  sach  times  the  chnrch  almost  loses  her  faith  in  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
looks  upon  preaching  as,  perhaps,  a  necessary  evil  to  be  borne  with,  but 
not  as  the  venicle  by  which  the  Holy  Ghost  saves  men.    They  have  small 
confidence  in  God's  word  that  *^  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching"  he  will 
**  save  them  that  beliere.''    They  do  not  expect  the  kingdom  of  Ohiist 
to  be  predominant,  but  they  say,  **  Since  the  fathers  fell  asleep  what  long 
ages  have  dragged  along,  and  what  slow  progress  Christianity  has  made. 
It  is  a  hopeless  cause.    Let  us  be  content  to  let  the  heathen  world 
alone."    At  such  time  they  lose  all  heart  and  all  faith  in  God.    Have 
we  not  seen  large  portions  of  the  visible  church  of  God  decline  into 
such  a  state  as  this  till  wo  have  been  ready  to  say  with  our  Master, 
''When  the  Son  of  man  cometh  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth?"    But 
what  then,    my  brethren?      Suppose   we  should  live   to  see  every- 
where a  degenerate  church  ?    Suppose  it  should  become  like  Laodicea, 
till  the  Lord  should  seem  to  spew  the  visible  church  out  of  his  mouth, 
because  she  has  become  neither  not  nor  cold  ?    Suppose  he  should  say  of 
the  professing  church  of  to-day  as  he  did  of  Shiloh  of  old — "  Go  now  to 
Shiloh  where  my  place  was  at  the  first,  and  see  if  there  be  one  stone  left 
upon  another  that  is  not  cast  down  "  ?    He  took  the  candlestick  away  from 
Home,  and  he  may  take  that  candlestick  away  from  other  churches  too. 
But  would  that  prove  that  God  was  unfaithful,  or  that  he  had  denied 
himself?    No,  beloved ;  no.    His  faithfulness  would  be  seen  then  in  the 
judgment  with  which  he  would  visit  an  unfaithful  church.    Ay,  and  it 
is  seen  to-day.    You  shall  see  a  church  which  does  not  believe  in  the 
simple  gospel  grow  few  and  feeble.    According  as  the  churches  cease  to 
be  evangelical  they  are  minished  and  brought  low.    A  church  that 
neglects  prayer  becomes  disunited,  scattered,  lethargic,  all  but  dead. 
A  church  that  has  no  faith  in  the  Holy  Ghost  may  carry  on  her 
ordinances,  but  it  will  be  with  barren  formality  and  without  power 
from  on  high :  all  of  which  proves  the  faithfulness  of  him  who  said, 
"  If  ye  walk  contrary  to  me,  I  will  walk  contrary  to  you."    If  they 
cast  away  ^m  them  that  which  is  their  strength,  it  is  but  faithfulness 
on  God's  part  that  they  should  become  weak.    AH  the  history  of  the 
church,  if  you  read  it,  from  the  days  of  Christ  till  now,  will  go  to  show 
that  he  deals  with  his  church  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  her  see  that  he  is 
faithful,  whatever  she  may  be.    He  will  help  her  when  she  turns  to  him, 
he  will  bless  her  when  she  trusts  him,  he  will  crown  her  when  she  exalts 
him,  but  he  will  bring  her  low  and  chasten  her  when  she  turns  in  any 
measure  aside  from  the  simplicity  of  her  fiaith.    Thus  does  he  prove  that 
he  still  is  faithful. 

Once  more,  my  brethren,  I  will  read  the  text  in  a  somewhat  naiTower 
circle.  "If  we  believe  not" — that  is  to  say,  if  the  choicest  teachers, 
and  preachers,  and  writers  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  fiiithful. 

One  of  the  most  shocking  trials  to  young  Christians  is  the  fall  of 
an  eminent  teacher.  I  have  known  some  that  have  been  almost  ready 
to  give  up  their  faith  when  some  one  who  appeared  to  bo  very  earnest 
and  faithful  has  suddenly  apostatized.  Such  things  have  nappened 
in  our  memory,  to  our  intense  grief;  and  I  want,  therefore,  to  put  it 


ETERNAL  FAITHFUI«NESS  UKAFFECTEB  BT  HUMAN  UNBELIEF.      31 

Terj,  veiy  plainly.  If  it  shonld  oome  to  pass  that  any  one  whom  yon 
rcTere  as  having  been  blest  to  yonr  soul — ^whom  you  love  because  you 
have  received  firom  him  the  word  of  life — if  such  a  one  upon  whom  you 
may,  perhaps^  have  leaned  too  much,  should  in  the  future  turn  out  not  to 
be  true  and  faithful,  and  should  not  believe,  do  not  follow  his  unbelief, 
for  "if  we  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  fidthful:  he  cannot  deny  him- 
self/' Peter  denies  his  Master :  do  not  follow  Peter  when  he  is  doing 
that^  for  he  will  have  to  come  back  weeping,  and  vou  will  hear  him 
preaching  his  Master  again.  Worse  still,  Judas  sefis  his  Master :  do 
not  follow  Judas,  for  Judas  will  die  a  wretched  death,  and  his  destruction 
fihall  be  a  warning  to  others  to  cling  more  closely  to  the  faith.  You  may 
see  the  man  who  stood  like  a  cedar  in  Lebanon  foil  by  one  stroke  of  the 
deviFs  axe,  but  do  not,  therefore,  think  that  the  trees  of  the  Lord,  which 
are  fiill  of  sap,  will  fall  too.  He  will  keep  his  own,  for  he  knows  them 
that  are  his.  Pin  not  yonr  foith  to  any  man's  sleeve.  Let  not  your 
confidence  rest  on  any  arm  of  flesh,  neither  say  '*  I  believe  because  of 
the  testimony  of  such  a  one,  and  I  hold  to  the  form  of  sound  words 
because  my  minister  has  held  it";  for  all  such  props  may  be  smitten 
avaj,  and  on  a  sudden  may  fail  you.  Do  let  me  put  this  very, 
Terj  plainly, — ^if  we  beh'eve  not — ^if  those  that  seem  to  be  the  choice 
teachers  of  the  age,  if  those  that  have  been  the  most  sucoessfnl  evange- 
lists of  the  period,  if  those  who  stand  high  in  the  esteem  of  God's  people, 
shooldy  in  an  evil  hour,  forsake  the  eternal  verities  and  begin  to  preach  to 
jOQ  some  other  gospel  which  is  not  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  beseech  you 
follow  us  not  whoever  we  may  be,  or  whatever  we  may  be.  Suffer  no 
teachera,  however  great  they  may  be,  to  lead  you  to  doubt,  for  God  abideth 
feithfoL  Keep  you  to  the  revealed  will  and  mind  of  (Jod — ^for  •*  he  can- 
not deny  himself." 

Here,  then,  is  the  fearfid  possibility ;  and  side  by  side  with  it  runs 
Mii  most  blessedly  consoling  assurance-^"  He  abideth  faithful."  Jesus 
Christ  abideth :  there  are  no  shifts  and  changes  in  hinu  He  is  a  rock, 
and  not  a  quicksand.  He  is  the  Saviour  whether  the  rulers  and  the 
philosophers  believe  in  him  or  refuse  him,  whether  the  church  and  her 
ministers  are  true  to  him  or  desert  him.  He  is  the  same  Saviour,  (xod- 
man,  sitting  supreme  upon  the  throne.  "  Why  do  the  heathen  rage,  and  the 
people  imagine  a  vain  thing  ?  The  kings  of  the  earth  set  thcmsohcs, 
and  the  risers  take  coimsel  together,  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his 
anointed.  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh :  the  Lord  shall 
have  them  in  derision.  Yet,"  saith  he,  "  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my 
holy  hill  of  Zion."  They  cannot  affect  the  imperial  throne  of  our  im- 
mortal Lord«  He  still  is  "  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,"  and  so  ho 
most  be,  let  them  say  what  they  will. 

And  as  Christ  remains  the  same  Saviour,  so  we  have  the  same  gospel. 
They  have  improved  upon  it,  they  tell  us !  Well,  well,  I  feel  so  satisfied 
with  the  gospel  as  I  get  it  from  Paul  and  the  inspired  apostles  that  I 
would  ra&er  not  have  this  improved  gospel  if  they  will  allow  mo  to 
keep  to  the  old  original.  But  so  it  is,  like  babies  pleased  with  new  toys 
they  cry  up  their  "  modem  thought,"  and  culture  and  advanced  ideas. 
fie  that  has  once  tasted  the  old  wine  does  not  desire  the  new,  because  he 
saith,  "  The  old  is  better."  Our  Saviour  and  his  gospel  abide  the  same. 
The  gospel  of  Paul,  the  gospel  of  Augustine,  the  gospel  of  Calvin,  the 


S2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLE  PULPIT. 

gospel  of  Whitefield,  the  gospel  of  any  snccession  of  faithfnl  men  you 
like  to  strike  out  abundantly  saffices  as.    ''  He  abideth  faithfh].*' 

And  afi  the  gospel  is  the  same,  so  does  Christ  remain  faithfdl  to  his  en- 
gagements to  his  Father.  He  has  promised  to  keep  those  whom  the 
Father  gave  him,  and  he  will  keep  them  even  to  the  end ;  and  when  the 
sheep  shall  pass  i^in  nnder  the  hand  of  him  that  telleth  them  he  will 
say,  "  Of  all  whom  thou  gavest  me  I  have  lost  none."  "  He  abideth 
faithful "  :  to  sinners  all  over  the  world  he  says  that  if  they  come  to 
him  he  will  not  cast  them  out,  and  he  is  faithfnl  to  that.  He  gracionislj 
promises  that  ^*  whosoever  calleth  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
saved  ";  and  he  wiU  be  fiuthful  to  that.  He  is  also  faithful  to  his  saints. 
He  has  promised  to  preserve  them  to  his  eternal  kingdom  and  glory,  and 
he  will  preserve  them.  He  says,  "  I  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,  and 
they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hands  ": 
and  he  has  held  them  in  his  loving  grasp,  and  he  will  hold  them  even  to 
the  end ;  and  all  this,  though  all  the  unbelief  in  the  world  should  rise 
against  him.  He  will  stand  to  every  word  he  has  spoken,  and  carry  out 
every  promise  he  has  declared,  thoagh  all  should  distrust  and  deny. 
**  Yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus  "  are  all  the  promises,  henceforth  and  for 
ever,  and  we  shall  find  it  so. 

II.  And  now  we  have  but  a  little  time  to  spend  upon  the  second  very 
important  part  of  our  text,  which  is  A  glorious  impossibility  with  a 

SWEET    inference    THAT    BfAY    BE    DRAWN    FROM    IT.       "He  cannot 

deny  himself." 

Three  things  God  cannot  do.  He  cannot  die,  he  cannot  lie,  and  he 
cannot  be  deceived.  These  three  impossibilities  do  not  limit  his  power, 
but  they  magnify  his  majesty  ;  for  these  would  be  infirmities,  and 
infirmity  can  have  no  place  in  the  infinite  and  ever  blessed  God. 

Here  is  one  of  the  things  impossible  with  God—*'  he  cannot  deny 
himself."  What  is  meant  by  that?  It  is  meant,  first,  that  the  Lard 
Jesus  Christ  cannot  change  as  to  his  nature  and  character  towards  us,  the 
sons  of  men,  for  if  he  were  to  change  he  could  only  change  from  one 
state  to  another — from  a  better  to  a  worse  or  from  a  worse  to  a  better.  If 
from  a  better  to  a  worse,  that  were  to  deny  himself  indeed  by  ceasing  to  be 
as  good  as  he  is  by  nature  ;  and  if  from  a  worse  to  a  better,  that  were 
to  deny  himself  by  proving  that  he  was  not  before  so  good  as  he  might 
have  been.  In  no  one  point  can  Jesus  Christ  be  changed,  for  he  is 
"Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."    If  in  any 

Soint  he  changed,  he  would,  in  that  point,  deny  himself :  but  he  cannot 
0  this,  for  being  God  he  changeth  not. 

His  word  cannot  alter.  I  want  you  to  notice  this,  because  his  word  is 
so  conspicuously  himself.  His  name  shall  be  called  the  Word  of  God ; 
yea,  he  is  himself  the  Logos,  the  eternal  Word  ;  and  that  Word  cannot 
change.  "  The  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  away,  but 
the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever,  and  this  is  the  word  which  by 
the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you."  0  servant  of  the  Lord,  the  assurance 
which  Faul  and  Peter  gave  you  may  give.  That  same  word  of  mercy 
which  those  first  messengers  of  heaven  went  forth  to  declare  you  may 
declare,  for  it  still  stands  the  same.  He  cannot  deny  his  word,  since  that 
word  is  himself,  and  he  cannot  deny  himself. 
He  cannot^  beloved  friends,  withdraw  the  salvation  which  Jie  has 


STKRNAL  FAITHFULNB88  UHAFFBOTSD  BT  HUMAN  UKBKLIEF.      88 

ifr$$mted  h  the  sans  ofmen,  for  that  Balvation  is  indeed  himself.  Jeans  iB 
like  salration  of  IsraeL  If  a  ainner  wants  to  know  where  Balvation  lies, 
ve  point  him  to  the  Christ  of  God.  He  is  not  only  a  Savionr,  but  he  is 
saivadon  itself ;  and  his  salvation  cannot  be  changed,  for  if  it  were 
changed  be  would  be  himself  changed  or  denied,  and  he  cannot  deny 
himself.  There  is  still  the  same  pardon  for  the  chief  of  sinners^  stiU 
the  same  renewing  for  the  hardest  hearts,  still  the  same  g^enerous  res- 
ponse to  those  who  have  strayed  most,  still  the  same  adoption  into  the 
&mily  £>T  aliens  and  foreigners.  His  salvation,  as  Peter  preached  it  at 
Penteooet^  is  the  sdration  whic^  we  preaoh  to  sinners  now.  "  He  cannot 
deny  himself." 

And  then  ths  aianemerU  m  siHl  the  same,  for  that,  too,  is  himself :  he 
has  by  himself  pnrged  onr  sins.  He  himself  is  the  sacrifice.  Well  did 
the  poet  say, — 

'*  Dear  dying  Lamb,  thy  precious  blood 
Shall  never  lose  its  power.** 

Because  it  is  Aw  blood  it  must  be  unchanged  in  efficacy.  He  cleanses 
away  our  sins  by  himself.  His  blood  is  his  life,  and  he  ever  liveth,  and 
anceheeyer  tiveth  he  is  "able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that 
come  unto  God  by  him.*'  Blessed  be  his  name,  the  atoning  sacrifice 
has  not,  even  in  the  smallest  degree,  lost  its  efficacy.  It  is  just  as 
mighty  as  when  it  washed  the  dying  thief  from  the  foulness  of  hell  into 
the  purity  of  heaven,  and  carried  Um  from  a  gibbet  to  a  throne.  Oh, 
how  blessed  must  its  power  be  to  have  cleansed  so  foul  a  wretch,  and 
to  have  placed  him  with  the  Master  himself  in  paradise  the  self-same 
day.  The  atonement  cannot  change,  for  that  would  involve  that  Jesus 
had  denied  himself. 

And  the  mercy-seat,  the  place  of  prayer,  still  remains  ;  for  if  that  were 
altered  he  would  have  denied  himself,  for  what  was  the  mercy-seat,  or 
propitiatory,  that  golden  lid  upon  the  covenant  ark?  What  was  it 
bat  Christ  himself,  who  is  our  propitiatory,  the  true  mercy-seat  ?  You 
may  always  pray,  brethren,  for  if  prayer  were  denied  its  efficacy,  God 
Toold  have  denied  himself.  This  is  his  memorial,  ''The  God  that 
heaieth  prayer  " ;  and  if  he  does  not  hear  prayer  he  has  denied  himself 
and  ceased  to  be  what  he  was.  Jehovah  will  never  so  deny  himself  as 
to  become  like  Baal,  a  deaf  god;  to  imagine  it  would  be  blasphemy. 

And  here  is  another  sweet  thought :  Christ* s  love  to  his  church,  and 
his  purpose  towards  her  cannot  change^  because  he  cannot  deny  himself, 
and  his  church  is  himself.  I  mean  not  that  visible  church  of  which 
I  spoke  just  now,  which  is  a  mixed  multitude,  but  I  mean  that 
invisible  church,  that  spiritual  people,  that  bride  of  Christ,  which  no 
man  seeth,  for  she  is  prepared  in  darkness,  and  curiously  wrought  in  the 
lowest  parts  of  the  earth ;  and  her  Lord  himself  will  never  see  her  ac- 
tually dll  she  is  perfected,  even  as  Adam  never  saw  Eve,  but  slept  until  the 
great  God  had  finished  his  bride,  and  presented  her  in  all  her  matchless 
beauty  to  be  his  sister  and  spouse.  The  day  comes  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  shall  thus  receive  his  perfected  bride,  and  meanwhile  he 
cannot  change  towards  her,  but  his  espousals  shall  be  confirmed.  8he 
was  taken  out  of  liis  side  when  in'  deep  sleep  of  death  he  lay,  and  she 
u  fashioned  to  be  like  to  him,  so  that  when  in  joy  he  sliail  behold 


84  MKTROPOLITAN  TABBBKACLS  PULPIT. 

her  his  joy  and  her  joy  shall  be  fall.  No,  he  will  never,  never  deny  her, 
for  he  cannot  deny  Umself.  His  plan  of  love  shall  be  carried  out  and  all 
his  thoDghts  of  grace  fulfilled. 

Nor  will  any  one  of  his  offices  towards  his  ehureh  and  people  ever 
£ul.  The  prophet  shall  be  prophet  for  ever, — *'  Ue  cannot  deny  him- 
self." The  pnest  shall  be  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedec, 
and  will  never  refuse  to  offer  our  prayers  and  praises,  and  to  cleanse  onr 
soids,  for  he  cannot  deny  himself.  The  king  will  never  cease  to  reign, 
or  doff  his  crown,  or  lay  down  his  sceptre,  for  ho  cannot  deny  himself. 
The  shepherd  will  for  ever  keep  the  flock.  The  friend  will  eternally 
stick  closer  than  a  brother.  Ihe  husband  will  still  love  his  spouse. 
All  that  he  is  in  relation  to  his  people  shall  continne  and  abiae,  for 
he  abideth  faithful.    "  He  cannot  deny  himselfl" 

Now,  my  last  word  is  about  an  in/ermce.  The  text  says,  '^If  we 
believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful:"  it  runs  on  that  supposition. 
Now,  brethren,  take  the  other  supposition : — Suppose  we  do  believe.  Will 
he  not  be  faithful  in  that  case  ?  And  will  it  not  be  true  that  he  cannot 
deny  himself? 

I  will  suppose  that  a  sinner  is  at  this  moment  saying,  "  I  believe  that 
Christ  can  save  me :  I  will  go  and  ask  him,  I  will  go  and  trust  him." 
Ah,  he  will  not  deny  himself  by  rejecting  your  crv.    I  tell  yon,  if  he 
were  to  shut  yon  out,  dear  soul,  whoever  yon  may  be,  if  you  go  to  him, 
he  would  deny  himself.    He  never  did  deny  himself  yet.    Whenever  a 
sinner  comes  to  him  he  becomes  his  Saviour.    Whenever  he  meets  a  sick 
soul  he  acts  as  his  physician.    Now,  I  have  heard  of  persons  who  have 
been  physicians,  who  were  ill,  or  weary  and  wanted  rest :  an  accident  has 
liappened,  and  they  have  felt  inclin^  to  get  out  of  the  way  if  they 
could,  because  they  were  very  hard-worked  and  worn  out.    They  have 
told  their  servant  to  say,  "  My  master  is  not  at  home ! "  but  my  Master 
never  denied  himself.    He  will  never  get  out  of  the  way  of  a  sinner. 
If  you  so  to  him  you  will  find  him  at  home  and  on  the  look-out 
for  you :  ne  will  be  more  glad  to  receive  yon  than  you  will  be  to  be 
received,  for  he  **  waiteth  to  be  gracious."    As  Matthew  sat  at  the  receipt 
of  custom,  waiting  for  the  people  to  pay  their  dues,  so  does  Christ  sit  at 
the  receipt  of  sinners  waiting  for  them  to  mention  their  wants.     He  is 
watching  for  yon.    I  tell  yon  again  that  he  cannot  reject  you :  that 
would  be  to  alter  his  whole  character  and  un-Christ  himself.    To  spurn 
a  coming  sinner  would  un-Jesus  him,  and  make  him  to  be  somebody 
else,  and  not  himself  any  longer.    "  He  cannot  deny  himself."    Go  and 
tiy  him :  go  and  try  him.    I  wish  some  trembling  soul  would  at  this 
moment  go  and  cast  himself  upon  Christy  and  then  report  to  us  the  re- 
salt.    Come,  poor  quivering  seekers,  sing  in  your  heiui;^  unbelieving  as 
yon  are,  that  hymn  of  ours — 

"  I  can  but  perish  if  I  go, 
I  am  resolved  to  try  ; 
For  if  I  stay  away,  I  snow 
I  must  for  ever  die.** 

Oh,  but  if  yon  were  to  perish  at  his  feet,  you  would  be  the  first  that  ever 
did  fo  oat  of  all  those  who  have  ever  come  to  him ;  and  that  first  man 
has  never  been  seen  yet.    Go  and  tiy  my  Lord  and  see  for  yourselves. 


ETBRKAL  FAITHFULNE8S  UNAFFECTED  BT  HUMAN  UNBELIEF.      85 

Well  now,  yon  Chriatiaa  people,  I  want  you  to  come  also.  If  you 
betiere  your  Lord  he  will  be  faithful  to  you.  Suppose  it  is  a  time  of 
to>uble  with  yon  :  he  will  be  faithful  to  you ;  go  and  cast  your  burden 
upon  him.  Suppose  at  this  time  you  are  much  exercised  with  spiritual 
distress :  go  to  the  Lord  as  you  did  at  first,  as  poor,  guilty,  reoellious 
sinners,  aiMl  cast  yourself  upon  him,  and  you  will  find  him  faithful.  "  He 
cannot  deny  himself."  If  my  Lord  were  not  kind  to  me  to-night  when 
I  go  to  him  ^nth  my  burden  1  should  think  that  I  had  knocl^d  at  the 
wrong  door ;  because  the  Lord  has  been  so  good  and  so  faithful  to  me 
hitherto  that  it  would  take  my  breath  away  if  I  found  him  changed.  Oh, 
how  good,  how  exceeding  good  is  my  Lord !    Did  not  we  sing  just  now— 

"  He  by  my  side  hfts  always  stood  : 
His  lovingkindnestf,  ob,  Lqw  good!** 

I  could  sing  that  with  all  my  heart,  and  I  hope  many  of  you  could 
camefitly  join  with  me.  You  have  a  dear  mother,  or  a  fond  wife,  or  a 
choice  friend,  and  none  of  them  has  ever  spoken  anything  but  kindness 
to  you  ;  and  therefore  if  in  some  dark  hour  you  were  to  go  to  them,  and 
in^ead  of  showing  sympathy  they  gave  you  sharp  words,  and  you  could 
evidently  see  that  they  did  not  love  you,  how  surprised  you  would  be  ! 
So  should  I  be  if  I  were  to  meet  anything  but  Iotc  from  my  dear  Lord 
after  all  these  years  of  tenderness.  There  is  no  fear  of  it,  for  "he 
cannot  deny  himself.'* 

So  I  finish  by  saying  that  we  shall  find  it  so  in  connection  with  the 
things  of  his  kingdom  and  the  concerns  of  his  trujbh.  There  is  a  great 
uproar  just  now  about  the  God  of  proyidence,  and  they  call  me  I  know 
not  by  what  names  for  speaking  the  tmth  for  my  Master,  Well,  what 
comes  of  it  ?  Shall  ^-e,  therefore,  be  afraid  ?  No  ;  but  if  we  believe  we 
diall  find  him  faithfuL  He  will  not  deny  himself.  Is  the  good  old 
cause  really  in  danger  from  scepticism  and  superstition  ?  Speaking  after 
the  manner  of  men,  it  may  seem  so ;  but  it  never  really  is  so.  Even  if 
it  were  tottering  we  must  not  put  our  hand  upon  the  ark  of  the  Lord  to 
steady  it.  God's  cause  is  always  safe.  I  do  not  know  whether  we  may 
live  to  see  it,  but  as  surely  as  the  Lord  lives  the  truth  will  be  triumphant 
in  England  yet.  They  may  tell  us  that  Pnritanism  is  thrust  to  the  wall, 
but  it  will  take  the  crown  of  the  causeway  yet.  The  old  cause  goes 
back  a  little  to  take  breath,  but  she  will  make  such  a  leap  in  this  land 
as  shall  utterly  surprise  the  soothsayers;  for  the  Lord  will  make  the 
diviners  mad,  and  they  that  count  the  towers  and  say  that  Zion  is 
utterly  fallen  shall  not  iaiow  where  to  hide  tJieir  heads.  The  devil  once 
flew  lUl  over  Europe,  and  said,  '^  It  is  all  mine.  Here  they  are  selling 
indulgences,  and  the  Pope  and  I  are  master  of  it  all."  But  there  was  a 
poor  monk  who  had  not  himself  seen  the  light  any  long  time,  who  nailed 
his  Uieses  oil  the  door  of  a  church,  and  from  that  hour  the  light  began 
to  spread  all  over  Europe.  And  do  you  think  the  Lord  is  short  of 
Luthers  ?  Do  you  imagine  that  he  has  no  sword  or  spear  left  in  his 
armoury  ?  I  tell  you  he  has  as  many  instruments  within  reach  as  there 
are  stars  in  the  sky.  When  the  influence  of  the  gospel  appears  to  recede 
it  is  like  the  tide  when  it  is  ebbing  out.  Steadily  it  goes  back,  and  if 
we  did  not  know  better  we  should  begin  to  think  that  the  silver  waves 
would  all  give  place  to  mire  and  shingle :  yet  when  the  hour  comes,  at 


86  HETROPOLTTAir  TABEBKAGLB  PULPIT. 

the  very  minute,  the  waters  pause  and  remain  atone  point  awhile.  Then 
up  comes  the  first  wave  of  the  wash,  and  another,  and  another,  and 
another,  and  another,  rising,  advancing,  conqnering  the  shore,  tiU  the  sea 
has  come  to  her  fulness  again.  So  must  it  be,  and  so  shall  it  be  with 
the  ocean  of  truth ;  only  let  us  have  faith,  and  we  shall  see  the  gospel  at 
the  flood  again,  and  old  England  covered  with  it.  Doubt  what  you  like, 
brethren,  but  do  not  doubt  divine  truth,  or  doubt  Gk)d.  Hold  you  on  to 
the  side  that  is  most  disgraced  and  dishonoured,  and  that  has  the  worst 
word  from  men ;  for  Christ  and  his  church  usually  have  the  bleak  side  of 
the  hill.  Be  content  to  breast  the  stream  with  courage  learned  from 
your  Bedeemer  and  Lord,  for  the  day  comes  when  to  have  stood  with  the 
truth  and  with  the  Son  of  the  Highest  will  be  the  grandest  honour  that 
a  creature  can  have  worn. 
May  that  honour  be  ours,  for  Jesus's  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  Bead  before  Sermon— 2  Timothy  ii. 


Hyuks  from  "Our  Own  Htmk  Book" — 192,  664, 196. 


TO  MY  BELOVED  CHURCH  AND  CONGREGATION. 

Deak  Fbibnds, — After  a  long  and  flevere  illness  I  am  now  on  my  way 
to  the  Sonth  of  France  to  seek  rest  and  father  strength  in  a  less  trying 
climate.  The  church  has  requested  me  to  tAKe  three  months*  furlough,  and  as 
this  corresponds  with  the  senous  counsel  of  physicians  and  judicious  friends,  I 
shall  probably  accept  the  considerate  advice.  I  have  promised  to  correspond 
widi  you,  and  with  my  sermon  readers,  week  by  week,  by  a  note  appended  to 
the  sermon,  or  bv  a  short  discourse  such  as  I  have  written  during  toe  last  two 
weeks.  This,  then,  to  commence  with :  I  have  reached  Paris  (Jan.  18)  by 
easy  stages,  and  I  am  none  the  worse  for  the  travelling,  but  all  ^e  better  for 
the  change.  Snow  is  falling  heavily,  and  may  detain  us,  but  if  not  we  hope  to 
be  at  Mentone  next  Wedn^ay. 

It  would  have  been  a  far  greater  pleasure  to  me  to  have  been  able  to  occupy 
my  pulpit,  but  as  this  must  not  be,  I  am  right  glad  to  speak  by  the  press.  May 
the  weekly  sermon  be  used  by  the  Lord  in  a  greater  degree  now  that  the 
preacher's  voice  ceases  for  awhile  to  proclaim  the  gospeL 

One  great  favour  I  have  to  ask  of  you  all : — wiU  yon  unite  in  hearty  prayer 
that  there  may  be  a  great  revival  at  ^e  Tabernacle  during  my  absence  r  xou 
have  united  to  celebrate  the  twenty-fiflh  year  of  my  pastorate  by  a  noble 
Testimonial,  which  I  have  dedicated  to  the  Lord*s  work ;  now  unite  with  even 
greater  ardour  in  seeking  a  ^eat,  a  surpassing,  a  cro^vning  spiritusl  blessing. 
The  Lord's  own  word  is,  '*  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  storenouse,  and  prove 
nie  now,  herewith,  if  I  will  not  open  the  windows  of  heaven  and  pour  you  oat 
a  blessing,  that  ye  shall  not  have  room  enouo^h  to  receive  it**  You  have  ful- 
filled the  precept,  now  enquire  for  the  promise.  The  Lord  has  guaranteed  a 
heavenly  blessmjo;,  a  divine  blessing,  an  overwhelming  blessing ;  do  not  be 
content  without  it,  or  it  will  look  as  if  you  despised  the  promise  of  the  Lord. 
We  stand  on  vantage  ground  now ;  let  us  plead  with  double  importunity, 
sa)  ing,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go  unless  thou  bless  me.'*  Then  will  the  windows 
open,  and  the  divine  hand  pour  out  the  benediction  of  his  Spirit,  and  sslvatioii 
snail  come  to  multitudes  through  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

My  love  be  with  you  all. 

Yours  for  Jesus'  sake, 

a  H.  SPURQEON. 


^tiimaViim  i^afrtrtmcte 


THE  EMPTY  SEAT. 


II 


WBITTRH    WHEir    AWAT    FBOK    HIS    PEOPLK,    B7 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


^'I>aTid'8  place  was  empty." — 1  Samuel  xx.  27. 

It  was  onite  right  that  David's  plaoe  ahonld  be  empty,  becanse  Sanl  sought 
to  day  him,  and  he  ooold  not  safely  sit  in  the  presence  of  an  enemy  who 
had  twice  before  cast  a  javelin  at  him  to  "smite  him  even  to  the  wall 
with  it."  Self-preservation  is  a  law  of  nature  which  we  are  bound  to 
obey ;  no  man  ahonld  needlessly  expose  himself  to  sudden  death.  It  were 
well  if  many  a  seat  were  empty  for  this  reason ;  for  there  are  places  ex- 
ceedingly dangerons  to  the  soul,  from  which  men  should  rise  and  flee 
at  once.  Where  Satan  sits  at  the  head  of  the  table  no  man  should 
tarry.  There  is  the  seat  of  the  scomer,  of  which  the  Psalmist  spoke : 
God  grant  that  those  who  have  occupied  it  may  leave  it  in  trembling 
haste.  There  is  the  settle  of  the  drunkard,  and  the  chair  of  the  pre- 
somptaonSy  and  the  bench  of  the  sluggard,  from  each  of  which  it  were 
wisdom  to  depart.  May  the  grace  of  Ood  make  such  a  change  in  all 
who  have  frequented  the  gatherings  of  the  frivolous  and  the  assemblies 
of  the  wicked  that  they  may  never  be  found  in  them  again,  but  may  bo 
missed  by  their  old  companions,  who  shall  ask,  "  Wherefore  oometh  the 
son  of  Jesse,  neither  yesterday  nor  to-day?  "  The  lavelin  of  temptation 
may  soon  destroy  character,  prospects,  and  life  itself,  and  he  is  guilty  of 
the  grossest  follv  who  exposes  himself  to  it  by  placiug  himself  where  the 
arch-enemy  finds  chosen  opportunities  to  work  his  deadly  will. 

At  this  time  I  shall  use  David's  empty  place  for  quite  another  purpose, 
and  shall  note  first  that  in  your  assemblies  at  this  time  there  are  8£ATS 
EXPTIED  BY  DBATir.  Before  I  had  left  the  shores  of  England  for  the 
cpaoe  of  two  days  I  received  the  grievous  intelligence  that  two  out  of 
the  membership  of  my  church  had  been  called  home  in  one  day.  Of  a 
sister,  the  wife  of  an  earnest  and  well-beloved  deacon  it  must  be  said — 
her  place  is  empty ;  and  of  a  brother,  who  had  been  her  friend  and  mine, 
the  same  expression  must  be  employed.  Our  sympathies  must  now  flow 
forth  to  a  bereaved  husband,  and  also  to  a  widow,  in  whose  hearts  there 
are  places  sorrowfully  emptied,  and  in  whose  homes  there  will  be  an  empty 
chair  and  an  empty  couch,  which  will  force  from  their  eyes  rivers  of 
tears  whenever  they  look  upon  them.  It  is  our  flrm  hope  and  confident 
belief  that  in  tliese  cases  the  loss  of  the  house  of  God  below  is  the  gain  of 
Nos.  1,454-5, 


88  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  bouse  of  God  above :  they  fill  other  and  better  places,  and  evea 
those  who  loved  them  best,  and  miss  them  most,  would  not  wish  to  call 
them  back  again.  Jesus  wills  that  his  own  should  be  with  him  where  he 
is,  and  we  cannot  deny  that  he  has  a  right  to  have  them.  Do  not 
their  eyes  behold  the  King  in  his  beauty  ?  Would  we  deprive  them  of 
the  vision?  May  the  thought  of  the  bliss  of  the  departed  yield  solace  to 
the  surviving,  and  may  divine  consolations  be  richly  given  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  the  hour  of  painful  bereavement. 

Oicr  places  vdW  be  empty  soon,  and  we  shall  be  missed  from  our 
accustomed  pews  in  the  house  of  prayer ;  let  the  seats  which  have  been 
jusc  vacated  remind  us  of  this,  and  silently  call  to  our  remembrance  the 
precept,  "  Be  ye  also  ready."  Use  well  your  places  for  hearing  the 
gospel,  for  gathering  at  the  communion  table,  and  for  meeting  for  prayer 
while  yet  the  opportunities  remain  to  you,  for  the  time  is  short,  and  an 
account  will  have  to  be  rendered.  Love  well  those  who  are  spared  to 
you,  and  do  them  all  the  good  you  can,  for  their  places  will  not  hold 
them  for  ever.  Cheer  the  aged,  console  the  desponding,  help  the  poor, 
for  thev  will  soon  be  beyond  your  reach,  and  when  you  look  for  them 
you  will  be  told  that  David's  place  is  empty. 

Permit  me  also  to  remind  you  that  among  your  assemblies  there  are 
SEATS  EMPTIED  BY  SICKNESS  for  awhile.  You  will  not  forget  one  place, 
the  most  conspicuous,  which  would  be  empty  were  it  not  filled  by  willing 
ministers  who  supply  our  lack  of  service.  The  providence  which  empties 
that  place  is  so  wise  and  good  that,  though  we  cannot  understand  its 
object,  we  are  sure  that  it  will  work  for  good  and  for  the  glory  of  God. 
May  I  ask  that,  often  as  I  am  missed,  I  may  have  a  fresh  interest  in  your 
prayers ;  for  these  are  a  minister's  wealth,  a  pastor's  portion.  Many 
others  of  the  Lord's  family  arc  also  siclj^  and  detained  at  home.  They 
sigh  as  they  remember  the  happy  days  when  they  went  np  to  the  house 
of  God  in  company,  and  mingled  in  the  solemn  feasts  of  Zion  ;  but  for 
them  there  are  now  no  more  the  thundera  of  our  united  shouts  of  praise, 
nor  the  deep  Amens  of  our  forms  of  prayer,  and  they  envy  the  very 
swallows  that  build  their  nests  under  the  eaves  of  the  sanctuary.  Many 
of  us  have  such  afflicted  ones  in  our  own  families,  and  God  forbid  that  we 
should  cease  to  sympathize  with  them  in  their  deprivations.  Yet  long 
continuance  of  health  may  dry  the  founts  of  pity,  and  lead  to  forgetful- 
ness  of  the  sorrows  of  others  ;  and  therefore  it  is  no  superfluity  when  we 
remind  the  healthy  that  there  arc  othera  far  less  favoured  to  whom  it  is 
one  of  their  sharpest  sorrows  that  their  places  at  public  worahip  are 
empty.  Let  us  pray  that  a  portion  may  be  sent  to  their  homes,  accord- 
ing to  the  old  law  of  David,  "as  his  part  is  that  goeth  down  to  the 
battle,  so  shall  his  part  be  that  tarricth  by  the  stuff:  they  shall  part 
alike."  Let  us  try  to  make  this  rule  of  battle  a  matter  of  fact  by  caiTying 
home  to  the  Lord's  prisoners  as  much  of  the  sermon  as  we  can. 
Jacob  did  not  go  down  at  the  first  to  Egypt,  for  he  was  aged  and 
infirm,  but  his  sons  brought  back  corn  for  him  none  the  less.  In  telling 
the  sick  and  bedridden  the  tmths  which  we  have  heard  our  owa 
memories  will  be  refreshed.  We  are  bound  with  those  who  are  in  bonds, 
and  we  suffer  with  the  suffering,  and  therefore,  if  we  are  living  members 
of  our  Lord's  mystical  body,  it  is  to  us  a  matter  of  personal  interest  that 
David's  seat  is  empty. 


THB  EMPTY  SEAT.  :)9 

In  every  well-ordered  congregation  there  are  seats  emptied  by  holy 
SERVICE.     Many  Christian  professors  appear  to  think  that  their  entire 
religions  duty  begins  and  ends  with  attendance  upon  the  means  of  grace: 
no  village  station  receives  their  ministry,  no  ragged  school  enjoys  their 
presence,  no  street  comer  heara  their  voice,  but  their  pew  is  filled  with 
commendable  constancy.    We  do  not  condemn  such,  yet  show  we  unto 
them  a  more  excellent  way.    We  know  scores  of  brethren  and  sisters  who 
come  to  one  service  on  the  Sabbath  for  spiritual  food,  and  then  spend  the 
rest  of  the  day  in  active  labour  for  their  Lord.    Q^hey  are  not  so  unwise 
83  to  leave  their  own  vineyard  untcnded  by  neglecting  personal  edifica- 
tion, but  when  this  is  earnestly  attended  to  they  hear  their  Cluster's  call 
aod  go  forth  into  the  great  harvest  and  use  the  strength  whicli  their 
spiritual  meal  has  given  them.    In  this  way  they  are  even  more  boucfited 
than  if  they  were  always  "feeding,"  for  holy  exercise  helps  their  mental 
digestion,  and  they  all  the  more  completely  assimilate  their  sacred  food ; 
in  addition  to  which  they  have  struck  a  blow  at  the  spiritual  selfishuess 
which  tempts  ns  to  enjoy  religious  feasts  and  to  make  ourselves  com- 
fortable while  sinners  are  perishing  around  us.     Many  are  the  Christians 
whose  places  ought  to  be  empty  during  part  of  the  Lord's  day  :  they  are 
able-bodied  and  gifted,  and  they  ought  not  to  eat  the  &t  and  drink  the 
sweet  all  day  lon^,  but  should  be  engaged  in  carrying  portions  to  those 
Ijt  whom  otherwise  nothing  woidd  be  prepared.    When  the  great  king 
made  a  wedding-feast  for  his  son  he  sent  forth  his  servants  iuto  the 
higliways  and  hedges  to  compel  the  wanderers  to  come  in.   Did  he  starve 
those  servants?    Assuredly  not.    Yet  he  was  not  content  to  invite  them 
to  the  table  and  leave  the  outsiders  to  hunger  and  faint.     II is  servants 
f^und  it  to  be  their  meat  and  their  drink  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent 
them,  and  to  finish  his  work.    Even  so  will  believers  receive  edification 
while  they  are  seeking  the  good  of  others :  like  swallows,  which  feed  on 
the  wing,  they  shall  find  heavenly  meat  while  they  fly  in  the  ways  of 
service.     The  Holy  Spirit  delights  to  give  more  "oil  lor  the  light"  to 
those  who  are  diligently  shining  amid  the  darkness. 

Yet,  let  me  add  a  warning  here :  I  have  known  some  young  believers 
who  have  lacked  prudence,  and  have  carried  a  good  thing  too  far.  Before 
they  have  well  learned  they  have  been  eager  to  teach,  and  to  do  so  they 
have  ceased  learning :  multiplied  engagements  have  left  them  no  time 
for  their  own  instruction,  and  they  have  left  an  edifying  ministry  to  enter 
upon  labour  for  which  they  were  not  qualified.  Wisdom  is  profitable  to 
direct.  The  most  of  Christians  need  to  fill  their  seats  for  a  part  of  the 
Sabbath,  to  hear  the  woinl  of  God,  and  very  few  can  afford  to  spend  the 
whole  day  in  seeking  the  good  of  others.  We  grieve  to  meet  with  some 
who  are  absent  from  the  Lord's  table  for  months  because  of  their 
z-:iaIou8  occupations.  This  is  presenting  one  duty  to  God  stained  with 
the  blood  of  another.  It  is  the  positive  duty  of  every  disciple  to  obey 
tlic  Lord's  command,  "  This  do  ye  in  remembrance  of  me";  and  efforts 
which  necessitate  neglect  of  the  divine  precept  must  be  curtailed.  Ollen 
ought  we  to  show  his  death  until  he  come.  School-teaching,  street- 
preaching,  sick-visiting,  and  so  fordi  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  sub- 
btiuite  for  hearing  the  Word,  and  commemorating  the  death  of  the 
Redeemer.  We  must  have  time  to  sit  at  the  Master's  feet  with  ^Mary, 
<'r  soon,  like  Martha,  we  shall  be  cumbered.    Nevertliclcss,  despite 


40  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLV  TXJVtTt. 

this  word  of  caution,  I  am  often  glad  to  hear  that  ''  David's  place  was 
empty." 

It  is  to  be  feared  that  too  easily  we  could  find  bbats  emptied  fob 
NO  GOOD  REASON.  Ministers  in  many  congregations  are  distressed  by 
the  irregular  attendance  of  their  hearers.  A  little  rain,  a  slight  indis- 
position, or  some  other  frivolous  excuse  will  keep  many  at  home.  A  new 
preacher  has  come  into  the  neighbourhood,  and  the  rolling  stones  are 
moved  in  his  direction  for  a  season  to  the  grievous  discouragement  of 
the  pastor.  This  evil  of  irregular  attendance  is  most  manifest  at  week- 
day services :  there  often  enough  David's  seat  is  empty.  No,  not  David's, 
for  he  longs  to  be  even  a  door-keeper  in  the  house  of  his  God :  we  mean 
the  seat  of  Didymus,  who  was  not  with  the  apostles  when  Jesus  came;  of 
Demas,  who  loved  this  present  evil  world ;  and  of  many  a  hearer  who  is 
not  also  a  doer  of  the  word.  In  many  a  congi'egation  those  who  gather  at 
meetings  for  prayer  are  shamefully  few.  I  have  no  reason  to  complain  of 
this  as  a  &ult  among  my  own  beloved  people  to  any  large  extent,  and  yet 
I  cannot  shut  my  eyes  to  the  &ct  that  there  are  some  members  of  the 
church  who  would  have  to  carry  their  memories  a  long  way  back  to  recol- 
lect what  a  prayer-meeting  is  like.  Little  do  they  know  what  they 
have  lost  by  their  neglect.  Ah,  my  friend,  does  that  refer  to 
you  ?  Is  David's  place  empty  ?  Then  mend  your  ways  and  fill  it.  Of 
all  soul-refreshing  seasons  I  have  often  found  week-night  services  to  be 
the  best.  Like  oases  in  a  desert,  these  quiet  periods  amid  the  cares  of 
the  week  wear  a  greenness  peculiar  to  themselves.  Come  and  try 
whether  your  experience  will  not  tally  with  mine.  I  believe  you  will  find 
it  good  to  be  there.  Children  it  is  said  should  be  fed  like  chickens,  *'  little 
and  often";  and  to  my  mind,  short,  lively  services  coming  frequently,  on 
Sabbaths  and  week-days,  are  more  refreshing  than  hearing  two  or  even 
three  long  sermons  on  one  day  in  the  week  only.  At  any  rate  it  is  good 
for  us  to  keep  the  feast  with  our  brethren  and  not  to  make  them  asl^ 
"  Wherefore  cometh  not  the  son  of  Jesse  either  yesterday  or  to-day  ?" 

I  must  take  the  liberty  of  being  very  personal  to  the  usual  attendants 
at  the  Tabernacle.  Dear  friends,  do  not  let  your  seats  be  empty 
during  my  absence.  I  shall  be  distressed  beyond  measure  if  I  hear 
that  the  congregations  are  declining.  The  best  preachers  we  can  obtain 
are  selected  to  address  you,  and  therefore  I  hope  you  will  see  no  need 
to  forsake  your  usual  i)lace.  If  you  do  so  it  will  reflect  but  small  credit 
upon  your  pastor's  ministry,  for  it  will  be  manifest  that  you  are  babes 
in  grace,  dependent  upon  one  man  for  edification.  "All  are  yours, 
M'hethcr  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas";  and  if  you  are  men  in  Christ 
Jesus  you  will  get  good  out  of  them  all,  and  will  not  sav,  **Our  own 
blunt  Cephas  is  away,  and  we  cannot  hear  any  one  else.  I  beseech 
you  be  very  regular  in  your  attendance  during  my  absence,  lest  thoso 
who  preach  to  you  should  be  discouraged,  and  ourselves  also.  Abovo 
all,  keep  up  the  prayer-meetings.  Nelson  said,  "  England  expects  every 
man  to  do  his  duty,"  and  at  this  time,  which  is  an  emergency  in  our 
church  history,  I  would  say, — ^the  church  expects  every  member  to 
sustain  all  meetings,  labours,  and  offerings  with  unflagging  energy, 
and  especially  to  ksep  up  the  prauer-meetmgs.  There,  at  any  rate,  let  it 
not  be  said  of  any  one  of  you,  '*  David's  place  was  empty." 

Grace,  mercv,  and  peace  be  with  you  all  in  Christ  Jesus.    Amen. 


^eixmiMm  ^Tshtrmk 


THE  POOR  MAN'S  PEAYEB. 


%  ^m\if^ 


DELIYEBED  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

▲T   THE    UETROPOIJTAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


**  Benember  me,  O  Lord,  with  the  favour  ttiat  thon  bearest  nnto  thy  people :  O 
Tidt  me  with  thy  ealTation ;  that  I  may  see  the  good  of  thy  chosen,  that  I  may 
rejoice  in  the  gladneu  of  thy  nation,  that  I  may  glory  with  thine  inheritance.'*-^ 
Pdalm  ctL  4^  5, 

BKiA)YKDf  we  always  reckon  it  a  very  hopeful  sign  when  a  man  be^ns  to 
think  of  personal  religion.  Merely  to  come  with  the  crowd  and  pro- 
fessedly to  worship  is  but  poor  work ;  but  when  a  man  gets  to  feel  the 
weight  of  his  own  sin,  and  to  confess  it  with  his  heart  before  God, — when 
he  wants  a  Saviour  for  liimself,  and  begins  to  pray  alone  that  he  may 
find  that  Saviour, — when  he  is  not  content  with  oeing  the  child  of  pions 
parents,  or  with  having  been  introduced  into  the  church  in  his  childhood 
ailer  the  fashion  of  certain  sects ;  but  when  he  pines  for  real  godliness, 
personal  religion,  true  conversion,  it  is  a  blessed  sign.  When  the  stag 
separates  itself  from  the  herd  we  reckon  that  the  dart  has  struck  home ; 
the  wound  is  grievous,  and  the  creature  seeks  solitude,  for  a  bleeding 
heart  cannot  bear  company.  Blessed  are  God's  woundings,  for  they 
lead  to  a  heavenly  healing ! 

We  are  still  more  glad  when  this  desire  for  personal  salvation  leads  a 
man  to  prayer, — when  he  begins  really  to  cry  out  before  God  on  his  own 
account, — ^when  he  has  done  with  the  prayers  he  used  to  repeat  by  rote 
like  a  parrot,  and  bursts  out  with  the  language  of  his  heart.  Tnough 
that  language  may  be  very  broken,  or  consist  only  of  sighs  and  tears 
and  groans,  it  is  a  happy  circumstance.  ''Behold,  he  prayeth"  was 
enough  for  Ananias ;  he  was  sure  that  Paul  must  be  converted ;  and 
when  we  find  a  man  praying,  and  praying  earnestly,  for  personal  sal- 
vation, we  &el  that  this  is  the  finger  of  God,  and  our  heart  is  glad 
within  ns. 

The  passage  before  ns  is  one  of  those  earnest  personal  supplications 
which  we  love  to  hear  from  any  lips.  I  will  read  it  again,  and  then  pro- 
ce^  to  use  it  in  two  or  three  ways.  ''  Bemember  me,  0  Lord,  with  the 
&voar  that  thou  bearest  nnto  thy  people :  0  visit  me  with  thpr  salvation ; 
that  I  may  see  the  good  of  thy  chosen,  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  glad* 
of  th^  nation,  that  I  may  f\ovf  with  thine  ii^hentanqei" 


99 


42  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Nowj  first,  this  is  a  very  suitahh  prayei'  for  the  htmbk  believer :  it 
was  a  humble  believer  who  firafc  uttered  it.  Next,  //  would  make  a  very 
siiifabis  2^li(ion  for  a  penitent  backslider ;  and,  thirdly,  //  would  be 
a  very  street  gospel  prayer  for  a  seeker,  ^Maj  the  Spirit  of  God  bless  the 
word  to  each  of  these  characters. 

I.  First,  then,  this  is  an  admirable  prayer  for  a  poor  humble 
Christian.    I  think  I  can  hear  him  using  the  very  words. 

Notice  with  interest  the  first  fear  felt  by  this  poor  tremWinor  Christia]!. 
He  is  afraid  ika^  he  is  such  a  little  one  thut  God  will  forget  him,  and 
so   he  begins  with,  "  0  remember  me  with   the   favour   which    tliou 
bearest  to  thy  people."   I  know  this  man  well.    I  think  very  much  of  I)im, 
but  he  thinks  very  little  of  himficlf.    I  admire  his  humihty,  but  he  ofleu 
complains  that  he  feels  pride  in  his  heart.     He  is  a  true  believer,  but  he 
is  a  sad  doubter.    Poor  man,  he  often  hangs  his  head,  for  he  has  such  a 
sense  of  his  own  unworthincss ;  I  only  wish  he  had  an  equal  sense  of 
Christ's  fulness  to  balance  his  humility.   He  is  on  the  road  to  heaven,  but 
he  is  often  afi*aid  he  is  not,  and  that  makes  him  watch  every  step  he  ttikes. 
T  almost  wish  some  confident  professors  were  altogether  as  doubtful  as  he 
is  if  they  would  be  half  as  cautious.     He  is  afraid  to  put  one  foot  before 
another,  lest  he   should   go  wrong,  and  yet  he  mourns  his  want  of 
watchfulness.     He  is  always  complaining  of  the  hardness  of  his  heart, 
and  yet  he  is  tenderness  itself.     Dear  man — you  should  hear  him  pray. 
His  prayers  are  among  the  most  earnest  and  blessed  you  ever  listened 
to,  but  when  he  has  done  he  is  afraid  he  never  ought  to  have  opened  his 
mouth.    He  is  not  fit  to  pray  before  others,  he  says.    He  thinks  his 
prayers  the  poorest  that  ever  reach  the  throne  of  God ;  indeed,  he  is 
afi^aid  they  do  not  get  there,  but  spend  themselves  as  wasted  breath. 
He  has  his  occasional  gleams  of  sunlight,  and  when  he  feels  the  love 
of  God  in  his  soul  he  is  as  merry  afi  the  cricket  on  the  hearth.    There  is 
not  a  man  out  of  heaven  more  gay  than  he  when  his  hope  revives.  But,  oh, 
he  is  so  tender  about  sin  that  when  he  finds  himself  growing  a  little  cold, 
or  in  any  measure  backsliding,  he  begins  to  flog  himself, — at  which  I  am 
very  glad,  but  he  also  begins  somewhat  to  doubt  his  interest  in  his  Lord, 
of  which  I  am  not  glad,  but  pity  him  much  and  blame  him  too,  though 
mth  much  sympathy  for  him.    Now,  I  am  not  quite  sure  about  this 
good  man's  name^ — ^it  may  be  Littlefaith,  or  Feeblemind.    Or  is  it 
Mr.  Despondency  I  am  thinking  of?      Or  am   I  talking  of  Miss 
Much-airaid  ?    Or  is  it  Mr.  Beady-to-halt  ?    Well,  it  is  some  one  of 
that  numerous  family.    This  poor  soul  thinks,  "  Surely  God  will  forget 
me  !  *'     No,  no,  dear  heart,  he  will  not  forget  you.    It  is  wonderful  how 
God  does  think  of  little  things.    Mungo  rark  picked  up  a  little  bit  of 
moss  in  the  desert,  and  as  he  marked  now  beautifully  it  was  variegated, 
he  said,  "  God  is  here  :  he  is  thinking  of  the  moss,  and  therefore  he  will 
think  of  me."    Once  upon  a  time  a  Uttle  plant  grew  right  in  the  middle 
of  the  forest,  and  the  trees  stretched  for  many  a  mile  all  around  it,  and 
it  said  to  itsdf,  '*  The  sunlight  will  never  get  at  me.    I  have  a  little  flower 
which  I  would  fain  open,  but  it  cannot  come  forth  till  the  sunbeam 
cherishes  me.    Alas !  it  will  never  reach  ms.    Look  at  the  thick  foliage : 
see  the  huge  trunks  of  those  towering  oaks  and  mighty  beeches,  these 
will  effectually  hide  the  sun  from  my  tiny  form."    But  in  due  season 
the  sun  looked  through  the  trees  like  a  king  through  the  lattices  and 


THE  POOR  man's  PRAYER.  43 

snuled  on  the  little  flower ;  for  there  never  was  a  flower  that  God  has 
not  thought  of  and  provided  for.  Say  ye  not  right  well  that  "each 
blade  of  grass  hath  its  own  drop  of  dew,"  and  think  you  that  God  will 
forget  yon,  little  as  yon  are?  He  knows  when  sv.allows  fly,  and  when 
emmets  awake  and  gather  their  stores,  and  Avill  he  not  think  of  you  ? 
Because  yon  are  little  you  must  not  suspect  the  love  of  your  heavenly 
Father.  Mother,  which  child  is  that  which  you  never  do  forget  ?  If 
YOU  CYer  went  to  bed  at  night  and  left  one  of  the  children  out  of  doors, 
1  know  which  one  it  was  not.  It  was  not  the  babe  which  lies  helpless 
in  your  bosom.  You  never  forget  that.  And  ye  helpless  ones,  ye  timid 
trembling  ones,  if  the  Lord  must  forget  any,  it  would  be  the  strong, 
but  certainly  not  you.  As  yon  breathe  the  prayer,  "  Remember  me  with 
the  favour  that  thou  bearest  to  thy  people, '  the  Lord  answers  you,  "  I 
do  earnestly  remember  thee  still." 

Observe  next,  that  this  poor  trembling  heart  seems  to  be  in  great 
trouble  for  fear  the  Lord  should  pass  it  by,  but  at  the  same  timo  feels 
thai  every  good  thing  U  can  possibly  receive  must  come  from  the  Lord,  and 
miAsi  he  brought  to  it  by  the  Lord,  Note  the  words  :  "  0  visit  me  with 
thy  salvation,"  as  if  he  had  said,  ''Lord,  I  cannot  come  to  thee:  I 
am  too  lame  to  come,  I  am  too  weak  to  come,  but  visit  me.  0  Lord, 
I  am  like  the  wounded  man  between  Jericho  and  Jerusalem  :  I  am 
half  dead,  and  cannot  stir.  Come  to  me,  Lord ;  for  I  cannot  move  to 
thee.  Visit  me,  for  only  thy  raitations  can  preserve  mv  spirit.  I  am 
so  wounded  and  sore  broken,  and  undone,  that  if  thou  do  not  visit  me 
with  thy  salvation  even  as  if  I  never  had  been  saved  before,  I  must  be 

l06t." 

Now,  poor  trembler,  let  me  whisper  a  half  word  into  thine  ear,  and  may 
God  the  Holy  Spirit  make  it  a  comfort  to  thee.  Thou  needest  not  say, 
if  thou  hast  a  broken  heart,  "  Lord,  visit  me."  Do  you  not  know  that 
he  dwells  in  you,  for  is  it  not  written,  "  To  this  man  will  I  look,  and 
with  this  man  will  I  dwell,  even  with  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contiite 
spirit,  and  that  trembleth  at  my  word  "  ?  Are  you  not  the  very  person  ? 
I  wish  you  could  rejoice  at  God's  word,  but  as  you  cannot,  I  am  glad 
yon  tremble  at  it,  for  you  are  the  man  that  God  has  promised  to  dwell 
with.  "  Trembleth  at  my  word^' — lay  hold  on  that,  and  believe  that  the 
Lord  looks  towards  you,  and  dwells  with  you. 

What  a  plaintive  prayer  this  is  !  Carefully  consider  that  this  poor, 
weak,  humble,  trembling  one  longs  to  partake  in  tlie  blessings  which  the 
Lord  gives  to  his  own  people,  and  in  the  joy  which  he  has  in  store 
for  them.  This  is  the  way  in  which  he  speaks,  "I  hear  many  Chris- 
tians around  me  say  that  they  know  and  are  persuaded,  0  that  I  had  a 
little  of  their  certaintv.  I  hear  them  speak  so  confidently,  with  such  full 
assurance,  and  I  see  the  light  leap  out  of  their  eyes  when  they  talk  about 
their  sweet  Lord  and  Master,  and  all  his  love  to  them  ;  oh,  how  I  wish 
I  could  talk  so  I  Poor  I,  I  am  only  able  to  say,  *  Lord,  I  believe  :  help 
thou  mine  unbelief.'  I  see  them  sitting  at  a  loaded  table,  and  they  seem 
to  feast  most  abundantly,  but  as  for  me,  I  am  glad  it  is  written  that  the 
dogs  eat  the  crumbs  which  fall  from  the  Master's  table,  for  if  I  get  a 
crumb  now  and  then,  I  feel  so  happy  with  it;  but  I  wish  I  could  sit 
and  feast  where  others  of  God's  children  do.  Oh  that  I  could  talk  of 
rapt  fellowship  and  close  communion  and  uiward  joy,  and  overflowing 


44  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACtH  F0LPn. 

bliss !  They  tell  me,  some  of  them,  that  they  sit  down  on  the  doorstep 
of  heaven,  and  look  within  and  see  the  golden  streets,  and  that  some- 
times they  hear  stray  notes  from  the  harps  of  the  blessed  ones  in  the  &r« 
off  C50untry.  Oh,  how  I  wish  I  had  a  sip  of  these  joys  ;  for,  woe  is  me, 
I  dwell  in  Mesech  and  sojourn  in  the  tents  of  Kedar ;  and  the  oiJy  mnsic 
that  I  hear  is  the  din  of  a  sinful  world, — the  viols  of  them  that  make 
merry  in  wantonness.  I  miss  those  precious  things  which  the  saints 
delight  in."  Poor  sorrowing  heart,  let  me  say  to  thee,  and  say  in  God*8 
name,  if  thou  lovest  thy  Lord,  all  things  are  thine.  They  ora  thine  freely  to 
enjoy  even  at  this  moment.  The  Lord  denies  thee  no  covenant  blessing. 
Make  bold  to  appropriate  the  sacred  joys,  for  if  thou  be  the  least  child 
in  the  family,  yet  the  heritage  of  God's  children  is  the  same  for  every  one. 
There  is  no  choice  thing  that  God  will  keep  away  from  thee.  Nay,  if 
there  be  one  morsel  more  dainty  than  another  it  is  reserved  for  sucn  as 
thou  art.  Make  bold,  theu.  If  thou  be  the  Benjamin  in  the  &mily, 
thou  shalt  have  Benjamin's  mess  which  is  ten  times  larger  than  any 
other.  He  will  comfort  thee  and  bless  thee.  Only  be  thou  of  good 
cheer,  and  when  thou  art  praying,  "  Favour  me  with  the  fevonr  which 
thou  bearest  to  thy  people,  let  tny  faith  hear  him  say,  '•  I  am  thy  por- 
tion.'' Eejoice  in  tne  Lord  thy  God.  Lift  up  the  hands  that  hang 
down,  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees.  Is  not  my  text  a  sweet  prayer 
for  thee  ?  Pray  it  in  feith,  and  be  at  peace. 
II.    We  wiU  now  look  another  way,  and  say  that  OUK  text  is  a 

SUITABLB    petition    FOR    A    POOR    PENriENT    BACKSLIDER.       I   knOW 

there  are  backsliders  here ;  though,  alas,  I  am  not  sure  that  they  are 
penitent.  The  Lord  alone  can  read  their  hearts.  But  if  they  are 
penitent  I  can  hardly  conceive  a  more  suitable  petition  for  them  than 
that  which  is  before  us. 

It  is  clear  that  this  poor,  pleading  backslider  feeU  thai  he  hasfargoifen 
his  God,  Have  you  done  that?  You  have  been  a  church-member, 
and  you  have  gone  sadly  astray ;  have  you  quite  forgotten  his  command- 
ments. You  thought  you  loved  him.  You  used  to  pray  at  one  time : 
you  had  some  enjoyment  in  reading  and  in  hearing  the  Word ;  but  now 
you  find  your  pleasure  somewhere  else.  You  have  left  your  first  love 
and  gone  after  many  lovers.  But,  oh,  if  the  Lord  is  gracious  to  yon,  you 
are  lamenting  your  forgetfulness ;  and  though  yon  have  not  remembered 
him,  the  prayer  leaps  to  your  lips,  "  Lord,  remember  me."  Blessed  be 
his  name,  he  does  not  so  easily  forget  us  as  we  forget  him.  If  thou  be  a 
truly  penitent  backslider  thy  feelings  of  repentance  prove  that  God  re- 
members thee.  It  is  he  that  sets  thee  weq)ing,  and  makes  thee  sorrow 
for  thy  sin.  If  thou  hadst  been  alto^ther  forgotten  of  Crod  thou  wonldst 
not  have  any  desire  to  return  to  him ;  but  those  inward  pangs,  those 
secret  throes,  those  desires  to  be  restored  to  the  Lord — these  prove  that 
le  remembers  thee  with  the  favour  which  he  has  towards  his  people. 

And,  then,  I  think  your  next  trouble  will  be  this :  jou/esl  that  you 
Juive  tost  yaur  fellowship  with  Chnst:  and  you  are  right  m  so  feeling,  for 
"How  can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed?"  How  could 
Christ  have  fellowship  with  you  in  the  ways  of  folly  ?  Do  you  think 
Christ  would  come  and  talk  comfortably  to  you  while  jrou  are  frivolous, 
or  while  you  are  unclean  ?  How  could  that  be  ?  All  joyful  communion 
between  your  *oul  and  God  is  broken,  and  well  may  you  pray,  **  0  vjsit 


tHB  POOR  XAN*S  PRATSA.  45 

me  with  thy  salvation.  Come  back  to  me^  Lord.  Come  aadt  dwell  iii 
me  again. 

*  Why  should  my  foolish  passions  rovo  ? 
Where  can  snch  sweetness  be 
Ai  I  have  tasted  in  thy  love, 
As  I  have  found  in  thee  ?* 

Come  back,  my  Lord,  and  visit  me  with  thy  salvation.*'  Is  not  this  a 
prayer  made  on  pnrpose  for  yon  ? 

And,  nexty  yon  observe  in  the  text  that  the  poor  backslider  i3  lotting 
io  g$t  a  siffhl  of  the  good  things  which  for  a  long  time  has  been  hid  from 
km.  He  cries,  "  That  I  may  see  the  good  of  thy  chosen."  He  has  been 
ont  amongst  the  swine,  but  he  could  not  fill  his  belly  with  the  husks. 
He  has  been  hungering  and  thirsting,  and  now  he  remembers  that  in 
his  Father's  house  there  is  bread  enough  and  to  spare.  Backslider,  do 
Ton  remember  that  to-night  ?  You  know  yon  are  not  happy,  and  you 
begin  to  perceive  that  yon  never  will  be  happy  while  you  are  living  in 
the  far  country.  If  yon  had  not  been  a  child  of  Ood  you  might  have 
made  a  happy  worldling  after  the  sort  of  happiness  that  worldlings  know ; 
bat  yon  are  spoiled  for  a  worldling  if  you  nave  ever  known  the  love  of 
Gk>d ;  and  you  have  known  that,  or  else  you  have  been  indeed  a  hypocrite. 
Do  yon  not  sigh  to  the  Lord  to  give  you  these  good  things  again? 
Well,  he  will  freely  rive  them  to  you,  and  he  will  not  upbraid  you. 
Come  and  try  him.  He  is  ready  to  press  you  to  his  bosom,  and  to  forget 
and  forgive  the  past,  and  accept  you  in  the  Beloved. 

The  poor  backslider  praying  in  the  words  of  my  text  lonas  to  taste 
ones  more  ih$  jog  he  used  to  feel,  and  therefore  he  says,  "  That  I  may 
rejoice  in  the  gladness  of  thy  nation";  and,  again,  ?ie  wants  to  he  able 
to  speak  as  he  once  could — **  that  I  may  glory  with  thine  inheritance." 
Poor  man,  he  is  ashamed  to  speak  to  sinners  now.  He  hangs  his  head 
in  company,  for  there  are  some  that  call  him  turncoat.  He  does  not  like 
to  have  it  known  that  he  was  once  a  Christian :  and  therefore  he  comes 
stealing  in  to  the  assembly  of  the  saints  as  if  he  hoped  no  one  would 
know  him.  There  he  ia^  but  he  feels  half  ashamed  to  be  here :  and 
yet  he  wishes  that  he  were  once  more  with  the  Christian  brotherhood, 
and  could  rejoice  with  them.  My  poor  friend,  you  used  to  be  bold  as  a 
lion  for  Christ  once,  and  now  you  turn  tail  and  fly.  How  can  you  be 
bold  with  all  those  inconsistencies?  There  was  a  time  when  you  might 
have  made  a  martvr,  but  now  what  a  coward  you  are ;  and  who  wonders 
that  you  are  so  when  they  know  that  secret  sin  has  sapped  and  under- 
mined your  profession,  and  made  you  weak  as  water?  I  beg  you  to  pray 
the  prayer — "That  I  may  glory  with  thine  inheritance."  You  never 
will  again  make  your  boast  in  the  Lord  till  you  are  restored,  till  you 
come  back  again  as  you  came  at  first  with  the  old  cry,  "  Father,  I  have 
sinned  before  thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son." 
Come  back  even  now,  my  brother,  and  get  another  application  of  the 
blood  of  sprinkling:  Look  again  to  Jesus.  Ah,  and  I  may  here  say, 
if  yon  have  not  bad^slidden,  look  again  to  Jesus.  Those  of  us  who  have 
not  fiillen  had  better  look  to  him  with  our  brethren  who  have  fallen,  for 
there  is  the  same  blessing  wanted  by  us  all.  We  have  all  wandered  to 
some  extent.    Come,  let  us  look  to  those  dear  wounds  anew.    Can  ye 


40  3IETR0P0L1TAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

not  see  liim?  I^retliinks  he  hangs  before  me  now.  The  thorn-crown  is 
on  his  liead,  and  his  eyes  ai*c  lull  of  languid  pity  and  tearful  grief.  I 
see  his  face  bestained  with  spittle,  and  black  and  blue  with  cruel 
bruises.  I  see  his  hands,  they  are  founts  of  gore.  I  see  his  feet,  they 
gush  with  rivulets  of  crimson  blood.  I  look  npon  him,  and  I  cry, 
"  Was  ever  grief  like  thine,  0  King  of  sorrow?  and  as  I  look  I  do 
remember  that  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  all  his  people ; 
and,  looking,  my  sin  departs  from  me,  because  it  was  laid  on  him.  Lock- 
ing, my  heart  begins  to  love,  and  then  begins  to  leap.  Looking,  I  come 
back  a^ain  to  where  I  stood  before ;  and  now,  once  again,  Christ  is  my 
all,  and  I  rejoice  in  him.  Have  you  gone  through  that  process,  back- 
slider ?  If  you  have  done  so  while  I  have  been  speaking,  let  us  praise 
God  together. 

III.  The  last  use  I  have  to  make  of  my  text  will,  I  hope,  be  bene- 
ficial to  many  here  present.  It  is  this :  this  is  a  tehy  s^VEET  prayer 
FOR  A  POOR  soiiROwiNa  SEEKER.  I  beg  all  who  desire  conversion  to 
remember  this  prayer.  They  had  better  jot  it  down,  and  carry  it  home 
with  them,  or,  better  Still,  breathe  it  to  heaven  at  once. 

Consider  it  well.  To  begin  with,  it  is  a  simien-'s  prayer,  "  Remem- 
ber me,  0  Lord !  '*  A  sinner's  prayer,  I  say,  for  the  dying  thief  rejoiced 
t)  use  the  words.  He  could  not  have  reached  down  a  prayer-book 
and  said  a  collect,  poor  man,  when  he  was  dying,  and  there  was  no  need 
he  should.  This  is  the  best  of  prayers, — "  Lord,  remember  me  when 
thou  comest  into  thy  kingdom.*'  Trembling  sinner,  what  suited  the 
dying  thief  may  well  suit  you.  Breathe  it  now,  "Forget  my  sins, 
my  Father,  but  remember  me.  Forget  my  delays,  forget  my  rejectings 
of  a  Saviour,  forget  the  hardness  of  my  heart,  but,  oh,  remember  me. 
Let  everything  pass  away  from  thy  mind,  and  be  blotted  from  thy 
memory ;  but,  dear  Father,  by  the  love  of  the  liord  Jesus,  do  remember 
me."     Sinner,  do  not  go  home  without  presenting  that  prayer  to  God. 

Note,  again,  it  is  the  prayer  of  a  lost  one,  "  Visit  me  with  thy  salva- 
tion." Nobody  wants  salvation  unless  he  is  lost.  People  may  talk  about 
salvation  who  do  not  feel  that  they  are  lost,  but  they  do  not  know  any- 
thing about  it,  and  do  not  really  desire  it.  Lost  soul,  where  art  thou  ? 
Art  thou  lost  in  a  thousand  ways — lost  even  to  society  ?  Well,  here  is 
a  fit  prayer  for  thee — "  Visit  me  ^vitil  thy  salvation."  Jesus  Christ  has 
not  come  to  seek  and  to  save  those  who  do  not  want  saving,  but  he  has 
come  on  purpose  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  Thou  art  the 
man  he  came  to  bless.  Look  to  him,  and  thou  shalt  find  that  he  is  the 
Saviour  thou  dost  i-equire.  **  Visit  me  with  thy  salvation  " — I  cannot 
get  this  prayer  into  your  hearts,  but  Gk)d  can,  and  I  am  praying  in  my 
own  soul  that  many  of  you  in  the  galleries,  or  down  below  there,  may 
now  be  crying,  "  Visit  me  with  thy  salvation." 

Further,  remark  that  our  text  is  the  prayer  ofom  who  has  a  dim  ey^— 
'*  That  I  may  see  the  good  of  thy  chosen."  We  have  told  the  seeker  to 
look  to  Jesns,  but  he  complains,  **  I  do  try  to  look,  but  I  cannot  see." 
Beloved  seeker,  I  do  not  know  that  you  are  bidden  to  see.  You  are 
bidden  to  look ;  and  if  you  could  not  see  when  you  looked  you  would 
at  least  have  obeyed  the  gospel  command.  The  looking,  the  looking  would 
bring  salvation  to  you.  But  for  dim  eyes  Christ  is  the  great  cure. 
He    can    take  away  the  cataract  and  remove  the  gutta  sei'ena,    l^tBj 


THB  POOR  man's  PRAYKR.  47 

to-nighty  "  Lord,  open  my  blind  eyes,  that  I  may  see  the  good  of  thy 
chosen.'* 

Then  it  is  a  prayer  for  a  heavy  heart.  *'That  I  may  rejoice  in  the 
gladness  of  thy  nation."  The  seeking  sonl  moans  oat,  **  0  that  I  had 
a  little  joy,  or  even  a  trembling  hope.  If  it  were  ever  so  small  a  portion 
of  light  I  should  be  glad."  Pray  for  iov.  The  Lord  waits  to  gire  it, 
and  if  yon  believe  in  «Jesas  yonr  joy  shall  be  fhU. 

And  in  the  last  place — ^not  to  detain  yon  till  yon  are  weary — onr  text  is 
(he  prayer  of  a  spirit  that  is  humble  and  lata  in  the  very  dust,  which 
cries  to  Gk>d  to  enable  it  to  glory  with  his  inheritance,  because  it  is 
stripped  of  all  other  glory,  emptiea  of  its  own  boastings.  Practically 
its  plea  is,  "  Lord,  give  me  to  boast  in  thy  mercy  and  thy  goodness,  for 
I  have  nothing  else  to  boast  of." 

Now,  beloved  hearer,  this  prayer  I  would  most  earnestly  press  upon 
you,  and  I  would  press  it  upon  you  for  these  reasons. 

Just  think  for  a  moment.  Supposing  you  are  living  now  without 
seeing  the  good  of  God's  chosen,  without  being  saved,  what  a  wretched  life 
it  is  to  live !  I  cannot  understand  what  men  do  without  Qod :  I  cannot 
comprehend  how  they  live.  Do  you  have  no  cares,  men  ?  "  Oh,"  you 
say,  "  we  have  anxieties  in  shoals."  Well,  where  do  you  take  them  ? 
I  find  I  have  troubles  enough,  but  I  have  a  God  to  take  them  to. 
What  do  you  do  with  many  troubles  and  no  God  ?  Do  your  children 
never  distress  your  mind  ?  How  can  you  live  with  bad  children,  and  no 
God  ?  Do  you  never  lose  money  in  your  business  ?  Do  you  never  feel 
distracted?  Do  you  never  say,  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  Whi-ch  way  shall  I 
turn  ?"  I  suppose  you  do.  Then  what  do  you  do  without  a  helper  or 
a  guide  ?  Poor  weak  thing  as  I  am,  I  run  under  the  shelter  of  my 
Father's  win^,  and  I  feel  safe  enough.  But  where  do  you  go  ?  Where  do 
you  fly?  What  is  your  comfort?  I  suppose  you  are  something  like  the 
poor  creatures  condemned  to  death  in  old  times  to  whom  they  gave  a  stupe- 
fying cup,  so  that  they  might  die  without  feeling  the  horror  of  death  : 
surely  yon  must  be  under  a  strong  delusion  that  you  can  believe  a  lie, 
for  if  you  were  in  your  senses  you  could  not  do  without  a  God, — no,  not 
with  your  beautiful  gardens  and  fine  parks,  and  wealth,  and  riches,  much 
less — many  of  you — with  your  poverty  and  hard  labour.  Poor  man 
without  a  God,  how  do  you  keep  up  your  spirits  ?  What  comfort  is 
there  in  your  life  ?  No  prayer  in  the  morning,  no  prayer  at  night :  what 
days,  what  nights  I  Oh,  men,  I  could  as  soon  think  of  living  without 
eatine,  or  living  without  breathing,  as  living  without  prayer.  Wretched 
naked  spirits,  your  souls  must  be  with  no  God  to  cover  them  !  But  if  it 
be  bad  to  live  without  Christ — and  I  am  sure  it  is, — what  will  it  be  to 
die  without  him  ?  What  will  it  be  to  look  into  the  future,  and  find  no 
light — no  light,  and  nobody  that  can  bring  you  any  ?  You  have  sent  to 
the  minister,  and  he  has  spoken  with  you,  but  he  cannot  help  you  ; 
you  have  had  the  prayers  of  your  family,  who  are  sobbing  at  the  tnought 
of  losing  you,  but  you  are  looking  out  alone  like  one  that  gazes  upon 
an  angry  sea  in  a  cold  winter*s  storm,  and  you  can  see  nothing  but 
the  palpable  dark.  Or,  to  change  the  metaphor,  you  are  like  a  man  on 
yonder  wreck.  See,  he  is  clinging  to  the  mast ;  he  hears  the  blast  go 
Tt'histling  by  him,  and  anon  it  comes  back  howling  around  him,  as  if 
hungry  for  its  prey.     He  can  hear  the  sea  mews  screaming  in  the  sky 


48  MSTROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  tJiey  seem  to  prophesy  his  doom.  The  waves  break  over  him, 
dreaching  him  with  theur  brine,  till  he  is  ready  to  freeze  as  he  han^ 
between  death's  awful  jaws.  The  lifeboat  has  been  and  carried  off  all  it 
can,  and  it  will  never  come  back  any  more ;  and,  though  he  clings  with 
desperation,  he  knows  it  is  a  forlorn  hope.  He  will  drift  out  to  sea^ 
and  his  corpse  will  lie  where  pearls  lie  deep,  in  the  caverns  where  many 
thousand  Etkeletons  have  bleadied  these  many  years :  his  case  is  terrible 
to  the  last  degree,  and  yet  it  is  a  feeble  picture  of  a  soul  leaving  the  body 
without  an  interest  in  Christ's  salvation.  Before  you  get  into  that  state, 
cry  to  God,  **  Remember  me,  0  Lord,  with  the  favour  that  thou  bearest 
unto  thy  people.    0  visit  me  with  thy  salvation ! " 

But  the  mist  darkens  and  the  tempest  lowers  in  tenfold  fury  when  we 
come  to  think  what  it  must  be  to  rise  again  from  the  tomb  without 
Christ.  When  that  last  shrill  clarion  has  sounded,  and  every  grave  and 
cemetery  shall  have  given  up  their  sleepers,  and  the  sea  has  yielded 
up  the  dead  that  are  therein,  and  battle-fields  are  swarming  with  the 
myriad  slain  that  live  again,  and  in  the  sky  shall  be  seen  the  great 
white  throne,  and  upon  it  the  Son  of  man  who  bled  for  sinners  now  come 
to  judge  and  to  condemn  his  adversaries ;  what  will  men  then  do  if 
they  have  no  personal  religion,  no  interest  in  Christ,  no  portion  in  his 
salvation?  Scripture  tells  us  that  they  will  ask  the  rocks  to  hide  them 
and  the  hills  to  cover  them :  but  they  have  no  bowels  of  compassion, 
thev  will  yield  no  shelter.  There  will  be  no  refuge  for  the  ungodly, 
and  nothing  before  them  except  the  fiery  indignation  and  wrath  of  God. 
"  0  turn  ye,  turn  ye,  why  will  ye  die  ?  " 

This  is  a  common  scene  to  many  of  you,  this  great  gathering  in  the 
Tabernacle.  I  must  confess  I  cannot  look  upon  it  without  emotion, 
though  I  see  it  twice  each  Sabbath  day.  Here  are  all  of  you,  and  I, 
a  lone  man,  standing  here  to  talk  to  you  in  God's  name.  It  is  as 
much  as  my  soul  is  worth  if  I  am  not  earnest  with  you ;  but  ah,  I 
am  not  half  as  earnest  as  I  ought  to  be.  Yet  hear  me  once  more.  I 
am  a  true  prophet  at  this  hour — when  I  warn  you  that  you  shall  see  this 
sight  again  if  you  reject  the  Saviour.  Across  the  flames  of  hell  you  will 
see  it,  and  you  will  say  to  yourself,  "The  preacher  did  warn  us: 
he  did  tell  us  to  cry  to  God  for  mercy :  he  did  point  us  to  the  Saviour. 
He  bade  us  pray,  and  pray  there  and  then."  You  will  remember  mv 
entreaties,  and  then  you  will  renew  your  agony  as,  with  a  wail  which 
shall  never  end,  you  will  cry,  *'  God  called,  but  I  refused :  he  stretched 
out  his  hands,  but  I  regarded  him  not,  and  now  the  day  of  grace  is  past, 
and  the  Christ  whom  I  despised  doth  laugh  at  my  calamity  and  mock 
when  my  time  is  come :  for  there  is  no  hope — ^no  hope.  I  knocked  too 
late  at  mercy's  door.  My  lamp  went  out.  I  was  a  foolish  virgin,  and  I 
am  shut  out  in  outer  darkness,  where  there  is  weeping  and  wailing  and 
gnashing  of  teeth."  In  the  name  of  the  everlasting  God  I  pray  you 
submit  yourselves  to  Clirist  your  Lord  at  once  and  you  shall  live.  Auieu. 
Amen. 

Portion  of  ScaipruRB  rrad  befobe  Sermon— Psahn  li. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 51,  584,  556. 


^tttapUim  ^^hvamh  fttlpi 


EVEET  MAN'S  NECESSITY. 


3^.  ^^tw0\( 


DELIYEBED  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THB    URTaOPOIilTAH    TABERNACLK,    NRWIKGTON. 


'*  Ye  moat  be  bom  ogaiiu" — John  iii.  7. 

WuKS  men  are  perishing  all  around  yon  it  would  be  cruel  to  waste 
time  in  attempting  to  interest  their  minds  or  to  amuse  their  fancies. 
We  mnst  do  something  more  practical,  and  give  earnest  heed  to  their 
pressing  necessities.  Is  it  famine  which  slajs  them  ?  Let  us  feed 
them.  Is  it  cold  ?  Jjet  us  supply  them  with  covering.  Is  it  disease  ? 
Let  ns  administer  medicine.  When  the  case  is  urgent  we  confine  our- 
selves  to  necessaries,  and  attend  with  our  whole  heart  to  that  which 
must  have  our  attention.  That  which  may  be  can  wait,  but  that  which 
must  be  demands  our  immediate  care.  Now,  the  spiritual  needs  of  men 
are  urgent,  and  among  them  the  most  pressing  is  their  regeneration : 
they  most  be  bom  again,  or  they  are  lost.  Therefore,  at  this  time,  we 
will  dwell  on  this  topic  and  give  it  our  whole  consideration,  letting 
other  interesting  matters  wait  till  tliis  most  weighty  business  is  happily 
over.  This  is  a  must,  and  we  must  press  it  upon  you  at  once  with  our 
whole  heart.  Our  earnest  desire  is  for  a  great  ingathering  of  souls  to 
the  gamer  of  salvation,  but  in  order  to  this  they  must  be  born  again. 
We  hare  had  many  of  you  hovering  round  about  us  like  birds  around 
the  fowler,  but  you  are  not  as  yet  taken  in  the  gospel  net ;  this  state  of 
things  cannot  content  us ;  we  want  to  see  you  decided  for  Christ,  and 
truly  bom  again.  You  have  been  hearers  long,  but,  alas,  you  remain 
hearers  only,  and  are  not  "  doers  of  the  word."  We  mean  that  the  fault 
shall  not  lie  with  us;  if  you  continue  unsaved  it  shall  noc  be  because 
we  have  not  preached  the  gospel  and  kept  to  preaching  it,  and  preached 
it  as  a  matter  of  life  and  death.  Again,  then,  do  we  aim  at  the  one 
point,  the  point  of  absolute  necessity — *'Ye  must  be  bom  again." 
We  trust  that  if  one  arrow  docs  not  reach  the  mark  another  may  ;  at 
any  rate,  we  will  continue  driWng  at  the  one  target — the  conversion  of 
your  souls.  0  you  who  as  yet  have  not  been  brought  to  know  the  Lord, 
may  the  Holy  Spirit  guide  the  arrow  at  this  hour. 

And  now  we  will  have  a  little  simple  talk  about  the  great  experience 
called  regeneration,  or  the  new  birth,  without  which  no  man  can  see  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  much  less  enter  it. 


60  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

* 

1.  And  \re  shall  remark  concerning  it  in  the  first  place  that  the 
change  which  is  wrought  in  ns  by  the  new  birth  is  most  thorough  : 
"Ye  must  be  born  again.**  A  new  birth  is  the  most  sweeping  and 
entire  process  conceivable.  It  is,  in  fact,  more  than  a  change,  it  is  a 
creation.  Regeneration  is  a  great  deal  more  than  reformation  of  life, 
or  a  becoming  religion;  for  it  is  not  ''Ye  must  be  washed,  je  must  be 
improved,  ye  must  be  elevated;"  but  "ye  must  be  horn**  It  is  not 
enough  that  the  present  life,  as  already  postessed,  should  be  renovated, 
that  the  existing  nature  should  receive  fresh  vigour  and  new  tone,  but 
" ye  must  be  ho^n  again ":  a  new  life  must  be  received,  and  no  im- 
proving the  present  life  will  suiBce  in  its  stead. 

It  is  a  great  deal  more  also  than  any  change  of  opinion.  I  am  always 
afraid  of  those  persons  who  glory  in  being  converted  from  one  set  of 
religious  opinions  to  another.  The  best  converts  to  a  church  are  those 
who  are  brought  into  it  from  the  world :  those  who  migrate  from  other 
sections  of  Cnristianity  are  not  often  the  most  valuable  acquisitions. 
Sometimes,  like  the  convicts,  who  leave  their  country  for  their  country's 
good,  they  benefit  their  party  best  by  leaving  it,  and  do  not  come  to  the 
newly  adopted  section  of  the  church  as  an  unmixed  gain.  The  text  says 
not "  Ye  must  change  your  opinions,  and  drink  in  new  notions,"  but  "  Ye 
must  have  a  new  nature ;  ye  must  be  born  again."  Notions  may  be 
altered  again  and  again,  and  yet  the  man  may  be  no  nearer  being  a 
child  of  God;  but  let  the  nature  be  changed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
then  the  matter  is  accomplished.  This  it  is,  and  nothing  short  of  this, 
that  can  land  a  man  in  heaven ;  he  must  become  a  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus.  The  process  of  the  new  birth  is  so  thorough  that  it  is  a  great 
deal  more  than  an  alteration  of  a  man's  way  of  thinking,  even  upon  the 
best  of  topics.  A  man  may  now  think  it  his  duty  to  be  religious, 
whereas  ouce  he  was  debauched  :  he  may  now  conceive  it  to  be  his 
duty  to  be  sober,  whereas  before  he  was  drunken :  he  may  feel  it  his 
duty  now  to  be  diligent,  whereas  before  he  was  a  shiggjxrd:  but  all 
these  put  together  would  not  amount  to  a  new  birth.  We  rejoice  in 
reformation  of  any  sort.  The  less  sin  there  is  in  the  world  the  better, 
but,  for  all  that,  the  vital  point  will  not  have  been  reached  with  all  the 
alterations  of  thought,  and  even  of  life,  of  which  a  man  is  capable ;  for 
the  text  remains  in  force  after  all  the  renovations,  conversions,  and 
reformations  that  are  possible  to  unaided  flesh  and  blood,  and  it  cries 
with  stern,  unchanging  voice — **  Ye  must  be  bom  again." 

The  person  concerned  may  have  passed  through  a  long  series  of  cere- 
monies. He  may  have  been  received  with  a  welcome  into  a  so-called 
church,  and  from  the  hands  of  those  who  think  themselves  priests  there 
may  have  distilled  the  aqueous  imposture  which  is  said  to  regenerate 
the  soul :  but  there  is  something  more  wanted  than  priests  can  convey, 
or  tlian  water  can  effect.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  meant  something  far 
other  than  the  hocus  pocus  of  an  empty  form  when  he  said,  "  Ye  must 
bo  born  again."  I  say  in  the  presence  of  all  that  have  been  baptized  in 
infancy,  and  all  that  have  been  baptized  in  adult  age  but  were  not 
believera  : — ye,  even  ye,  baptized  infidels — "Fie  must  bo  bom  again."  If 
ye  have  been  baptized  and  ro-baptized,  but  are  still  unbelievers,  and  have 
Hot  the  Spirit  of  God  in  your  souls,  "  ye  must  be  born  again." 

What  mcaneth  all  this  ?  and  what  is  the  signification  of  this  change, 


EVERY  man's  necessity.  61 

60  thorough  ?  Do  nofc  the  words  evidently  mean  that  a  new  nature  mnsfe 
be  created  in  us  ?  For  a  life,  a  nature  is  the  production  of  a  birth.  At 
a  birth  there  comes  into  the  world  a  life  which  was  not  there  before. 
There  must  come  into  us  a  new  life  to  which  by  nature  we  arc  perfect 
strangers ;  something  far  beyond  that  which  belongs  to  us  as  we  are  bom 
aft€r  the  flesh,  a  life  that  was  not  latent  in  the  infant,  to  be  gradnally 
developed  in  the  training  of  the  child,  but  a  life  which  is  altogether 
absent  till  divine  grace  implants  it  there.  "  Ye  must  be  born  again  " — 
ye  must  be  created  again,  or  as  the  Scriptures  say, '' Begotten  again 
unto  a  lively  hope."  The  life  within  you  must  be  as  fresh  a  creation  as 
was  the  light  when  God  spoke  it,  or  as  was  the  world  when  God  formed 
it  out  of  nothing.  A  work  of  divine  power  must  be  exercised  upon  you 
equal  to  that  which  raised  the  Lord  Jesus  from  the  dead  and  gave  him 
glory. 

With  a  new  life  in  the  matter  of  our  ordinary  birth  there  begins  a 
new  experience.  To  the  new-born  child  everything  is  new.  Every 
pain,  every  sensation  of  pleasure,  is  all  novel  to  him — he  has  known 
nothing  of  all  this  before.  And  though  we  may  have  attained  to  man- 
hood, or  even  to  old  age,  when  we  are  born  again,  the  spiritual  life  is 
all  a  fresh  experience.  There  arc  new  feelings  of  contrition,  there  is  a 
new  faith,  there  is  a  new  joy,  a  new  hope,  everything  is  new — "  Old 
things  have  passed  away,  and  all  things  have  become  new."  Though 
the  man  may  have  traversed  many  paths,  and  experienced  many 
sensations,  yet  the  moment  he  is  born  again  he  is  a  stranger  in  a 
strange  land,  and  he  is  led  in  a  way  which  he  knows  not,  and  in  paths 
which  he  has  not  seen.  All  young  souls  just  born  to  God,  however  old 
they  may  be  as  to  the  bodily  reckoning,  rejoice  in  the  sacred  novelty  of 
the  new  life,  and  they  thank  and  bless  God  who  has  put  his  hand  a 
second  time  to  the  work  and  quickened  them  into  newness  of  life. 

Now,  as  there  is  a  new  life,  and  anew  nature,  and  a  new  experience,  so 
is  there  to  the  child  bom  and  the  man  regenerated  a  new  world.  It  is 
all  new  to  the  child — its  brothers  and  sisters  surprise  it.  When  it  is 
taken  into  the  open  air,  and  sees  the  green  fields  fur  the  first  time,  it 
marvels  at  them.  To  the  little  one  everything  is  fresh.  It  lives  in  a 
iniii?cum,  it  is  suiTounded  with  wonders.  Even  the  toys  which  grown- 
uj)  |)eople  look  upon  with  so  much  contempt  are  quite  marvels  to  the 
little  one,  it  is  charmed  with  them  all.  Now,  a  Christian,  a  man  born 
again,  lives  in  a  new  world.  It  is  all  new  to  him  now,  as  1  remember 
to  have  heard  a  young  girl  say  when  first  she  found  the  Saviour.  "When 
she  came  to  confess  her  fiiith  in  Christ  she  said,  "Either  I  am 
altogether  changed,  or  else  the  world  is:"  and  I  could  not  help  telling 
her  I  hoped  it  was  both — I  hoped  she  herself  was  changed,  and  that 
this  change  had  produced  the  other,  so  that  all  things  had  become  new. 
There  is  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  reserved  for  us  by-and-by, 
and  even  now,  while  we  are  in  this  world,  it  is  no  longer  to  us  what  it 
is  to  the  camal  man.  To  the  twice-bom  the  world  is  turned  upside 
down.  The  things  we  once  loved  we  cease  to  care  for,  former  objects 
of  ambition  we  count  but  dross,  while  things  that  were  contemptible 
become  to  us  objects  of  supreme  solicitude.  The  Holy  Spirit  having 
changed  us,  our  views  of  all  around  us  are  entirely  different.  Such  must 
be  your  experience,  dear  hearer,  or  you  will  live  as  camal  men  and  die 


it  MSTBOmLlTAH  TABERKACLS  Pm^IT. 


Too  nnut  experience  this  divine  creafcion,  no  matter  who 
tva  maj  be ;  there  can  be  no  exceptions,  yon  mnst  know  this  great 
cta^^  or  be  lost  Ton  may  have  been  dandled  on  the  lap  of  piety  ; 
the  name  of  Jesns  may  have  mingled  with  the  hnsh  of  yonr  first 
Inlbiby»  jou  may  scarce  at  first  have  heard  any  mnsic  bnt  that  of 
bfltr  hymns,  yon  may  have  been  tanght  morality  and  sanctity  by 
tbc  example  of  many  generations  of  ancestors ;  bnt,  be  yon  who  you 
may,  or  what  yon  may,  you  mnst  receive  a  new  life,  and  yon  mnst  pass 
thnmgh  a  new  experience,  and  you  must  live  in  a  new  world  or  be 
)o^.  You  must  live  in  the  spiritual  world,  where  all  is  new ;  you  must 
have  converse  with  God,  a  thing  unknown  to  you  before ;  you  must 
eouiXTse  with  his  Son,  to  whom  you  have  been  a  stranger ;  you  must 
fivl  the  power  and  energy  of  the  Spirit  working  in  yon,  a  matter 
which  yon  have  never  known  till  now  ;  or  there  is  no  hope  for  you. 

Note  that  every  birth  brings  into  operation  a  new  force,  A  new 
worker  is  bom ;  he  is  feeble  as  yet,  but  those  little  feet  will  yet  be  strong 
t\>r  running,  and  those  tiny  hands  will  yet  become  dexterous  at  some 
iisefiil  craft.  And  so,  when  a  soul  is  bom  to  God  it  feels  a  new  power 
within,  and  itself  becomes  a  new  force.  It  is  obedient  to  a  power  which 
it  never  recognised  before,  and  a  power  is  put  forth  from  it  which  it  had 
not  been  able  to  exercise  before,  and  did  not  even  understand.  A  new 
(KAVor  has  come  among  men  when  another  soul  is  born  to  God :  the 
sniritual  world  is  stronger,  and  the  camal  world  is  all  the  weaker  for 
tno  birth  of  another  spiritual  man. 

I  do  not  know  how  to  put  the  matter  better  than  this,  but  I  think  I 
have  shown  you  that  regeneration  is  a  most  thorough  change.  To  be 
l)orn  again  is  no  child's  play.  It  is  not  enough  for  a  man  to  rise  under 
a  sermon  and  say,  "  1  have  been  impressed  and  touched  by  it,  and  I  believe 
I  am  converted."  There  is  a  vast  diflference  between  saying  "  I  am  bom 
again  *'  and  really  undergoing  the  heavenly  birth.    It  is  not  making  a 

ta'ofvssion,  or  even  maintaining  it  with  credit  for  years  which  will  suffice, 
or,  alaa,  some  have  seemed  almost  apostles,  and  yet  have  been  alto- 
gi^thor  sons  of  perdition.  You  must  come  to  know  vitally,  indeed  and 
of  a  truth,  in  your  own  soul,  what  it  is  for  the  flesh  to  be  crucified  with 
(lirJMt,  and  for  a  new  life  to  be  implanted  in  you  superuaturally  as  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  else  you  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  God.    The  work  is  radical,  spiritual,  marvellous,  divine. 

II.  In  the  second  place  it  is  most  wondebful.  It  is  most  won- 
(lurAU  in  the  sense  of  mystery — as  to  the  manner  of  it.  It  is  not  easy 
to  pnuioh  iVinn  this  text  and  attempt  to  go  minutely  into  details  ; 
for,  if  wo  did  so,  we  might  venture  too  far.  I  have  read  treatises 
\\\m\  the  Hubjcet  which  were  far  too  destitute  of  delicacy,  and  calculated 
to  iliHgust  rather  than  to  impress.  We  do  not  pry  and  must  not  pry  into 
u  (iivino  sevrot.  **Thou  hcarest  the  sound  thereof,  bnt  canst  not  tell 
>vhonoo  it  cometh,  or  whither  it  goeth  ;  so  is  every  one  that  is  born 
of  the  Spirit,"  Who  shall  know  how  the  Holy  Ghost  works  ?  That 
ho  Works  by  moans  of  the  word  of  God  we  know  ;  that  he  blesses  the 
tTXiih  mwl  in  a  book  or  heard  from  the  minister — this  we  know,  but  how 
'('  Im  lio  enters  into  the  heart,  how  it  is  he  creates  a  spirit  within  us,  how 
ll(t  tM^tr^ttii  in  us  the  spiritual  life — who  shall  tell  but  God  only?  But 
b^'U  Wo  do  not  want  to  know ;  it  is  enough  for  us  to  be  assured  of 


A 


EYEBT  ]CAK*S  NECE6SITT.  58 

the  fact,  the  manner  we  need  not  pry  into.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord 
isirith  them  that  fear  him":  they  know  experimentally  what  it  is  to 
be  bom  again,  but  they  themselves  conld  not  explain  how  it  is  that 
the  Escred  wind  bloweth,  nor  how  the  Spirit  operates  upon  the  human 
beart.  Many  discussions  there  have  been  as  to  whether  the  Spirit  of 
God,  as  it  were,  comes  nakedly  into  contact  with  the  nature  of  man, 
or  whether  he  always  works  in  and  by  truth  and  thought,  and  so  on. 
hto  all  this  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  go.  We  would  rather  admire, 
Touder,  and  adore,  for  these  are  better  than  merely  to  comprehend ; 
since  a  man  may  nndci'stand  all  mysteries  and  yet  be  as  a  sounding 
brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal. 

It  is  a  mystery  as  to  the  supeinaiuralnesa  of  the  (iteration,  for  ever- 
more  tmc  regeneration  is  always  supernatural.'  There  is  no  doubt  that 
moral  aoasion  does  much  with  men,  that  the  influence  of  association 
will  often  improve  men's  manners  and  habits ;  that  great  results  may 
flow  from  education,  es{)ecially  if  it  be  of  the  right  kind ;  and  that 
much  may  be  developed  in  mankind  that  is  admirable,  honest,  lovely, 
and  of  good  repute.  But  this  is  nothing  to  the  purpose,  since  it  is  not 
what  our  Saviour  meant — ^it  falls  short  of  the  new  birth,  and  is  indeed 
QQite  another  thing.  The  Holy  Spirit,  the  third  person  in  the  blessed 
Trimty  must  as  much  come  to  work  upon  us  as  God  came  forth  to  work 
npon  this  world  in  its  creation,  or  else  we  are  not  bom  again.  It  is  not 
enoQgh  that  we  of  our  own  selves  and  in  the  energy  of  our  old  nature 
b^in  to  pray,  repent,  and  so  on ;  for  all  that  which  can  come  of  our 
fl^  will  still  be  flesh ;  but  in  regeneration  it  is  the  Spirit  who  begins 
by  infusing  the  life,  and  then  the  new  nature  begins  to  pray  and  repent. 
That  which  is  bom  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit,  and  hence  the  new  birth 
most  be  a  spiritual  operation  in  order  to  produce  that  spiritual  nature 
without  which  we  cannot  see  and  enter  into  the  things  of  God.  This 
is  a  solemn  matter  for  you,  my  hearer,  if  you  have  been  merely  an 
attendant  upon  the  means  of  grace  and  a  lover  of  the  outward  forms  of 
feligiou.  Do  I  mean  to  teU  you  that  you  must  undergo  a  change  which 
is  beyond  your  own  working,  which  all  the  men  in  this  world  and  all 
the  angels  in  heaven  could  not  work  in  you,  but  which  God  himself 
most  perform  ?  I  do  mean  that — I  mean  nothing  less  than  that.  "  Am 
I  to  understand,"  say  you,  "  that  almighty  power  must  work  upon  me 
i^mnch  as  in  my  creation?"  I  mean  all  that,  and  that  it  needs  as 
much  newer  to  cause  you  to  be  born  again  as  it  did  to  make  a  world : 
aj,  ana  that  the  same  power  which  raised  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead 
when  he  had  slept  three  days  in  the  grave  is  needed  in  all  its  fulness  to 
r&ise  joa  from  your  death  of  sin,  and  must  be  exerted  if  ever  you  are 
niised  at  all  It  is  a  wonderful  thing  that  the  Spirit  of  God  should 
condescend  to  undertake  this  work,  and  that  the  Lord  should  set  himself 
^  second  time  to  the  work.  It  is  surprising  that  when  the  vessel  was 
Qianed  upon  the  wheel  and  spoiled,  instead  of  breaking  it  up  and 
consigning  it  to  destruction,  he  should  put  forth  all  his  power  again 
and  fashion  the  clav  to  his  own  model.  He  stoops  to  make  us  twice 
bom,  new-created,  begotten  again,  that  we  might  at  the  last  come  to 
^ear  the  image  of  Jesus,  the  first-born  among  many  brethren.  ''  Ye 
^^  be  bom  again" :  the  infinite  Jehovah  must  deign  to  b^  a  second 
tjme  Qur  Creator  or  we  must  perish  hopelessly. 


54  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  Pm.PrT. 

Tbis  work  is  wonderful  because  of  Ihe  granchur  of  iM  relationshtp 
into  ichich  it  introduces  ns.    The  child  that  is  boni  has  a   father 
from  the  very  fact  of  its  birth,  and  we  that  are  born  from  above  cry 
*'  Abba,  Father,'*  from  the  yerjfact  that  we  are  regenerated.    Adoption 
gives  us  the  rights  of  children,  but  regeneration  alone  gives  us  the 
nature  of  children.     Because  we  are  sons  God  sendeth  forth  the  Spirit 
of  his  Son  into  our  hearts,  whereby  we  cry  **  Abba,  Father."    If  I  have 
been  born  again,  no  matter  what  my  station  in  life  or  position  in  so- 
ciety, then  God  is  my  Father,  and  it  follows  that  Jesus  Christ  is  mj 
brother ;  and  this  not  merely  in  form  and  in  name,  as  men  call  each 
other  brethren  when  there  is  no  actual  relationship,  but  there  is  a  real 
relationship  between  us  and  Christ  Jesus  and  the  divine  Father,  for 
wo  are  made  "  partakers  of  the  divine  nature."    We  are  the  sons  of 
God,  and  if  sons  of  God,  then  are  we  brethren  of  Christ.    It  must 
be  so,   and  it  follows  from  this  that,  if  children,  then  heira,  and  if 
Christ  is  the  heir,  we  arc  joint-heirs  with  hira.    My  brethren,  what 
privileges  spring  out  of  the  relationship  which  arises  from  the  new  birth, 
for  our  Fatlier  then  pledges  himself  for  our  support,  for  our  comfort, 
for  our  education,  for  all  that  is  necessary  for  our  perfection  in  the  day 
of  the  home-bringing  when  we  shall  see  him  face  to  face.     What  caa 
liapi)cn  to  a  man  so  great  as  to  be  born  again  ?    Suppose  some  of  the 
poorest  of  the  earth  who  have  swept  the  streets  for  a  paltry  pittance 
should  suddenly  be  elevated  by  royal  favour  to  the  peerage,  or  imagine 
that  by  some  revolution  of  the  wheel  of  providence  they  should  become 
emperors  and  kings  themselves ;  yet  what  of  that  ?    The  change  would 
bo  extraordinary,  and  men  would  wonder  at  it ;  for  the  passages  in 
history  which  have  been  thought  most  noteworthy  have  been  those 
wherein  paupers  have  mounted  from  the  dunghill  to  the  throne,  and 
fishermen  have  cast  aside  their  rough  garmente  to  put  on  the  imj>erial 
purple.    But  these  strides  from  nothingness  to  greatness  are  inconsider- 
able and  trifling  compared  with  rising  from  being  a  slave  of  Satan  to 
become  a  son  of  God.    To  be  elevated  by  Qod  himself  from  the  darkness 
and  degradation  and  bondage  under  which  we  are  brought  by  the  fall 
and  by  actual  sin  to  the  liberty,  to  the  glory,  to  the  eternal  blessedness 
of  the  children  of  God — this  surpasses  all  conception.     This  can  only 
be  ours  through  our  being  born  again.     Our  first  birth  makes  us  soas 
of  Adam,  our  second  birth  makes  us  sons  of  God.    Born  of  the  flesh,  we 
inherit  corruption ;  we  must  be  bom  of  the  Spirit  to  inherit  incorrup- 
tion.    We  come  into  this  world  heirs  of  sorrow  because  we  are  sons  of 
the  flUlen  man :  our  new  life  comes  into  the  new  world  an  heir  of  glory, 
because  it  is  descended  from  the  second  man,  the  Lord  from  heaven. 
Thus  I  have  spoken  upon  the  wonderful  character  of  this  work,  as  well 
as  upon  the  thoroughness  of  it. 

III.  Now,  let  us  remark,  in  the  third  place,  that,  wonderful  and 
mysterious  as  the  new  birth  must  always  be,  it  is  most  manifest.  The 
house  knows  when  a  child  is  bom.  There  are  mysteries  surrounding 
its  birth,  but  the  fact  is  apparent  enough.  You  shall  soon  hear  its 
cry  in  the  nursery,  and  ere  long  itsprfltMe  in  the  parlour;  you  shall  see 
the  joy  of  the  parents  as  they  clasp  their  oflFspring,  and  the  care  with 
which  they  watch  for  its  good.  So  in  the  new  birth,  we  know  not  how 
the  Spirit  works,  but  we  know  that  he  does  work,  and  we  soon  see  that  a 


EVBttY  man's  necessity.  65 

marrellons  change  has  come  over  those  whom  he  has  made  possessors  of 
the  heaTenl J  seed,  creatures  of  the  new  life.  Those  who  know  converted 
persons  best  are  among  the  first  to  perceive  the  transforming  miracle 
of  grace.  Do  yon  not  think  that  Elstow  knew  when  John  Bunyan 
had  found  the  Saviour?  The  bell-ringers  knew  it,  there  was  no  more 
Sabbath  breaking:  and  the  few  poor,  godlj  peo])]o  tliat  used  to  meet  at 
Bedford  knew  it,  for  he  crept  into  their  miast  and  began  to  ask  them 
about  the  things  which  haa  become  the  delight  of  hh  Fonl.  We  some- 
times hear  of  a  peraon  being  born  again  and  not  knowing  it — a  some- 
Trhat  singular  matter.  Yet  I  suppose  that  such  an  event,  after  a  fashion, 
very  commonlj  happens  in  the  Episcopalian  denomination,  because  if 
persons  are  born  again  in  infant  baptism  there  are  tiiousauds  in  London 
who  liaye  undergone  the  change,  but  I  am  sure  that  tlicy  cannot  be  sure 
of  it,  for  their  own  lives  would  not  tell  them  so,  and  their  own  emotions 
and  feelings  would  not  lead  them  to  any  such  belief.  Regeneration  is  a 
poor  business  if  these  baptized  rebels  are  regenerate.  Why,  at  that  rate, 
our  prisons  swarm  with  regenerated  thieves,  and  our  streets  arc  infested 
with  regenerated  harlots,  and  occasionally  we  have  regenerate  murderers 
—all  bom  again  in  their  baptism,  and  made  children  of  God,  members 
of  Christ,  and  inheritors  of  tne  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  lie  is  sickening : 
the  devil  himself  laughs  at  it.  Of  all  transparent  falsehoods  surely  that 
of  baptismal  regeneration  is  the  grossest.  It  is  a  marvel  that  men  who 
live  and  walk  among  sane  persons  should  ever  fall  into  it.  Ah,  sirs, 
where  the  true  heaven-given  life  is  found  there  is  something  to  show 
for  it.  Does  a  man  say  "  I  am  regenerate**  ?  Come,  then,  sir,  what  is 
the  difference  in  you  ?  What  life  do  you  lead  ?  Have  you  a  higher  object 
than  the  ordinary  sons  of  men?  Are  you  swayed  by  higher  motives? 
Are  there  diviner  impulses  pulsing  in  your  soul  than  those  which  stir 
the  hearts  of  worldlings  ?  "  for  except  your  righteousness  exceed  that  of 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,"  the  best  of  worldlings,  '•  you  cannot  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God."  If  the  love  of  Christ  within  does  not  make 
us  better  than  the  best  of  worldly  men,  we  give  no  evidence  of  having 
experienced  the  renewing  work  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  heavenly  life  is  very  manifest, :  and  it  is  all  the  more  so  from  the 
fact  that  there  are  certain  signs  which  always  attend  and  attest  the  new 
birth.  Persons  may  be  born  again,  and  yet  they  may  not  be  able  to  see 
with  us  in  certain  points  of  doctrine ;  but  there  are  some  things  which 
all  the  regenerate  agree  about.  For  first,  eve}'i/  soul  that  is  honi  again  re- 
penh  of  Ss  sin.  If  a  man  lives  in  his  sin  as  he  used  to  do,  he  must  not 
pretend  that  he  is  a  twice-born  man,  or  he  will  mightily  deceive  himself. 
If  he  can  look  upon  sin  in  the  siime  light  as  he  did  before,  if  he  can 
find  pleasure  in  it,  yea,  if  he  does  not  unfeignedly  turn  from  it  with 
loathing  and  seek  the  mercy  of  God  to  blot  it  out,  he  knows  nothing 
of  what  regeneration  is.  Again  all  fJie  regeiwale  have  faith :  they  all 
sgree  in  finding  all  the  sole  giouud  of  their  hope  in  the  blood  and 
merit  of  Jesus.  Meet  them  anywhere  and  they  will  tell  you  they  have 
no  confidence  except  in  the  Sa\iour's  precious  blood ;  he  is  all  their 
salvation  and  all  their  desire.  They  rest  upon  this  rock,  every  one  of 
them  ;  and  no  matter  what  high  professors  they  may  be,  nor  what  lofty 
ofiices  they  hold  in  the  church,  if  Christ  is  not  their  one  and  only  trust, 
^ey  know  not  what  it  is  to  be  born  again. 


56  HETROFOLITAK  TABERNACLE  TXJhBTt* 

In  addition  to  this  all  that  Jiave  passed  from  death  wUo  life  pray. 
If  it  really  rises  from  the  heart,  prayer  is  an  infallible  mark  of  the 
new  birth ;  and  if  it  can  be  said  of  a  man  ''  He  does  not  pray,"  then 
he  is  still  dead  in  his  sins,  the  Spirit  of  God  has  not  renewed  his  souL 
I  miglit  mention  some  other  holy  signs  which  are  invariable  accompa- 
niments of  the  new  birth,  bnt  these  three  will  suffice  for  all  practical 
purposes.  Ton  can  test  yourselves,  beloved,  by  them.  Have  you  re- 
pented? Have  you  faith  towards  God  ?  Do  you  rejoice  to  draw  near 
to  God  in  praver  ?  If  these  things  be  in  you  the^  are  marks  of  the 
new  life,  for  they  were  never  yet  found  in  the  spiritually  dead.  Do 
you  groan  over  sin  ?  A  corpse  does  not  groan :  gracious  mourning  over 
transgression  is  one  of  the  surest  proofs  of  inward  spiritual  life.  Trust 
in  Jesus  is  an  equally  clear  sign  of  spiritual  life,  for  the  dead  man  does 
not  know  what  it  is  to  trust ;  and  genuine  prayer  is  equally  a  certain 
token  of  life  received  from  above.  A  pang  of  penitential  grief,  a  thought 
of  holy  trust,  and  a  yearning  of  inward  prayer  are  more  than  all  the 
unregenerate  upon  earth  can  compass,  even  though  they  should  be 
doctors  of  divinity  or  cardinals  of  the  church. 

This  new  life,  the  new  birth,  is  a  very  manifest  thing  from  the  power 
that  it  puts  into  men  after  it  has  had  time  to  develop  itself.  At  first 
eonverU  are  trembling  and  weak,  but  if  they  have  received  the  new 
life  the^  gather  strength,  and  there  is  a  power  in  it  which  the  church 
soon  rejoices  in,  and  which  the  devil  trembles  at.  This  power  of  course 
can  be  kept  under  restraint  by  unbelief  and  other  follies,  but  it  ought 
to  have  full  range,  and  should  never  be  repressed.  I  often  wish  our 
Christian  people  were  a  little  more  natural  in  their  expression  of  what 
th^y  feel.  If  any  brother  cries  •*  Amen  "  very  heartily  after  prayer  many 
look  at  him,  and  yet  in  the  primitive  church  it  was  the  universal  custom 
of  those  who  joined  in  prayer  to  say  "  Amen,"  by  way  of  endorsing  it 
and  making  it  their  own.  I  wonder  Christian  people  have  to  so  large 
an  extent  given  up  the  practice.  It  is  a  most  fit  and  proper  one,  and 
ought  to  be  restored.  I  read  the  other  day  of  a  good  Bible  Christian 
brother  who  sometimes,  when  his  lieart  was  merry  within  him  with  joy 
in  the  Holy  Ghost,  would  even  leap  for  joy  as  he  went  to  the  pit  to 
work.  Why  should  he  not  do  so  ?  Yet  you  do  not  like  the  look  of  it ; 
do  you  ?  I  would  a  good  deal  sooner  a  man  should  be  as  nimble  as 
David  before  the  ark  than  be  as  sleepy  as  some  Christians  are,  wlio,  if 
they  have  any  jojr,  repress  it  and  never  tell  it  out :  they  are  afraid  of 
expressing  their  joy  for  fear  they  should  be  misjudged.  Let  it  not  be 
so  with  you.  If  you  let  the  new  life  within  you  have  its  own  course, 
you  may  be  thought  eccentric,  but  in  those  eccentricities  will  lie  your 
force.  Who  is  he  that  shall  cramp  us  and  hold  us  in  when  the  eternal 
Spirit  quickens  us  ?  If  God  has  blotted  out  our  sin  we  will  praise  and 
magnify  his  name ;  and  if  we  have  been  delivered  from  going  down 
into  the  pit  we  will  tell  others  of  it  and  not  hold  our  tongues.  Even 
though  our  testimony  may  not  be  delivered  in  the  most  classical  style, 
and  our  telling  forth  of  the  precious  Saviour's  love  may  not  be  all  that 
the  educated  may  wish  it  to  be,  yet  if  we  should  hold  our  peace  the 
stones  of  the  street  would  cry  out,  and  therefore  we  must  and  we  will 
speak.  He  that  has  a  well  within  him  bubbling  up  must  let  it  gush 
forth,  and  be  that  has  the  new  life  within  bim  will  in  some  form  or 


BVBUY  man's  necessity.  57 

other  become  a  power  in  the  midst  of  his  fellow  men,  and  the  secret 
wfll  oo2se  out  that  he  is  a  twioe-bom  man. 

I  cannot  linger  longer.  Segeneration  is  a  thorough  change,  and  a 
wonderfal  change ;  but  it  is  a  manifest  change,  and  in  some  men  it  is 
eq)ecially  so.  ne  it  onr  aim  to  prove  to  a  demonstration  that  we  are 
bora  from  above. 

lY.    But  now,  very  briefly,  regeneration  is  a  most  impebatiye 
chaise.     Ye  must,  ye  must,  ye  must  be  bom  again.    Ye  may  be  rich 
or  ye  may  be  poor,  but  •*  ye  must  be  born  again."    Ye  may  be  in- 
teUigent,  ye  may  be  educated,  ye  may  be  talented,  but  "  ye  mitst,  ye 
must  be  born  again.*'    Many  things  are  desirable,  but  one  thing  is 
needful,  imperatively  needfal — ^ye  must,  ye  must,  ye  must  be  bom 
again.    This  imperative  necessity  may  be  seen  from  many  points  of 
view.    We  cannot  mention  them  all,  but  just  one  or  two.    If  you  are 
not  bom  ogam,  you  have  no  life,  no  spiritual  life.    The  first  birth  gave 
yon  bodily  life  and  mental  life,  but  it  did  not  give  you  spiritual  life- 
it  could  not  do  so,  for  that  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  no 
more.    Now,  you  must  have  spiritual  life  or  else  you  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  and  to  all  that  has  to  do  with  spiritual  blessings-— 
to  a  spiritual  gospel,  a  spiritual  salvation,  a  spiritual  heaven,  to  all  these 
things  you  are  dead  as  the  corpses  in  their  graves  are  dead  to  the 
business  of  to-day.     There  may  bo  great  changes  taking  place  in 
politics ;   trade  may  be  very  prosperous,  or  it  may  be  depressed,  but 
the  ^ead  man  has  no  int^st  in  the  nation  or  its  commerce — how 
can  he  have  ?     So  is  it  with  you ;  until  you  are  bom  again,  the 
spiritual  world  is  shut  to  you,  and  you  are  indifferent  to  it.     Angels 
may  be  rejoicing,  and  believers  may  be  rejoicing  over  saved  somls, 
but  yon  care  nothing  about  it.    The  Lord  Jesus  himself  may  be  seeing 
of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  but  it  is  nothing  to  you,  and  it  must  he 
nothing  to  you  because  you  are  dead.    Oh  if  our  bodies  could  take  the 
shape  of  our  souls,  there  would  be  many  carcases  sitting  before  me  in 
these  pews.    Ah,  strange  and  ghastly  sight  I    We  thank  God  that  he 
conceals  the  spiritual  from  our  eyes,  else  might  we  in  horror  leave  the 
places  where  we  sit,  because  we  should  find  ourselves  in  close  companion* 
ship  with  the  dead.    What  a  horrible  thing  a  dead  soul  must  be,  if 
oor  spirits  could  now  perceive  it  as  our  senses  would  perceive  a 
corpse.       Let  us  pause  here  to  realise  striking  facts  in   this  con- 
nection.   Some  of  you  are  linked   in  marriage  with  the  spiritually 
dead.     Some  of  you  have  dwelling  in  your  house  the  children  of  your 
care,  who  are  dead  while  they  live.     You  will  sit  to-night  at  the 
supper-table  with  the  spiritually  dead.     Regard  them  in  that  light 
and  your  hearts  will,  perhaps,  be  moved  to  pray  more  intensely  for 
tliem  than  you  have  hitherto  done.    You  that  sit  regularly  in  this  place, 
I  would  like  you  to  remember  this  fact  when  this  house  is  crowded. 
Think,  '^In  my  pew  there  are  sitting  an  unconveited  man  and  an 
unconverted  woman,  and  they  are  dead."    We  don't  expect  them  to 
feel  for  themselves,  but  we  do  expect  the  living  to  feel  for  them. 
My  dear  hearers  who  are  unrenewed,  do  you  not  see  that  you  must  be 
bom  again,  for  unless  you  are  so,  you  will  remain  dead  to  spiritual 
things? 
Furthermore^  remember  that  a  man  who  is  not  bom  again  has  no 


58  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

spirilual  opacify.  We  must  be  receivers  first  in  the  spiritual  life,  and 
tne  dead  sinner  as  yet,  until  God  quickens  him,  can  receive  nothing. 
How  often  are  the  saints  of  God  spiritually  comforted,  instructed, 
enriched  under  the  preaching  and  hearing  of  the  word  ;  but  it  is 
their  spiritual  nature  that  receives  the  enrichment.  The  unregenerate 
have  no  spiritual  nature  :  they  are  carnal,  sold  under  sin,  and  their 
mental  powers,  as  well  as  their  bodily  appetites,  are  enslaved  :  hence 
they  have  no  power  to  receive  the  blessing.  The  gracious  and  ever 
blessed  rain  of  the  Spirit  comes,  but  they  are  not  like  Gideon's  fleece 
ready  to  drink  it  in,  but  like  an  hard  stone  upon  which  the  drops  may 
descend,  but  it  cannot  be  saturated  with  the  moisture,  nor  softened  by 
it.  Unregenerate  men  are  broken  cisterns,  which  it  is  vain  to  attempt 
to  fill.  Even  if  God's  own  grace  were  to  come  to  them  it  could  not  be 
retained,  for  they  have  not  the  capacity  to  hold  it.  Only  the  spiritual 
can  receive  the  spiritual.  You  must  then  be  bom  again  to  have  a 
spirit  by  which  spiritual  things  are  discerned  and  received.  Do  you  not 
see  that  you  must  be  born  again  ? 

Once  more,  ye  must  be  born  again,  because  tcithout  the  Spirit  of  God 
you  are  not  the  children  of  God^  and  conscq^ucnlhj  you  have  no  spiritual  in- 
hei'itance.  The  Spirit  causes  us  to  be  bom ;  that  birth  makes  us  children, 
and  our  being  children  makes  us  heira.  If  we  are  not  bom  again  we 
ace  not  c!iildrcn,  therefore  we  arc  not  heirs,  and  we  are  out  of  the  heritage, 
for  God's  heritage  of  glory  is  for  the  heirs  of  grace  and  for  none  others ; 
and  none  sliall  come  into  the  eternal  portion  but  those  who  are  boyi  in 
his  house  and  are  his  true  sons  and  daughters.  Univei'sal  fatherhood, 
whatever  that  may  be,  biings  us  common  mercies  ;  but  it  is  the  special 
fatherhood  which  God  hath  towards  the  living  in  Zion  which  brings 
us  special  blessings.  Ye  must,  then,  be  born  again  or  lose  all  share  m 
the  divine  inheritance.  No  soul  can  ever  cross  the  threshold  of  heaven 
that  has  not  received  the  new  life.  No  matter  how  abundant  its  prayers, 
nor  hoAV  multiplied  its  acts  of  religiousness,  unless  it  has  been  bom 
again,  the  gates  of  paradise  are  for  ever  fastened  against  it.  Banished 
from  the  presence  of  Jehovah's  glory,  there  is  only  one  other  place 
where  it  can  dwell,  and  that  must  be  where  their  worm  dieth  not  and 
their  fire  is  not  quenched.     "  Ye  must  be  born  again." 

V.  I  will  finish  my  discourse  by  saying  that  this  new  birth  is 
E^riNEXTLY  PERSONAL.  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  The  idea  of 
proxy  is  quite  apart  from  the  figure  of  the  text.  A  man  is  born  him- 
self, in  propria  persona :  no  other  can  be  born  for  him ;  so  here  the 
change  which  must  be  wrought  in  us  must  be  personally  experienced 
and  indindually  kno^vn  and  felt.  What  delusion  it  is  to  fall  back 
upon  a  parent's  godliness  or  a  godfather's  promises,  or  to  imagine 
that  the  minister  or  the  so-called  priest  can  stand  before  God  for  us. 
**Ye" — '^ye  must  be  born  again,"  and  if  ye  are  not  ye  shall  never  enter 
the  kingdom. 

Now,  I  think  I  hear  passing  through  the  congregation  at  this  moment 
the  whisper  of  many  hearts  who  are  saying,  **  This  is  very  discouraging. 
We  like  to  hear  '  Only  believe,  and  you  shall  be  saved.'  We  are  glad 
to  be  told  that  *  whosoever  believeth  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  ever- 
lasting life,'  but  this  distresses  us,  for  it  does  not  open  the  door  so 
wide  as  we  could  wish."    Believe  me,  I  am  very  glad  to  tell  you  of  the 


EVBRY  man's  NBCBSBITT.  59 

free  and  wide  gospel  of  grace.  It  is  joyful  work  to  me  to  bring  that 
welcome  message  to  you,  and  I  am  sure  I  do  bring  it  as  constantly  as  I 
come  upon  this  platform.  My  most  frequent  note  is — "  Look  unto 
Christ  and  be  saved  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth."  But  at  the  same  time 
God  forbid  that  you  should  be  built  up  upon  a  false  foundation,  or  that 
yonr  faith  and  confidence  should  stand  apart  from  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.  It  will  be  found  to  be  wood,  and  hay,  and  stubble  if  it  be  so. 
But  you  say  my  sermon  is  discouraging:  had  you  not  better  ask,  ''Is 
it  true  ?*'  A  person  has  been  building  a  house,  and  we  see  him  piling 
up  the  stones,  but  he  has  never  digged  out  the  foundation.  It  is  certainly 
discoaraging  to  him  to  tell  him  that  it  is  not  the  right  way  to  build  a 
house,  but  it  will  be  a  great  mercy  for  him  to  be  discouraged  in  a  work 
which  is  so  foolish.  It  will  be  a  great  saving  to  him  in  the  long  run  if 
all  that  he  has  already  built  should  come  down  at  once,  and  he  should 
even  now  begin  at  the  beginning  once  more,  and  lay  a  good  foundation 
and  make  sure  work  of  it.  It  would  be  foolish  to  cry  out,  "  Do  not  dis- 
courage him  ";  he  ought  to  be  discouraged.  Yes,  indeed,  we  would  dis- 
courage all  that  will  end  in  disappointment.  The  fact  is,  your  efforts, 
and  your  doings,  and  your  merits,  all  of  them,  at  their  very  best, 
most  be  a  failure,  and  it  is  a  good  thing  for  us  to  tell  you  so.  "  But 
what  am  I  to  do  ?"  saith  one.  That,  permit  me  to  remind  you,  is 
not  the  best  question  for  you  to  ask,  for  if  the  work  of  salvation  were 
what  you  must  do,  surely  it  would  be  left  undone.  You  may  put  the 
question,  "  AVhat  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?"  but  we  will  point  you  away 
from  ^oing,  and  we  will  tell  you  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
you  may  be  saved.  If  you  persist  in  saying,  "  What  must  I  do"  we  will 
tell  you  that  the  sooner  you  look  away  from  all  that  you  can  do  the 
better  ;  for  the  work  of  salvation  from  sin  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  you,  and  you  must  come  to  look  to  him  through  Jesus  Christ 
that  he  may  work  in  you  all  those  giuces  and  gifts  which  shall  adorn 
your  future  life.  Faith  looks  to  the  blood  of  Jesus  for  the  pardon  of 
sin,  and  then  looks  to  him  for  his  Spirit  to  overcome  the  power  of  sin 
within  the  heart,  nor  does  she  look  in  vain ;  but  if  you  look  elsewhere 
you  will  search  till  your  eyes  fail  you,  but  never  see  your  desire. 
Would  to  God  we  could  bnng  you,  not  only  to  discouragement,  but 
to  desjiair  of  yourselves.  When  you  shall  feel  you  are  powerless  we 
shall  have  hope  of  you,  for  then  you  will  leave  yourselves  in  the  hands 
of  him  who  can  do  all  things.  When  self  s  strength  is  gone,  God's 
strength  will  come  in. 

"  Oh,  but  you  tell  me  I  must  have  divine  power  working  in  me." 
We  do  tell  you  that ;  we  can  tell  you  nothing  less,  and  if  that  power 
is  ever  at  work  in  your  soul,  its  first  efiect  will  be  to  bring  you  to  con- 
fess this,  and  you  will  fall  down  before  the  footstool  of  divine  mercy 
and  say  "Lord  save  me,  or  I  perish.  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 
I  do  not  want  to  rouse  your  activity,  you  unconverted  people :  I  want 
to  rouse  you  to  the  conviction  that  you  are  lost,  and  I  pray  God  the  Holy 
Spirit  may  so  convince  you.  I  wish,  not  to  make  you  think  "  we  can 
cure  ourselves/'  but  oh  !  that  you  would  feel  that  you  are  diseased,  and 
that,  though  you  have  destroyed  yourselves,  your  remedy  lies  in  a 
higher  hand — that  you  must  look  to  Jesus  only  for  healing.  To  get 
the  supernatural  element  into  the  matter  is  that  ^hich  we  would  striye 


CO  JOTBOPOUTAB  TABKRIUOLB  PITLPtT. 

for,  and  may  God  the  H0I7  Spirit  help  lu  in  it.  We  wonid  bnve  yon  look 
awny  from  what  is  in  yon  or  can  come  from  yon,  and  tnist  to  what 
Chnst  did  on  the  cross,  to  vhat  the  graciona  Father  is  waiting  still 
to  do,  and  what  the  Holy  Spirit  is  sent  on  purpose  to  work  in  yoa 
that  yoQ  may  be  saTed.  Oh  that  yon  may  begin  to  pray  for  the  divine 
power  I  May  yon  never  rest  in  anything  short  of  the  divine  working 
in  yonr  spirit.    It  is  to  this  we  would  bring  yon. 

Now  yon  know  all  this  and  have  known  it  for  years,  the  most 
of  yon.  To  know  it — ah  how  great  a  priiilcgc  if  not  abnscd I  how 
great  a  responsibility  if  the  knowledge  snail  end  here  !  Yet  to  iaoto 
it,  oh  how  sad,  nnless  yon  feel  it !  To  feci  that  "I  mnst  be  bom 
ogain,"andtobe  wretched  till  I  am  renewed  in  heart  is  a  good  beginning. 
I  pray  that  yon  may  go  home  and  feel "  There  is  no  pillow  in  this 
world  that  will  suit  my  head  till  I  have  laid  it  npon  the  Saviour's 
bosom ;  there  is  no  bliss  that  can  give  me  solace  till  I  have  fonnd 
pardon  in  the  wonnds  of  my  Bedeemer,"  Qod  grant  yon  may  sigh  and 
pant  in  this  way,  and  we  shall  then  beUere  that  yoa  are  r^nerate. 
May  yon  receive  the  Lord  Jesua,  and  he  will  give  yon  power  to  become 
tho  eons  of  Qod,  for  those  who  believe  in  him  were  bom,  not  of  blood, 
nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  bnt  of  God.  Then 
shall  yon  know  the  secret  of  regeneration,  and  the  Lord  himself  shall 
be  revealed  in  you.  Then  shall  yoa  know  that  you  are  blessed  of  the 
Lord,  for  flesh  and  blood  could  not  have  revealed  this  tmto  yoa.  May 
the  Holy  Qhost  be  within  yoa  evermore.    Amen. 


POBTIOK  or  80BIFT17&B  BSAD  BEFOBE  Sbexoh— John  jii.  1—21. 


Etxns  paoji"ODB  Own  Hymh  Book" — 156,448,  461, 


TO  HEARERS  AND  READERS  AT  TABERNACLE  AND 
ELSEWHERE. 
BeiL^vED  FauNDs, — By  the  tender  klndneu  of  God  the  journcj  biilicr  iv*s 
wiUiout  excessive  &tJKue,  and  now  I  trust  that  cenial  weather  will  bring 
t rapid  reatorstion.  Tbia  place  hna  participated  in  tlio  seicrc  weather 
hosBWCpt  over  the  Continent,  so  that  I  tiiisB  just  now  the  bright  itunshinc 
2fa  I  have  been  fbrmerljr  acctuComed  ;  yet  it  is  comparativclj'  warm,  and 
is  bcncRcial  to  an  invalid.  Rest  is  uio  main  Ihin^,  and  rest  1  hope  to 
liat  I  may  come  back  to  you  Btrcunthcncd  for  Kourcd  service, 
at  tLc  rcfjueat  of  many  that  1  write  these  few  lines,  othenrisc  I  should 
ter  content  to  say  nothing  about  myself.  Totlcriiic  on  my  stalT  (t>-day 
kncss  I  look  forward  hopefully  to  the  time  when  I  sliall  stand  nnioiiz 
I  fnlnefui  of  vigour.  God  grant  that  mental,  and  above  all  siiirituoi, 
ih  may  be  given  me  for  the  preaching  of  the  word  in  vunr  niitlsl,  and  that 
ig  bodily  allliction  may  assist  to  that  end.  I  ti-ust  I  fholl  not  be  fiirgotlcn 
r  prayers  when  it  is  well  with  you.  I  hone  also  that  the  variocui  enter- 
snoh  aa  the  CcJlege  and  Orphanage,  wUl  not  bo  allowed  to  laugnialt 
«  tbeir  FresideDt  a  ill.    Peace  be  to  yon  all. 

yours  very  heartily, 
irnita,  Jmuarg,  1879.  &  U.  SPtJRGEON. 


in[(ti[xr9nte  ^isbtrmk  f  tttpi 


PEACE:  A  FACT  AND  A  FEELING. 


3^  ^tmtti 


DSLIYEBKD  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  XXTROPOLITAK  TABEBKACLB,  NEWINGTON. 


"Tkoefore  being  jiutified  tiy  Uiih,  we  have  peaoe  with  God  throngb  our  Lord 
JMMGliruit"— BoBuma  t.  1. 

WoiTOEBFUL  is  the  power  of  laith.  In  the  Epigde  to  the  Hebrews  our 
apostle  tells  us  of  the  marvellous  exploits  which  it  has  wrought  in 
snbdaing  kingdoms  and  obtaining  promises,  in  quenching  the  violenoe 
of  fire  and  stopping  the  mouths  of  lions,  in  braving  perils  and  doing 
deeds  of  j^rowess.  Still,  to  us  personally  one  of  the  most  wonderfol  of 
its  effects  is  that  it  brings  us  justification  and  consequent  peace.  **  Being 
justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God.*'  If  we  Imow  the  justifying 
power  of  faith,  and  the  wf^  in  which,  like  a  hand,  it  puts  upon  us  the 
matchless  garment  of  the  Saviour's  righteousness,  we  shall  value  that 
faith  as  our  first  parents  did  the  gracious  hand  of  God  which  made  for 
them  coats  of  skins  and  therewith  covered  their  nakedness.  The  little 
faith  we  have  will  make  us  crave  for  more ;  and  every  need  we  feel  will 
make  us  long  to  prove  its  virtue  in  our  own  souls  to  meet  our  own  per- 
sonal case,  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

Now,  &ith  brings  to  the  soul,  according  to  the  text,  two  blessings.  It 
is  not  the  creator  of  these  things,  but  the  conveyance,  the  channel,  the 
conduit  pipe  through  which  these  favours  come  to  us.  First,  ii  brings  us 
a  slaie  of  peace — ^*  being  justified  by  faith";  and,  secondly,  ii  brings  us 
a  sense  Cf  peace — ^'we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ*' 

I.  Onr  first  thoughts  shall  cluster  about  that  most  important  of  all 
matters — x  ctate  of  pbaob  with  God. 

Naturally  we  have  no  peace.  God  is  angry  with  us  because  we  are 
sinful,  and  we  are  at  variance  with  God  because  he  is  holy.  God  cannot 
agree  with  us — "  Can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  And  we 
cannot  agree  with  God,  for  "  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God :  for 
it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be."  There  is  a 
breach  between  the  rebellious  creature  and  the  righteous  Creator.  Sad 
that  it  should  be  so,  but  such  is  the  case  by  nature  with  every  man  that 
is  bom  of  woman.  We  are  set  against  the  Lord.  We  kick  against  his 
No.  1,456. 


62  METROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PrLPIT. 

pfrDvidciioe,  %vc  rebel  against  his  commands,  wc  resist  his  Holy  ^jin't, 
we  reject  his  love  as  manifested  in  the  death  of  Christ,  and  we  should 
live  and  die  in  this  hostility  if  it  were  not  for  his  almighty  grace.  Be- 
fore ever  we  can  enjoy  peace  within  our  hearts  there  must  be  a  state  of 
peace  established  between  us  and  God.  We  must  submit  ourselves  to 
the  Lord,  and  he  must  forgive  the  past,  and  make  with  us  a  covenant 
of  peace,  or  else  there  is  no  peace  for  us ;  for  "  there  is  no  peace,  saith 
my  God,  mito  the  wicked." 

Let  me  briefly  explain  to  you  the  way  in  which  we  come  to  possess 
peace  with  God.  We  are  criminals  condemned,  though  we  do  not  con- 
sider ourselves  to  be  in  such  a  critical  condition.  We  persist  that  we  are 
righteous,  we  decline  to  acknowledge  the  jurisdiction  of  the  law,  and  we 
refuse  to  own  the  justice  of  its  sentence.  Therefore  or  ever  we  can 
have  peace  with  God  we  must  be  brought  into  court,  hear  the  indict- 
ment preferred  against  ns,  and  be  put  on  our  trial.  When  thus  arraigned 
we  must  put  in  our  pleading.  Dost  thou  say  "Not  guilty"?  Then, 
man,  thou  challengest  thine  accuser  to  bring  forward  the  evidence  which 
will  soon  spoil  thy  conceit,  and  crush  thee  with  its  weight.  But  before 
there  can  be  peace  between  us  and  God  we  must  with  all  our  hearts  plead 
*'ffuilttj,''  We  must  confess  ttie  truth,  for  God  will  never  agree  with 
liars,  nor  with  those  who  indulge  self-deception.  He  is  a  God  of  truth, 
and  dissemblers  can  have  no  communion  with  him.  Being  guilty,  we 
must  take  the  place  of  the  guilty :  it  is  our  proper  position,  and  it  is 
due  to  the  judge  of  all  the  earth  that  we  take  it ;  to  refuse  to  do  so  is 
contempt  of  court.  There  ia  mercy  for  a  sinner,  but  there  is  no  mercy 
for  the  man  who  will  not  own  himself  a  sinner.  ^'  If  we  confess  our  sins 
he  is  faithful  and  juBt  co  forgive  us  our  sins";  but  if  any  man  say  that 
he  has  no  sin  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him,  and  there  cannot 
be  peace  between  him  and  God  while  he  is  in  that  humour. 

It  seems  a  stem  demand,  and  very  galling  for  our  pride,  to  have  to 
stand  in  the  dock,  and  in  answer  to  the  qnestiou,  "Guilty  or  not  guilty  ?  ** 
to  reply,  "  Guilty,  Lord,  guilty.  Whatever  the  consequences  may  be, 
guilty.'  But  to  some  of  us  it  no  longer  seems  to  be  hard,  because 
we  could  not  now  plead  otherwise.  We  are  so  conscious  of  our  guilt  that 
we  cannot  escape  from  a  sense  of  it.  "  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow  water, 
and  make  my  hands  never  so  clean,  yet  ahalt  thou  plunge  me  in  the 
ditch,  and  mine  own  clothes  shall  abhor  me."  We  cauuot  look  upon  a 
single  day  without  being  convinced  of  sin ;  and  in  reviewing  our  past 
lives  from  our  childhood,  we  are  over  and  over  constrained  to  blush  at 
the  memory  of  our  waywardness  and  our  wilfulness,  our  perverseness  and 
our  provocation.  The  faults  and  the  follies  that  have  tracked  our 
course  haunt  ns,  till  our  very  looks  would  t^U  the  tnith  though  our 
tongiies  were  silent.  To  plead  guilty  has  now  become  a  positive  though 
a  painful  relief  to  us ;  it  is  the  ending  of  a  vain  show  which  we  found 
it  nard  to  keep  up ;  it  is  coming  to  the  bottom  of  the  matter,  and  know- 
ing the  worst  of  our  case.  Dear  hearer,  before  thou  canst  have  peace 
with  heaven  thou  must  take  up  thy  true  position,  and  plead  guilty.  I 
pray  the  Holy  Spirit  to  lead  thee  to  do  so.  It  is  lus  work  to  convince 
ns  of  sin^  and  if  he  shall  exercise  his  divine  office  upon  any  of  us  we  shall 
-10  longer  profess  hke  the  Pharisee  that  we  are  not  as  other  men,  but  like 
*ie  publican  we  shall  heartily  pray,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner," 


PKICE :  A  FACT  AND  A  FEELIKG.  68 

Sa^yposing  that  with  confasion  of  face,  oontrition  of  heart,  and  aroT](;ed 
oonaaenoe  we  own  and  acknowledge  our  inexcnfiable  gnilt,  fhe  next  thing 
r^uitiie  to  (Mr  peace  is  that  we  should  admit  the  justSe  of  the  divine  sen- 
tence, and  reverence  instead  of  revfline  the  Jndge  of  all  the  earth, 
against  whom  we  have  so  grossly  revolted.  There  are  men  who  will  say, 
''  Yes,  I  am  gnilty  and  si^fol,  bat  still  the  penalty  is  ont  of  proportion 
to  my  crimi^ity ;  I  cannot  believe  that  God  will  deal  so  severely  with 
the  olTences  of  his  creatures."  Now,  however  rational  such  reflections 
may  sound  they  certainly  are  not  acceptable  with  God.  Of  this  thing,  my 
friend,  I  warrant  thee :  if  the  Holy  Spirit  has  ever  shown  thee  sin  in  its 
natond  hideousness  and  deformity,  thou  wilt  think  nothing  too  bad  for 
it.  Hiou  wilt  cry  from  the  depths  of  thy  soul,  "  Ijet  it  be  condemned,, 
let  it  be  punished."  I  would  not,  if  I  could,  lift  a  finger  to  prevent  God 
from  ptmishing  sin.  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  must  he  reap :  the 
result  of  sin  must  follow  its  commission.  The  foundations  of  society 
would  be  undermined  and  there  would  be  no  living  in  the  world  if  there 
were  no  laws,  or  if  laws  might  be  violated  with  impunity.  There  would 
md^d  be  no  proof  that  there  was  a  great  Judge  of  all  the  earth  if  he 
did  not  do  right ;  and  if  he  does  right,  he  must  punish  sin,  for  it  ought 
to  be  panish^.  Were  I  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead  the  &*st  thing  that 
I  would  do  would  be  to  condemn  myself,  for  I  deserve  condemnation  and 
punishment.  Neither  would  it  yield  my  heart  the  least  comfort  to  be 
told  that  God  could  wink  at  sin.  I  want  not  such  a  God,  neither  could 
I  endure  to  think  that  the  law  of  righteousness  was  thus  relaxed.  My 
conscience  would  not  be  relieved  of  a  sense  of  obligations  I  could  not 
deny,  nor  of  impurities  I  could  not  cleanse,  nor  of  wrongs  I  could  not 
rectify,  by  a  suspicion  that  the  Majesty  of  heaven  had  threatened  a 
damiui^on  which  did  not  exist.  I  pray  the  Spirit  of  God  to  bring  you, 
my  hearer,  not  only  to  be  oonvincea  of  sin,  but  of  righteousness  and  of 
judgment  te  come.  Qod  is  righteous  in  fixing  a  day  in  which  he  will 
judge  the  world  by  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  aocoraing  to  our  gospel. 

TtoB  appears  to  be  a  painful  process^  to  be  bound  to  confess  your 
guilty  ana  then  to  bare  your  neck  to  the  sword  of  vengeance,  and  to  say, 
''Thon  wilt  be  justified  when  thou  judgest,  and  wilt  be  clear  when  thou 
condemnest;  for  against  thee,  thee  only  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this 
evil  in  thy  sight ;"  yet,  there  cannot  be  any  peace  with  God  till  we  come 
to  it :  because  there  can  be  no  peace  with  the  God  of  truth  where  there 
is  any  prevarication.  Lasting  peace  must  be  founded  upon  everlasting 
truth.  The  &ct  is,  we  are  guilty,  and  we  deserve  the  punishment  which 
God  apportions  to  guilt,  and  we  must  agree  with  that  truth,  grim  as  it 
looks,  or  eUe  we  cannot  be  friends  with  God. 

The  next  essential  to  our  receiving  justification  is  this :  the  prisoner 
is  guilty,  sentence  is  pronounced,  and  he  admits  the  righteousness  of  it ; 
he  is  asked  if  he  has  anything  to  say  why  the  sentence  should  not  be 
executed,  and  he  stands  speechless :  and  now  comes  in  the  abounding 
mercy  of  G<>d,  icho,  in  order  to  our  peace,  finds  a  substitute  to  bear  our 
penalty,  and  reveals  to  us  this  gracious  fact.  He  puts  his  Son  into  the 
sinner's  place.  Voluntarilv  doth  the  divine  Saviour  take  upon  himself 
onr  nature,  and  come  unaer  the  law,  and  by  a  sovereign  act  Jehovah 
lays  upon  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  That  sin  having  been  laid  on 
Christy  he  has  borne  it  and  carried  it  away.    In  his  own  body  he  bore 


64  METBOPOLITAK  TABEBNAGLE  PULPIT. 

it  on  the  tree.  Tlie  transgressions  of  his  people  were  made  to  meet 
upon  his  devote  I  person :  those  five  wounds  tell  what  he  saffeied^  that 
marred  countenance  bears  the  tokens  of  liis  inward  grief,  and  that  ay, 
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  host  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  indicates  to  us,  as 
hi  as  wo  arc  able  to  understand  it,  what  he  endured  when  he  stood  in 
the  sinner's  stead,  the  sin-bearer  and  the  sacrifice. 

When  the  Lord  enables  the  soul  to  perceive  that  Christ  stood  in  its 
stead,  then  the  work  of  appropriating  the  justification  is  going  on. 
Christ  died  "  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  Gkxl  ;** 
for  he  '*  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin ;  that  we  might  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."  He  was  "  made  a  curse  mr  us : 
as  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  tliat  hangeth  on  a  tree."  Christ 
hath  once  suffered  for  sin,  and  this  is  the  foundation  of  our  peace. 

The  point  wherein  faith  comes  into  contact  with  pardon  is  when  fiutli 
believes  that  the  Son  of  God  did  come  and  stand  in  the  sinner's  stead, 
and  when  faith  accepts  that  substitution  as  a  glorious  boon  of  grace,  and 
rests  in  it,  and  says,  '*  Now  I  sec  how  God  is  just,  and  smites  Christ  in  my 
stead.  Seeing  he  condemned  me  before  I  had  personally  sinned,  because 
of  Adam's  siu,  I  see  how  he  can  absolve  me,  though  I  have  no  righteous- 
ness, because  of  Clirist's  righteousness.  In  another  did  I  Ml,  and  in 
another  do  I  rise.  By  one  Adam  I  was  destroyed  :  by  another  Adam 
am  I  restored.  I  see  it.  I  leap  for  joy  aa  I  see  it,  and  I  accept  it 
as  from  the  Lord." 

This  is  not  quite  all.  for  now  here  stands  the  guilty  one,  who  has 
owned  the  sentence,  and  he  has  seen  the  sentence  executed  upon  another. 
What  then  ?  He  fa  Ices  It  is  place  as  no  longer  liable  to  that  aenteiice. 
The  penalty  cannot  be  exacted  twice.  It  were  neither  in  accord  with 
human  or  divine  righteousness  that  two  individuals  should  be  punished 
for  the  same  offence  unless  both  were  guilty.  When  God  devised  the 
plan  of  substitution  the  full  penalty  demanded  of  the  guiltless  surety 
was  clearly  intended  to  bring  exemption  to  the  guilty  sinners.  That 
Jesus  should  suffer  vicariously  and  yet  those  for  whom  he  paid  the 
quittance  in  drops  of  blood  should  obtain  no  acquittal  could  not  be. 
When  God  laid  sin  upon  Christ  it  must  have  been  in  the  intent 
of  his  heart  that  he  would  never  lay  it  on  those  for  whom  Christ 
died.  So  then  there  staudeth  the  man  who  Wiis  once  guilty,  but  he  is  no 
more  condemned,  because  another  has  taken  upon  him  the  condemnation 
to  which  he  was  exposed.  Still  more,  inasmuch  as  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  came  voluntarily  under  the  law,  obeyed  the  law,  fulfilled  the  law, 
.and  made  it  honourable,  according  to  the  infinite  purpose  and  vnM  of 
God  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  imputed  to  the  believer.  While 
Christ  stands  in  the  sinner's  place,  the  believing  sinner  stands  in  Christ's 
place.  As  the  Lord  looked  upon  Christ  as  though  he  had  been  a 
Kiiiii'jr,  tlif)ii«rh  he  was  no  sinner,  and  dealt  with  him  as  such,  so  now  the 
JiOrd  lu()k.s  r.pon  tho  believing  sinner  as  though  he  were  righteous, 
though  indeed  he  has  no  righteousness  of  his  own  ;  and  he  loves  him, 
and  delights  in  his  perfect  comeliness,  regarding  him  as  covered  with 
the  mantle  of  his  Kedeemer's  righteousness,  and  as  having  neither  spot 
nor  wrinkle  nor  any  such  thin^. 

This  is  wonderful  doctrine,  but  it  is  the  doctrine  of  the  word  of  God. 
It  is  the  doctrine  whereon  faith  can  feed  and  rest;   and  when  fiiith 


PEACE:  A  FACT  AND  A  FEELING.  65 

reeeiTes  it  she  says  to  the  soul^  "  Soul,  thou  art  free  from  ^iii,  for  Christ 
hsA  borne  thy  sm  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  Sonl,  thou  art  righteous 
before  God,  for  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  thiue  by  imputation." 
Without  any  works  of  thine  own  thou  art  yet  justified  according  to 
the  ri^teonsneBB  of  faith,  even  as  faithful  Abraham,  of  whom  it  is 
witteu,  *^  He  bdieved  God,  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteons- 
n^s."  This  is  a  wonderful  exchange,  the  putting  of  Christ  wliere  the 
sinner  ^ras,  and  of  the  sinner  where  Christ  was.  And,  now,  what  does 
tbe  conrt  say?  The  court  says,  "Not  guilty;  absolved;  acquitted." 
And  what  is  ihe  condition  of  the  man  towards  God  ?   Why,  he  can  say — 

**  *  Now  freed  fio.u  sin,  I  walk  at  large ; 
My  Saviour's  blood's  my  fall  discLarjie. 
At  hia  dear  feet  my  soul  I  lay, 
A  sinner  saved  Til  homage  pay.' 

Now  do  I  love  the  Lord,  and  I  know  that  the  Lord  loveth  me." 

By  this  process  we  have  come  to  the  truth  before  God,  aud  we  have 
dealt  with  each  other  on  the  line  of  truth.  There  has  been  no  &>bricatiou 
or  fiilsehood.  Justice  has  been  vindicated,  mercy  has  been  magnified,  and 
we  are  jastly  forgiven.  Strange  fusion  of  vehement  grace  and  vindic- 
tive wrath!  Behold  how  jadgment  and  mercy  have  linked  hands 
together  in  the  peiaon  of  the  dying,  bleeding,  rising  Son  of  God.  This 
is  the  way  by  which  we  obtain  justScation. 

The  soul  may  well  have  a  settled  peace  wlien  it  has  realized  and  received 
each  a  justification  as  this,  seeing  it  is  a  peace  consistent  with  justice. 
The  Lord  has  not  winked  at  sin ;  he  lias  not  treated  sin  as  if  it  were 
a  trifle;  the  Lord  has  punished  transgression  and  iniquity.  The  rod 
has  been  made  to  fall,  and  the  blessed  shoulders  of  our  Lord  have 
been  made  to  smart  under  the  infliction.  If  justice  had  never  been 
(satisfied  the  human  conscience  would  not  have  been  content.  The 
proclamation  of  unconditional  mercy  would  never  have  satisfied  a  human 
mind.  If  we  had  to  preach  to  you  that  God  forgave  you  irrespectively 
of  an  atonement^  no  awakened  conscience  would  welcome  the  tidings ;  we 
should  still  have  to  confront  the  question,  "Where  is  justice,  then?  " 
We  should  be  unable  to  see  how  the  law  could  be  vindicated,  or  the 
moral  government  of  God  maintained.  AVe  are  quite  at  rest,  when  we 
see  that  there  is  as  much  justice  as  there  is  mercy  iu  the  forgiveness  of 
a  believing  soul,  and  that  God  is  as  glorious  in  holiness  when  he  passes 
by  sin  as  he  would  have  been  if  he  had  cast  the  whole  race  into  the  abyss 
of  un&thomable  woe. 

Nor  need  there  be  any  morbid  apprehension  as  to  whether  all  the 
evideiice  that  could  be  produced  ogainst  us  at  our  trial  has  been 
brought  forward.  Nobody  can  come  in  and  say  "  Though  you  have  been 
exonerated  upon  a  partial  trial,  upon  a  more  searching  iuvestigation 
your  guilt  could  have  been  proved."  We  can  reply,  "But  it  was 
proved."  There  was  the  best  of  evidence  to  prove  it,  for  we  confessed 
it  There  was  no  other  evidence  wanted,  and  noUiing  further  could  have 
been  biought,  since  we  pleaded  guilty  to  every  charge.  If  you  bring  any 
further  accusation,  we  can  only  say  that  we  pleaded  guilty  without  reserve. 
It  mts  all  in  the  indictment ;  we  did  not  attempt  for  a  moment  to  cloak 
or  oonceal  any  guilt  we  had  incurred.    We  confessed  it  all  before  the 


66  UETBOPOLTTAK  TABEBKACLE  PULPIT. 

Lord,  and  owned  to  it ;  and  since  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ  took  it  all  there 
is  no  cause  for  reopening  the  proceedings.  There  cannot  be  a  second 
trial  through  a  writ  of  error :  the  case  is  thoroughly  disposed  of ;  the 
prisoner  has  pleaded  guilty  to  the  capital  charge,  and  nas  borne  the 
utmost  penalty  of  the  law  by  his  Substitute,  which  penalty  Ood  himself 
has  accepted.  His  acqnittid  is  such  as  he  can  rest  upon  \rith  implicit 
reliance. 

Moreover  we  know  that,  being  justified,  we  are  now  at  peace  with  God, 
because  there  cannot  be  any  more  demands  made  against  us.  All  that 
was  against  us  Christ  took  &way.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  The  death  of  our  great  Redeemer  has 
abounding  merit  in  it,  seeing  that  he  was  the  Son  of  Ood.  All  the 
transgressions  and  iniquities  that  could  ever  be  raked  up  against  us 
were  all  laid  to  his  charge,  and  his  atonement  by  one  offering  has  put  an 
end  to  them  all.  We  are  not  afraid,  therefore,  that  anything  £resh  will  be 
raised  against  us. 

Again,  our  acq[nittal  is  certified  beyond  all  question,  and  the  certificate 
is  always  producible.  Somebody  might  say  to  a  prisoner  **  How  do  you 
know  that  you  were  acquitted  ?  "  He  cannot  produce  any  writing. 
On  the  record  of  the  court  it  stands ;  and  yet,  mayhap,  he  has  no  means 
of  access  to  the  court  record.  But,  beloved,  you  and  I  have  a  writ  of 
acquittal  which  is  always  visible.  Faith  can  see  it  to-night.  *'  What  is 
that  ?  '*  say  you.  It  is  the  risen  Christ,  for  Jesus  Christ ''  died  for  our 
sins,  and  rose  again  for  our  justification."  You  all  know  how  that  was. 
He  was  cast  into  the  prison  of  the  grave  until  it  had  been  certified  that 
our  liabilities  were  fvliy  discharged,  and 

<*  If  Jesus  ne*er  had  paid  the  debt 
He  ne^er  had  been  at  fireedom  set.** 

• 

He  was  our  hostage,  and  his  body  was  held  in  duiaace  till  it  was  certified 
that  there  was  no  further  claim  against  anj  one  of  his  people.  That 
done,  he  rose  again  from  the  dead  for  our  justification.  He  is  at  the 
Father's  right  hand,  and  he  could  not  be  there  if  any  of  our  iniquity 
remained  on  him.  He  took  our  sin,  but  he  has  our  sin  no  loneer, 
for  on  the  cross  he  discharged  and  annihilated  it  all  so  that  it  ceased  to 
be,  and  he  has  gone  into  the  glory  as  the  representative  and  the  substi- 
tute of  his  people,  cleared  from  their  imputed  liabilities — clean  delivered 
from  anything  that  could  be  brought  against  him  on  their  account.  So 
iong  as  we  see  the  Lord  Jesus  sitting  in  the  throne  of  glory,  we  may 
boldly  ask,  "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  Christ  has  died,  yea  rather, 
hath  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  ri^ht  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh 
intercession  for  us."  We  know  our  justification  to  be  for  ever  com- 
plete, and  beyond  challenge,  for  Jesns  keeps  the  place  of  acceptance 
for  us. 

And  lastly,  on  this  point,  it  was  a  justification  from  the  very  highest 
court.  You  know  how  it  is  in  law :  a  matter  may  be  decided  in  your 
favour,  but  there  is  an  appeal  to  a  higher  court;  and  such  are  the 
glorious  uncertainties  of  law  that  a  sentence  which  has  been  confirmed 
in  several  courts  may  after  all  be  reversed  when  it  comes  before  the 
highest  authorities.  But  you  and  I  pleaded  guilty  bpfare  God.  There 
is  no  higher  authority  than  that  of  Ood  himself.    When  Jesns  stood 


PEACB:  A  FACT  AND  A  FEKfilNO.  67 

in  oor  stead  toe  we  did  not  pat  him  there ;  nor  did  he  pat  himself  there ; 
it  was  the  act  and  deed  of  tne  Eternal  Father.  Is  it  not  written — "  The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  It  is  not  only  true  as  a 
matttf  of  personal  fiEuth  that 

**  I  lay  my  sins  on  Jesus/* 

but  as  a  matter  of  fact  of  a  far  earlier  date  the  Lord  laid  them  on  him. 
Theie  is  no  higher  authority  than  the  Lord's ;  and  therefore  do  we  cry, 
^^  it  is  God  that  justifieth,  who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  "  We  have  been 
taken  into  the  highest  court  of  all,  and  there  we  have  been  cleared 
through  Jesns's  blood ;  have  we  not  cause  to  be  fully  at  peace  with  God, 
^  being  justified  by  &ith"?  Precious  doctrine !  Oh  to  rest  in  it  with  a 
childlike  confidence  henceforth  and  for  evermore ! 

II.  I  now  come  to  the  second  part  of  the  subject,  which  is  this. 
Faith  brings  us  into  the  state  of  peace  which  I  have  explained,  and  after- 
wards FAITH  GIVES  vs  THB  SENSE  OF  PEACE.  ''Therefore  being 
justified  by  &ith,  we  have  peace  with  God." 

Will  you  please  to  notice  that  the  sense  of  peace  follows  upon  the  state 
of  peace.  We  do  not  get  peace  before  we  are  justified,  neither  is  peace 
a  means  of  justification.  No,  brethren,  we  are  justified  first.  "  While 
we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly." 
God  justifies  the  ungodly.  We  have  no  peace  till  that  is  done.  At 
letBt  there  may  seem  to  be  peace,  a  horrible  peace — the  peace  of  death  and 
of  daring  presumption — wnen  a  man  says, ''  Peace,  peace,"  when  there 
is  no  peace,  and  talks  about  rest  when  he  has  a  conscience  seared  as 
wkh  a  hot  iron — ^and  a  mind  drugged  with  presumption,  so  that  he 
sleeps  that  awful  sleep  which  is  the  presage  of  waking  up  in  hell.  From 
soch  peace  may  God  deliver  us !  lout  real  peace — ^the  peace  of  God — 
andx^eaoe  with  God  must  spring  out  of  our  being  justified  in  the  way 
which  I  have  been  trying  to  describe.  The  man  who  is  justified, 
aoooiding  to  the  text,  at  this  moment  has  a  sense  of  peace  with  God, 
but  this  is  only  true  of  those  who  by  faith  are  iustified. 

Here  I  want  you  to  observe — for  every  wora  is  instructive — that  wc 
have  peace  with  God  "through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Many  children 
of  God  lose  their  peace  in  a  measure,  and  part  of  the  reason  of  it  is  because 
they  begin  to  deal  with  God  absolutely.  None  of  us  will  ever  experience 
tme  peace  with  God  except  through  Jesus  Christ.  I  like  that  strong 
expression  of  Luther,  bala  and  bare  as  it  is,  when,  in  commenting  on 
the  Epistle  to  the  G^tians,  he  says, ''  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  an 
absolute  GK)d»"  If  you  have  anything  to  do  with  God  absolutely,  you 
will  be  destroyed.  There  cannot  be  any  point  of  contact  between  abso- 
lute deity  and  fitUen  humanity  except  through  Jesus  Christ,  the  appointed 
Mediator.  That  is  God's  door ;  all  else  is  a  wall  of  fire,  xou  can 
by  Christ  approach  the  Lord,  but  this  is  the  sole  bridge  across  the  gulf. 

Whenever  you,  dear  soul,  begin  to  deal  with  God  according  to  your 
own  experience,  according  to  your  own  frames  and  feeUngs,  or  even 
according  to  the  exercises  of  your  own  faith,  unless  that  &ith  keeps  its 
eye  on  Christ,  you  will  lose  your  neaoe.  Stand  out  of  Christ,  and  what 
a  wretdied  creature  you  are !  Have  you  attempted  to  approach  the 
Eternal  King  without  his  chosen  ambassador  ?  How  presumptuous  is 
yoor  attempt  I    The  throne  of  divine  sovereignty  is  terrible  apart  from 


C8  METROPOLITAW  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  redeeming  blood.  Peace  with  God  must  come  to  us  by  the  way  of 
the  cross.  Through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  wc  gain  it,  and  through  him 
we  keep  it 

There  be  some  among  you  who,  I  trust,  are  really  believers  in  Christ, 
who  are  constantly  prone  to  fret  and  say,  "I  have  no  lasting  peace. 
I  am  a  believer  in  Jesus,  and  I  have  a  measure  of  peace  at  times,  but 
I  do  not  enjoy  fulness  of  peace."  Well,  now  we  must  look  at  this  a 
little,  and  the  more  closely  we  inspect  it  the  more  convinced  we  shall 
be  that  peace  is  the  right  of  every  believer.  What  is  there  now  between 
him  and  God  ?  Sin  is  forgiven.  What  is  more,  righteousness  is  imputed. 
He  is  the  object  of  eternal  love ;  he  is  more  than  that ;  he  is  the  object 
of  divine  complacency.  God  sees  him  in  his  Son,  and  loves  him.  Why 
should  he  not  be  at  peace  ?  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled ;  ye 
believe  in  God,"  said  Jesus,  "believe  also  in  me."  Christian,  there 
is  no  ground  of  quarrel  between  you  and  your  heavenly  Father.    God 

^for  Clmst's  sake  has  forgiven  you.  To  you  the  Lord  virtually  says, 
"  Come  now  and  let  us  reason  together,  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  I 
have  made  them  as  wool.  Though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  I  have 
already  made  them  as  snow."    When  he  says,  "They  shall  be,"  he  is 

,  speaking  to  the  sinner ;  but  to  you  they  are  so.    You  are  justified. 

[^ Why  have  you  not  peace,  then  ?  You  have  a  claim  to  it,  and  you  ought 
to  enjoy  it.  What  is  the  reason  why  you  do  not  possess  it?  I  will  tell 
you.  It  is  your  unbehefc  You  are  justified  by  faith,  remember;  and  it 
is  by  faith  that  you  obtain  peace  with  God ;  and  when  you  are  doubting 
and  fearing  instead  of  simply  beUeving — when  you  are  questioning  and 
ginimbling,  then  it  is  that  you  lose  your  peace ;  but  in  proportion  as 
yojir  faith  stands  so  will  your  peace  with  Gx>d  abide. 

I  feel  certain  that  the  text  tells  us  that  every  justified  man  has 
peace  with  God ;  and  if  so  how  is  it  that  I  hear  poor  souls  crying,  "  I 
do  believe,  but  I  do  not  enjoy  peace."  I  think  I  can  tell  you  how  it 
is.  You  make  a  mistake  as  to  what  this  peace  is.  You  say,  "I 
am  so  dreadfully  tempted.  Sometimes  I  am  drawn  tliis  way,  and 
sometimes  the  other,  and  the  devil  never  lets  me  alone."  Listen. 
Did  you  ever  read  in  the  Bible  that  you  were  to  have  peace  with  the 
devil?  Look  at  the  text — ^'^ Therefore  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have 
peace  wHh  Ood'^  That  is  a  very  different  thing  from  having  peace 
with  Satan.  If  the  devil  were  to  let  you  alone  and  never  to  tempt  yoii 
I  should  begin  to  think  that  you  belonged  to  him ;  for  he  is  kind  to 
his  own  in  his  own  way,  for  a  while.  He  has  a  way  of  whispering 
soft  things  into  their  ears,  and  with  dulcet  notes  and  siren  songs  he 
lures  them  to  eternal  destruction.  But  he  worries  with  a  malicious 
joy  those  whom  he  cannot  destroy ;  for  in  their  case  he  hath  great  wrath, 
knowing  that  his  time  is  short.  He  expects  to  see  you  soon  in  heaven  out 
of  gunshot  of  him  ;  and  so  he  makes  the  best  of  his  opportunities  to  try  if 
he  can  distress  and  injure  yon  while  you  are  here.  You  will  soon  be  so 
far  above  him  that  you  will  not  be  able  to  hear  the  hell-dog  bark,  and  so 
he  snaps  at  you  now  to  see  if  he  can  hurt  you,  as  once  he  did  your 
Master  when  he  wounded  his  heel.  You  never  nad  a  premiss  of  being  at 
peace  with  the  prince  of  darkness,  but  there  is  another  promise  which  is 
tar  better:  it  is  this — ^**The  Lord  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet 
shortly."    A  bruise'  it  shall  be  when  we  have  him  under  our  feet ;  we  will 


PEACE:  A  FACT  AND  A  FEELING.  69 

trionmh  like  oar  Master  in  the  breaking  of  his  head.  Till  then 
depeia  upon  it  the  enmity  between  the  seed  of  the  serpent  and  the 
seed  of  the  woman  will  oontinue,  and  there  will  be  no  truce  to  the  war. 

Do  I  hear  another  tried  one  saying,  ''Alas,  it  is  not  the  devil;  it  is 
myself  tJiat  I  fear.  I  feel  the  flesh  revolting  and  rebellbg.  Lusts  that 
I  thought  were  slain  have  a  terrible  resurrection.  When  I  would  do 
good,  evil  is  present  with  me.  Sin  assails  me  with  an  awful  power 
by  reason  of  tne  weakness  of  my  spirit  and  the  strength  of  my  flesh, 
and  I  cry, '  0  wretched  man  that  I  am !' "  Hearken  again.  Did  the 
Lord  ever  promise  that  you  should  have  peace  with  the  flesli  ?  Oh  no, 
the  moment  you  were  converted  there  began  a  battle  between  the  flesh 
and  the  spirit,  and  that  battle  will  last  till  that  flesh  of  yours  shall  lie 
low  ia  the  dust  from  whence  it  came,  and  your  spirit,  delivered  from  its 
bondage,  shaU  ascend  to  God.  You  must  not  suppose  that  as  long  &s 
you  are  in  this  body  the  flesh  will  help  you.  Ah  no,  you  will  cry  \vith 
Paul,  ''  0  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body 
of  this  death  ?  "  Yon  are  harassed  and  hampered  by  the  rising  corrup- 
tion of  your  nature,  and  it  will  still  rise,  xour  brethren  will  still  say 
of  you,  "  What  will  ye  see  in  the  Shulamite  ?  As  it  were  the  company 
of  two  armies."  The  flesh  is  striving  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit 
against  the  flesh  ;  and  though  the  lion  shall  one  day  lie  down  with  the 
l^onb,  the  flesh  vnR  never  agree  with  the  spirit.  As  the  Lord  hath  war 
with  Amalek  for  ever  and  ever,  so  there  is  war  between  the  spiiit  and 
the  flesh  so  long  as  the  two  are  in  the  same  man.  There  is  no  promise 
of  peace  with  the  flesh,  then ;  but  we  Imve  peace  with  God. 

"Ah,"  says  another,  "I  have  little  peace,  for  I  am  surrounded  by 
those  that  vex  me.  When  I  ser^-e  the  Lord  they  malign  and  misre- 
present me  with  scoff  and  slander.  They  take  up  an  evil  report  against 
me.  Woe  is  me  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech,  that  I  dwell  in  the  tents  of 
Kedar.  My  soul  is  among  lions,  even  amongst  them  that  are  set  on  fire 
of  hell.  They  give  me  no  rest."  Yes,  but  I  smile  as  I  think  of  it.  Did 
you  ever  dream  of  having  peace  with  the  wicked,  peace  with  such 
as  turn  aside  to  their  crooked  ways,  peace  with  the  workers  of  iniquity  ? 
Vain  thought  I  Peace  in  this  world  where  your  Lord  was  cruciJied — 
peace  with  those  that  hate  you  for  his  sake  ?  Why,  did  he  not  say  to 
you  at  the  first,  "If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it  hated  me  before 
it  hated  you.  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  his  own : 
but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the 
world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you."  What !  do  you  expect  to  wear  a 
CTown  of  gold  where  he  wore  a  crown  of  thorns  ?  The  confessors  and 
martyrs  of  ancient  times  never  reckoned  upon  peace  with  the  world. 
Nor  did  the  apostle  Paul,  for  he  said,  "  The  world  is  crucified  to  me, 
and  I  unto  the  world."  You  have  no  promise  of  the  world's  love,  but 
you  have  a  promise  of  this  sort,  •'  These  tilings  have  I  spoken  unto  you, 
that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace.  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation : 
but  be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  overcome  the  world."  "And  this  is  the 
victory  Avhich  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  I  pray  you,  then, 
do  not  misconstrue  the  text.  It  does  not  say  that  you  shall  either  have 
peace  with  the  devil,  or  peace  with  the  flesh,  or  peace  with  the  world ; 
but  it  does  say  that  you  have  peace  with  God,  which  is  infinitely  better. 

"  Still,"  says  one,  "  I  find  every  day  that  I  sin,  and  I  hate  myself  for 


70  METKOPOLITAlSr  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Binning.  I  cannot  get  to  my  bed  at  night  bat  I  feel  ^ievcd  in  nlV  soul 
that  I  am  not  more  like  Christ,  and  that  I  cannot  grow  in  grace  as  I  desire. 
I  do  not  seem  to  make  the  advance  in  the  divine  life  that  I  hoped  I 
should,  and  I  am  fall  of  sin.  Whatever  I  do  is  stained  with  aefile- 
ment.  Wherever  I  go  I  seem  to  fall  one  w^  or  another  into  something  that 
wounds  my  conscience  and  hurts  me."  xes ;  and  the  Lord  never  said 
that  you  should  have  peace  with  sin.  I  am  delighted  to  find  that  sin 
stints  you,  and  that  you  hate  it.  The  more  hatred  of  sin  the  better.  A 
sin-hating  soul  is  a  God-loving  soul.  If  sin  never  distresses  vou,  then 
God  has  never  favoured  you.  Dnless  you  hate  sin  you  do  not  love  holi- 
ness ;  and  if  you  hate  sin  you  cannot  nave  any  peace  with  it.  You  will 
never  be  satisfied  till  you  are  perfect,  and  when  will  you  be  perfect  ? 
Why,  when  you  wake  up  in  your  Lord's  likeness.  That  will  be  the  hour 
of  your  perfection,  but  till  then  sin  will  vex  you.  Then  shall  you  have 
no  Canaanite  to  harass  you,  and  there  shall  be  war  with  Amalek  no 
more,  when  the  last  enemy  is  slain,  when  sin  is  extirpated,  and  you  shall 
be  near  and  like  your  God.  You  have  no  promise  of  peace  with  sin, 
nor  need  you  wish  for  one,  but  you  have  peace  with  God. 

To  come  back  again  to  what  is  promised,  and  indeed  to  what  is  not 
only  promised  but  really  bestowed  and  communicated  to  us — **  Being 
justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  Oody 

IMost  assuredly  we  do  enjoy  peace  tilth  God  in  this  respect — ^that  we 
know  he  loves  tis.  He  would  not  have  given  his  Son  to  die  for  us  if  he 
had  not.  He  would  not  have  devised  this  matchless  plan  of  justification 
if  he  had  not  loved  us.  Moreover,  we  feel  a  fervent  love  to  him  in  return. 
We  do  not  love  him  as  we  wish  to  do,  nor  as  we  hope  to  do,  but  we  do 
love  him  for  all  that.  We  can  say,  "  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things ; 
thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee." 

**  Yes,  I  love  thee  and  adore, 
Oh  for  grace  to  love  thee  more." 

Of  the  excellence  and  virtue  of  this  peace  we  make  daily,  hourly 
proof ;  for  now  we  are  not  afraid  to  go  to  our  covenant  Ood  for  all  neces- 
sary things,  and  to  seek  his  face  for  help  in  time  of  trouble.  Why,  to 
some  of  us  this  resorting  to  God  has  b^me  so  habitual,  that  we  speak 
with  him  every  hour  of  the  day.  Nothing  happens  but  we  fly  to  him 
for  counsel  or  for  succour.  We  no  longer  ask  leave  to  do  so,  for  he 
has  given  to  us  the  private  key  and  the  perpetual  permit  of  access. 
We  have  not  always  such  settled  peace  with  our  fellow  creatures,  for  at 
times  we  so  much  lack  confidence  in  them  that  we  could  not  divulge 
to  them  our  troubles ;  but  we  have  peace  with  God ;  such  an  amity 
that  we  can  always  have  recourse  to  nim,  assured  of  his  sympathy  and 
his  i-eadiness  to  come  to  our  relief  in  every  time  of  need.  Oar  habitude 
of  prayer  proves  that  we  have  peace  with  God ;  we  should  not  think 
of  praying  to  him  if  we  believed  that  he  was  our  adversary,  or  if  we 
doubted  his  goodwill.  If  we  felt  any  enmity  in  our  hearts  to  him  we 
should  not  go  to  him  as  we  do,  with  a  childlike  hope,  in  time  of  distress. 

This  peace  with  God  makes  us  delight  in  him.  I  am  sure  that  ever} 
soul  here  that  has  been  justified  by  faith  delights  in  God.  You  do  not 
always  feel  him  equally  near,  but  when  he  is  near  it  is  the  joy  of  your 
spirit.    What  are  the  best  and  happiest  moments  you  ever  know  ?    Are 


PKACK  :  A  FACT  AXD  A  FSKLIKa.  71 

thej  not  those  in  which  jou  have  communioQ  with  God  ?  What  days  can 
TOO  reflect  upon  with  the  greatest  Batisfaction  and  ardently  wish  to  have 
repeated  ?  Are  they  not  those  in  which  his  majesty  and  mercy  have  been 
so  revealed  to  yonr  spirit  that  with  mingled  awe  and  sweetness  yoa  hare 
realized  intensely  his  power  and  his  presence  ?  Oh,  what  a  good  God  he 
is !  Bad  as  we  are,  how  good  he  is !  Now^  take  care  that  you  indulge 
this  delight  very  often.  If  yon  delight  in  anything  eke  you  will  be  an 
idolater,  but  he  has  said,  *'  Delight  thyself  in  the  I^rd,  and  he  will  give 
thee  the  desire  of  thy  heart"  You  cannot  be  too  delighted  with  your 
God.  Is  he  not  perfection  itself?  Are  we  not,  in  all  respects,  rejoiced 
to  have  such  a  God?  We  would  not  have  one  attribute  changed;  nor 
one  appointment  of  his  sovereign  will  in  the  least  degree  moved  from  its 
order.  Let  him  be  as  he  is,  and  do  as  he  pleases,  and  our  souls  shall 
delight  in  him.  ''Yea,  though  he  slay  me^  yet  will  I  tnist  in  him." 
Now,  when  you  can  delight  in  God,  though  you  cannot  delight  in  your- 
self, it  shows  that  you  have  peace  with  him,  and  are  justified. 

Then,  brethren,  this  peace  also  shows  itself  in  our  acquiescing  in  all 
thai  he  does  in  his  rough  providences.  You  know  that  a  hypocrite  is 
like  a  strange  dog  that  will  follow  a  man  as  long  as  he  casts  him  a  bone 
or  a  hit  of  meat ;  but  a  true  believer  is  like  a  man's  own  dog  that  will 
follow  him  when  he  gives  him  nothing,  and  even  when  he  deals  him  a 
cuff  or  a  blow.  A  toe  believer  says,  "  ShaQ  I  receive  good  from  the 
hasai  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  I  not  also  receive  evil  ?  If  he  chasten  me,  I 
would  sooner  be  chastened  by  my  Father  than  I  would  be  caressed  by 
Hatan."  It  were  better  to  smart  till  one  were  black  and  blue  under  the 
rod  of  God,  than  to  be  set  upon  a  high  throne  by  the  world  or  the  de^il. 
When  he  offers  thee  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  be  sure  that  thou  say  to 
the  foul  fiend,  "  Get  thee  behind  me  " ;  but  when  the  Lord  hands  thee  the 
bitter  cup  be  sure  to  say,  "  Thy  ^-ill  be  done,"  and  take  it  cheerfully  at  his 
bands,  if  we  feel  an  agreement  with  our  Lord's  will  it  shows  that  we  are 
at  peace  with  him. 

One  more  e-videncc  of  being  at  peace  with  God  is  when  you  can 
tcifh  confidence  hok forward  to  the  time  of  your  departure  out  of  this  world 
and  say,  "  I  can  die,  if  thou,  0  Lord,  be  with  me."  When  you  can 
foil  in  with  the  words  of  the  hymn  we  were  singing  just  now— 

«  Bold  shall  I  stand  in  that  great  day, 
For  who  aught  to  my  charge  shall  iky  ? 
While  through  thy  blood  absolved  I  am, 
From  Bin*s  tremendons  curse  and  shame," 

We  are  not  afraid  of  the  day  of  jud^ent  because  we  have  peace  with 
God,  and  hence  we  are  not  afraid  to  die. 

There  is  concord  and  harmony  between  the  righteous  God  and  his 
redeemed  people,  and  hence  fear  is  banished.  He  has  given  to  us  his 
Spirit  to  dwell  in  our  hearts,  and  now  we  desire  that  each  rising 
wish  may  be  prompted  by  his  will.  Our  mind  is  agreed  with  the 
mind  of  God.  He  wishes  us  to  be  holy,  and  we  wish  to  be  holy. 
He  would  kill  sin  in  us,  and  we  long  to  have  it  killed.  He  wishes 
us  to  obey,  and  we  desire  to  obey.  He  would  have  us  seek  his  gk)ry, 
and  we  desire  that  he  should  be  glorified  in  us,  in  our  whole  spirit, 
vail,   and  body.    The  lines  of  our  life  run  parallel  with  the  life  of 


72  HETROPOLITAN  TABEKNAGLS  PULPIT. 

God,  though  upon  a  lower  level :  we  can  never  be  as  he  is  in  the  glory 
of  his  nature,  but  still  we  desire  to  be  holy  as  he  is  holy.  The  life 
within  us  is  divine,  for  we  have  been  begotten  again  by  himself,  and 
henceforth  we  are  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  us,  and  so  we  are  at  peace 
with  God. 

Go  your  way,  my  brethren,  and  swim  in  this  peace.  Bathe  your 
weary  souls  in  seas  of  heavenly  rest  until  you  come  to  the  place  where 
not  a  wave  of  trouble  shall  ever  roll  across  your  peaceful  breasts ;  and 
the  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  yon  wholly,  and  preserve  you  blameless 
nnto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Faithful  is  he  that  calleth 
you,  who  also  will  do  it.    Amen. 


PoRTiOH  OF  Scripture  Bead  before  Sermok— Romans  v. 


Hymks  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 776,  897,  708. 


LETTER  FROM  MR.  SPURGEON. 

Mentohb. 

Dbab  Feiskds, — The  sermon  is  so  long  that  only  a  line  or  so  is  left  for  me. 
I  will  say  the  less  of  myself.  The  warm  sanny  days  which  I  have  spent  in  th» 
retreat  are,  by  God^s  blessing,  bringing  back  to  me  health  and  strength.  I 
shall  be  happy  indeed  if  my  mental  and  spiritual  vigour  should  also  be  renewed 
by  the  removal  of  the  daily  care  which  pressed  upon  me  ;  if  it  be  so  my  hearers 
shall  be  the  gainers,  for  all  my  strength  has  been  and  ever  shall  be  laid  out  in 
my  ministry. 

I  am  right  glad  to  hear  that  special  services  are  commencing  at  the  Taber- 
nacle, and  I  entreat  all  the  brethren  there  to  throw  all  their  energies  into  them. 
Pray  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  work  mightily  and  glorify  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the 
midst  of  the  congregations  ;  and  then  set  to  work  to  fetch  in  the  people  from 
the  outside.  Gather  them !  Gather  them  from  hedge  and  highway,  and  crowti 
the  gospel  feast.  The  preachers  are  among  you  whom  God  has  widely  blest, 
but  how  can  they  benefit  the  people  if  they  do  not  come  to  hear  them.  Make 
the  services  known  and  press  those  to  come  who  do  not  usually  attend  public- 
worship.  We  long  to  see  souls  8aved,~Hlo  we  not  ?  My  heart  cannot  be  con- 
tent whUe  men  are  being  lost  I  cannot  be  among  the  crowds  to  preach,  bot 
my  inmost  soul  prays  for  those  who  are  indulged  with  that  privilege,  and  for 
you  also  who  have  the  joy  of  helping  on  the  work  of  the  Lord. 

I  am  bound  to  thank  those  generous  friends  who  continue  to  send  aid  to  tlie 
various  works  under  my  care  :  the  Lord  reward  them.  To  each  and  all  my 
hearers  and  readers  1  send  my  hearty  Christian  salutations. 

C.  IL  SPURGKON. 


^eti[0plton  ^ixhvmdt 


THE    NUMBERED    PEOPLE. 


01       tig 

4.  ^mn 


XLZ77S2fr      JLV      111  a  2$r  O?  O  XT  S  ,       Z3 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


'*  Aecording  to  ihe  commmdment  of  the  Lord  they  were  numbered  by  the  hand  of 
Moeei,  OTCxy  one  aeoonling  to  hie  serviee,  and  acooiding  to  his  harden :  thus  were 
they  nnmbored  of  him,  as  the  Lord  commanded  Moies." — Numbers  ir.  49. 

IsaASL  in  the  wilderness  is  admitted  in  some  respects  to  have  been  a 
tjpe  of  the  church  in  its  present  condition.  The  tribe  of  Levi  was  in  a 
peculiar  and  ioner  sense  the  type  of  that  peculiar  people  who  under  the 

n  high-priest  are  set  apart  for  the  service  of  the  Lord  and  his  church. 
lem  the  carriage  of  the  holy  vessels  from  place1S6  place  was  com- 
mitted, each  Sunily  of  the  tribe  hieing  made  responsible  mr  the  safe  and 
reverent  transport  of  a  certain  part  of  the  sacred  furniture.  Since 
nothing  in  the  service  of  the  Goa  of  order  may  be  left  to  hazard  but 
eveijimng  must  be  done  decently  and  according  to  arrangement,  all  the 
Levites  were  counted,  and  then  appointed  each  man  to  his  service. 
Those  persons  who  in  hackneyed  phrase  cry  out  against "  system  "  ought 
to  be  told  that  the  Lord  has  always  had  a  system,  not  onlv  in  nature  and 
providence,  but  also  in  his  own  courts.  There  is  an  admirable ''  economy  " 
in  the  palace  of  the  cjeat  King  :  whatever  of  disorder,  waste,  and  riot 
there  may  be  surroun£ng  other  monarchs,  nothing  of  the  land  will  be 
found  breath  the  shadow  of  the  divine  throne.  He  who  counts  the 
stars  and  calls  them  all  by  their  names,  leaves  nothing  unarranged  in  his 
own  service.  His  church,  therefore,  ^ould  exhibit  the  disci^ine  of  an 
army,  and  all  his  warriors  should  know  how  to  keep  rank.  Though  we 
are  not  under  the  law,  we  are  not  without  law  to  Christ,  nor  do  we 
wish  to  be,  for  his  commandments  are  not  grievous. 

At  this  season,  when  our  church  is  maUng  a  most  earnest  effort  to 
glorify  the  Lord  by  seeking  conversions,  we  would  muster  all  the  servants 
of  our  Master  and  summon  each  one  to  take  bis  appointed  place  and 
service.  The  work  of  the  Lord  is  to  be  done,  and  snould  be  done  well, 
and  done  by  us  all  most  cheerfully  and  heartily.  Gather,  therefore, 
yourselves  together  and  let  each  redeemed  one  take  up  his  burden,  and 
hear  it  before  the  Lord  in  dae  order  :  to  this  end,  like  Moses,  we  would 
call  yon  out  one  by  one,  and  give  you  a  charge  as  from  the  Lord. 

Our  text  contains  authority  for  the  musi^-roU,  appointment  for  ihs 
MkndudU^  and  account  of  the  actual  execution  of  the  command.  Upon 
each  of  these  an  absent  ofScer  of  your  company  would  try  to  say  a  little 
as  the  Holy  Spirit  may  enable  him. 

I.  Here  is,  first,  authobitt  for  the  husteb-boll,  *' according 
to  the  commandment  of  the  liord  they  were  numbered."  It  was  not 
Na  1,497. 


f  4  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACIiB  PULPIT. 

leil  to  Moses  to  number  the  people  without  divine  sanction,  else  the  deed 
might  have  been  as  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  as  that  of  David  when 
he  made  a  census  of  the  nation  ;  neither  may  any  man  at  this  day  snm- 
mon  the  saints  of  the  Lord  at  his  own  discretion  to  enterprises  for  which 
they  were  never,  set  apart.  The  armies  of  Israel  are  none  of  ours  to  lead 
whither  we  will,  nor  even  to  reckon  up  that  the  number  may  be  told 
to  our  own  honour.  The  counting  of  apostles  and  disciples  is  lawful 
enough,  for  it  was  frequently  done  in  the  best  days  of  the  church,  bat 
statistics  may  be  taken  in  such  a  spirit  as  to  be  the  occasion  of  sin.  In  no 
such  manner  would  we  now  numocr  the  host  unto  the  battle,  but  would 
summon  the  chosen  of  the  Lord  to  the  Lord's  work  and  in  the  Lord's 
name. 

Beh'cvers  in  Christ  Jesus,  you  are  now  called  forth  to  do  suit  and  ser- 
vice, because  like  the  tribe  of  Levi  you  are  the  Lwd!e.  He  views  you  as 
the  church  of  the  firstborn,  as  the  redeemed  from  among  men,  and  as  his 
peculiar  portion  and  inheritance,  and  therefore  above  all  other  men  you 
are  under  his  special  rule  and  governance.  The  Lord  said  unto  Moses, 
"  The  Levites  snail  be  mine  :  I  am  the  Lord,"  and  he  has  made  the  same 
declaration  concerning  all  those  that  fear  the  Lord  and  that  think  npon 
his  name  :  '^  They  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord,  in  the  day  when  I  make 
up  my  jewels."  Upon  whom  shall  we  call  to  perform  the  work  of  the 
Lord  but  upon  those  who  are  his  own  ?  To  these  belong  a  devout  care 
for  the  interest  of  true  religion  and  an  earnest  zeal  for  the  glory  %i  God. 
Obligations  as  powerful  as  they  are  honourable  are  npon  them.  "  Ye  are 
not  your  own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price,  therefore  glorify  God  in  your 
body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's."  Do  you  feel  a  shrinking 
from  being  numbered  and  called  out  for  active  service  ?  Is  not  this  an 
evil  and  unworthy  sensation  ?  Should  yon  not  ftir  rather  account  it  your 
glory  to  be  called  out  with  the  dedicated  ones  ? 

Brethren,  you  are  further  called  because  this  ie  a  change  laid  upon  you 
of  the  Lord,  to  whom  yon  specially  belong.  The  Levites  (Numb^  i  v.  3) 
were  ordained  **to  do  the  work  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation." 
They  were  not  numbered  with  the  rest  of  the  nation,  for  their  vocation 
was  altogether  difierent,  and  their  whole  business  was  ''about  holy 
things."  Ye  see  in  this  your  calling,  brethren,  for  hereunto  are  ye  also 
ordained  that  ye  may  live  unto  the  Lord  alone.  To  whom  does  the  work 
of  God  belong  but  to  his  children  ?  Who  should  serve  the  Lord  Christ, 
and  gather  in  his  wanderers,  but  those  whom  he  has  called  to  that  office  ? 
If  you  refuse  the  honourable  yoke  how  will  the  work  of  mercy  be  done  ? 
Can  it  be  left  to  hirelings,  or  will  the  spiritually  dead  perform  the  service 
of  the  living  God  ?    No,  it  is  your  charge,  and  look  ye  to  it. 

Again,  brethren,  the  Lord  may  well  call  you  to  this  service,  seeing  he 
has  given  you  to  his  Son,  even  as  he  gave  the  Levites  to  Aaron,  as  it  is 
written  (Numbers  iii.  9)  "  they  are  wholly  given  unto  him  out  of  the 
children  of  Israel."  The  Lord  had  also  said,  "  Bring  the  tribe  of  Levi 
near,  and  present  them  before  Aaron  the  priest,  that  they  may  minister 
unto  him.  They  were  happy  thus  to  serve  the  head  of  their  own  tribe, 
and  more  happy  still  are  we  to  serve  the  Lord  Christ,  who  is  the  firstborn 
among  many  brethren.  Because  ye  belong  to  Christ,  therefore,  hide  not 
yourselves  from  his  service,  but  come  forward  with  alacrity. 

Once  more,  the  Lord  has  constituted  you  the  servants  of  all  his  people, 


THE  KIJHBERED  PBOPLF.  75 

even  a«  he  said  of  the  LeTites  that  they  were  to  **  do  the  service  of  the 
children  of  Israel  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  We  are  debtors 
to  all  onr  brethren^  and  we  are  their  servants  to  the  full  extent  of  onr 
power.  The  greater  we  are  in  the  chnrch  the  more  are  we  the  servants- 
of  all ;  it  is  onrs  to  fulfil  this  service,  or  else  we  are  untrue  to  the  position 
of  ChristianSy  who  are  all  called  in  love  to  serve  one  another. 

Here  are  a  few  of  the  claims  which  the  Lord  has  upon  you,  will  yon 
not  own  the  supreme  authority  which  cafls  you  to  active  service  ? 

II.  Under  our  second  head  we  shall  notice  the  appointxbkt  of  rwR 
iKDiYiDUALSy — ''every  one  according  to  his  service,  and  according  to  his^ 
bnrden.''  By  our  varied  gifts,  positions,  offices,  and  opportunities  we 
are  as  much  set  apart  to  special  services  as  were  the  sons  of  Kohath, 
Gtfshon,  and  Merari.  One  family  bore  the  ark  and  the  other  the  holy 
reaselA,  another  had  charge  of  the  sacred  hangingsi,  and  a  third  carried  the 
boards  and  the  pillars  and  framework  of  the  tabernacle;  but  supreme 
authority  had  set  each  &mily  its  own  special  service  and  burden.  Evenr 
thns  18  it  among  ourselves,  and  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  observe  the  divine 
appointment.  "  Having  then  gifts  differing  according  to  the  grace  that  is> 
given  to  us,  whether  ministry  let  us  wait  on  our  ministiy,  or  he  that  teach^ 
eth,  on  teaching;  or  he  that  ezhorteth,  on  exhortation :  he  that  giveth, 
let  him  do  it  wiui  simplicity;  he  that  ruleth,  with  diligence;  he  that  show- 
eCh  meicnTf  with  cheenulness."  Great  evils  arise  out  of  persons  mistaking 
their  calung,  and  undertaking  things  of  which  they  are  not  capable ;  and 
on  the  other  hand  the  success  of  Christian  worl^  in  a  large  measure, 
arises  out  of  places  of  usefulness  being  filled  by  the  right  men.  In  the 
march  through  the  wilderness  the  sons  of  Herari  never  interfered  with 
the  bmdens  of  the  sons  of  Kohath,  or  the  arrangements  would  have  been 
sadly  disturbed ;  each  one  took  up  his  allott^  load  and  went  on  his 
way  rejoicing,  no  one  jostling  his  fellow.  If  we  oould  bring  all  our 
workers  into  like  order  how  like  an  army  with  banners  would  the  church 
beoome,  and  how  beautiful  would  be  her  battle-array.  ''A  place  for  every 
one  and  every  one  in  his  place "  should  be  the  practical  motto  of  our 
congregations,  and  the  people  should  be  numbiered,  not  according  to 
worldly  rank  or  self-estimate,  but  '*  every  one  according  to  his  service." 

It  is  to  be  noticed  here  Uiat  the  Levites  only  rendered  this  service, 
**  from  thirty  jears  old  and  upward,  even  unto  fifty  years  old."  We 
rejoice  that  it  is  not  so  among  us  under  the  gospel,  for  there  is  work  for 
the  young  people,  and  also  for  the  aged.  Little  children,  and  young 
men  and  maidens,  may  take  their  places  among  the  servitors  of  the  rrince 
of  peace,  and  he  who  leans  upon  his  staff  for  very  age  shall  not  find 
himself  dismissed  from  his  Master's  beloved  service. 

No  women  are  mentioned  as  bearers  of  the  tabernacle  and  its  holy 
funiiture.  It  was  a  work  for  which  they  were  scarcely  fitted,  and  an 
economy  under  which  the^  were  seldom  employed.  Here,  too,  we  have 
a  great  change,  for  there  is  neither  male  nor  female  in  Christ  Jesus,  and 
in  their  own  way  the  sisters  are  our  fellow-servants,  even  as  they  are 
onr  fellow-heirs.  Never  can  women  be  forgotten  in  any  enumeration  of 
the  forces  of  the  church.    What  could  we  do  without  them  ? 

Let  it  not  be  forgotten,  then,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  great 
Head  of  the  church,  calls  out  all  his  redeemed  to  his  service,  and  that  he 
laya  upon  each  one  a  burden  which  no  one  else  can  carry.    It  should  be 


76  METROPOLITAN?  TABE&lfiLCLE  PULPIT. 

the  joy  of  each  believer  to  know  what  it  is  that  bis  shoulders  arc  per- 
mitted to  bear)  and  then  he  should  gladly  take  up  the  ennobling  load. 
Exemption  there  can  be  none,  unless  a  man  will  dare  to  claim  that  he 
is  his  own,  and  was  never  bought  with  a  price.  Each  one  throughout 
life  must  be  ^'steadfast,  unmovable,  always  abouudiug  in  the  work  of 
the  Lord." 

III.  Thudly,  our  text  is  the  summary  of  the  chapter  in  wliich  we 
have  an  account  op  the  actual  fulfilment  of  the  Lord*s  com- 
mand BY  Moses.  He  numbered  each  family,  and  cast  up  the  total  of 
the  tribe,  at  the  same  time  moutiouing  iu  detail  the  peculiar  service 
of  each.  We  would  imitate  him  at  tliis  important  moment,  and  take  the 
census  of  those  who  are  consecrated  to  the  Lord's  own  service. 

Where  are  you,  then,  who  can  bear  the  heavier  service  of  the 
sanctuary,  carrying  its  pillars,  and  the  boards,  and  the  sockets  thereof? 
You  are  now  needed  to  speak  in  the  meetings,  to  lead  the  people  in  prayer, 
to  order  the  assemblies,  and  to  take  the  heavier  work  of  this  holy  business. 
The  Lord  Jesus  should  have  able  men  to  speak  for  him  ;  he  deserves  the 
best  of  the  best.  Now  is  the  hour,  where  is  the  man  ?  Let  no  diffidence 
or  love  of  ease  keep  one  back  who  might  make  known  the  gospel  and  win 
a  soul  for  Jesus.  By  the  curse  of  Moroz  when  they  came  not  to  the 
help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty,  we  would  charge  all  Christians  of 
influence  and  aUlity  to  hasten  to  tlie  field. 

But  where  are  you  who  can  only  car^  the  pins  and  the  cords  ?  Your 
burden  is  ligliter,  but  probably  your  strength  is  also  less,  and  lighter 
though  your  load  may  be,  the  matters  which  you  carry  are  quite  as 
essential  as  the  pillars  and  the  boards.  Where  are  you  ?  You  who 
can  say  a  few  words  to  lonely  enquiring  ones ;  yon  who  can  do  no  more 
than  pray,  where  are  yon  ?  At  your  posts,  or  idling  ?  Answer,  and 
answer  quickly,  for  time  and  need  are  pressing.  If  the  load  which 
you  can  carry  be  so  very  small  be  all  the  more  ready  to  bear  it. 

Are  you  a  lorer  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  do  you  wish  to  be  omitted 
from  the  roll-call  ?  If  so,  let  it  be  known  to  yourself,  and  stated  plainly 
to  your  conscience.  Do  not  pretend  to  be  a  labourer  and  remain  a 
loiterer,  but  openly  avow  to  your  own  soul  that  you  stand  all  the  day 
idle,  and  feel  fully  justified  iu  so  doing.  Deny  your  Lord  his  due,  but  do 
it  to  his  face.  Tell  him  openly  tbit  you  do  not  mean  to  speiid  your 
days  in  glorifying  his  name.  Do  yon  shrink  from  this  honest  refusal  of 
service  ?  You  need  not  do  so  because  it  is  at  all  unusual,  for  as  Nabal 
said^  "there  be  many  servants  nowadays  that  break  away  every  man 
from  his  master."  It  is  plain,  however,  that  you  have  no  siomadh  for  so 
clear  a  rejection  of  your  Lord.  Gome,  then,  and  take  your  place  among 
those  who  are  striving  together  to  honour  their  Lord.  At  this  timo 
your  help  will  be  precious.  Seek  a  new  anointing,  and  then  hasten  to  the 
work.  Is  not  the  Holy  Ghost  in  you  ?  Does  he  not  prompt  you  to  seek 
the  salvation  of  others?  Is  not  the  Lord  Jesus  the  model  to  which 
^aoe  conforms  you  ?  How  can  this  be  if  yon  have  little  or  no  love 
tor  the  souls  of  your  neighbours  ?  Your  pastor  calls  you,  though  far 
away  ;  by  all  our  mutual  love  he  beseeches  you  to  fulfil  your  ministry 
every  one  according  to  his  service  and  according  to  his  biu-den.  But, 
far  above  this,  your  God,  your  Saviour,  your  Comforter  call  you  with 
one  voice.     Can  you  refuse  the  heavenly  vocation  ? 


^etii0paliten  iFab^rmick  f  itljjit 


SEEKERS  DIRECTED  AND  ENCOURAGED. 


%   I 


DEUVERED  BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    TH£  METEOFOLIUN  TABERNACLE^  NEWINQTON. 


'*  And  ye  shall  seek  me,  and  find  znCj  when  ye  shall  search  for  me  with  all  your 
heart" — Jeremiah  xxiz.  13. 

This  was  a  part  of  the  direction  which  God  gave  by  his  scrTant  to  the 
captives  in  ^ibylon.  They  were  to  remain  quiet  in  Babylon  until  the 
set  time  came  for  their  deliverance,  and  then  there  would  be  granted  to 
them  a  gracious  visitation  ftom  God  which  would  move  them  to  repent- 
ance, and  incite  them  to  prayer.  Then  midit  they  be  quite  sure  that 
the  time  had  come  for  their  deliverance,  when  they  sought  the  Lord 
with  their  whole  heart.  It  is  a  general  principle  that  a  blessing  is 
about  to  come  from  the  All-Merciful  One  when  we  ai*e  moved  to 
pray  for  it  with  all  our  heart.  The  Ijord  of  grace  may  send  us  bless- 
ings before  we  search  for  them,  for  he  is  a  sovereigp,  and  often  far  out- 
strips what  we  might  have  expected,  but  his  promise  runs, ''  Seek  and 
ye  shall  find  it,"  and  it  is  with  the  promise  that  we  have  most  to  do. 
A  cheering  assurance  is  given  to  those  who  seek  in  hearty  earnest,  and 
to  this  requirement  of  heartiness  we  must  give  earnest  need. 

At  this  time  I  shall  not  attempt  instruction,  but  strive  to  drive  home 
the  truth  into  the  heart  and  conscience :.  I  pray  the  Holy  Spirit  to  help 
me,  and  I  ask  the  prayers  of  those  who  have  power  with  God,  that  the 
word  may  be  as  a  goad  to  arouse,  bestir,  and  urge  onward  those  upon 
whom  it  is  used. 

Our  address  will  be,  first,  io  ihe  unconverted ;  secondly,  to  hackdiders; 
and  thirdly,  io  this  church,  or  any  other  Christian  people. 

I.  And  first  to  the  uncoitvebted.  Our  text  has  a  word  for  you. 
"  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  find  me,  when  ye  shall  search  for  me  with 
all  your  heart."  You  have  lost  your  God  :  you  are  at  a  distance  from 
him;  your  sins  have  separated  you  from  your  Maker,  and  nothing 
will  ever  be  right  with  you — really  right — till  you  get  back  to  your 
God.  You  are  a  sheep  away  from  its  shepherd  now  ;  you  are  a  prodigal 
sou  away  from  his  father  now ;  and  you  will  never  be  right,  I  say,  till, 
as  a  sheep,  you  get  back  to  the  fold,  and  as  a  son  that  has  rebelled  you 


78  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

are  reconciled  to  your  Father.  You  want  your  God,  and  you  will  never 
be  right  till  you  find  him.  You  are  therefore  stirred  up  by  the  text  to 
**  search  for  "  him.  You  are  not  to  sit  still  with  folded  arms,  and  say, 
"  He  will  come  if  he  will."  The  prodigal  said,  •'  I  will  arise  and  go  to 
my  father/'  and  some  such  spirit  must  be  in  you,  or  we  cannot  hope 
well  of  you.    You  must  searcn  after  the  Lord. 

In  this  search  it  will  be  of  no  use  for  you  to  look  within  your  heart, 
for  it  is  empty  and  Toid  of  anything  godlike,  and  altogether  estranged 
from  God.  Expect  not  to  find  the  remedy  in  the  disease.  No  one  turns 
to  his  empty  purse  in  the  hope  that  it  will  supply  his  necessities,  for 
poverty  is  not  the  source  of  riches.  It  were  vain  to  look  for  the  living 
among  the  dead,  therefore  look  not  for  grace  and  salvation  to  yourself 
Neither  will  it  be  the  ]^th  of  wisdom  to  endeavour  to  perform  good 
works  of  your  own,  hopmg  to  set  yourself  right  by  your  own  exertions 
in  gaining  merit.  Man,  the  whole  mischief  is  that  you  are  separated 
from  God,  and  you  must  get  back  to  God  ;  the  best  works  done  while 
jou  are  at  enmity  with  your  liord  and  King  are  only  part  and  parcel 
-of  the  proud,  presumptuous  sin  which  rejects  the  Saviour  ana  sets 
4ip  itself  in  his  place.  It  would  have  been  quite  right  for  the  prodigal 
Xo  wash  himself,  and  cease  &om  feeding  the  swine  ;  it  was  most  ciesirable 
that  he  should  leave  the  harlots  and  the  riotous  living  in  which  he  had 
indulged  ;  but  if  he  had  done  all  that  and  nothing  more  the  great  mis- 
chief would  not  have  been  cured,  for  the  radical  evil  lay  in  his  being 
away  from  his  father's  house.  That  is  the  essential  wrong  in  your  case, 
*  0  unconverted  man.  You  will  never  be  perfectly  happy  and  right  till 
you  are  reconciled  to  God. 

You  are  allowed  to  search  for  him,  and  what  a  privilege  that  is.    When 

Adam  sinned,  he  could  not  go  back  to  Paradise,  for  with  a  flaming 

-  sword  in  his  hand  there  stood  the  mailed  cherub  to  keep  the  way  that 

he  might  not  touch  the  tree  of  life.    But  Gk)d,  as  far  as  the  garden  of 

his  mercy  is  concerned,  has  moved  that  fiery  sentinel,  and  Jesus  Christ 

has  set  angels  of  love  to  welcome  you  at  mercy's  gate.  You  may  come  to 

^God,  for  God  has  come  to  you.    He  has  taken  upon  himself  your  nature, 

*and  his  name  is  Emmanuel,  God  with  us.    Yes,  the  Infinite  became  a 

man,  and  he  that  builded  yonder  arch  of  heaven,  and  hung  it  with 

those  starry  lamps,  came  down  below,  to  be  subject  to  lowly  parents,  to 

work  in  a  carpenter's  shop,  and  to  die  upon  a  felon's  gibbet,  ^  the 

just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God."    Sdarch  for  him, 

and  you  must  find  him,  for  so  stands  his  own  word,  **  Ye  shall  seek  me, 

and  find  me." 

The  text,  however,  demands  that  our  searching  after  God  should  be 
done  with  all  our  heart.  There  are  several  ways  of  seeking  God  which 
must  prove  failures.  One  is  to  seek  him  with  no  heart  at  all  This  is  done 
by  those  who  take  their  book  and  read  prayers,  never  thinking  what  they 
say ;  or  who  attend  a  dissenting  place  of  worship,  and  hear  another 
person  pray,  but  never  join  in  it.  This  is  done  by  those  who  bend  the 
knee  at  eventide,  and  mutter  pious  words,  but  never  think  ;  who  rise 
in  the  morning  and  repeat  sacred  sentences,  and  never  consider ;  who 
with  regard  to  divine  things  are  as  little  thoughtful  as  if  the  gospel 
were  all  a  legend  or  an  old  wives'  fable,  not  worth  an  hour's  meditation. 
I  have  seen  young  women,  sometimes,  when  I  have  been  travelling. 


8EBKERB  DIBBCTBD  AND  ENOOXmAOED.  79 

reading  those  trashy  novels,  which  they  purchase  at  the  railway  stall, 
and  I  have  seen  them  waste  their  tears  on  some  imaginary  heroine  or 
bero,  and  yet  they  and  others  hear  abont  the  majesty  and  the  love  of 
God  without  emotion,  and  read  of  heaven  and  hell,  and  Christ  and 
God,  with  scarce  a  tear  or  a  thought.  Dear  friend,  you  will  never  find  the 
Lord  if  you  seek  him  in  a  heartless,  unthinking  manner.  God  is  not 
mocked.  If  any  of  you  have  fallen  into  a  formal  religion,  and  seek  the 
Lord  without  your  heart,  your  seeking  is  in  vain. 

Some  seek  God  mth  a  false  h$(irt.  They  flame  with  zeal,  and  would 
have  their  friends  know  it,  for  they  say  as  Jehu  did  to  Jehonadab, 
*^  Gome  with  me  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord  ";  but  their  heart  is  not 
true  towards  God.  Their  piety  is  an  affectation  of  feeling,  and  not  deep 
sold- work;  it  is  sentimentality,  and  not  the  graving  of  God's  Spirit  upon 
the  heart  Beware  of  a  false  religious  excitement— of  being  borne  up 
with  religious  gas  as  some  are,  inflated  like  balloons  by  a  revival,  only 
to  burst  by-and-by  when  most  they  need  something  to  support  them. 
God  grant  us  to  be  saved  from  a  lie  in  the  hearty  for  it  is  a  deadly 
canker,  fatal  to  all  hope  of  finding  the  Lord. 

Some  seek  him,  too,  with  a  double  heart — a  heart  and  a  hearty  as  the 
Hebrew  puts  it  They  have  a  heart  towards  God,  and  they  have  a 
heart  towards  sin :  they  have  a  heart  towards  the  pardon,  but  they  have 
also  a  heart  towards  the  transgression.  They  would  fain  serve  God  and 
Mammon :  they  would  build  an  altar  for  Jehovah,  and  stiU  keep  Dagon 
in  his  place.  If  your  heart  is  divided  you  will  be  found  wanting. 
Those  prayers  will  never  get  to  heaven  which  only  fly  upward  with  one 
wing.  If  one  oar  pulls  towards  earth  and  the  other  towards  heaven 
the  boat  of  the  soul  will  revolve  in  a  circle  of  folly,  but  never  reach  the 
happy  shore.    Beware  of  a  double  heart. 

And  some  seek  God  w^h  half  a  heart  They  have  a  little  concern, 
and  are  not  altogether  indifferent ;  they  do  think  when  they  pray,  or 
read,  or  sing,  but  the  thought  is  not  very  intense.  Superficial  in  aU 
things,  the  seed  is  sown  in  stony  ground,  and  soon  it  is  withered  away, 
because  there  is  no  depth  of  earth.    The  Lord  save  us  from  this. 

Now,  ye  that  are  seeking  Christ,  remember  that  if  you  would  find 
him  you  must  neither  seek  him  without  heart,  nor  with  a  false  heart, 
nor  with  a  double  heart,  nor  with  a  half  heart,  but  '^  Ye  shall  find  me," 
saith  the  Lord,  ''when  ye  shall  search  for  me  with  all  your  heart" 

Nobody  gets  on  in  the  world  who  is  half-hearted.  If  a  man  wants 
money  he  must  hunt  for  it  morning,  noon,  and  ni^ht  If  a  man  longs 
for  knowledge  he  cannot  take  a  bw>k  and  ladle  it  into  his  brain  widi 
a  ^oon :  he  must  read  and  study  if  he  is  to  be  a  scholar.  If  a  man 
desires  to  rise  in  such  an  age  as  this,  he  cannot  do  it  without  stem 
labour.  Great  discoverers,  eminent  artists,  and  powerful  orators  have 
ail  been  men  of  hard  work.  Handel,  who  composed  such  majestic 
music,  practised  so  often  on  his  harpsichord  that  he  hollowed  out  the 
keys  like  spoons  through  his  constant  use  of  them.  Nothing  is  to  be 
done  without  earnestness,  and  you  may  not  expect  that  God  is  to  be 
found,  and  pardon  is  to  be  received,  and  grace  to  be  had,  while  you  have 
only  one  eye  open,  and  are  not  half  awakened  out  of  sleep.  What 
did  Jesus  say  ? — **  The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,  and  the 
violent  take  it  by  force."    Heaven's  celestial  bastions  must  be  stormed 


80  METB0P0LITA17  TABERNACLK  PULPIT. 

by  downright  importunity.    You  must  take  the  knocker  of  heaven's 
gate,  and  not  drop  it  from  jour  fingers  with  a  dainty  tap,  but  hammer 
at  mercy's  door  again  ana  again  till  you  make  the  infernal  deeps 
of  despair  resound  with  your  desperate  knocks,  and  cause  heayen  itselt 
to  echo  with  your  hopefal  determination  that  you  will  enter  in,  or  know 
the  reason  why.    Oh,  knock  and  knock  and  knock  and  knock  again, 
for  the  door  shall  be  opened  when  you  knock  with  all  your  hearts. 
Sarely,  dear  friends,  if  any  men  have  reasons  to  bring  their  whole  hearts 
into  action,  you  uncouYerted  people  are  the  men.    I  am  sure  Uiat  if  I 
were  to  intimate  to  you  that  a  hundred  pounds  of  gunpowder  were 
stowed  away  in  yonder  centre  seat,  and  the  probability  was  uiat  it  would 
soon  explode,  you  would  not  remain  yery  long  in  this  Tabernacle,  but 
would  hurry  out  with  all  your  heart.    But  any  destruction  that  could 
be  caused  by  gunpowder,  as  far  as  its  effects  on  earth  arc  concerned, 
could  be  nothing  at  all  as  compared  with  the  oyerwhelmin^  destruction 
which  will  come  upon  body  and  soul  to  men  who  are  under  the  wrath 
of  Qod.    That  wrath  of  God  abides  on  every  one  of  you  who  are  un- 
converted.   God  is  angry  with  the  sinner  every  day,  and  if  it  be  so 
your  position  is  the  most  perilous  one  conceivable.    You  will  soon  die. 
JDo  not  be  vexed  with  my  reminding  you  of  it.    We  are  compelled  to 
see  it,  some  of  -us,  who  watch  lai^e  congregations.    Never  does  the 
same  assembly  meet  in  this  place  twice,  and  I  suppoEe  between  ISabbath 
and  Babbath  it  happens  almost  invariably  that  some  one  hearer  goes 
to  his  account.    Certainly  in  the  church  here  we  lose  all  the  year  round 
more  than  one  per  week  of  our  friends.    It  is  true,  then,  that  you 
will  soon  have  to  die,  and  how  will  you  bear  to  close  your  eyes  on  all 
mortal  things  without  a  hope  of  immortal  joy?    To  go  before  the 
dread  tribunal  of  your  Maker  and  your  Eedeemer  unwashed  in  the 
precious  blood,  with  all  your  sins  from  the  first  day  of  your  life  till  now 
about  your  neck  like  millstones,  to  sink  you  for  .ever,  how  can  you  bear 
it  ?    Do  think  of  this,  and  if  you  do  you  will  have  good  reason  for 
seeking  your  God  with  all  your  heart.   Remember,  also,  that  after  death 
comes  judgment    We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of 
Christ:  and  after  the  judgment  comes  the  final  award,  which  to  those 
who  have  rejected  Christ  will  be  eternal  destruction  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord  and  the  glory  of  his  power.    Do  not,  I  pmy  you,  defy  the 
wrath  of  God  or  dare  his  infinite  displeasure,    fie  himself  has  said  it, 
**  Beware  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  I  tear  you  in  pieces  and  there  be  none 
to  deliver.''    Surely  every  man  in  his  senses  who  knows  that  he  is  ex- 
posed to  such  an  imminent  risk  as  this  will  with  his  whole  heart  seek 
unto  the  Lord. 

But  why  is  it  that  when  men  search  with  all  their  heart  they  do  find 
God?  I  will  tell  you.  The  only  way  in  which  we  can  find  God  is  in 
Jesus  Christ.  There  he  meets  with  men,  but  nowhere  else,  and  to  get 
to  Jesus  Christ  there  is  notiiingon  earth  to  be  done  but  simplv  to  believe 
in  him.  It  is  a  matter  which  does  not  take  a  moment.  Believe  God's 
testimony  about  Jesus  Christ,  and  trust  yourself  with  Jesus  Christ,  and 
salvation  is  yours.  The  saving  word  is  near  thee,  in  thy  mouth,  and  in 
thy  heart,  and  that  is  why  when  men  seek  the  Lord  with  their  whole 
hearts  they  find  him,  for  before  they  called  the  Lord  was  ready  to 
answer.    Jesus  was  always  ready ;  but  other  wishes  and  other  thoughts 


6KBSBBS  DntECTSD  AKD  BETCOUIIAQKD.  81 

made  the  seeker  unready.  Sins  were  there,  and  lasts  of  tlie  flesh,  and 
all  manner  of  hamper  to  hinder  the  man.  When  a  man  comes  to  seek 
God  witti  all  his  hearty  he  lets  thoee  things  go,  and  soon  sees  Jesus. 
Then,  too,  a  man  hecomes  teachable,  for  when  a  man  is  in  earnest  to 
escape  froin  danger  he  is  glad  enough  to  be  told  by  anybody.  If  I  had 
lost  my  way,  and  feared  I  might  Ml  over  a  precipice,  I  should  be  glad 
for  the  tiniest  child  to  tell  me  my  right  road ;  and  a  man  is  likely 
to  kam  who  is  willing  to  be  taught.  This  seeking  God  with  all  his 
heart  makes  a  man  quick  in  nnderstanding.  Before  he  was  a  dolt, 
became  his  heart  was  not  in  it,  like  a  boy  at  scliool  who  does  nob 
want  to  lean.  Where  a  man  seeks  God  with  all  his  heart  yon  do  not 
need  to  pteach  fine  sermons  to  him ;  he  does  not  crave  elegance  or 
eloquence ;  no,  tell  him  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners, 
and  that  ^  there  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One,"  and  he  jumps 
at  it.  **  That  is  what  I  want,''  says  he.  The  Spirit  of  God  has  made 
him  es^er  to  learn,  and  so  he  catcher  at  onoc  at  the  blessed  message,  and 
believes  in  Jesus.  Half  a  heart,  or  no  heart,  or  a  double  heart  will 
not  see  what  is  as  plain  as  a  pikestaff,  and  wiU  not  accept  a  gospel  which 
is  as  glorions  to  God  as  it  is  simple  to  man.  I  charge  you,  then,  you 
that  aedc  the  Lord,  to  be  whole-hearted  in  it,  for  you  cannot  expect 
peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  till  all  those  straggling  affections  and 
wandering  desires  are  tied  up  into  one  bnndle,  and  your  entire  being 
is  eager  in  the  search  for  Goa  in  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  I  cannot  spare  the  sedcer  any  more  time,  fori  want  to  have  five 
minutes  with  the  backslidsb.  Backsliders,  you  have  lefi;  your  Lord. 
Perhaps  yon  have  left  the  church,  or  the  church  has  left  yon  by  putting 
you  outside  its  pale ;  and  deservedly  so,  because  you  were  a  dishonour 
to  it.  I  am  glad  yon  come  among  us  to  worship.  You  have  had  to 
lie  cut  off  from  our  fellowship  because  of  your  sad  conduct,  but  yon 
stick  to  us  still,  and  I  am  glad  to  see  you.  I  always  feel  a  hope  of  you 
so  long  as  you  love  the  old  house.  I  am  glad  that  though  you  are  not 
recognized  as  a  child  in  it,  and  do  not  feel  that  you  ought  to  be,  yet 
still  yon  wait  under  the  window  to  hear  the  family  sing.  When  the 
children  of  God  are  feasting  together  at  the  table  I  have  marked  you 
looking  on  and  wishing  yon  were  again  in  the  happy  household.  1  do 
not  know  whether  you  are  God's  children  or  not;  I  cannot  judge  your 
hearts.  I  call  yon  backsliders,  not  because  I  am  sure  you  are  really  so, 
for  it  is  very  possible  that  yon  made  a  false  profession,  and  you  after- 
wards did  what  was  natural  you  should  do,  you  broke  down  in  trying 
to  carry  ont  a  practical  falsehood.  I  will  not  try  to  judge  that,  but  I 
will  say  this  to  you, — surely,  if  there  are  any  people  in  the  world 
who  ought  to  be  whole*hearted  in  seeking  after  God,  you  are  the  people. 
If  I  am  to  be  lost,  I  pray  God  I  may  not  perish  as  an  apostate  or  a 
backslider.  O  yon  who  once  made  a  profession  of  religion,  I  cannot 
understand  how  yon  can  dare  to  think  of  the  judgment  day,  for  yon 
will  not  be  able  to  plead  ignorance,  for  you  knew  the  truth  and  pro- 
fessed to  believe  it.  Yon  will  not  be  able  to  say,  "  I  never  heard  of 
these  thingB."  No,  but  yon  came  to  the  communion  table,  and  you 
joined  the  church  ;  you  even  preached  to  otJiers»  or  you  taught  in  the 
Sundayniehool :  for  you  ran  over  at  the  mouth  about  divine  thiogs 
though  you  were  empty  at  the  heart.    How  speechless  you  will  stand 


82  HETBOPOLITAN  TABEBNACLTS  PULPIT. 

at  the  last  dreadful  day,  with  yonr  old  regimentals  hanging  aboni 
yon  to  prove  that  you  were  deserters !  Yon  will  not  be  able  to  lift  a 
finger  or  utter  a  word  in  defence  of  yourself.  And  what  will  yon 
do  when  jon  go  down  to  hell  ?  The  prophet  represents  the  king 
of  Babylon  as  going  there,  and  as  he  descended  the  little  petty  princes 
whom  he  put  to  death,  who  were  lying  there  in  their  dungeons  in  the 
X  I  prison  of  hell,  rose,  and  leaning  on  their  elbows,  looked  at  him,  and 
said, ''  Art  thou  become  like  one  of  ns  ?  "  Methinks  I  hear  the  drunkard 
rising  up  and  saying  to  you,  "  What,  and  are  yon  here  after  all  ?  Yon 
used  to  preach  sobriety  to  me,  and  warn  me  of  the  drunkard's  doom." 
Ah,  my  nearers,  hypocrites  are  damne^s  well  as  drunkards.  Then 
will  speak  the  woman  whom  you  talkedAout  reclaiming,  and  what  a 
sneer  she  will  meet  yon  with,  and  say,  ''Yon  needed  a  refnge  yourself, 
you  hypocrite !"  Then,  too,  will  speak  your  neighbours  who  never  went 
to  a  place  of  worship,  whom  you  thought  were  so  very  bad,  because 
yon  went  there  and  forgot  what  you  heard.  They  will  say,  ''This  is 
what  came  of  your  going  to  the  Tabernacle,  and  hearing  Spnrgeon !  Is 
this  the  end  of  your  joining  the  church,  and  going  to  the  communion 
table  ?*'  What  answer  can  you  give  when  those  eyes  shall  leer  on  you, 
and  those  lips  shall  hiss  in  derision  of  yon  ?  Others  shall  say, 
"  I  never  had  the  opportunities  you  had ;  I  never  was  warned  as  yon 
were ;  I  never  rejected  Christ  as  yon  have  done :  I  never  stained 
the  robes  of  his  church  and  wounded  him  anew  in  the  house  of 
his  friends,  as  you  have  done."  Then  they  will  insult  and  triumph 
over  yon.  If  a  prince  of  the  blood  were  sent  to  a  common  gaol, 
what  a  misery  it  would  be  to  him.  I  pity  every  man  who  has  to 
work  upon  the  treadmill,  so  far  as  he  can  deserve  pity,  but  most  of  all 
the  man  who  has  been  delicately  brought  up  and  scarce  knows  what 
labour  means,  for  it  must  be  hard  indeed  to  him.  Ah,  you  delicate 
sons  and  daughters  of  Zion,  you  whose  mouths  were  never  stained 
with  a  curse,  and  whose  hands  have  never  been  defiled  with  outward 
sin,  if  your  hearts  be  not  right  with  God,  yon  must  take  yonr  place 
with  the  profane  and  share  with  them.  What  say  you  to  this?  Do 
you  say,  "  I  would  fain  return  and  find  acceptance  in  Christ"?  To  von 
the  text  speaks  expressly.  Then  shall  yon  "  find  me  when  ye  iwall 
search  for  me  with  all  your  heart." 

III.    My  last  word  is  to  you,  my  brethren  in  Christ,  and  esnecially 

TO  YOU,  THE  HsifBEBS  OF  THIS  CHUBCH.    Thus  saith  the  Lord,  *'  Ye 

shall  seek  me,  and  find  me,  when  ye  shall  search  for  me  with  all  your 

heart."    Brethren,  we  want  the  Lord  to  be  always  among  ns.    We 

have  had  his  presence  very  graciously,  but  I  am  always  troubled  lest 

any  sin  of  ours  should  cause  him  to  depart.    I  dread  anything  like  a 

decline  in  zeal  and  ardour,  and  generosity,  and  prayerfulness,  and  holy 

living  among  any  of  ns,  lest  the  glory  should  aepart  and  Ichabod  be 

nvTitten  on  our  walls.    We  hunger  for  onr  God,  for  I  trust  we  can  say 

[we  love  him.    Can  you  say  that?    I  heard — this  last  week — a  story 

'  about  that  mighty  preacher,  Bobert  Hall,  which  touched  me  as  I  heard 

it     A  friend  related  that  Bobert  Hall  was  riding  one  day  through  a  little 

hamlet  on  his  way  to  preach  at  a  country  town.  It  snowed  very  heavily, 

and  Mr.  Hall  wa^  paeusing  through  the  village,  unaware  of  the  state  of 

.  the  road  beyond.    A  Christian  man,  who  knew  him  well,  cried  out^ 


SEEKERS  DIRECTED  AKD  EHCOUEAGED. 


83 


**  Mr.  Hall,  yoa  mnst  not  go  farther ;  the  snow  is  very  deep,  yon  cannot 
get  through  it ;  yon  must  come  in/'  Mr.  Hall  stopped  in  the  house  and 
rested  awhile.    He  looked  out  of  the  window,  and  saw  that  it  kept  on 
snowing.      He  looked  out  again,  and  it  snowed  more  heavily  than 
before,  and  his  friend  said  to  him,  ^  You  cannot  go,  Mr.  Hall ;  you 
cannot  get  there.'*    But  said  he,  "  Sir,  I  must  go."    "  Sir,'*  said  the 
pood  man,  ^*  you  cannot,  it  is  impossible.    You  cannot  get  to  the  place ; 
the  roads  are  blocked  up."    So  the  great  preacher  agreed  to  remain  if 
he  could  deliver  his  sermon.    " I  must  preach,  sir;  I  must  preach,  sir* 
I  cannot  remain  unless  I  pogtoh."    His  host  went  round  the  hamlet, 
knocked  at  the  doors  of  thKottages,  and  got  a  few  people  together' 
into  his  room.    Mr.  Hall  preached  a  wonderful  sermon.    The  good  man 
seemed  to  mount  to  heaven  in  preaching  from  the  words,  '^  I  saw  no 
temple  therein."  When  the  people  had  gone  home  he  said  to  his  friend, 
*'  My  dear  sir,  I  am  afraid  I  am  not  a  child  of  God."     '^  Why,  Mr. 
Hall,  how  can  you  sav  such  a  thing  as  that  ?"    **  But  I  am  afraid  I  am 
u  hypocrite,  sir."    '*  Well,  nobody  else  is  afraid  of  that  about  you,  Mr. 
Hall,  and  I  cannot  think  how  you  can  give  way  to  such  a  notion." 
*^  Ah,  but  I  want  to  ask  you  a  question,  sir.    What  do  you  think  is  a 
sare  sign  that  a  man  is  a  child  of  Gk)d?"    *^  Mr.  Hall,"  said  the  good 
man,  '*  you  ought  to  know  better  than  I  do.    I  cannot  undertake  to  in- 
&tmet  yon."    ''I  want  to  know,  sir,  and  shall  be  obliged  by  your  judg- 
ment," said  Mr.  Hall.    ''  Well,"  said  the  man, ''  this  is  what  I  think 
is  a  sure  sign ;  if  a  man  really  hv$s  God  he  must  be  a  child  of  God, 
and  there  must  have  been  a  change  in  him."    **  Thank  you,  sir;  thank 
YOU,  sir,  for  that  word,"  said  Mr.  Hall ;  '^  that  is  just  what  I  wanted. 
Love  God,  sir?    I  love  him  with  my  whole  soul."    ''And,"  said  the 
jrood  host,  in  talking  to  my  friend,  **  you  should  have  heard  how  Mr. 
Hall  went  on  about  God ;  it  was  wonderful  to  hear  him,  sir.    He  praised 
him  above  all  things,  he  said  all  that  was  good  about  him,  and  he  kept 
saying,  'I  cannot  help  loving  such  a  being  as  God  is,  and  if  that  proves 
that  I  am  saved  then  I  am  sure  of  it,  for  I  must  love  him.' "    Now,  my 
brethren,  we  love  God  with  all  our  hearts,  and  therefore  we  desire 
to  have  him  glorified  in  our  midst.    Do  you  not,  my  brethren,  vehe- 
mently desire  this  ?    I  know  you  do.    How,  then,  shall  the  Lord  be 
honoured  ?    He  may  be  glorified  by  holier  living.     How  is  that  to  be 
done  ?    The  text  says  we  shall  find  him  if  we  seek  him  with  all  our 
hearts,  and  in  finding  him  we  shdl  find  holiness.    I  have  given  up  the 
idea  that  I  shall  ever  get  a  church  in  which  all  hearts  will  seek  God 
earnestly.    I  know  you  will  not  all  be  alive  and  fall  of  fervour,  for 
come  of  you  are  a  dishonour  to  the  church.     You  will  never  help 
ns,  but  you  will  remain  among  us  as  dead  weights.    How  I  wish  I 
could  hope  otherwise,  but  I  dare  not  deceive  myself  or  you.    I  do  ex- 
pect, however,  that  all  who  have  the  life  of  God  really  in  their  souls  will 
give  their  whole  hearts  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  will  do  it  always 
intensely.    I  look  to  them  to  seek  the  Lord  by  prayer,  praying  much 
for  God  to  be  glorified,  and  to  back  up  their  prajrer  by  efibrt,  cheerfully 
seeking  to  take  their  full  share  in  the  extension  of  the  Redeemer's 
kingdom. 

Brethren,  did  Christ  die  for  you  ?    Yes  or  no  ?    If  he  did,  then,  in 
the  name  of  common  honesty,  live  unto  him,  for  you  cannot  be  your 


84  KETROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

own ;  he  has  bonght  yon  with  a  price.  When  yon  were  baptized  in  the 
name  of  The  Sacred  Three,  did  yon  mean  it?  If  yon  did,  in  the 
name  of  tmth,  lire  onto  God,  for  yon  then  confessed  that  yon  were  dead 
to  the  world  and  bnried  with  Christ,  that  henceforth  yon  should  live 
nnto  him.  When  last  time  yon  came  to  the  communion  table,  did  you  * 
really  believe  that  Jesus  gave  himself  for  von,  and  did  you  know  that 
you  feasted  upon  his  flesh  and  drank  his  blood  by  faith  ?  Then,  I  say, 
m  the  name  of  both  honesty  and  truth,  live  as  souls  should  live  who 
have  eaten  better  than  angels'  meat,  and  have  Christ  within  them. 

I  try  to  speak  as  earnestly  as  I  can,  but  usually  when  I  reach  my 
home  I  say  to  myself,  ''What  are  you  at?  You  do  not  arouse  those 
people,  or  yourself  either.  You  are  getting  dull  and  old :  you  are  not 
half  so  zealous  as  you  used  to  be  in  your  younger  days."  I  try  to  stick 
big  pins  into  mvself  in  a  spiritual  faishion,  to  wake  myself  up  again,  for 
fear  I  should  fall  into  the  same  drowsy  state  as  some  I  know  of,  whose 
preaching  is  little  better  than  articulate  snoring.  They  are  sound 
asleep,  and  as  a  natural  consequence  their  people  are  asleep  too.  If  this 
Book  be  true,  the  most  of  us  are  not  living  as  we  ought  to  live.  If 
there  be  a  heaven,  we  are  not  living  in  the  joy  which  the  hope  of  it 
ought  to  inspire.  If  there  be  a  hell,  and  some  of  our  own  chilaren  are 
going  down  to  it,  we  do  not  act  towards  them  as  if  we  believed  in 
their  danger.  We  are  acting  like  monsters,  and  not  like  men,  if  we 
suffer  our  fellow-creatures  to  be  lost  without  lilting  a  finger  for  their 
salvation.  Awake  I  arise  I  my  brethren.  Oh,  church  of  Otoi  in  this 
place,  and  church  of  God  everywhere,  shake  thyself  from  the  bonds  of 
thy  neck.  Arise,  and  sit  down  on  thy  throne  of  power,  0  daughter  of 
Zion.  Put  on  thy  strength  as  in  the  ancient  days,  for  strength  shall 
be  thine  if  thou  searchest  after  the  Lord  with  all  thine  heart.  God 
grant  that  as  a  church  we  may  be  thoroughly  earnest  in  seeking  for  a 
display  of  his  saving  power,  and  he  shall  have  the  glory.    Amen, 

POBTiOK  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sebkon: — ^Matthew  zi. 


Htmns  from  "Oub  Own  Hticn  Book" — 429,  503,  649. 


TO  MY  CHURCH  AND  PEOPLE. 

Deab  Feibnds, — ^I  am  hoping  and  praying  that  the  special  services  at  the 
Tabernacle  may  excel  all  that  have  gone  before.  To  uige  jou  to  the  utmost 
earnestness  about  them,  I  have  written  the  short  sermon  of  this  week.  It 
would  give  me  great  joy  to  hear,  as  I  feel  sure  I  shall,  that  in  this  as  in  all  the 
other  works  of  the  church  you  are  abundantly  filled  with  zeal  and  constancy. 
My  one  concern  is  lest  the  Lord's  work  should  suffer  by  mj  absence ;  I  entreat 
you,  do  not  permit  it  to  be  so  in  any  one  point  or  degree.  > 

The  damp  and  dull  weather,  which  has  reached  us  even  Bvei  has  somewhat 
retarded  my  progress  to  health  and  strength,  so  that  I  remM[^  ^  ^^  feeble 
traveller;  but  yet  I  am  greatly  improved,  and  feel  that  my  mincWid  spirits  are 
the  better  for  the  rest  To  aU  of  yon,  from  the  bottom  of  my  hel''^  i  send  my 
sincere  love  in  Christ  Jesus.  \ 

Yours  to  serve  while  there  remains  any  life  in  me,    • 
Mentone,  Feb.  6,  1879.  C.  H.  SPUbG^EON. 


i 


|ttcti[0jolitmi  ilab^maHe  f  «l^ 


A  SERMON  UPON  ONE  NOTHING  BY  ANOTHER  NOTHING. 


%      l^niUH 


DELIYEBED  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTOW. 


«  Though  I  be  nothing."— 2  CorinthianB  zii.  11. 

The  diTine  discipline  had  succeeded  well  with  the  apostle  Paul.  There 
was  danger  of  his  being  exalted  above  measure  by  the  abundance  of  the 
lerelation  which  he  received,  and  therefore  there  was  given  him  a  thorn 
in  the  flesh,  a  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  him :  this  trial  fully  answered 
its  purpose,  and  Paul  remained  a  lowly-minded  servant  of  Jesus  Christ. 
His  humility  comes  out  in  the  incident  before  us.  He  was  compelled 
to  defend  himself  and  prove  his  apostleship,  and  this  he  does  very 
thoroughly  but  very  moaestly.  In  the  midst  of  strong  expressions  ot 
self-assertion,  every  one  of  them  truthful  and  none  of  them  exaggerated, 
his  true  humility  is  as  manifest  as  if  he  had  been  unveiling  his  inward 
faults,  or  vrriting  his  '*  Confessions."  Not  Augustine  at  his  *^  Retract- 
ations "  is  more  humble  than  Paul  in  his  self-vindication.  It  is  easy 
for  a  man  to  use  lowly  expressions  when  he  is  writing  about  his  own 
faults  and  the  grace  of  God  which  saved  him  from  them ;  but  it  is  not 
80  easy  to  maintain  the  virgin  blush  of  modesty  when  called  in  necessary 
self-defence  to  vindicate  one's  own  character,  and  mention  one's  own 
achievements.  Indignation  is  generally  aroused  in  such  a  case,  and 
humOity  creeps  out  of  the  way :  the  more  wonderful  is  it  then  to  find 
Paul  esteeming  himself  as  nothing,  even  when  answering  the  cruel 
depreciations  of  his  opposers.  Re^  verse  eleven,  and  see  the  lowly 
heart  of  the  man — "  I  am  become  a  fool  in  glorying ;  ye  have  compelled 
me :  for  I  ought  to  have  been  commended  of  you :  for  in  nothing  am  I 
behind  the  very  chiefest  apostles,  though  I  be  nothing."  Beloved,  when 
we  have  to  take  the  same  medicine,  may  it  have  as  sure  an  effect  upon 
us  as  it  had  upon  Paul.  If  it  should  be  needful  for  us  to  be  buffeted,  or 
to  endure  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  may  the  affliction  be  as  much  sanctified 
to  its  end  as  it  was  in  his  case.  Alas,  I  am  afraid  that  some  have  many 
thorns  in  the  flesh,  and  yet  are  not  humble^  many  buffetings,  and  yet 
are  lifted  up ;  and,  what  is  worse  still,  they  have  never  enjoyed  a  peri- 
lous abundance  of  revelation  to  lift  them  up,  but  rather  they  have  been 
surfeited  with  an  abundance  of  that  which  is  gross  and  earthy,  and  yet 
Ko.  1,458. 


86  METROPOLITAN  TARERNACLK  PUTiPIT. 

they  arc  not  humble.  Though  they  have  no  good  thing  to  glory  in,  they 
have  exalted  themselves  above  their  brethren,  and  have  spoken  harshlj 
of  them  and  to  them,  «ind  have  been  exceeding  high  and  haughty  in  all 
that  they  have  done.  Such  persons  may  expect  to  be  stayed  in  their 
gtorying  ere  long.  May  God  grant  that  a  little  thorn  may  be  enough  for 
us,  that  one  touch  of  the  lancet  may  suffice  to  let  out  our  proud  blood, 
that  a  little  buffeting  by  the  messenger  of  Satan  may  avail  to  prevent 
our  being  exalted  above  measure  ;  for  hath  not  the  Lord  said,  '*  Be  ye 
not  as  the  horse,  or  as  the  mule,  which  have  no  understanding :  whose 
mouth  must  be  held  in  with  bit  and  bridle*'?  A  little  trial  ought  to 
suffice  to  ballast  us,  for  I  am  sure  we  have  nothing  so  abundant  in  the 
way  of  revelations  and  spiritual  attainments  that  we  should  feel  in* 
clined  at  all  to  glory.  It  is  a  great  shame  if  we  have  fallen  into  the 
danger  which  Paul  escaped,  and  have  fallen  into  it  without  rhyme  or 
reason.     He  who  is  proud  about  nothing  is  a  fool  in  capitals. 

I  desire  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  although  Paul  was 
undoubtedly  humble,  and  the  discipline  of  God  had  helped  to  keep  him 
so,  yet  there  is  not  a  particle  of  cant  in  any  of  his  expressions.  There 
is  no  trace  of  the  whine  of  hypocrites,  revealing  rather  than  concealing: 
j  their  self-conceit.  Humility  has  been  well  defined  as  having  a  just 
I  estimate  of  yourself.  There  is  no  humility  in  such  self-depreciation  as 
would  lead  yon  to  deny  what  God  has  wrought  in  you,  or  wrought  by 
you  :  that  might  be  wilful  falsehood,  and  certainly  would  be  grievoas 
error.  Falsehood  is  not  a  constituent  element  of  anything  that  is  grra- 
cious ;  we  are  not  required  to  call  five  talents  one  in  order  U>  be  humble. 
If  we  make  a  fair  and  just  estimate  of  ourselves  we  shall  certainly 
discover  nothing  therein  to  boast  about,  and  we  shall  not  then  be  likely 
to  bon*ow  fVom  the  lips  of  others  words  and  confessioiw  whioh  do  not 
accurately  represent  our  character,  or  state  our  feelings;  and  ought  not, 
therefore,  to  bo  employed  by  us.  The  mimicry  of  humility  is  a  very 
common  piece  of  masquerading.  You  shall  find  persons  speaking  ia 
very  lowly  terms  of  themselves,  but  they  do  not  expect  yon  to  believe 
them.  A  brother  who  has  called  himself  worldly  in  prayer,  if  you 
should  tell  him  in  private  conversation  that  you  were  glad  to  hear  his 
truthful  description  of  himself,  would  not  take  it  ataU  kindly,  but  would 
ask  who  and  what  are  you  that  you  should  judge  him ;  he  is  as  spiritual 
as  you  are,  and  perhaps  more  so.  A  monk,  we  remember,  confessed 
that  he  was  so  great  a  sinner  that  he  had  broken  all  the  command- 
ments, and  when  afterwards  one  of  his  friends  began  to  charge  him 
with  breaking  first  one  commandment  and  then  another,  the  hypocrite 
aveiTed  that  he  had  not  broken  any  one  of  them.  Men  arc  so  little 
humble  that  when  they  smite  on  their  breasts  they  may  be  still  boast- 
ing in  their  hearts.  Mock  humility  creeps  around  us,  cringing  and 
fawning,  but  every  honest  man  loathes  it,  and  we  may  be  sure  that 
God  loathes  it  too.  Now,  if  the  apostle  had  said  that  he  was  not  an 
{ipostlo  at  all,  that  he  had  never  suffered  anything  for  Christ,  or  done 
any  tiling  to  spread  the  gospel,  he  would  have  been  speaking,  as  some 
say,  *'  humbly  ";  but  this  i^a  mistake, — ^he  would  have  been  tolling  lies. 
He  thercforo  does  nothing  of  the  kind.  He  says  that  he  is  not  a  whit 
behind  the  very  cliief  of  the  apostles,  speaks  of  his  sufferings  and  his 
toils,  and  of  the  manifestations  of  divine  grace  to  his  soul ;  aud  3'ot  for 


A  SERMON  UPON  ONE  NOTHINO  BY  ANOTHEB  NOTHING.     87 

all  that  he  finishes  his  detail  of  experience  hy  saying,  "  Though  I  be 
nothing."  Brethren,  do  not  deny  what  God  has  done  for  you,  or  by 
yoQ.  Look  at  all  of  it  and  yalne  it,  and  bless  the  Lord  for  it ;  but  still 
when  an  is  said  and  done  yon  must — ^nay,  I  tmstyou  cheerfnlly  will- 
come  back  to  this, "  Though  I  be  nothing."  Tmth-speaking  all  the 
while,  and  not  nsin^  a  good  expression  for  a  sort  of  religions  fashion's 
sake,  bat  because  it  is  deeply  felt  to  be  quite  as  true  that  you  are 
nothing,  as  it  is  true  that  God  has  blessed  you. 

1  shall  endeayour  at  this  time,  as  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  help  me,  to 
q)eak  upon  this  very  remarkable  expression  of  the  apostle,  "  Though  I 
he  nothing."  0  that  both  the  preacher  and  his  hearers  may  be  able  to 
enter  into  the  spirit  and  soul  of  the  text  and  make  it  all  our  own. 

I.  And  first,  we  shall  say  of  it  that  this  was  othbr  men's  estimate 
OF  HOC  Every  one  did  not  yalue  the  great  apostle  as  we  do,  but  many 
spoke  ill  of  him.  Perhaps  he  meant,  though  I  be  nothing  in  the  opinion 
of  my  detractors.  I  hardly  think  he  so  intended  it,  but  still  he  may 
hare  included  that  in  its  meaning.  **  I  am  not,"  saith  he,  '*  a  whit 
behind  the  chiefest  of  the  apostles,  though  in  the  judgment  of  others 
I  be  nothing."  I  mention  this  point,  first,  because  it  may  comfort  any 
earnest  servant  of  God  who  is  faithfully  serving  his  Master,  but  finds 
himself  undervalued  and  despised  by  those  from  whom  he  expected' 
sympathy  and  help. 

^n  may  be  starting  in  the  Christian  life  as  a  young  man  full  of  zeal' 
and  fervour ;  but  you  dwell  among  a  people  who  count  you  hot-headed 
and  self-conceited,  and  do  their  best  to  thwart  you.  You  are  like 
Joseph  among  his  brethren,  and  the  archers  sorely  shoot  at  you  ;  you 
are  looked  upon  as  a  dreamer,  and  a  pretentious  fool.  Tour  companions 
are  as  rough  to  you  as  were  David's  brethren  when  he  came  down  to 
the  host :  they  charge  you  with  pride  and  wilfulness.  Be  comforted 
about  this  trial  if  you  are  indeed  a  true-hearted  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ, 
for  if  Paul  heard  that,  in  the  judgment  of  many,  his  personal  presence 
was  weak  and  his  speech  was  contemptible,  and  if  many  other  eminent 
men  have  been  frowned  upon  and  misjudged,  you  need  not  wonder  if 
the  like  thing  happens  to  you.  It  is  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the- 
yoke  in  his  youth ;  bear  it  and  profit  by  it. 

The  case  is  harder  with  older  servants  of  God.  After  a  long  life  of 
usefulness  the  churches  often  forget  all  that  a  man  was  and  did  in  his' 
vigorous  times,  and  now  that  the  elasticity  of  his  mind  has  abated, 
they  treat  him  with  indifference.  His  ministry  is  now  more  solid  and 
full  of  experimental  teaching ;  an  ungenerous  race  of  hearers  do  not 
say  that  his  preaching  has  become  weighty,  but  they  complain  that  the 
old  gentleman  is  "  very  heavy,"  and  they  cannot  endure  his  prosiness. 
The  good  old  man,  who  deserves  to  be  honoured  by  his  congregation, 
runs  the  risk  of  being  elbowed  out,  and  reckoned  as  a  worn-out  nobody. 
Yon  must  not  marvel,  my  dear  brother,  if  foolish  lovers  of  novelty 
should  so  treat  you  ;  it  is  inexcusable,  and  yet  it  is  too  common.  It 
wounds  your  heart  and  makes  you  wish  to  be  gone  to  the  better  land ; 
but  do  not  let  it  too  sorely  vex  vou,  for  the  same  thing  happened  to  him 
at  whose  feet  you  would  be  glad  to  sit — I  mean  the  apostle  of  the 
Gentiles — who,  when  he  was  ''  such  an  one  as  Paul  the  aged,'*  knew  that 
to  many  he  was  nothing. 


d3  XSTAOPOUTAir  TABSftVACLE  PTJLPII. 

la  following  np  the  subject  we  obaenre  that  Paul  was  nothmg,  fii*st, 
in  the  estimation  of  hatred.  His  Jewish  brethren,  when  he  was  with 
them^  the  slare  of  their  prejudices  and  an  adyocate  of  their  principles, 
thought  him  some  great  one.  He  was  a  leader  among  them,  a  Pharisee 
among  the  Pharisees,  a  man  deeply  taught  in  rabbinical  lore,  a  scholar 
to  be  gloried  in,  a  zealot  to  be  trusted.  Then  Paul  was  something ;  buc 
when  he  went  over  to  the  hated  sect  and  became  a  worshipper  of  the 
Nazarene,  he  was  nothing.  The  bigot  spat  at  the  very  mention  of  his 
name.  He  was  an  apostate,  a  worthless  fellow,  a  madman,  a  nothing. 
He  became  an  alien  and  worse,  a  castaway  and  a  cnrse.  Such  is  in  a 
measure  the  case  when  men  become  thoroughly  and  brayely  followers  of 
Jesus.  The  worid*s  market  price  of  them  lalls  a  hundred  per  cent.  If 
a  scientific  man  is  of  infidel  principles  he  is  cried  up  as  an  eminent 
thinker  and  discoverer ;  but  should  he  be.  a  true  Christian,  and  know 
twenty  times  as  much  as  his  fellows,  he  is  a  person  of  antiquated  views 
and  narrow  notions.  If  a  preacher  proclaims  novel  heresies,  then  he  is 
a  man  of  advanced  thought,  a  leader  abreast  of  the  times,  though,  in- 
deed, there  may  be  nothing  in  him  but  an  a&ctation  of  singularity 
imd  a  lack  of  reverence  for  the  Word  of  God. 

He  who  is  content  with  the  exceeding  broadness  of  the  divine 
testimony,  and  asks  no  greater  liberty  than  that  of  the  truth,  is  in 
certain  quarters  reported  to  have  narrowed  his  soul,  and  to  be  possessed 
of  but  slender  intellect.  Of  conrse,  it  always  haa  been  so ;  but  methinks 
it  is  easier  to  call  a  man  a  fool  than  to  prove  him  to  be  so,  and  it 
is  a  great  deid  easier  to  boast  of  your  own  wonderful  powers  and  the 
ezpansiveness  of  your  mind,  and  the  great  progress  that  you  have  made 
in  thought,  than  it  will  be  to  convince  really  thoughtful  and  experienced 
men  who  walk  with  Qod  that,  after  all,  the  new  is  better  than  the  old, 
and  that  the  inventions  of  man*s  fa.ncy  are  better  than  the  doctrines  of 
divine  revelation.  That  is,  however,  the  custom  of  men  who,  being 
^ort  of  arguments,  seize  upon  the  weapons  of  contempt.  If  you  are 
not  of  their  way  of  thinking  you  are  not  a  thinker  at  all.  If  you  will 
chime  in  with  their  notions,  vou  are  worthy  of  all  honour ;  but  if  yon 
differ  from  them,  you  must  be  nothing.  Paul  was  marked  at  zero  by 
the  measurement  of  those  who  hated  him. 

He  was  also  nothing  in  the  valuation  of  envy.  There  arose  Gvcsi  in 
the  church  of  Clirist  certain  brethren  who  loved  pre-eminence,  and 
found  the  apostle  already  in  the  highest  place.  False  brethren  claimed 
to  be  apostles,  and,  in  order  to  maintain  their  pretensions,  they  Ques- 
tioned the  ^postleship  of  Paul.  They  strove  to  rise  by  pulling  aown 
one  who  was  superior  to  themselves.  Who  was  Paul  ?  they  asked. 
He  could  write  a  weighty  and  powerful  letter,  but  if  you  came  to  listen 
to  him,  his  weak  eyes,  his  short  stature,  and  his  cramped  resolve  to 
know  nothing  but  Christ  crucified,  caused  him  to  make  a  sorry  figure 
BB  an  orator.  They  themselves  with  enticing  words  and  fair  speeches 
boasted  that  they  far  excelled  him.  Where  was  the  excellency  of  his 
words  ?  Where  was  the  depth  of  his  wisdom  ?  He  was  nothing,  and  they 
sneered  at  him,  and  exalted  themselves.  The  apostle  knew  all  this,  and 
was  by  no  means  crushed  thereby,  for  he  could  stand  even  before  envy. 
Ah,  brethren,  envy  has  a  wonderful  skill  in  the  cruel  arts  of  slander 
and  detraction.    If  the  envious  cannot  quench  the  sun,  they  can  at 


A  SERMON  UPON  ONE  NOTHING  BY  ANOTHBH  NOTHING.     60 

]enst  point  to  his  spots,  or  raise  a  dast  to  blind  men's  eyes  to  his  bright- 
ness. Many  a  hero  of  the  truth  has  been  despised,  for  the  yery  reason 
which  onght  to  haye  secured  him  honour.  It  is  an  unfortunate  thing 
for  some  men,  if  they  love  their  own  ease,  that  they  have  risen  to  con- 
5:picuons  nsefolness,  for  in  a  middle  place  thev  might  hare  been  allowed 
to  be  something,  but  jealousy  is  now  resolvea  to  rate  them  at  nothing. 
If  Paul  had  wanted  to  be  comfortable,  and  repose  had  been  his  object, 
he  had  only  to  subside  into  the  common  ranks  of  the  lukewarm  Lao- 
diceans,  and  then  he  would  have  been  far  less  plucked  at :  zeal  and  holi- 
ness, if  they  are  accompanied  with  a  measure  of  suocoss,  will  secure  a 
man  that  contempt  among  the  envious  which  is  the  homage  that  evil 
hearts  must  of  necessity  pay  to  goodness. 

Again,  the  apostle  was,  evidently,  nothing  to  thaee  who  desired  that 
Chri&tianiiy  should  make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh  Certain  brethren  had 
come  in  among  the  believers  who  brought  with  them  human  wis- 
dom, and  thought  therewith  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  cause 
the  offence  of  the  cross  to  cease.  Gnosticism  was  the  ^modern  thought" 
of  the  apostle's  age,  and  of  the  era  which  followed  it.  It  was  a  trans- 
lation of  the  gospel  into  the  language  of  the  schools,  and  the  evapora- 
tion of  its  true  life  and  meaning  m  the  process.  Our  apostle  abhorred 
the  wisdom  of  words.  '*  We  use,"  saith  he,  **  great  plainness  of  speech." 
He  tore  the  mask  from  off  those  half  heathens  who  made  the  cross  of 
Christ  of  none  effect  by  their  philosophizing,  and  therefore  they  retali- 
ated by  declaring  that  he  was  not  a  man  of  great  mind,  that  in  fact  he 
was  notfaine.  Other  teachers  arose  who  were  opposed  to  the  philoso- 
phical way,  out  they  must  needs  take  the  way  of  tradition  and  ritualism, 
declaring  that  men  must  be  circumcised,  or  else  their  faith  in  Christ 
would  be  of  no  avail.  Such  persons  dwelt  much  upon  the  observance  of 
holy  days  and  months,  and  so  on,  and  thus  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  the 
apostle  till  he  came  forth  and  cri2d,  **  I  Paul  say  unto  you,  that  if  ye 
b3  circumcised,  Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing.  By  the  deeds  of  the 
law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified."  By  declaring  the  clear  plain  gospel  of 
salvation  by  grace  through  faith  he  kid  the  axe  at  the  root  of  all 
ritnaiism,  as  he  had  before  done  at  the  root  of  all  rationalism.  Straight- 
way the  High  Churchmen  discovered  that  Paul  was  nothing.  He 
might  have  decorated  the  gospel  with  learning,  and  made  it  palatable 
to  the  Greeks,  or  he  might  have  cramped  it  with  tradition,  and  made 
it  agreeable  to  the  Jews,  but  he  scorned  to  do  either.  When  Peter 
went  a  little  in  the  Jewish  direction  Paul  **  withstood  him  to  his  face, 
because  he  was  to  be  blamed ;"  and  therefore  some  cried  up  Cephas,  but 
cried  down  Paul,  and  according  to  their  account  he  was  just  nothing. 

May  the  Lord  grant  to  all  of  us  who  preach  the  gospel  a  willingness 
to  be  lightly  esteemed.  The  Lord  give  us  all  grace  to  be  fools  in  the 
estimation  of  modem  wise  men.  May  we  have  enough  backbone  of 
holy  firmness  to  be  conservative  of  the  old  truth,  and  to  be  careless  of 
the  ridicule  of  the  worldly  wise.  May  we  have  enough  loyalty  to  Christ 
to  be  willing  to  be  despised  for  his  sake,  manliness  enough  not  to  care 
one  atom  whether  we  are  in  honour  or  dishonour  so  long  as  our  con- 
science is  clear  that  we  have  faithfully  preached  Jesus  Christ  and  him 
crucified.  The  day  shall  come  when  he  who  has  borne  the  most 
obloquy  for  Christ  will  be  esteemed  the  happiest  and  most  honoured 


90  METROFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

man  alive ;  and  when  he  who  was  counted  the  greatest  fool  for  Christ 
shall  he  acknowledged  to  be  among  the  wisest  of  men,  and  shall  shine 
as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever.  Will  we  not  cheerfallj  consent  to  be 
nothing  for  his  sake  who  made  himself  of  no  reputation  for  our  sakes  ? 
Will  we  not  with  John  rejoice  that  he  must  increase  and  that  we  most 
decrease  ?  It  is  our  joj  to  see  him  all  in  all,  and  if  any  shame  or  con- 
tempt borne  by  us  could  uplift  his  name  but  one  hair's  breadth,  we 
would  rejoice  therein  with  J07  unspeakable.  What  is  man's  opinion 
after  all  ?  The  balances  are  not  those  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the  weights 
are  not  those  of  justice.  The  verdict  of  earth  will  be  reversed  by  the 
judgment  of  heaven,  for  that  which  is  highly  esteemed  among  men  is 
abomination  in  the  sight  of  Ood.  When  any  measure  of  injustice 
grieves  us,  we  should  console  ourselves  with  the  remembrance  that  so 
persecuted  they  the  prophets  that  were  before  us,  and  yet  the  prophets 
have  lost  no  leal  honour,  so  also  despised  they  the  Master,  and  yet  his 
thtone  has  lost  none  of  its  glory. 

Thus  have  we  discussed  a  meaning  which  some  have  seen  in  the 
text,  and  if  it  be  not  the  first  sense  of  it,  at  any  rate  it  is  a  truth 
which  may  be  profitably  remembered. 

II.  But  now,  secondly,  we  have  here  in  the  words  of  the  apostle 
HIS  OWN  BSTMATB  OP  HiMSELP.  "  Though  I  be  nothing."  Our  first 
observation  upon  the  apostle's  valuation  of  himself  is  that  it  is  a  very 
greut  c&rrectum  upon  his  original  estimate  of  himself y  for  in  former 
days  he  carried  a  nigh  sail,  and  would  by  no  means  lower  his  flag  to 
any  man.  When  he  was  on  the  road  to  Damascus  to  hunt  the  saints, 
he  was  on  first-class  terms  with  himself,  and  thought  that  he  was 
•doing  God  service.  He  was  somebody  then,  both  good  and  great,  a 
Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews ;  as  touching  the  law,  a  Pharisee  ;  you  might 
have  ridden  many  a  mile  to  find  his  equal.  Saul  was  like  his  namesake 
^f  old,  head  and  shoulders  above  all  others  ;  but  Paul  was  of  quite  a 
different  stature,  short,  and  even  diminutive :  I  refer,  of  course,  to  his 
height  in  his  own  esteem.  He  would  not  then  have  owned  that  he  was 
(nothing,  for  he  was  a  student  of  the  law,  and  a  great  deal  more  besides. 

This  corrected  estimate  very  much  resulted  from  the  efilightenmeni 
which  he  received  at  his  conversion.  What  a  flood  of  light  does  the 
Lord  pour  in  upon  a  man's  soul  when  he  brings  him  to  himself!  At 
first  it  almost  blinds  him,  so  that  like  Paul  he  owns,  '^  I  could  not  see 
for  the  brightness  of  that  light."  It  was  so  in  my  own  case.  I  had 
often  been  down  into  the  cellar  of  my  heart,  and  I  rather  admired  the 

Surity  and  order  of  the  place.  It  seemed  to  me  60  be  festooned  and 
ecorated,  and  it  boasted  a  good  share  of  vegetation  and  a  considerable 
life  of  its  own.  A  dim,  flickering  light  sufficed  to  show  me,  as  I  thought, 
that  it  was  by  no  means  a  very  foul  place,  but  rather  the  reverse.  I 
could  not  be  so  vain  as  to  say  that  I  thought  it  absolutely  perfect  in 
cleanliness  and  beauty,  but  still  it  was  as  well  as  could  be  expected,  and 
far  better  than  the  most  of  other  hearts.  Now,  it  was  ordained  that 
this  flattering  illusion  should  be  dispelled.  On  a  day,  as  I  ^cnt  into 
this  vault,  there  came  one  with  a  larger  candle  than  I  had  been  wont  to 
carry,  and  what  I  saw  surprised  me  beyond  measure.  I  saw  tthat  the 
festoons  which  I  imagined  to  be  special  decorations  were  huge  tobwebs 
heavy  with  dust ;  the  vegetation,  too,  I  saw  was  all  blanched,  and  much 


A  SERMON  UPON  ONE  KOTHISa  BY  ANOTHER  NOTHING.     91 

of  it  a  Boxions  growth,  while  the  life  which  I  had  somewhat  boadted  of 
I  was  ashamed  to  look  upon  or  eren  to  think  of.  That  candle  shining 
in  the  cellar  of  mj  sonl  had  wrought  a  melancholy  change  in  my 
thongbts  of  myself/ and  foolishly  I  resolved  never  to  permit  so  bright  a 
light  to  enter  there  again,  as  if  to  hide  the  evil  was  to  remove  it.  But 
things  conld  not  remain  as  they  were,  for  on  a  day  there  came  another 
who  did  me  a  worse,  yet  better  tnm,  for  he  descended  into  my  cellar 
and  removed  certain  shutters  which  had  long  excluded  the  light  of  day. 
When  next  I  entered  the  vault  I  was  ready  to  swoon  for  very  iright,  for 
a  dunghill  was  sweetness  to  it :  it  was  the  concentration  of  abomina- 
tions. There  were  all  manner  of  creeping  things,  loathsome  and  pol- 
luting ;  I  was  ready  to  die  at  the  sight.  Truth  to  tell,  I  did  not  even 
then  see  it  all,  for  the  window  was  still  so  much  covered  over  with 
thick  cobwebs  and  filth  that  the  whole  of  the  light  did  not  enter; 
yea,  I  fear  I  have  not  even  yet  seen  all  the  pollution  of  my  nature, 
but  I  thank  God  1  have  seen  enough  to  make  me  cry  to  him  who 
is  able  to  cleanse.  Hercules  turned  a  river  into  the  Augean  stable  and 
purified  it,  and  my  Lord  Jesus  has  with  his  own  blood  purged  my 
natnre :  but  this  I  know,  I  am  nothing,  and  less  than  nothing,  in  my 
natural  estate. 

I  have  but  given  you  a  parable  of  what  the  apostle  saw  in  himself 
whoi  the  law  came  with  its  condemning  power  into  his  soul.  During 
those  three  days  in  which  the  scales  were  on  his  eyes  and  he  was  blind, 
not  seeing  the  sun  for  a  season,  he  turned  all  his  sight  within,  and  saw 
himself.  Then  ^at  Saul  dwarfed  into  little  Paul,  and  the  learned 
rabbi  shriveUed  mto  a  poor  brother  who  was  glad  to  receive  humble 
Ananias,  and  to  learn  from  him  what  he  was  yet  to  do.  He  who 
hectored  over  the  church  of  God  now  meekly  arose  and  was  baptized, 
calling  npon  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Three  days  of  glorious  light,  so 
bright  that  it  made  him  blind,  had  corrected  his  estimate  of  himself ; 
and  it  was  in  memory  of  that  lesson  and  of  all  that  he  had  learned 
subsequently  that  he  said,  **  Though  I  be  nothing." 

Beloved  friends,  the  force  of  that  eeimate  had  tncreased  by  a  groiomg 
belief  m  the  dockme  of  grace.  If  you  wish  to  find  the  free  will  of  man 
very  much  extolled,  you  must  not  read  in  the  epistles  of  Paul.  If  any 
of  yon  desire  to  write  an  essay  upon  the  dignity  of  human  nature,  or  to 
preach  a  sermon  upon  the  glory  which  still  remains  in  man  despite  his 
fallen  state — the  recuperative  power  of  human  nature  despite  its  disease 
— ^you  will  gain  little  help  from  our  apostle.  I  could  refer  you  to 
certain  modern  divines  for  a  good  deal  of  stuff  of  that  kind,  but  the 
apostle  of  the  Gentiles  does  not  deal  in  that  material.  His  indictment 
against  humanity  in  the  first  chapter  of  Romans,  is  as  terrible  as  it  is 
trne.  **  Dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  "  is  his  description  of  man's  con- 
dition ;  sovereign  grace  is  his  only  remedy.  He  tells  us  of  being  born 
again,  and  of  being  new  created  by  the  work  of  God ;  and  of  justifica- 
tion by  faith  through  grace  by  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  but 
he  has  not  a  word  to  say  of  human  power  or  merit.  If  ever  a  man 
could  sajr,  "  Grace  I  grace  !  "  and  did  say  it,  and  kept  on  saying  it, 
most  distinctly  it  was  the  apostle  Paul.  In  proportion  as  he  learned 
the  fulness,  freeness,  richness,  and  sovereignty  of  divine  grace  did  he 
see,  side  by  side  with  it,  the  nakedness,  the  filthiness,  the  nothingness  of 


92  HETBOPOUTAK  TABKRKAOLfi  PULPIT. 

man,  and  so  he  who  could  best  glory  in  the  grace  of  God  thought  less 
and  less  of  himself,  and  said, ''  Though  I  be  nothing." 

In  addition  to  this  his  oion  tntemal  ea^^irience  hid  very  much  helped 
him  io  feel  Ihat  he  was  nothing,  for  he  had  experienced  great  spiritual 
struggles.  **  Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  from 
the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  was  not  once  nor  twice  his  cry,  but  he  often 
felt  the  law  of  his  old  nature  struggling  against  the  law  of  his  mind, 
and  he  li?ed  in  lifelong  conflict  with  the  evil  which  he  saw  within  him- 
self, therefore  feeling  daily  that  salvation  must  be  of  grace  alone,  and 
that  ho  himself  was  nothing,  and  less  than  nothing. 

Beloved,  I  feel  sure  that,  when  the  apostle  said  that  he  was  nothing, 
ho  meant  that  he  was  nothing  in  compcfrisofi  tvith  his  Lord.  He  h^ 
seen  the  glory  of  his  Master  up  yonder  in  heaven,  and  he  had  preached 
that  glory  among  the  sons  of  men,  and,  as  for  himself,  he  could  not 
find  any  figure  to  represent  his  own  insignificaace.  The  smallest  of 
figures  was  too  large  for  him.  He  dared  not  describe  himself  by  the 
figure  one,  and  so  he  put  down  a  cipher,  and  declared  ^^  I  am  nothing" 
When  a  man*s  heart  is  fiUed  with  adoring  reverence  of  the  fiedeemer^ 
he  shrinks  into  nothing,  and  feels  a  kind  of  self-annihilation  passing 
over  his  spirit.  Ah,  if  thou  hast  never  seen  the  Lord,  but  only  beam 
of  him  by  the  ear,  thon  mayest  aim  at  humility,  but  when  thine  eye 
sees  him,  then  wilt  thou  have  it,  for  thon  wilt  abhor  thyself  in  dust  and 
ashes.  Our  apostle  had  in  the  fullest  sense  seen  the  Ix>rd,  and  for  that 
reason,  with  emphasis  he  cried,  '^  Thongh  I  be  nothixig." 

He  meant,  next,  that  he  was  nothing  io  boast  of;  that  albeit  he  had 
been  a  night  and  a  day  in  the  deep,  and  had  been  stoned,  and  had  been 
beaten  with  rods,  and  had  been  a  faithfal  saffisrer  for  Christ,  albeit  that 
he  had  preached  the  gospel  in  the  regions  beyond,  not  buUding  upon 
another  man's  foundation ;  yet  in  all  these  he  saw  nothing  whatever  of 
which  he  could  boast,  but  he  was  still  nothing.  I  remember  well  a 
talkative  Christian,  who  supposed  herself  to  possess  very  remarkable 
attainments,  very  much  of  the  same  character  as  those  who  swarmed 
around  us  a  few  months  a^o,  people  who  were  of  very  superfine  hot- 
pressed  quality.  I  wish  ^em  every  blessing,  bnt  I  am  not  at  all 
enamoured  of  their  pretensions,  wonderful  as  they  axe.  Now,  this 
;  superior  person  was  talking  of  the  marvellous  things  which  she  had  felt, 
known,  and  done.  She  was,  if  not  quite  perfect,  in  remarkable  danger 
of  becoming  so.  She  turned  to  an  aged  Christian  in  the  company,  and 
said,  **  But  you,  dear  brother,  do  not  say  a  word«"  Now,  you  know 
there  are  individuals  who  say  little  who  think  all  the  more,  and  our  old 
friend  was  one  of  them,  and  still  remained  silent.  *'  Come,"  said  she, 
*'  have  you  no  religious  experience  ?"  The  old  man  said  very  quietly, 
^*  I  never  had  any  to  boast  about."  That  remark  I  heartily  endorsea. 
If  we  attain  to  the  highest  experience,  and  rise  very  near  to  God,  and 
conquer  open  sin,  we  shall  still  have  to  look  within,  and  say,  **  I  am 
nothing."  Boasiing  is  a  sure  sign  of  £etilure  wherever  it  is  found ;  even 
a  giant  like  Goliath  had  hardly  done  boasting  before  he  fell  beneath  the 
sling  and  stone  of  a  ruddy  youth.  Restrain  every  feeling  of  pride  i  nay, 
chase  it  from  your  soul,  for  it  is  foob'sh,  and  will  lead  to  further  folly ; 
it  is  a  noxious  insect  which  will  corrupt  whatever  it  lights  upon,  gaudy 
though  its  wings  may  be.    King  Herod  was  soon  eaten  of  worms  when 


A  SEBMOH  UPOH  On  HOTHIVa  BT  AHOTHSB  XOTHIXa.  9d 

he  began  to  be  fly-blown  witii  pride.  Where  tbeie  is  the  moafc  precious 
grnoe,  there  is  alwaja  a  jewel-case  of  humility  to  keep  it  in.  Gilded 
wood  may  floaty  but  an  ingot  of  gold  will  sink.  Diotrephes  was  a 
nobody,  and  loTsd  the  pre-eminence,  Paul  was  not  a  whit  behind  the 
diidT  of  iiie  apostleSy  yet  he  said,  **  Though  I  be  nothing."  If  we  reach 
the  apoade'a  point  of  conscious  nothingness  we  had  better  stop  there, 
far  there  is  no  plaoe  safer  and  hi4)pier,  and  none  more  consisteoit  with 
the  &ct8  of  the  case.  Those  who  are  lowly  are  excellent^  but  pride  is 
pestiloit.  The  possesaioa  of  grace  seonres  a  measure  of  self-deprecia- 
tion, and  in  pr^)Qrti(»i  as  that  grace  increases,  the  thermometer  of 
sdf-eatiinafcion  wiQ  fUL  Below  zero  is  the  proper  point  for  us,  for  in 
truth  we  are  less  than  the  least  of  all  the  saints. 

The  apostle  meant,  next,  that  he  was  nothing  to  trust  in.  ''  Though 
I  be  nothing/'  We  b^n  our  Christian  life  by  trusting  in  Christ  alone, 
and  vfe  shall  continue  so  to  trust  as  to  his  merit,  but  we  are  very  apt  to 
get  WTon^  in  other  matters.  We  begin  with  a  sense  of  being  very 
weak  and  foolish,  and  we  look  to  Jesus  only  for  strength  and  guidance, 
bat  after  awhile  we  think  ourselves  growing  into  deeply  experienced 
and  well-instmcted  Christians,  and  the  tempUtion  is  to  lean  somewhat 
to  our  understanding  and  stability.  All  this  oometh  of  evil,  and  will 
lead  to  fiirth^  evil.  I  recollect  well  a  person  asking  a  brother  of  my 
acquaintance  to  lend  him  a  certain  sum  of  money.  This  my  friend  was 
wiUing  to  do,  but  the  man  added,  "  You  know  yon  can  trust  tne.  I 
bare  been  a  Cbristlaa  now  five-and-thirty  years,  and  I  am  past  tempta- 
tion." Hy  friend,  like  a  wise  man,  buttoned  bis  pocket  very  quietly, 
and  said  he  nmst  decline  to  make  him  a  loan.  He  had  intended  to  do 
so  till  that  vainglorious  speech  was  made.  That  boaster  failed  the 
next  day,  and  was  discovered  to  have  been  an  arrant  rogue.  Whenever 
a  man  says,  "  I  am  past  temptation,''  he  reveab  the  pride  of  his  heart ; 
and  whenever  any  of  us  even  dream  of  such  a  thing  about  ourselves,  we 
have  need  to  tremble  for  fear  that  some  terrible  fafi  is  near.  Yet  that 
thought  does  come  across  us,  though  we  do  not  utter  it :  we  half  think 
in  our  hearts  that  those  inexperienced  young  men  may  go  wrong,  but 
that  we  who  are  middle-aged  men  are  not  so  likely  to  be  overthrown. 
Yet  grievous  sins  in  churches  are  as  common  among  the  more  ad- 
Tanced  as  among  the  young.  Most,  if  not  all,  the  great  falls  recorded 
in  the  Bible  happened  to  middle-aged  and  old  people ;  think  of  the 
drunkermeas  of  Noah  and  of  Lot,  and  the  sin  of  Reuben,  and  Judah, 
and  David,  and  Peter,  and  you  will  see  that  these  were  not  hotheaded 
boys,  but  experienced  men,  who  should  have  acfed  better. 

We  must  come  to  this :  I  am  nothing — ^I  am  strong  in  the  Lord  when 
he  strengthens  me,  but  I  am  as  weak  as  an  infant  without  his  aid. 
I  may  Imow  a  great  many  things  as  the  Lord  continues  to  teach  me, 
but  if  his  grace  were  removed  1  should  be  as  foolish  and  ignorant  as 
when  I  first  came  into  his  school.  **  In  me,  that  is,  in  my  flesh,  there 
dwelleth  no  good  thing."  Within  my  nature  there  is  no  stay  for  my 
canfidenoe,  I  am  nothing  to  trust  in. 

**  Though  I  be  nothing,"  agaiUi  means  this — I  am  nothing  worth 
etmsideHng:  as  if  he  said, ''  If  there  is  any  good  thing  for  me  to  do,  I 
ittTer  calculate  whether  I  shall  be  a  loser  by  it  or  a  gainer,  for  I  am 
not  worth  taking  into  the  account    If  Christ's  kingdom  will  but  come, 


94  MBTROPOLITAN  TABBBNACa:*B  PULPIT. 

it  does  not  matter  whether  PanI  li^es  or  Paul  dies.  I  am  nothing  in 
comparison  with  his  glor^."  I  think  he  meant  this  also  ;  '^  I  am  of 
small  consequence.  Christ's  kingdom  will  go  on  without  me.  Souls 
will  be  won  without  me.  His  glory  will  be  promoted  in  the  world  evea 
if  am  no  more  alive  to  work  for  his  cause.  I  do  not  count  myself  to  be 
a  person  of  such  consequence  to  his  church  that  the  Lord  needs  me. 
He  may  use  me,  but  if  he  does  not  use  me,  he  will  use  somebody  else. 
I  am  but  a  pen,  and  he  can  produce  many  such  ;  if  he  does  not  write 
with  one,  he  can  write  with  another — I  am  nothing.  If  I  am  now  a 
trumpet  in  his  hand,  he  can  blow  through  another  if  he  chooses  to  lay 
me  aside,  for  rams'  horns  are  common  enough,  and  the  walls  of  Jericho 
will  not  stand  for  want  of  them."  I  think  that  was  what  he  meant  by 
"  Though  I  be  nothing."  I  pray  God  we  may  make  a  lowly  estimate 
of  onrselyes,  and  never  dream  ourselves  to  be  essential  to  God's  cause. 

I  shall  yet  spend  a  few  minutes  more  in  speaking  of  our  own  esti- 
mate of  ourselves,  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  and  may  we  all  be  made  bj 
divine  grace  to  say  "  Though  I  be  nothing."  I  will  tell  you  why  I  wish 
that  we  may  come  to  this.  It  is  because  it  will  be  exceedingly  beneficial 
to  us,  if  with  deep  sincerity  we  feel  that  we  are  nothing.  It  will  prevent 
pride,  and  that  which  will  prevent  pride  is  worth  a  Jew's  eye.  It  will 
prevent  our  being  mortified,  as  we  sometimes  are,  because  notice  is  not 
taken  of  us  when  we  have  done  something  that  we  thought  was  greatly 
praiseworthy.  If  we  say  "  Though  I  be  nothing,"  we  do  not  expect 
people  to  talk  much  about  a  nothing,  nor  do  we  wish  them  to  do  so  ; 
we  are  glad  to  get  into  the  shade,  and  if  we  do  not  receive  a  single  word 
of  commendation  we  are  content  to  have  worked  for  the  Lord  in  quiet- 
ness. No  man  will  look  for  honour  among  his  fellows  when  he  owna 
that  he  is  nothing. 

This  humility  will  also  prevent  severe  censures  of  others.  We  are  all 
very  handy  at  picking  holes  in  our  brethren's  coats ;  but  when  we  are 
nothing  we  shall  draw  back  our  hand  and  say,  **  It  does  not  become  a 
nothing  and  a  nobody  to  be  finding  fault  with  other  people."  I  some- 
times wish  that  those  who  criticize  ministers  would  think  of  this.  I 
do  not  believe  that  a  public  person  can  nowadays  say  five  plain  words 
which  some  critic  or  other  will  not  misunderstand  or  misrepresent.  I 
wish  they  would  try  to  speak  or  write  themselves,  and  see  whether 
others  could  not  pull  them  to  pieces  quite  as  readily.  You  wiU  be 
greatly  helped  in  avoiding  censoriousness  if  you  have  a  lowly  view  of 
yourself,  so  as  to  say — **  Though  I  be  nothing." 

This  will  also  help  you  to  avoid  all  self-seeking.  Why  should  yoo 
seek  your  own  if  you  be  nothing  ?  There  is  no  good  in  seeking  for 
great  things  for  a  nothing.  If  you  be  nothing,  you  wUl  keep  vour 
motives  clear ;  you  will  seek  the  glory  of  God,  and  not  your  own  glory. 
If  you  be  nothing,  self-denial  will  become  very  easy  to  you.  You  will 
be  willing  to  be  a  doormat  to  God's  temple  for  his  saints  to  wipe  their 
feet  upon,  if  you  can  be  more  serviceable  than  in  any  other  capacity. 

A  man  who  feels  himself  to  be  nothing  will  be  easily  contented.  He 
who  is  nothing  does  not  want  a  thousand  a-year  to  maintain  his  dignity. 
He  who  is  nothing,  having  food  and  raiment,  is  therewith  content.  It 
would  be  a  pity  to  spend  a  great  deal  upon  nothing ;  so  he  that  ia 
nothing  thanks  God  for  what  he  has,  and  eats  his  bread  and  drinks  hia 


A   SEBMON  trPOK  02^  KOTHmO  BY  ANOTHER  KOTlinTG.  95 

cnp  of  water,  and  blesses  God  that  he  has  all  that,  and  Jesus  Christ  too. 
Mr.  Somebody  wants  a  large  estate  and  a  heap  of  money,  and  when  he 
has  that,  Mr.  Somebody  wants  mnch  more,  and  is  never  satisfied. 
TlicDy  too,  he  has  so  many  calls  that  he  cannot  afford  to  give  anything 
away;  while  he  who  is  nothing  haa  hia  weekly  tithe  to  bring,  for  he 
feels  himself  to  be  nothing  bnt  a  steward,  and  most  &ithfally  nse  his 
Master's  goods. 

He  who  knows  himself  to  be  nothing,  is  also  full  of  giatitnde.  If 
ton  catch  him  alone  yon  will  find  the  tears  in  his  eyeS)  and  if  you 
qaestion  him  he  will  tell  yen  that  he  was  weeping  to  think  that  God 
ebonld  eyer  have  lov«d  him,  ft>r  he  is  such  a.  nobody.  He  was  wonder- 
iag  at  his  election,  marvelling  that  eternal  lore  should  have  pitched 
apon  him.  He  wm  wondering  at  redraaptioo,  admiring  that  the  Lord 
Jesns  Christ  shoold  ha¥e  shed  his  blood  for  him*  He  was  wonderinc:  at 
elTectaal  calling,  amaaed  that  the  Holy  QhoBt  should  ever  have  cculed 
him«  He  was  wondering  at  t^e  persevering  love  of  Qod,  that  the  Lord's 
mercy  should  have  endured  his  ill  manners  so  long.  He  was  wonder- 
ing that  there  shoidd  be  a  heaven  for  him,  wondeidng  that  there  should 
be  eternal  life  for  him.  ''  Though  I  be  nothing,"  says  he, "  yet  infinite 
graee  is  nune."  How  can  there  be  ail  this  for  a  nobody  ?  Great  God, 
how  good  thou  art !  Is  not  all  this  a  sweet  commendation  of  a  lowly 
spirit?  He  that  l^es' in  die  Valley  of  Humiliation,  among  the  lilies, 
dwells  where  the  biids  sing  all  day,  and  the  roes  and  the  hinds  of  the  field 
lie  down  in  peace. 

Now,  I  finish  with  this  one  thought.  When  the  apostle  says, 
"  Though  I  be  nothing,"  that  word  shows  that  there  was  a  fact  in  the 
background.  He  had  been  telling  us  that  he  was  once  caught  up  into 
the  third  heaven,  and  had  enjoyed  a  special  revelation  of  Christ.  Yes, 
beloved  fellow-believer,  we  have  had  our  banqueting  days  when  the 
banner  over  us  was  love ;  we  have  been  very  near  the  Beloved,  and  we 
have  been  made  to  drink  the  spiced  wine  of  his  pomegranate,  and  he 
has  manifested  himself  to  us  as  he  does  not  unto  the  world.  All  this 
you  know,  and  I  also  know  it,  **  though  I  be  nothing." 

In  addition  to  thisy'Hhe  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us,  whereof 
we  are  glad,"  by  enabling  us  to  serve  his  cause.  If  we  have  not  been 
stoned  and  scourged,  yet  we  have  borne  something  for  Christ,  and  borne 
it  cheerfully ;  if  we  cannot  emulate  the  apostle  in  abundance  of  ser- 
yjce,  yet  the  Lord  has  not  left  us  without  fruit  unto  his  glory ;  and  this 
we  are  right  glad  of,  though  we  heartily  add, "  though  I  be  nothing." 

We  can  also  beUevingly  say :  "  though  I  be  nothing,"  yet  the  Spirit 
of  God  dwells  in  me.  **  Though  I  be  nothing,"  the  Spirit  of  God  uses 
me.  I  want  yon  not  to  forget  the  background  of  mercy  which  sets  oat 
this  poor  nothing,  and  make  it  look  all  the  less,  albeit  that  it  makes  it 
all  the  sweeter  for  it  to  be  so  little. 

Oh,  yes,  and  there  is  a  heaven  for  me,  and  there  is  eternal  life  for  me, 
and  there  are  the  three  persons  of  the  divine  Trinity  sworn  to  save  me ; 
and  heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  I  shall  never  perish,  neither 
Bhall  any  pluck  me  out  of  Jesu's  hand,  "  though  I  be  nothing."  His 
angels  are  commissioned  to  keep  me,  and  he  himself  in  covcuant  has 
(riten  his  oath  and  promise  to  preserve  me,  "  though  I  be  nothing." 

•*  Tliough  I  be  nothing."    Does  it  not  make  your  soul  laugh  with 


OG  MBTROPOLITAK  TABEBNACLE  FULPIT. 

inexpressible  deliglit  to  think  that  you  shall  wear  a  crown  of  life  that 
fadeth  not  away,  and  that  your  hands  shall  strike  the  strings  of  a  harp 
which  shall  pour  forth  immortal  melody,  though  you  be  nothing.  My 
heart  dances  while  I  feel  that  the  pearly  gates,  the  streets  of  gold,  the 
goodly  company  of  angels,  and  the  assembly  of  the  firstborn  are  for  me, 
"  though  I  be  nothing  "  I 

Dearly  beloved,  go  away  with  "Though  I  be  nothing*'  in  your 
mouths  ;  but  yet  say,  "  Yet  hath  he  loved  me  with  an  everlasting  love, 
and  because  he  hath  set  his  love  upon  me,  he  will  deliver  me  and  set  me 
on  high.  Since  I  was  precious  in  his  sight  I  have  been  honourable,  and 
he  has  loved  me  and  he  gave  more  than  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  for 
me,  "  though  I  be  nothing." 

The  Lord  bless  you ;  and  if  there  is  a  sinner  here  who  is  somebody, 
may  the  Lord  turn  him  into  nobody ;  but  if  there  is  a  nobody  here, 
may  the  Lord  bless  him,  for  he  is  the  sort  of  man  that  Jesus  saves. 
0  soul,  you  must  be  nothing  if  God  is  to  save  you.  You  must  come 
down  ^m  your  high  horse ,-  yon  must  give  up  your  trust  in  works  and 
ceremonies  and  natural  goodness  and  be  nothing ;  and  when  you  are 
nothing,  then  will  Jesus  Christ  be  all  in  all  to  you.  He  is  a  full  Christ 
for  empty  sinners.  He  gives  life  to  dead  sinners,  healing  to  sick 
sinners,  and  clothing  to  naked  sinners ;  but  if  you  be  full  and  rich  and 
lively  in  yourselves,  you  mav  go  your  way,  he  will  have  nought  to  do 
with  you.  If  you  are  nothing,  clean  emptied  out  and  stripped  and 
done  for,  ground  to  powder,  crushed,  and  rendered  helpless,  yon  are  of 
those  for  whom  Jesus  shed  his  precious  blood.  Come^  trust  in  hiiu, 
and  find  eternal  life. 


Portion  of  Scripture  Eead  before  Sermon— 2  Cor.  xi.  18 — S3 ;' 

3di.  1—12. 


Hyjins  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— C25,  627. 


LETTER  FROM  MR.  SPURGEON. 

Beloyed  Feiskds, — Yesterday  I  was  gladdened  hj  a  telegram  from  our 
well-beloved  deacon,  Mr.  Murrell.  '*  All  going  well.  Tabernacle  crowded 
each  service.  All  friends  united  and  hearty,  expecting  great  results  this  Feb- 
ruary." This  was  more  precious  to  me  than  a  banknote  for  a  large  amount. 
I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  the  Lord  blesses  the  work  at  home. 

For  myself,  as  you  desire  to  hear  frequently  of  my  welfare,  I  can  only  say 
that  the  weather  here  is  variable  and  J  have  varied  with  it,  but  yet  I  am 
greatly  refreshed,  and  in  a  fair  way  to  recover  strength.  I  still  lean  heavily 
upon  my  staff,  and  can  only  totter  a  short  distance,  but  my  spirits  are  revived, 
and  my  mind  is  regaining  its  tone.  Pray  for  me  daily,  as  1  also  do  for  you 
with  ail  my  heartw 

Your  loving  friend, 

Mentonc,  Feb.  11,  1879.  C.  H.   SPURGEON. 


SATAN'S  PUNOTUALITT,  POWEE,  AND  PUBPOSE. 


%.  ^mn 


-V^  ^t,  X  T  T  TllSr     JlV     ACS  XT  7  0  27  a,      s 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


^Thea  comAth  fhe  deril,  and  taketh  awav  fhe  word  out  of  Uioir  heartti  leat  ihey 
ihoiild  bcritOTO  and  be  aaved.'*— Luke  tuL  12. 

It  is  a  great  comfort  that  sach  mnltitndes  are  williDg  to  hear  the  word 
of  QoA.  Even  though  many  should  tnm  ont  to  be  as  the  rode,  the 
wajndey  or  the  thorny  ground,  still  it  is  a  cheering  circumstance  that 
the  seed  can  be  sown  broadcast  over  so  large  an  acreage.  Tet  the 
thoughts  excited  by  the  sight  of  a  Tast  congregation  are  not  all  plea- 
surable ;  the  question  most  naturally  arises — What  will  oome  of  all  this 
preaching  and  hearing  ?  Will  the  heavenly  seed  produce  a  harvest  or  fall 
on  barren  soil?  The  thoughtful  Ohristian,  in  considering  this  question, 
takes  into  consideration  the  condition  of  the  persons  addressed,  and 
remembers  that  many  are  unprepared  for  the  gospeL  So  &r  from  being 
like  a  field  furrowed  to  receive  the  seed,  they  are  like  a  trodden  pathway. 
They  hear  the  gospel,  and  so  far  we  are  liopeful  of  them,  but  they  have 
no  idea  of  allowing  it  to  enter  their  inmost  souls.  The  ground  of  their 
hearts  is  too  much  occupied  already,  other  feet  will  tread  there  and 
speedily  obliterate  the  sower's  footprints,  and  as  for  the  good  seed,  it  may 
lie  where  it  falls,  entrance  into  the  inner  man  it  can  have  none.  Nor  is 
this  all,  the  anxious  observer  remembers  that  there  is  yet  another  diffi- 
culty :  the  arch-enemy  of  God  and  man  is  opposed  to  the  salvation  of 
Bouls,  and  therefore  he  is  present  with  destructive  power  wherever  the 
seed  of  the  Word  is  being  sown.  It  is  of  this  we  shall  now  speak, — the 
activity  of  Satan  during  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  He  is  out  of  sight, 
bat  we  may  not  allow  him  to  be  out  of  mind :  he  does  all  the  more 
mischief  if  men  sleep ;  let  us  watchfullv  turn  our  eyes  towards  him,  and 
prove  that  we  are  not  imorant  of  his  cfevices. 

Oar  divine  Lord  in  the  words  before  us  reminded  his  hearers  of  the 
devifa  puneinaliiy, — *'lhen  cometh  the  devil";  of  his  power, — "and 
taketh  away  the  word  out  of  their  hearts";  and  of  his  purpose,  which  is 
the  prevention  of  saving  fidth, — "  lest  they  should  believe  and  be  saved." 
At  uus  time,  when  special  services  are  being  held,  it  may  be  well  to 
bring  these  points  clearly  forward  that  all  may  be  warned  against  the 
widced  one,  and  so  by  the  grace  of  God  his  designs  may  be  frustrated. 

L    First  observe  the  evil  one's  pxtnctuality.    No  sooner  does  the 
seed  fall  than  the  fowls  devour  it.    Oar  text  says  "  then,'*  that  is,  there 
and  then,  ^  cometh  the  devil."    Mark  renders  it^  "  Satan  cometh  imme- 
diately."   Whoever  else  may  loiter,  Satan  never  does.  No  sooner  does  a  ' 
Nos.  1,459-60. 


98  HETBOPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLE  PULPIT. 

'  ci^el  Ml  dead  in  the  wildemeas  than  the  vultares  appear.  Not  a  biid 
was  Tisible,  nor  did  it  seem  possible  that  there  oouid  be  one  within  • 
radius  of  many  mil^,  yet  speedily  there  are  specks  in  the  sky,  and  soon 
the  devourers  are  gorging  themselves  with  flesh :  even  thus  do  the  spirits 

)0f  evil  scent  their  prey  from  afar,  and  hasten  to  their  destroying  work. 
The  lapse  of  time  might  give  opportunity  for  thought,  and  thought 
might  lead  to  repentance,  and  therefore  the  enemy  hurries  to  prevent 
the  hearer  from  considering  the  truth  he  he^  heard.  When  the  gospel 
has  somewhat  affected  the  hearers,  so  that  in  some  sh'ght  degree  it  is  in 

•  their  hearts,  then  swifter  than  the  flight  of  the  eagle  is  the  haste  of  the 

*  devil  to  take  the  word  out  of  their  hearts.    A  little  delay  might  put  the 
'  case  beyond  Satanic  power,  hence  the  promptitude  of  diabolic  activity. 

0  that  we  were  half  as  quick  and  active  in  the  service  of  our  Lord,  one 
I  half  as  prompt  to  seize  every  opportunity  for  blessing  the  souls  of  men ! 
^  No  doubt  Satan  acts  at  times  directly  upon  the  thoughts  of  men.  He 
personallv  su^ested  to  Judas  the  selling  of  his  Master,  and  many  ano- 
ther black  insinuation  has  he  cast  into  men's  minds.  Like  the  foul  yul- 
tnro  which  constantly  feasted  itself  upon  the  vitals  of  Prometheus,  so 
does  the  devil  tear  away  the  good  thoughts  which  would  be  the  life  of  a 
man's  soul.  Insatiably  malicious,  he  cannot  endure  that  a  single  divine 
truth  should  bless  the  heart.  Fearful  blasphemies,  lewd  imaginations, 
gross  unbeliefe,  or  vain  frivolities  the  devil  casts  into  the  mind  like  infernal 
bombshells  to  destroy  any  new-born  thought  which  looks  toward  Christ 
and  salvation.  At  one  time  he  fascinates  the  mind,  and  anon  he  terrifles 
it ;  his  one  aim  being  to  distract  the  man's  thoughts  from  the  gospel, 
and  prevent  its  lodgment  in  the  conscience  and  heart. 

As  Satan  cannot  be  everywhere  present  at  one  time,  he  frequently 
does  his  evil  work  by  his  servants,  sending  the  inferior  spirits  to  act  as 
fowls  in  devouring  the  seed,  and  these  again  emplov  various  agents. 
With  great  cunning  are  the  common  incidents  of  lire  used  in  the  evil 
business,  so  that  even  by  things  indificrent  in  themselves  the  purposes 
of  the  adversary  are  brought  about.  The  preacher  has  some  speciality  in 
his  manner,  utterance,  or  appearance,  and  this  becomes  the  bird  which 
devours  the  seed :  the  hearer  is  so  taken  up  vnth.  a  trifling  oddity  in  the 
minister  that  he  forgets  the  truth  which  was  spoken.  An  anecdote  was 
related,  an  illustration  employed,  or  a  word  used  which  awakened  a  memory 
in  the  hearer's  breast,  and  away  went  the  word  out  of  his  heart  to  make 
room  for  mere  vanity.  Or  if  the  sermon  was  preserved  to  its  close,  it  then 
encountered  a  fresh  peril :  a  lost  umbrella,  an  extra  pressure  in  the  aisle, 
a  foolish  jest  overheard  in  the  crowd,  or  the  absurd  dress  of  an  unknown 
person,  may  any  one  of  them  answer  the  devil's  purpose  and  snatch  away 
the  word.  Little  does  it  signify  whether  the  seed  is  devoured  by  black 
crows  or  white  doves,  by  great  fowls  or  little  sparrows :  if  it  does  not 
abide  in  the  heart  it  cannot  bring  forth  fruit,  and  hence  the  devil  arranges 
that  somehow  he  will  take  away  the  seed  at  once.  If  he  never  visits  a 
place  of  worship  at  any  other  time,  he  will  be  sure  to  be  there  when  a 
revival  has  begun, — "  thai  cometh  the  devil."  He  lets  many  a  pulpit 
alone,  but  when  an  earnest  man  begins  preaching,  **  Satan  cometh 
immediately" 

II.  Secondly,  we  will  now  for  a  moment  notice  his  poweb.  "  And 
taketh  sway  the  word  out  of  their  hearts.''    It  is  not  said  that  he  tiiea 


BATAJf'S  PUNCTUALITY,  POWBB,  AND  PUEPOSB.  90 

to  do  it,  bdt  that  he  actnally  does  so.  He  sees,  he  comes,  and  he  con- 
quers. The  word  is  there,  and  the  devil  takes  it  away  as  easily  as  a  bird 
remoyes  a  seed  from  the  wayside.  Alas,  what  a  sway  has  the  evil  one 
OTcr  the  human  mind,  and  hotv  ineffectual  is  the  preacher's  work,  unless 
a  diviBe  power  is  put  forth  with  it.  Perhaps  from  the  striking  manner 
in  which  it  was  stated,  a  little  of  the  trnth  abides  in  the  memory,  bat 
the  enemy  takes  it  quite  out  of  the  heart ;  and  so  the  main  part,  the  all* 
important  part  of  our  work  is  undone.  We  may  be  foolish  enough  to 
aim  at  the  bead  only,  but  he  who  is  crafty  beyond  aU  craft  deals  with 
the  heart.  Who  will  may  win  the  intellect,  if  Satan  can  keep  the  afibc* 
tions  he  is  miite  content.  To  the  man's  heart  the  good  seed  is  lost,  the 
fowls  hare  devoured  it ;  it  has  become  to  him  a  nullity,  having  no  power 
orer  him,  no  life  in  him.  Not  a  trace  is  left,  any  more  than  there  would 
be  a  mark  remaining  of  seed  cast  on  the  wayside  after  the  birds  had  taken 
it  away  :  so  elSectnsS  is  the  work  of  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air. 
When  Satan  thinks  it  worth  his  while  to  come,  and  come  immediately,  he 
means  business,  and  he  takes  care  that  his  errand  shall  not  fail. 

His  power  is  partly  derived  from  his  natural  sagacity.  Fallen  as  ho 
now  is,  he  was  once  an  angel  of  light,  and  his  superlative  &culties, 
though  perverted,  defiled,  and  dimmed  by  the  blighting  influence  of  sin, 
aie  still  Tastly  superior  to  those  of  the  human  beings  upon  whom  he  tries 
bis  arts.  He  is  more  than  a  match  for  preacher  and  hearer  united  if  the 
Holy  Spirit  be  not  there  to  baffle  him.  He  has  also  acquired  fresh 
canning  by  long  practice  in  his  accursed  busmess.  He  knows  the  human 
heart  bietter  than  anyone,  except  its  Maker;  for  thousands  of  years 
he  has  studied  the  anatomy  of  our  nature,  and  is  conversant  with  our 
Teaker  points.  We  are  all  young  and  inexperienced  compared  with  this 
ancient  tempter,  all  narrow  in  our  views  and  limited  in  our  experience 
compared  with  this  serpent,  who  is  more  subtle  than  all  the  beasts  of  the 
field  :  what  wonder  that  he  takes  away  the  word  which  is  sown  in  hard 
hearts. 

MoreoTer,  he  derives  his  chief  power  from  the  man's  condition  of 
soul :  it  is  easy  for  birds  to  pick  up  seed  which  lies  exposed  on  a 
trodden  path.  If  the  soil  had  been  good  and  the  seed  had  entered 
it,  he  would  have  had  far  greater  difficnltv,  he  might  even  have 
been  foiled  ;  but  a  hard  heart  does  the  devil's  work  for  him  in 
great  measnre;  he  need  not  use  yiolence  or  craft;  there  lies  the  unre* 
oeived  word  upon  the  surface  of  the  soul,  and  he  takes  it  away.  The 
pow^  of  the  evil  one  largely  springs  from  our  own  evil.  Let  us  pray 
the  Lord  to  renew  the  heart  that  the  testimony  of  Jesus  may  be  accepted 
heartily,  and  may  never  be  taken  away.  Great  is  the  need  for  such 
prayer.  Our  adversary  is  no  imaginary  being,  his  existence  is  real,  his 
presence  constant,  his  power  immense,  his  activity  indefatigable.  Lord, 
match  him,  and  overmatch  him.  Drive  away  this  foulest  of  fowls, 
break  np  the  soil  of  the  soul,  and  let  thy  truth  truly  hve  and  gra* 
cionsly  grow  within  us. 

III.  Our  short  sermon  closes  with  the  third  point,  which  is  the  devU'B 
IT&FOSE.  He  is  a  sound  theologian,  and  knows  that  salvation  is  by 
bdJeving  in  the  Lord  Jesus ;  and  hence  he  fears  above  all  things  lest 
mm  should  **  believe  and  be  s&ved."  The  substance  of  the  gospel  lies 
in  those  few  words,  **  believe  and  be  saved,"  and  in  proportion  as  Satan 


100  UETROPOLITAir  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

hates  that  eospel  we  ought  to  prize  it.  He  ib  not  00  much  afraid  of 
worla  as  of  faith.  If  he  can  lead  men  to  work,  or  feel,  or  do  anything 
in  the  place  of  believing,  he  is  content ;  but  it  is  believing  that  he  drcads, 
becaose  Grod  has  coupled  it  with  being  saved.  Evety  hearer  should 
know  this,  and  be  instructed  thereby  to  turn  all  his  attention  to  the 
point  which  the  devil  considers  to  be  worthy  of  his  whole  activity.  If 
the  destroyer  labours  to  prevent  the  heart's  believing,  the  wise  will  hare 
their  wits  about  them,  and  regard  &ith  as  the  one  thing  needful. 

"  Lest  they  should  bdieve  and  be  saved  "  Satan  takes  away  the  word 
out  of  their  hearts.    Heie  also  is  wisdom, — wisdom  hidden  within  the 
enemy's  cunning.    If  the  gospel  remains  in  contact  with  the  heart  its 
tendency  is  to  produce  faith.    The  seed  abiding  in  the  soil  springs  up 
and  brings  forth  fruit,  and  so  will  the  gospel  display  its  living  power  if 
it  dwells  within  the  man,  and  therefore  the  devil  nastens  to  take  it  away. 
The  word  of  God  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  devil  does  not  like  to 
see  it  lie  near  the  sinner  for  fear  it  should  wound  him.    He  dreads  the 
influence  of  truth  upon  the  conscience,  and  if  he  cannot  prevent  a  man's 
hearing  it  he  labours  to  prevent  his  meditating  upon  it.    "  Faith  cometh 
by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  €k)d   :  to  obliterate  that  which 
has  been  heard  is  the  Satanic  method  of  preventing  fidth.    Here,  again, 
is  a  practical  word  for  the  ear  of  prudence : — let  us  keep  the  gospel  as 
much  as  possible  near  the  mind  of  the  unconverted,  let  us  sow  and  sow 
again,  if  haply  some  grain  may  teke  root.    Oountrjmen  were  wont  ia 
planting  certam  seeds  to  put  in  ''one  for  the  worm,  and  one  for  the  crow, 
and  then  a  third  which  would  surely  grow,"  and  we  must  do  the  like. 
In  the  book  of  Jeremiah  the  Lord  describes  his  own  action  thus, — "  I 
spoke  unto  you  rising  up  early  and  speaking,  but  ye  heard  not ;  and  I 
called,  but  ye  answered  not ":  surely,  if  the  Lord  himself  has  thus  con- 
tinued to  speak  to  an  unanswering  race  we  need  not  murmur  if  much  of 
our  preaching  should  appear  to  be  in  vain.    There  is  life  in  the  seed  of 
the  gospel,  and  it  will  grow  if  it  can  be  Rot  into  the  soil  of  the  heart ;  let 
us  therefore  have  faith  in  it,  and  never  dream  of  obtaining  a  crop  except 
by  the  old-fashioned  way  of  sowing  good  seed.     The  devil  evidently 
hates  the  word,  let  us  then  keep  to  it,  and  sow  it  everywhere. 

Reader  or  hearer,  you  have  often  heard  the  gospel,  have  you  heard 
it  in  vain  ?  Then  the  devil  has  had  more  to  do  with  you  than  you 
have  dreamed.  Is  the  thought  a  pleasant  one  ?  The  presence  of  the 
devil  is  defiling  and  degrading,  and  he  has  been  hovering  over  you  as  the 
birds  over  the  high-road,  and  lighting  upon  you  to  steal  away  the  Word. 
Think  of  this.  Fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  his  Spn  Jesus 
Christ  you  are  missing  by  your  unbelief,  and  instead  thereof  vou  are 
having  fellowship  with  Satan.  Is  not  this  homble  ?  Instead  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  dwelling  in  you  as  he  dwells  in  all  believers,  the  prince  of  darkness 
is  making  you  his  resort,  coming  and  goin^  at  his  pleasure  into  your 
mind.  You  remember  Jacob's  dream  of  a  ladder,  and  angels  ascending 
and  descending  from  himself  to  heaven :  your  hfe-experieuce  may  be  set 
forth  by  another  ladder  which  descends  into  the  dark  abyss,  and  up  and 
down  its  rounds  foul  spirits  come  and  go  to  yourself  I  Does  not  this 
startle  you  ?  The  Lord  grant  it  may.  Bo  you  desire  a  change  ?  May 
the  Holy  Spirit  turn  your  heart  into  good  ground,  and  then  shaU  the  aee4 
of  divine  grace  grow  in  you,  and  pr^uce  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus, 


THE  DUAL  NATURE  AND  THE  DUEL  WITHIN. 


%     I 


PELIYEBED  B7 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    TUB  METEOPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE,  NEWINQTON.  ' 


"Bat  I  see  another  law  in  my  members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind, 
and  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  my  memberB.*'— 
Bomaiu  tiL  23. 

I  QTTKSTiON  whether  any  man  understands  himself,  and  I  am  quite  cer- 
tain that  no  Christian  does  so.  "  Oreat  is  the  mjsterj  of  godliness  "  in 
more  senses  than  one.  The  believer  is  a  great  riddle  to  those  who  ob- 
serre  him  ;  "  he  is  discerned  of  no  man."  He  is  equally  an  enigma  to 
himself.  The  frequency  of  books  like  Venning*s  "  Orthodox  Paradoxes," 
and  good  Ralph  Erskine's  "  Believer's  Riddle,"  is  not  at  all  wonderful ; 
for  a  thousand  riddles  may  be  made  about  the  Christian,  since  he  is  a 
naradox  from  beginning  to  end.  As  Plato  used  to  say  of  each  man  that 
he  was  two  men,  so  may  we  with  emphasis  say  of  each  Christian  that 
he  is  two  men  in  one.  Oftentimes  to  himself  the  evil  man  within  him 
appears  to  be  uppermost,  and  yet,  by  the  grace  of  God,  it  never  can  be, 
for  the  ultimate  victory  belongs  to  the  new  and  spiritual  life.  We  see 
in  every  Christian  what  was  seen  in  the  Shulamite  in  the  Song,  "  as  it 
were  the  company  of  two  armies."  This  is  not  always  known  by  the 
believer  when  ne  commences  the  new  life.  He  starts  knowing  that  he  is 
a  sinner,  and  that  Jesus  is  his  Saviour,  but  as  he  proceeds  he  finds  that 
he  is  more  a  sinner  than  he  thought  he  was.  Many  surprises  await  him, 
and  some  things  which,  if  he  be  not  prepared  for  them,  will  stagger  him 
as  though  some  strange  thing  had  happened  to  him.  Perhaps  my  dis- 
course on  this  sabjeet  may  prevent  a  new  convert  from  being  over- 
whelmed with  unexpected  storms,  and  help  him  to  solve  the  question 
which  will  then  arise  in  his  mind,  **  If  I  were  a  child  of  God,  comd  it  be 
thus  with  me  ?  " 

Our  first  head  will  be,  there  are  ik  all  believers  two  prin- 
ciples. The  apostle  speaks  of  the  law  of  his  mindy  and  then  of  another 
law  inkU  members  warring  against  the  law  of  his  mind.  The  converted 
man  is  a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  bat  the  old  nature  remains  within 
him. 


102  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

The  firsfc  life  in  a  Obristian  in  order  of  time  is  fhs  old  AdanhfuUure. 
It  is  there  &om  the  first.      It  is  bom  of  and  with  the  flesh;  and  ii 
remains  in  us  after  we  are  bom  of  the  Spirit,  for  the  second  birth  does 
not  destroy  in  us  the  products  of  the  first  birth.    Regeneration  brings  into 
us  a  new  and  higher  pnndple,  which  is  ultimately  to  destroy  the  sinful 
nature,  but  the  old  principle  still  remains,  and  labours  to  retain  its  power. 
Some  fancy  that  the  carnal  mind  is  to  be  improved,  gradually  tamed  down 
and  sanctified ;  but  it  is  enmity  against  God,  and  is  not  reconciled  to  God, 
neither,  indeed,  can  be.    The  old  nature  is  of  the  earth  earthy,  and  mast 
be  crucified  with  Christ  and  buried  with  him,  for  it  is  altogether  too  bad 
for  mending.    This  old  nature  lives  in  our  members ;  that  is  to  say,  its 
nest  is  the  body,  and  it  works  through  the  body.    There  are  certaia 
appetites  of  ours  which  are  perfectly  allowable,  nay,  even  necessary  to 
existence ;  but  they  can  be  very  easily  pushed  to  sinful  extremes,  and 
then  that  which  is  lawful  and  right  becomes  a  nest  for  that  which  is  un- 
lawful and  wrong. '  It  is  a  commendable  thing  that  a  man  should  seek 
to  provide  for  his  own  household,  yet  how  msmj  crimes  and  how  much 
covetousuess  come  into  the  world  from  an  inordmate  indulgence  of  that 
desire.   A  man  may  eat  and  drink,  yet  it  is  through  those  appetites  that 
a  thousand  sins  are  engendered.   A  man,  when  he  is  in  his  right  condition, 
puts  a  bit  into  the  mouth  of  his  desires,  and  holds  them  in  as  with  bit 
cmd  bridle ;  his  higher  nature  governs  his  bodily  appetites,  but  not  with- 
out great  effort,  for  ever  since  the  fall  of  Adam  the  machine  works 
irregularly,  and  is  not  properly  controlled  by  that  which  should  be  the 
ruling  force. 

I  have  heard  of  some  professors  who  dream  that  sin  is  utterly  destroyed 
in  them,  and  that  they  have  no  more  evil  tendencies  and  desires.  I 
shall  not  controvert  their  notion.  If  it  be  so,  I  congratulate  them,  and 
greatly  wish  it  were  so  with  me.  I  have,  however,  had  some  little  expe- 
rience of  perfect  people,  and  I  have  generally  found  them  the  most  dis- 
agreeable, touchy,  and  sensitive  persons  in  the  world,  and  some  of  them 
have  turned  out  to  be  such  detestable  hypocrites,  that  I  am  rather  afraid 
of  a  person  who  has  no  imperfections.  As  soon  as  I  leam  that  a 
brother  states  that  he  has  lived  for  months  without  sin,  I  wonder  whether 
his  secret  vice  is  lewdness,  or  theft,  or  drink,  but  I  feel  sure  that  some- 
where or  other  there  is  a  leak  in  the  ship. 

The  sin  which  lurks  in  the  flesh,  wul  grow  weaker  in  proportion  as 
the  holy  principle,  of  which  I  have  to  speak,  grows  stronger;  and  it  is  at 
no  time  to  be  tolerated  or  excused,  but  we  are  to  fight  against  it,  and 
conquer  it,  and  ultimately  it  is  to  be  destroyed  in  us,  root  and  branch : 
yet  there  it  is,  and  let  not  the  young  Christian  be  staggered  when  he 
finds  it  there. 

When  we  are  bom  again  there  is  dropped  into  our  soul  i?te  living  and 
ineorruptible  teed  of  the  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever. 
It  is  akin  to  the  divine  nature^  and  cannot  sin,  because  it  is  bom  of 
God :  it  has  no  tendency  to  sin,  but  all  its  appetites  are  heavenward  and 
Ohristward.  It  never  stoops  from  its  high  position ;  it  is  always  asj^iring 
towards  heaven.  It  is  at  deadly  enmity  with  the  old  nature,  which  it 
will  in  the  end  destroy  ;  but,  as  I  have  said  before,  it  has  its  work  to  do, 
and  it  is  a  work  which,  assisted  even  by  divine  strength,  will  not  be 
accomplished  all  at  once.    It  is  a  warfare  which,  when  it  seems  ende4. 


fHB  DUAL  NATUBB  AND  THE  DUEL  WITHIN.  103 

has  often  to  be  renewed^  since,  after  long  and  victorious  campaigns^  the 
routed  enemy  retnms  to  the  field. 

Now,  I  wonld  like  each  Christian  to  be  assured  that  he  has  this 
second  principle  in  him.  It  may  be  weak ;  it  may  be  struggling  for  an 
existence ;  but  it  is  there,  my  brother.  If  thou  hast  believed  in  Jesus, 
thoa  hast  the  hfe  which  hates  sin,  and  makes  thee  repent  when  thou 
hast  &llen  into  it.  That  is  the  life  which  cries,  *'  Abba,  Father,"  as 
often  as  it  tiiinks  of  God,  the  life  which  aspires  after  holiness,  and  delights 
in  the  law  of  God.  This  is  the  new-bom  principle  which  will  not  permit 
thee  to  be  at  peace  if  thou  shouldst  wander  into  sin,  which  finds  no  rest 
but  in  the  bosom  of  that  God  from  whom  it  came,  and  in  likeness  to  that 
God  from  whom  it  sprang. 

These  are  the  two  principles  which  make  up  the  dual  man :  the  flesh 
and  the  spirit,  the  law  of  the  mind  and  the  law  of  sin,  the  body  of  death 
and  the  spirit  of  life. 

We  notice,  secondly,  that  the  existence  op  these  two  principles 
Di  A  Christian  necessitates  a  conflict,  even  as  the  text  says, 
**  Another  law  in  my  members  warring  against  the  iaw  of  my  mitid,*' 
The  lion  will  not  lie  down  with  the  lamb  in  us.  Fire  will  not  be  on 
good  terms  with  water.  Death  will  not  parley  with  life,  nor  Christ  with 
Belial.     The  dual  life  provokes  a  daily  duel. 

I  am  not  sure  that  the  conflict  between  the  new  nature  and  the  old 
is  felt  by  all  young  Christians  at  the  first.  Frequently,  Christian  life 
may  be  oiTided  into  three  sta^s :  the  first  period  is  that  of  comfort,  in 
which  the  young  Christian  rejoices  in  the  Lord,  and  his  principal  business 
is  to  sing,  and  tell  what  God  has  done  for  him. 

The  more  of  this  the  better.  After  that,  very  often  comes  the  stage  of 
conflici:  instead  of  being  children  at  home  we  have  grown  into  men, 
and  therefore  we  must  go  to  war.  Under  the  old  law,  when  a  man  was 
married,  or  had  built  a  nouse,  he  was  excused  from  fighting  for  a  season, 
but  when  that  was  over,  he  must  take  his  place  in  the  ranks :  and  so  is 
it  with  the  child  of  God ;  he  may  rest  awhile,  but  he  is  destined  for  the 
war.  The  period  of  conflict  is  often  succeeded,  especially  in  old  age,  by  a 
third  stage  which  we  may  call  contemplation;  in  which  the  believer  sits 
down  to  reflect  upon  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  towards  him,  and  upon 
aU  the  good  things  which  are  in  store  for  him.  This  is  the  land  Beulah, 
which  John  Bunyan  describes  as  lying  on  the  edge  of  the  river,  and  so 
near  to  the  Celestial  City  that  you  can  hear  the  heavenly  music  across 
the  stream,  and,  when  the  wind  blows  that  way,  you  can  smell  the 
sweet  perfumes  from  the  gardens  of  the  blessed.  That  is  a  stage  which 
we  must  not  expect  to  reach  iust  now.  My  young  friend,  inasmuch  as 
yon  arc  at  the  first  weak  ana  tender,  the  Lord  may  be  pleased  to  screen 
Ton  from  a  great  many  temptations  and  from  the  uprisings  of  your  flesh, 
bat  the  probabilities  are  that  before  long  you  will  put  down  your  harp 
and  take  up  your  sword,  and  your  joy  of  spirit  will  give  place  to  the 
agony  of  conflict.  Sin  is  in  you,  lurlang  in  secret  places,  tnough  it  has 
not  as  yet  leaped  forth  upon  yon  as  a  young  lion  on  its  prey.  You  per- 
haps have  thought,  "1  shall  do  better  than  those  who  have  gone 
before  me;  I  shall  shine  as  a  brilliant  saint";  let  not  him  that  putteth 
on  his  harness  boast  himself  as  though  he  put  it  ofi*.  There  are  fights 
before  yon,  and  I  warn  you  of  them,  so  that  when  you  remove  from  the 


104  MEIROPOLITAN  TABBBNICLB  PULPIT. 

state  of  content  to  the  state  of  conflict  you  may  confess,  *'  Before  it 
cainc  to  pass  I  was  warned  of  this,  and  therefore  I  am  prepared  for  it." 
The  reason  of  the  fight  is  this ;  the  new  nature  comes  into  our  heart, 
to  rule  over  it,  but  the  carnal  mind  is  not  willing  to  surrender  its  power, 
A  new  throne  is  set  up  in  the  heart,  and  the  old  monarch,  dethroned, 
outlawed,  and  made  to  lurk  in  holes  and  comers,  says  to  himself,  "I  will 
not  have  this.  Why  should  it  be?  Here  am  I,  who  was  once  this 
man's  king,  snubbed  and  made  to  hide  myself  as  though  I  were  a 
stranger.  I  will  get  the  throne  back  again."  Master  Bunyan,  in  his 
"  Holy  War,"  which  is  a  very  wonderful  allegory,  describes  Diabolus, 
you  know,  as  having  his  city  taken  from  him.  But,  after  the 
city  had  been  taken,  there  lurked,  in  the  holes  and  corners  of  that 
city,  certain  subjects  of  Diabolus,  and  these  were  always  plotting  and 
planning  how  they  could  get  the  city  back,  by  opening  the  gates  at 
night  to  let  in  their  old  king,  or  by  sowing  discontent  among  the 
inhabitants.  This  is  the  reason  for  the  perpetual  strife  within  our  souls. 
The  old  lusts  that  are  under  ban  and  curse,  and  which  we  are  hunting 
after  to  crucify  them,  put  their  heads  together,  and  labour  to  regain 
dominion.  The  flesh  will  wait  till  you  are  in  a  very  quiet  frame  of  mind  and 
feel  very  secure,  and  then  it  will  come  down  upon  you  with  its  evil 
fascinations.  At  another  time,  it  may  be,  you  are  in  great  trouble,  and 
you  feel  ready  to  sink,  and  then  comes  the  devil  upon  you  like  a  roaring 
lion,  hoping  to  destroy  your  fliith.  He  knows  how  to  time  the  tempta- 
tion, and  the  flesh  knows  how  to  rise  in  insurrection  when  we  arc  off 
our  guard,  and  when  surrounding  circumstances  are  all  conducive  to  sin. 
We  cannot  be  too  watchful,  for  the  flesh  will  rebel  all  of  a  sudden.  Wo 
may  get  it  down,  and  think  we  have  fettered  it  securely ;  but,  ah !  it  finds 
its  hands,  it  bresdcs  its  bonds,  and  lots  fly  an  arrow  at  our  heart.  You  said, 
"  I  shall  never  be  angry  again,"  and  while  you  were  congratulating  your- 
self on  the  sweetnass  of  your  temper  you  were  on  a  sudden  provoked 
from  quite  a  new  quarter,  and  your  wrath  boiled  over  directly.  "  No," 
said  you,  "I  never  shall  be  impatient  any  more,"  and  yet  within  a 
few  moments  you  were  as  full  of  murmuring  as  ever  you  had  been  in 
your  life.    Till  the  flesh  lies  in  the  grave  sin  will  not  l>e  dead. 

And  let  me  warn  you  that  the  flesh  may  be  doing  us  more  mischief 
when  it  seems  to  be  doing  no  mischief  at  all  than  at  any  other  time. 
During  war  the  sappers  and  miners  will  work  underneath  a  city,  and 
those  inside  say,  "The  enemy  are  very  quiet;  we  hear  no  roaring  of 
cannon,  we  see  no  capturing  of  Malakofe.  What  can  the  enemy  be  at  ?" 
They  know  their  business  well  enough,  and  are  laying  their  mines  for 
unexpected  strokes.  Hence  an  old  divine  used  to  say  that  he  was  never 
so  much  afraid  of  airy  devil  as  he  was  of  no  devil.  That  is  to  say» 
when  Satan  does  not  tempt,  it  is  often  our  worst  temptation.  To  be  let 
alone  tends  to  breed  a  dry  rot  in  the  soul.  *'  He  has  not  been  emptied 
from  vessel  to  vessel,"  said  the  prophet  of  old,  "  he  is  settled  upon  his 
lees":  this  spake  he  of  one  mio  was  under  the  divine  displeasure. 
Stagnation  is  one  of  the  worst  things  that  can  happen  to  ns,  and  so  it 
happeneth  that  we  are  never  secure. 

Thus,  dear  friends,  I  have  showed  you  that  thei'e  is  a  conflict  \iithin ; 
and  let  me  congratulate  you  if  it  he  a  conflict  The  ungodly  know  no 
such  inward  warfare.    They  sin,  and  thej  love  it;  but  where  there  is  a 


THIS  DUAL  iTATUttE  AKD  THIt  DVSL  WlTHIlf.  i05 

q>iritaal  conflict  the  grace  of  Ood  is  present.  We  do  sin,  bnt  we  hate 
an ;  we  &11  into  it,  but  we  loathe  it  and  fight  against  it ;  and  every  true 
diild  of  Ood  can  say  honestly  that  there  is  nothing  in  this  world  he 
dreads  so  mnch  as  to  grieye  his  Ood«  If  you  were  dead  in  sin  yon  would 
hare  no  trouble  about  it :  but  those  inward  pangs,  those  deep  emotions, 
tboae  bitter  sighs  and  cries,  that  exclamation  of  "  Oh,  wretch^  man  that 
I  am !  who  shall  deliver  me  fix>m  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  all  indicate 
roiritoal  life.  While  I  sympathise  with  your  sorrow  I  congratulate  you 
that  Tou  feel  it>  for  this  is  one  of  the  marks  of  a  child  of  God.  Forget 
not  that  in  renewed  men  there  are  two  opposing  forces,  and  that  these 
neoeasitate  a  life-long  war. 

Thirdly,  we  must  now  note  that  this  warfare  sohetihes  leads  us 
nrro  captiyity.  Observe,  "I  see  another  law  in  my  members  warring 
against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  ms  into  captivity  to  the  law  ^ 
Ml  which  is  in  my  mmnbersJ*  **  What  does  that  mean  ?  "  says  one.  It 
means  this,  that  if  you  sin  it  will  be  captivity  to  you  if  you  are  a  child 
of  God.  The  sinner  may  find  pleasure  in  sin,  but  you  will  not  if  you 
are  God's  son.  You  will  be  like  a  slave  in  chains,  locked  up  in  a  hor- 
rible dungeon,  if  you  fall  into  sin.  But  does  the  old  nature  make 
Christians  captives?  Yes,  in  this  way.  First,  many  a  Christian  feels 
himself  in  captivity  from  the  very  fact  that  the  old  nature  has  risen 
within  him.  Let  me  explain  myself.  Suppose  that  the  old  nature  sug- 
gests to  you  some  sin :  you  hate  the  sin  and  loathe  it,  and  you  despise 
yourself  for  lying  open  to  be  tempted  in  such  a  way.  The  very  fact 
that  such  a  thought  nas  crossed  your  mind  is  bondage  to  your  pure  spirit. 
Yon  do  not  fall  into  the  sin;  you  shake  off  the  serpent,  but  yon 
feel  its  slime  upon  your  soul.  Do  you  not  know  what  it  is  to 
have  a  very  violent  tendency  towards  an  evil,  the  very  thought  ol 
which  is  detestable  to  you  ?  Your  renewed  mind  exclaims,  "  How  can 
I  do  this  great  wickedness  and  sin  against  God  ?  "  but  yet  the  flesh  says, 
'^  Do  it,  do  it,  do  it,"  and  pictures  the  sweetness  and  the  pleasure  of  it. 
With  yonr  whole  soul  you  set  yourself  against  the  temptation,  the  cold 
sweat  stands  upon  your  brow  at  the  very  thought  of  your  Mliug  into  so 
fonl  a  transgression,  and  you  cry  to  God  in  prayer ;  but  yet  the  captivity  of 
your  soul  is  great  while  the  trial  lasts,  and  even  in  the  remembrance  of 
it.  Yon  say  to  yourself, ''  I  am  afraid  I  dallied  with  the  temptation. 
The  bait  would  not  have  been  so  alluring  to  me  if  there  had 
not  been  some  consent  of  my  soul  to  it.''  You  also  charge  your 
heart  witli  folly,  saying,  "  Though  I  did  not  commit  that  sin,  yet  there 
was  a  hankenng  after  it  in  me."  Though  others  could  not  condemn 
jou,  but  must  even  honour  your  self-denial,  yet  you  condemn  yourself 
for  any  degree  of  inclination  in  the  wrong  direction,  and  you  feel  that  the 
temptation  has  brought  you  at  once  into  captivity.  What  a  difference 
there  is  between  a  spot  on  one  thing  and  a  spot  on  another.  A  man 
makes  a  spot  with  ink  on  my  coat,  and  nobody  perceives  it;  but  if  he 
were  to  cast  a  drop  upon  this  white  handkerchief  how  soon  everybody 
would  see  ik  The  old  nature  is  like  a  black  coat,  too  dark  to  show  a 
blot ;  but  one  spot  of  temptation  falling  on  the  pure  white  linen  of  the  new 
nature  troubles  us  exceedingly ;  we  see  it,  and  we  loathe  it,  and  we  cry 
out  to  God  that  we  may  get  rid  of  it.  The  very  passing  of  temptation 
across  a  renewed  soul  brings  it  into  captivity.    I  stood  one  day  in  Eome 


106  HETBOPOLITAK  TABEBNACLB  PULPIT. 

looking  at  a  ver j  large  and  well  executed  photograph  of  a  street  and  an 
ancient  temple.    I  had  never  seen  bo  fine  a  photograph ;  but  I  noticed 
that  right  across  the  middle  of  it  was  the  trace  of  a  mule  and  a  cart. 
The  artist  had  done  his  best  to  prevent  it^  but  there  was  the  ghost  of 
that  cart  and  mule  all  the  way  along,  right  across  the  picture.    I  do  not 
say  it  spoilt  it,  but  it  certainly  did  not  improve  it.    Even  so  oftentimes, 
when  our  heart  is  most  cleansed  and  bears  best  the  image  of  God,  right 
across  the  Mr  picture  comes  the  trace  of  a  temptation,  and  we  are  grieved. 
An  observer  unskilled  in  art  might  not  notice  the  mark  on  the  photo- 
graph, but  a  careful  artist,  with  a  high  ideal,  is  vexed  to  see  his  work 
thus  marred ;  and  so  with  moral  stains,  that  which  the  conunon  man 
thinks  a  trifle  is  a  great  sorrow  to  the  pure*hearted  son  of  God,  and  he 
is  brought  into  captivity  by  it. 

Sometimes,  too,  a  Christian's  captivity  consists  in  his  losing  his  joy^ 
through  the  uprising  of  the  flesh,  I  speak  what  I  am  sure  many  of  the 
children  of  God  here  know.  You  are  rejoicing  in  the  Lord  and 
triumphant  in  his  name,  and  by-and-by  some  corruption  struggles  for 
the  mastery.  "  It  shall  not  rise,"  say  you.  You  put  it  down,  but  it 
strives  and  you  strive  too,  and  in  the  struggle  the  joy  of  the  Lord, 
which  was  your  strength,  seems  to  be  taken  away  fix>m  you.  A  sense  of 
the  dreadful  fact  that  the  leprosy  is  in  the  house  of  clay  in  which  you 
live  terrifies  you,  and  you  are  so  anxious  to  get  the  leprosy  out  of  the 
walls  that  you  would  sooner  see  the  old  house  moulder  into  dust  than 
live  where  evil  so  readily  approaches  you.  This  sight  of  inbred  sin 
may  cast  a  chill  upon  your  joy.  You  want  to  sing  the  praises  of  God, 
but  the  temptation  comes  ]ust  at  that  very  minute,  and  you  have  to 
battle  with  it,  and  the  song  gives  place  to  the  battle-shout.  It  is  time 
for  prayer,  and  you  are  in  the  attitude  of  devotion,  but  somehow  you 
cannot  control  your  thoughts ;  they  will  roam  hither  and  thither  under 
the  force  of  the  flesh.  My  thoughts  frequently  seem  like  a  lot  of  colts 
let  loose,  tearing  over  the  fields  of  my  soul  without  restraint.  In  holy 
contemplation  you  try  to  concentrate  your  thoughts  upon  the  subject 
in  hand,  and  you  cannot ;  very  likely  somebody  knocks  at  the  door  at 
the  same  time,  or  a  child  begins  to  cry,  or  a  man  begins  to  grind  an 
organ  under  your  window,  and  how  can  you  meditate  ?  All  things  seem 
to  be  against  you.  Little  outside  matters  which  are  trifling  to  others 
will  often  prove  terrible  disturbers  of  your  spirit,  and  what  others  smile 
at  you  are  made  to  weep  over ;  for  the  flesh  will  lay  hold  of  the  most 
paltry  concerns  to  prevent  your  coming  into  oommunion  with  the  Lord 
your  God.  Thus  by  taking  away  our  joy,  and  marring  our  fellowship, 
the  old  corruption  within  us  leads  us  into  captivity. 

But,  ah,  brethren,  this  is  not  all,  for  we  do  not  always  escape  from 
actual  sin.  We  do,  in  moments  of  forgetfulness,  that  which  we  would 
willingly  undo,  and  say  that  which  we  would  willingly  unsay.  The  spirit 
was  willing  to  be  perfect,  but  the  flesh  was  weak  ;  and  then  the  conse- 
quence is,  to  a  child  of  God,  that  he  feels  himself  a  captive.  He  has 
yielded  to  treacherous  blandishments  and  now  like  Samson  his  locks  are 
shorn.  He  goes  out  to  shake  himself  as  he  did  aforetime,  but  the  Philis- 
tines are  upon  him,  liis  God  is  not  with  him,  and  it  will  be  a  happy 
thing  for  him  if  he  does  not  lose  his  eyes,  and  come  to  grind  at  the  mill 
like  a  slave.    Oh,  what  need  have  we  to  be  on  our  guard,  and  to  look  to 


THl  DITAIi  VATtTBB  AND  THS  DUEL  WITHHT.  107 

the  strong  for  Btrength,  for  this  old  nature  within  ns  will  bring  us  into 
ca^yi^  if  it  can,  and  will  hold  us  there. 
jBat  I  must  close  with  this  reflection^  that  this  warfare,  Aim  this 

OOCAfilOKAL    TRIUMPH    07    THE    FLESH,    MAKE    US    LOOK    TO    CHRIST 

FOR  TiCTORY.  The  apostle  asks, ''  Who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  bodj 
of  this  death  ?  '*  And  his  reply  is,  **  I  thank  God  throudi  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.*'  Brethren  and  sisters,  I  am  persuaded  that  there  is  no  place 
BO  safe,  and  none  so  proper  and  fitting  ror  any  of  us,  as  a  sinner^s  place 
at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  I  have  reiMi  a  great  deal  about  perfection  in 
tiie  flesh,  and  I  have  tried  to  get  it.  I  have  also  tried  to  pray  after  the 
fiiahion  which  I  suppose  a  perfect  man  would  pray  in ;  but  the  theory  will 
not  hold  water  as  far  as  I  am  concerned.  IVhen  I  went  up  to  the  temple 
in  thafc  way,  and  tried  to  pray,  I  found  a  Pharisee  at  my  elbow.  A  good 
way  off  I  saw  a  poor  sinner,  smiting  on  his  breast,  and  saying,  "  God  be 
mcTOifial  to  me  a  sinner,"  and  I  perceived  that  he  went  away  justified, 
while  I  stood  there  and  envied  him.  I  could  not  stand  it,  I  went  back  to 
my  old  place  at  his  side,  and  smote  my  breast,  uttering  the  old  cry, "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  Then  I  too  felt  at  ease,  and  I  went  home 
jastified  and  rejoicing  in  the  Lord. 

Beloved,  whenever  there  is  a  question  between  me  and  the  devil  as  to 
whether  I  am  a  child  of  God,  I  have  given  over  seeking  evidence  in  my 
own  favour,  or  turning  to  my  experience  to  prove  that  I  am  in  a  state  of 
moe,  for  that  cunning  o]d  lawyer  knows  more  about  my  infirmities  than 
I  do,  and  can  very  soon  bring  two  to  one  against  me.  My  constant  way  is  to 
tell  the  accuser,  **  Well,  if  I  am  not  a  saint  I  am  a  sinner,  and  Jesus  came 
into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  therefore  I  will  go  to  Christ,  and  look  to 
him  again."  The  devil  himself  cannot  answer  that.  You  that  are  oldest 
in  the  divine  life — and  I  speak  to  some  who  have  known  the  Lord  these 
fifty  years — I  am  sure  that  you  find  times  in  which  no  mark,  evidence, 
or  eimerience  is  worth  a  groat  to  you  by  way  of  comfort,  and  you  are  led 
to  adopt  the  simple  expedient  which  I  have  recommended  to  all  the 
tempted  ones.  It  will  be  wise  to  live  upon  Jesus  always.  Begin  again 
at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  where  you  began  at  first,  with  the  old  cry. 


"  Nothing  in  my  hand  I  brinff  : 
Simplj  to  thj  cross  I  cling. 


That  is  the  way  to  conquer  sin,  as  well  as  to  overcome  despair ;  for, 
when  faith  in  Jesus  comes  back  to  vour  soul,  you  will  be  strong  to  fight 
with  your  corruptions,  and  you  will  win  the  victory,  which  you  never 
will  gain  if  you  allow  your  struggles  with  yout  sins  to  drive  you  away 
firom  your  Saviour.  Let  us  resort,  then,  to  Christ  who  giveth  us  the 
victory,  and  let  us,  the  longer  we  live,  praise  Christ  the  more.  You 
j^ang  Christian,  you  do  not  know  yet  what  a  dear  Saviour  you  have 
found.  You  know  you  have  found  him,  but  he  is  a  dearer  Christ  than 
on  think  he  is.  lou  were  naked  and  he  has  clothed  you  :  ay,  he 
as  put  the  armour  upon  you  which  will  ward  off  the  darts  of  the 
arch-enemy.  You  were  hungry,  and  he  has  fed  you  ;  ay,  but  he  has 
fed  yon  with  bread  immortal,  he  is  nourishing  a  divine  life  within  your 
soul.  He  has  given  you  peace,  and  you  are  grateful  for  it ;  ay,  but  he 
has  given  you  a  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding,  that  shall  keep 
your  heart  and  mind.    You  say  it  is  sweet  to  find  him  with  you.    So  it 


I 


108  XETBOPOLITAN  TABERKACLB  PULPIT* 

is,  but  oh,  how  sweet  ifc  will  be  to  have  him  with  you  when  vou  pass 
through  the  fires  and  are  not  burned,  when  you  go  through  the  floods 
and  arenotdrownedy  when  you  enter  upon  the  final  struggle  and  are  not 
afraid.  Oh,  beloved,  we  may  find  out,  and  shall  find  out,  more  of  our 
own  wants,  but  we  shall  also  discover  more  of  Christ's  all-sufficient  ful- 
ness. The  storm  will  become  more  terrible,  but  the  pilot's  power  to 
rule  that  storm  wiU  only  be  the  more  displayed.  The  ship  may  rock 
to  and  £ro  tiU  all  her  timbers  are  strained,  and  her  keel  may  threaten  to 
snap  in  twain,  but 

'*  He  will  preserve  it,  he  doth  steer 
Even  when  the  bark  seems  most  to  reel. 
Storms  are  the  trimnph  of  his  art." 

He  will  bring  his  people  safely  through  the  howling  wildeiiiess  and  the 
land  of  great  drought.  Be  not  afraid,  ye  that  have  begun  the  divine 
pilgrima^,  for  his  fiery  cloudy  pillar  will  attend  yon.  Dragons  there 
are,  but  oy  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  you  shall  wound  the  dragon  as  of 
old  he  was  wounded  at  the  Eed  Sea.  There  wiU  be  death  to  fight  with, 
but  Christ  has  died,  and  you  shall  be  victorious  over  the  grave.  Expect 
conflict ;  be  not  astonished  when  it  comes,  but  as  confidently  expect  vic- 
tory, and  shout  in  prospect  of  it.  As  surely  as  the  Lord  has  called 
you  to  this  celestial  warfare  he  will  bear  you  through  it.  You  shall 
sing  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan  unto  him  that  loved  you  and  washed 
you  from  your  sins  in  his  blood.  In  the  haven  of  the  blessed,  in  the  land 
of  the  hereafter,  in  the  home  of  the  holy,  where  the  weary  are  at  rest, 
you  shall  sing  the  hi^h  praises  of  God  and  the  Lamb. 

I  would  to  Ood  this  sermon  had  a  relation  to  all  those  who  hear  or 
read  it,  but  I  fear  it  has  not  I  can  only  hope  that  those  who  have  no 
conflict  within  may  begin  to  feel  one.  May  God  grant  that  yon  may  not 
rest  quiet  in  sin,  for  to  be  at  peace  with  sin  is  to  be  sleeping  youi-self 
into  helL  God  arouse  you,  that  you  may  flee  to  Christ  for  mercy  at  this 
very  hour,  and  there  shall  be  joy  in  his  presence.    Amen. 


PoETiON  OP  ScRiPTimB  READ  BEFORE  Sermon — Eoman3  vii. 


Hymns  prom  "Our  Ows  Hymn  Book." — 436,  C44,  760. 


Otie  of  the  most  pithy  and  conyincing  works  ever  written  upon  Belierers* 
Baptism  is  "BAPTISM  DISCOVERED  PLAINLY  AND  FAITHFULLY 
ACCORDING  TO  THE  WORD  OF  GOD."  By  John  Nokcott.  A  Now 
Edition.  Corrected  and  somewhat  altered  by  Cuakles  Haddon  Spvageox. — 
Hewn.  Paasmore  and  Alabaster  pablieh  it  at  One  Shilling. 


r 


^ttfopUtm  M^ipcte  inl^ti 


THE  MEAT  AND  DEINK  OP  THE  NEW  NATUBE. 


%     I 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    UETROPOLITAR    TABERNACLE,    NBWIKGTOH* 


*  For  my  fleali  u  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood  ia  drink  indeed.*' — John  ▼!.  56. 

We  know  that  the  Sayionr  s^ke  of  spiritual,  not  of  carnal  things,  and 
be  spoke  of  himself  not  as  being  in  any  sense  meat  for  our  bodies — ^that 
could  not  be — but  as  being  food  for  our  souls.  This  statement  is  very 
plain  to  us,  but  those  who  heard  it  at  the  first  found  it  very  hard  to 
understand*  Nor  need  we  wonder,  for  men  of  the  schools  who  play 
with  letters,  words,  and  phrases,  frequently  meet  with  difficulties 
where  none  exist.  The  Jews  of  our  Lord's  day  had  &llen  into  the 
foolish  habit  of  taking  words  to  pieces  and  dwelling  upon  the  syllables 
and  letters^  until  they  seemed  to  nave  lost  all  power  of  getting  at  the 
plain  meaning  which  ordinary  language  was  intended  to  convey.  They 
blinded  their  own  eyes  with  the  pretence  of  superior  wisdom,  made 
puzzles  and  riddles  out  of  plain  words,  raised  a  huge  dust,  and  sat  down 
in  it  blinded  to  the  end.  Our  God  has  taught  us  more,  and  given  us  to 
understand  more  clearly,  for  his  Holy  Spirit  has  given  us  back  the 
childlike  spirit,  so  that  we  are  willing  to  see  the  natural  sense  which 
words  were  meant  to  reveal.  Now  we  see  great  force  and  clear  ex- 
pressiveness in  that  very  language  which  seemed  before  to  conceal  the 
Saviour's  meaning.  It  was  a  veil  to  the  Jews,  and  they  saw  not :  it  is 
an  instructive  parable  to  us,  which,  instead  of  hiding  the  truth,  shadows 
it  oat  to  us,  and  softens  the  light  for  our  weak  eyes.  We  sec,  I  fear, 
even  now  but  dimly,  for  our  spiritual  sight  is  scarcely  clear  as  yet ;  but 
vet  we  see,  blessed  be  God  for  that,  and  we  see  Jesus,  and  we  see  some- 
thing of  his  loving  meaning.  We  do  more  than  see :  we  enjoy,  and 
therefore  know  to  the  life  what  it  is  to  feed  upon  his  flesh,  which 
ifl  meat  indeed,  and  to  drink  his  blood,  which  is  drink  indeed. 

We  cannot  attempt  to  explain  the  deep  mysteries  of  our  text,  but  rather 
—as  the  swallow  touches  the  brook  with  his  wing  and  is  awav  again — 
we  will  glance  at  these  crystal  waters  of  this  sacred  truth,  and  then  up 
and  away.  The  text  teaches  us,  first,  w?uit  Christ  must  be  to  us.  We 
shall  consider,  secondly,  tvhat  is  botmd  up  in  this;  and,  thirdly,  what 
TtjUcHcns  naturally  arise  out  of  it. 

I.    What  Christ  must  be  to  us.    The  answer  from  the  text  is, 


110  M8TB0P0LITAH  TABSBKACLE  PULPIT. 

He  must  be  onr  meat  and  drink.  He  most  be  eyerythmg  to  m — ^ihe 
one  thing  ncedfal,  the  indispensable^  necessarT,  all-snfficient  supply. 
He  must  be  the  source  of  strength,  the  sapport  of  life,  and  we  must 
feel  him  to  be  so.  He  musti  to  oome  baek  to  the  figurei  be  meat  and 
drink  to  us.  Our  tiord  in  speaking  to  the  Jews  was  doubtless  thinking 
of  the  paschal  lamb,  and  of  the  time  when  Israel  came  out  of  Egypt ; 
when  they  not  only  had  the  blood  of  the  lamb  sprinkled  upon  their 
houses  for  their  security,  but  the  lamb  itself  within  them  as  their  sus- 
tenance. They  sat  down  to  feed  upon  it  before  they  enjoyed  the  fulness 
of  redemption  by  passing  out  of  Egypt  from  under  the  bondage  of 
Pharaoh.  They  did  not  understand  that  symbol,  and  they  little  knew 
what  our  great  Lord  and  Master  meant  when  he  employed  it  to  set 
forth  himself,  and  said,  ''My  flesh  is  neieat  indeed,  and  my  blood  is 
drink  indeed." 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  must  be  to  us,  then,  our  spiritual  meat  and 
drink.    What  mean  we  by  that  ? 

First,  that  the  doclrine  of  God  indamafe  mtist  be  the  food  of  our 
souls.  Brethren,  we  have  no  doubt  as  to  the  true  and  proper  Deity  of 
our  Lord  Jesus.  We  have  lon^  since  passed  out  of  the  region  of  con- 
troversy about  that,  for  he  has  been  God  to  us  in  the  work  of  salvation 
and  in  the  new  creation  which  we  have  experienced  through  his  power. 
We  have,  moreover*  no  doubt  about  his  humanity,  but  we  do  not 
Dsually  dwell  enough  upon  it.  We  are  bound  to  adore  his  Deity,  but  we 
must  not  forget  that  he  is  as  truly  man  as  if  he  were  not  God,  and  as 
much  a  brother  to  us  as  if  he  were  not  the  Son  of  the  Highest.  Jesus  is 
assuredly  man.  Kow  feed  on  this.  The  man  Christ  Jesus  heads  up  a 
new  race :  as  the  first  Adam  headed  up  the  race  of  old,  and  was  our 
federal  head  to  stand  or  fall  for  us,  and  we  were  to  stand  or  fall  in  him, 
BO  is  there  now  a  new  head,  who  brings  us  up  from  the  ruin  of  the  first 
Adam's  fall  and  puts  us  into  a  new  position  before  the  living  God. 
There  is  a  man  who  has  redeemed  us.  There  is  a  man  who  has  made 
all  the  men  in  him  well  pleasing  to  God.  There  is  a  man  who  repre- 
sents manhood  in  perfection  in  the  glonr  above.  There  is  a  man  in 
whom  all  believers  are,  even  as  we  rea^  that  Levi  was  in  the  loins  of 
Abraham  when  Melchisidec  met  him.  We  are  in  Christ,  and  we  stand 
now  before  the  eternal  throne  in  that  blessed  representative  man.  Feed 
on  this  doctrine  now.  Jesus  is  a  real  mau,  though  clothed  with  all 
power;  he  is  God,  and  yet  he  is  the  mirror  of  tenderness;  he  ruleth 
all  things,  and  yet  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  You 
must  believe  this,  and  you  must  receive  it,  and  you  must  rest  upon  it, 
otherwise  you  have  no  life  in  you.  Some  try  to  turn  this  fact  into  a 
myth,  but  indeed  it  is  no  parable  or  figure  of  speech,  for  the  Christ  who 
spoke  these  words  was  there  before  them — one  whom  they  had  often 
seen  eat  and  drink :  he  spake  of  himself  with  his  own  lips,  and  was  not 
a  phantom  or  apparition,  but  a  solid  existence  of  flesh  and  blood.  So 
then  it  is  upon  the  historical  Christ,  whose  existence  is  a  matter  of  fact, 
that  my  soul  must  feed,  as  I  believe  him  to  be  both  human  and  divine. 

But  this  is  not  all :  the  food  to  J>e  fed  upon  is  not  merely  God  in- 
carnafe,  but  Christ  suffering.  Notice  that  he  puts  it  "Mj  flesh  is  meat 
indeed,  and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed'':  when  the  flesh  and  the  blood 
are  mentioned  separately,  death  is  implied.    The  two  being  divided  and 


THE  HSAT  AND  DRINK  OF  THB  NEW  KATURB,  111 

bem*:  named  together  in  one  connection  are  the  token  and  emblem  of 
onr  Saviour*B  vicarions  sacrifice.  We  also  (I  am  speaking  of  the 
brethren  worshipping  here)  have  long  ago  past  beyond  the  region  of  con- 
troversy as  to  tne  snbstitutionary  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  onr  Lord ; 
for  if  it  be  not  so,  then  is  onrpreaching  vain  and  onr  hope  is  also  vain, 
and  we  are  jet  in  onr  sins.  We  have  no  hope  of  eternal  life  save  that 
which  begins,  centres,  and  ends  in  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ.  '^  This 
man,  when  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat  down  at 
the  right  hand  of  Ood" — that  is  our  sole  hope,  ffe  has  made  expiation 
for  sin. 

^*  He  bore,  that  we  might  never  beari 
His  Father's  righteous  ire/' 

We  are  now  to  bnild  np  onr  souls  by  feeding  upon  the  suffering,  the 
crucified,  the  dead,  the  buried  Christ,  as  having  stood  as  our  repre- 
sentative, and  as  having  endured  death  in  our  stead.  You  cannot  obtain 
comfort  apart  from  this  if  you  have  felt  the  weight  of  sin ;  and  you 
cannot  continue  happy  apart  from  this  great  historical  fact  if  you  ai*e 
oonscions  of  sin.  rly,  my  hearers,  into  the  wounds  of  Jesus,  and  like 
doves  ye  shall  find  shelter  in  that  rock ;  but  with  eager  wing  ye  may 
glide  over  the  waste  of  human  thought  without  finding  a  rest  for  the 
sole  of  your  weary  foot  till  you  light  upon  the  truth  of  the  great 
Eubstitntion.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us,"  is  the 
first  bell  of  heaven's  marriage  peal,  and  the  second  has  an  equally  sweet 
note  of  its  own — "  Christ  died  for  our  sins.*'  Ring  them  both  full 
often.  Listen  to  them  as  they  sound  forth — "God  with  us,  Christ 
fvr  us."  Incarnation,  substitution — was  there  ever  better  meat  and 
drink  for  a  hungry  soul  ?  This  surely  satisfies  the  desire  of  the  most 
hungry  spirit — "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  fix>m 
all  sin." 

I  have,  as  it  were,  in  those  few  words  set  out  the  viands  of  the  feast. 
But  now  I  would  have  you  note  that  our  Lord  must  be  to  us  meat  and 
drink ;  and  meat  is  not  intended  to  look  at,  but  to  feed  on,  I  heard 
the  other  day  that  in  a  certain  Socinian  place  of  worship  they  have 
gone  the  length  of  setting  the  bread  and  wine  on  the  table  for  the 
pe<jple  to  look  at,  but  they  suppose  that  it  is  quite  unnecessary  that  they 
should  actually  eat  and  drink.  It  is  fittingly  done  of  them :  that  is 
con^tent  with  their  creed.  They  have  no  Christ  to  feed  upon.  There 
is  nothing  in  their  belief  which  could  feed  the  soul  of  a  mouse,  if  a 
mouse  had  a  soul.  Why  should  they  attempt  to  feed  the  people  in 
figure  when  really  they  have  no  incarnate  God  or  atoning  Saviour.  If 
it  be  indeed  true  that  in  one  of  their  places  of  worship  they  have 
exhibited  the  bread  and  wine  instead  of  handing  it  out  to  be  eaten,  it 
is  remarkably  typical  of  their  bloodless,  lifeless  gospel,  their  Christ  who 
is  no  Deity,  their  Jesus  who  is  no  sacrifice  for  sin.  How  can  the  soul 
find  food  there  ?  But  we  must  beware  lest  we  ourselves  should  ever 
Ti%i  content  with  merely  glancing  at  Christ  and  not  partaking  of  him. 
What  is  to  be  done  with  food,  with  meat  and  drink  ?  It  is  to  be  re- 
ceived. Food  on  the  table  does  not  nourish ;  it  must  be  taken  into  the 
hani  The  cup  on  the  board  will  never  cheer ;  it  must  be  lifted ;  it 
most  be  appropriated.    I  know  that  many  of  you  have  by  a  humble  but 


112  MBTBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

braye  faith  appropriated  Christ  as  he  is  set  before  yon  in  the  gospel 
He  has  bidden  yon  come  and  eat,  and  yon  have  come  pressed  by  a  sore 
famine  that  was  in  yonr  sonl.  Yon  have  come,  and  yon  have  said, 
''  He  is  mine/'  and  yon  have  taken  him  to  yonrselves  by  simple  child- 
like confidence  in  him.  Yon  have  well  done,  continne  to  do  the  same. 
^^  As  ye  have  received  Christ  Jesns  the  Lord,  so  walk  ye  in  him."  Go 
on  receiving  him.  ''To  whom  coming/'  says  the  apostle,  ''as  nnto  a 
living  stone";  regard  him  not  as  one  to  wnom  yon  nave  come  by  one 
act  and  have  done  with  him,  bnt  as  one  to  whom  yon  come  continnally. 
"  Of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace/'  but  we  are 

foing  on  receiving,  by  continuing  to  believe  in  him.  Hold  on  to  this, 
[aving  begun  in  the  spirit,  do  not  hope  to  be  perfected  by  the  flesh. 
Do  not  think  that  you  are  to  be  fed  afterwards  on  something  other 
than  Christ,  but  go  on  receiving,  appropriating,  and  taking  home  the 
great  truths  concerning  your  Lord.  Here,  my  brethren,  is  the  life  of 
your  faith.  But  even  appropriating  is  not  enough  to  constitute  feeding. 
After  taking  the  morsel,  it  is  put  into  the  mouth,  and  received  inwardly ; 
the  draught  of  wine  is  poured  into  the  throat  and  it  disappears.  Receive 
truth  not  only  as  a  matter  of  creed,  but  drink  it  in  as  the  ox  sucks 
in  the  water  when  he  stands  up  to  his  knees  in  the  pool.  Take  Christ 
into  your  very  soul — into  your  JiearVs  belief  as  well  as  into  your  mind's 
belief.  Mental  beliefs  shift  and  change :  the  inward  sours  belief  never 
alters.  I  reckon  that  we  know  nothing  rightly  till  we  have  absorbed 
it,  and  made  it  part  and  parcel  of  ourselves.  The  vital  truths  with 
regard  to  our  T^ord  Jesus  must  go  down  into  the  inward  parts  of  the 
soul,  as  the  food  descends  into  the  secret  parts  of  the  belly  to  feed  the 
entire  man. 

And  you  know  what  l)ecomes  of  the  food.  16  is  taken  up  by  the 
nature  itself,  and  becomes  transmuted  into  it.  After  its  digestion  it 
passes  through  various  processes,  and  ultimately  becomes  the  life-blood, 
out  of  which  is  built  up  nerve,  muscle,  sinew,  bone,  flesh,  heart.  Every- 
thing comes  of  it.  Now,  you  must  so  believe  in  Jesus  that  no  longer  is 
it  a  matter  of  question  with  you  whether  you  will  retain  him  or  not, 
for  if  you  have  inwardly  received  him  you  cannot  lose  him  for  ever. 
Oh  that  blessed  "  Quis  separabiff* — "Who  shall  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ?"  It  is  difficult  to  de- 
prive a  person  of  that  which  he  has  received  mentally,  for  facts  learned 
in  childhood  are  remembered  even  to  old  age.  No  one  could  compel 
another  to  forget,  but  yet  without  such  compulsion  the  memory  might 
relax  its  hold  through  lapse  of  years :  the  mind  might  part  with  that 
which  it  has  received,  but  no  known  power  could  take  away  fi'om  a  man 
that  which  he  has  eaten  and  assimilated.  A  person  may  very  readily 
pick  my  pocket  of  ray  purse,  but  what  I  ate  yesterday  he  cannot  steal. 
That  is  mine ;  it  is  joined  to  myself,  and  has  built  me  up.  I  do  not 
know  what  portion  of  my  flesh  comes  of  my  morning  meal,  or  of  my 
mid-day  repast,  but  there  it  is,  and  there  it  must  be.  It  has  entered  into 
me,  and  never  can  be  got  away  from  me  again.  So  when  the  soul 
takes  in  Christ's  truth  with  that  simple  childlike  faith  which  is  the 
mouth,  the  truth  goes  into  the  soul  and  is  thought  over,  trusted  in, 
delighted  in,  and  becomes  so  part  and  parcel  of  the  inner  consciousness 
and  of  the  new  nature  of  the  man  that  it  would  be  henceforth  utterlv 


THE  KEAT  ASD  DBIKK  OF  THE  NEW  NATURE.  113 

impossible  to  tear  away  that  truth  from  him.  Pound  a  true  Christian 
in  a  mortar  and  eyery  single  atom  would  say, ''  I  belong  to  Christ." 
Grind  him  finer  than  the  smallest  dust  of  the  threshing  floor  and  every 
minate  particle  would  still  sny,  *'  Christ  is  in  me."  For  so  it  is  that 
the  Chnst  has  entered  the  man,  permeated  his  nature,  become  his  very 
life,  and  now  it  is  ''  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  Now  is 
the  text  fulfilled  in  us, ''  For  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ 
in  God.  When  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also 
^)pear  with  him  in  glory."  ^'  Abide  in  me,"  said  our  Lord,  and  ho 
gave  his  own  promise  to  be  with  us  for  ever.  That  is  just  the  result  of 
eating  Christ,  and  to  this  we  must  come.  Beloved,  I  have  thus  ex« 
plained  the  matter  as  well  as  I  can,  but  as  old  Bollock  says,  '^  The  only 
way  to  understand  feeding  upon  Christ  is  to  feed  upon  Christ."  This 
is  a  practical,  personal,  experimental  business.  In  learning  certain 
acts  you  must  yourself  become  a  practical  scholar,  the  master  cannot 
teach  by  merely  setting  the  copy,  the  scholar  must  imitate  it  line  by 
hue  with  his  own  hand :  and  so  here,  I  can  teach  little  by  words  only, 
you  must  practise  what  is  spoken.  Now  feed  ve  on  the  Lord  Jesus ;  let 
each  one  of  yoa  do  it.  I  know  what  some  ao :  they  will  not  feed  on 
Christ,  bat  they  pick  over  the  heavenly  bread  like  dainty  folks  who 
have  no  stomach  for  their  meat.  This  bit  of  Christ  they  would  have, 
but  the  other  does  not  suit  their  tooth:  justification  by  faith  they 
would  have,  but  not  sanctification, — ^they  do  not  like  that.  lb  is  a 
whole  Christ  you  and  I  must  have — a  whole  Christ,  as  to  every  part  of 
his  teaching,  character,  work,  and  offices.  We  must  receive  him  into 
oaraelv^  without  division,  rejoicing  to  take  him  just  as  he  is. 
Especially  must  we  receive  the  spirit  of  Christ,  for  "  if  any  man  have 
not  the  spirit  of  Christ  he  is  none  of  his."  We  must  partake  in  the 
hxing  spirit,  the  self-denying  spirit,  the  generous  spirit  which  lives  not 
within  itself,  but  goes  forth  in  forgiveness  of  injuries,  and  in  seeking  to 
licnefit  all  mankind.  We  must  have  Jesus  in  us,  deh'ghting  to  take  in 
the  whole  of  him,  for  he  says  farther  on  in  this  very  chapter, ''  He  that 
cateth  me** — that  is  even  more  comprehensive  than  his  ''flesh  and  his 
blood" — ^''He  that  eateth  me,  even  he  shall  live  by  me":  the  entire 
Christ  must  be  taken  into  the  soul  to  build  up  the  inner  man. 

II.  Now,  secondly,  what  is  bound  up  m  this  bating  of  his 
FLESH  AND  DRiNKiNa  OF  HIS  BLOOD  ?  Here  WO  wlU  take  you  back 
to  the  context. 

And  notice,  first,  that  there  is  for  this  eating  the  flesh  and  di'inking 
the  blood  of  Christ  snch  an  essential  necessity  that  Aa  wlio  has  not  so 
eaten  and  drank  has  no  spiritual  life  at  aU,  It  is  a  strong  word, ''  Ex* 
cept  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no 
life  in  yvni."  He  does  not  mean  that  they  have  no  natural  life ;  he  is 
speaking  about  spiritual  thiners.  Some  that  are  as  foolish  as  Jndaiaers 
in  the  matter  of  sticking  to  tne  letter,  tell  us  that  this  means  existence, 
and  that  no  man's  eternal  existence  is  certain  except  that  of  a  believer  in 
Christ.  That  dogma  is  not  taught  here,  certainly.  Our  Lord  is  not 
speaking  of  existence ;  he  is  speaking  of  a  far  higher  thing  than  exist- 
ence, namely,  life,  Have-you  never  learned  the  difference  between  death 
and  non-existence,  and  between  life  and  existence  ?  If  you  have  not, 
yon  are  babes  in  understanding!  and  you  will  often  be  blundering  and 


114  UETROPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

losing  yonr  way  in  the  midsfc  of  texts  of  Scripture.    A  man  may  exist  in 
everlasting  death,  as,  alas,  all  who  die  unbelievers  must  do;  but  blessed 
is  he  who  lives  !    Blessed  is  he  who  shall  live  for  ever !    Let  me  repeat 
the  word,  "lives";  I  did  not  say  exists.     What  a  glorious  thing  is  life. 
Tet,  if  I  had  to  explain  to  you  what  life  is,  I  might  find  it  far  easier 
by  some  action  of  my  own  to  show  that  I  lived  than  to  tell  you  exactly 
what  life  is.    He  however,  who  eats  Ohrist  has  life.    He  who  has  not 
done  so  has  not  life.    Do  you  understand  this ;  that  unless  you  have 
received  Christ  by  faith  into  your  souls  you  have  no  life.    You  can  work, 
you  can  walk,  you  can  speak ;  you  have  all  sorts  of  natural  life,  but  you 
have  not  the  life  everlasting  of  which  Jesus  speaks.    The  life  of  God  is 
not  in  you.    You  are  dead,  and  what  a  frightful  condition  that  is,  and  to 
what  horror  yet  greater  does  it  lead !     For  wherever  there  is  death  the 
dead  thing  will  go   a   stage  farther  on.    And  what  is  that  stage? 
Corruption.  Only  leave  a  corpse  alone  long  enough,  and  it  must  corrupt. 
Flesh  corrupts  necessarily.    Already  there  are  some  signs  of  corruption 
about  every  ungodly  man :  outward  sin,  and  especially  the  inward  sin 
of  rejecting  Christ,  are  a  grievous  corruption.    Your  worm  has  begun 
to  devour,  even  the  worm  that  never  dies.   Then  will  be  reached  another 
stage,  for  corruption  must  be  cast  into  the  fire.    For  utter  rottenness 
the  end  must  be  burning.    0  sinner,  your  fire  has  begun  to  burn — tho 
fire  that  will  never  be  quenched,  for  sin  is  the  kindling  of  hell.    It  is  an 
awful  thing  to  abide  in  death,  and  yet  he  that  believeth  not  on  Christ  is 
condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not  believed  on  the  Son  of  God.   It 
is  enough  to  make  you  spring  from  your  seats,  0  ye  that  are  unbelievers, 
to  think  that  you  are  not  waiting  to  be  tried :  you  are  condemned 
already.    This  is  not  a  state  of  probation,  as  I  often  hear  it  said.    Your 
probation  is  past.     You  are  condemned  already,  because  you  have  not 
believed  on  the  Son  of  God ;  and  death  is  upon  you  now.    The  sentence 
has  already  begun  to  take  effect,  and  it  will  go  on  to  tho  consummatiou 
of  corruption,  till  at  last  the  Lord  shall  say, ''  Bury  my  dead  out  of  my 
sight,"  and  you  must  be  driven  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  from 
the  glory  of  his  power.    There  is  no  life  in  you  unless  you  have  I'eceived 
Christ.    Will  you  think  of  this,  you  thinkers  ?    Only  think  of  your 
being  dead.    Will  you  think  of  this,  vou  ceremonialists,  to  whom  the 
outward  baptism,  and  the  outward  Lord's  supper,  and  the  church-going 
and  the  chapl-going  are  everything  ?    Unless  you  have  fed  on  Ohrist 
there  is  no  life  in  you. 

Then  comes,  in  the  next  place,  the  further  truth,  namely,  that  all  who 
Jiave  received  Jesus  Christ  to  he  to  them  their  meat  and  drfkk  have  eternal 
life.  "  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eternal  life." 
I  do  not  know  how  our  brethren  who  doubt  the  final  perseverance  of  the 
saints  manage  to  escape  from  the  plain  teaching  of  the  text.  There  are 
always  ways  of  getting  over  everything ;  you  can  drive  a  coach  and  six, 
they  say,  through  any  form  of  human  language.  But  it  does  seem  to  me 
that  if  1  have  eternal  life  I  must  eternally  live,  and  cannot  possibly  die. 
If  I  have  got  eternal  life,  if  words  mean  anything,  I  am  an  eternally 
saved  man.  If  I  have  received  Jesus  Christ  into  my  soul,  I  have  the 
life  in  me  which  will  no  more  die  than  the  life  of  God,  for  God's  own 
life  is  eternal  life,  and  if  I  have  received  such  life  as  his,  how  can  I 
perish  ?    I  shall  not  be  slain  by  sin :  the  life  in  me  cannot  sin,  because 


THEXBAT  AND  DRINK  OF  THB  NEW  NATURE.  115 

it  18  bom  of  God.  The  life  in  me  will  throw  off  the  darts  of  tempta- 
tion if  it  be  eternal  lifb.  There  remains  nothing  for  it  but  to  shake  off 
the  death  which  often  surrounds  it  by  reason  of  the  old  man,  and  to 
mount  up  like  a  bird  set  free  from  its  cage,  singing  because  of  its 
escape,  singing  in  the  joy  of  life,  and  winging  its  happy  way  upwaid  to 
the  throne  of  Qod. 

Rejoice  then,  dear  friend,  that  if  you  have  received  Christ,  you  have 
eternal  life  in  actual  possession  at  this  moment.  "I  do  not  feci  it 
sometimes,"  say  you.  Do  not  try  to  live  by  feeling.  It  is  the  most 
uncertain  thing  in  the  world ;  you  might  as  well  try  to  live  by  the 
barometer.  Feeling  goes  up  and  down,  up  and  down,  and  changes 
oftener  than  the  moon.  It  is  hard,  uncomfortable  living.  Live  by  faith, 
for  it  is  written,  "  the  just  shall  live  by  feith."  Your  life  is  a  life  of 
trust.     Keep  to  it. 

'^  Ah,  but  I  see  so  much  about  mo  that  grieves  mc."  Thank  God  it 
grieves  you.  If  you  see  sin  and  it  does  not  grieve  jon,  it  is  a  token  of 
death  ;  but  if  it  grieves  you,  there  is  life  still  in  you,  notwithstanding 
all  the  death  that  surrounds  it.  You  may  sometimes  have  seen  a  spark 
in  the  midst  of  a  heap  of  autumn  leaves  which  are  all  damp  and  will  not 
bum,  but  only  smoulder  and  smoke,  and  yet  that  spark  continues  to 
live,  and  the  very  smother  from  the  heap  proves  it  is  so.  There 
is  one  who  will  not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  but  will  fan  it  till  it  rises 
to  a  flame,  and  then  it  will  devour  the  leaves  which  covered  it,  and  dry 
up  the  damps  which  sought  to  destroy  it 

Furthermore,  if  you  believe  in  Jesus  and  have  received  him,  you  have 
gathered  a  lifb  in  which  Christ  giveth  us  the  victory,  even  through  his 
name — a  life  which  will  rise,  and  rise,  and  rise,  and  conquer  ail  sin. 
The  believer's  inner  life  must  come  to  absolute  perfection,  and  tread 
every  sin  beneath  its  foot.  Very  different  is  this  from  the  doctrine  that 
a  man  who  is  a  child  of  God  may  sin  as  he  pleases  and  yet  be  saved. 
That  doctrine  is  of  the  devil ;  but  this  is  quite  another  doctrine,  and 
ministers  to  holiness.  The  quickened  man  will  not  willingly  and 
habitually  sin,  for  his  seed  remaineth  in  him,  and  he  cannot  sin,  be- 
cause he  is  bom  of  God.  The  tone  and  tenor  and  bearing  of  his  life 
will  be  towards  holiness  and  not  towards  sin,  and  the  Lord  who  is  able 
to  keep  him  from  falling  will  preserve  him  to  his  eternal  kingdom 
and  glory,  and  he  that  has  begun  a  good  work  in  them  will  perfect  it 
unto  the  dav  of  Ohrist. 

Onr  Lord  having  thus  given  ns  the  negative  and  the  positive  in  our 
text,  tells  us  that  his  flesh  and  blood,  or  himself,  received  into  the  soul, 
are  most  efScient  nourishment:  in  it  is  BaUsf action,  ''My  flesh  is 
meat  indeed*^  The  Greek  word  is  "tmly,"  or,  some  say,  "true  meat." 
Now  that  which  we  eat  for  the  body  is  not  tme  meat.  As  George 
Herbert  says,  **  When  thon  art  at  thy  meat  eat  a  bit,  and  then  say, 
'Earth to  earth  I  commit.'"  It  is  a  deadly  business.  It  is  burying 
earth  in  earth,  and  that  living  grave  of  earth  will  be  itself  buried  in 
earth  by-and-by«  The  eating  of  material  meat  is  the  poor  building  up 
of  a  fabric  that  must  ultimatelv  crumble  into  nothingness.  The  meat 
we  eat  has  all  the  elements  of  aissolution  about  it  before  we  receive  it, 
and  it  only  feeds  for  a  short  time, — hence  it  is  not  meat  indeed. 
In  the  matter  of  mental  food  how  much  there  is  which  is  not  bread, 


116  UBTROPOLITAN  TABSENAOLE  PULPIT. 

and  can  neyer  satisfy  the  mind.  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  that  can 

fill  a  sonl  to  the  fall  save  Jesus.    Perhaps  I  ad<^8S  some  thinker  who 

has  been  trying  to  satisfy  his  sonl  by  sniffing  np  the  east  wind  of 

speculative  philosophy.    Ah,  well,  if  you  swallow  a  dose  of  Kant,  or 

Hegel,  Schleiermacher,  or  any  one  of  those  gentlemen,  if  you  do  not  feel 

as  if  you  had  been  eating  bubbles  and  bladders,  your  mental  constitution 

and  mine  dififer  greatly.    There  is  nothing  in  them  all  but  gas,  or  vapour 

less  substantial    Why,  a  man  may  take  down  their  books^a  whole 

dozen  of  them — and  devour  their  contents,  and  then  say,  **  What  is  it  ? 

Is  it  not  much  ado  about  nothing  ?    These  thinkings  are  dreamings, 

vacuums,  airy  nothings."    All  the  philosophies  that  ever  were  invented 

could  not  satisfy  a  soul.    The  worst  of  it  is  that  many  do  not  want 

to  be  satisfied.     **  We,"  say  they,  "  would  sooner  be  seekers  after 

truth  than  finders  of  it."    They  somewhat  dififer  from  men  of  practical 

common  sense  who,  ordinarily,  would  rather  have  money  than  earn  it, 

and  would  rather  eat  their  ainners  than  hunt  for  them.    Still  that  is 

their  way,  and,  if  they  like  it,  I  suppose  they  must  have  it.    Every 

creature  after  its  own  order.    But  if  you  want  to  be  fed,  dear  friends, 

depend  upon  it  nothing  will  feed  you  but  Christ.    There  was  a  man  of 

great  appetite  who  lived   many  years  ago,  and  he  be^an  to  feast 

ravenously.    He  was  such  a  drinker  that  I  may  say  of  nim  that  he 

drank  up  Jordan  at  a  draught,  and  he  was  such  an  eater,  that,  if  you 

heard  the  story  of  what  was  brought  to  his  table,  you  would  be  like  the 

Queen  of  Shcba,  utterly  astonished,  and  say  that  the  half  was  not  told 

you.    His  name  was  Solomon,  and  he  fed  his  soul  with  all  the  arts  and 

sciences,  and  with  all  the  poetries  and  luxuries  of  the  age,  nor  did  he 

refrain  from  laughter  and  wantonness.    Thei*e  was  not  a  cup  he  did  not 

drain,  nor  a  dainty  from  any  land,  nor  a  fruit  from  any  tree,  of  which  he 

did  not  eat.    Yet  when  he  rose  up  from  that  abundant  banquet,  all  he 

had  to  say  was,  *'  Vanity  of  vanities  ;  all  is  vanity."    I  have  seen  a  poor 

soul  feed  on  Christ  in  a  very  humble  cottage,  upon  a  bed  in  a  little 

room,  where  she  has  lain  alone  almost  all  day  and  all  night  long,  year 

after  year,  with  many  aches  and  pains,  and  scarcely  able  to  lift  her  hand 

to  her  head,  with  little  but  dry  bread  and  a  cup  of  water ;  and  yet  I  have 

seen  in  that  bedridden  woman's  pain-worn  face  a  fulness  of  satisfaction. 

I  hare  known  her  speak  like  one  that  had  not  a  wish  ungratificd,  nor 

a  grief  worth  mentioning.    I  have  beheld  her  when  in  her  sufiferings 

she  could  scarcely  speak,  and  yet  her  every  word  was  essential  poetry 

when  she  spoke  of  Atm,  her  best  beloved,  who  had  filled  her  soul  even  to 

overflowing.    There  is  no  food  indeed^  no  drink  indeed,  for  soul  and 

spirit,  but  that  which  you  find  in  the  incarnate  God  and  in  the  sacrifice 

of  Christ.    0  ye  hungry,  come  ye  hither  and  eat  ye  that  which  is  good 

and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness.    0  ye  thirsty,  come  ye 

hither,  for  behold  the  waters  are  flowing  freely,  and  the  wines  on  the  leea 

are  ready  for  you  in  Christ  Jesus.      That  is  what  is  bound  up  in 

feeding  upon  Jesus,  there  is  satisfaction  in  him. 

And  then  there  is  bound  up  with  it  one  other  matter,  namely,  f/t- 
dwelling.  I  go  over  the  same  ground  again.  The  Lord  Jesus  says, 
^*  He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and  c&inketh  mv  blood,  dwelleth  in  me,  and 
I  in  him."  When  you  have  eaten  the  bread,  it  dwells  in  you  and  you  in 
it :  it  goes  into  you  and  it  is  in  you ;  it  becomes  part  of  yourself,  and 


THE  MEAT  AND  TBIKK  OP  THE  NEW  NATUBE.  117 

you  Htc  by  it  and  in  its  strength.  It  is  a  part  of  the  fabric  in  which 
yon  dwell.  Even  so  he  that  believes  in  Christ  lives  in  Christ.  He  does 
not  merely  go  to  Christ;  but  he  enters  into  Christ.  I  delight  to  remem- 
ber that  I  am  not  merely  under  the  shadow  of  my  Lord,  but,  as 
David  in  the  cayems  of  Engeddi,  so  does  my  soul  hide  herself  right 
away  in  Jesus.  We  dwell  in  him,  and  are  at  home.  Moreover  he  enters 
into  us  by  our  feeding  upon  him,  so  that  he  becomes  our  life,  the  spring 
of  our  being,  the  object  of  our  desire,  the  motive  force  of  our  service.  We 
are  woren  together — Christ  warp  and  ourselves  woof — woven  together 
in  a  living  loom,  and  so  conjoined  that  it  were  hard  to  tell  where  he 
ends  who  nas  no  end,  and  where  we  begin  who  are  lost  in  him.  We  are 
less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  and  yet  members  of  hts  body  who 
is  Lord  of  all. 

We  mnst  leave  the  mystery ;  remarking  that  if  we  have  fed  on  Christ 
for  ourselves,  we  have  proof  of  what  good  meat  it  is  we  have  fed  on, 
and  we  shall  always  pray,  **  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread." 

III.    I  want  your  attention  for  a  few  minutes  while,  in  the  third 

?lacc,  we  consider  what  ebflections  arise  out  op  this  truth. 
will  simply  throw  them  out  for  you  to  turn  over  for  yourselves. 
They  occurred  to  me  when  I  was  hearing  a  brother  preach  upon  a 
kindred  subject.  They  took  hold  of  my  soul ;  may  they  prove  useful  to 
you. 

And  the  first  was  this.  If  I  have  a  life  that  feeds  on  Christ  tohat  a 
tronderful  life  it  must  be.  My  bodily  life  is  wonderful,  yet  it  only  feeds 
on  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  My  mental  life  is  a  marvel,  but  I  know 
that  I  can  build  it  up  with  literature  and  thought.  Above  all  these  I 
have  a  life  which  cannot  feed  on  anything  but  the  flesh  and  blood  of 
the  Son  of  God.  What  a  life  that  must  be!  "What  a  wonderful 
being  a  man  is  when  God  is  in  him.  I  almost  reverence  the  meanest 
saint  when  I  think  of  this,  for  he  bears  about  with  him  not  a  Koh-i- 
noor,  but  a  gem  of  life,  compared  with  which  the  queenly  diamond 
pales  into  a  glittering  vanity.  0  love  divine,  dost  thou  tabernacle  in  the 
sons  of  men !  I  have  been  speaking  of  mysteries,  but  I  ask  you  to 
explain  which  is  the  greater  mystery,  the  incarnation  of  God  in  Christ 
or  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  believers  ?  They  are  two  won- 
drous stoops  of  Deity,  which  can  only  be  likened  to  each  other,  being 
each  one  without  other  parallel.  The  spiritual  life  given  to  the  regene- 
rate must  be  a  life  of  inconceivable  excellence  and  heavenliness  since  it 
can  only  feed  on  Christ  himself. 

The  next  thought  is,  if  we  have  the  life  that  feeds  on  such  meat  as  this, 
hota  eirong  it  mvsi  be.  They  say  of  such-and-such  men  that  they  may 
well  be  strong,  seeing  what  good  food  they  have.  Ay,  but  see  what  food 
ice  have ;  how  strong  we  must  be.  Do  we  know  our  own  strength  ?  I 
do  not  mean  our  natural  strength,  for  that  is  weakness,  but  I  mean 
the  strength  which  lies  in  the  new  nature  when  it  has  fed  on  Christ.  0 
brethren,  we  are  strong  to  do ;  we  are  strong  to  be ;  we  are  strong  to 
suffer.  And  to  take  an  easy  illustration  of  this — the  one  that  occurs  to 
me  first — look  at  how  the  saints  have  suffered.  Take  down  **  Foxc's 
Book  of  Martyrs":  read  of  Marcus  Arcthusa,  stung  to  death  by  wasps 
without  a  sigh.  Think  of  Blandina  tossed  on  the  horns  of  bulls,  ex- 
posed in  a  r^-hot  iron  chair,  and  yet  never  flinching.    Give  up  Christ  ? 


118  METROPOLITAN  TABEHNACLE  PULPIT. 

They  never  dreamed  of  such  a  thing.  Think  of  Lawrence  oa  the 
|2:ridiron,  and  other  heroes  innumerable,  who  were  made  strong  because 
Christ  was  in  them  Ay,  and  turn  to  humble  men  and  women,  over 
yonder  there  in  Smithfield,  who  could  clap  their  hands  while  every  finger 
burned  like  a  candle,  and  could  shout  "  None  but  Christ,  none  but 
Christ."  Why,  they  fed  on  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ,  and  that  made 
them  mighty.  They  were  tortured  on  the  rack  like  Anne  Askew,  and 
yet  they  scorned  to  yield.  Brave  woman !  the  priests  and  the  friars  could 
not  vanquish  her.  Neither  could  all  the  Bisnop  Bonners  in  the  world 
burn  Christ  out  of  poor  Tomkina.  When  Bonner  held  the  poor  man's 
finger  over  the  candle  and  said,  "  How  will  you  like  that  in  every  single 
limb  of  your  body?"  Tomkins  smiled  on  the  bishop  and  said  that  he 
forgave  him  the  cruelty  that  he  was  doing  him.  Christ  in  a  man  makes 
him  a  partaker  of  divine  strength.  Do  you  not  think,  my  brethren,  that 
as  you  are  not  called  to  suffer  you  ought  to  lay  out  your  strength  in  the 
line  of  doing  and  giving,  and  self-denial,  and  serving  Christ  by  holy 
living  ?  Certainly  you  should  try  to  do  so,  and  your  strength  will  be 
found  equal  to  it.  You  do  not  know  how  strong  you  are,  but  Paul  shall 
tell  you — "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  me." 
Well  may  you  do  all  things  if  you  have  fed  on  him  who  is  all,  and  in  all. 

Then  a  third  reflection  crossed  my  mind.  If  we  have  a  life  that  feeds 
on  this,  hmv  immortal  it  must  he.  We  have  a  text  to  prove  that,  and 
we  have  given  it  to  you  already — "  He  that  believeth  on  him  hath 
everlasting  life."  Wnen  a  man  has  nothing  but  bad  food,  you  do  not 
wonder  that  he  dies.  It  is  little  marvel  that  they  died  by  millions  in 
India  and  China,  considering  how  little  nourishment  they  had  during 
the  famine.  But  if  you  and  I  eat  Christ,  eat  the  incarnate  God  and 
drink  his  blood,  how  can  we  die  ?  What,  kill  a  man  that  has  even  a 
particle  of  Christ  in  him!  The  devil  cannot  do  it:  he  knows  his 
master.  And  what  does  Christ  say  ?  "  I  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life ; 
and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand."  Oh,  blessed  truth  I  We  live,  not  only  because  our  life  is  itself 
eternal,  but  because  it  feeds  on  eternal  meat.  We  keep  on  receiving 
Christ  day  by  day,  for  we  live  upon  him :  eating  is  not  a  work  that 
we  finished  five-and-twenty  years  ago,  but  we  continue  to  feed  upon 
Jesus,  and  therefore  we  live.  Feeding  upon  Christ  does  not  mean 
being  converted  and  then  saying,  **  I  am  safe,  and  have  no  more  need  to 
care."  Ah,  no.  It  means  beginning  to  receive  him  in  conversion,  and 
continuing  to  feed  upon  him  evermore  ;  and  they  who  do  this  may  be 
sure  that  their  life  is  immortal. 

The  next  thought  that  struck  me  was  this:  if  we  feed  on  such 
meat  as  this,  haw  that  life  must  develop,  I  do  not  quite  see  in  myself, 
and  I  may  say  that  I  do  not  see  in  some  believers,  the  full  result  I  should 
like  to  sec  from  such  food.  Has  this  man  been  eating  such  divine  food  ? 
Let  us  hear  him.  He  cries,  "  My  leanness,  my  leanness,  woe  unto  me." 
He  is  doing  Christ's  work  spasmodically,  feebly,  sleepily.  He  does  it 
without  joy,  and  is  soon  weary.  Is  this  all  he  is  going  to  do?  Is  this 
all  he  is  going  to  be  ?  Oh  no,  brethren,  **  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what 
we  shall  be.*'  We  shall  grow ;  we  shall  grow.  When  I  near  a  man 
talk  about  being  perfect  in  the  flesh,  I  hope  for  the  best,  and  trust  that 
be  is  not  wilfully  lying.    At  any  rate^  I  do  not  believe  him.    I  woal4 


THE  MEAT  AND  DRINK  OF  THB  KEW  VATURE.  119 

like  to  9ee  his  perfection  rather  than  to  hear  him  talk  about  it.  I  have 
generally  fonnd  that  when  a  cart  needs  a  bell  it  is  a  dust  cart.  I  never 
knew  the  x>^p1e  of  the  Bank  of  England  ring  a  bell  when  they  were 
going  throngh  the  streets  with  bullion,  and  I  do  not  think  it  is  likely 
that  a  man  who  has  much  grace  will  boast  of  it.  Yet  I  do  believe 
that  we  can  be  developed  into  something  very  wonderful.  A  man  may 
grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  till  his  conversation  is 
in  hearen,  and  he  becomes  wholly  consecrated  to  the  Lord,  hating  sin,  and 
living  like  Enoch,  who  walked  with  God.  There  have  been  such  men, 
and  there  are  such  men  and  women  among  us  still,  whose  lives  glitter 
with  the  light  of  God ;  why  should  not  we  be  like  them  ?  They  are 
stars  in  Gm's  firmament,  and  they  shine  in  the  glory  of  the  Most 
High.  The  Lord  grant  us  that,  feeding  on  the  divine  meat,  we  may 
develop  till  the  image  of  Jesus  is  perfected  in  us. 

An^  lastly,  he  who  is  thus  fed,  dear  friends,  what  company  he  mu^t 
heepi     ''He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth 
in  me,"  saith  Christ,  "  and  I  in  him."    What  heavenly  company  is 
this !     He  goes  home  at  night  to  his  poor  family,  perhaps,  and  there 
is  nothing  great  about  his  house  that  you  can  see ;  but  if  your  eyes  are 
opened  you  will  see  that  it  is  a  king's  palace,  and  if  you  are  one  of  the 
Lord's,  and  can  step  inside,  you  will  see  that  he  has  *'  come  to  the 
general  assembly  and  church  of  the  firstborn  whose  names  are  written 
in  heaTcn,  and  unto  God  the  Judge  of  all,  and  unto  the  spirits  of  just 
men  made  perfect,"  because  he  that  has  Christ  in  him  has  heaven  around 
him.     All  good  things  are  attracted  by  Christ  in  man.    Put  down  a 
little  honey,  and  see  how  wasps  and  flies  and  bees  come  all  around  it. 
What  is  the  sweetest  honey  in  the  universe  ?    It  is  Christ ;  and  if  you 
have   Christ  in  yon,  his  name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth,  there- 
fore do  the  virgins  love  him,  and  they  will  come  where  he  is.    I  will 
tell  you  yet  more, — Christ  is  never  without  God,  and  he  that  has  Christ 
has  the  company  of  the  Father.    And  Christ  is  never  without  the  Spirit 
of  God,  for  the  Spirit  of  God  is  upon  him  ;  and  he  that  has  Christ  is 
never  without  the  Spirit.    What  divine  society  is  this  !    Our  Lord 
Jesus  is  never  unattended  by  a  retinue  of  sublime  intelligences,  and  so 
if  Christ  be  in  you,  he  will  give  his  angels  charge  over  you  to  keep 
yon  in  all  your  ways  ;  they  shall  bear  you  up  in  their  hands,  lest  you 
dash  your  loot  against  a  stone.    0  Prince  of  the  blood  royal  of  heaven, 
0  Peer  of  God's  own  kingdom,  thou  art  more  nearly  related  to  the 
Kiug  of  kings  than  the  peers  of  the  realm  can  be  to  the  Queen,  for  are 
you  not  married  to  the  Prince  Imperial  ?    Is  he  not  coming  to  receive 
you  to  himself,  that  where  he  is  you  maybe  also?    If  you  are  feed- 
mg  on  him  your  union  with  him  is  complete.    If  he  is  your  food,  if  he 
is  yonr  raiment,  if  he  is  your  dwelling-place,  if  he  is  your  all  in  all, 
methtnks  I  may  compare  you  to  that  angel  of  whom  Milton  sang,  even 
Uriel,  who  dwelt  in  the  centre  of  the  sun.    It  is  there  we  live — in 
the  very  substance  and  essence  of  all  things,  and  all  things  move  around 
ns  like  satellites  around  a  central  globe,  for  we  are  a  chosen  generation, 
a  royal  priesthood,  a  peculiar  people,  inasmuch  as  we  have  fed  on  Christ, 
and  Christ  dwelleth  in  us  and  we  in  him. 

I  have  not  said  anything  to  the  unconverted,  and  yet  I  have  meant  it 
all  for  them.    When  you  spread  a  dainty  feast,  you  practically  invite 


120  METROPOLITAN  TABBBNACLB  PULPIT. 

the  family  to  come  and  dine.  It  is  the  very  best  way  of  enticing 
them.  If  they  are  hungry  the  meats  on  the  table  will  make  their 
mouths  water,  and  they  will  long  to  partake.  Oh,  my  hearers,  whoever 
vou  may  be,  if  your  mouths  water  after  Christ,  come  and  have  him,  for 
lie  is  free  to  every  soul  that  hungers  and  thirsts  after  him. 
The  Lord  give  him  to  you  at  once,  for  Jesus's  sake.    Amen, 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — John  vi.  41 — 71 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—260,  820,  761. 


LETTER  PROM  MR.  STURGEON. 

Beloved  Fbiends, — By  the  time  that  this  note  is  printed  the  Special  Ser- 
vices at  the  Q'ahemacle  will  he  drawing  to  a  close,  and  it  will  be  meet  to 
harrow  in  the  seed  with  renewed  supplication.  Shall  so  much  effort  be  in 
vain  ?  It  cannot  be  ;  and  yet  everything  depends  upon  the  mighty  working 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  therefore  we  must  seek  his  face  if  we  would  sco 
large  residts.  I  suggest  that  every  sermon  reader  should  spend  a  special  timo 
in  prayer  next  Sabbath-day  in  pleading  for  the  revival  of  Evangelical  religion. 
The  Times  pronounced  the  funeral  oration  of  the  Evangelical  party,  but  it  is 
not  even  dead  within  the  Established  Church,  and  certainly  not  among  Dis- 
senters. Let  us,  however,  pray  that  it  may  exhibit  more  vigorous  life.  There 
is  need  of  such  supplication,  but  it  must  be  presented  in  faith  and  with  holy 
importunity.    So  let  it  be. 

For  myself,  one  word  only.  I  am  recovering,  and  rest  is  restoring  mind  and 
heart.     Pray  for  me. 

Yours  to  serve  always, 

Iklcntone,  Feb.  20.  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


Iddtt^^jrtitmt  i^atr^ade  inlpt 


THE    SEVEN    SNEEZES. 


%  I 


C.  H.   SPURGEON. 


"The  child  sneezed  seven  time«."— 2  Kings  it.  34. 

The  child  was  dead.  Although  he  had  been  the  special  gift  of  divine 
promise  and  was  therefore  donbly  prized  by  his  parents^  yet  the  little 
iad  was  not  secore  from  the  common  hazards  of  life.  He  was  in  the 
harvest  field  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  and  a  snn-stroke  smote  him  down. 
His  father  bade  one  of  his  yonng  men  carry  him  home,  and  he  died  on 
his  mother*B  knees.  The  brave  woman  was  heartbroken,  bnt,  being 
fhll  of  energy  and  spirit,  she  rode  off  to  Elisha,  the  man  of  Ood,  to  tell 
him  her  sorrow,  and  to  npbraid  him  with  the  short-lived  blessing  which 
had  come  to  her  through  his  prayers.  She  clang  to  the  prophet  in  the 
hoar  of  her  bitter  sorrow,  and  he  with  his  whole  heart  sympathized  in 
her  motherly  grief.  He  hastened  to  the  chamber  where  the  dead  child 
was  laid  upon  the  bed,  and  there  alone  he  exercised  the  sacred  power  of 
prayer :  again  and  again  he  wrestled  and  at  length  prevailed,  so  that 
in  the  glad  Shanammite*s  case  it  was  true  that  **  women  received  their 
dead  raised  to  life  again."  Such  is  the  power  of  faith  when  it  uses  the 
weapon  of  all  prayer :  even  the  gates  of  the  grave  cannot  prevail  against 
it. 

The  prophet's  mode  of  operation  when  he  lay  upon  the  child  and  put 
his  month  upon  the  boy's  mouth,  "and  his  eyes  upo>n  his  eyes,  and  his 
hands  upon  his  hands,"  is  full  of  instruction.  Spiritual  life  is  the  gift 
of  God,  but  if  the  dead  are  to  be  raised  by  our  means  we  must  enter 
into  hearty  sympathy  with  them ;  we  must  create  spiritual  contact,  and 
become  in  a  great  measure  identified  with  those  whom  we  would  bless. 
The  Holy  Ghost  works  by  those  who  feel  that  they  would  lay  down 
their  own  lives  for  the  good  of  others,  and  would  impart  to  them  not 
only  their  goods  and  their  instructions,  but  themselves  also,  if  bv  any 
means  they  might  save  some.  0  for  more  Elishas,  for  then  we  should 
see  more  sinners  raised  from  their  death  in  sin. 

The  first  clear  evidence  that  the  child  was  restored  to  life  was  his 

B&eezing.    Doubtless,  it  greatly  rejoiced  the  prophet's  heart.    We,  too, 

who  are  seeking  the  good  of  others  will  greatly  exult  if  we  are  favoured 

to  see  gracious  tokens  in  those  for  whose  good  we  labour.    At  all  gospel 

Ko.  1,461. 


Iti  HETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

ui0t>tings  earnest  people  should  be  on  the  look*ont  for  persons  con- 
vinced of  sin,  aroused  in  conscience,  or  in  any  other  manner  made  to 
feel  the  power  of  the  life-giving  Spii'it.  It  will  be  well  if  these  persons 
watch  with  instructed  eyes,  so  that  they  do  not  look  for  what  they  will 
never  see,  nor  overlook  that  which  should  give  them  full  content.  Of 
natural  life  we  may  discern  the  tokens  more  readily  than  those  of 
spiritual  life ;  we  need  practice  and  experience  in  reference  to  this  more 
mysterious  matter,  or  we  may  cause  great  pain  to  ourselves  and  to  those 
whom  we  would  befriend.  Possibly  we  may  gather  instruction  from  the 
signs  of  life  which  contented  the  piophet . — the  child  sneezed  seven 
times. 

This  evidence  of  life  was  very  simple.  Nothing  is  freer  from  art 
than  a  sneeze.  It  is  so  far  fr-om  being  artificial  that  it  is  involuntary. 
As  a  rule  we  sneeze,  not  because  we  will,  but  because  we  must.  No 
instruction,  education,  talent,  or  acquirement  is  neeessary  to  a  sneeze, 
nor  even  to  a  series  of  seven  sneezes  ;  it  is  the  act  of  a  child,  or  of  an 
illiterate  peasant,  quite  as  much  as  of  a  philosopher  or  a  divine.  Yet 
Elisha  asked  no  further  evidence  of  life.  He  did  not  require  the  little 
lad  to  repeat  a  psalm,  or  walk  a  mile,  or  climb  a  tree ;  he  knew  that  he 
was  alive  although  the  act  of  the  newly-given  life  was  of  the  most 
elementary  kind.  Just  so  let  us  feel  thankful  when  we  hear  the  first 
groan  of  distress  or  see  the  first  tear  of  repentance.  Hopefulness  is  a 
helpful  element  in  the  success  of  those  who  have  to  deal  with  seeking 
sinners.  We  ought  not  to  expect  too  much  in  enquirers ;  we  ought  not  to 
be  satisfied  without  signs  of  life ;  but  the  faintest  sign  of  life  ought  to 
encourage  us  and  lead  us  to  encourage  fJiem,  Very  little  knowledge  can 
be  looked  for  in  enquirers ;  Elisha  did  not  ask  the  child  to  say  his 
catechism.  Very  little  strength  will  be  found  in  them;  Elisha  did  not 
bid  the  child  move  the  table,  and  the  stool,  and  the  candlestick  with 
which  the  room  was  furnished.  No,  the  sneeze  proved  life,  though  it 
was  inarticulate,  and  the  uninstructed  expression  of  untrained  vitality. 
Repentance  for  sin,  desire  after  holiness,  child-like  trust  in  Jesus, 
tearful  prayer,  carefid  walking,  delight  in  the  word  of  God,  and  intense 
self-distrust  are  among  the  elementary  tokens  of  life,  the  sneezes  of 
those  freshly  raised  from  the  dead.  Such  tokens  are  to  be  seen  in  all 
the  truly  living  in  Zion,  whether  old  or  young,  and  hence  they  are  not 
proofs  of  growth,  but  of  life,  and  it  is  life  that  we  have  to  deal  with 
at  the  first ;  growth  is  an  after  consideration.  Elisha  did  not  leave  the 
child  upon  the  bed  till  he  had  developed  into  a  man,  but  as  soon  as  he 
had  heard  him  sneeze  he  said  to  the  mother,  "  Take  up  thy  son";  and 
we  would  earnestly  say  to  every  church  in  whose  midst  a  soul  has  been 
bom  unto  God,  "  Take  up  thy  son."  Receive  the  convert,  though  he 
be  weak  in  the  faith.  Carry  the  lamb  in  thy  bosom,  cherish  and  nur- 
ture him  till  life  has  girded  itself  with  manly  strength. 

This  evidence  of  life  was  in  itself  unpleasant.  To  the  child  it  was  no 
*  pleasure  to  sneeze.  We  should  most  of  us  prefer  to  be  excused  from 
sneezing  seven  times.  Many  of  the  surest  marks  of  the  new  life  are 
by  no  means  pleasurable.  The  regenerate  are  not  at  once  happy ;  on 
the  other  hand,  they  are  often  in  great  bitterness  for  their  sins,  and 
in  sore  anguish  because  they  have  pierced  their  Saviour.  The  divine 
life  is  not  bom  into  the  world  without  pangs.    When  a  man  has  been 


THE  SEVEN  SNEEZES.  128 

nearly  drowned,  and  animation  is  restored  by  rabbinf^,  the  first  moT0- 
Bents  of  the  blood  within  the  veins  causes  tingling  and  other  sensa- 
tions which  are  exquisitely  painful.    Sin  canses  numbness  of  sonl,  and 
this  is  attended  by  an  absence  of  sensation ;  this  is  changed  when  life 
oomes  with  its  look  of  faith,  for  the  first  result  is  that  men  look  on  him 
whom  they  have  pierced,  and  mourn  for  him.    Some  regard  pleasurable 
emotions  as  the  clearest  signs  of  grace,  bnt  they  are  not  so.    **  I  am  so 
happy,'*  is  frequently  a  far  less  certain  token  than  ^^  I  am  so  grieved 
becanse  I  have  sinned."    We  do  not  think  mnch  of  the  song  of ''  Happy 
day/'  unless  it  has  been  preceded  by  the  mournful  ditty : 

'*  O  that  my  load  of  sin  were  gone !" 

A  sneeze,  again,  is  not  very  musical  to  those  who  hear  it,  and  so  the 
first  signs  of  grace  are  not  in  themselves  pleasing  to  those  who  are 
wat<;hing  for  souls.  Our  minds  may  be  greatly  pained  to  see  the  sorrow 
tnd  despondency  of  the  stricken  heart,  and  yet  that  which  we  see  may 
be  none  the  less  a  certain  sign  of  renewed  life.  We  cannot  take  delight 
in  heart-break  and  convulsion  of  soul  when  considered  in  themselves ; 
on  the  contrary,  our  earnest  endeavour  is  to  apply  the  balm  of  the 
gospel  and  remove  such  pains ;  yet  are  they  among  the  most  assured 
marks  of  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  in  its  earlier  stages,  and  we  ought 
to  be  thankful  whenever  we  see  them.  That  which  worldlings  condemn 
as  melancholy  is  often  to  us  a  hopeful  sign  of  thoughtfulness ;  and  the 
self-despair  which  the  ignorant  deplore  is  cause  for  congratulation 
among  those  who  pray  for  conversions.  We  delight  in  the  sorrows  of 
penitents  because  of  their  results,  otherwise  we  take  no  delight  in 
human  grief,  but  the  very  reverse. 

"The  child  sneezed  seven  times,"  the  evidences  of  life  were  very 
monoUmotu.  Again  and  again  there  came  a  sneeze  and  nothing  else. 
No  song,  no  note  of  music,  not  even  one  sofl  word,  but  sneeze,  sneeze, 
sneeze,  seven  times.  Yet  the  noises  wearied  not  the  prophet,  who  was 
too  glad  to  hear  the  sounds  of  life  to  be  very  particular  about  their 
musical  character.  The  child  lived,  and  that  was  enough  for  him. 
Much  of  the  talk  of  enquirers  is  very  wearisome ;  they  tell  the  same 
melancholy  tale  over  and  over  again.  Answered  a  score  times,  they 
return  to  the  same  questions  and  repeat  the  same  doubts.  If  one  were 
seeking  interest  and  variety,  he  would  not  look  for  it  in  the  painful 
repetitions  of  persons  under  conviction  of  sin  :  though  when  we  are 
watching  for  men's  souls  we  do  not  grow  weary,  yet  in  themselves  the 
utterances  of  the  newly  awakened  are  frequently  among  the  most 
tiresome  of  communications.  They  are  often  difficult  to  understand, 
involved,  confused,  and  even  absurd ;  they  frequently  betray  culpable 
ignorance  and  sinful  obstinacy,  combined  with  pride,  unbelief,  and  self- 
will  ;  and  yet  in  them  there  is  a  secret  something  which  betokens  an 
airakening  to  the  higher  life ;  and  therefore  we  cheerfully  lend  our  ear. 
After  days  of  exhortation  and  consolation  we  find  them  still  floundering 
in  the  slough  of  despond,  sticking  fast  in  the  mire,  out  of  which  they 
seem  half  unwilling  to  be  drawn  ;  we  must  render  them  the  same  help 
over  and  over  again,  and  point  out  the  stepping  stones  for  the  hundredth 
time.  Better  that  our  service  should  be  monotonous  than  that  a  soul 
should  perish.    The  poor  child  may  sneeze  seven  times  if  it  will,  and 


124  METROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PUHTT. 

•We  irill  gladly  hear  ft,  for  it  hi  a  joy  thnB  to  know  that  it  Uvea  ;   and 
our  poor  neighbour  may  repeat  his  painfnl  story  until  sercnty  times 
Boren,  if  therein  ire  oan  diBcoyer  traces  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  upon 
his  soul.    Lot  us  not  be  disappointed  because  at  the  first  we  get   so 
little  which  is  interescing  from  young  converts.    Wc  arc  not  cxaminin<}: 
them  for  the  ministry,  we  are  only  looking  for  evidences  of  spiritual 
life  :  to  apply  to  them  the  tests  which  would  be  proper  enough  for  a 
doctor  of  divinity  would  be  both  cruel  and  ridiculous.     In  preachers  of 
the  gospel  we  expect  variety,  and  wish  we  could  have  more  of  it,  but 
from  blic  babe  in  grace  we  are  quite  content  to  hear  a  cry,  and  a  crj  is 
not  a  subject  for  musical  variations  any  more  than  a  sneeze. 

Yet  the  sound  which  entered  the  prophet's  ear  was  a  sure  token  of 
life,  and  wc  must  not  be  content  with  any  doubtful  or  merely  hopeful 
signs.    We  want  evidences  of  life,  and  these  we  must  have.    We  long  to 
see  our  friends  really  and  truly  saved.    Do  but  prove  to  us  that  tiicy 
have  passed  from  death  nnto  life,  and  we  rejoice  in  the  lowest  form  of 
that  proof,  bnt  with  less  than  this  we  cannot  be  quiet    Mere  resolves  to 
reform,  or  even  reform  itself,  will  not  end  our  anxiety.    No  fine  talk,  or 
expressed  emotion,  or  remarkable  excitement  will  at  all  content  us,  we 
want  tliem  to  be  converted,  to  be  born  again  from  above,  to  be  made 
new  creatures  in  Chi'ist  Jesus.    The  child  might  have  been  washed  and 
dressed  in  his  best  clothes,  bnt  this  would  not  have  fulfilled  the  prophet's 
desire  ;  the  lad  might  have  been  decked  with  a  ohaplet  of  flowers,  and 
his  young  cheeks  might  have  been  rouged  into  the  imitation  of  a  ruddy 
blush,  but  the  holy  man  would  have  remained  unsatisfied :  he  must  have 
a  sign  of  life.    However  simple,  it  must  assuredly  be  a  life'toluny  or  it 
would  be  in  vain.    Nothing  could  have  been  more  conclusive  than  a 
sneeze.    We  remember  a  cose  in  which  a  loving  watcher  fancied  that  a 
corpse  moved  its  arm,  but  it  was  only  imagination  seconding  the  wish 
of  affection  ;  there  could,  however,  be  no  room  for  a  mistake  in  a  sneeze, 
much  less  in  seven  sneezes  ;  the  prophet  might  safely  call  in  the  mother 
and  commit  to  her  care  her  undoubtedly  living  boy.    So  we  also  ask 
for  indisputable  marks  of  grace,  and  till  wc  see  them  we  shall  still  praj 
and  watch  and  feel  painfnl  anxiety. 

So  far  we  have  kept  to  the  text,  and  as  our  space  is  limited  we  can 
ouly  add  these  few  precepts.  Let  the  Lord's  living  ones  believe  that  he 
can  raise  the  spiritually  dead.  Let  them  make  the  ungodly  their  daily 
care.  Let  them  bring  them  where  souls  are  quickened — namely,  under 
the  sound  of  the  gospel ;  and  then  let  them  prayerfully  and  w.'s^ly 
watch  for  results.  The  more  watchers  in  a  congregation  the  better; 
they  will  be  the  preacher's  best  allies,  and  greatly  increase  the  fruit 
of  his  labours.  What  sayest  thou,  dear  friend  in  Christ,  canst  thou 
not  attempt  this  service  ?  It  requires  graces  rather  than  gifts,  affec- 
tion rather  than  talent.  Rouse  thyself  to  the  delightful  service,  and 
watch  until  thou  seest  the  signs  of  spiritual  vitality.  However  un- 
noticed by  others,  let  them  not  escape  thine  eye  and  ear  and  heart,  but 
be  ready  to  take  care  of  tlie  newly-quickened  one,  even  if  there  be  no 
more  to  be  said  of  him  than  that  ^^  the  child  sneezed  seven  times." 


pirtrD^alitott  iJakiprle  fulpii 


EYES     OPENED. 


t  I 


<tmirtt 

DELIYEILED  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THK    M  ICraOrOLITAN    TABERNACLK,    NE\nNGTOir. 


••  And  God  opened  her  eyes.'* — Geneiis  xxi.  19. 

Therb  was  a  well  of  water  close  to  Hagar  all  the  while  though  she  saw  it 
noL  God  did  not  cleave  die  earth  and  oanBenew  waters  to  ^jsh  forth, 
nor  wfis  there  need.  The  well  was  there  already,  bat  for  all  practical 
porpoaea  it  might  not  have  been  there,  for  she  coold  not  see  it.  Tlie 
water  was  spent  in  her  bottle,  her  child  was  dying  with  thirst,  and  she 
herself  was  ready  to  &int,  and  yet  the  cool  spring  was  bubbling  up  hard 
by  the  sppt.  It  was  needful  that  she  should  see  the  well,  quite  as 
i^edfol  as  that  the  well  should  be  there,  and  therefore  the  Lord  in 
great  compassion  led  her  to  see  it,  or  as  the  text  puts  it,  ^'  God  opened 
her  eyes." 

This  was  a  small  matter  compared  with  the  creation  of  a  new  foun- 
tain, but  our  God  does  very  little  things  as  well  as  very  great  things 
vhen  there  is  need  for  them.  The  same  God  who  divides  the  £cd  Sea, 
Mid  mak^  the  Jordan  to  be  dried  up,  opens  a  poor  woman's  eyes.  The 
auue  Grod  who  came  with  all  his  chariots  of  fire  to  Pnran,  and  with  all 
his  holy  ones  to  Sinai,  and  made  the  monntain  utterly  to  smoke  in  his 
piesence,  is  he  of  whom  we  read,  ^'aaid  God  opened  Hagar*s  eyes,*' 
The  inimite  Lord  is  at  home  in  doing  little  things;  he  counts  the  stars, 
but  he  also  numbers  the  hairs  of  onr  heads.  Remember  that  the 
aune  God  who  moulded  the  orb  on  which  we  dwell  also  &shions  every 
tiny  dewdrop,  and  he  who  makes  the  lightning  bolt  to  fiy  through  the 
midst  of  heaven  wings  every  butterfly  and  guides  every  minnow  in  the 
Ivooklet.  He  prepared  a  great  fish  to  swallow  Jonah,  but  he  also  pre* 
pared  a  little  worm  to  destroy  the  gourd.  How  condescending  he  is, 
since  he  carefully  attends  to  minor  matters  for  his  children,  and  not  only 
kills  for  them  the  fatted  calf,  but  puts  shoes  on  their  feet.  Sometimes 
very  little  things  become  absolutely  necessary,  for  they  act  as  the  hinges 
of  history,  the  pivots  upon  which  the  future  turns.  How  frequently 
Uie  whole  course  of  a  man's  career  has  been  affected  by  a  moment  s 
thought.  The  word  of  a  child  has  affected  the  destiny  of  an  empire : 
tbe  chance  expression  of  a  speaker,  as  men  talk  of  chance,  has  flred 
races  with  a  new  passion,  and  changed  times  and  shaken  kingdoms. 


)9i  KETBOPOIilTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Hie  Lord  worketh  gloriously  by  agents  and  events  small  and  despised. 
God,  by  opening  Hagar's  eyes,  secured  the  existence  of  the  Ishmaelitish 
race,  which  eyen  to  this  day  remaineth:  from  the  little  cometh  the 
great. 

There  may  be  persons  present  who  want  but  very  little  to  enable 
them  to  enter  into  eternal  life :  they  need  only  that  their  eyes  should 
be  opened.  May  the  Lord  grant  them  that  favour.  0  that  he  may  now 
bid  many  a  Hagar  see  his  salvation.  Why  should  the  thirsty  souls  wait 
any  longer  ?  Everything  is  ready :  they  are  on  the  borders  of  salvation, 
but  they  need  that  their  eyes  should  be  opened.  Our  subject  at  this 
time  shall  be  the  opming  of  eyes,  taking  rather  a  wide  range,  because 
it  is  a  wide  subject,  and  hoping  that  both  to  those  who  see  and  to  those 
who  cannot  see  there  may  come  a  gracious  opening  of  the  spiritual  eye. 

I.    Our  first  head  shaU  be  that  if  our  eyes  were  further  opened 

THE  RESULT   TO  ANY  ONE    OF  US  WOULD  BE  VERY  REMARKABLE.     We 

are  at  present  limited  in  our  range  of  sight.  This  is  true  of  our  natural 
or  physical  vision,  of  our  mental  vision,  and  of  our  spiritual  vision ;  and 
in  each  case  when  the  range  of  sight  is  enlarged  very  remarkable  dis- 
'K^overies  are  made.  God  has  been  pleased  to  open  the  natural  eyes  of 
^mankind  by  the  invention  of  optical  instruments.  What  a  discovery 
it  was  when  first  of  all  certain  pieces  of  glass  were  arranged  in  con- 
.nection  with  each  other,  and  men  began  to  peer  into  the  stars !  What  a 
•change  has  oome  over  the  knowledge  of  our  race  by  the  invention  of  the 
telescope !  How  much  of  truly  devout,  adoring  thought,  and  of  deep, 
intense,  unutterable  reverence  has  been  born  into  the  world  by  the 
Ijord*s  having  in  this  sense  opened  men's  eyes !  When  he  turned  his 
telescope  upon  the  nebulse,  and  discovered  that  these  were  innumerable 
stars,  what  a  hymn  of  praise  must  have  burst  from  the  reverent  as- 
tronomer*s  heart.  How  infinite  thou  art,  most  glonous  Lord  !  What 
wonders  hast  thou  created!  Let  thy  name  be  had  in  reverence  for 
fiver  and  ever. 

Equally  marvellous  was  the  effect  upon  human  knowledge  when  the 
•microscope  was  invented.    We  could  never  have  imagined  what  won- 
•  ders  of  skill  and  of  taste  would  be  revealed  by  the  magnifying  glass, 
-  «nd  what  marvels  of  beauty  would  be  found  compressed  within  a  space 
too  small  to  measure.     Who  dreamed  that  a  butterfly's  wing  would 
display  art  and  wisdom,  and  a  delicacy  never  to  be  rivalled  by  human 
workmanship.    The  most  delicate  work  of  art  is  rough,  crude,  raw  com- 
pared with  the  commonest  object  in  nature ;  the  one  is  the  production  of 
man,  the  other  the  handiwork  of  God.   Spend  an  evening  with  the  micro- 
scope, and  if  your  heai't  be  right,  you  will  lift  your  eye  away  from  the 
glass  to  heaven,  and  exclaim, ''  Great  God,  thou  art  as  wonderful  in  the 
little  as  thou  art  in  the  great,  and  as  much  to  be  praised  for  the  minute 
as  for  the  magnificent"    While  we  say,  **  Great  art  thou,  0  God,  for 
thou  madest  the  great  and  wide  sea,  and  the  leviathan  whose  lot  it  is  to 

S)lay  therein";  we  feel  that  we  can  also  say,  "  Great  art  thou,  0  Lord, 
or  thou  madest  the  drop  of  water  and  hast  filled  it  with  living  things 
innumerable."  Our  physical  eyes  thus  opened  by  either  glass  reveal 
strange  marvels,  and  we  may  infer  from  this  fact  that  the  opening  of 
our  mental  and  spiritual  eyes  will  discover  to  us  equal  wondera  in  other 
domains,  and  thus  increase  our  reverence  and  love  towards  God. 


ETEH  OPENED.  127 

Sappose,  dear  brethren,  that  our  eyes  conld  be  opened  as  to  all  owr 

past  Iwes.     We  have  seen  them,  for  we  haye  travelled  through  them ; 

bat  it  was  very  cloudy  when  I  went  that  way ;  I  do  not  know  how  it 

was  with  yon.    None  of  us  have  our  eyes  thoroughly  opened  yet ;  we 

hsTe  hitherto  been  travelling  through  life  as  men  who  journey  in  a  mist. 

Even  the  things  which  have  come  close  to  us,  and  have  most  affected  us, 

have  been  hidden,  as  it  were,  in  that  which  is  not  light,  but  darkness 

visible.    And  now,  if  we  could  look  back  upon  the  whole  length  of  life, 

forty,  or  fifty,  or  sixty,  or  seventy  years,  with  our  eyes  opened,  how 

singular  it  would  look !     Our  childhood — ^how  different  that  period 

would  now  appear  with  Ood*s  light  upon  it.    Those  early  struggles  for  a 

livelihood  :  we  thought  them  hard,  but  we  already  begin  to  see  what 

discipline  there  was  in  them,  and  how  necessary  they  were  for  us. 

Those  losses  and  crosses, — why  even  with  our  present  partial  sight  we 

can  see  how  much  they  were  for  our  good.    Yet  there  remain  in  life 

some  singular  things  which  we  cannot  as  yet  explain.    Why  was  the 

&voarite  son  taken  away  just  when  all  our  hopes  were  to  have  been 

fulfilled  in  him  ?    Why  was  the  husband  struck  down  when  the  little 

diildren  were  so   dependent?    Why  was  the  wife  removed  when  a 

mother*8  care  was  most  needed  ?  Why  fell  that  daughter  sick  so  suddenly  ? 

Why  were  we  ourselves  balked  in  the  moment  of  success  ?    If  our  eyes 

oonld  be  opened  so  that  we  could  see  what  would  have  been  if  things 

had  gone  differently  we  should  all  of  us  thank  God  that  our  lives 

were  ordered  as  they  have  been.    Have  you  never  heard  of  one  who  was 

grievonsly  lamenting  the  death  of  his  favourite  son,  and  falling  asleep 

dreamed  that  he  saw  his  boy  alive  again  and  that  he  beheld  the  life 

which  that  son  would  have  led.    It  was  such  a  life  that  he  wept  in  his 

dream,  and  waking  he  blessed  God  that  his  son  could  never  act  according 

to  what  he  had  seen  in  vision ;  it  was  better  that  he  should  be  dead. 

Repine  no  more,  my  sorrowing  friend,  for  that  which  you  would  have 

kept  in  your  bosom  might  have  turned  into  a  viper,  that  which  von 

thought  a  treasure  might  have  burned  in  your  heart  like  coals  of  nre. 

Providence  has  ordered  all  things  wisely,  and  if  our  eyes  were  opened 

we  should  bow  in  adoring  reverence  and  magnify  the  God  who  hath  done 

aU  things  well    Our  vision  will  be  strengthened  one  day,  so  that  we 

shall  see  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  then  we  shall  understand 

that  the  Lord  maketh  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 

love  him. 

And  now  suppose,  again,  our  eyes  should  be  opened  upon  the  future. 
Ay,  would  you  not  like  to  spy  into  destiny  ?  My  curiositv  is,  probably, 
as  great  as  yours,  but  still  it  is  balanced  by  another  facultv,  and  I  pro- 
test that  if  I  could  see  into  to-morrow  I  would  refuse  to  look.  There 
is  a  desire  in  man  to  know  what  lines  are  written  for  him  in  the  book 
of  fate — whether  they  shall  be  bri&'ht  or  dark.  Ah,  dear  friend,  if 
your  eyes  could  be  opened  as  to  aU  that  is  to  happen,  what  would 
yon  do  ?  If  you  were  wise,  and  knew  vour  future,  you  would  commit 
it  unto  God :  commit  it  to  him  though  you  do  not  know  it.  If  yon 
were  wise  you  would  wish  to  spend  that  future  in  his  service  if  you  knew 
it :  spend  it  in  his  service  though  it  is  hidden  from  you.  If  you  knew 
what  would  happen  you  would  feel  great  need  for  faith ;  you  do  not  know 
what  will  happen,  but  your  need  of  faith  is  precisely  the  same.    Trust 


128  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

yon  in  God,  come  what  may.  This  thing  is  certain — that  to  live  nn- 
saved,  and  unforgiven,  is  a  very  dangerous  condition ;  God  help  yoa  to 
get  out  of  it  at  once  by  flying  to  Jesns  for  present  Balration,  and  finding 
it  on  the  spot.  If  yoa  taiew  the  fatnre,  it  miglrt  make  you  idle,  but  it 
ought  to  make  you  diligent ;  if  you  knew  the  fatnre,  it  might  make 
you  vain,  but  it  should  make  you  humble  ;  if  you  knew  the  future,  it 
might  make  you  (fespondent,  but  it  should  make  yon  trust.  At  any  rate, 
knowing  nothing  at  all  about  it,  obey  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
saith,  **  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord :  trust  also  in  him  and  he  shall 
bring  it  to  pass :  and  he  shall  bring  forth  thy  righteousness  as  the  light, 
and  thy  judgment  as  the  noon-day." 

If  our  eyes  were  opened,  again,  on  another  point,  as  to  the  existence 
of  angels,  we  should  see  marvels.  We  will  enter  into  no-  speculations ; 
but  what  a  sight  would  be  before  us  if  suddenly  we  could  behold  all 
the  creatures  that  are  round  about  us.  The  prophet  of  old  prayed 
for  a  young  man  that  his  eyes  might  be  opened,  and  immediately 
he  saw  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  Elisha.  So 
do  angels  encircle  the  people  of  God.  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord  en- 
campeth  round  about  them  tliat  fear  him."  "  He  shall  give  his  angels 
charge  over  thee  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy  Avays  :  they  shall  bear  thee  up 
in  their  hands,  lest  thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone."  "  Are  they  not  all 
ministering  spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them  that  are  heirs  of  salva- 
tion ?  "  Millions  of  spiritual  creatures  walk  this  earth,  both  when  we  sleep 
and  when  we  wake,  and,  if  we  were  more  like  those  pure  spirits  and  more 
familiar  with  their  Master,  we  should  feel  more  gratitude  to  him  for 
setting  them  round  about  us.  Fear  not,  you  are  not  alone,  0  child  of 
God;  your  Father  never  calls  oflP  your  body-guard.  The  evil  spirit 
comes  to  tempt  you,  but  the  Lord  has  set  his  angel'-sentinel  to  keep 
watch  and  ward  that  no  ill  may  approach  you.  If  the  Lord  q)ened  the 
eyes  of  his  greatly  beloved  servants  to  see  how  many  of  these  mighty 
intelligences  are  silently  guarding  them,  they  would  cease  to  complain  of 
loneliness  while  in  the  midst  of  such  a  throngii^  ministry  of  willing 
friends. 

And  what,  once  more,  if  your  eyes  could  be  opened  to  look  into 
heaven  ?  Where  it  is  we  do  not  know.  It  is  not  very  for  away.  At 
any  rate,  the  glorified  know  what  we  do  here,  for  they  rejoice  over  one 
sinner  that  repents.  Evidently,  too,  it  takes  not  long  to  travel  thither, 
for  it  was  eventide  when  Jesus  told  the  thief  that  he  should  be  with 
him  in  paradise  that  very  day,  and  you  may  be  sure  he  was  there.  Oh, 
that  we  could  see  the  place  of  unveiled  glory  and  unmingled  bliss  as  we 
shall  see  it  in  an  instant  when  our  Father*s  messenger,  called  death, 
shall  strike  the  scales  from  our  eyes,  or  rather,  remove  these  dim  optics 
with  which  we  blunderingly  see,  and  let  our  naked  spirit  gaze  on  the 
reality  of  things  without  these  hindering  eyes,  which  do  but  inform  us 
of  their  outward  show.  Oh,  what  glories  shall  we  then  see !  What 
splendour,  above  the  light  of  the  sun!  What  music,  sweeter  than 
harpers  harping  with  their  harps  !  What  glory !  Solomon  knew  not 
the  like  of  this.  There  is  the  light  of  aU  lights,  the  delight  of  all 
delights,  the  heaven  of  heavens,  the  sun  of  our  soul,  our  all  in  all, —Jesus 
upon  the  throne !  What  bliss  to  be  with  him — with  him  for  ever  and  ever. 
Break,  thou  eternal  morning !     Break  e'en  now  I     Would  God  that,  at 


STSB  OPRKED.  129 

kast  for  once,  till  the  day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away,  we  had  oar 
eyes  opened  to  see  the  glories  beyond ;  then  this  poor  world  wonld  be 
despised  by  ns,  we  shonld  forget  its  pains  end  pleasures,  we  should  rise 
superior  to  all  its  influences^  and  we  should  rise  to  be  heavenly  ourselves. 
Wait  awhile,  brethren.  Wait  fi>r  a  very  little  while.  Wait  a  ''  wee  and 
dinna  weary,"  as  the  Scotchwoman  said,  and  you  shall  see  it  alL 

"  Just  when  thou  wilt,  O  Bridegroom,  say, 
*  Rise  up,  my  love,  and  conic  away  I  * 
Open  to  me  thy  golden  gate 
Just  when  thou  wilt,  or  soon  or  Iste.** 

80  far,  I  have  wandered  from  the  text,  but  now  in  my  second  head  I 
will  come  back  to  it. 

II.      In  8QKE  THINGS  OUB  EYJB8  ITUST  BB  OPENED.      ThOBC    I   have 

spoken  about  are  desirable  in  a  measure,  but  these  are  absolutely  neces- 
sary. For  instance,  as  to  the  divine  salvation,  our  eyes  must  be  opened. 
Hagar's  case  is  a  strange  one.  Picture  it.  She  is  thirsty,  and  her  boy 
is  dying :  her  instincts  are  quiokeued  by  her  love  to  her  child,  and  yet 
she  cannot  see  a  well  of  water.  There  it  is!  Close  to  her !  Do  you 
not  see  it  ?  Jnst  ther&  She  cannot  see  it  till  her  eyes  are  opened.  It 
is  as  plain  as  a  pikestaff,  but  she  does  not  perceive  it.  Now,  this 
is  a  graphic  representation  of  the  position  of  many  a  seeking  sinner. 
There  is  the  way  of  salvation,  and,  if  there  is  anything  plain  in  the 
wtvld,  it  is  that  road  of  life«  The  act  that  twice  two  make  four 
is  not  plainer  than — ^believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved.  Look  unto  the  Son  of  God  and  live:  what  can 
be  more  simple  ?  And  yet  nobody  ever  did  understand  the  doctrine 
of  **  believe  and  live  "  tUl  God  opened  his  eyes.  The  well  is  there,  but 
the  thirsty  soul  cannot  see  it.  Christ  is  there,  but  the  sinner  cannot  see 
him.  There  is  the  fountain  filled  with  blood,  but  he  does  not  know 
how  to  wash  in  it  There  stand  the  words,  "  Believe  and  live,"  simple 
vords  that  need  no  explanation,  legible  by  their  own  light,  and  so 
plain  that  the  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  may  comprehend  them ; 
yet,  till  the  eternal  light  flashes  upon  the  daricened  eyeballs  of  the 
sinner,  he  cannot,  and  he  will  not  perceive  the  self-evident  truth. 

Wh^ice  this  inability  to  see  ?  I  su^osc  Hagar's  eye  was  somewhat 
darkened  by  her  grief.  She  was  broken-hearted,  poor  woman,  and 
dieiefore  her  eye  was  not  so  clear  as  usual  So  some  souls  have  such 
grkf  for  sin,  such  sorrow  for  having  ofiTended  God,  such  fear  of  wrath 
to  come,  that  they  cannot  perceive  the  truth  which  would  comfort  them. 
What  aileth  thee,  poor  soul  ?  What  aileth  thee  ?  It  is  well  that  thou 
dost  grieve  for  sin,  hot  Christ  has  come  to  put  it  away.  It  is  well 
that  thou  dost  mourn  thy  lost  estate,  but  Christ  has  come  to  save  thee, 
and  there  he  is  right  before  thee  if  thou  canst  but  see  him. 

It  was  unbelief^  too,  that  daricened  Hagar's  eyes.  God  had  speared 
to  her  years  before,  von  remember,  when  she  was  in  very  much  the  same 
plight,  and  he  had  then  given  her  a  promise  that  he  would  make  of  her 
son  that  was  to  be  bom  a  great  nation.  She  might  have  reflected  that 
this  could  never  happen  unless  the  boy's  life  was  preserved,  and  since  he 
ooold  not  live  without  a  drink  of  water,  she  should  have  felt  confident  that 
water  would  be  forthcoming.   She  was  unbelievii^,  but  it  is  not  ours  to 


ISO  METBOPOLITAH  TABEBJTACLE  PULPIT. 

jadge  her ;  for,  alas,  we  are  nnbelieTing  too.  Anxious  sonl,  is  that  thj 
case  ?  Oh,  if  thou  couldflt  belieye  !  Truly,  thou  hast  good  cause.  It 
should  not  be  hard  to  believe  what  God  says,  for  he  cannot  lie ;  but, 
still,  unbelief  darkens  many  an  eye. 

There  are  many  who  cannot  see  because  of  self-conceit  When  great 
self  feasts  his  eye  upon  his  own  good  works  or  religious  performances,  of 
course  he  cannot  see  the  way  of  salvation  by  Christ  alona  The  Lord 
take  these  scales  from  thy  eyes,  poor  sinner,  for  self  is  a  great  maker  of 
darkness.  Nothing  more  surely  holds  a  soul  in  gloom  than  a  conceit  of 
its  own  powers.  How  I  wish  I  could  so  put  the  gospel  as  to  win  men 
from  self.  I  preach  the  plan  of  salvation  as  plainly  as  ever  I  can.  I  use 
very  homely  metaphors.  I  have  sometimes  even  emploved  what  the 
more  refined  call  vulgar  expressions :  I  would  be  more  vulgar  still,  if  I 
oould  thereby  help  a  soul  to  see  Christ.  I  tell  you  Jesus  is  near  to  yon, 
and  within  your  reach,  and  that  salvation  is  close  at  your  foot.  You 
have  but  to  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  shall  be  saved.  But 
I  know  that,  after  all  is  said  and  done,  if  you  ever  see  Christ  it  will  be 
because  the  Holy  Spirit  opens  your  eyes.  I  cannot  open  them,  nor 
any  other  mortal  man ;  for  since  the  world  began  it  hath  not  been 
known  that  any  man  has  opened  the  eyes  of  one  that  was  bom  blind. 
Oh,  that  the  Lord  would  be  pleased  now  to  open  the  eye  of  every  sinner 
here  to  see  salvation  in  the  atoning  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God. 

III.    I  must  leave  that  point,  and  finish  with  one  more.    In  our 

PRESENT    CASE    IT  IB  VERT  DESIRABLE    THAT    OUR   EYES    SHOULD  BB 

OPENED.  To  many  it  is  imperatively  needful  at  this  very  moment,  for 
if  not  now  recovered  from  their  blindness  they  will  die  in  their  sins. 
In  this  great  throng  there  are  some  to  whom  it  is  pre-eminently 
desirable  that  their  eyes  should  be  opened  at  once  to  see  what  the 
inevitable  result  of  their  present  mode  of  life  will  be,  for  their  blindness 
is  the  source  of  gi*eat  peril  to  them.  That  young  gentleman  who  is 
spending  his  money  upon  the  racecourse  and  loose  society,  I  should  think 
he  might  see  with  half  an  eye  what  will  come  of  his  conduct.  The 
devil  never  runs  express  trains  to  hell :  there  is  no  need  for  it,  for 
you  can  go  there  fast  enough  by  race-horses.  The  turf  has  furnished 
to  many  an  express  method  of  ruining  their  fortunes  and  their  souls. 
Get  into  that  line  of  things,  and  all  it  means,  and  all  the  society  that 
goes  with  it,  and  your  future  needs  no  prophet.  Many  young  men  do 
not  think  till  it  is  too  late  to  think.  I  wish  I  could  put  a  cool  hand 
upon  that  hot  brow  and  stop  that  young  man  and  make  him  stand  still 
and  consider.  0  that  the  Lord  would  open  his  eyes.  And  that  young 
woman  who  has  begun  to  look  (not  much,  as  yet)  on  what  is  called  gaiety* 
Ah,  the  Lord  stay  thee,  my  sister,  and  open  th^  eyes  ere  thou  goest  one 
step  farther,  for  one  step  farther  may  be  thy  mm.  And  that  tradesman 
who  has  begun — ^no,  he  has  not  quite  begun  as  yet, — but  he  is  thinking 
about  a  course  of  trade  which  will  land  him  in  something  more  shameful 
than  bankruptcy,  I  pray  the  Lord  to  open  his  eyes  that  he  may  see 
matters  in  the  true  light.  I  see  a  man  before  me  who  is  about  to  commit 
moral  suicide.  0  for  a  gleam  of  light  just  now,  and  a  touch  of  that 
finger  which  can  open  blind  eyes.  I  cannot  particularize  and  go  into 
every  case,  but  I  have  upon  me  a  strong  impression  that  I  am  speaking 


ETES  OPENED.  181 

to  some  young  man  whose  fatnro  depends  upon  his  pradcnt  pausing 
and  carefnl  consideration  before  he  pats  his  foot  down  again.  One  step 
more,  and  yon  fall.  I  beseech  yon,  stand  still  and  hear  what  God  wonld 
speak  to  you  now.  Turn  thee,  turn  thee  from  thy  sin  and  seek  thy 
^viour  noWy  and  he  will  be  found  of  thee  at  once,  and  there  shall  be 
a  life  honourable  and  bright  before  thee  to  his  glory.  But  if  thou  go 
one  step  farther  in  the  way  in  which  the  tempter's  charms,  like  siren 
music,  would  entice  thee,  thou  art  lost  for  ever.  Ood  help  thee,  there- 
fore, to  stop,  and  may  it  be  said  of  thee,  *'  Ood  opened  his  eyes." 

Now,  leaving  all  these  themes  of  thought,  I  wonld  remind  yon  that 
ire  are  about  to  gather  at  the  communion  tabic  and  there  we  would  sit 
Tith  opened  eryes.  Those  who  love  the  Lord  cannot  endure  to  sit  as 
Mind  men  in  his  palace,  but  they  long  for  all  the  sight  which  grace  can 
give  tiiem. 

First,  we  would  have  opened  eyes  that  we  may  see  Jems  to  he  very 
H4(ir  us.  Do  not  think  of  him  just  now  as  if  he  were  far  away  in 
liearen.  He  is  there  in  his  glorions  personality,  but  his  spiritnal 
presence  is  here  also.  l>id  he  not  say,  '^Lo,  I  am  with  you  aiway;" 
and  ''If  I  go  away  £  will  come  again"?  He  abides  with  us  by  his 
S{Hrit  for  erer.  Come,  let  us  sit  while  this  sacramental  least  is  going 
on,  and  sing — 

'*  Amidst  OS  our  Beloved  stands. 

And  bids  us  view  his  pierced  hfttuU  ; 

Points  to  his  wounded  feet  and  sido, 

Blest  emblems  of  the  Crucified. 

"If  now  with  eyes  defiled  and  dim, 
We  see  the  signs  but  see  not  ^I'm, 
Oh  may  his  lore  the  scales  displace, 
And  bid  us  see  Mm  face  to  face! 

**  Our  former  transports  we  recount, 
When  with  him  m  the  holy  mount, 
These  cause  our  souls  to  thirst  anew^ 
His  marr'd  but  lovely  face  to  view." 

We  desire  that  you  may  have  your  eyes  opened  to  see  what  you  are 
in  Christ.  You  complain  that  you  are  black  in  yourselves ;  but  you  are 
most  fair  in  him.  You  lament  that  you  are  so  wandering :  yes,  but  you 
are  fixed  in  him.  You  mourn  that  you  are  so  weak ;  yet  you  are  strong 
in  him.  A  good  man  went  the  other  day  to  visit  a  poor  child  who  was 
^ying,  a  child  whom  the  Lord  had  taught  many  things ;  and  the  dear 
little  fellow  as  he  pat  out  his  wasted  hand  said,  "  So  strong  in  Christ." 
He  could  hardly  lilb  a  finger^  and  yet  he  knew  that  his  weakness  was 
clothed  with  power  in  Christ.  We  are  poor  puny  things,  but  we  can  do 
all  things  through  Christ.  We  are  poor  foolish  things,  but  we  are  wise 
in  Christ.  We  are  good-for-nothing  things,  but  yet  we  are  so  precious 
in  Christ,  so  dear  to  God  in  Christ,  as  to  be  numbered  with  his  jewels, 
^d  known  as  the  Lord's  pecutiar  portion.  We  are  sinful  creatures  in 
oorBelves,  and  yet  we  are  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus  and  complete  in  him. 
These  are  strong  expressions,  but  as  they  are  scriptural,  they  are  as- 
suredly true.  How  blessed  we  are  in  our  covenant  Head !  The  Lord 
open  our  eyes  to  see  this. 

Lastly,  dear  friend,  may  the  Lord  open  your  eyes  to  see  what  you 


132  METROPOLITAK  TABEBKACLB  PUIiPIT. 

mil  he  in  htm.  Ah,  what  will  yoa  be  in  Christ  ?  In  a  very  little  while 
we  shall  be  with  him.  Many  of  onr  members  have  gone  home  to  Jesas, 
and  one  yery  earnest  brother,  very  diligent  in  working  for  the  Master, 
a  young  man  of  whom  we  expected  much,  has  been  swept  away  by  the 
receding  tide  while  bathing  m  the  sea,  but  be  has  gone  to  his  rest,  I 
doubt  not.  Older  friends  have  also  ascended  to  Ood  just  lately,  ra- 
joicing  to  enter  into  the  joy  of  the  Lord.  Between  now  and  next 
month's  communion  some  of  us  will,  probably,  have  departed  to  the 
Father.  Let  our  eyes  be  opened  to  behold  by  faith  the  glory  soon  to  be 
revealed.  It  may  almost  make  you  laugh  for  joy  to  think  of  your  head 
wearing  a  crown — ^that  poor  head  of  yours.  These  poor  aching  knees, 
and  weary  feet,  there  will  be  no  more  toil  for  them.  That  poor  scantily 
Aimished  room,  and  hard  fare,  and  narrow  means,  and  weary  labour 
will  all  be  exchanged  for  mansions  of  rest,  bread  of  bliss,  and  new  wine 
of  delight.  Ton  Know  each  pavement  stone  between  here  and  your 
house,  for  you  come  so  often  to  the  Tabernacle,  but  you  will  be  walking 
the  streets  of  gold  before  long  to  the  eternal  temple  above.  Instead  of 
noisy  streets  you  will  traverse  paths  of  rest,  amid  the  songs  of  seraphs 
and  the  psalms  of  the  redeemed,  and  that,  perhaps,  within  a  month. 
Yes,  in  less  than  it  takes  the  moon  to  fill  her  horns  you  shall  be  where 
the  Lord  God  and  the  Lamb  are  the  eternal  light.  Certain  of  us  are 
nearer  heaven  than  we  think.  Let  our  hearts  dance  for  joy  at  the  bare 
thought  of  such  speedy  felicity.  Let  us  go  on  our  way  blessing  and 
magnifying  him  who  nas  opened  our  eyes  to  see  the  glory  which  he . 
has  prepared  for  them  that  love  him,  which  shall  be  ours  ere  long. 
God  bless  you  for  Christ's  sake. 


POBTIOK  OF    ScaiPTUnE  BEAD  BEFORE  SeBUON— GeUCSis  XXl.   1 — 21. 


Hymns  from  "  Cub  Own  Hymn  Book."— 852,  785. 


LETTER  PROM  MR.  SPURGEON. 

To  MT  Fbi£nd8  in  Englahd, — Until  yesterday  the  weather  here  has  been 
80  unsettled  that  it  was  not  favourable  to  my  complaint,  but  now  I  hope  it  has 
taken  a  turn  for  the  better,  and  will  be  more  suitable  for  rheumatic  jomts.  It 
has  taken  me  six  weeks  to  get  rid  of  the  disease,  and  now  I  hope  to  spend  the 
rest  of  my  sojourn  here  in  gathering  strength.  If  it  may  please  God  to  permit 
me  to  return  in  full  vigour  to  my  delightral  work,  I  shall  mdeed  rejoice.  Tfll 
then  be  so  good  as  to  maintain  by  your  prayers  and  liberality  the  good  works 
over  which  I  have  so  long  presided,  so  that  there  may  be  no  lack.  College, 
Orphanage,  Colportage,  and  Evan^jelista  are  ail  work,  and  must  not  be  for- 
gotten.   May  the  Lord*s  own  blessing  rest  on  tJiem  all. 

Yours  heartily, 

Mentone,  February  28.  0.  H.  STURGEON. 


JKetitapIton  il^alitmatk  faljU. 


THE  YOKE  EEMOYED  AND  THE  LORD  BJETEALED. 


%  ^mm 


DELIYEEED  BT 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   TUS    KETKOPOLITAN    TABBRNAGLB,    NBWXNQTON. 


*'They  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  whan  I  have  broken  the  hands  of  their 
yoke.*'— Eiekiel  xzxiv.  27. 

But  do  not  all  men  know  that  God  is  the  Lord  ?  They  should  know 
it,  for  he  is  clearly  to  be  seen  in  the  works  of  nature :  even  where  no 
revelation  has  come,  yet  heaven  and  earth  and  sea,  and  the  rain  which 
brings  with  it  fruitful  seasons,  filling  men's  hearts  with  food  and  glad* 
ness,  all  proclaim  the  Most  High.  But  man  by  wisdom  knows  not  Qod. 
He  shuts  his  eyes  to  evidence  brighter  than  the  sun,  and  in  his  wilful 
blindness  he  sets  up  an  image  of  wood  or  stone  or  gold  or  silver,  bows 
before  it,  and  calls  that  his  god.  This  is  the  sin  of  the  nations,  that 
they  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  Qod  into  an  image  made 
like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and  four-footed  beasts  and  creeping 
things. 

But  do  not  all  know  God  in  this  land — this  land  where  there  ia 
so  much  gospel  teaching,  where  we  boast  of  our  open  Bible  and  of  our 
Protestant  pulpit  ?  Alas !  no.  There  are  multitudes  who  have  heard  of 
God,  and  who  say  that  they  believe  in  him,  but  who  have  no  personal 
acquaintance  with  him,  and  do  not,  in  the  sense  of  the  text,  know  that  he  is 
the  Lord.  Ah,  dear  friends,  there  is  no  knowing  God  except  by  personal 
acquaintance  with  him,  and  there  is  no  personal  acquaintance  with  him 
except  by  his  own  revealing  of  himself  to  our  spirit.  You  may  read  as 
much  as  ever  you  will,  and  hear  as  long  as  ever  you  please ;  but  until  your 
own  spirit  comes  into  contact  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  you  do  not  and 
cannot  know  the  Lord.  You  know  the  report  of  him  which  you  have 
heard  with  the  hearing  of  the  ear ;  but  that  is  a  small  matter  unless  it 
leads  to  something  higher. 

There  are,  I  fear  me,  a  great  many  Christian  people  whom  we 
must  not  judge,  for  they  keep  up  outwardly  all  that  is  to  be  expected 
in  the  Chnstian  character  according  to  the  common  run  of  profession 
nowadays,  who,  nevertheless,  do  not  truly  know  God  by  spiritual  fel- 
lowship with  him.  Their  faith  stands  upon  reason :  it  is  based  upon 
argument,  and  appeals  to  the  intellect ;  but  it  has  never  led  to  per- 
£onal  knowledge  and  acquaintance.  The  Lord  is  to  tiiem  a  logical 
No.  1,462. 


184  METROPOLITAir  TABBEKACLB  PULPIT, 

abstraction,  not  a  beloved  Person.    Or,  perhaps,  which  is  somewhat 
worse,  their  faith  as  to  God  rests  upon  excitement,  upon  association^ 
upon  the  eloquence  of  a  favourite  preacher,  or  something  of  that  sort. 
Now,  in  such  cases  as  this,  God  is  not  so  known  as  he  should  be,  and^ 
after  a  while,  if  another  god  is  preached,  a  dififerent  god  from  th& 
God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  they  leave  the  true  God  for  th& 
false.     In  these  days  of  worldly  wisdom  men  set  up  a  fresh  Deity,  who 
is  more  effeminate  and  pliable  than  the  glorious  God  of  Moses  and  or 
Aaron,  the  God  of  the  fathers  and  the  prophets ;  and,  straightway,, 
those  who  know  not  the  only  living  and  true  God,  for  there  is  but  one, 
run  after  this  new  god,  newly  set  up  by  these  modem  divines,  who 
have  manufactured  him  in  their  studies  as  certainly  as  ever  the  Hindu 
manufactures  mud  gods  b^  the  river  Ganges.    They  bow  before  this 
new  god,  and  cry  out  against  the  Jehovah  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  as  if  he  were  to  be  judged  by  them,  and  to  be  no  more  accounted 
Lord.    It  is  amazing  to  hear  them  speak  of  the  "  stem  Deity  of  the 
Old  Testament,"  and  of  ''  the  semi^enlightened  views  of  Moses  and 
Isaiah."    As  for  us^  we  heartily  love  him  who  made  known  his  ways 
unto  Moses,  his  acts  unco  the  children  of  Israel,  and  we  desire  none 
other  God. 

Those  who  know  the  Lord  know  that  he  is  still  the  I  AU  that  I  ah, 
unchangeable  in  all  respects ;  and  we  know  that  the  God  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  glory,  is  the  same  God  who  revealed  him- 
self at  Paran,  and  came  with  sound  of  thunder  at  Sinai.  The  God  who 
manifests  himself  in  Jesus  Christ  is  he  who  spake  aforetime  to  our 
fathers  and  the  prophets,  for  he  is  tl\e  one  glorious  Lord  God.  Now,  my 
brethren,  there  is  no  fear  of  your  running  after  the  new  gods  if  yoo 
have  once  known  the  tme  God.  If,  by  experience,  you  have  been 
brought  into  fellowship  with  the  Most  High,  and  felt  his  power  and 
seen  his  glory,  you  will  be  confirmed  in  those  things  which  he  has 
taught  you,  and  which  his  Spirit  has  graven  upon  your  soul  as  with  an 
iron  pen  and  written  with  the  point  of  a  diamond. 

It  appeal's  from  the  text  that  there  is  a  process  by  which  God's  own 
people  are  brought  to  know  the  Lord.  This  process  takes  place  when  he 
breaks  the  bands  of  their  yoke.  Then  they  know  that  the  Lord  is  God. 
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  he  must  first  of  all  permit  his  own  chosen, 
for  a  wise  purpose,  to  come  into  bondage.  They  must  be  in  bondage,  or 
else  they  would  not  wear  the  yoke,  and  there  would  be  no  opportunity 
for  the  Lord  to  break  that  yoke.  I  do  not  commend  the  bondage  ;  it  is 
a  thing  to  be  deplored ;  but,  as  Augustine  ouce  cried  out, "  Beata  culpa ! " 
''  Happy  fault !  '  when  he  saw  how  sin  had  made  space  for  the  wonder- 
ful display  of  divine  grace,  so  I  venture  to  say, "  Blessed  bondage,  which 
gives  an  opportunity  for  our  God  to  come  in  and  set  his  children  free, 
and  by  thus  breaking  the  bands  of  their  yoke  to  teach  them  that  he 
himself  is  the  Lord." 

Let  us  now  describe,  by  the  help  of  God*s  Spirit,  who  alone  can  teach 
us,  this  process  of  breaking  the  bands  of  the  yoke,  by  which  the  eman- 
cipated xnow  that  the  Loi^  is  God. 

There  are  two  things  to  be  considered — First,  that  fhe  Lord  does 
hreak  the  hands  of  the  yoke  of  his  people;  and,  secondly,  that  Ihm  thejf 
know  him  to  he  the  LorcL 


TnE  YOKE  mOIOYED  AJSD  THE  LORD  REVEALED.  135 

It  is  not  difficnlt  to  show  that  the  Lord  breaks  the  bands  of  the 
TOKR  OF  his  people,  for  the  yokes  \¥hich  they  wear  at  different  times 
are  many,  and,  in  the  breaking  of  each  one  of  these,  they  learn  that  Jie 
is  Om  Lord. 

You  cannot  forget  the  first  yoke  of  which  you  were  conscious.  It 
was  a  yoke  of  iron;  but  you  had  worn  it  for  many  years  without 
feeling  it»  A  spark  of  divine  life  dropped  into  your  bosom,  and  then 
joa  b^^n  to  perceive  that  a  yoke  of  sin,  of  guilt,  of  condemnation  under 
ihs  law,  was  nrmly  fixed  upon  your  neck.  If  joix  felt  as  I  felt,  it  was, 
indeed,  an  iron  bondage,  and  the  iron  entered  into  your  souL  We  can 
well  nndentand  the  feeling  of  some  who,  when  wearing  this  yoke,  wish 
that  Gk>d  had  made  them  finogs,  or  toads,  or  snakes,  or  anything  sooner 
than  that  they  should  be  men,  and,  being  men,  should  be  sinAil,  and 
ofanozioiis  to  divine  wrath.  It  is  a  horrible  thing  to  be  a  sinner ;  and 
when  the  horror  is  fully  perceived  it  brings  a  little  hell  into  the  souL 
What  stings  of  scorpions,  or  teeth  of  lions,  or  lashes  of  a  whip  of  wire 
can  be  more  sharp  and  cutting  than  reflections  such  as  these — "  I  have 
sinaed  and  cannot  undo  the  sin.  I  have  provoked  God,  and  can  make 
no  atonement  for  my  provocation.  I  deserve  his  wrath,  and  can  present 
no  plea  why  that  wrath  should  not  come  upon  me  "  ?  The  fabled  Atlas, 
whm  the  world  pressed  on  his  shoulders,  was  not  more  loaded  than  an 
awakened  conscience  pressed  with  its  own  iniquities.  It  is  easy  to  talk 
of  oonviction  of  sin,  but  to  feel  it  is  quite  another  matter :  it  putteth 
the  seal  nnder  saws  and  imder  harrows  of  iron,  and  maketh  it  to  pass 
tfarongli  the  brick-kibi.  Sin  on  the  conscience  is  a  spectre  which  will 
haunt  yon  by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  and  drive  sleep  away  fix>m  your 
mlids,  till  yoor  soul  chooseth  strangling  rather  th^  li&.  I  say  not 
that  conviction  is  equally  terrible  in  all  cases ;  but  some  have  felt  this 
joke  to  be  exceeding  heavy,  and  I  believe  that  all  Ood's  people,  when 
the  Lord  begins  to  deal  with  them,  to  a  greater  or  less  d!egree  are 
bowed  down  beneath  the  oppressive  bondage.  Happjr  is  the  hour  when 
the  Lofd  breaks  that  yoke.  He  alone  can  remove  it,  but  he  does  it 
most  effiBotually,  and  then  we  know  t^at  he  is  Jehovah  our  God  that 
brongfat  US  out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  To  emancipate  a  soul  from 
the  thzaldom  of  sin  is  a  labour  worthy  of  a  God,  and  to  his  liberating 
hand  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 

Then  the  awakened  soul  begins  to  be  conscious  of  a  second  yoke. 
More  or  leas,  according  to  temperament  and  circumstances,  and  so  on, 
bat  sdll  in  each  case  somewhat,  we  feel  the  yoke  of  naiwral  corruption 
and  inbred  sin.  The  moment  we  become  Christians  an  inward  battle 
begins.  The  old  self  will  not  tolerate  the  intruder,  the  new  creature 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  a  conflict  ensues.  The  converted  man  will  be  clean 
rid  of  some  sins,  and  scarcely  ever  feel  a  temptation  to  them.  Notably 
some  men,  who  have  been  given  to  certain  evil  habits,  have  never  been 
tempted  tiiat  way  again ;  bnt  the  flesh  has  taken  a  turn,  and  rebelled 
in  another  direction.  I  have  known  a  man,  after  conversion,  tempted  to 
commit  a  totally  new  sin  for  him,  and  the  suggestion  has  been  availing 
yoke  to  him.  A  passion  which  before  he  did  not  know  to  be  in  his 
soul  has  be^i  aronsed,  and  he  has  seen  the  meshes  of  a  net  gradually 
encompassing  him, — then  has  he  cried  out  because  of  the  oppression 
pat  npon  his  sin-hating  heart.    If  a  believer  has  gone  very  deep  in  sin 


186  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACI-E  PULPIT. 

befcH^  conyersiony  be  will  often  haye  a  hard  batfcle  of  it  arising  from  the 
recollection  of  old  transgressions,  and  old  habits,  and  old  Insts.    Yoa 
may  get  the  serpent  out,  bnt  the  slime  of  the  reptile  still  remains  ;  and 
it  needs  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  parge  its  former 
larking  place.    If  a  lion  has  long  had  his  lair  in  a  thicket  the  hunters 
may  chase  him  out,  but  his  den  is  there,  and  likely  enough  cubs  will 
come  forth  when  least  expected,  and  so  it  is  with  evil  in  the  heart  of 
man.    An  old  cask  smells  of  the  wine  it  held  ;  it  will  need  a  great  deal 
of  scalding  to  sweeten  it ;  and  eyen  then,  if  you  put  pure  water  into 
it,  there  will  soon  be  a  taste  of  the  old  liquor  about  it.     In  certain  of 
oar  petty  wars  we  neyer  seem  to  come  to  an  end  ;  the  natives  are  not  at 
peace  nor  will  they  keep  quiet ;  they  watch  an  opportunity  and  break 
out  again.    It  is  so  with  the  war  in  the  Christian's  soul.    You  may 
presume  that  sin  is  completely  dead  in  you,  but  it  laughs  while  you 
are  boasting,  and  before  long  it  will  make  you  weep  to  think  that 
you  were  so  readily  deceived.     I  have  known  a  Christian  man  have  a 
temptation  come  upon  him,  and  though  he  has  not  yielded  to  it  in 
any  degree,  it  has  clouded  his  joy,  and  put  a  yoke  on  his  neck. 
The    temptation    comes ;   he    hates   it,   but    it    oomes.      He    goes 
to  God  and  prays   against   it,  bnt   it  comes.     He  watohes   every 
step  he  takes,  but  there  it  comr^s.    It  seems  to  pursue  him  like 
his  shadow.     He  would  go  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  to  get  rid  of  it ; 
but  there  it  is ;  it  dogs  his  footsteps.    He  kneels  down  to  pray,  and 
there  it  is.    It  is  like  the  old  story  of  the  Scotoh  neople  who  had  the 
brownies  in  their  house,  and  so  they  said  they  would  move  away  to  get 
Xid  of  them ;  but  as  they  moved,  they  heard  a  noise  in  the  chum, 
for  the  mischievous  sprites  were  going  with  them.    So  have  we  known 
a  Christian  man  move  and  shift  and  try  to  get  away  ftom  a  temptation ; 
but  there  it  has  been ;  the  torment  of  his  life,  a  sword  in  his  bones 
piercing  him  to  the  heart  with  daily  anguish.    To  some  men  of  God 
temptation  to  a  certain  sin  has  been  a  galling  yoke  by  the  year  together. 
They  have  cried  to  God,  with  their  hair  almost  on  end,  for  horror  of 
the  sin  ;   and  yet  the  suggestion  to  the  eyil  has  thrust  itself  upon  them, 
as  if  it  would  not  be  refused.    Read  in  Bunyan*s  ''  Grace  Abounding  " 
how  he  was  haunted  with  that  thought  of  selling  Christ,  and  how  the 
words  seemed  to  ring  in  his  ears — ''  Sell  him  I  seU  him  !  sell  him  !  sell 
him !  sell  him  ! "  till  at  last  he  inadvertently  said,  or  thought  be  said, 
**  Let  him  go  if  be  will."    And  then  the  devil  gloried  over  him,  and 
said,  '^  You  have  sold  Christ."    For  the  ten  thousandth  time  Satan  was 
a  liar  in  his  accusations.    Honest  John  had  done  nothing  of  the  sort, 
but  he  had  been  so  plagued  and  perplexed  with  the  temptation  that 
he  scarcely  knew  what  he  said  or  tnought.    Madame  Bubble  too  is 
hard  to  shake  off  when  she  courts  a  poor  pilgrim.    Her  seductions  are 
ooly  to  be  resisted  on  our  knees,  and  even  then  they  give  us  terrible 
twists.    You  do  not  all  understand  this,  and  I  do  not  wish  you  should ; 
bat  if  you  are  now  experiencing  what  I  describe,  I  would  have  you  re- 
member tibat  the  Lord  can  break  this  yoke  also,  and  tear  away  each 
one  of  ito  bands.    Very  joyful  as  the  deliverance,  and  when  it  comes 
the  text  is  abundantly  fulfilled— -''  They  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord 
when  I  have  broken  the  bands  of  their  yoke." 
Another  yoke  which  the  Lord's  people  have  too  often  borne  is  that  of 


THB  TOKB  BEHOVED  AND  THE  LORD  REVEALED.       187 

cperpefual  tendency  to  unbelief.  Unbelief  lies  in  us  all :  it  is  the  sin  of 
mankind — ^the  root-sin — the  tap-root  of  all  sorts  of  iniquitr.  Blessed 
are  those  vho  believe,  and  are  strong  in  faith.  The  Lora  be  praised 
whenever  he  brings  ns  to  fall  assurance  :  bat  there  are  certain  of  God's 
people  who  are  very  conscions  that,  on  the  very  slightest  turn  of  cir- 
comstances,  they  begin  to  fret ;  at  little  troubles  they  grow  nervous ; 
and  as  to  their  own  spiritual  state,  they  appear  to  themselves  to  be  in 
jeq>ardy  every  hour.  Often,  the  only  pix)of  of  their  spiritual  life  which 
they  can  themselves  perceive  is  their  wish  to  be  right,  their  desire  to 
avoid  sin,  and  their  longing  after  God.  They  cannot  say  that  they  have 
much  joy  or  much  peace  through  believing,  neither  can  they  expect  it, 
for  their  faith  is  so  exceedingly  weak.  Others  call  them  *'  killjoys," 
because  they  mope  and  mourn  so  much ;  and  in  truth  they  reflect  but 
snail  credit  upon  their  religion,  and  act  more  as  scarecrows  to  keep 
othcTB  off  than  as  attractions  to  draw  them  in.  Some  of  the  Lord's 
pei^le  seem  to  be  bom  in  the  shade  and  to  live  in  the  shade,  as  if  they 
were  descended  from  the  old  troglodytes,  or  cave-dwellers,  and  love  to 
be  buried  before  they  are  dead.  This  habit  of  mind  is  to  be  condemned, 
nor  should  any  who  fall  into  it  think  lightly  of  it.  But,  dear  friends, 
we  must  not  be  severe  upon  others,  or  condemn  them :  we  must,  on  tbo 
contrary,  feel  that  they  are  putting  a  very  heavy  yoke  upon  themselves, 
and  that  the  burden  weighs  down  their  spirits  and  crushes  the  joy  out 
of  them.  Many  about  whose  interest  in  Christ  nobody  who  knows  them 
can  have  any  doubt  at  all,  whose  Christian  consistency  is  beyond  all 
question,  whose  prayerfulness,  whose  love  of  the  word  of  God,  whose 
simple^  child-like  trust  in  Jesus  Christ  is  manifested  to  everybody  except 
^emselves,  are  nevertheless  in  heaviness  through  anxiety  as  to  their 
state.  Their  faces  shine  to  others,  but  they  share  not  in  the  brightness. 
No  one  has  a  doubt  about  them,  but  they  are  full  of  doubts  for  them- 
selves. May  the  Lord  bring  up  such  brothers  and  sisters  out  of  their 
prison,  and  then  shall  they  know  that  he  is  the  Lord  when  he  has 
broken  the  bands  of  their  yoke. 

tk>me  Christians  are  also  loaded  with  a  yoke  through  great  trotihie. 
We  come  together  and  we  look  cheerful  and  happy,  but  we  do  not  know 
the  burden  of  the  person  sitting  in  the  pew  with  us.  In  such  an 
assembly  as  this  on  Thursday  nights  I  know  there  is  many  a  merchant 
who  has  come  irom  the  City  whero  he  has  been  driven  to  his  wits'  end 
all  day  long,  and  he  scarcely  knows  what  he  shall  do,  and  he  has  said, 
**  AVeU,  I  will  just  run  into  the  house  of  God,  and  I  will  hear  what  the 
Lord  may  have  to  say  to  my  soul."  Many  and  many  a  time  a  sweet 
promise  has  here  come  home  to  the  bewildered  child  of  God,  and  he  has 
gone  away  feeling  that  the  Master  had  sent  a  message  to  him  through 
his  servant.  I  have  known  the  housewife  come  up  to  the  house  of  God 
in  the  same  state ;  one  child  is  sick  and  another  sickenin|^,  the  husband, 
perhaps,  walking  in  a  way  that  grieves  the  tender  Christian  heart  of  the 
wife,  and  home  affairs  are  anything  but  as  they  should  be,  but  while  she 
has  sat  before  the  Lord  there  has  come  a  word  from  the  oracle  of  comfort, 
and  Uannah  has  been  no  more  sad.  Some  of  our  brothers  and  sisters 
have  a  perpetual  cross  to  carry.  If  we  knew  \rhafc  they  have  to  suffer  in 
business,  suffer  in  body,  suffer  in  the  domestic  circle — if  we  knew  the 
weight  they  have  to  carry,  we  should  very  often  communicate  to  them 


138  METROPOLITAN  TABERKACLE  PUTiPIT. 

words  of  comfbrfc,  wheieas  now,  through  our  nofc  knowing,  they  are  lef% 
nnheedcd,  and  there  is  little  or  no  Christian  sympathy  manifested. 
Ah,  dear  hrother,  it  may  be  that  yon  have  been  made  to  carry  a  very 
heavy  yoke  for  years,  bnt  when  the  Lord  shall  break  the  bands  of  yoar 
yoke  then  shall  yon  know  that  he  is  the  Jjord.     I  can  bear  witness  that 
trial  has  been  a  great  blessing  to  me.  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  learned 
much  except  in  trouble.    What  little  I  know  has  been  whipped  into 
me ;  and  I  suspect  it  is  so  with  most  of  my  Master's  family.     By 
scourging  he  instructs  eyery  son  that  he  receives.    But  when  yon  havo 
been  in  sore  perplexity  and  difficulty,  and  did  not  see  your  way  out  of 
it,  and  could  not,  in  fact,  get  out  ox  it  yourself — ^then  have  you  known 
that  the  Lord  was  €k>d  when  he  has  himself  appeared  for  yon  and  broken 
the  bands  of  your  yoke.   With  a  song  you  have  magnified  his  surprisinor 
grace  and  blessed  his  delivering  love. 

I  have  not  time,  however,  to  mention  all  the  various  yokes ;  but  I 
would  say  next  thsk  tnany  yokes  which  GhcTs  people  bear  they  cannot  break 
themselves.  When  the  sinner  bears  the  yoke  of  sin  he  cannot  get  it  oif. 
He  may  tug,  and  tug,  but  he  only  galls  himself,  and  fixes  the  yoke  faster 
than  ever.  Itie  riveted  fetter  of  sin  is  not  to  be  shaken  off.  Can  the 
Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots  ?  If  so,  then  he 
who  IS  accustomed  to  do  evil  may  learn  to  do  well  by  himself,  apart 
from  divine  grace.    The  yoke  of  despondency  of  mind,  and,  very  fre- 

Siently,  the  yoke  of  temporal  trouble,  will  be  such  that  a  man  cannot 
ear  himself  from  them.  <'  Stand  still  and  see  the  salvation  of  Ood/* 
is  sometimes  the  very  best  advice  von  can  give  to  a  man  in  distress.  He 
is  like  a  drowning  man,  the  more  he  struggles  the  sooner  he  goes  down. 
He  cannot  help  himself.  The  Lord  often  puts  hia  peotde  on  nnrpoae 
into  positions  where  there  is  an  end  of  the  creature,  where  all  carnal 
hope  fails,  where  you  look  all  around  and  not  a  single  ray  of  light 
gladdens  your  weary  eye  till  the  star  of  Bethlehem  breaks  forth,  and 
heralds  the  morning. 

But,  dear  friends,  let  us  recollect  that  though  yokes  be  very  many, 
and  some  of  them  are  such  that  we  cannot  possibly  break  them  off,  yet 
ffiiere  is  no  yoke  but  what  the  Lord  can  readily  enough  take  from  his 
people.  To  remove  the  yoke  of  sin  he  brings  the  pardoning  blood  of 
Jesus  near,  and  our  heavy  load  departs.  As  for  the  power  of  sin  over 
ns,  we  overcome  it  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  As  for  our  daily 
cares,  we  cast  our  care  on  him  who  careth  for  us.  As  for  our  despond- 
encies of  spirit,  our  soul  has  heard  him  say,  **  Let  not  yoar  heart  be 
troubled ;  ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me."  Nothing  is  impossible 
with  God,  and  therefore,  dear  friend,  though  the  peculiar  form  of  yoar 
distress  at  this  time  is  known  to  none  but  your  heavenly  Father  and  your- 
self,  I  am  quite  safe  in  saying  that  Ood  can  remove  it  in  an  instant  if  he 
pleases.  He  lifteth  the  beggar  from  the  dunghill  and  setteth  him  among 
princes.  He  bringeth  forth  those  that  are  bound  with  chains.  Though 
fbon  hast  lien  among  the  pots,  yet  shalt  thon  be  as  the  wings  of  a  dove 
covered  with  silver,  and  her  feathers  with  yellow  gold.  One  of  hia 
saints  of  old  recorded  his  experience  in  these  words,  "  Ont  of  the  depths 
have  I  cried  unto  thee,  O  God,  and  thon  heardest  me/'  His  eiq)erience 
is  that  of  all  the  captives  who  trust  in  the  Lord.  No  condition  is  so 
dark  that  he  cannot  at  once  enlighten  it,  and  no  case  is  so  hopeless  that 


THE  YOKE  RISVOTED  AKB  THE  LOBD  BSYEALED.  139 

he  cannot  instantly  relieye  it.  Do  yon  believe  that  ?  Are  yon  sare 
of  it  ?  ^Why,  the  yery  belief  of  that  fact  ought  to  minister  comfort  to 
jonr  mind. 

One  other  reflection  comes  to  me ;  and  it  is  this.  We  may  eapect  the 
Lord  to  Jrreak  the  hand9  of  our  yoke.  If  he  can  do  it,  and  we  are  his 
people,  we  may  expect  him  to  do  it.  Our  children  look  for  a  great  deal 
from  their  Mhers,  and  I  think  yon  will  find  thai  friends  and  relatives 
frequently  expect  much  more  of  yon  than  they  are  likely  to  get ;  but 
none  eyer  expected  more  of  God  than  Gtod  has  been  pleased  to  bestow. 
^  My  sonl,  wait  thon  only  upon  Ood,  for  my  expectation  is  ftom  him." 
You  know,  if  your  child  were  sick,  and  yon  conld  heal  him,  he  would 
not  be  rash  in  expecting  yon  to  do  it ;  and  if  your  child  were  carrying 
an  intolerable  load,  and  you^  as  his  father,  could  release  him  from  it,  it 
▼onld  be  only  a  natural  expectation  that  he  should  reckon  that  yon  would 
do  80.  Oh  you,  then,  that  are  oppressed,  expect  to  be  set  free.  Gap- 
tires  under  the  bcmdage  of  sin,  since  you  /e$l  sin  to  be  a  slavoy 
Toa  are  the  Lord's  prisoners  of  hope.  Oh,  yon  that  haye  the  deepest 
sense  of  guilt,  and  have  written  the  blackest  things  against  yomrselyes, 
expect  the  Lord  to  set  yon  free ;  for  if  he  had  meant  to  destroy  yon  he 
would  haye  left  yon  to  bear  your  sin  in  utter  indifibrence,  and  would 
not  haye  conyinoed  you  of  it.  What  can  be  the  good  of  his  giying  yon 
two  hells,  one  here  and  another  hereafter  ?  No,  he  is  iudging  you  now. 
He  is  holding  a  quarter  sessions  in  your  conscience,  and  condemning  you 
now«  that  yon  may  not  be  condemned  with  the  world  at  the  great  assise. 
He  is  bringing  you  to  pronounce  sentence  against  yourself,  that  you  may 
plead  guilty,  and  that  then  he  may  absolve  you  throdgh  his  aboonding 
grace.  Christian,  he  is  bringing  you  low,  he  is  stripping  you»  he  is 
casting  you  into  the  mire,  he  is  beating  you  small  as  the  dnst  of  the 
streets,  and  all  because  by  this  means  he  will  make  you  see  your  nothing- 
ness, aiid  will  cause  yon  more  fully  to  appreciate  the  q^endour  of  his 
grace,  and  the  all-sumcienoy  of  his  power.  ICnowing  this^  fisith  mi^  h€^ 
us  to  rejoice  in  tribulation  at  the  moment  it  arriyes,  sayings  **  Here 
is  my  Father's  black  horse  come  to  my  door  to  Mng  me  a  new  token 
of  love  from  him."  "  We  glory  in  tribulation  also,  knowing  that  tribu- 
lation worketh  patience,  and  patience  experience,  and  experience  ho^*' 
0  g;rouiid,  wdcome  the  spade  that  is  to  turn  thee  into  a  garden  I  0 
soul,  welcome  the  affliction  that  is,  through  infinite  mercy,  to  make  thee 
bring  forth  fMt  unto  thy  God.  Then  shalt  thon  know  that  the  Lord  is 
God  when  he  has  broken  the  bands  of  thy  yoke ;  and  this  thou  mayest 
expect  him  to  do  it  Thus  much  upon  the  first  head,  namely,  that  the 
Lord  does  break  the  bands  of  his  people. 

II.  Now,  second^,  whxh  rb  dobs  this  thbw  test  show  hix 
TO  BE  thb  Lobd.    Here  we  come  to  personal  experience. 

Beloved,  when  we  have  great  deliverances  from  bondage  then  ws 
begin  to  see  the  divine  attributes  displayed.  You  M  believe  God  to  be 
very  powerful,  for  you  have  heard  his  voice  in  the  thunder,  and 
seen  his  might  in  the  tempest ;  but  when  yon  have  been  bron(|^t  into 
very  deep  distress,  and  God  has  brought  you  out  of  it  with  a  high 
hand  and  an  outstretched  arm,  then  you  have  said,  **  Now  I  see  his 

Kwer.    No  hand  but  his  could  have  moved  that  burden,  and  he  has 
Be  it**    I  do  not  suppose  that  all  of  you  can  go  with  me  in  this; 


140  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLB  PULPIT. 

bnt  yon  who  have  done  bnsinesa  in  great  waters  have  seen  the  works 
of  the  Lord  and  his  wonders  in  the  deep.  Yon  have  known  times 
when  if  anybody  had  told  yon  that  yon  wonla  be  delivered  you  would  have 
said,  '*  Impossible !  Impossible !"  Yet  you  have  been  deli?ered,  and 
you  have  cried  out,  '*  This  is  the  finger  of  God.  Now  I  know  that 
there  is  a  God  in  Israel,  for  he  has  done  for  me  what  no  man  could 
have  accomplished,  no,  nor  the  angels  of  God."  You  have  felt  the 
power  of  God  come  so  near  to  you  that  you  have  said,  like  Jacob, 
**  How  dreadful  is  this  place ! "  Awe  has  overwhehned  you  at  the 
thought  that  God  should  display  such  power  towards  such  an  unworthy 
one  as  yon,  to  nplift  you  from  such  depths  of  trouble. 

You  mnst  also  have  seen  with  wonderful  vividness  the  attribute  of 
wisdom.    You  have  been  all  in  a  snarl.    You  have  done  your  best, 
and  yon  have  made  things  worse.    You  have  gone  for  advice,  and 
the  advice  has  perplexed  yon.    You  have  looked  in  all  directions,  and 
the  more  you  have  looked  the  less  hope  yon  have  seen ;  and  then,  on  a 
sudden,  God's  finger  has  seemed  to  be  put  out,  and  all  the  knots  have 
been  untied,  and  his  word  has  been  fulfilled, — **  I  will  make  the  crooked 
places  straight  and  the  rough  places  plain."  You  have  had  clear  sailing 
where  rocks  appeared  to  hem  you  in,  and  when  you  have  safely  passed 
both  Scylla  and  Charybdis  you  have  magnified  the  divine  Pilot,  and 
been  astounded  at  his  infallible  wisdom.    Then  have  you  called  him 
*'  the  only  wise  God,"  and  felt  that  he  has  abounded  towards  you  in  all 
wisdom  and  prudence.    The  path  of  your  feet  as  you  have  looked  back 
upon  it  has  shooe  with  mercy,  and  jou  have  said, ''  What  a  blessed 
road  is  this  by  which  I  have  been  led !    I  thank  God  that  ever  I  came 
this  way  I    It  is  the  b^st  path  that  ever  I  have  trodden — the  most  soul 
enriching  track-way.    What  wisdom  has  been  shown  towards  me  I    I 
have  had  a  considerable  trouble,  but  it  has  saved  me  from  one  a  thou- 
sand times  worse.    I  have  been  a  great  loser ;  but,  still,  I  am  a  greater 
^ner  than  a  loser.    I  would  not  have  missed  this  triid  though  I  dreaded 
it !    I  would  not  have  missed  it  for  a  thousand  worlds  I    No  one  could 
have  told  me  how  this  was  to  be  done,  nor  by  what  process  I  was  to  be 
released ;  but  now  I  know  that  the  Lord  is  exceeding  wise  and  wonder- 
ful in  counsel,  and  blessed  be  bis  name."    If  anv  caviller  had  answered 
Jou,  ''I  do  not  believe  in  providence;  it  is  aU  stuff  and  nonsense  I" 
do  not  suppose  that  you  would  have  had  much  more  patience  with 
such  a  person  than  I  should  have,  and  that  is  wonderfully  little ;  for 
I  am  of  the  mind  of  a  good  old  man  to  whom  I  was  speaking  yester- 
day, who  said,  "  Mainly  I  read  my  Bible ;  and  having  read  this  about 
fifty  years,  and  having  tried  it  and  lived  by  faith  upon  God,  the  modem 
humbug  of  the  free*Uiinkers  does  not  bother  me.    I  know  better.    I 
never  argue  about  it.    I  have  lived  upon  the  old  doctrines,  and  know 
the  truth  of  them."    You  will  see,  as  I  quote  his  woids,  that  ho  put  it 
rather  strongly;  but  I  am  altogether  of  the  old  man's  mind.    The 
gentlemen  waste  their  words  when  they  try  to  make  me  doubt  the 
overruling  presence  and  personal  interference  of  the  Lord  in  the  affairs 
of  his  people.    They  might  as  well  tell  me  that  I  have  no  father,  or 
that  I  never  had  a  mother,  and  that  my  parents  never  treated  me 
kindly.    I  know  what  I  do  know,  and  I  know  this — that  the  Lord  is 
kind  in  all  his  ways,  and  that  his  providence  does  continually  interpose 


THS  YOKE  RCXOVED  AND  THE  LOAD  REVEALED.      141 

OD  behalf  of  his  praying  people.  If  the  learned  donbters  cannot  see  a 
proTidence, — ^well,  perhaps  no  special  proridence  has  been  songht  for  by 
them  or  Yonchsafed  to  them.  If  they  have  no  God  and  no  proTidenoe, 
of  oonrae  they  cannot  bear  witness  to  what  they  do  not  know.  Let 
them  go  home  and  pray  God  to  teach  them.  Bat  we  know  that  God 
does  appear  for  ns,  and  are  not  to  be  beaten  ont  of  it ;  and  we  expect 
to  accnmnlate  mnch  more  personal  evidence  upon  that  subject  between 
this  and  heaven,  for  we  shall  again  suffer  times  of  dark  distress  in 
which  Ood  will  appear  for  as,  and  we  shall  know  that  he  is  the  Lord 
by  his  breaking  the  bands  of  onr  neck. 

The  liord's  love  also  is  clearly  revealed  in  onr  deliyeranccs.  Have 
jon  not  sat  down  with  tears  of  gladness  in  your  eyes  and  said  to 
jonrself,  **  What  a  God  he  is !  Oh,  what  a  God  he  is ! "  ?  Have  yon 
not  almost  wanted  to  get  np  into  a  high  pulpit,  with  all  the  world 
sronnd  yon,  that  yon  might  bear  witness  to  his  grace  to  yon  on  each 
partfcnlar  occasion.  My  feet  were  almost  gone,  my  steps  had  well- 
nigh  slipped.  I  was  in  a  great  strait.  I  was  hemmed  in.  I  knew  not 
what  to  do ;  and  I  had  grieved  him  by  my  sin,  and  wandered  from 
him ;  bnt  though  I  had  forgotten  him,  he  did  not  forget  me.  Though 
I  was  nnbelieying,  he  was  faithful ;  though  I  was  foolish,  he  was  wise; 
and  be  set  my  feet  into  a  large  room :  therefore  is  my  mouth  opened, 
and  my  heart  constrains  me  to  speak  well  of  his  name  before  many 
witneflses.  I  know  that  there  are  some  of  yon  who  neyer  will  be  able 
U>  tell  what  love  God  has  manifested  to  you.  The  poet,  though  he 
strained  the  sense,  yet  spoke  the  truth  when  he  said — 

^  But  O  etemitv's  too  short 
To  utter  half  thy  praise.** 

We  shall  never  get  through  it,  brothers  and  sisters.  There  is  no  fear 
of  onr  stopping  the  eternal  music  for  want  of  matter,  for  the  goodness, 
and  the  grace,  and  the  love  of  God  to  us  are  past  finding  out,  and  are 
altogether  infinite.  When  we  have  had  the  bands  of  our  yoke  suddenly 
broken,  then  the  divine  love  in  its  boundless  length  and  breadth  has 
been  conspicuously  before  ns,  and  we  have  known  the  Lord. 

Thna  i  might  speak  of  each  of  the  divine  attributes,  bnt  I  choose 
rather  to  pass  to  another  topic.    It  is  this.    When  the  bands  of  our 

Ske  have  been  broken  it  u  often  in  answer  to  pratfer,  and  because  that 
»erty  has  come  in  answer  to  prayer,  we  have  exclaimed,  ^'Now  I 
know  the  Lord."  If  yon  have  gone  to  God  twenty  times  about  a 
thing—^nay,  twenty  times  would  oe  just  nothing)— if  yon  haye  risen 
in  ue  ni^ht-watcnes  and  cried  with  groans  and  tears  about  your 
burden, — ^if  you  have  walked  your  garden  or  walked  the  streets,  and 
all  the  while  your  soul  has  been  crying,  **  My  Father,  deliver  me  !  " 
pleading  every  argument  your  soul  knew  with  God  that  he  would 
come  to  your  rescue :  then,  when  the  rescue  has  come,  you  haye  known 
the  Lord.  An  answered  prayer  is  a  window  into  God's  existence,  a 
proof  of  his  faithfulness,  an  evidence  of  his  presence.  Therein  yon  see 
that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  the  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him. 
So,  again,  we  know  him  from  another  reason :  tM  special  hand  of 
God  is  tffen  seen  in  the  breaking  of  the  yoke  of  his  people — ^the  special 
hand.     Those  who  look  at  providences  carefully  will  often  wonder  at 


141  UETROFOLITAN  TABEBNAOLS  PULPIT. 

th«  apocuJitiea  of  God  aboat  little  thhigs:  for  inBtance,  about  the 
time«-the  exact  time.  God  never  is  before  his  time»  and  he  never  is  too 
late.  He  times  his  mercies  to  die  tick  of  the  clock.  If  thej  had  come 
a  little  before  they  might  have  been  misused,  if  they  came  a  little  later 
our  spirit  might  have  been  broken,  and  the  steed  might  have  been  starved 
while  the  grass  was  gronring.  There  it  is:  the  moment  the  hand  of 
the  devil  lifted  the  dart  the  hand  of  the  Eternal  lifled  the  shield,  so 
that  the  dart  was  turned  aside.  Wonderful  are  the  punctualities  of 
God.  You  have  noticed  them.  I  am  sure  you  must  have  done  so.  You 
have  met  a  friend  by  accidentally  going  down  one  street  when  you 
generally  went  another,  and  that  very  friend  has  been  the  one  that  you 
most  needed  to  see.  I  have  known  what  it  is  to  go  out  of  my  way,  and 
to  complain  of  myself  for  having  made  such  a  blunder,  and  thus  wasting 
half-an-hour;  till  I  have  seen  the  person  that  I  wanted  to  meet  above 
^  men,  but  had  not  thought  of  hun  as  the  right  person  to  enquire  of, 
and  he  has  told  me  exactly  what  I  wanted  to  know.  I  was  going  the 
night  way  when  I  was  going  out  of  the  way.  But  often  it  is  so,  and  so 
shall  you  find  it,  and  you  shall  have  to  lift  «p  your  hands  and  say 
''Now  also  do  I  know  the  Lord, — timci  place,  cireumstanoeSy  words, 
little  petty  details,  small  things,  he  has  nad  a  hand  in  them  alL'' 
''  Blessed  be  God,"  said  I,  to  a  dear  one  to-day,  '<  for  our  great  God, 
that  he  loves  us  in  great  troubles."  "  And,"  she  replied,  *'  blessed  be  his 
name  that  nothing  is  too  little  for  him."  So  do  I  say  to-night  Blessed 
be  his  name  for  breaking  the  little  bands  of  our  yoke^  and  for  removing 
tiie  great  yokes  by  such  small  but  efifectual  means.  We  most  admire 
those  little  touches  which  are  so  omnipotent.  The  magicians,  of 
Egypt  turned  water  into  blood,  or  pretended  to  do  it,  and  they  brought 
forth  frogs ;  but  when  once  Aaron  oegan  to  make  the  dust  into  tiny  life, 
they  ooi2d  not  counterfeit  the  wonder,  and  they  said,  ''  This  is  the 
finger  of  God."  l^^uently  by  minute  marvels  God  reveals  himself 
most  clearly  to  the  secret  souls  of  his  people,  and  they  hear  in  his  still 
small  voice  more  of  his  mind  than  in  his  tnnnder  and  mighty  wind. 

Dear  fiaenda,  if  you  have  passed  through  any  great  and  special  deli- 
verances, vou  will  join  with  me  in  feeling  that  the  presence  of  God  is 
often  vividly  perc^ved.  I  fear  that  the  presence  of  Gk>d  is  not  often  felt 
as  it  ought  to  be  at  a  dinner-table,  when  a  number  of  people  are  met 

t  together  and  are  enjoying  themselves.  But  I  remember  my  feeling  the 
presence  of  God  at  a  dinner-table  on  a  memorable  occasion.  There  was 
a  ve^  large  sum  of  money  to  be  paid  for  the  building  of  the  Orphanage, 
i^id  1  was  up  with  certain  friends  at  Bef^ent's  Park— ^ning  at  tne  house 
of  one  of  our  brethren.  I  there  mentioned  that  I  was  Siort  of  some 
£2,000,  to  meet  an  account  which  would  very  soon  be  due,  but  that  I  was 
sure  that  God  would  graciously  give  it,  for  it  was  h$8  work  and  he  would 
supply  its  needs  in  answer  to  nrayer.  We  were  discussing  as  to  whether 
it  was  not  rather  bold  to  speak  too  positively  about  answers  to  a  prayer 

,  of  such  a  kind,  and  while  we  were  still  discoursing  there  came  a  tele- 
gram from  the  Tabemade  to  me,  saying, "  A  person  unknown  has  called 
and  left  £2,000  in  bank-notes  for  the  Orphanage."  I  read  the  telegram 
to  the  friends  assembled,  and  their  gratitude  and  astonishment  abounded. 
My  dear  old  friend.  Dr.  Brock,  who  is  now  with  God,  said,  **  Put  down 
your  knives  and  forks,  and  let  us  Uess  the  name  of  the  Lord;"  and 


TU£  YOKE  KEMOYED  AND  THE  LOUD  REVEALED.  143 

he  stood  np  and  poured  onb  his  heart  in  a  most  wonderfal  manner  in 
deTont  thankfnlness  to  the  Answerer  of  prayer.  We  all  heartily  joined 
in  that  act  of  devotion.  The  Lord  was  there ;  we  felt  his  presence  as 
mnch  as  if  it  had  been  a  sacramental  sapper,  for  the  Lord  had  drawn  so 
near  to  us.  If  some  one  had  said  to  ns  jnst  then,  '^  Well,  you  know, 
this  is  a  coincidence,  a  mere  coincidence,"  we  should  have  laughed,  and 
I  for  one  sbonld  have  said,  '*It  is  a  very  blessed  coincidence,  and  I  hope 
it  will  go  on  coinciding ;  for  truly  it  coincides  with  the  promise  and 
with  mj  faith  in  God."  The  devil  does  not  give  his  followers  such 
coincidences.  lict  me  say  that  I  have  prayed,  and  God  has  heard  me, 
and  if  that  is  only  a  coincidence,  it  has  happened  so  many  hundreds 
and  thousands  of  times  to  me,  and,  I  suppose,  to  you  also,  beloved, 
that  we  are  not  to  be  cheated  out  of  a  demonstrated  fact  by  the  un* 
believer^s  impudent  theories. 

We  can  boldly  say,  "  Now  I  know  the  Lord,  for  he  has  broken  the 
bands  of  my  yoke  in  answer  to  prayer,  and  I  have  felt  him  near."  Yes, 
and  we  feel  him  so  near  that  often  we  are  obliged  to  utter  words  of 
praise.  See  what  the  Israelites  did  when  thev  had  been  in  Egypt  making 
nrickfl  without  straw,  and  seeing  their  male  children  destroyed  by  a 
merciless  tyrant.  It  was  a  happy,  happy  time  for  them  when  at  mid- 
night thej  came  out  of  Egypt.  Do  you  wonder  after  they  had  crossed 
the  Red  Sea,  and  Pharaoh  and  his  chariots  had  all  been  drowned 
in  the  midst  of  it,  that  when  they  saw  their  enemies  dead  upon  the 
shore,  Miriam  took  her  timbrel,  and  all  the  daughters  of  Israel  went 
forth  with  music  chanting, "  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed 
glorionslj.  The  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the  sea "  ? 
**  Be  quiet,  good  women.  The  philosophers  have  discovered  that  God  is 
the  '  totality  of  existence,'  and  that  he  has  no  personality,  and  con- 
sequently never  interferes  with  the  fixed  laws  of  matter.  Tou  must  not 
believe  that  he  drowned  those  Egyptians  by  his  own  act  and  deed : 
it  was  an  extraordinary  natural  phenomenon  which  occasionally  happens 
just  about  this  place.  You  ought  rather  to  wonder  at  the  marvellous 
laws  of  gravitation  by  which  these  Egyptians  have  sunk  under  the 
water."  Thus  some  superfluously  wise  fool  might  have  prated  to  the 
ivomen  of  Israel ;  but  what  would  they  have  thought  of  him  ?  What 
wonid  Miriam  have  said  to  that  ?  Modem  philosophers  explain  all 
miracles  away,  and  Colenso,  with  a  slate,  figures  the  whole  storv  of  the 
Exodus  into  thin  air.  What  would  Moses  have  said  to  him  for  a  bishop  ? 
In  the  presence  of  that  miracle,  with  their  shoulders  still  red  with  the 
lash,  their  faces  still  grimed  with  the  brickdust,  conscious  that  they  had 
been  in  bondage  and  knew  it,  and  were  now  free,  and  that  none  but 
the  eternal  Jehovah  could  have  set  them  free,  the  sons  of  Jacob  would 
have  pitched  the  philosophers  into  the  Bed  Sea  along  with  the 
Egyptians,  where  I  almost  wish  they  were,  for  they  are  of  no  use  among 
us  nowadays.  Infinite  mercy  lets  the  creatures  five,  but  we  shall  not 
cease  from  our  glorying  in  our  God  because  of  what  they  call  their 
criticism.  In  our  case  is  fulfilled  the  promise,  '^They  shall  know  that 
I  am  the  Lord  when  I  break  the  bands  of  their  yoke." 

Beloved,  if  you  do  not  know  the  Lord  personally,  do  not  talk  about 
him,  nor  pretend  to  know  him,  but  if  you  do  know  him  be  not  afraid 
of  being  caU^  dogmatical  because  you  speak  confidently.    Read  the 


144 


UETEOPOLITAX  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


Epistles  of  John,  and  see  how  the  beloved  disciple  harps  upon  that 
word.  He  says,  we  know :  we  know :  we  know :  we  know.  Tiie  word 
oocoTs,  perhaps,  forty  times  in  that  short  epistle.  Know  what  you  do 
know,  and  when  you  know  it,  do  not  be  driren  from  it,  but  let  the  text 
be  fulfilled  in  your  experience,  **  They  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord 
when  I  haTe  broken  the  bands  of  their  yoke."  If  your  sins  haye  been 
forgiven,  if  you  have  been  brought  up  out  of  the  horrible  pit  and  out 
of  the  miry  clay,  if  you  have  be^  delivered  from  the  power  of  sin,  so  as 
^  to  perfeot  holiness  in  the  foar  of  the  Lord/'  or  aim  at  it,  and  if  you 
have  been  blest  in  providence  with  answers  to  prayer,  and  many  a  time 
rescued  as  from  between  the  lion's  jaws,  then  say,  "  The  liord  liveth, 
and  blessed  be  my  rock,  and  I  will  walk  by  &ith  in  him.  As  lor  others, 
let  them  say  what  they  will,  and  doubt  what  they  please ;  my  soul  fol- 
loweth  hard  after  the  Lord,  for  his  right  hand  upholdeth  me." 

There  I  leave  the  subject,  praying  that  every  one  of  you  may  have 
the  bands  of  your  yoke  broken,  for  then  shall  you  know  the  Lord,  and 
not  till  tiien.    The  Lord  bless  you  evermore.    Amen. 


POBTIOK  OF  SCBIPTUBB  BEAD  BBFOBB  SbBMOIT — Ezddel  XXxiv. 


Hymkb  fbom  "  OuB  0 WK  HvMN  Book  "—708,  126,  660. 


"  THE  SWORD  AND  THB  TROWEL."    Edited  by  0.  H.  SPURGEON. 

00XTBXT9  voa  Makck,  U79. 


Incidents  of  Traral  dottering  rnund  a  Text.  By 
C.  U.  SpurgMB. 

Little  Didqr. 

Xtemal  Punishment. 

A  Sanday  Afternoon  in  Oolden  Lane. 

The  Lore  ef  Christ.    By  J.  Clark. 

If  onconlbTBiity  in  iNoorAjlk  and  Suflblk. 

Hr.  Bartlett's  Work  at  the  Tabemaole,  Orphan- 
age, and  Almshouses. 

Oovper  on  "  The  Lie  of  Popery.'* 

Trust  in  Qod's  Unchanging  Lovo. 

aalration  a  Gift. 


The  Diaeiplea— Simon   Hie   Xanunite, 

Zealot.    B/  Pastor  0.  A.  Davis. 
A  Rare  Woraer  for  Qod. 
Andrew  Darn. 
Aches  So. 
Notices  of  Books. 
Notes. 

Pastors'  College. 
Stockirell  Orphanage 
Oolportage  Association. 
Society  of  Evangelists. 
The  Spuigoon  lestimonlal. 
The  Spurgeon  Testimonial  fiaaaar. 


er  U&tt 


^ioe  3d.    Po9t  free,  4  atamiiB. 


Pammou  ^  AulBASTBB,  4,  PatenMster  BoUdings;  and  oU  BookseUen. 


^dttujditmi  i^Hkmad^  §viipt. 


THE  EOES  AND  THE  HINDS. 


II 


C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


"By  the  roes,  and  hy  the  hinds  of  the  field.**— Solomon*i  Song  il.  7. 

The  q>on6e  was  in  the  fall  enjoyment  of  fellowship  with  her  Beloved. 
Iler  joj  was  so  great  as  almost  to  overpower  her,  and  vet,  so  nearly 
docs  fear  tread  npon  the  heels  of  joy,  she  was  filled  with  oread  lest  her 
bliss  shonld  come  to  an  end.  She  feared  lest  others  should  disturb  her 
Lord,  for  if  he  were  grieved  she  would  be  grieved  also,  and  if  he  de- 
parted the  banquet  of  her  delight  would  be  over.  She  was  afiraid  even 
of  her  fiiendsy  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem ;  she  knew  that  the  best  can 
intermpt  fellowship  as  well  as  the  worst,  and  therefore  she  adjured  even 
Zion's  daughters  not  to  sin  against  Zion's  King.  Had  they  aroused 
her  Beloved  and  broken  his  sacred  peace  she  would  not  have  found  a 
recompense  in  their  company,  but  would  rather  have  regarded  them  with 
areiBion,  for  haying  robbed  her  of  her  chief  delight.  The  adjuration 
which  she  used  is  a  choice  specimen  of  oriental  poetry :  she  charges 
them,  not  as  we  should  prosaicallv  do,  by  everything  that  is  sacred  and 
true,  but  ''by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field."  So  far  as  we 
understand  her  meaning  we  will  endeavour  to  profit  by  it  during  our 
brief  meditation.  It  touches  one  of  the  most  mysterious  points  of  the 
secret  life  of  the  believer,  and  we  shall  much  need  the  guidimce  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  while  we  endeavour  to  open  up  its  meaning. 

**  The  roes  and  the  hinds  of  the  field*'  are  creatures  of  great  beauty. 
Who  can  gaze  upon  them  as  thej  wander  among  the  bracken  without 
an  inwara  admiration?  Now,  smce  nothing  can  be  more  lovely  than 
commnnion  with  Jesus,  the  spouse  exhorts  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem 
by  all  the  loveliest  objects  in  nature  to  refrain  from  disturbing  it.  No 
one  would  wish  to  drive  away  the  gazelle,  but  would  feast  his  eyes  upon 
it,  and  yet  its  graceful  elegance  can  never  be  compared  with  that  beauty 
of  holiness,  that  comeliness  of  grace  which  are  to  be  seen  in  fellowship 
with  Jesus.  It  is  beautiful  irom  both.sldes;  it  is  a  lovely  display  of 
condescension  for  our  beloved  Lord  to  reveal  himself  to  us,  and  on  the 
other  hand  it  is  a  charming  manifestation  of  every  admirable  virtue  for 
a  belieyer  to  enter  into  fellowship  with  his  Lord.  He  who  would  dis- 
turb such  mutual  intercourse  must  be  devoid  of  spiritual  taste,  and 
llind  to  all  which  is  most  worthv  of  admiration. 

As  one  delights  to  see  the  red  deer  in  the  open  glades  of  the  forest, 
and  counts  them  the  finest  ornaments  of  the  scene,  so  do  men  whose  eyes 
are  opened  rejoice  in  the  saints  whose  high  communion  with  heaven 
No.  1,463. 


1^6  METROPOLITAN  TABEaNACLE  PULPIT. 

iWKkrs  them  beings  of  saperior  tnould  to  common  mortals.  A  seal  ia 
couTcrsc  with  its  God  is  the  admiration  of  angels.  Was  ever  a  lorelier 
sight  seen  than  Jesns  at  the  table  with  the  beloved  disciple  leaning  on 
his  bosom  ?  Is  not  Mary  sitting  at  the  Master's  feet  a  pictui-e  worthy 
of  the  choicest  art  ?  Do  nothmg,  then,  0  ye  who  joy  in  things  of 
beanty,  to  mar  the  fellowship  in  which  the  rarest  beanty  dwells.  Neither 
by  worldly  care^  nor  sin,  nor  trifling  make  eren  the  slightest  stir  which 
might  break  the  Beloved's  rq)ose.  His  resttnl  presence  is  heaven  below, 
and  the  best  antepast  of  heaven  above ;  in  it  we  find  everything  that  is 
pare,  and  lovely,  and  of  good  report.  It  is  good,  and  only  good.  Why, . 
then,  0  daughters  of  «ferusalem,  should  ye  stir  up  our  Beloved,  and 
cause  his  adorable  excellency  to  be  hidden  from  us  ?  Rather  join  with 
US  in  pi'eserving  a  joy  so  fair,  a  bliss  so  comely. 

The  next  thought  suggested  *'  by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the 
field"  is  that  of  tender  innocenx'E.  These  gentle  creatures  are  so 
harmless,  so  defenceless,  so  timid,  that  he  must  have  a  souHess  soul  who 
would  do  them  harm  or  cause  them  fright.  By  all,  then,  that  is  tender 
the  spouse  beseeches  her  friends  not  to  disturb  her  Beloved.  He  is  so 
good,  so  kind,  so  holy,  harmless,  and  undcfiled,  that  the  most  indifl^srent 
ought  to  be  ashamed  to  molest  his  rest.  About  him  there  is  nothing  to 
provoke  ofiPence,  and  everything  to  forbid  it.  He  is  a  man  of  sorrows 
and  acquainted  with  grief;  he  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters,  arid  his 
cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair,  he  hid  not  his  face  from 
shame  and  spitting.  Being  reviled  he  reviled  not  again,  bnt  in  his 
death  agonies  he  prayed  for  his  enemies.  Who,  then,  could  find  cause 
for  offence  in  him  ?  bo  not  his  wounds  ward  off  the  blows  which  might 
be  challenged  had  he  been  of  another  character  ?  Who  will  wish  to 
vex  the  Lamb  of  God  ?  Go  elsewhere,  ye  hunters !  "  The  hind  of  the 
morning"  has  already  sweated  great  drops  of  blood  falling  to  the 
ground.  When  dogs  compassed  him  and  the  assembly  of  the  wieked 
enclosed  him  he  felt  the  full  of  grief — will  ye  afflict  him  yet  again? 

In  fello^vship  with  Jesus  there  is  a  tenderness  which  ought  to  disarm 
all  opposition,  and  even  command  respectful  deference.  A  soul  com- 
muning with  the  Son  of  God  challenges  no  enmity.  The  world  may 
rise  against  proselyting  zeal,  or  defiant  controversy,  or  ostentatious 
ceremonialism,  for  these  have  prominence  and  power,  and  are'  fair  game 
for  martial  spirits :  but  fellowship  is  quiet,  retiring,  unobtrusive,  harm- 
less. The  saints  who  most  abound  in  it 'are  of  a  tender  spirit,  fearful 
to  offend,  non-resistant,  and  patient — surely  it  would  be  a  superfluity 
of  cruelty  to  wish  to  deprive  them  of  their  unselfish  happiness,  which 
deprives  no  heart  of  a  drop  of  pleasure,  and  costs  no  eye  a  tear.  Kather 
let  even  those  who  are  most,  indifferent  to  religion  pay  a  generous 
respect  to  those  who  find  theii-  delight  in  it.  Though  the  worldling 
may  care  nothing  for  the  love  which  overpowers  the  believer's  ravished 
spirit,  let  him  tread  with  reverent  care  when  he  passes  the  closet  of  de- 
votion, or  hears  a  stray  note  from  the  song  of  meditative  gratitude. 
Bough  men  have  paused  when  they  have  suddenly  come  upon  a  fair 
gazelle  grazing  in  a  secluded  spot :  charmed  at  the  sight  of  such  tender 
foveliness  they  have  scareely  dared  to  move  a  foot  lest  they  should  alarm 
the  gentle  roe;  and  some  such  feeling  may  well  forbid  the  harsh 
oriticism  or  the  vulgar  laugh  when  c  /en  the  infidel  beholds  a  sincere 


THE  B0E8  AKB  THB  HIin)S»  147 

beut  in  conrerse  with  its  Lord.  As  for  those  of  ns  who  know  the 
bkflBedneflB  of  fellowship  with  JesnSj,  it  behoyes  ns  to  be  doubly  jealous 
of  oar  words  and  deeds,  lest  in  a  single  instance  we  offend  one  of  the 
Bedeemer*s  little  ones,  and  cause  him  to  lose  even  for  an  hour  his  de« 
Hgfat  in  the  Lord.  How  often  are  Christians  careless  abont  this ;  till  at 
the  sight  of  some  professors  the  more  spiritnal  may  well  take  alarm^ 
and  cry  out  in  angnish,  *'  I  charge  you,  0  ye  daughters  of  Jerusalem,, 
by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field,  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awake 
my  k>Te,  till  he  please." 

A  third  thougnt  most  certainly  had  place  in  the  mind  of  the  anxious 
fpooae ;  she  meant  to  adjure  and  persuade  her  friends  to  silence  by 
eTerything  which  sets  forth  LOTS.  The  lilies  and  the  roes  have  always 
been  sacr^  to  love.  The  poet  of  the  Canticles  had  elsewhere  used  the 
symbol  of  the  text  to  set  forth  married  love.  **  Let  her  be  as  the  loving 
hind  and  pleasant  roe  "  (Prov.  v.  19).  If  ever  there  was  true  love  in 
all  this  selfish  world,  it  is  the  love  of  Jesus  first,  and  next  the  love  of 
his  people.  As  for  his  love,  it  passeth  the  love  of  women,  many  waters 
cannot  quench  it,  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it ;  and  as  for  the  love 
of  the  cnurch,  he  who  best  knows  it  says,  **  How  taAt  is  thy  love,  my 
sister,  my  spouse  I  How  much  better  is  thy  love  than  wine  I  and  the 
smell  of  thine  ointment  than  all  spices !"  If  love,  therefore,  may  plead* 
immanity  from  war,  and  ask  to  have  its  quietude  respected,  the  spouse 
used  a  good  argument  when  she  pleaded  **  by  the  roes  and  by  the  hinds 
of  the  field,"  that  her  royal  Bridegroom's  rest  of  love  mis'ht  not  be 
invaded*  If  vou  love,  or  are  loved,  or  wish  to  be  loved,  have  a 
reverent  regard  for  those  who  commune  with  Jesus,  for  their  souls  take 
their  fill  of  love,  and  to  drive  them  from  their  bliss  would  be  inex- 
cusable barbarity.  0  ye  who  have  any  hearts  to  feel  for  others,  do  not 
cause  the  bitterest  oi  sorrow  by  depriving  a  sanctified  soul  of  the 
sweetest  of  delights.  Draw  not  nigh  hither  with  idle  tale,  or  wanton 
speech,  or  empty  mirth  :  the  place  whereon  thou  standestis  holy  ground, 
for  sorely  God  is  in  that  place  where  a  heart  enamoured  of  the  alto* 
gether  Lovely  One  delights  itself  in  the  Lord. 

O  that  all  believers  were  so  anxious  to  retain  the  enjoyment  of  divine 
love  that  they  would  warn  off  every  intruder,  whoever  he  might  be. 
The  daughters  of  Jerusalem  were  welcome  to  visit  the  spouse  at  fitting 
times,  she  even  on  another  occasion  bade  them  carry  a  message  for  her 
to  her  Beloved  One,  and  gave  them  a  full  description  of  his  surpassing 
charms,  but  when  her  Lord  was  with  her  at  the  banquet,  she  only  asked 
of  them  that  they  would  not  come  between  her  and  the  sunshine  of  his 
presence.  Nor  do  we  wonder  at  her  jealous  fear,  for  we  have  had  a 
sip  of  those  sweets  which  she  had  tasted,  and  we  would  sooner  lose 
all  else  than  lose  the  luxury  of  love  divine.  It  is  such  joy  as  cannot  be 
imagined  by  those  who  have  never  partaken  ot  it,  such  joy  as  can 
never  be  rivalled  even  in  the  paradise  above,  if  in  that  place  there  be 
any  other  joy  than  that  which  springs  from  divine  love.  Let  none, 
then,  deprive  us  of  its  continued  enjoyment.  By  the  sanctities  of  true 
love  let  every  friendly  mind  assist  us  to  preserve  the  hallowed  quiet  so 
essential  to  communion  with  our  Lord. 

Once  more,  upon  the  very  surface  of  the  figure  lies  the  idea  of 
delkale  sensitiveness.    The  roes  and  the  hinds  of  the  field  are  soon 


148  HETEOPOLITAN  TABEKNAOLS  PULPIT. 

away  if  anything  occurs  to  distnrb  them.  In  this  respect  they  set 
forth  to  the  life  the  speediness  with  which  the  Beloved  departs  when 
he  is  annoyed  by  sin.  He  is  as  a  roe  or  a  young  hart,  for  this  quality 
among  many  others  that  wliile  ''he  comes  leaping  upon  the  moun- 
tains^ skipping  upon  the  hills/'  he  also  soon  withdraws  himself  and 
is  gone.  Ah,  then  his  spouse  bewails  his  absence,  saying, ''  I  sought 
him,  but  I  could  not  find  him ;  I  called  him,  but  he  gave  me  no  answer." 
The  Lord  our  God  is  a  jealous  God.  In  proportion  to  the  fire  of  lore 
is  the  heat  of  jealousy,  and  therefore  our  Lord  Jesus  will  not  brook  a 
wandering  affection  in  those  greatly  beloved  ones  to  whom  he  manifests 
himself.  It  needs  constant  watchfulness  to  maintain  constant  fellowship. 
Hence  the  spouse  entreats  and  beseeches  those  who  came  near  her  not 
to  give  umbrage  to  her  Lord.  They  might  do  this  unwittingly,  hence 
she  warns  them ;  they  might  do  it  in  wanton  cardessness,  hence  she 
'^  charges  "  them.  She  would  have  them  speak  softly  and  move  gently, 
lest  he  should  be  disturbed.  Should  we  not  feel  a  like  anxiety  that 
nothing  in  our  families,  or  in  any  of  our  relations  or  connections  should 
be  tolerated  by  us  so  as  to  envelope  us  in  the  wrong,  and  grieve  onr 
Lord?  Should  we  not  specially  watch  every  thought  of  our  mind, 
desire  of  onr  heart,  word  of  our  tongue,  and  deed  of  our  hand,  lest  any 
of  these  should  give  him  umbrage,  and  break  our  rapturous  intercourse  ? 
If  we  would  be  &voured  above  others  we  must  be  more  on  our  guBxd 
than  others  are.  He  who  becomes  ''  a  man  greatly  beloved  "  must  needs 
keep  his  heart  with  sevenfold  diligence,  for  to  whom  much  is  given  of 
him  much  will  be  required.  Kings  will  bear  &om  common  subjecta 
behaviour  which  could  not  be  endured  in  favourites ;  that  which  might 
cause  but  slight  pain  from  an  enemy  will  sorely  wound  if  it  come  from 
a  friend.  Therefore  the  favoured  spouse  may  well  use  in  her  entreaty 
the  name  of  the  most  tenderly  susceptible  of  love's  favourites,  and  plead 
**  bv  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field." 

Dear  friend,  do  you  know  what  intercourse  with  Jesus  means  ?  If  so, 
imitate  the  spouse  whenever  you  are  in  the  enjoyment  of  it.  Be  j^ous 
of  yourself  and  all  around  vou,  that  the  Well-beloved  may  not  be  vexed. 
Aim  at  the  maintenance  of  life-long  communion.  Remember  how  for  cen- 
turies Enoch  walked  with  God :  our  lives  are  but  a  span  compared  with 
his,  why  should  we  not  always  come  up  from  the  wilaerness  leaning  on 
onr  Beloved  ?  The  Holy  Ghost  has  almighty  power.  Let  us  ask  and 
receive  that  onr  joy  may  be  full. 

If  you  do  not  understand  this  precious  secret,  may  the  Lord  reveal  it 
to  you  even  now.  Yon  must  first  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  as  your 
Saviour,  or  you  can  never  know  him  as  your  Bridegroom.  Faith  must 
tmst  him  before  love  can  embrace  him.  You  must  be  brought  to  be 
washed,  or  you  can  never  be  brought  to  be  banqueted.  Pant  after  the 
Redeemer  as  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water  brooks,  and  when  you 
have  drank  of  the  water  of  life  then  shall  you  be  as  a  hind  let  loose : 
then,  too,  your  feet  shall  be  like  hinds'  feet,  and  you  shall  be  set  upon 
your  high  places.  When  this  shall  have  been  made  your  own  by  expe- 
rience you  shall  understand  the  text,  and  shall  also  breathe  the  prayer 
of  another  verse  of  the  same  song — ''  Make  haste,  my  beloved,  and  be 
thou  like  to  a  roc  or  to  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains  of  spices." 


p:di(0^alitatt  i^afrinrade  pup. 


THE    BISING    SUN. 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE  METROPOLITAN  TABEKNACLB,  NEWINGTON. 


"  Bat  unto  yoa  that  fear  my  ziame  ahall  the  Son  of  righteoofBeu  ariie  with 
healing  in  bis  wings ;  and  ye  shall  go  forth,  and  grow  up  as  oalves  of  the  stall.*' — 
llakchi  iv.  2. 

The  Jews  expected  that  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  would  exalt  ererj 
one  of  the  Israelitish  race.  Their  expectations  were  great,  bat  they 
were  also  carnal  and  sensuous,  since  they  looked  for  an  earthly  king, 
who  would  make  the  despised  nation  victorious  over  all  it$  enemieSy 
and  enrich  every  man  of  Abraham's  race.  The  Scriptures  gave  them 
no  ground  for  such  universal  expectations,  but  quite  the  reverse,  and 
in  the  chapter  which  is  now  before  us  the  prophet  explains  that  ti^e 
coming  of  Christ  would  certainly  be  like  the  rising  of  the  sun,  full  of 
glory  and  of  brightness,  but  the  results  would  not  be  the  same  to  all. 
To  those  who  thought  that  they  were  righteous,  and  despised  otherB, 
but  who  were  wicked  in  their  conversation,  the  rising  of  that  sun  would 
bring  a  burning,  withering  day.  Bead  the  first  verse.  ''The  day 
Cometh,  that  shall  bum  as  an  oven  ;  and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  thsi 
do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble.''  They  shall  not  be  like  plants  full  of 
sap  that  would  flourish  in  the  tropical  heat,  but  like  stubble,  which 
becomes  drier  and  drier,  until  it  takes  fire :  ''  and  the  day  that  cometh 
shall  bum  them  up,  saith  the  Lord,  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither 
root  nor  stock,"  for  so  might  it  be  translated,  and  then  the  figare 
woold  be  congruous  throughout.  It  would  scorch  up  the  stubble-field 
in  which  there  was  no  life,  so  intense  would  be  the  heat.  Now  that 
was  the  consequence  of  Christ's  coming.  The  religion  of  the  Jews  at 
his  coming  was  dry  and  dead,  like  stubble.  The  Pharisee  thought  that 
he  was  righteous  because  he  put  on  a  broad  phylactery,  and  tithed 
anise,  and  mint,  and  cummin,  and  such  trifles ;  the  Sadduoee  thought 
much  of  himself  because  he  was  a  man  of  common  sense,  a  thinker,  a 
rationalist ;  and  other  sectaries  of  that  period  found  equally  frivoloua 
grounds  for  glorying.  The  ministry  of  Christ  dried  them  right  up,  and 
they  have  ceased  to  be.  We  use  uie  name  of  Pharisee  and  Sadducee 
to-day,  but  there  is  no  person  in  the  world  who  would  like  to  wear 


150  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

either  name.  The  result  of  Christ's  coming,  by  his  Spirit  as  well  as 
by  his  personal  advent,  is  always  much  the  same.  Should  the  Spirit  of 
God  yisit  this  church  with  reyival  it  will  not  have  an  equally  beneficial 
effect  upon  all.  To  some  the  rising  of  this  sun  will  bring  healing  and 
blessing,  but  to  othera  it  will  bring  scorching  and  withering.  Know 
ye  not  that  the  summertide  which  fills  the  corn  and  makes  it  hang  its 
golden  head,  blushing  in  very  modesty  for  the  blessing  which  has  come 
upon  it,  fetches  up  also  the  noxious  weeds  from  their  secret  laii-s.  Tares 
gather  encouragement  from  the  sun  as  well  as  doth  the  wheat,  and  so 
the  bad  come  to  their  ripeness  as  well  as  the  good ;  but  the  ripeness  of 
that  which  is  bad  is  only  a  hurrying  on  to  destruction :  the  dryness  of 
the  stubble  is  the  preparation  for  its  being  utterly  consumcJ.  We 
may  well  pray  for  reviyal,  but  we  must  not  suppose  that  to  the  mere 
formalist  a  reriyal  will  bring  a  blessing.  It  may  possibly  disgust  him, 
Bud  drive  him  from  religion  altogether.  He  will  discover  that  he  has 
no  true  religion,  as  he  sees  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  around  him, 
-and  so  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  to  him  ^'  bum  as  an  oven,"  and  being 
proud  and  at  the  same  time  doing  wickedly,  his  empty  profession  of 
.-religion  will  consume  like  the  stubble. 

The  coming  of  the  Messiah  was  to  brin^  to  another  class  a  fulness  of 
blessing,  and  it  is  of  these  we  have  to  spe^.  '*  But  unto  you  that  fear 
my  name  shall  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise,"  not  with  scorching,  but 
^'  with  healing  in  his  wings ;  and  ve  shall  go  forth," — ^ye  shall  not  be 
-dried  up,  and  burnt,  and  destroyed,  but  ye  shall  *'  gi'ow  up  as  calves  of 
the  stalL"  You  shall  obtain  great  blessings  through  the  presence  of 
your  Lord.  Two  things  will  take  up  our  attention ;  the  first  is,  the 
description  of  the  people  of  God — "  Unto  you  that  fear  my  name";  and 
the  second  is,  the  blessing  which  is  promised  to  them — "the  Sun  of 
righteousness  shall  arise  with  healing  in  his  wings;  and  ye  shall  go 
forth,  and  gfow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall." 

I.  Here  are  true  saints  described.  Let  us  look  at  them.  The 
description  may  be  diWded  into  two  parts.  First,  here  is  their  abiding 
•character — thev  fear  the  name  of  tne  Lord ;  and  secondly,  we  gather 
£tom  the  text  their  accidental  character,  a  character  which  is  not  always 
theirs,  but  into  which  they  sometimes  fall,  namely,  that  they  need 
healing,  for  were  they  not  sick  there  would  be  no  need  of  the  promise 
that  the  Sun  of  righteousness  should  arise  upon  them  with  healing  in 
his  wings. 
'  Notice  then,  first,  their  abiding  character,  thej  fear  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  I  am  delighted  to  think  that  this  promise  is  given  to  this  par- 
ticular character,  for  it  thus  comes  to  beginners  in  grace.  "  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom," — ^it  is  not  the  highest  grace, 
nor  the  loftiest  attainment  of  the  spiritual  nature.  Bless  the  Lord, 
therefore,  ye  weak  and  feeble  ones,  tnat  the  promise  is  given  to  you. 
Ton  do  fear  the  Lord.  There  are  times  when  we  ask  ourselves  whether 
we  know  the  rapture  of  love,  and  we  question  greatly  whether  we  ever 
had  the  assurance  of  faith,  but  even  then  we  know  that  we  have  an  awe 
of  God.  Jonah  in  the  ship  was  in  a  very  sinful  state  of  mind,  and  was 
fleeing  away  from  God,  but  yet  he  did  not  hesitate  to  say,  "  I  am  an 
Hebrew,  and  I  fear  the  Lord."  This  is  the  abiding  character  of  the 
saints  in  their  worst  state.    If  they  backslide,  they  still  fear  the  name 


THB  ElSIirO  SUN.  151 

of  the  Lord.    They  fear  it  at  times  very  glayishly,  with  the  spirit  of 

bondage,  but  they  ao  fear  it.    They  lose  the  evidence  of  their  sonship, 

and  they  cease  to  walk  in  the  light,  bat  still  they  haye  a  fear  of  the 

Host  High:  they  do  not  treat  him  lightly,  they  could  not  sin  against 

him  cheaply,  there  is  still  within  their  hearts  a  sense  of  his  greatness. 

It  generally  assnmes  the  form  of  a  reyerenoe  of  his  person.    They  faiow 

there  is  a  God,  and  they  are  sore  that  he  made  the  heayens  and  the 

earth ;  they  are  equally  clear  that  he  is  everywhere  present,  marking  the 

ways  of  men.    Others  ma^  blaspheme,  but  they  cannot ;  others  may 

sin  and  make  merry  with  it,  but  sin  costs  them  dear;  others  may  feast 

themselyes  without  apprehension,  but  they  cannot,  for  they  fear  the 

Lord.     I  know  that  tliis  expresses  all  true  religion  and  has  a  very  com-  ' 

prehensive  meaning,  but  it  suits  my  purpose  just  now  to  yiew  it  as 

a  description  of  belieyers,  which  is  true  of  them  all,  into  whatever  state 

they  may  come.    They  still  fear  the  Lord.    Now,  soul,  dost  thou 

tremble  before  God?    There  is  something  in  that.    I  do  not  ask  thee 

wh^her  thou  tremblest  at  hell.    That  were  no  sign  of  grace,  for  what 

thief  will  not  tremble  at  the  gallows  ?    I  do  not  ask  thee  if  thou  art 

afraid  of  death.    What  mortal  man  is  not,  unless  he  has  a  good  hope 

throngh  grace?    But  dost  thou  tremble  in  the  presence  of  G^  because 

thou  hast  offended  him,  and  dost  thou  tremble  in  the  presence  of  sin  lest 

thon  shonldst  again  offend  him  ?    Does  it  eyer  come  over  thee  thus— 

*'  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness  and  sin  against  God  ?"    Just  as  ' 

some  men  are  kept  back  from  crime  \>j  the  fear  of  the  law  art  thou  kept 

back  from  folly  by  the  fear  of  God  ?  «fust  as  some  are  impelled  to  energy 

by  the  fear  of  poverty,  so  art  thou  impelled  to  the  divine  service  by  a  < 

sense  of  the  fact  that  not  to  serve  him  is  to  abide  under  his  wrath  ? 

It  is  a  low  and  small  matter  compared  with  the  higher  graces  which  God 

worketh  in  his  people,  but  still  it  is  a  precious  thing  even  to  tremble 

at  his  word.    I  am  glad  to  think  that  many  of  you  haye  lately  begun  ' 

to  fear  God.    I  bless  his  name  that  you  cannot  live  now  as  you  once 

did.    Ton  are  uneasy  in  your  former  careless  way.    I  am  right  glad  of 

it^  and  though  I  cannot  be  sure  that  this  fear  may  not  be  a  slavish 

fear,  yet  I  hope  for  the  best,  and  pray  that  it  may  ripen  into  that  real  , 

fear  of  God  which  is  always  a  work  of  grace  in  the  soul,  so  that  the 

promise  of  our  text  may  belong  to  you. 

Now,  beloved,  I  have  said  tnat  the  description  which  is  here  given  of 
the  people  of  God  denotes  not  only  their  abiding  character,  that  they 
fear  the  Lord,  but  it  also  mentions  ikeir  occasional  character.  They 
sometimes  fall  into  a  condition  which  they  deplore,  and  this  the  text 
intimates,  first,  by  the  fact  that  the  Sun  of  righteousness  is  to  arise 
^pon  them ;  for  this  implies  that  they  were  in  the  dark  until  then. 
Whflieyer  other  light  there  may  be,  we  every  one  of  us  know  that 
until  the  sun  rises  our  condition  is  one  of  comparative  darkness.  There 
are  children  of  God  who  waUc  in  darkness,  dear  children  of  God,  too ; 
indeed,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  every  child  of  God  gets  into  the 
dark  sometimes.  Some  begin  with  brightness,  and  then  they  get  a 
fcloudy  time  in  the  middle  of  their  experience,  while  others  have  their  ' 
worst  darkness  at  last.  Knox  and  Luther  had  their  sharpest  tempta- 
tions when  they  came  to  die.  It  has  been  well  said  that  God  sometimes  . 
pats  his  children  to  bed  in  the  dark.    It  does  not  matter,  for  they  wake  ^ 


|^;:^  XETROFOLITAK  TABflBNAOLE  PULPIT. 

up  in  ih«  lights  la  the  eternal  moming;  but  a  dark  seaaon  nsaally 
happens  to  us  somewhere  between  the  new  birth  and  heayen,  perhaps 
to  make  Uie  brightness  all  the  brighter  when  the  night  shall  be  for  ever 
ended.  Are  yon  in  the  dark  at  this  moment,  dear  brother,  and  are  you 
wondering  at  it  because  everybody  else  seems  so  lively  ia  their  religion  ? 
Dear  sister,  does  it  seem  to  you  as  if>  though  you  have  been  a  believer 
fiur  years,  you  were  never  in  a  worse  state  than  now,  while  others  are 
rejoicing  ?  Then  a£^  yourself— Do  you  fear  the  Lord  still  ?  Ia  your 
soul  humbled  in  the  presence  of  his  majesty,  and  have  you  a  desire  for 
his  glory  ?    Never  despair ;  the  San  shall  rise  upon  you  soon. 

Very  clear  is  it  from  the  text,  too,  that  the  children  of  God  may 
sometimes  be  in  ill  health,  for  the  Sun  of  righteousness  is  to  arise  upoa 
them  with  healing  in  his  wings,  which  would  not  be  so  needful  a 
promise  if  they  were  not  sick.  A  Christian  may  be  bowed  down  with 
grievous  spiritual  maladies.  His  pulse  may  beat  slowly,  his  heart  may 
become  feeble;  he  may  be  alive,  and  that  may  be  about  all;  lethargy 
may  seize  him,  palsy  may  make  him  tremble  despondently,  he  may 
have  wandered  from  his  God.  Alas !  even  an  a5^ue  fit  may  be  upon 
him,  in  which  he  shakes  with  unbelief  from  head  to  foot.  It  may  be 
his  eyes  have  become  so  blinded  that  he  cannot  see  afar  off;  and 
his  ears  may  be  dull  of  hearing,  and  he  may  be  like  the  fools  in  the 
psalm,  whose  .souls  abhorred  all  manner  of  meat.  He  may  have  put  away 
ficom  him  the  comforts  of  the  promise,  and  he  may  be  brought  very  low ; 
yet  he  shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  proclaim  the  works  of  the  Lord,  for 
the  soul  sickness  of  a  saint  is  not  unto  death.  He  shall  be  recovered 
from  it,  and  he  shall  sing  of  the  Lord  whose  name  is  ''Jehovah  Hophi, 
the  Lord  that  healeth  thee.''  Oh,  child  of  God,  if  thou  art  in  a  sick 
and  sorrowing  state,  cry  mightily  unto  thy  Lord,  and  the  Sun  of 
righteousness  shall  arise  upon  thee  with  healing  in  his  wings. 

Note  again,  that  the  children  of  God,  according  to  our  text,  may  be 
in  a  condition  of  bondage,  for  it  is  said  that  when  the  Sun  of  righteous- 
ness arises  "  they  shall  go  forth  as  calves  of  the  stall"  Understand  the 
figure.  The  calf  in  the  stall  is  shut  up,  tied  up  with  a  halter  at  night, 
but  when  the  sun  rises  the  calf  goes  forth  to  the  pasture ;  the  young 
buUock  is  set  free.  So  the  child  of  God  may  be  in  bondage.  The 
recollection  of  past  sins  and  present  unbelief  may  halter  him  up  and 
keep  him  in  the  stall,  but  when  the  Lord  reveals  himself  he  is  set  free. 
Even  true  children  of  God  may  sometimes  have  to  cry  like  Paul  that 
they  are  sold  under  sin ;  they  may  forget  the  blood  of  redemption  for 
a  season,  and  think  themselves  still  to  be  slaves,  and  yet  bo  the  true 
children  of  God«  Hence  the  beauty  of  the  promise  that  they  shall  go 
forth. 

Yes,  and  there  is  more  in  the  text.  The  children  of  God  may  be  in 
such  a  state  that  they  are  not  growing,  for  else  we  should  not  have  the 
promise, ''  Ye  shall  go  forth  and  grow  up  "  when  the  Sun  of  righteous- 
ness shall  shine,  uo  you,  my  dear  brother,  feel  as  if  you  had  not 
grown  in  grace  for  months  ?  You  need  the  Sun  of  righteousness  to 
shine  upon  you,  and  you  will  grow  as  the  plants  do.  The  trees  are  all 
bare  in  winter,  and  their  boughs  ai^arently  sear  and  dead,  but  bring  us 
the  spring  sun,  and  the  buds  will  begin  to  swell,  the  leaves  will  appear, 
and  the  trees  shall  blossom  and  yield  fruit.    So  shall  it  be  with  you. 


TKB  BIBING  BIJH.  153 

The  Lord  has  not  left  yoa.    You  xobj  have  «fcayed  in  your  growth 
awhile,  but  yon  shall  grow  again. 

Once  more,  the  child  of  God  m^  get  into  smch  a  condition  that  he 
has  lost  his  joy,  for  I  will  tell  yon  a  secret  about  the  text :  it  might  be, 
and  probably  onght  to  be,  translated,  for  the  Septnagint  has  it  so,  and 
the  Hebrew  has  that  forces  *^  They  shall  go  forth  and  leap  like  calves  of 
the  9iall"  The  young  cattle  may  have  been  kept  under  cover  in  the 
winter,  but  when  the  snn  brings  the  spring  the  fields  are  green,  and 
yon  let  the  calves  loose.  There  is  joy  about  the  creatures'  movements. 
Even  so  when  the  Lord  appears  to  his  people,  they  move  with  delight, 
and  dance  for  joy  of  heart.  The  Lord's  love  within  them  shall  mi^e 
tibem  give  ezfrasion  to  their  joy.  I  pray  that  you  may  feel  this  in* 
tense  delight  in  gospel  liberty  and  leap  for  joy.  Thus  I  have  described 
the  people  to  whom  the  promise  comes. 

II.  My  second  and  most  pleasing  doty  is  to  open  up  thb  fbohisb 
crssi^.  "  The  Snn  of  righteousness  shall  arise."  Child  of  Ood  in  the 
dark,  in  niaon,  nngrowing  and  imhappy,  what  a  promise  is  here  -for 
jDu !  **  The  Sun  of  righteousness  shall  arise."  His  rising  is  to  do  it 
an,  there  is  nothing  for  yon  to  do,  no  works  for  yon  to  perform  in  order 
to  get  the  needed  Uessing.  The  Sun  of  righteousness  shall  arise ;  now, 
the  rising  of  the  sun  is  one  of  the  most  wonderful  things  in  nature,  not 
merely  for  its  grandenr  and  beauty,  but  for  its  sublime  display  of 
strength.  Who  could  hold  ba(^  the  horses  of  the  sun  ?  What  hand 
could  block  the  golden  wheel  of  his  chariot,  or  bid  him  stay  his  course  ? 
The  time  is  come  for  him  to  rise,  and  lo,  he  delip:hts  the  world  with 
dawn.  Holy  Spirit,  such  is  thy  power.  When  it  is  thy  time  to  work 
who  can  stand  against  thee  ?  As  the  sun  floods  the  whole  earth  with 
his  splendour,  and  no  power  can  hinder  his  movements,  so  will  the  Holy 
Spirit  work,  and  none  can  let  him.  Plead  ye  then  this  promise  to-night 
and  cry :  **  0  Sun  of  righteousness,  arise  upon  those  that  fear  thee : 
come  now  in  all  t^y  majesty  and  wealth  of  grace :  pour  upon  us  thy 
light  and  heat  and  life,  and  fill  this  place  with  thy  glory." 

Now  mark  what  will  be  the  result  of  his  rising.  As  soon  as  ever  ' 
this  snn  is  np  and  Christ  begins  to  shine  upon  his  people,  they  enjoy  a 
clear  light.  They  were  in  the  dark  before,  but  they  are  in  the  light 
now.  I  have  been  living  for  awhile  in  a  country  where  the  sun  is 
everythin|^.  The  temperature  and  the  atmosphere  are  made  salubrious 
and  delicious,  I  had  lumost  said  celestial,  by  his  presence.  When  he 
shines  not  the  sick  pine  and  the  healthy  are  gloomy,  but  when  clouds 
no  k>ng€r  veil  his  lace  we  are  as  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  Everything 
depend  upon  the  sun.  Step  down  into  a  valley  where  he  has  not  shone, 
and  yon  will  find  frost ;  cross  the  street  into  the  shade,  and  you  shiver 
in  the  cold.  So  clear  does  the  atmosphere  become  through  the  removal 
of  idl  fogs  and  mists  that  sometimes  we  have  seen  a  hundred  miles 
across  the  sea,  rising  up  like  a  fair  vision,  the  mountains  of  distant 
Corsica.  I  cannot  help  using  the  illustration,  because  it  is  so  distinctly 
before  me.  When  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arises  upon  a  Christian,  and 
shines  full  upon  him,  he  does  not  see  islands  a  hundred  miles  away,  but 
he  sees  the  golden  gates  of  the  celestial  city,  and  the  King  in  his 
beauty,  and  the  land  that  is  very  far  off;  for  the  presence  of  Christ  clears 
the  atmosphere,  and  enables  us  to  sec  the  invisible.    Unto  you  that 


154  MSTROPOLITAH  TABSftHAOUl  PULPIT. 

fear  his  name  may  the  Bon  of  righteousness  arise  and  give  yon  jnst  sncb 
clearness  and  light* 

But  according  to  the  text,  the  San  of  righteousness,  when  it  rises  on 
those  that  fear  the  Lord,  gires  them  healing.  There  is  heah'ng  in  its 
wings.  By  the  wings  of  the  sun  are  meant  the  beams  that  shoot  up 
from  it  into  the  air,  or  seem  to  slant  down  ftx>m  it  when  it  is  aloft  in 
the  sky.  There  is  really  healing  to  men's  bodies  in  the  sun.  Hare  wc 
not  seen  them  oome  to  the  sunny  land  consumptive  and  doubled  with 
weakness,  and  as  they  hare  sat  in  the  sun  and  warmed  themselves  for  a 
few  weeks,  the  wound  within  the  lung  has  begun  to  heal,  and  the  con- 
sumptive man  has  breathed  again,  and  you  have  seen  that  he  would 
live.  Some  have  gone  thither  who  scarce  could  speak,  and  beneath  the 
sun  they  began  to  speak  again,  like  men  whose  youth  has  been  renewed. 
The  sun  is  the  great  physician.  Where  he  enters  not  the  physician 
will  be  needed,  but  where  he  shines  men  speedily  revive.  As  for  the 
Sun  of  righteousness,  oh,  how  he  heals  the  sick  I  I  would  like  you 
sick  Christians  to  sit  in  his  sunlight  by  the  year  together,  if  you  did 
nothing  else  but  bask  there,  as  animals  delight  to  bask  in  the  snn. 
The  flowera  know  the  sun,  and  they  turn  their  cups  to  him  and  drink 
in  of  the  health  he  gives  them  from  his  golden  store.  Oh,  that  we 
had  as  much  sense  to  know  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  that  we  might  by 
prayer,  and  meditation,  and  holy  living,  bask  and  sun  ourselves  in  his 
delicious  beams.  We  shall  be  strong  indeed  if  he  rises  upon  us  with 
healing  in  his  wings.  He  has  risen,  but  we  wander  into  the  shade :  he 
has  risen,  but  we  get  into  the  ice  wells  of  worldliness  and  sin,  and  shut 
out  his  warmth,  and  then  we  wonder  we  are  sick,  but  sick  we  always  shall 
be  till  we  come  out  into  the  light  again,  and  Jesus  shines  on  us  from 
mom  till  eve. 

I  must  not  enlarge  upon  any  one  point,  for  my  time  is  limited ;  bnt 
I  would  have  you  notice  how  the  text  says  that  when  the  Sun  of 
righteousness  shines  the  Christian  gets  his  liberty.  '^Ye  shall  go 
forth."  I  have  been  sta^ng  where  the  invalid  does  not  venture  out  if 
the  wind  blows,  and  if  it  is  a  little  chill  and  the  sun  is  not  bright  he 
must  stay  indoors  or  lose  the  benefit  he  has  received ;  but  when  the  san 
is  out  and  the  air  is  calm,  then  he  comes  forth  and  leaves  his  bedroom, 
and  is  all  alive  once  more.  There  are  Christians  who  have  been  kept 
indoors  a  long  time ;  thev  have  not  walked  the  length  of  the  promise^ 
nor  spied  out  the  breadth  of  the  covenant,  nor  climbed  to  the  top  of 
Pisgah  to  gasse  upon  the  landscape.  0  beloved,  if  the  Sun  of  righteous- 
ness, even  the  Lord  Jesus,  shall  shine  upon  you,  you  will  go  forth  not 
only  to  enjoy  Christian  life,  but  to  enter  into  Christian  service,  and  you 
will  go  forther  afield  to  bring  others  to  Christ. 

Then  you  will  begin  to  grow.  That  is  another  effect  of  the  sun,  and 
how  wonderfully  the  sunlight  makes  things  grow.  Here  we  have  in 
our  hot-houses  little  plants  that  we  think  so  wonderful  that  we  show 
them  to  our  friends,  and  put  them  on  our  tables  as  rarities,  but  I  have 
seen  them  in  the  sunny  south  ten  times  as  large  growing  in  the  open 
fields,  because  the  sun  has  looked  upon  them.  The  rarities  of  oar 
country  are  the  common-places  of  the  land  of  the  sun.  I  have  known 
Christians  who  have  received  a  little  faith  and  been  perfectly  astonished 
at  it,  and  God  has  blessed  them  with  a  little  love  to  Jesus,  and  they 


THB  BI8IVG  BUV.  155 

faftTe  felt  as  though  they  were  splendid  sainte ;  bnfc  if  tbey  lived  in  the  ; 
nmli^ht  they  might  move  mountains  by  their  faith,  and  their  love  [ 
vwla  lead  them  to  devote  their  whole  life  to  Jesos,  and  yet  they  would 
Dot  be  astoni^ed.    The  Son  of  righteoQsneaB  can  prodace  frnits  rich  • 
and  me.     Onr  cold,  aonless  land,  beneath  its  cloud  and  fog,  what  can 
it  yield  in  the  winter  ?    In  more  favoured  parts  of  the  earth,  even  in 
ear  winter,  the  trees  are  golden  with  fruits.    So  is  it  with  the  sonL 
What  can  it  grow  if  it  Uvea  in  worldlineas  ?    What  can  it  produce  if  it 
liTes  to  itself  ?    But  when  it  knows  the  love  of  Jesus  and  the  povrer  of 
ha  grace,  even  in  its  w<»Bt  estate  it  Inings  forth  the  richest  and  the 
nrest  fruit  to  the  glory  of  his  grace. 

I  sbali  close  by  eihorting  my  fellow  church  members  to  live  in  the 
nmliglit.  Get  out  of  the  shadows.  There  are  dreary  glens  in  this 
vorid  where  the  sun  never  shines :  they  are  called  glens  of  pleasure,  and 
smetimes  the  pale  moon  looks  down  on  them  with  sickly  ray ;  but  the 
iaint  knows  the  light  of  the  sun  from  the  light  of  the  world's  moon, 
ikt  away  from  those  chill  places  into  the  clear  light.  ''But,"  says 
one,  **  I  did  not  know  there  were  joys  in  religion."  My  dear  friend,  ao 
jou  know  true  religion  then  ?  for  it  is  ''  a  tiling  of  beauty,  and  a  joy 
for  ever.*'  He  who  knows  Christ  has  seen  tli^  sun,  but  till  he  has 
known  him  he  has  seen  but  the  glow-worm's  glitter.  Peace,  deep  peace, 
he  never  knew  who  never  knew  the  power  of  the  blood ;  and  joy,  real 
joy,  such  as  angels  call  joy,  he  never  knew  who  never  trusted  in  the 
Saviour's  atoning  sacrifvee.  Oh,  come  ye  depressed  and  distressed  and 
de^ondent  ones,  whose  religion  has  been  slavery,  and  whose  profession 
has  been  bondage  :  get  a  true  baptism  into  Ghnst  by  faith  in  him,  and 
wh^i  yon  have  been  plunged  into  the  Godhead's  deepest  sea  then  shall 
you  know  a  joy  and  peace  which  pass  all  understanding.  The  world 
gives  them  not:  it  cannot  take  them  away.  ''Unto  you  that  fear  the 
Lord^  the  Sun  of  righteousness  shall  arifie  with  healing  in  his  wings." 

I  would  encourage  those,  who  fear  the  Lord  a  Httle,  I  mean  the  | 
seekers.  Come  ye  into  the  light.  Come  and  welcome,  none  will  ques- 
tion your  right.  I  never  heard  of  anybody  yet  who  said  "  I  must  not 
sit  in  the  sun ;  the  sun  is  not  mine."  The  lords  of  this  world  have 
hedged  in  every  acre,  and  there  is  scarce  a  sterile  mountain  side  which 
is  not  guarded  with  **  trespassers  beware."  But  they  cannot  hedge 
in  the  blessed  sunlight ;  no,  not  even  for  an  hour.  Through  the  poor  " 
man's  window,  though  the  glass  be  broken  and  stuffed  up  with  rags,  a 
l>eam  of  sunlight  will  pierce  its  way  as  gladly  as  into  the  halls  of 
monarcbs :  it  shines  on  the  beggar's  rags  as  well  as  on  the  prince's 
scarlet :  it  is  free.  When  Diogenes  bade  Alexander  get  out  of  his  son- 
light  he  had  a  right  to  do  so,  for  the  sunlight  belonged  as  much  to 
Diogenes  in  his  tub  as  to  Alexander  who  had  conquered  a  world.  O  * 
meanest  of  the  mean  in  thine  o\^  judgment,  lowest  of  the  low  in  thine 
own  esteem^  guiltiest  of  the  guilty  as  thy  conscience  calls  thee  before 
God,  know  thou  that  the  Sun  of  righteousness  has  risen,  and  his  light 
18  free.  Come  into  the  sunlight ;  come  into  the  sunlight  I  "  Oh,  but  I  - 
shall  get  better  soon :  I  am  sick,  but  I  shall  get  better  soon."  Come 
into  the  sunlight,  man,  for  there  is  healing  beneath  the  wings  of  tho 
8nn  of  righteousness,  but  nowhere  else.  ''  I  am  kindling  a  tire,  I  am 
hoping  that  I  may  get  warm  by  the  sparks  of  my  own  kindling."  ) 


IS^  METROPOLITAN  TABBBVAOLB  PULPIT. 

Come  into  the  snnlight,  man.  What  were  all  thy  fires  ?  Though  thon 
shoaldest  set  Lebanon  npon  a  blaze,  and  take  all  the  timber  that  ever 
grew  on  Sirion  to  make  a  pile  thereof,  what  were  it  as  eompared  with 

Jonder  mighty  fnmaoe  of  tne  snn,  which  has  burnt  on  for  ages,  and  will 
urn  on  till  the  last  eye  of  mortal  man  shall  hare  looked  upon  it  ?  O 
soul,  go  not  about  with  thy  whims  and  thy  fancies  to  save  thyself:  bat 
come  mto  the  sunlight !  Gome  into  the  sunlight,  man !  **  But  perhaps 
I  may  not."  Who  is  the  poorer  if  the  sunlight  shine  on  thee  ?  There 
is  enough  for  others  even  though  it  pour  its  floods  on  thee.  The  sun  is 
no  brighter  if  thou  hast  not  his  beams ;  he  will  be  no  duller  though  thoa 
and  a  thousand  like  thee  should  lie  by  the  century  together  basking  in 
his  light.  So  with  Jesus.  "  In  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodily."  If  thou  take  all  the  mercy  that  can  be  wanted  to 
lift  thee  up  flnom  the  gates  of  hell  to  heayen  itself  he  will  hare  as 
much  mercy  left.  If  all  the  merit  thou  canst  want  to  saye  thy  con- 
demned spirit  and  make  thee  into  a  child  of  God  should  be  thine,  as  I 
pray  it  may,  there  will  be  as  much  merit  left  in  Christ  as  eyer.  Why 
Keep  back  ?  Why  keep  back  ?  "  But  I  am  so  base."  Does  not  the 
sun  shine  on  dunghills  ?  May  not  the  mercy  of  Gkxl  shine  on  thee,  thoa 
dunghill  sinner?  Thou  canst  not  be  too  low,  thou  canst  not  be  too 
yile ;  the  infinite  mercy  of  God,  like  the  infinite  light  of  the  sun,  can 
reach  thee.  **  Alas,  I  am  dark."  And  what  night  was  too  dark  for 
the  sun  to  turn  it  into  day  ?  *'  Alas,  I  am  cold."  But  what  icebei^^ 
was  too  cold  for  the  sun  to  thaw  it  ?  What  winter  was  too  severe  for 
the  sun  to  turn  it  into  summer  ?  Yield  thyself  up,  thou  icicle,  yield  to 
the  sun,  and  it  will  melt  thee.  Yield  thyself  up,  thou  dead  and 
shrivelled  bough,  to  that  dear  sunbeam  which  waits  to  kiss  thee  now, 
and  it  will  awaken  life  within  thee,  and  warm  thee  till  thou  shalt  be 
laden  with  rich  fruit,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  the  Sun  of  righteous- 
ness which  has  risen  upon  thee.  The  £ord  grant  it  may  be  so  with  us 
all,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


POBTIOK  OF  SORIPTUBB  BEAD  BEFORE   SSBXON — Malachi  iii.  iv. 


Hymns  from  "  Oub  Own  Hymn  Book  "—705,  799,  19. 


LETTER  FROM  MR,  SPURGEON. 

Dear  Friends, — Although  I  am  still  weak  upon  my  knees,  I  am  so  greatly 
refreshed  in  spirit  that  I  feel  able  to  retam  to  preach  on  Sunday,  April  13. 
Glad  tidings  of  the  Lord's  work  at  home  have  greatly  cheered  me,  and  I  am 
also  rejoiced  that  most  of  the  work  committed  to  me  has  prospered  during  my 
absence.  This  is  a  great  point  gained,  for  now  all  will  know  that  the  work  is 
a  living  one,  and  does  not  depend  upon  personal  oversight.  I  heartily  thank 
all  the  workers  and  givers,  and  most  of  all  our  gracious  God  who  has  kept  them 
faithful. 

Right  glad  shall  I  be  to  see  the  beloved  Tabernacle  people  again.  I  beg  to 
be  duly  remembered  in  prayer,  and  I  am 

Yours  to  serve, 
Mentone,  March  14.  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


|lldi[d|0litan  iHatrentatte  inlpt 


A    BEFBESHINQ    PBOMISE. 


%      I 


*gV  Zt  Z  7  7  S  XT      .A.V      3MCS3  2iT*r0  2TS,       S 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 


"1  will  water  it  every  moment"— Isaiah  xxrii.  8. 

Wheh  the  Lord  ia  xnofii  intent  oa  jnstioe  he  is  at  the  same  time  earnest 
in  hia  love.  The  day  of  vengeance  of  onr  God  is  also  the  acceptable  year 
of  the  Lord.  In  the  Scripture  before,  na  the  prophet  saith,  "  Behold, 
the  Lord  cometh  ont  of  his  place  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 
for  their  iniquity/'  (Isa.  xxvi.  21),  and  he  foretells  that  the  Lord  will 
oome  forth  as  one  anned  with  a  f^veU  and  strong  sword  to  smite  the 
fieiceat  of  his  enemies  with  a  deadly  wound  (Isa.  xxvii.  1);  yet  before  he 
had  bared  his  arm  for  the  battle  he  prepared  chambers  of  refoge  for  his 
peofHe  that  they  might  dwell  as  within  closed  doors  until  the  tempest 
of  indignation  was  overpast  (Isa.  xxvi.  20).  The  shoutings  of  war  did 
not  pievent  the  Lord  irom  remembering  his  beloved  and  his  song  of 
love  oonoeming  her,  for  he  saith,  **  In  that  day  sing  ye  unto  her,  a 
vineyard  of  red  wine.  I  the  Lord  do  keep  it;  I  wOl  water  it  every 
moment."  Happy  people,  who  even  in  the  day  of  wrath  are  satisfied 
with  fovour.  Messed  heirs  of  grace  who  hear  the  just  and  terrible 
avenger  say  concerning  them,  "  Fury  is  not  in  me"  (v^rse  4). 

The  love  of  the  Lord  towards  his  whole  church  goes  forth  to  each  in- 
dividual member  thereof ;  the  care  which  he  displays  towards  the  vine* 
yard  is  exercised  upon  each  vine  which  he  has  planted.  So,  then,  we 
may  without  hesitation  believe  that  the  Iiord  will  do  for  us  personally 
tfai^  which  he  promises  to  do  for  his  people  as  a  whole ;  else  would 
there  have  been  exceptions  stated,  and  the  word  would  have  run  thus — 
I  will  water  a  part  of  my  vineyard,  but  a  portion  of  the  plants  shall  be 
left  to  be  dried  up.  The  Lord's  word  is  so  truthful  that  it  would  never 
raise  migroundea  expectations  by  general  statements  if  there  were, 
indeed,  cases  not  included  therein.  We  are  always  safe  in  concluding 
that  if  the  Lord  had  meant  to  shut  ont  one  believing  soul  from  a  pri- 
vdege  he  would  have  mentioned  it,  for  he  has  not  spoken  in  secret,  in  a 
dark  place  of  the  earth,  anything  which  would  militate  against  the  hap- 
piness of  any  one  of  his  people.  This  then,  beloved  ftiends,  is  the 
pledge  of  love  concerning  the  spiritual  life  of  my  soul  and  yours,  and  the 
sonl  of  every  humble  believer  in  Jesus, — ''  I  will  water  it  every  moment." 
This  is  a  precious  promise,  and  the  more  we  meditate  upon  it  the  more 
rich  will  it  appear.  May  we  now  be  watered  by  the  Holy  Ghost  while 
we  meditate  upon  this  promised  watering. 
Nos.  1,464-5. 


158  KETROPOLITAir  TABERETACLE  PULPIT. 

In  warm  climates  irrigBtioa  ia  aueftMal  ta  fdrtili^ ;  honoe,  trarellera 
see  on  all  sides  pools  and  waterconraes,  wheels  and  cisterns,  and  channeh 
far  the  water  to  flow  in.  The  wstermg  ariaes  fioin  neoowttj,  and  it  is 
carefally  attended  to,  because  otherwise  the  hnhbandman  or  gardener 
would  look  in  vain  for  fhtit  I  remarked  to  a  gardener  in  the  South  of 
France  that  the  weather  was  bad»  but  he  repBed  that  it  was  good  for 
the  garden,  for  the  rain  gave  plentj  of  water,  and  that  was  the  chief 
thing.  In  Paradise  it  was  no  mean  advastage  to  its  verdant  bowers 
that  a  fourfold  river  pumued  its  course  through  its  midst,  and  that 
before  the  rain  had  fallen  upon  the  earth  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the 
earth  and  watered  the  faee  of  the  ground.  From  the  necessity  and 
value  of  water  to  the  plants  of  tha  earth  the  Lord  would  teach  us  our 
own  need  of  his  grace,  and  the  preciousness  of  that  grace,  and  render 
his  promise  of  supply  the  more  daligbtful  to  our  souls. 

That  we  may  prize  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  in  the  promises  before 
us  we  shall  consider  t?ie  necessity  of  our  being  watered,  the  manner  in 
nHiich  the  Lord  promises  to  supply  our  need,  and  ths  cmiami^  that  he 
win  do  so.  0  for  a  Itviog  meditetien,  not  upon  the  letter  of  tfae  word 
only,  but  upon  its  innermost  teaching. 

I.  Here  is  a  great  iraoEsarry  ibr  the  watering  j^mised  in  the  text. 
This  we  might  conchide  from  the  {nromise  itself,  smce  tJiere  is  net  one 
superfluous  word  of  promise  in  the  whole  Scripbores,  but  it  becomes 
mere  evident  when  we  reflect  that  ail  or$atu»i§  life  u  dependmi  up&n  ik» 
perpetual  oui^omg  €fdwme  p(H90r.  Bxisftenee  is  a  continued  creatioa, 
for  the  creatures  have  no  power  wil&in  themselves  to  preserve  their  own 
being ;  even  the  solid  tx)oks  and  the  great  mountains  would  melt  away 
as  so  many  shadows  if  eternal  omnipotence  did  not  every  moment  keep 
them  in  being.  The  world  is  not  like  a  wheel,  which,  having  received 
a  great  push  firom  a  strong  bond,  continues  to  revolve  long  after  the 
huid  is  withdrawn  ;  but  the  divine  energy  goes  forth  continnally  to 
upbokl  all  things  which  it  has  made.  Now,  the  same  law  holds  good 
in  the  more  c^eice  and  illustrieus  works  of  God  in  the  kingdom  ol 
mce,  and  multitudes  of  illnstrationB  of  this  axe  te  be  found  in  Holy 
writ.  Believers  are  stones,  but  their  vpbolding  oomes  continnally  froni 
the  foundation ;  they  are  branehea  sucking  nourishment  perpetually  from 
the  stem,  members  of  the  body  always  deriving  life  from  the  Head. 
Towards  Ood  we  are  streams  and  not  fountaina ;  rays  of  light,  not  euna ; 
lamps  which  must  be  trimmed  and  nonrished  with  oil ;  aheep  which 
need  unceasing  care  and  feeding.  The  innav  life  cannot  live  npon 
itself.  It  ifi  one  maik  of  its  presence  that  the  believer  is  not  only 
dependent  as  a  creature,  but  feela  it  as  a  living,  sensible,  inatmctedy 
and  trustfiil  creature.  The  Christian  faaa  no  quarrel  with  the  hint  of 
utter  weakness  wliich  is  implied  in  the  text,  f«r  he  is  right  well  aware 
that  he  must  be  each  moKient  watered  or  he  wiU  dry  up  from  the  root 
and  ceaee  to  be. 

Moreover,  the  tmtb  is  qMcially  certain  as  touching  the  believer,  for 
a  muUUuds  (f  agencies  asfe  at  work  ts  dry  up  the  moisture  of  his  soul, 
Aa  &r  as  this  world  is  coneemed,  he  is  planted  in  a  dry  and  thirsty 
land,  where  no  water  is ;  his  sorrows  toid  to  parch  him»  like  a  hot  wind 
firom  the  desert,  and  earthly  joys  are  still  more  like  a  sirocco  whioh 
bums  as  an  ovea    Satan's  temptations  scorch  and  wither  onr  heartn 


▲  BSFBssmNd  r&QMias.  159 

the  wrter  of  life  is  abmidaatly  laid  at  our  loofc ;  and  the  men  of  the 
widd  act  after  the  Bameminner.  If  we  trusted  in  onrselves  we  ahonld 
oxn  be  as  the  heath  in  the  desert,  or  as  the  grass  npon  the  hoasetopa« 
IndvdliDg  sin  eroeoiallj  is  a  devouring  blast,  and  would,  if  it  acted 
witlMNi&  cheek  and  eounterbalance,  turn  the  ^den  of  the  soul  into  a 
desolaie  wild^neas*  We  are  as  plants  set  in  the  blaze  of  a  tropical 
inn,  upon  which  a  burning  oven  pours  forth  its  tremendous  heat.  One 
■MOMait  without  divine  watering  and  shading  would  dry  us  up  root  and 

hraitrfi. 

Nmiher  have  we  anyoih$r  eource  of  supply  but  the  living  Ood.  ''All 
my  springs  are  in  thee."  We  have  the  ordinances  and  means  of  grace, 
bcti  we  cannot  of  ourselves  &tch  a  blessing  from  them :  the  Spirit  of 
God  ia  as  the  dew  and  therain,  but  wecannot  command  his  influences,  these 
lie  altogether  at  the  sovereign  disposal  of  the  Lord.  To  convince  us  of 
oar  otter  impotence  in  the  matter  the  Lord  asks  us  in  the  book  of  Job, 
*'  Canst  thou  lift  up  thy  voice  to  the  clouds  that  abundance  of  water  may 
eovcT  tiiee  ?  "  No,  the  bottles  of  heaven  drop  at  Jehovah's  bidding, 
and  nnlesa  his  good  pleasure  gives  the  land  its  refreshment ''  the  dust 
^loweth  into  he^ness,  and  the  clods  cleave  fast  together/'  the  brooks  are 
dried  np,  and  the  sfffings  of  water  fail.  None  can  afford  us  a  drop  of 
flpiritoai  water  unless  the  infinite  depths  of  divine  grace  overflow  to 
na  and  the  Iicnrd  visits  the  heart  and  waters  it  from  the  river  of  God, 
which  is  fall  of  water.  Hence  the  need  that  we  crv  with  David,  "  I 
siretdi  forth  my  hands  unto  thee :  my  soul  thirsteth  after  thee,  as  a 
thirsty  land." 

Bemember,  also,  that  our  need  of  divine  watering  is  clearly  seen  when 
we  consider  what  draughty  and  barremiBss,  a$id  death  would  come  upon  %is 
if  hie  handioere  withdrawn.  Then  would  be  fulfilled  in  us  the  prophecy 
of  Jeremiah, ''  Their  nobles  have  sent  their  little  ones  to  the  waters : 
tbey  come  to  the  pits,  and  found  no  water ;  they  returned  with  their 
Teasels  empty ;  they  were  ashamed  and  confounded,  and  covered  their 
heads.  Because  the  ground  is  chapt,  for  there  was  no  rain  in  the  earth, 
the  plowmen  were  ashamed,  they  covered  their  heads."  Then  would 
ear  leaf  wither  and  oar  root  fail ;  as  for  iruit,  there  would  be  none,  and 
we  should  be  only  fit  for  the  burning.  Without  watering  every  moment 
the  most  faithful  among  us  would  be  cast  forth,  and  be  only  fit  for  the 
fire;  every  prophet  would  become  a  Balaam,  every  apostle  a  Judas, 
eveij  disciple  a  Demas*  We  must  be  watered,  and  watered  every 
moment,  or  we  die.  Lord*  save  us,  we  perish.  Look  down  from  heaven, 
aod  behold  and  visit  this  vine  and  the  vineyard  which  thy  right  hand 
hath  planted. 

IL  This  point  is  clear,  and  our  experience  daily  brings  it  under  our 
notice.  Let  us  now  carefully  regard  the  mannek  in  which  the  Lord 
promises  to  water  his  people—''  I  will  water  it  every  moment." 

Onr  first  tliought  is  excited  by  the  perpetual  act — ''  every  moment " 
the  Lord  will  water  the  vineyard.  There  is  never  a  mom^it  in 
which  it  ceases  to  need  it,  and,  therefore,  the  supply  is  as  constant  as  the 
demand*  lie  further  saySj  '^  Lest  any  hurt  it,  X  will  keep  it  night  and 
day,'*  so  that  at  all  hours  of  the  night,  as  well  as  of  the  day,  the  Lord's 
care  is  over  his  people.  Mercy  knows  no  pause.  Orace  has  no  canonical 
bouB^  or  rather  all  hems  ace  alike  canonical :  yea,  and  all  moments  too. 


160  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACLB  PULPIT. 

We  may  stay  our  asking,  but  God  doth  not  stay  his  gimg.  We  may 
not  perceive  the  Sowings  of  his  grace,  and  yet  they  are  never  suspended, 
no,  not  for  a  moment,  or  else  it  were  not  true, — **  I  will  water  it  erery 
moment."  This  leads  us  to  rest  assured  of  our  final  perseverance, 
since  his  perseverance  in  watering  will  produce  our  perseverance  in 
budding,  leafing,  and  fruit-bearing,  else  were  his  watering  in  vain,  his 
grace  ineffectual,  and  his  purpose  defeated,  and  it  would  not  be  true 
that  none  had  hurt  the  vineyard.  Glory  be  to  the  great  Keeper  of  the 
vines,  he  will  give  a  good  account  of  his  charge,  saying,  "  Of  all 
that  thou  gavest  me  I  have  lost  none."  Between  here  uud  heaven 
there  will  never  be  a  moment  in  which  the  Lord  will  not  water  his 
people,  and  therefore  never  a  moment  in  which  they  will  be  dried  up, 
and  80  left  to  perish.  Let  faith  lay  hold  of  this  and  gather  strength 
from  it. 

Nor  is  this  all — the  Lord's  watering  is  a  rmeived  act  He  does  not 
water  us  once  in  great  abundance,  and  then  leave  us  to  live  upon  what 
he  has  already  poured  out.  He  does  not  cause  so  much  rain  to  fall  in 
one  day  as  may  water  the  earth  for  seven  years,  or  there  could  not  then 
be  a  daily  dependence  upon  him  for  rain  and  dew  ;  neither  does  he  give 
grace  enough  to  his  servants  at  any  one  time  to  seiTe  them  for  a  month, 
or  a  week,  or  a  day,  or  even  an  hour,  but  he  waters  them  "  every 
moment "  that  they  may  know  that  at  no  one  instant  of  time  can  they 
do  without  him.  He  placed  the  whole  fountain  of  living  water  in  his 
Son,  for  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,  but  in 
our  case  he  husbands  his  showers  that  we  may  seek  and  obtain  new  out- 
Sowings  of  the  eternal  life,  and  every  moment  come  under  new  debts  to 
his  infinite  love.  It  is  very  sweet  to  have  it  so,  for  thus  we  have  each 
moment  a  reason  for  coming  to  him,  inasmuch  as  evei^  moment  he  has 
something  to  impart  to  us.  If  we  are  conscious  at  this  moment  of  our 
poverty  we  need  not  despair,  nor  even  hang  our  heads,'  for  the  next 
moment  has  its  appointea  watering,  and  ere  the  clock  has  ticked  &ith 
may  receive  a  flood  of  grace,  according  to  the  promise  :  **  I  will  pour 
water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground." 

Attention  should  be  gratefully  directed  to  the  fact  that  the  watering 
promised  by  the  Lord  is  a  personal  act :  "I  will  water  it."  Apollos 
waters,  but  he  cannot  do  it  of  himself,  nor  can  he  do  it  every  moment, 
nor  at  all  except  as  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  God.  The  Lord  doth 
his  work  effectually ;  as  in  creation  he  spake  not  in  vain,  but  he  spake 
and  it  was  done,  so  in  grace  he  waters,  and  we  are  watered  indeed. 
Sweet  is  the  truth  that  we  are  not  left  to  second  causes  or  agents ;  these 
might  fail  us  in  the  hour  of  need,  yea,  they  must  prove  liars  unto  us 
if  we  depended  on  them,  for  it  would  be  impossible  for  any  of  them,  or 
all  of  them  put  together,  to  water  us  every  moment;  but  the  all- 
sufficient  God  out  of  the  measureless  stores  of  grace  can  and  will,  in 
his  own  person,  supply  all  his  saints  for  ever,  giving  them  to  be  filled 
with  his  fulness  and  never  to  know  a  lack.  Not  even  to  angels  has  he 
left  the  care  of  his  saints,  but  he  himself,  through  the  mediation  of  his 
his  dear  Son,  doth  every  moment  keep  and  water  us  by  his  effectual 
grace. 

How  condescending  is  this  on  the  Lord's  part !  He  who  leads  forth 
the  stars  by  their  armies  bows  the  heavens  to  visit  your  soul  and  mine. 


A  HEFRE8HIK0  I»BOHISE.  161 

care  that  there  shall  be  a  channel  for  the  water  of  life  to  flow  to 
the  poorest  and  meanest  of  his  people.  How  near  this  brings  the  Lord 
to  nB»  and  what  an  idea  it  dres  ns  of  his  perpetual  active  presence.  As 
the  gardener  stands  over  the  plant,  gentW  pouring  the  water  all  around 
it  and  upon  it,  so  as  to  feed  the  roots  and  wash  the  leaves^  even  so  doth 
the  Lord  as  it  were  stand  over  his  people,  watching  oyer  them  for  good, 
and  dispensing  his  grace  with  all  wisdom  and  prudence  as  thej  are  able 
to  receive  it.  Our  necessity  calls  for  his  abiding  presence,  and  his  lore 
Tonchsafes  iL  Every  moment  is  the  Lord  near  us,  for  every  moment  he 
waters  ua.  Every  moment  does  he  love  us,  because  his  love  is  actively 
demonistrating  itself  in  oondescending  actions.  His  love  suggests  the 
watering,  and  the  watering  proves  his  love.  He  is  never  weary  of  the 
work  which  he  has  himself  undertaken  in  love,  and  which  he  will  not 
delegate  to  others  because  he  is  so  well  pleased  with  doing  it  himself. 

III.  This  much  suffices  to  fill  our  slender  space  :  let  us  now,  in  the 
third  place,  consider  the  OERTAnrnr  that  the  Lord  will  water  every 
plant  that  his  own  right  hand  hath  planted.  Here  a  vast  number  of 
aignmente  suggest  themselves,  but  we  will  content  ourselves  with  the 
one  ground  of  confidence  which  is  found  in  the  Lord  himself  and  his 
previous  deeds  of  love.  The  Lord  our  Ood  is  true  and  cannot  lie,  and 
therefore  if  he  says,  '*  I  will  water  it "  we  need  no  further  guarantee 
that  it  will  be  done.  "  Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it  ?"  Has  he 
ever  broken  the  word  which  has  once  gone  out  of  his  mouth? 
Assuredly  not.  The  Lord  is  mighty,  and  cannot  therefore  leave  his 
promise  unfulfilled  f^om  want  of  power  to  make  it  good.  He  may 
safely  say  '*  I  will,"  be^sause  nothing  is  impossible  with  him.  Man's  '^  I 
will  ^'  is  often  an  empty  boast,  never  is  it  so  with  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
Our  souls  need  supplies  so  great  as  to  ditiin  rivers  of  grace,  but  the  all- 
sufficient  God  is  able  to  meet  the  largest  demands  of  the  innumerable 
company  of  his  people,  and  he  will  meet  them  to  his  own  honour  and 
glory  for  ever.  Mere,  then,  we  see  his  truth,  his  power,  and  his  all- 
sofficiency  all  pledged  to  provide  for  his  chosen,  and  we  may  be  sure 
that  the  guarantee  will  stand. 

The  immutability  and  omnipresence  of  God  both  speak  to  the  like 
eifect.  The  Lord  has  watered  his  people  hitherto,  and  as  he  cannot 
change  they  may  expect  the  like  treatment  at  his  hands.  He  will  neither 
revoke  his  promise  nor  cease  from  folfiUing  it.  Moreover,  he  can  be 
with  his  needy  servants  every  moment,  as  his  promise  implies  ;  for  it 
will  never  be  said  of  him,  "  reradventure  he  is  pursuing,  or  he  is  on  a 
journey,  or  he  sleepeth  and  must  be  awakened."  While  he  is  working 
in  heaven  and  on  earth,  and  in  all  deep  places,  yet  can  his  gracious  hand 
be  busy  among  the  tender  plants  of  his  grace,  and  that  at  all  times,  yea 
every  moment. 

If  we  needed  further  confirmation  we  might  well  remember  that  the 
Lord  has  already  watered  his  vineyard  in  a  far  more  costly  manner 
than  it  will  ever  need  again.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  watered  it  with  a 
sweat  of  blood,  and  can  it  be  supposed  that  he  will  leave  it  now  ?  Geth- 
semane  wrought  for  the  church  much  beyond  any  fiitnre  need  which 
can  possibly  arise  to  her ;  he  who  spared  not  his  own  blood  will  not 
withhold  watering  fh>m  those  he  has  redeemed.  Dear  friend,  you  and 
I  have  already  cost  the  Saviour  so  much  that  there  is  no  fear  of  his 


162  METROPOLITAN  TABEBKACLE  PULPIT. 

parting;  with  as,  or  losing  his  reward  in  ns,  by  giving  ns  orer  to  barren- 
ness. Jesus  has  already  fulfilled  on  our  behalf  a  weightier  engagement 
than  that  which  is  contained  in  the  text.  He  said  ''  I  will  redeem  it/' 
and  he  has  kept  his  word  ;  and  now  if  he  declares  ^'  I  will  water  it,"  it 
would  be  a  superfluity  of  unbelief  to  distrust  his  word. 

Hitherto  the  sacred  promise  has  been  fully  kept,  for  we  have  been 
graciously  preserved  in  spiritnal  life.  Droughty  times  have  befallen  us, 
and  yet  our  soul  has  not  been  suffiared  to  famish ;  why,  then,  should  we 
question  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  as  to  years  to  come  ?  His  delight 
is  in  us  as  much  as  ever,  because  Jesus,  in  whom  he  beholds  us,  is  us 
fur  and  lovely  as  ever,  and  (therefore  we  may  expect  the  same  kindness 
from  the  same  loving  heart.  He  has  not  only  pledged  himself  to  water 
his  people,  but  again  and  again  has  he  spoken  to  the  same  effect.  Hear 
how  Isaiah  speaketh  by  the  Holy  Ghost — ^' And  the  Tjord  shs^  guide 
thee  continually,  and  satisfy  thy  soul  in  drought,  and  make  fat  thy 
bones :  and  thou  shalt  be  like  a  watered  garden,  and  like  a  spring  of 
water,  whose  waters  fail  nob."  Jeremiah  also  speaketh  to  the  same 
effect  in  his  thirty-first  chapter  at  the  twelfth  verse.  Shall  the  Lord 
ran  back  firom  his  covenant?  Shall  we  so  much  blaspheme  his  name  as 
to  suppose  that  he  will  be  false  to  his  engagements  ?  Unbelief,  hide  thy 
guilty  heod^  Doubting  one,  be  comforted.  He  who  said,  ^'I  will  water 
it  every  moment"  must  not  be  dishonoured  by  thy  guilty  suspicions, 
for  he  will  do  even  as  he  hath  said.  It  is  true  thy  heart  is  by  nature 
barren  and  dry,  but  what  has  that  to  do  with  the  promise  of  free  grace 
so  as  to  render  it  of  none  effect  ?  Is  not  thy  parcoed  and  desolate  con- 
dition the  rather  to  be  viewed  as  a  reason  why  the  Lord  should  c^n  the 
windows  of  heaven  above  thee  and  pour  out  his  blessing  ? 

One  thing  is  never  to  be  forgotten — we  are  the  Lord's.  Therefore,  if 
he  do  not  water  us,  he  will  himself  be  the  loser.  An  owner  of  vine- 
lands,  if  he  should  suffer  them  to  be  parched  with  the  droughty  would 
derive  nothing  from  his  estate ;  the  vineyard  would  be  dried  up,  but  he 
he  himself  would  receive  no  closters.  With  reverence  be  it  spoken,  our 
Lord  himself  will  never  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  in  untended  vines^ 
nor  in  hearts  unsanctified  and  anrenewed,  nor  in  men  whose  graces 
dioop  and  die  for  want  of  divine  refreshings.  The  Lord  must  carry  the 
work  through,  or  lose  what  ho  hath  wrought,  and  that  would  not  be 
,  consistent  with  the  foresight  of  his  wisdom,  or  the  purpose  of  his  heart. 
He  chose  us,  he  boaght  us,  he  delights  in  us,  he  pat  his  very  glory  in 
pawn  concerning  us,  and  we  may  therefore  be  sure  beyond  all  per- 
adventure  that  he  will  water  us  to  the  end. 

Does  he  water  us  every  moment?  Then  let  his  pcaise continually  be 
in  our  months.  Doth  he  thus  care  for  us  ?  Let  us,  then,  watch  for 
the  advance  of  his  cause,  the  extension  of  his  kingdom,  the  good  of 
his  people.  He  who  is  thus  watered  should  water  others.  If  the 
Lord  puts  within  us  a  well  of  living  water  through  his  divine 
watering,  then  let  us  give  forth  to  others  rivers  of  living  water.  Yet 
let  not  this  be  our  first  thought,  but  rather  let  us  go  away  crying, 
**  Lord,  make  my  soul  as  a  watered  garden.  Saturate  my  fleece,  fill  my 
vessel  to  the  brim,  and  keep  it  full  for  ever.  Fulfil  tiiis  word  unto  thy 
servant,  upon  the  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope,  and  water  m» 
every  moment,  wen  me,'* 


THE  SOK  GLOBIFIED  BY  THE  FATHER  AND  THE 
FATHEE  GLOBIFIED  BY  THE  SON. 


%     T 


DEUVXaSD  BT 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THS   MVTAOPOLITAH   TABBUHAQU,   NEWIvaTOtf* 


*  lliete  words  ipake  Jeaw,  and  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaTen,  and  said,  Father,  the 
is  come ;  gwnty  thy  Soo,  that  thy  Son  also  may  glorily  thee."-— John  zviL  1. 


Tjsia  was  a  prayer  after  a  sermon.  These  words  spake  Jesus,  and  thea 
he  lifted  up  nis  eyes  to  heayea  in  supplication.  Tso  discourse  should  be 
unattendea  by  prayer^  for  how  can  we  expect  a  blessing  on  what  we 
haye  heard  or  spoken  unless  we  ask  it  of  the  Lord.  The  sower  should 
water  with  many  a  supplication  the  seed  that  he  has  sown,  and  the 
hearer  should  diligently  seek  the  favour  of  him  who  giveth  bread  to  the 
eater  as  well  as  seed  to  the  sower. 

It  was  a  prayer  tit  connection  tvilh  the  Lmis  Supper.  Surely  above 
all  things  prayer  should  mix  with  every  part  of  our  attendance  at  the 
sacred  table?  Dare  we  come  to  the  saczm  feast  without  prayer?  Can 
we  sit  there  without  prayer  ?  Can  we  retire  without  prayer  ?  If  so,  let 
UB  not  wonder  if  the  ordinance  shonld  be  a  mere  form  and  unrefieshing 
to  onr  souls.  With  sermon  and  with  sacrament  let  us  mingle  the  salt  of 
sappUcation,  without  prescribing  how  much. 

Ohaerve  ihs  atUtude  of  the  prayer.  The  Saviour,  it  appears,  prayed  with 
uplifted  eyes.  There  is  much  in  this  outward  manifestation  of  his  devo- 
tioD.  We  have  not  time  to  enter  into  it  folly,  but  this  may  suffice :  the 
uplifted  eye  showed  to  whom  he  was  speaking,  and  it  bore  testimony  that 
toat  he  was  not  idly  drawing  the  bow  at  a  venture,  but  directing  his 
ptayer  nnto  3od  and  looking  up  as  the  arrow  ascended  to  his  Father's 
throne.  It  showed  also  what  ne  was  looking  awav  from,  and  above  his 
disciples  and  their  sympthy,  above  all  the  world  and  its  enmity,  and 
eyen  above  himsel£  His  outlook  was  towards  the  Invisible :  this  is  for 
our  instruction.  He  could  have  prayed  with  eyes  closed  if  so  it  had 
ideased  him,  but  his  were  the  opened  eyes  of  &ith  and  love,  which  could 
bok  into  the  face  of  Gh)d,  and  could  yet  look  upon  all  things  round  with* 
out  distraction,  and  hence  it  was  not  needful  for  him  to  draw  down  the 
onrtains  of  the  eyelids,  but  he  gaaed  nnto  the  opened  heaven. 


164  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Notice  ths  €omimncem$nt  of  his  prayer,  for  it  famishes  onr  text  He 
began  by  saying,  **  Father.  He  did  not  say  "  Our  Father."  "  Onr 
Father  "  is  for  ns,  for  we  in  the  filial  relationship  which  we  sustain  are 
many ;  but "  Father  "  is  for  him,  for  he  is  one,  and  he  is  such  a  son  as 
in  some  respects  we  can  never  be.  Into  the  mysterious  doctrine  of  the 
eternal  filiation  it  is  not  ours  to  enter,  but  we  know  it  to  be  a  truth. 
"  Father  "  is  a  word  appropriate  to  our  Lord's  lips  alone  in  its  highest 
conceivable  sense ;  but  how  grandly  it  comes  from  him.  It  shows  his 
love  to  Ood,  his  confidence  in  God,  his  complete  resignation  to  the  divine 
will,  and  his  sweet  acquiescence  in  it.  He  is  about  to  be  broken  in  pieces 
with  the  iron  rod  of  his  Father's  vengeance,  but  he  calls  him  **  Father  '* 
still.  He  is  about  to  drink  that  cup  of  wormwood  and  gall,  which  would 
have  been  hell  to  us  if  he  had  not  drained  it  dry,  but  he  says  **  Father  '* 
still.  And  herein  he  sets  us  an  example :  in  all  times  of  tribulation  let 
us  fall  back  upon  our  sonship,  our  adoption,  and  the  Mherhood  of  our 
great  God.  To  our  Father  let  us  go,  for  to  whom  else  should  a  child  so 
naturally  fly?  Where  else  can  we  go  but  to  our  Father  who  knows 
what  we  have  need  of  before  we  ask  him  and  who  will  never  desert  his 
own,  but  like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children  will  pity  them  that  fear 
him? 

The  prayer  itself^the  very  fact  of  the  prayer,  shows  us  his  manhood. 
Jesus  pleads :  he  must  be  man.  He  lifts  his  eyes  to  heaven  and  he  cries 
**  Father  ";  he  must  be  like  ourselves,  a  man.  But  the  prayer  in  some 
respects  bespeaks  the  deity  which  it  scarcely  veils.  As  in  some  statues^ 
which  you  must  often  have  looked  upon  with  admiration,  you  seem  to 
see  the  face  of  the  figure  through  the  marble  veil,  so  it  is  here  in  the 
prayer  of  Christ,  the  God  shines  through  the  man.  It  is  such  a  prayer 
as  only  he  might  offer  who  is  God  as  well  as  man.  Dare  you  say» 
"  Father,  glorify  me,  that  I  may  glorify  thee  "  ?  That  would  be  a  pre- 
sumptuous expression  for  creature-lips  to  utter.  He  alone  who  counted 
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  though  he  made  himself  of  no 
reputation,  might  thus  pray.  Though  he  cries  to  God,  "  Father,  glorify 
thy  Son,"  yet  may  he  add,  and  put  no  explanatory  sentence  therewith, 
"that  tty  Son  also  may  glorify  thee."  He  is  able  to  return  all  the 
glory  God  may  give,  and  has  the  power  as  much  to  magnify  the  Father's 
name  as  the  Father  may  magnify  his  name.  Herein  I  see  the  humanity, 
but  I  admire  and  adore  the  deity,  of  our  blessed  Lord. 

T/ie  first  eentence  of  his  prayer  reveals  his  foresight — ''Father,  the 
hour  is  come" — the  hour  ordained  in  the  eternal  purpose — the  hour 
prophesied  of  which  Daniel  sought  to  know,  the  hour  towards  which  all 
hours  had  pointed,  the  central  hour,  the  hour  up  to  which  men  dated 
and  from  which  they  shall  date  again  if  they  read  time  aright;  the 
hinge,  pivot,  and  turning  point  of  all  human  history :  the  dark,  yet 
delivering  hour,  the  hour  of  vengeance  and  of  acceptance.  "  The  hour 
is  come."  He  knew  it.  His  inward  infallible  foresight  made  him  know 
that  now  was  the  time  for  him  to  offer  up  himself  a  sacrifice  for  sin. 

His  expression  is,  however,  very  choice.  "  The  hour  is  come."  His 
faith  thinlvs  it  but  an  hour :  the  midnight  of  Gethsemane,  the  morning  of 
the  scourging,  the  day  of  the  cnicifixion,  all  are  but  an  hour,  a  short 
space.  Now  is  he  in  trouble,  for  his  time  of  travail  is  come ;  but  he 
counts  it  as  an  hour,  for  joy  of  that  which  shall  be  bom  into  the  world 


TUB  80K  OLOBIFIED  BT  FATHEB  AND  FATHER  BY  SON.         165 

hj  hifl  grievous  pang^.    Thus  his  loye  and  pat;ience  make  him  despise 
the  tiiuo  of  shame  and  reckon  it  bnt  a  brief  intcrral. 

The  foresight  of  which  we  hare  spoken  makes  him  look  beyond  the 
hoar.  Yon  and  I  look  into  the  hour  of  darkness,  as  a  frequent  rule,  and 
see  no  farther,  for  our  eyes  are  dim  through  unbelief;  but  he  goes  on 
beyond  the  hoar,  and  his  prayer  is,  *^  Glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also 
may  glorify  thee."  lie  fixes  his  eye  upon  the  glory  that  was  yet  to 
be  revealed,  and  for  joy  of  that  he  counts  even  his  aeath  to  be  but  an 
hoar,  looking  upon  it  as  soon  to  be  overpast  and  lost  in  the  glory  of  his 
Father.  In  all  this,  brethren,  let  us  imitate  our  Lord,  and  let  us  keep 
oar  eye,  not  on  the  present,  but  on  the  afterwards ;  not  on  this  light 
affliction,  which  is  bnt  for  a  moment,  but  on  the  for  more  exceeding  and 
eternal  weight  of  glory  which  will  come  of  it  all;  and  let  us  with  holy 
ODiifidence  whenever  our  hour  of  darkness  arrives  resort  to  our  God  in 
seczet.  The  best  preparation  for  the  worst  hour  is  prayer,  the  best 
remedy  for  a  depressed  spirit  is  nearness  to  God.  In  this,  then,  let  us 
follow-  cm*  Master,  and  may  the  Holy  Spirit  help  us  so  to  do. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  essential  words  of  the  prayer.  They  are  two- 
fold ;  and  in  them  we  find  first  a  petition  for  hhnself:  "  Father,  glorify  thy 
iSon;"  andi,  secondly,  the  motive  of  that  petition:  "that  thy  Son  also  may 
glorify  thee." 

I.  Begin,  then,  with  the  petition  for  himself  ;  and  I  invite  you 
to  observe  it  as  an  answered  petition.  Eighteen  hundred  years  and 
more  have  rolled  away  since  those  di\'ine  words  fell  f^om  our  blessed 
Master's  lips,  and  they  have  been  answered,  and  are  being  answered  still. 
We  shall  not  look  upon  them  from  the  standpoint  of  the  apostles,  but 
from  onr  own,  and  regard  the  prayer  as  one  which  is  granted. 

And,  first,  it  was  ariawefied  in  and  during  his  sufferifigs.  Some  of  the 
early  fathers  confined  the  sense  of  these  w^ords  to  the  passion  of  our 
Lord,  and  I  like  their  strong  expressions  when  they  say  that  his  cross  was 
his  throne,  and  Gethsemane  was  as  glorious  as  Olivet,  if  not  more  so ;  for 
the  glory  of  the  cross  would  be  a  wonderful  theme  if  man  had  mhid  aud 
wor&  enough  to  expatiate  upon  it.  Speak  we  of  ignominy  ?  Doubtless 
he  died  a  felon's  death.  Speak  we  of  shame  ?  No  doubt  they  spat  upon 
him  and  derided  him.  Speak  we  of  weakness  ?  No  doubt  he  slept  m  a 
grave.  But  in  his  ignominy,  shame,  and  weakness  Jesus  is  most 
honourable,  adorable,  and  strong.  Faith  sees  a  moral  and  spiritual 
splendour  about  her  crucified  Lord  which  outshines  all  the  prenous 
glories  of  his  eternal  throne. 

I  shall  not  so  confine  the  sense  of  the  words,  but  yet  that  sense  must 
be  included.  The  Son  of  God  was  glorified  while  he  was  dying,  and  it 
was  one  part  of  his  glory  that  he  should  he  able  tc  hear  the  enormous  load 
ef  human  guilt.  As  a  race  we  lay  crushed  beneath  it.  A  thousand 
lliamsons  could  not  relieve  us.  Angels  and  archangels,  cherubim  and 
seiaphim  must  have  £uled  to  lift  the  stupendous  mass ;  but  this  one  man 
aloney  nnhelped,  in  weakness  of  body  and  in  death  pangs,  bore  away  the 
enormous  load  of  human  guilt.  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon 
him ;  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquitv  of  us  all.  What  a  load 
it  was!  And  that  he  could  bear  it  was  indeed  a  display  of  his  glory. 
The  lost  in  hell  cannot  bear  the  wrath  of  God ;  an  eternity  of  sufi'ering 
will  not  have  discharged  the  dreadful  penalty,  and  yet  he  bore  that 


166  METBOPOUTAV  TABBBKACLX  F0LPR. 

burden  in  an  honr.  Oh,  marrellonB  strength  of  the  tncannte  God ! 
Olorioas  art  thou,  indeed,  0  Chmt,  npon  thy  croas ;  more  gtorioos  than 
even  in  that  moment  when  with  a  wora  thon  shalt  shake  not  only  earth, 
bnt  also  heaven,  for  now  the  weight  of  an^  heaven  rests  on  thee,  aad 
thou  dost  stand  &st  beneath  it.  Glorify  hmi,  beloved,  yoa  for  whom  lie 
bore  that  weight,  glorify  him  that  he  was  able  to  endnre  it. 

He  was  ghrified  also  in  th$  mamver  m  which  he  bor$  it,  in  that  he 
sustained  it  witiioat  shrinking  or  starting  back.  There  was  no  guilt  or 
guile  in  him,  though  questioned  again  and  again  before  Caiaphas,  and 
Herod,  and  Pilate.  There  were  no  angry  speeches  when  he  was  brow- 
beaten, and  buffeted,  and  blindfolded,  and  spat  upon ;  he  displayed  nothing 
but  gentleness,  even  when  his  enemies  had  piercei  his  lian<u  and  his  feet, 
nothing  but  triumphant  picy  and  almighty  love  even  when  they  mooked 
his  agonies.  They  could  not  anger  him  with  all  their  reviiings,  and  when 
they  cried,  **  Let  him  come  down  from  the  cross,  and  we  will  believe  mi 
him,"  yet  he  did  not  loose  a  hand  fh>m  the  cruel  tree  to  nnite  the 
scomers  nor  diake  his  foot  free  from  the  nail  to  spnm  the  biaq>hemet8. 

When  you  think  of  his  physical  agonies,  of  his  mental  torture,  of  his 
spiritual  darkness — when  you  consider  that  all  the  powers  of  earth  and 
hell  were  let  loose  upon  him,  and  when,  worst  of  all,  yon  recollect  that 
the  Father's  face  was  hidden  from  him  till  he  cried,  **  Why  hast  tiiou 
forsaken  me?"  and  yet  consider  that  our  champion  having  b^un  the 
redeeming  work,  went  through  with  it,  and  never  drew  bi^k  his  hand 
from  the  covenant  which  he  had  made,  nor  flinched  under  the  stroksB 
he  bore,— I  sav  he  was  glorious  in  his  passion,  and  his  prayer  was  heard. 
The  Father  did  glorify  his  Son  even  on  the  tree.  It  was  an  hour  of  glory 
that  might  dazzle  angels*  eyes — that  hour  when  he  said,  "  It  is  finished, ' 
and  gave  up  the  ghost.  For  what  had  he  finished  then  ?  He  had  finished 
that  which  has  saved  his  people,  has  peopled  heaven  with  immortal 
spirits  who  shall  delight  in  him  for  ever,  and  has  shaken  the  gates  of 
helL  God  indeed  glorified  his  Son  in  enabling  him  to  bear,  and  bear  bo 
well,  all  the  weight  of  sin  and  the  penalty  that  was  due  to  it. 

Ajid  now  to-day,  beloved,  we  see  that  Ood  glmfted  his  Son  in  his 
death,  because  in  dying  he  did  save  his  people.  I  do  not  beheve  for  a 
single  moment  that  the  result  of  Christ's  death  ever  was  or  ever  could  be 
uncertain.  That  which  he  intended  to  do  by  it  will  be  done,  and  has 
been  so  fitr  done  to  the  last  jot  and  tittle  up  to  this  moment.  His  great 
object  was  the  redemption  of  his  chosen;  ''Ohrist  loved  his  church  and 
gave  himself  for  it."  It  is  said  of  a  certain  company  that  they  sing, 
"  He  hath  redeemed  us  from  among  men.**  Now,  when  he  died  he  did 
not  render  the  redemption  of  his  people  possible,  but  he  ransomed  them 
completely.  By  his  agonies  and  death  he  did  not  merely  give  a  bare  hope 
of  the  pardon  of  sin,  but  he  hurled  the  sin  of  all  his  elect  into  the  depths 
of  the  sea  in  that  selfsame  moment.  He  did  not  merely  make  the  stuva- 
tion  of  men  a  possibility  if  they  would,  but  he  saved  his  people  then  and 
there,  and  finished  the  work  which  he  came  to  do,  in  proof  whereo>f 
it  is  written  that  ^Hhis  man,  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for 
sins  for  ever,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  and  he  would  not 
have  sat  there  if  his  work  had  not  been  done.  According  to  the  words  of 
the  prophet  he  had  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  brought 
in  everlasting  righteousness,  for  he  had  offered  an  effectual  atonement 


THE  809  Qtmarm  vr  tATRrait  mkd  vathmr  by  son.      S87 

iriMefa  none  oan  gaiaaay;  aad  lo  the  ¥\ither  glorified  his  Son,  eiveti 
vfaen  he  died,  smce  he  accepted  his  rodeeraing  Mood  on  the  behalf  of  his 


fkB  Futhgr  ghriflBd  his  Son  by  making  him,  wm  in  ike  hotsr  of  kis 
jMiiniiii,  io  be  rieiorious  over  aU  his  enemies.  That  nailed  foot  braised 
the  serpent's  head,  so  that  he  coidd  never  resume  his  former  power ;  that 
nafled  nand  grasped  the  serpent  of  sin  and  strangled  it ;  and  that  dying 
head  as  it  bowed  itself  smote  death  vnth  its  own  sword,  as  David  smote 
Goliath,  for  he  **  death  by  dying  slew." 

The  powers  of  evil  were  tremead^^ns.  Think  of  sin,  of  Satan,  and  of 
death,  out  all  their  leagaered  hosts  were  defeated  in  that  one  pitched 
battle^  of  which  the  cross  was  the  banner  and  the  dying  Bedeemer  the 
chjEmpion.  0  sionons  Lord,  thon  hast  led  captivity  captive,  makin?  a 
Aow  of  thine  aOTersaries  openly  even  on  thy  cross,  and  nailing  np  to  ttie 
aocmnsed  tvee  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  that  was  a^inst  ns.  Yes, 
the  Fa^r  glorifled  thee  eyen  there  while  yet  then  wast  m  the  agonies  of 
death. 

Beside  this  ^»re  were  seme  outward  signs  of  the  glcry  of  Christ  even 
«t  his  death  which  we  can  scarcely  stay  to  mention.  Did  not  the  temple 
Tend  her  veil  ?  Did  not  the  sun  conceal  his  &ce  ?  Did  not  the  rocks 
open,  and  the  dead  arise  ?  Was  not  all  Jerusalem  filled  with  tremor, 
and  did  not  the  centurion  cry,  "Truly,  this  was  the  Son  of  God*'? 
Yes,  tbe  Father  glorif^d  his  Son,  even  when  it  pleased  him  to  bruise  him 
and  to  pnt  him  to  grief  With  one  hand  he  smote,  and  with  the  other 
hand  he  glorified.  There  was  a  power  to  crush,  but  there  was  also  a  power 
to  SQstain  working  at  the  self-same  time.    The  Father  glorified  his  Son. 

And  now,  beloved,  what  shall  I  say  conceniing  (he  Father  gJorifying 
the  Son  after  his  death,  and  as  the  result  of  itf  I  will  not  attempt  to 
expatiate,  but  I  will  simply  say  that  the  rending  of  the  veil  at  the 
moment  of  his  death  was  the  dorifying  of  Christ :  for  now  there  is  a 
way  to  the  throne  of  God  made  manifest  for  us,  which  aforetime  had 
hcea  closed.  Then  the  opening  of  his  pierced  side  was  another  glori- 
fying of  him,  for  this  day  the  £)uble  fount  is  to  believers  the  eflectual 
cteaming  of  both  the  guilt  and  the  power  of  sin ;  and  thus  the  Saviour's 
pierced  heart  glorified  him  in  its  power  to  bless.  Then  that  poor  body 
aj  in  the  grave — I  call  it  poor,  for  so  it  seemed — ^wrapped  in  the  linen 
and  the  spices.  But,  beloved,  the  Father  glorified  even  that  dead  body 
which  men  thought  to  be  corruptible,  for  it  saw  no  corruption.  During 
the  three  days  and  nights  no  worm  could  come  near  it,  nor  trace  of 
decay.  That  crystal  vase  in  which  the  rich  ointment  of  the  Saviour's 
soul  had  dwelt  "must  not  be  injured.  **  Not  a  bone  of  him  shall  be 
broken."  Beautified  by  those  scars  as  when  a  skilful  artist  renders  an 
image  more  lovely  than  before  by  marks  of  the  graver's  tool,  that  body 
most  be  safelv  guarded  by  watching  angels  till  the  morning  came.  It 
bar^  dawned.  As  yet  the  sun  was  rising,  and  lo  the  Sun  of  righteousness 
himself  arose !  As  a  man  arising  from  his  couch  puts  on  his  garments,  so 
did  oar  Lord  put  on  the  vesture  of  the  body,  which  he  had  laid  aside,  and 
came  again  into  the  world,  alive  as  to  his  body  and  his  soul,  a  perfect 
man.  Oh,  it  was  a  grand  glorifying  of  Ohrist  when  the  Father  raised  him 
from  the  dead,  and  he  was  seen  by  his  disciples  once  again.  Death  had 
no  bands  wh^:ew]th  to  hold  him.    The  sepulchze's  ward  could  not  confine 


168  METBOPOLITAK  TABERKAOLB  PUI«PIT. 

the  nnequalled  prisoner.     Declared  to  be  glorious  by  the  resttrrection 
from  the  dead,  liis  prayer  was  heard. 

And  ere  long,  when  a  few  weeks  had  passed  over  him,  there  oaiue 
another  glory ;  for  from  the  brow  of  Olivet  he  gently  ascended,  floating 
in  the  air  from  the  company  of  his  disciples,  rising  up  in  the  midst  of 
angels  till  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  hiunan  sight. 

'^  They  broueht  his  chariot  from  on  high 
To  bear  him  to  his  throne ; 
Clapped  their  triumphant  win^  and  cried, 
'  1  he  glorious  wo^  is  done.*  *' 

His  Father  glorified  him,  and  now  he  sits  at  the  right  band  of  God. 
Words,  ye  are  dumb  things,  ye  cannot  tell  out  his  present  glory.  Early 
the  other  morning  there  came  to  my  bedside  a  brother  to  awaken  me 
whose  face  seemed  to  beam  with  joy,  as  he  said,  "  In  my  sleep  last  night 
I  thought  I  saw  the  Lord  upon  his  throne ;  and  oh,  the  glory  which  the 
Father  put  upon  him !  I  wish  I  could  fall  asleep  again  that  I  might 
continue  to  aream  on."  The  tears  were  in  his  eyes,  as  he  said,  '<  Oli, 
the  glory  of  Christ !  Oh,  the  glory  of  Christ !"  I  reminded  him  of  how 
Mercy  laughed  in  her  sleep,  and  Christiana  asked  her  why ,-  and  when 
she  told  her  dream,  the  matron  said  she  might  well  laugh  if  she  so 
dreamed.  Happy  are  those  who,  sleeping  or  waking,  living  or  dying,  may 
but  get  a  glimpse  of  his  glory.  Nothing  ever  ravishes  my  heart  like  the 
thought  of  my  Lord's  being  glorified*  Oh,  if  I  could  by  some  means 
help  to  honour  him !  If  I  may  but  be  the  earthen  vessel  in  which  his 
treasure  should  be  stored,  or  the  trumpet  by  which  his  name  might  be 
proclaimed  I  Tliis  is  Joy  enough  for  me.  And  you  all  feel  the  same, 
vou  who  love  him.  You  delight  to  think  how  high  his  throne  is,  and 
how  bright  is  his  countenance,  and  how  resplendent  are  his  courts. 
Have  patience.  You  shall  see  him  soon,  for  the  Father  will  glorify  him 
in  the  second  advent.  He  tarries,  he  torries  long,  as  we  think ;  yet  he 
saith,  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly ;  and  my  reward  is  with  me."  He  is 
coming  to  be  glorified,  even  among  the  sons  of  men.  So  shall  the  prayer 
of  the  text  be  fulfilled  in  the  golden  ages  yet  to  dawn,  and  then  through- 
out eternity. 
II.    Wc  pause  a  moment,  and  then  we  shall  briefly  think  of  th£ 

MOTIVE  OF  HIS  PRATER. 

" Father,  glorify  thy  Son,  thai  thy  Son  also  may  glorify  thee"  Do 
notice  this.  When  yon  pray,  it  is  a  grand  thing  to  pray  with  a  clean 
heart ;  but  selfishness  is  uncleanness.  In  our  blessed  Lord  there  was 
no  selfishness.  He  said,  "  I  seek  not  mine  own  glory  ";  and  even  in  this 
prayer  that  word  of  his  is  true,  for  he  only  seeks  glory  that  he  may 
glorify  the  Father.  Beloved,  the  desire  of  our  Lord  is  granted,  for  God 
is  glorified  in  Jesus  Christ  more  than  in  any  other  way.  The  glory  of 
God  in  nature  is  inconceivable.  This  round  world  and  all  that  dwell 
therein ;  the  open  sea  calmly  mirroring  the  sky  or  ruffled  with  tempests ; 
the  wondrous  expanse  of  heaven,  fleecy  with  clouds,  or  blue  beneath  a 
torrid  sun,  or  Ut  up  with  innumerable  stars ;  yon  hills  with  all  their 
woods,  yon  laugliing  valleys  with  their  lowing  herds  and  bleating 
flocks, — 

•«  These  are  thy  glorious  works.  Parent  of  good,  almighty," 


THB   801^  OLOBIFIBD  BT  rATEJO,  AVD  FATHKU  BT  60K.        169 

thoa  gettest  glory  from  every  fliokermg  blade  of  grass  or  frond  of  fern,  and 
epeiy  flittiiig  inflect  and  creeping  worm  mean  U^  praise ;  there  is  nought 
bat  what  glorifieth  thee,  firom  leviathan  to.  a  minnow.  Yet  all  natnre 
pat  together  &ils  to  reveal  all  thy  glorious  attributes.  The  divine 
Liithfiamess,  and  justice,  and  truth  are  scarcely  manifest  in  nature  though 
traces  of  them  may  be  seen ;  but  in  the  fiM«  of  Jesus,  who  is  the  express 
image  of  the  Father,  God  is  glorified  to  the  full.  In  the  deaw  of 
Chmt,  above  all  things,  Ood  is  glorified,  for  there  all  the  attributes  of 
God  are  seen.  There  was  the  power  which  sustained  Christ  beneath  his 
more  than  Herculean  task ;  the  love  which  surrendered  the  darling  of  its 
boaom  that  he  might  die  instead  of  traitors ;  the  justice  which  would 
tt>t,  ooald  not  forgive  sin  without  satisfaction;  the  truth  which  had 
threatened  to  punish,  and  did  punish;  which  had  promised  to  give  a 
Savioor,  and  did  give  him ;  the  fiuthfoLoess  to  the  covenant  which  kept 
that  ooTenant  at  such  a  diead  expense ;  the  wisdom  which  plann^  the 
marveUons  way  ox  salvation  by  a  substitute :  nay,  let  me  put  it  aU  to* 
gather,  the  wholeness,  the  holiness  of  God,  yea  all  his  attributes  are  seen, 
each  one  equally  magnified  in  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  ir#  is  glorious, 
and  the  triune  God  is  dorified  in  him. 

And  now,  beloved,  God  is  glorified  in  the  death  of  Christ  by  the  love 
of  all  those  whom  Jesus  saves,  by  the  sacred  awe  and  filial  fear  of  all 
irhom  Jesus  brings  to  the  Father's  feet,  by  the  ardent,  patient  devotion 
ot  all  who  are  consecrated  in  heart,  and  feel  the  sacred  flame  of  love  to 
Christ  setting  their  souls  on  a  blaze.  Up  there  in  heaven,  where  the  white* 
robed  never  cease  to  sing,  and  here  below  where  martyrs  were  burned 
for  love  of  God,  where  confessors  defied  all  adversaries  to  spread  abroad 
the  glory  of  his  name,  where  humble  Christians  suffer  in  patience,  or 
laboor  on  with  diligence,  or  walk  in  holiness,  the  Father's  name  is  glori* 
fied  through  the  passion  of  tlie  Christ  of  God. 

We  had  many  things  to  say,  but  time  fails  us ;  and  therefore  we  dose 
with  these  three  observations,  which  we  want  to  leave  upon  your  minds. 

The  first  is  this.  Chrisfs  motive  should  be  ours.  When  you  ask  a 
blessing  from  God,  ask  it  that  you  may  glorify  God  by  it.  Do  you  pine  to 
to  have  your  health  back  again  ?  Be  sure  that  you  want  to  spena  it  for 
binu  Do  you  desire  temporal  advancement  ?  Desire  it  that  you  may 
promote  hn  glory.  Do  you  even  long  for  growth  in  grace  ?  Ask  it  only 
that  yoa  may  glorify  him.  If  there  be  aught  that  you  dare  wish  and 
pray  for,  put  it  so  :  "  Father,  bless  thy  child,  that  thy  child  may,  in 
retom,  bless  thee  and  serve  thee."  Those  are  dean  pravers  which  have 
such  a  motive,  all  others  have  the  taint  of  self  about  them.  God  help 
yoa  to  do  everything  to  his  glory,  to  speak  to  his  glory,  to  hve  to  his 
glory,  to  die  to  his  glory,  and  then  you  diall  rise  again  and  live  for  ever 
to  his  glory.  Happy,  happv  is  the  man  whose  lot  this  shall  be.  Let 
this  be  the  constraint  whicn  masters  you,  even  that  which  moved  your 
Lord. 

Next,  ChrisVs  theology  should  be  ours.  What  is  that  ?  Why,  first 
that  he  is  to  be  glorified,  and  secondly  that  the  Father  is  to  be  glorified. 
Error  sometimes  blows  one  way  and  sometimes  another.  Years  gone  by 
the  difficulty  was  to  bring  men  to  glorify  the  Lord  Jesus ;  they  would 
worship  God,  but  not  the  Christ  of  God ;  and  so  there  came  the  great 
Arian  fight^  and  afterwards  Socinian  controversies,  for  they  would  not 


170  HmBOPOUTAH  TIBBBVAOLB  FCZiITE. 

fkriff  Ohrirt.  Oh,  jon  yfho  Imve  been  avred  by  htm,  I  am  not  afhtid  of 
Tim  on  that  point;  bat  nowndays  tiiere  appean  to  be  in  some  mintb  a 
ftngotfulneti  of  the  f^Uiher.  Obriet  is  loW,  ibr  he  died,  bnt  many 
aeem  to  look  upon  the  Fattier  aa  hating  no  ihiire  in  the  wondrom  work 
#f  redemption ;  whereas^  belored,  they  are  one  in  omr  ealvalion.  Father, 
Bon,  and  Spirit  agree  in  one  in  onr  redemption,  and  it  wonid  be  Mai 
indeed  for  as  to  set  one  person  of  Ae  divine  Trinity  aberv«  the  other  two. 
Let  all  men  hononr  tm  Son  even  as  they  honour  the  Father ;  and 
honour  the  Father  even  as  tiiey  hononr  the  Sen.  It  wonld  be  traitorous 
to  Ohrist's  inmost  wish  if  we  were  to  glorify  the  Son  and  M  to 
rer^reoee  and  love  the  Father. 

Lastly,  l$t  imry  bdmer  hmr»  gee  hie  eeemriiy.  Is  it  not  a  moat 
w<mderfal  goarantee  of  the  safety  of  eveiy  one  for  whom  Christ  died, 
tint  ttie  glory  of  Christ  and  ^  glory  of  the  Father— I  may  add  the 
ghnr  of  the  blessed  Spirit— are  all  eqnally  eonoemed  in  the  salvation  of 
the  believing  soal?  Disre  I  say  it  ?  It  would  be  a  Uot  upon  the  ever- 
huting  gl^yry  if  one  believing  soul  were  ever  lost,  llien  were  God's  truth 
no  longer  sore,  fads  fidthftihiesB  no  longer  firm,  his  love  no  more  im- 
mutable. His  power  might  be  doubted:  his  changeableness  would  be 
proved.  Bnt,  beloved,  it  cannot  be.  Christ  will  not  lose  a  Bheq>  of  his 
flock,  nor  will  the  Comforter  lose  a  spirit  in  whioh  he  hss  onoe  began  to 
indwell.  Best  ye  then  in  this.  Abide  ye  without  doubt  or  fear  in 
Christ ;  for  the  mountains  shall  depart  and  ^e  hills  be  removed,  but  the 
covenant  of  his  love  shall  not  be  removed  from  yon,  saith  the  Lord  that 
hath  meroy  on  yon. 

Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  dear  hearers,  and  these  divine  privi- 
leges shall  be  yours ;  and  as  I  prayed  jast  now,  so  pray  I  yet  agaia,  that 
tl^  things  may  belong  to  evety  soul  in  this  house  without  exception, 
through  &ith  in  Christ  Jesus,  by  the  work  of  th^  Holy  Ghost.  Amen. 
Amen. 


POBTION  OF  SCBIFnmB  BEAD  BEFORE  SeBMON — John  XViu 


Hthns  from  '*  Cub  Own  Hymn  Book  " — 416,  412, 23a 


The  Cdportsge  Society  conducted  by  Mr.  Spnrgeon  supports  8*2  men  hi 
needy  districts,  and  does  a  great  work  in  selling  Bibles  and  healthy  literature. 
Owing  to  the  depression  of  trade  and  the  falling  off  of  Rubscriptions  this  branch 
of  holy  service  is  at  this  moment  in  a  difficult  position,  and  will  soon  be  in 
urgent  need  unless  the  Lord  should  move  some  of  his  stewards  to  help.  It 
seems  needful  to  give  this  intimation,  that  friends  may  know  that  there  is  a 
channel  for  their  gifts,  and  a  reason  for  bringing  them  forth  ;  but  Mr.  Spurgeon 
feels  confident  that  by  some  means  or  other  the  present  necessity  for  the  Lortrg 
work  will  be  graciously  supplied,  and  famish  fresh  occasion  for  gratitude  and 
increased  faith. 


P^t)[0;0titmi  ^isibtrnwAt  §iiAj^ 


THE  BOTAL  PBBBOQATTVE. 


II 


DXUVXBXD  BT 

C.   H.   SPURGE  ON, 

AT    TBB    XBTROPOLITAir    TABBENACLB,    VBWINGTOV. 


''Sm BOW  thai  I,  trenl.  •»  he, ana  theno  is  no  god  wilh  am:  I  UU»  and  I  naka 
aliva ;  I  wound » and  I  heal."-— Deatoxonamy  xxzii.  89. 

Therb  IB  bnt  one  God :  Jehovah  is  his  XAmt — the  ''I  AM."  That  one 
God  win  not  endure  a mal.  Whysbonld  he  ?  He  made  all  things,  and 
mteioB  ail  things.  Shonid  a  creatme  that  his  own  hands  hare  imde  be 
setup  in  liralry  with  him?  If  it  be  a  great  man  like  Nebnchadnezzar, 
if  he  sttith,  *'  ^thold  this  great  Babylon  which  I  have  bmlded/'  God  win 
KDd  him  to  grass  among  the  bollocks,  and  make  him  to  know  that  no. 
man  is  great  in  tiie  s^t  of  God.  What  a  provocation  it  mnst  be  to  God 
to  see  men  bowing  down  before  idols  fashioned  by  ^eir  own  hands! 
What  a  degrsdation  to  man  that  he  should  worship  gold,  or  sflver,  or 
wood,  or  atone ;  bnt  what  a  grievous  dishonour  to  the  great  God  of  all ! 
And  it  seems  to  me  to  be  the  worst  of  all  dishonours  when  GtoA  sees  the 
image  of  hia  own  dear  Son  made  into  an  idol,  and  the  representation  of 
the  croas  on  which  redemption  was  made  lifted  on  high  that  before  it . 
men  mar  prostrate  themselves  in  worship.  This  must  touch  his  ^Bicred 
soul,  ana  vex  him  even  to  the  uttermost,  for  Grod  is  €rod  alone,  and 
beside  faim  there  is  none  else  ;  his  glory  will  he  not  give  to  another, 
neither  his  praise  to  graven  images.  In  the  text  before  us  the  great 
if9  m  seen.  The  Lord  savs,  *'  I,  even  I.'*  That  ego  is  so  great  that  it  fills  all 
places  :  and,  tterefore,  there  can  be  no  room  for  another.  "  I,  Qven  I, 
am  Oody  and  there  is  no  god  with  me."  **  Besides  me,"  saith  he  in 
another  place,  'Hhere  is  none  else."  Oh,  to  have  such  lofty  thoughts  of 
iiod  that  we  can  have  no  consideration  for  anything  that  would  rob  him 
of  the  glory  which  is  so  exclusively  his  own.  Pain  would  we  bum  with 
a  lu^  jealousy  which  abhors  the  idea  of  a  rival  god,  and  casts  the  name 
of  Bdud  oat  of  its  mouth  with  utter  loathing. 

In  the  text  the  Lord  daims  the  sovereign  prerogative  of  life  and 
death.  He  says,  ^  I  kill,  and  I  make  alive."  It  is  he  from  whom  we 
first  of  all  receive  our  being.  His  hand  kindles  the  torch  of  life,  and 
from  him  oomes  the  quenching  of  the  flame.  No  angel's  arm  could  save 
OS  from  the  grave ;  nor  could  a  myriad  of  angels  confine  us  there  when 
oaoe  again  he  shall  bid  us  rise.    God  killeth  and  God  maketh  alive. 


172  METROPOLITAN  TABBRKACLB  PULPIT. 

• 

Boryal  peiBonagoft  have  QsnaHj  been  very  jealoiis  of  the  prerogative  of 
ijfe  and  deaths  bat  our  great  (}od  hatb  it  without  bound  or  limit.  He 
reigns  supreme.   ^'I  kill,"  says  he,  "and  I  make  alive." 

From  the  connection  in  which  the  text  stands  it  is  clear  that  the 
Lord  alludes  to  the  making  of  nations,  or  to  the  destroying  of  nations. 
It  was  God  that  made  Israel  to  be  a  people ;  it  was  God  that  cast  out 
Canaanites,  Hivites,  and  Jebusites  ftom  being  nations  before  him :  it  was 
God  that  raised  up  Ghaldea,  and  Babylon,  and  then  stren^nhcned  Persia 
to  break  Babylon  in  pieces,  and  Greece  to  destroy  Persia,  and  Bome  w^ith 
iron  foot  to  break  down  Greece ;  and  when  the  time  had  come  it  was 
he  who  spoke  to  the  city  of  the  seven  hills,  and  she,  too,  lost  her  royal 
power.  Kingdoms  and  thrones  belong  onto  the  Lord,  and  the  shields 
of  the  mighty  are  lifted  on  high  or  laid  in  the  dnst  as  he  willeth. 
Though  they  regard  it  not,  there  is  a  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  ; 
and  when  the  long  page  of  history  shall  be  unrolled,  and  men  shall  be 
able  to  see  the  end  from  the  beginning  with  enlightened  eye,  they  shall 
know  that,  all  through,  the  disregard^  and  neglected  God,  the  unseen 
and  even  nnthought  of  God,  was  still  reigning  evermore.  Across  the 
pace  of  earth's  long  record  shall  be  written  in  right  royal  hand,  *'  I  kill, 
and  I  make  alive."  In  providence  God  is  absolute,  the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate  whose  sovereign  will  knows  no  dispute. 

At  this  time,  however,  I  purpose  to  carry  this  great  truth  away  from  the 
realm  of  providence  into  the  kingdom  of  grace ;  and  we  shall  confine  our- 
selves to  that  second  sentence — **  I  wound,  and  I  heal."  On  this  word 
we  shall  make  three  observations,  the  first  being  that  none  but  (he  Lard 
can  wound  or  heal;  secondly,  that  ih$  Lord  can  wound  and  heal ;  and, 
thirdly,  that  tlie  Loid  doee  wound  and  heal, — three  thoughts  which  are 
closely  connected,  and  yet  are  marked  by  instructive  shades  of  difference. 

I.      First,  NONE  BUT  THE  LOED    CAN  WOUND  OB   HEAL.     To  begin 

at  the  beginning — tJie  Lord  alone  can  spiritually  wound.  When  we 
have  to  deal  with  human  hearts  our  first  effort  has  to  be  to  wound  them. 
Naturally,  man  thinks  himself  whole-hearted,  and  in  sound  health,  but  he 
is  not  so.  The  great  object  of  the  gospel  ministry,  at  first,  is  to  con- 
vince men  of  sin,  to  humble  them  before  God :  in  fiurt,  to  wound  them, 
to  cut  them  to  the  heart.  But  no  man  can  wound  without  tiie  Lord.  I 
speak  without  any  measure  to  my  utterance,  no  preacher  can  truly 
wound  the  human  heart.  He  may  speak  very  honestly  and  plainly ;  he 
may  speak  with  deep  pathos  and  true  affection ;  he  may  wield  at  times 
the  thunders  of  God,  and  anon  the  soft  and  gentle  bands  of  love  may 
be  in  his  hand ;  but  in  no  way  can  the  preacher  get  at  the  heart  of  men 
unless  his  Master  be  with  him.  Charm  thou  never  so  wisely,  0  wise 
man,  the  adder  is  deaf,  and  it  is  in  vain  that  thou  nsest  tliine  enchant- 
ments. As  well  convince  the  wild  winds,  or  convert  the  wayward  waves, 
as  hope  to  touch  the  human  heart  till  God  makes  bare  his  arm.  It  is  the 
Holy  Spirit's  work  to  convince  of  sin,  and  until  he  puttetii  forth  his 
power  the  preacher  may  preach  himself  dumb  with  weariness  and  blind 
with  weeping,  but  no  result  can  possibly  follow.  And  what  is  true  of 
preachers  is  true  of  all  the  teachers  in  the  Sunday-school,  of  all  the  earnest 
lolk  that  go  about  to  speak  personally  to  men,  ay,  and  of  the  most  tender 
mother  and  the  most  earnest  father.  There  \&  no  wounding  the  child's 
heart;  there  is  no  breaking  it  down  into  contrition  by  the  tenderest 


THE  ROTAL  PRBROGATITE,  173 

argaments  or  the  wisest  coansels.  Ton  will  come  back  and  say  m  we 
!n?edone,  ''Who  hath  believed  our  report,  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of 
the  Lord  revealed?" 

Yes,  dear  friends,  and  the  most  solemn  fnilhi  which  in  themselves 
lisve  a  natural  tendency  to  wound  the  heart,  nevertheless  cannot  do  it 
ipart  from  the  work  of  Gk)d  himself.  There  is  the  sword,  and  in  itself 
it  is  gfaaip  and  cutting,  bnt  no  man  can  handle  it.  The  eternal  arm 
must  be  revealed,  or  the  hide  of  behemoth  will  not  feel  the  weapon.  A 
sfoid  will  cat  through  a  coat  of  mail  if  a  Coeur-de-Lion  hath  the  wield- 
ing of  it;  bnt  not  in  a  child's  hand  will  it  wound  to  killing.  God  must 
take  the  Scripture  in  his  hand  and  use  it  to  the  dividing  of  joints  and 
aarrow,  or  sinners  will  escape  its  power.  Terrible  truths  there  are  in 
the  Bible  which  ought  to  make  men  shake,  but  they  hear  them,  they 
<ienj  them,  they  even  laugh  at  them,  and  continue  in  sin.  Sweet  truths 
there  are  which  ought  to  make  a  rock  shed  tears,  but  you  may  tell  of 
Mfflemane's  bloody  sweat  and  the  five  dear  wounds  of  him  who  was 
foond  gnilty  of  excess  of  love,  and  yet  men  will  hear  it  and  go  their  way, 
etch  man  to  his  &rm  and  to  his  merchandise,  and  forget  it  all.  I  grant 
lOQthe  tmths  are  powerful,  but  not  until  the  mighty  God  applies  them 
to  the  heart  and  conscience. 

And  in  addition  to  truth,  providence  itself  may  come  and  work  upon 
the  heart  of  men,  but  cause  no  wounding  of  the  right  sort.  I  have  seen 
the  ungodly  brought  to  destitution  and  poverty  by  their  extravagances, 
md  broQg^t  to  sickness  and  death's  door  by  their  lusts,  and  yet  they  have 
^  been  wounded.  They  have  seen  the  result  of  sin,  they  have  even  felt 
^  in  the  marrow  of  their  bones,  and  yet  the  dogs  have  gone  back  to  their 
^l  They  have  still  clung  to  their  idols  and  held  to  their  abomina- 
^  The  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire,  but  the  burnt  sinner  thrusts  his 
hand  into  the  flame  again.  We  have  seen  men  so  sick  that  they  have 
^bled  at  the  thought  of  death,  and  it  has  been  supposed  from  what 
f^ysaid  that  they  were  really  impressed,  and  if  they  were  restored  to 
^th  would  lead  another  life :  but,  alas,  we  have  seen  them  restored 
to  health  and  sinning  worse  than  before.  The  wicked  break  his  bands 
JsoDder,  they  cast  his  cords  from  them.  All  the  terrors  of  providence — 
f««ivcment8,  losses,  sicknesses — all  have  failed  with  the-  unregenerate. 
Utir  adamantine  heart  has  turned  the  edge  of  the  plough  which  sought 
t-i  break  it  up.  Men  have  wearied  all  the  agencies  of  grace  and  provi- 
'^ce,  but  yet  they  have  not  been  wounded :  their  heart  is  stout  as  that 
"f  leviathan,  "  yea,  as  hard  as  a  piece  of  the  nether  millstone."  None 
^effectually  wound  the  heart  but  God  alone. 

^'ow,  the  same  thing  is  true  about  the  healing :  none  but  the  Lord  can 
^^'  Of  course  that  is  true  with  regard  to  those  who  were  never 
mounded.  Nobody  can  heal  such  persons.  I  have  known  some  preachers 
^todo  that,  though  it  has  always  seemed  to  me  to  be  poor  work  to  try 
t'j  heal  men  who  have  never  been  wounded,  to  preach  mercy  to  persons 
*ho  think  that  they  have  no  sin,  to  preach  grace  to  men  who  dream  that 
%  have  merits  of  their  own.  Christ  did  not  so ;  he  said,  ^  I  came  not 
^'^  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance.  The  whole  have  no  need 
'2^  physician,  but  those  that  are  sick."  There  is  no  healing,  then,  for 
^  who  are  not  wounded ;  and  equally  there  is  no  healing  those  who 
"-"t  mounded,  except  God  lay  his  hand  to  their  sore.    Have  you  ever  met 


17i  HETBOFOLTIAK  TABEKKACLE  PULPIT. 

with  spiritonlly  wounded  persons  ?  If  jon  have,  if  jou  are  a  believer,  your 
whole  neart  has  gone  oafe  towards  thern^  and,  drawing  exaaq)leB  from  your 
own  experienoe  and  promises  from  the  word  of  Ood  and  sweet  encourage- 
Bienta  from  gospel  ooctrine,  you  have  laboured  to  pour  a  healing  balm 
into  their  bleeding  wounds.  But  have  you  not  often  failed  ?  Nay,  apart 
from  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  have  you  not  always  failed,  and  must 
you  not  &ii  ?  Ah,  dear  friends,  it  is  one  thing  to  talk  of  a  wounded 
spirit,  bat  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  feel  a  wounded  spirit ;  and  you 
may  talk  about  healing,  too,  but  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  receive  the 
healing,  and  quite  another  thing  to  apply  it.  Let  God  cut  a  man  with 
his  great  swora  as  once  on  a  time  he  smote  me,  and  I  warrant  you  that 
no  ordinanoes  will  heal  him.  "  No,"  says  a  friend,  ''come  and  hear  a 
sermon."  He  hears  it;  but  the  preaching  makes  him  worse,  and  he 
feds  more  sad  than  ever.  I  have  known  persons  foolish  enough  to  per* 
snade  such  seekers  to  come  to  the  communion  table.  They  have  only 
eaten  and  drunk  oondemnation  to  themselves.  While  they  have  been 
at  the  table  they  have  known  themselves  to  be  intruders,  and  their  hearts 
have  bled  more  than  ever.  You  can  easily  pacify  a  man  whose  sense  of 
sin  is  a  mere  pretence,  just  as  you  may  soon  heal  the  imitation  of  a 
wound ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  one  who  has  the  arrows  of  the  Lord  rank- 
ling within  him,  he  needs  divine  surgery.  As  for  the  hypocritical  peni- 
tent, give  him  outward  sacraments  and  he  believes  that  he  is  all  right ; 
but  if  God  has  wounded  him  all  the  sacraments  under  heaven  will  never 
minister  oonsolation  to  him.  He  must  go  to  God  for  that,  for  only  in 
Christ  Jeans  can  it  be  found.  All  the  preachers,  ay,  and  all  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Bible,  sound  and  true  as  the  preachers  may  be,  and  inspired 
as  the  doctrines  certainly  are,  will  &il  to  comfort  a  bleeding  soul  until 
the  eternal  Lord  shall  bow  himself  from  his  throne  in  heaven  and  bind  up 
the  broken  in  heart  I  know  it  is  so.  Gospel  truth  is  sufficient  in  itself 
to  comfort  all  that  mourn,  but  it  will  comfort  nobody  so  long  as  the 
natural  unbelief  of  the  heart  remains.  Get  a  hold  of  a  lacerated  spirit, 
torn  with  unbelief^  and  try  what  you  can  do.  Say, ''  Trust  in  the  Lord, 
my  friend,"  and  1^  replies,  **  I  cannot  trust."  Tell  him  Christ  Jesus 
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners ;  and  he  says  he  knows  that,  but  he 
cannot  get  hold  of  it.  Go  on  to  tell  him  how  the  Lord  reoeiveth  the  very 
chief  of  sinners.  Do  your  duty  with  him,  for  whether  you  can  heal  him 
or  not  you  are  bound  to  set  the  gospel  before  him :  out  you  shall  find 
that  you  have  worked  in  vain  if  you  have  gone  in  your  own  strength,  and 
forgotten  the  nrayerfrd  spirit  and  the  humble  reliance  which  are  so  needful 
to  success.  God  can  use  you  to  heal  a  broken  heart,  but  you  cannot  do 
it  yonrself. 

Unconverted  hearer,  look  not  to  us  as  though  we  could  do  anything 
for  you,  but  look  to  Jesus  only.  Ah,  friend,  if  I  could  wound  you,  and 
if  I  could  heal  you,  it  would  do  you  no  good.  If  I  could  convert  every 
sinner  here,  of  what  use  would  the  human  conversion  be  ?  Have  vou 
never  heard  of  Mr.  Rowland  Hill  bein^  met  one  evening  by  a  drunken 
nian,  who  staggered  up  to  him  and  said, ''  Hallo,  Mr.  Hill,  I  am  one  of 
your  converts  I"  "Ah,"  said  Mr,  Bowland  Hill,  "  very  likelv,  but  you 
axe  none  of  God's  converts,  or  else  you  would  not  be  drunk."  Now,, 
our  converts,  if  they  be  cur  converts,  will  be  very  poor  productions.  If 
one  mau  can  convert  you,  another  man  can  unconvert  you.    That  which 


THB  BOYAL  PREBOGATIVIL  176 

ji  wToog^bt  by  the  flesh  can  be  undone  by  the  flesh.  "  Ye  must  be  bom 
i&uL  Except  a  man  be  bom  from  aboTe,  he  cannofc  see  the  kingdom 
^  God."  Unless  there  is  a  work  of  grace  in  the  soul  which  the  will  of 
aan,  Uie  will  of  the  flesh,  blood,  birth,  education,  teaching  can  never 
rcrk ;  nnleas,  I  say,  there  is  a  supernatural  power  exercised  upon  us,  we 
laail  neTer  see  the  face  of  God  at  the  last  with  acceptance. 

So  there  is  the  first  tmth — God  alone  can  wouna  and  God  alone  can 
xaL 

II.  And  now,  secondly,  tus  Lord  cak  wound  and  he  can  hbaii. 
What  a  mercy  this  is,  and  how  comfortably  it  encourages  the  Christian 
j>  go  about  bis  work !  The  Lard  can  wound.  He  can  pierce  the  most 
ssMkeLj  heart.  Look  at  Saul  of  Tarsus.  You  would  never  have 
dtooght  when  he  was  hurrying  to  Damascus  to  drag  the  saints  to  prison 
'  ±31  ever  he  would  be  humbled  and  made  to  cry  out,  *^  What  wilt  thou 
.JiTt  me  to  do  ? "  The  Lord  knew  his  man,  and  just  when  he  was  on 
"is  brow  of  the  hill^  and  could  see  Damascus  in  the  plain,  and  was  re^ady 
js>  deTonr  the  saints,  the  Lord  let  fly  an  arrow.  Down  went  one  Saul  of 
TsnoSy  so  wounded  that  it  took  three  days  to  extract  the  arrow.  This 
vas  wonderful ;  for  Saul  was  like  leviathan,  of  whom  we  read,  **  The 
^vord  of  him  that  layeth  at  him  cannot  hold :  the  spear,  the  dart,  nor 
die  habei^eon,"  yet  the  arrow  of  the  hcyri  laid  him  low.  The  Lord  can 
f onnd  men  in  very  unlikely  places.  I  have  known  the  arrow  of  con- 
viction come  home  to  a  man  who  had  not  entered  a  place  of  worship  for 
I  jeus.  Such  is  the  infinite  sovereignty  of  God  that  he  calls  them  a  people 
'  hat  were  not  a  people,  and  even  mose  who  songht  him  not  he  seeks  out. 
At«  even  in  the  haunta  of  sin  a  man  is  not  safe  from  the  arrows  of  God 
-^I  mean  the  arrows  of  God's  infinite  Ioyo.  God  can  stiU  touch  the  con- 
"kience.  Leviathan,  you  know,  is  wrapped  about  with  scales,  **  shut  up. 
leather  as  with  a  dose  seal";  yet  there  is  a  weak  point  eyen  inleviathan. 
The  cunning  hunter  knows  how  to  find  it  out;  and  there  are  some  men 
H)  sceptical^  so  atheistic,  so  obstinate^  so  pro&ne,  so  abominable,  that 
Qubody  dares  to  come  near  them ;  yet  have  we  known  it — tell  it  to  the 
^laiae  of  soT^reign  grace — the  Lord  has  smitten  even  these  with  his 
j^rot  and  strone;  sword,  and  afterwards  he  has  healed  them  by  his  mighty 
^rsoe.  Never  aespair  of  anybody.  If  salvation  were  man's  work  you 
uiight  despair ;  but  since  it  is  (Jed's  work,  despair  of  none.  The  wretch 
trho  is  the  nearest  approach  to  an  incarnate  devil  may  yet  become  as  an 
4agel  of  God*  Such  is  the  grace  of  God  that,  though  men  make  a  league 
vith  death  and  a  covenant  with  hell,  he  can  break  their  leagues  and  dis- 
amol  their  covenants,  take  the  prey  from  between  the  jaws  of  the  dragon, 
aod  get  to  himself  renown. 

The  Lord  can  wound,  then*  He  can  wound  some  that  have  been 
^tdng  under  the  gospel  for  years  and  have  defied  its  power.  My 
atiowB  have  rattled  against  your  harness,  and  I  have  said,  **  It  is  all  in 
nda;'*  but  I  pray  my  Master  that  one  of  these  days  when  I  am  drawing 
%  bow  at  a  venture,  he  may  be  pleased  to  direct  it  between  that  joint  of 
'^  hamesa  which  I  feared  did  not  exist,  that  little  joint  where  the 
saoolder-piece  does  not  fit  close  to  the  breastplate,  I  have  feared  that 
j(p&  were  encased  as  in  the  scales  of  leviathan,  of  which  we  read,  "  Que 
J  80  near  to  another  that  no  air  can  come  between  them :  they  are 
jijned  one  to  another";  yet  the  Lord  can  send  in  his  arrow,  and  make 


176  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLB  PULPIT. 

the  prond  heart  feel  the  power  of  his  rioriocui  tmth.  The  most  thonglit 
less,  the  most  careless,  the  most  abanaoned  are  still  within  range  of  th( 
LoM*8  bow. 

What  a  very  sweet  side  of  the  truth  is  the  second  part  of  it — ^namely, 
that  he  can  heal.  There  are  some  awful  cases  of  bleeding  wounds  !  ] 
wonder  whetlier  I  have  in  this  audience  any  souls  deq)erately  wounded. 
I  have  known  the  heart  bleed  as  though  it  would  bleed  to  death  beneath 
the  sword  of  conviction.  Some  are  driven  to  despair,  and  have  been  ready 
to  lay  violent  hands  upon  themselves  in  the  bitterness  of  their  souls.  Let 
it  ring  out  like  a  trumpet,  that  these  poor  despairing  ones  may  hear  it, — 
the  Lord  can  heal.  There  is  no  case  so  desperate  but  what  Jehovah-Jesofl 
can  recover  it.  Despair!  thou  must  let  thy  captive  go.  Despondency ! 
thou  must  open  thy  prison-house  when  Jesus  comes.  Has  he  not  come 
forth  fix)m  tne  Father  on  purpose  that  he  may  loose  the  captives  and  say 
to  the  bondaged  ones,  "  Go  ^." 

The  wouncfe  which  God  gives  are  apt  to  fester.  Ton  remember  how  the 
psalmist  said,  **  My  wounds  stink  ana  are  corrupt."  When  there  is  bad 
blood,  we  have  known  men's  wounds  to  become  horrible ;  and  some  souls 
who  have  had  their  conscience  awakened  have  become  a  terror  to  them- 
selves. "  I  cannot  be  saved,"  say  they.  "  I  cannot  pray.  How  should 
such  a  wretch  as  I  am  ever  pray?  I  cannot  hope  for  mercy.  It  would 
be  an  astonishment  to  heaven  and  hell,  too,  if  ever  I  found  mercy.'* 
Listen  to  me,  and  let  thy  own  heart  believe  it ;  thou  mayest  certainly 
recover.  God,  who  doeth  all  things,  and  to  whom  nothing  is  impossible, 
can  heal  thy  wounds  though  they  reek  with  corruption.  If  thou  dost  lie 
at  hell's  gate,  if  thou  seemest  to  be  half  in  Tophet  already,  his  arm  is 
strong  enough  to  help  thee  now.  If  thou  wilt  look  to  Christ  uplifted 
on  the  cross,  there  is  pardon,  life,  -acceptance,  joy,  and  heaven  for  thee, 
even  for  thee.  He  that  wounded  thee  wul  heal  thee,  he  that  hath  broken 
thee  will  bind  thee  up.  He  that  has  killed  thee  will  make  thee  alive. 
Let  thine  ears  take  in  the  gladsome  message  which  I  am  bidden  to  deliver 
thee, — "  I  wound,  and  I  heal." 

Yet  let  me  charge  you  not  to  look  for  a  cure  anywhere  but  to  God  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Shun  the  thought  of  being  healed  except  the  Lord  shall 
heal  thee.  I  dread  lest  a  wounded  soul  should  go  to  a  minister  or  to  a 
priest,  or  to  the  most  religious  person  in  the  world,  and  think  to  get 
healing  of  man.  Thy  wounds  are  meant  to  drive  thee  to  thy  God. 
Seek  him,  and  no  one  else.  To  thy  knees  now  in  thy  private  chamber, 
or  if  thou  hast  not  one,  get  alone  even  in  the  street,  tor  thou  canst  be 
alone  in  a  crowd*;  but  go  to  Ood  with  thy  bleeding  heart.  Tell  him,  "I 
am  a  sinner :  Lord,  I  am  all  but  a  damned  sinner.  I  have  been  such  an 
offender  that  I  scarcely  dare  to  hope ;  but  I  hear  that  thou  canst  heal 
me  and  give  me  comfort.  Oh,  for  Jesu's  sake  be  merciful  to  me.  J 
thank  thee  that  thou  hast  wounded  me ;  it  were  better  for  me  to  be 
wounded  than  to  be  as  indifferent  and  careless  as  I  used  to  be ;  but 
now.  Lord,  do  not  altogether  break  me  to  pieces  and  treat  me  as  an 
enemy.  My  spirit  fails  unless  thou  comfort  me.  Oh,  look  upon  me !" 
If  you  cannot  say  as  much  as  that,  yet  let  your  tears  drop  and  look  up, 
saying,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  Do  but  cry  to  him,  and  you 
shall  find  a  healing ;  for  God  can  heal  you  and  none  else.  Out  upon 
those  who  dream  that  outward  religiousness  can  do  yon  good.    Away, 


THE  ROTAIi  PREROOATITE.  177 

tirajTPith  the  deceivers  who  would  tell  you  that  ihey  can  give  you  pardon. 
So  man  living  can  absolve  his  fellow-Binners  :  the  pretenoe  is  the  super* 
iadve  of  blasphemy.  God  is  in  Christ  Jesus  reconciling  the  world  unto 
\me\f,  not  impnting  their  trespasses  nnto  them,  and  hath  conunitted  to 
liS  thf  word  of  reconciliation,  and  we  are  glad  to  proclaim  that  word, 
£Qd  point  yon  to  the  Lord  Jesus  who  is  exalted  on  nigh  to  give  repent- 
toce  and  remission  of  sins. 

III.  Now  I  come  to  my  third  and  last  point,  and  that  is — ^thb 
Lord  does  wound  and  does  heal.  I  have  two  things  here  to-night. 
I  Till  only  show  them  to  yon,  and  have  done.  First,  /  liave  a  hundU 
ff  motes  which  I  have  seen  shot  at  different  times  fix>m  the  bow  of 
(i(d  so  as  to  wonnd  men.  I  cannot  shoot  them  at  you  just  now,  but  I 
»iO  Aow  them  to  yon. 

I  have  known  him  shoot  this  arrow  at  a  man, — the  arrow  of  continual 
^tkness.  He  has  been  very  good  to  the  sinner,  and  continued  his  kind- 
^»  to  him  for  years,  Augustine  tells  of  one  to  whom  God  waA  so 
^ooderfolly  kind,  and  the  man  was  so  wonderfully  bad,  Uiat  at  last  he 
rrw  astonished  at  6od*s  goodness,  and  since  the  Lord  continued  to  load 
iiim  with  benefits,  he  turned  round  and  cried,  "  Most  benignant  God,  I 
'£  ashamed  of  being  thine  enemy  any  longer.  I  confess  my  sin  and 
^pent  of  it."  How  I  wish  that  this  arrow  would  pierce  your  hearts ! 
ii»  one  which  readily  penetrates  a  noble  mind.  The  more  gross  and 
^imal  natures  do  not  feel  it,  but  where  God  has  left  some  little  spark 
"f  QobOity,  a  man  more  readily  feels,  "  I  cannot  go  on  and  sin  against  a 
^'^*i  80  good."  It  is  a  very  sharp  arrow,  but  it  is  dipped  in  love,  and  it 
*')i:nds  most  sweetly. 

Here  is  another, — (Jod  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day.  Oh,  if 
f  *t  truth  would  go  home  to  some  of  you,  "God  is  angry  with  me,  for 
I  iKve  broken  his  holy  law."  Surely  it  would  cut  you  to  the  quick. 
1*^  not  like  anybody  to  be  angry  with  me ;  but  oh,  to  have  the  Lord 
»' ?7  rith  me !  How  could  I  endure  it  ?  Dear  hearer,  I  hope  you  will 
'*ti  the  smart  of  this  warning.  It  is  very  easy  for  you  to  hear  it  and  for 
t*  tr>  speak  it,  but  if  you  once  feel  it,  it  will  tear  your  heart  and  fill  your 
^M  with  agony. 

Another  arrow — '*  He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  aheady."  You 
^  Dot  to  be  condemned  at  last  merely,  you  are  condemned  now.  You 
^-  not  in  a  state  of  probation ;  you  have  already  been  proved,  and 
H  have  failed,  and  you  are  walking  this  earth  at  this  moment  as  a 
^'Udemned  criminal.  Ah,  if  that  barbed  iron  were  to  enter  your  soul, 
^  'c-old  wound  you  indeed. 

Hefe  is  anotlier  arrow, — "  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  with 
^^  tfie  nations  that  forget  God."  "  These  shall  go  away  into  everlasting 
?"Qi«hment."  Many  have  been  playing  with  that  arrow  lately ;  it  is  an 
'^^f^  tool,  and  he  had  best  beware  who  toys  with  it.  Let  the  Lord  send 
'-ome,  and  it  will  kill  a  man's  proud  hopes  and  vain  presumptions  as 
.''•"klv  as  any  arrow  in  the  quiver  of  the  Almighty. 

Here  is  another, — '*  Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  Your  present  state 
•  ^in  and  danger  is  your  own  fault.-  You  have  brought  it  upon  your- 
*i  and  you  have  nobody  to  blame  but  yourself  that  you  are  a  lost  man. 
•^^  that  will  rankle,  and  pain  the  soul  as  though  a  sword  were  in  the 


178  METRQFOLITjar  TABEBHAOLB  PULPIT. 

And  here  is  another, — ^''Yon  are  dead  in  sin.  Yon  have  destroyed 
yoinrself,  but  yon  cannot  save  yonraelf."  I  haye  seen  a  man  get  that 
into  his  flesh  a  little  way,  and  he  has  raved  with  anger.  He  has  bitten 
his  lips  and  said,  "  I  will  never  hear  that  preacher  again.  Why,  be 
made  out  my  case  to  be  hopeless."  The  man  is  sure  to  come  again. 
He  is  like  a  great  fish  in  a  stream,  with  a  hook  in  his  jaws.  He  will 
draw  out  a  good  deal  of  line,  and  we  will  let  him  have  it»  bat  he  mnst 
come  to  a  stop  before  long  with  that  solemn  trath  to  hold  him.  He 
straggles  hard;  bnt  that  smup  text  is  not  soon  dislodged  from  the  heart 
— '*  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself" 

Tbns  I  might  continue  to  show  yon  a  sample  of  the  weapons  with  which 
God  wounds  men  :  he  hath  his  two^ged  sword,  his  spear,  his  arrows*^ 
his  battle  axe,  and  weapons  of  war.  You  say,  ^'I  do  not  feel  them/' 
No,  and  I  cannot  make  you  feel  them.  I  have  told  you  before  that  it 
is  not  my  arm  that  can  wield  them ;  bot  when  God  is  pleased  to  use 
anj  of  these,  the  people  &11  under  him.  *'  Well,"  says  one,  ^'I  do  not 
think  that  I  shall  be  wounded."  No,  but  I  am  glad  you  are  in  the 
battle,  because  when  the  arrows  are  flying  they  may  strike  you  as  well  as 
anybody  else*  I  have  had  to  deal  with  wounded  ones  that  I  never 
reckoned  upon  seeing  in  such  a  condition.  Oh,  what  gashes  have  I 
seen  in  men  that  had  been  given  to  all  sorts  of  fashionable  sins,  and 
who  had  sneered  at  religion ;  they  have  come  here  at  first  from  the 
most  miserable  motives,  but  they  have  had  to  come  again  and  weep  and 
cry  before  the  Lord  with  broken  hearts.  You  never  know  where  bullets 
may  find  their  billets.  You  who  are  the  servants  of  the  devil  are  on 
dangerous  ground  when  you  come  near  a  faithful  ministiy.  Nay,  I  will 
alter  it,  you  are  on  blessed  ground,  where  the  slain  of  the  Lord  have  been 
many ;  and  where  the  people  of  God  are  earnestly  praying  for  you  now. 
I  know  at  this  moment  they  are  patting  up  the  prayer,  "  I^rd,  send 
the  arrows  home :  send  the  arrows  home."  Their  prayers  prevail  with 
God,  and  he  will  bare  his  arm.  There  is  no  mistake  about  this 
matt^,  he  "  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy,  and  he  will 
have  compassion  on  whom  he  will  have  compassion."  When  he  puts  his 
arm  to  the  work,  who  shall  stand  against  him  ?  He  wiU  do  all  his^ 
pleasure.  Glory  be  to  his  blessed  name,  he  can  wound,  and  he  does* 
wound  according  to  his  eternal  purpose. 

Now  I  will  hold  up  before  you  th$  boiih  of  balm.  When  a  soul  is 
wounded,  the  Lord  applies  his  sacred  surgery  to  the  heart  He  has  healed 
some  of  us.  The  particular  bottle  of  balm  which  he  used  in  healing  me 
is  one  which  I  know  well,  and  shall  never  forget.  This  was  the  label, 
**  Look  unto  me  and  be  yo  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,  for  I  am  God, 
and  beside  me  there  is  none  else."  Why,  do  you  know  ?  I  was  idraid  of 
God  until  I  heard  that  God  was  in  Christ,  and  that  I  was  to  look  to  God 
in  Christ,  and  that  the  ver^  God  whom  I  dreaded  would  save  ma 
That  revdation  came  home  with  divine  power  to  my  soul !  The  preacher 
said, "  Look.  This  is  all  that  is  wanted."  "  There,  he  said, ''  a  fool  can 
look ;  a  little  child  can  look ;  a  half  idiot  can  look ;  a  dying  man  can 
look."  "  Look,"  said  he,  **  and  it  is  done."  Did  I  really  understand 
him — that  I  was  only  to  look  to  Christ  dying  on  the  cross  for  me  and  see 
God  making  an  atonement  for  my  sin  in  the  person  of  his  Son — ^that  I 
was  only  to  look,  and  I  should  live  at  once.     It  was  even  so,  and  I  did 


TBE  BOTAL  PKBBMASIVl.  179 

looL  My  bnrdon  passed  awi^,  amd  from  tdiafc  hour  I  can  say  what 
Cowper  has  so  sweetl j  said  in  the  h jmn : — 

^  £*er  since  bj  fiuth  I  saw  the  stream 
Thj  flowing  wonnds  supplj, 
Redeeming  love  has  been  my  theme, 
And  abaU  be  tiU  I  die.** 

Oh,  what  a  bottle  of  balm  that  is — ^redeeming  love !  How  sweetly  it 
drops  into  the  siml !  The  Lord  shows  the  woanded  man  that  though 
he  is  fiiU  of  sin,  he  can  put  that  sin  away  without  any  violation  of 
JQBtioe  when  the  soni  believes  in  Jesus.  Now  let  the  balm  drop  a 
aunQte.  ''All  we  like  dieep  have  gone  astray :  we  have  turned  everyone 
to  bis  own  way" — that  fact  gives  us  woums.  But  now  "  The  Lord 
hs^  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  na  all :"  no  balm  of  Gilead  was  ever  so 
potent  as  that.  Poor  goil^  sinner,  if  you  will  now  trust  Christy  your 
sin  is  yours  no  longer ;  it  was  laid  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  upon  the 
^k  of  Christy  vour  great  Surety ;  he  was  punished  for  it,  and  he  has 
cast  it  into  the  depths  of  the  sea«    Yon  are  forgiven ;  go  in  peace. 

Here  is  anoihar  drop  of  balmy — ^When  a  man  is  wounded  be  feds  that 
he  cannot  help  himself;  but  then  there  comes  in  this  precious  truth — 
fhat  the  Spirit  of  God  can  do  it.  God  has  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his 
Son,  and  that  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities,  so  that  though  we  know  not 
what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought,  that  Spirit  is  waiting  to  help  us  to 
pray.  0  you  wounded  ones,  may  the  great  Spirit  show  you  at  this  time 
the  person  of  the  dear  Son  of  God — God  and  man.  May  he  show  you 
that  person  wounded,  covered  with  a  bloody  sweat,  and  put  to  death ; 
and  may  he  sweetly  whisper  in  your  ear  to-night,  "  He  was  your  substi- 
tate :  he  bore  that  you  might  never  bear  the  wrath  of  God."  Then  yon 
^ill  say  as  you  go  out  of  Qiis  house,  *'  He  can  heal,  for  he  has  healed 
me.  He  has  made  me  leave  my  despair,  and  even  my  doubts,  behind 
^e.    Xow  wiU  I  sing  unto  my  belovea  a  song : — 

*  Jesus  has  become  at  length 
My  salvation  and  my  strength.'  *' 

So  ha^e  I  pteadied  to  yon  nothing  but  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  I  am 
glad  to  have  him  to  preach  to  you.  Suppose  that  there  is  a  bad  young 
0^  here  at  this  time,  who  hais  left  his  home,  and  run  away  from  his 
&ther.  He  has  done  wrong,  very  wrong :  and,  instead  of  going  to  a 
tender,  loving  Mher  and  saying,  "  Father,  forgive  me,"  he  is  afciid  of 
ponisiunent,  and  therefore  he  has  run  away.  There  is  an  advertisement 
hv  him  in  the  paper,  inviting  him  to  come  home.  Now,  what  has  he  to 
do  to  be  right  with  his  fether  ?  This  poor,  wandering,  wayward,  lost 
W  has  got  among  the  very  scum  of  London,  and  he  is  being  ruined 
and  starved  to  death.  What  must  he  do  ?  Boy,  you  must  go  home  to 
jonr father;  go  home  to  your  father.  He  loves  you;  he  is  pining  for 
jou ;  he  is  grieved  at  heart  about  yon.  Oh,  if  he  saw  you  to-night,  it 
^onld  break  his  heart  to  see  yon  in  your  rags  I  He  wants  you  to  come 
home.  Do  you  not  see  that  it  would  be  very  foolish  for  that  lad  to  say, 
"I  shall  get  into  an  institution,"  or  '* I  shall  try  to  earn  money."  Your 
fether  is  rich,  good,  wise,  and  kind;  the  best  thing  you  can  do  is  to  go 
home  to  vour  fiather.   Going  home  to  your  fether,  au  will  be  right.   Now, 


180  MBTROPOLITAir  TABEBKAOLE  PULPIT. 

take  up  the  parable.  All  of  ns  have  left  onr  father,  and  have  joamejed 
into  a  far  ooantrj.  We  shall  never  get  right  again  exoept  by  going 
back  to  him  from  whom  we  have  gone  astray.  And  Jesus — God  in  Christ 
Jesns — ^is  waiting  to  welcome  us ;  he  is  ^eving  over  us  now.  We  have 
only  to  go  to  him,  for  he  says  that  he  will  never  cast  out  one  that  conies 
to  him.  "  I  do  npt  know  how  he  can  receive  me/'  says  one.  Well,  go 
air^how  and  try  him.  "  1  cannot  pray."  You  can  pray,  dear  friend. 
*•  But  not  properly."  Do  not  try  to  pray  properly.  Pray  your  heart 
out  as  you  can,  and  ask  to  be  helped.  I  know  that  some  poor  souls  are 
in  such  a  state  that  they  would  oe  glad  if  we  would  write  them  oat  a 
prayer.  I  was  talking  only  a  little  while  ago  to  one  in  distress,  and  he 
said  to  me,  "  Oh,  Mr.  Spttrgeon,  you  do  not  know  how  ignorant  we  are> 
and  when  we  are  under  a  sense  of  sin  you  do  not  know  how  foolish  we 
are.  If  you  would  sometimes  put  the  very  words  into  our  moutha  it 
would  do  us  good."  And  I  thought  he  was  right,  because  I  find  the 
Jjord  saying  in  Scripture, "  Take  with  you  words  and  say  ";  and  he  tells 
them  what  to  say. 

Come  now,  poor  soul,  if  you  want  to  find  €k>d,  let  us  pray  a  minate. 
'^  O  God,  save  us,  for  thou  alone  canst  do  it.  Of  thy  great  mercy  heal  our 
wounds,  for  else  we  must  bleed  to  death.  We  cast  ourselves  upon  thy 
promise  in  Chi-ist  Jesus  thy  Son ;  grant  us  now  thy  salvation,  we  beseech 
thee,  for  his  sake.    Amen." 


PoETiON  OP  ScRiPTUEE  READ  BBPORE  Sermou  : — Deuteronomy 

xxxii.  1 — 89. 


Htmnb  from  "Our  Own  Hyun  Book" — 187,  238,  285. 


LETTER  FROM  MR.  SPURGEON. 

Dear  Friends, — I  had  intended  to  be  home  to  preach  on  April  6,  but  as 
dear  friends  at  home  press  me  to  make  the  rest  longer,  I  have  so  &r  yielded  as 
to  wait  here  another  week  ;  and  I  now  propose  to  be  home  on  the  13th  of  April. 
My  knees  are  still  feeble,  but  in  all  other  respects  I  feel  fit  to  return.  More- 
over, I  lone  to  be  preaching  in  my  own  pulpit  among  my  own  people,  and  I 
must  comeliome,  though  I  somewliat  dread  the  cold  weather.  Please  pray  for 
me,  that  I  may  have  an  active  mind  in  a  body  which  will  allow  of  its  full 
exercise,  and  that  the  blessiuff  of  God  may  rest  on  my  future  labours  far  more 
than  on  those  of  past  years.  1  find  that  funds  are  coming  in  very  slowly  for 
the  College,  and  the  Colportage  has  a  pressing  need.  Earnest  fellow-workers 
will  only  need  to  know  diis. 

Yoiurs  to  serve  in  love  for  Jesus*  sake, 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 
Mcntonc,  March  20. 


* 


ax 


THE    THREE    WHAT3. 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON, 

Ck  a  mgkt  tchan  the  Jhbcmade  teat  throvm  open  to  all  comers^  tha  otdinarjf 

hearers  vacating  their  seats  for  the  occasion. 


"The  eyes  of  yonr  nhdentacdiDg;  being  enlightened;  that  ye  may  know  what  is 
tbehopeof  his  calling,  and  what  the  riches  uf  the  ^^lory  of  his  inheritance  in  the 
saiau,  and  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  to  us- ward  who  helieTe,  ao« 
ccidiac  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power,  which  he  wiought  in  Christ,  when  he 
raindaim  from  the  dead,  and  set  him  at  hia  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places.** 

~  i.  18—20. 


You  see  the  text  begins  with  a  personal  experience  \rithin  the  mind  and 
jodgment — ^'  tb^  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  enUghtened."  Every- 
thing  dmends  upon  the  opened  eye :  the  scene  may  be  iair,  and  the  light 
nuy  be  bright,  but  if  the  sight  be  gone  all  is  in  vain.  Zedekiah  had  his 
eyes  put  out  by  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  then  he  was  taken  down  to 
the  imperial  city,  bnt  for  aught  he  could  enjoy  of  all  its  splendour 
be  migot  as  well  have  been  in  a  desert.  There  were  vast  halls  and 
palaces,  and  hanging  gardens  and  a  city  wall  which  was  the  wonder  of  the 
world,  go  that  Babylon  is  called  by  the  prophet  "  the  glory  of  Idngdoms 
and  the  beauty  of  the  Chaldees'  excellency'*;  but  the  blinded  monarch 
l)eheld  nothing  of  all  the  grandeur  of  the  golden  city,  and  to  him  her 
wealth  was  as  though  it  had  not  b^«n.  Thus  is  it  with  us  by  nature, 
we  have  no  apprehension  of  spiritual  things,  no  power  to  discern  eternal 
good,  bnt  our  foolish  heart  is  darkened.  Therefore  the  Lord  must  first 
eoHghten  the  eyes  of  our  understanding,  or  else,  however  precious  the 
Em^  and  however  clearly  it  may  be  stated,  we  shall  never  be  able  to 
apprehend  it. 

I  find  there  is  a  rendering  of  the  text  which  runs  thus,  "  The  eyes  of 
TOUT  heart  being  enlightened,"  and  it  strikes  me  that  this  version  has 
abont  it  the  appearance  of  being  the  correct  one,  because  divine  things  are 
usually  better  seen  by  the  heart  than  by  the  understanding.  There  are  a 
tbousand  things  which  God  has  revealed  which  we  shall  never  imderstand, 
and  yet  we  can  know  them  by  a  loving,  trustful  e3q)erience.  Our  Saviour 
says,  "Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  The  ! 
purifying  of  the  heart  is  the  enlightening  of  the  spiritual  eye.  Strange  ' 
No.  1,466. 


182  METBOPOLITAK  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

as  it  may  seem,  the  true  eye  of  the  renewed  man  is  seated  rather  in  the 
heai*t  than  in  the  head :  holy  affections  enable  ns  to  see,  and  as  far  as 
possible  to  understand  cUvine  things.  I  pray  that  in  each  one  of  us  the 
eyes  of  our  heart  may  be  enhghtened^  that  we  may  know  spiritual  things 
as  they  are  best  known. 

Now,  the  prayer  of  our  text  was  offered  for  Christians — for  converted 
persons,  for  those  who  had  &ith  in  Christ  Jesus  and  love  to  all  the  saints; 
yet  Paul  says  that  he  never  ceased  to  pray  that  their  eyes  might  be 
enlightened.  Tes,  brethren,  he  who  sees  most  needs  to  have  his  eyes 
enlightened  to  see  more,  for  how  little  as  yet  of  the  glory  of  God  have 
any  of  us  beheld !  Even  that  &voured  pilgrim  who  has  been  led  by  the 
shepherds  to  the  top  of  Mount  Clear,  to  stand  there  with  telescopic 
glass  and  gaze  into  the  glories  of  Immanuers  land,  has  yet  only  com- 
menced to  perceive  the  things  which  God  has  prepaied  for  them  that 
love  him.  I  pray  God  that  if  we  do  already  see,  we  may  see  more,  until 
our  eye  shall  be  so  strengthened  that  the  light  of  the  New  Jerusalem 
shall  not  be  too  strong  for  us,  but  amid  the  splendour  of  God  which 
outshines  the  sun  we  shall  find  ourselves  at  home. 

But  if  believers  need  to  have  their  eyes  enlightened,  how  much  more 
must  those  who  are  unconverted.  They  are  altogether  blinded,  and  con- 
sequently their  need  of  enlightenment  is  fer  greater.  They  were  born 
blind,  and  the  god  of  this  world  takes  care  yet  further  to  darken  their 
minds.  Around  them  there  broods  a  seyenfold  midnight,  the  gloom  of 
spiritual  death.  "  They  meet  with  darkness  in  the  daytime,  and  grope 
in  the  noonday  as  in  the  night."  0  blind  eye,  may  Jesus  touch  thee ! 
May  the  Spirit  bring  his  sacred  eye-salve  and  make  thee  see,  and  to- 
night though  it  is  not  ours  to  give  thee  eyes,  we  would  tell  thee  what 
is  to  be  seen,  hoping  that,  peradventure,  wmle  we  give  the  description, 
God  may  give  thee  eyes  with  which  to  verify  our  report.  Perhaps  even 
the  reporting  of  these  things  may  set  thee  longing  for  them,  ana,  when 
thou  hast  but  a  longing,  God  will  hear  thee.  If  that  lon^ins^  be  turned 
into  a  prayer,  and  that  prayer  be  kindled  by  a  spark  of  &ith,  that  longing 
shall  be  the  beginning  of  hght  to  thy  soul,  ana  thou  shalt  see  the  salva- 
tion of  God. 

To-night,  then,  there  are  two  things  we  shall  ask  about,  tohai  things 
are  to  he  seen  and  knoton  according  to  the  text;  and,  secondly,  why  il  is 
our  anxious  desire  that  every  person  here  should  see  and  know  these  thitigs. 

I.  First,  then,  what  is  to  be  seen  and  known  aocordino  to 
THE  TEXT  ?  When  you  heard  me  read  it,  you  must  have  noticed  that 
it  contains  three  "  whats."  "  The  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  en- 
lightened that  ye  may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling,  and  wJuil  the 
riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints,  and  what  the  exceed- 
ing greatness  of  his  power  to  us-ward  who  believe."  Upon  these  thit»e 
"  whats"  I  shall  try  to  speak  to-night,  and  may  the  Holy  Ghost  speak 
through  me  to  all  your  souls. 

Our  first  point  is,  *^What  is  the  hope  of  his  calling V^  A  gi-cat  many 
persons  never  think  about  religion,  because  they  cannot  believe  that 
there  is  much  in  it.  If  they  hjul  half  an  idea  of  what  is  to  be  gained 
by  it  even  now,  and  of  the  unspeakable  blessedness  which  will  come  of  it 
throughout  eternity,  surely  their  own  desire  to  benefit  themselves  would 
incline  thera  diligently  to  consider  it,  even  if  they  went  no  further.    So 


THE  THBES  WHAT&  183 

psomising  a  matter  is  at  least  worth  looking  into,  for  it  would  be  a  great 
pity  to  miss  present  and  eternal  happiness  if  it  can  be  had.  But  no, 
atusy  sappose  it  to  be  a  very  small  and  trifling  thing,  fit  only  for  the 
thoughts  of  priests  and  women,  and  such  weak  folk,  and  so  they  neglect 
it,  dei^ise  it,  aad  look  after  other  business.  To-night,  while  I  try  to  tell 
what  is  the  hope  of  the  Christian  man*s  calling,  I  boldly  claim  your  best 
consideration.  If  the  preacher  may  not  req[uest  it  on  his  own  account  he 
may  assaredly  aak  it  on  the  grouna  that  his  theme  deserves  it.  Perhaps 
while  we  are  speaking  of  the  worth  of  this  hope,  and  you  are  lending  an 
attentiTe  ear,  the  Lord  may  lead  you  to  seek  his  face.  Is  it  not  written 
''Indine  your  ear  and  come  unto  me,  hear  and  your  soul  shall  live"? 
Hany  a  man  has  been  tempted  to  start  upon  a  voyage  by  hearing  much 
of  the  land  to  which  he  sails.  Praise  his  goods  and  you  will  find  the 
merchant  buyers.  Such  is  our  desire  at  this  time :  we  would  so  speak  of 
the  hope  of  our  calling  as  to  allure  those  who  are  eager  after  sweets  to 
taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good. 

The  idea  of  the  text  seems  to  mo  to  be  illustrated  well  by  the 
patriarch  Abraham.  Abraham  was  living  in  his  father's  house  in  Ur  of 
the  Ghaldees  when  a  cfdl  came  to  him.  That  call  came  from  God.  He 
was  to  separate  himself  entirely  and  to  get  away  to  a  land  which  he  had 
never  seen.  What  was  the  hope  of  that  calling  ?  It  was  the  hope  that 
God  would  give  him  a  seed,  and  give  to  that  seed  a  land  to  dwell  in. 
Thus  spake  the  Lord  unto  him :  ''  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation, 
and  I  will  bless  thee,  and  make  thy  name  great;  and  thou  shalt  be  a 
blessing:  and  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse  him  that 
curseth  thee :  and  in  thee  shall  all  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed." 
The  great  nation  which  should  spring  from  him  would  possess  the  land 
in  which  he  was  to  wander  as  a  pilgrim  and  a  stranger,  according  to 
the  word  of  the  Lord — **  For  all  the  land  which  thou  seest,  to  thee  will 
I  give  it^  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever."  For  the  sake  of  that  hope  he  for* 
sook  everything,  and  dwelt  in  teuts,  a  pilgrim  and  a  sojourner  with  God, 
living  entirely  by  fiiith,  but  living  grandly  and  sublimely,  and  thus  be- 
coming the  father  of  all  believers  throughout  all  ages,  greater  than  a 
prince  among  the  sons  of  men.  Now,  there  comes  to  every  man  who  is 
a  true  Christian  a  call  from  God.  We  ^eak  of  it  by  the  name  of 
^effectual  calling."  The  Spirit  of  God  personally  applies  the  truth  of 
Scripture  to  the  heart,  and  makes  the  chosen  man  to  feel  that  it  belongs 
to  him.  The  believer  perceives  that  he  is  separated  from  others  by  the 
sovereign  grace  of  God,  and  that  therefore  he  must  come  out  from  the 
world,  and  no  longer  live  according  to  the  sight  of  the  eyes  and  the 
hearing  of  the  ears,  bat  must  live  by  faith  upon  God,  as  seeing  him  who 
is  invisible  This  makes  the  believer  very  different  from  the  rest  of 
mankind.  Those  who  walk  by  sight  do  not  imderstand  him.  They 
geneially  misrepresent  him,  and  frequently  they  hate  him,  but  he  is  con- 
tent to  be  nnluiown,  for  he  remembers  it  is  written,  *'  Ye  are  dead,  and 
your  life  is  hid  witti  Christ  in  God."  "  Therefore  the  world  knoweth  us 
not  because  it  knew  him  not." 

But  what  is  the  vtroepeat  which  leads  the  believer  to  this  life  ?  What  is 
Uie  hope  of  his  cauing  ?  Brethren,  let  me  describe  the  hope  of  those  of 
^  who  have  come  out  to  walk  by  fiiith  in  Christ  Jesos.  We  have  already 
obtained  enough  abundwitly  to  reward  us  for  obedience  to  the  call,  ana 


iSi  XETBOPOLITAN  TABERNAOUB  PULPIT. 

1  even  if  nothing  were  shut  np  in  the  closed  hand  of  Hope,  her  open  hand 
J  has  greatly  enriched  ns.  Christian  man,  jou  have  in  possession  ahieadj 
the  forgiveness  of  yonr  sin,  acceptance  in  Christ,  adoption  into  the  divine 
fomily,  and  the  nature,  rank,  and  rights  of  a  child  of  God.  Yon  already 
possess  that  which  makes  yon  amongst  the  happiest  of  mankind,  and 
often  do  yon  feel  that  if  it  should  turn  out  that  there  is  no  hereafter  and 
if  you  should  die  like  a  dog,  yet  still  your  &ith  in  God  has  given  yon 
such  consolation  and  such  strength,  such  peace  and  such  joy  that  yoa 
would  bless  God  that  ever  you  had  it.  Our  hop  has  not  injured  ns 
either  as  to  character  or  to  happiness,  and  even  if  it  turned  out  to  be 
false  we  are  at  least  as  well  off  as  the  unbeliever.  Still  our  main  pos- 
session lies  in  hope.  We  carry  a  bag  of  spending  money  in  our  hands, 
but  the  bulk  of  our  wealth  is  deposited  in  the  Smk  of  Hope.  What 
then  is  the  Christian's  hope  ? 

Well,  first,  he  hopes  and  believes  that  he  shall  be  under  divine  pro- 
tection for  ever  ana  ever,  that  he  shall  be  the  ol^'ect  of  divine  love  time 
out  of  mind,  and  when  time  shall  be  no  more.  He  hopes  that  all  things 
shall  work  together  for  his  good  in  the  future  as  he  perceives  they  have 
done  in  the  past,  and  as  he  is  persuaded  they  are  doing  now.  He  expects 
a  stormy  voyage,  but  because  Christ  is  at  the  helm  he  hopes  to  come  to 
die  Sedr  havens  at  the  last.  He  expects  to  be  tempted,  but  he  hopes  to 
be  upheld.  He  expects  to  be  slandered,  but  he  hopes  to  be  cleared.  He 
expects  to  be  tried,  but  he  hopes  to  triumph.  Sustained  by  this  hope 
he  dreads  no  labours  and  fears  no  difficulties. 

**  He  holds  no  parley  with  unmanly  fean, 
Where  duty  oids  he  confidently  steers, 
Faces  a  thousand  dangers  at  her  call, 
And,  hoping  in  his  God,  surmounts  iiiem  all.** 

His  hope  is  that  all  through  life,  whether  that  be  long  or  short  (and  he 
has  not  much  care  about  the  number  of  his  years),  underneath  him  will 
be  the  everlasting  arms.  He  hopes  that  the  Lord  will  be  his  shepherd^ 
and  he  shall  not  want.  He  hopes  that  goodness  and  mercy  will  follow 
him  all  the  days  of  his  life.  Hence  he  is  not  afraid  to  die,  for  then  he 
expects  to  come  into  actualpossession  of  his  I  est  possessions.  He  looks 
for  his  best  thines  last.  He  believes  that  when  it  is  time  for  him  to 
depart,  Jesus  wiU  come  and  meet  him,  and  the  thought  of  that  meeting 
puts  aside  all  idea  of  the  gpim  terrors  of  the  grave.  His  hope  leaps  over 
the  grave,  and  lands  him  m  a  glorious  resurrection.  Does  not  the  hope 
of  our  calling  open  grandly  ? 

We  hope  also,  and  have  good  ground  for  it,  that  after  death  at  the  day 
of  judgment  we  shall  have,  as  we  believe  we  have  now,  a  perfect  justifica- 
tion. A  dread  assize  will  be  held.  Upon  a  great  white  throne  reflecting 
all  things,  and  brilliant  with  its  purity,  Jesus  the  Judge  of  all  will  sit^ 
and  he  shall  separate  the  mass  of  mankind  into  two  portions  as  a  shep-^ 
herd  divides  the  sheep  from  the  eoats.  We  know  that  in  that  day  he 
will  discern  those  who  believed  in  him  and  trusted  him  and  obeyed  him 
and  sought  to  be  like  him,  and  we  hope  that  we  shall  be  of  that  blessed 
number.  For  us  there  shall  be  no  sentence  of  condemnation,  for  it  is 
written,  ''There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in 
Christ  Jesus."    We  hope  for  a  sentence  of  acquittal^  and  we  therefore 


THE  TUBKB  WHATS.  185 

diaflenge  the  jndgment  which  others  dread.  Clothed  with  a  righteous- 
nea  diTine  we  await  with  expectation  the  day  which  shall  make  the 
impenitent  wish  that  they  had  never  heen  bom.  Hope  takes  into  her 
consideration  the  most  dreaded  of  all  eyents,  and  weaves  it  into  her 
song.  The  end  of  all  things  is  not  the  end  of  hope.  Is  not  this  brave 
hoping  ?  The  hope  of  a  man  who  sings  on  for  ever, — ^living  in  the  circle 
of  divine  love,  dying  beneath  the  protection  of  divine  power,  and  abiding 
in  the  jndgment  justified  by  divine  justice :  accepted  m  the  beloved,  ana 
beloved  of  the  Father. 

What  else  hope  we  for  ?  We  hope  for  absolute  perfection.  The  Ood 
who  has  changed  our  hearts  will  continue  the  good  work  of  sanctifica- 
lion  till  he  £uas  taken  every  sin  out  of  us,  every  desire  for  sin,  every 
poflsibility  of  sin.  We  expect  him  to  renew  our  minds  and  prevent  our 
making  so  many  mistakes  in  judgment.  We  expect  him  to  renew  our 
hmrts  that  they  may  be  wholly  set  on  divine  and  heavenly  things.  We 
expect  him  to  renew  our  entire  spirit  till  when  the  prince  of  this  world 
comes  he  shall  find  nothing  in  us — ^no  tinder  for  lus  sparks,  no  corruption 
in  which  to  sow  his  evil  seed.  We  hope  to  be  perrect,  even  as  God  is 
perfect.  As  Adam,  when  he  came  from  his  Maker's  hand,  so  shall  we 
be,  and  something  more,  for  we  shall  possess  a  life  in  Christ  which  our 
anfaUen  progenitor  knew  not  in  Paramse. 

We  hope,  also,  that  this  body  of  ours  will  be  perfected.  It  will  lie  in 
the  grave  and  moulder  into  dust,  unless  our  Lord  Jesus  should  come 
before  our  death  hour.  Of  this  we  make  small  account,  having  no  very 
intense  desire  to  avoid  the  grave  wherein  our  glorious  Redeemer  lay. 
We  have  nothing  to  lose,  but  much  to  gain,  by  dying,  for  therein  we  put 
off  onr  mortality  that  at  the  resurrection  we  may  put  on  immortality. 

"  Corruption,  earth,  and  worms 

Shall  but  refine  this  flesh. 
Till  when  the  Lord  our  Saviour  comes 

We  put  it  on  afresh.*' 

We  expect  that  this  our  body  shall  be  raised — changed,  but  still  the  same 
as  to  identity.  For  us  is  the  promise  of  the  Scripture— *'  I  will  ransom 
them  from  the  power  of  the  grave ;  I  will  redeem  them  from  death." 
When  our  body  awakes,  though  sown'  in  corruption  it  shall  be  raised  in 
incorruption,  though  sown  in  weakness  it  shall  be  raised  in  power,  though 
sown  a  body  only  fit  for  the  soul  it  shall  be  raised  a  body  meet  for  our 
Mghest  nature,  even  for  our  spirit.  As  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the 
earthy  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.  Our  body  shall  be 
fiuhioned  like  unto  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  himself.  We  are  looking 
Ibrwaid  to  a  time  when  we  shall  have  done  with  aches  and  pains,  with 
weariness  and  decay,  with  old  age  and  its  infirmities,  and  with  all  liability 
to  death.  We  expect  perpetual  youth  to  be  our  portion,  and  that  joy 
shall  thrill  through  every  nerve  and  sinew  of  our  fr^me,  which  now,  alas, 
80  often  becomes  the  theatre  of  agony.  Yes,  this  is  our  hope,  perfection 
of  qnrit,  soul,  and  body ;  for  Chrut  has  redeemed  the  whole,  and  he  will 
have  Uie  whole  to  be  his  inheritance,  and  in  the  whole  of  our  manhood 
his  glorious  image  shall  be  reflected  for  ever. 

What  else  is  tne  hope  of  our  calling  ?  Why,  that  being  thus  cleared 
in  jndgment  and  made  absolutely  perfect,  we  shall  for  ever — ^for  eternal 


186  METKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

duration  is  the  glory  of  our  herit^re — ^we  shall  for  ever  enjoy  infinflje 
happiness.  We  do  not  know  what  form  the  joys  of  eternity  will  take» 
bat  they  will  take  snch  form  as  shall  make  ns  the  most  happy.  We  shall 
have  heaven's  best,  yea  God's  best,  and  what  that  is  who  among  us  can 
guess,  though  he  use  all  his  knowledge  and  give  the  reins  to  his  expect- 
ancy ?  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  entered  into 
the  heart  of  man  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love 
him ;  but  he  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit,"  and,  as  far  as 
we  understand  that  revelation  we  are  taught  by  it  that  we  shall  enter  into 
a  state  of  complete  rest  and  perfect  peace ;  a  state  of  holy  delight,  and  of 
serene  and  blissful  activity ;  a  state  of  perfect  praise ;  a  state  <k  satis- 
faction ;  a  state,  probably,  of  progress,  but  still  or  completeness  at  evety 
inch  of  the  road ;  a  state  in  which  we  shall  be  as  happy  as  we  are  capabte 
of  being,  every  vessel,  little  or  great,  being  filled  to  the  brim.  We  shall 
be  supremely  blessed,  for  at  the  right  hand  of  God  there  are  pleasures  for 
evermore.    This  is  the  hope  of  our  calling. 

Nor  even  now  have  we  come  to  an  end,  for  something  more  yet  r^- 
mains.  You  say,  "  Can  more  be  ?"  Yes,  we  expect  for  ever  to  be  in  a 
condition  of  power,  and  honour,  and  relationship  to  God.  We  hope  to 
be  brought  so  near  to  God  that  all  the  universe  shall  distinctly  see  that 
we  are  courtiers  of  the  palace  of  the  great  King,  yea,  princes  of  the  blood 
royal  of  the  skies.  We  shall  be  very  near  to  God,  for  we  shi^  be 
with  Jesus  where  he  is,  and  sit  upon  his  throne.  We  shall  serve  our  God, 
and  see  his  face  while  we  serve  him ;  and  his  glory  will  be  reflected 
upon  us  and  ^m  ns,  and  we  shall  be  his  dear  sons  and  daughters  in 
Christ  Jesus  for  ever  and  ever.  There  is  not  an  angel  in  heaven  with 
whom  the  meanest  saint  might  wish  to  change  estates,  for  though  the 
angels  excel  us  now,  we  shall  certainly  excel  them  in  the  world  to  come : 
we  shall  be  nearer  the  eternal  throne  than  any  one  of  them,  inasmuch  as 
Christ  Jesus  is  our  brother  and  not  the  brother  of  angels.  He  is  God- 
and-man  in  one  person,  and  there  was  never  God  and  angel  in  like  union. 
We  shall  be  next  to  the  Creator — ^let  us  speak  it  with  bated  breath  but 
leaping  heart — ^we  shall  be  next  to  the  eternal  God,  one  with  his  only- 
begotten  Son,  who  is  one  with  himself    This  is  the  hope  of  our  calling. 

Oh,  sirs,  is  not  this  worth  the  having  ?  Is  not  this  worth  striving  for  ? 
When  you  count  the  cost,  what  cost  is  worth  the  counting  ?  Might  not 
a  man  for  this  lay  down  all  that  he  has,  yea,  and  his  lite  also,  to  ke^ 
this  pearl  of  exceeding  price  ?  And  what  if  you  should  miss  it  ?  What^ 
if  you  shouki  miss  it  ?  What,  if  it  could  be  proven,  as  it  never  will  be, 
that  there  are  no  pains  of  hell  and  no  eternal  wrath,  yet  is  not  this 
enough — to  have  lost  this  immortality  of  glory,  this  immortality  of  honour, 
and  of  likeness  to  God  ?  This  pain  of  loss,  may  none  of  us  ever  inour 
it :  for  it  is  hell  to  lose  heaven,  it  is  infinite  misery  to  miss  infinite  felicity 
To  be  within  an  inch  of  an  immortality  of  bliss  and  honour,  and  yet  to 
let  it  slip  by,  will  not  this  be  an  endless  torment  to  the  soul  ?  To  clutch 
the  pleasures  of  an  hour,  all  earth^tained  as  they  are,  shall  we  renonnoe 
the  ecstacies  of  eternity?  To  snatch  at  bubbles  which  break  ere  we  can 
grasp  them,  shall  we  let  unfading  glories  go  ?  For  the  mere  sake  of 
dwelling  at  eaae  by  escaping  thought  shall  we  let  boundless  blessings  TtM. 
by  us,  counting  ourselves  unworthy  of  them,  and  so  losing  them?  I  do 
pray  that  you  may  know  *^  what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling,"  and  that  when 


THE  THEEE  WHATS.  187 

joa  know  it  yon  may  cry,  '*  I  will  have  it.  If  it  is  to  be  had,  by  Gtod's 
grace,  I  will  have  it  now."    So  may  it  be,  for  Christ's  sake. 

Aiid  now  I  tarn  to  the  second  **  what "  of  the  text,  and  that  is  more 
marrellons  still.  I  am  snre  I  cannot  preach  the  text  out,  it  is  too  gr<^At 
for  me ;  bnt  here  it  is — "  That  ye  may  know  ivMt  are  the  riches  of  the 
glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints,** 

ULaxk  well  that  God's  people  are  by  ^ce  made  to  be  his  saints,  his 
select,  his  holy  ones,  and  then  they  arc  viewed  as  his  inheritance.  The 
whole  world  is  God's.  The  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  and  all  lands  and 
Beas  are  his,  and  yonder  starry  worlds  which  in  profusion  are  sown  in 
Fpace  are  all  his,  but  he  deigns  to  call  sanctified  men  and  women  his  in- 
heritance in  a  special  sense.  They  are  his  peculiar  treasure,  his  crown- 
jewels,  dear  and  precious  to  him.  **  The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people, 
Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance,'*  I  want  yon  to  think  of  this  grand 
truth,  because  practical  results  flow  from  it.  If  you  and  I  arc  believers 
in  Jcsos  we  are  God's  inheritance,  and  the  Lord  has  what  the  apostle 
calls  **  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints."  Bnt 
bow  can  God  make  riches  out  of  poor  men  and  women?  They  are 
behevers  in  Jesus,  but  what  is  there  in  them  that  he  counts  to  be  riches — 
lichea  of  glory,  too  ? 

We  answer,  first,  he  has  spent  riches  of  love  upon  them,  for  he  loves 
them,  poor  as  they  axe,  and  sick  and  sorry  as  they  often  are.  He  loved 
them  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  worid :  and  you  know  how  precious 
a  thing  becomes  when  you  love  it.  It  is  a  beloved  keepsake,  and  you 
wonid  not  part  with  it  for  a  mint  of  gold.  It  may  have  little  intrinsic 
value,  but  if  you  have  long  set  your  heart  upon  it  how  dear  it  becomes 
to  vou.  God  has  loved  his  people  so  long  and  so  intensely,  with  such  an 
nuDonnded  love,  that  there  is  a  wealth  in  them  to  his  heart.  Oh,  that 
we  knew  something  of  *'  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the 
saints"  as  measured  by  the  gauge  of  love. 

Moreover,  the  Lord  has  spent  a  wealth  of  wisdom  on  his  saints.  A 
material  may  be  almost  valueless  at  first,  but  when  a  wise  man  has  exer- 
cised his  thought  and  skill  upon  it,  the  value  may  be  enhanced  a 
thousaud-fold.  But  God  has  thought  of  his  saints  for  ever.  Eternal 
wisdom  found  her  delights  with  the  sons  of  men  and  occupied  herself  on 
their  behalf  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  "  How  precious  also  are 
thy  thoughts  unto  me,  0  God,  how  great  is  the  sum  of  them  ! "  God's 
wisdom  has  exhibited  itself  at  its  lull  in  the  plan  of  redemption.  I 
scarcely  hear  of  his  deliberating  for  any  purpose  except  for  the  salvation 
of  his  people,  but  in  that  matter  we  continually  read  of  **  the  counsel  of 
his  wiU,"  to  show  us  that,  spealcing  after  the  manner  of  man,  the  Lord 
has  reasoned  within  himself  how  best  to  save  liis  own  peoj^le.  His 
thoughts  of  wisdom  and  prudence  have  been  exercised  upon  his  saints, 
and  hence  it  is  that  there  is  a  riches  of  glory  about  them. 

What  is  more,  when  the  riches  of  his  love,  and  of  his  wisdom,  had  been 
expended  it  came  to  pass  that  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  spend  a 
Kfe  of  suffering  upon  them.  Look  ye  to  the  glorious  landscapes  of  rock 
and  hill,  and  dale  and  mountain ;  turn  your  eye  from  grassy  slope  to 
snowy  summit  sparkling  in  the  sun,  and  while  ye  admire  all  things  re- 
memb^  that  God  hath  costlier  works  than  these.  None  of  these  cost 
the  Lord  an  incarnation  and  a  death.    Look,  if  ye  will,  to  all  the*majcstic 


188  METROPOLITAH  TABEaNACLE  PULPIT. 

halls  of  heayea,  where  the  lamps  of  glory  are  lit  with  supernal  splendour, 
but  neither  angel»  nor  cherubim,  nor  seraphim  cost  their  Lord  a  bloody 
sweat.  Then  look  you  at  his  people;  view  "his  inheritance  in  the 
saints/'  for  it  is  there  that  the  Son  of  God,  taking  upon  himself  human 
nature,  sighed  and  groaned  and  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  and  felt  the 
agonies  of  death.  As  the  Lord  looks  over  all  that  he  has  made  he  sees 
nothing  that  has  cost  him  suffering  and  death  till  he  comes  to  his  people. 
Jesus  knows  what  the  saints  cost  him.  He  estimates  them  at  a  rate 
usual  among  men,  for  men  say,  "  The  price  is  what  it  will  fetch,"  and 
Jesus  knows  what  his  people  fetched  when  he  redeemed  them  by  giving 
himself  for  them.  Measured  by  that  standard  God  hath  indeed  riches  of 
glory  in  his  inheritance  in  the  saints. 

Ajid  then  there  comes  great  glory  to  God  from  the  workmanship  which 
heputs  into  his  people.  When  he  made  the  world  it  was  with  a  voice. 
*^  He  spake,  and  it  was  done."  When  he  made  the  things  that  are  he  had 
but  to  will  and  they  stood  forth,  but  in  the  making  of  a  Christian  it  needs 
the  labour  of  the  Godhead :  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  must  all  work  to 
create  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  Father  must  beget,  the  Son 
must  redeem,  the  Spirit  must  regenerate;  and  when  this  is  done  the  €rod- 
head's  omnipotence  must  be  put  forth  to  keep  a  Cliristian  alive,  and  to 
perfect  him,  and  present  him  "  faultless  befoi*e  the  presence  of  God  with 
exceeding  joy."  An  artisan  can  put  into  a  small  piece  of  iron,  of  no 
worth  at  all,  so  much  labour  that  it  shall  be  valued  at  scores  of  pounds, 
and  the  Triune  God  can  expend  so  much  workmanship  upon  our  poor 
nature  that  a  man  shall  be  more  precious  than  the  gold  of  Ophir. 
Valued  thus,  the  Lord  may  well  speak  of  "  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his 
inheritance  in  the  saints." 

Now,  as  I  want  if  I  can  to  lead  you  into  a  sense  of  this  glory  for  a 
minute,  I  should  like  you  to  accompany  me  while  I  speak  somewhat 
carefully  but  yet  enthusiastically  about  what  the  Christian  becomes 
when  God  has  perfected  his  work  upon  him. 

Notice,  then,  that  when  at  the  last  the  believer  shall  have  been  perfected 
by  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  as  he  will  be,  man  will  be  an  extraordinary 
creature.  Look  ye.  God  has  made  matter,  and  upon  matter  has  im- 
pressed his  will,  and  from  the  tiniest  drop  to  the  mightiest  orb,  matter 
never  disob^s  the  law  which  God  imposes  upon  it.  This  is  a  great 
triumph.  CSill  it  "  the  law  of  gravitation,"  or  what  you  will,  it  is  quite 
certain  that  all  inanimate  nature  is  put  under  law  by  the  Most  High  and 
that  it  never  rebels.  Huge  as  this  great  universe  is,  God  has  as  complete 
power  over  it,  as  you  have  over  the  ball  which  you  toss  in  your  hand. 
This  is  glorious,  but  still  it  is  small  glory  compared  with  that  which  God 
obtains  from  his  people  when  they  arrive  at  heaven,  for  they  will  not  be 
mere  dead,  inert  matter  governed  by  laws,  but  thcv  will  be  full  of  life 
and  moral  fi-eedom,  and  yet  they  will  be  as  completely  subject  to  the 
divine  mind  as  are  the  atoms  of  matter.  This  will  be  an  achievement 
indeed — to  have  produced  free  agents  which  will  be  under  no  control  of 
force,  but  perfectly  at  liberty,  and  yet  will  be  for  ever  absolutely  obedient 
to  the  divine  will. 

Listen  again.  The  perfected  saints  will  be  creatures  of  a  very  peculiar 
form,  for  they  will  not  be  pure  spirit,  dissociated  from  matter.  I  undor- 
stand  yonder  spirits  berore  tiie  throne  standing  in  their  obedience. 


THE  THBES  WHATS.  189 

beeanse  they  haye  no  materialism  to  hamper  them  and  drag  them  down. 
Isgels  are  spirits  without  material  bodies,  and  they  obey  God,  hearken- 
ing to  his  commandments ;  but  a  perfected  saint  is  a  creature  in  which 
de  material  is  linked  with  the  spiritual.  Such  are  we  now,  and  I  sup- 
p-jse,  in  a  measare,  such  shall  we  abide,  and  yet  there  will  be  no  sin  in 
UN  no  violation  of  the  divine  command.  Man  is  a  strange  mixtare. 
Be  is  next  akin  to  Deity,  and  jet  he  is  brother  to  the  worm.  We  are 
j«rtakeTs  of  the  divine  nature,  and  the  children  of  Ood ;  and  yet  as  to 
•ar  bodies  we  are  linked  to  rocks  and  stones,  and  grosser  things.  Man 
renewed  by  grace  touches  the  centre  in  Christ  Jesus,  but  being  still  man 
^  sweeps  the  circumference  of  creatureship,  and  includes  within  him* 
^If  a  summary  of  tiie  whole  creation.  He  nas  been  called  a  microcosm, 
or  a  little  world,  and  so  indeed  he  is.  Such  a  creature  Crod  is  now 
perfecting.  A  being  in  whom  dust  and  Deity  each  own  a  kindred. 
fech  a  being,  purified  from  taint  of  evil,  shall  greatly  glorify  God. 

Think,  again,  dear  friends.     There  once  stood  a  bright  spirit  in 

^Ten,  leader  of  the  angels,  but  the  place  was  too  high  for  him,  and  the 

^  of  the  morning  fell  from  heaven  and  dragged  others  with  him.    God 

is  making,  by  his  grace,  beings  who  will  stand  next  his  throne,  but  will 

J^eniain  reverently  loyal  for  ever.    They  will  be  peers  in  his  kingdom, 

Wt  they  will  never  lie  proud  or  ambitious.    We,  my  brethren,  though  in 

^  possession  of  our  free  agency,  shall  never  fall  from  our  eternal  glory^ 

bat  shall  be  faithfril  for  ever.    We  shall  have  passed  through  such  an 

^rience  of  gin,  we  shall  so  intensely  feel  our  indebtedness  to  grace,  we 

^80  fervently  love  the  dear  Bedeemer,  that  we  shall  cast  onr  crowns 

^  his  feet,  and  we  shall  ascribe  our  joy  to  him  alone,  and  so  shall  never 

^^  of  revolting  from  him.    God  is  thus  making  bein^  whom  it  will 

w  safe  to  exalt  to  honours  so  near  his  own :  wUl  not  this  be  a  triumph 

^  power  and  goodness?    Can  you  think  of  it,  that  yon  will  be  one  of 

wch  favoured  creatures,  if  indeed  you  are  a  believer  ? 

I^^^eae  beings  will  have  known  evil.  Think  of  that  The  nnfallen 
^Is  have  never  actually  known  evil,  but  in  restored  man  shall  be  fulfilled 
^devil's  lie  made  into  God's  truth, — ^''Ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing 
g^  and  evil."  They  shall  hate  evil  as  the  burnt  child  dreads  the  fiie, 
^  they  shall  love  righteousness  because  by  righteousness  they  have 
^n  saved,  and  in  righteousness  they  have  been  created  anew.  How 
^derful  will  that  creature  be  which  has  known  sin,  and  remains  a 
^  Agent,  and  yet  will  never  yield  to  folly,  but  abide  for  ever  in  holiness, 
W  by  bonds  of  love.  Oh,  when  I  think  of  the  destiny  of  a  child  of 
^f  my  eyes  sparkle,  bnt  my  tongue  refuses  to  utter  what  I  think 
^J^  a  being  art  thou,  0  man  I  What  art  thou  that  God  should  visit 
uiee?  He  has  made  thee  "  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,"  but  in  Christ 
^^B  he  has  crowned  thee  with  glory  and  honour,  and  given  thee 
^niinion  over  all  the  works  of  his  hands,  yea,  in  Ghrist  he  has  raised 
uiee  up  and  made  thee  to  sit  with  him  in  the  heavenly  places,  far  above 

KQdpalities  and  powers,  and  thy  time  to  reign  and  triumph  for  ever  is 
^  at  hand.    How  glorious  is  God  in  his  people  I    God  in  Ghrist 
'    '^^a,  seen  in  the  church,  who  is  like  unto  thee  ? 

^ow,  the  point  is,  that  if  this  be  the  riches  of  God's  glory  in  his  in- 

!^tanoe  in  the  saints,  you  may  read  it  in  another  way,  and  say,  **  This 

]     ^  the  riches  of  onr  inheritance  too,  for  what  shall  we  be  if  God  is  to  have 


190  HETBOPOLITAN  TABB&NAOLB  PULPIT. 

US  for  an  inheritance  ?"    Will  yon  miss  it  ?    Will  you  miss  it  ?    Will 
you  miss  it  ?    If  this  be  a  dream,  I  could  wish  to  die  rather  than  have 
the  illusion  dispelled.    But  it  is  fact^  as  God's  word  is  true.    Will  yoix 
miss  it,  then  ?    Oh,  if  there  were  crowns  to  be  scrambled  for,  most 
men  are  ambitious  enough  to  seek  for  one,  though  it  might  be  a  curse 
to  them.    If  there  be  gold,  or  if  there  be  &me,  men  have  but  to  hear 
the  chink  of  the  metal  or  the  blast  of  the  trumpet,  and  many  stir  them- 
selres  to  win ;  but  here  is  honour,  and  glory,  and  immortaUty  in  Ghiist, 
and  it  is  to  be  had  for  the  asking  ;  it  is  to  be  had  by  simply  believing  and 
trusting  in  Jesus  Christ, — ^Will  you  not  have  it  ?    Oh,  false  hand  that  is 
not  stretched  out  to  reoeiye  it !    Oh,  &l6e  heart  that  does  not  pray  for 
it !    God  grant  you  to  know  what  is  the  ''  riches  of  his  inheritance  in 
the  saints,''  that  you  may  seek  to  be  a  part  in  that  inheritance  and  seek 
it  now. 

Now,  the  third  ^'what":  *^What  is  the  exceedmg  greatness  of  his  power 
to  us-'Ward  who  believe,  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power , 
which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  set 
him  at  his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places.**  I  thought  I  heard 
somebody  saying,  "  Woe  is  me  I  Woe  is  me  I  X  hear  of  what  man  may 
be,  I  hear  of  what  God  may  make  of  him,  but  woe  is  me ;  it  will  never 
come  to  my  lot.  I  am  so  weak,  so  fickle,  so  irresolute,  so  frail.  Woe  is 
me ;  I  am  undone.  I  have  no  strength."  Now,  the  third  '^  what "  is 
this :  "  that  ye  may  know  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power 
to  US-ward,  who  believe." 

Now,  learn  ye  this  and  know  it — that  in  the  conversion,  preservation, 
and  salvation  of  any  one  person  God  exhibits  as  great  power  as  he 
manifested  when  he  raised  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead  and  set  him  at  his 
own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places.    The  salvation  of  no  man  in  the 
world  is  by  his  own  streugth.    It  is  by  the  power  of  God, "  for  we  are  his 
workmanship."    This  iiBM)t  should  greatly  reneve  you  who  are  discouraged : 
the  thing  is  impossible  with  you,  but  it  is  not  impossible,  or  even  hard, 
with  God.    He  that  has  wrought  lis  to  the  selfiiame  thing  is  God,  and  he 
is  quite  as  able  to  work  it  in  yon,  my  dear  hearer,  as  to  work  it  in  the 
apostle  Paul  himself.    God  can  do  all  things.    Now,  when  our  Lord  Jesus 
lay  in  the  tomb  he  was  dead,  but  God  quickened  him.    Jesns  was  im- 
prisoned in  the  sepulchre,  and  the  stone  at  the  grave's  mouth  was  sealed 
and  guarded;   but  the  stone  was  rolled  away  and  the  guards  were 
affrighted,  and  the  Lord  of  life  rose  from  among  the  dead.    Every  sinner 
is  shut  up  in  the  tomb  of  sin  by  evil  habit,  but  Christ  can  roll  away  Uie 
stone,  and  the  sinner  can  come  forth  a  hving  man.    Our  Lordcontinaed 
on  earth  among  men  for  several  days  ;  but,  despite  human  enmity,  no 
man  hurt  him,  for  he  had  received  a  life  ana  a  glory  which  they 
could  not  approach.    The  saints  also  abide  here  among  men,  and  many 
seek  to  destroy  them,  but  God  has  given  them  a  new  life,  which  can 
never  be  destroyed,  for  he  hath  hedged  it  about  from  all  its  adversaries. 
All  the  powers  of  darkness  fought  against  the  Lord  Jesus  Chiist,  but  yet 
through  the  power  of  Qoi  he  conquered  them  all.    I  think  I  see  lum 
now  ascending  up  on  high  leading  captivity  captive  in  the  power  of 
God.    So,  my  brother,  you  will  be  opposed  by  the  powers  of  darkness, 
and  by  your  own  evil  heart ;  but  you  shall  conquer,  for  God  will  put  forth 
the  same  power  in  you  which  he  manifested  in  his  dear  Son,  and  you,  U^ 


THE  THBBB  WHATS.  191 

M  lead  captivity  captive.  I  see  the  Lord  Jesus  entering  the  pearly 
gates  and  dimbing  to  his  throne,  and  there  he  sits,  and  none  can  pluck 
Mm  down :  and  yon,  too,  believing  in  Jesus,  shall  have  the  same  power 
to  tnsA  down  all  jour  foes,  your  sins,  your  temptations,  till  you  shall 
rise  aad  sit  where  Jesus  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  The  very  same 
power  which  raised  Christ  is  waiting  to  raise  the  drunkard  from  his 
dnmkenneas,  to  raise  the  thief  from  his  dishonesty,  to  raise  the  Pharisee 
from  his  self-righteousness,  to  raise  the  Sadduoee  from  his  unbeliefl  God 
lias  power  amon^  the  sons  of  men,  and  this  power  he  puts  forth  in 
nakuig  them  to  be  a  people  that  shall  show  forth  his  praise.  Oh,  that 
joa  knew  whait  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  to  us- ward  who 
beiiere,  becaoae  then  you  woula  fling  away  despair.  There  remains 
nothing  for  yoa  in  this  case  but  to  submit  to  the  divine  power.  God 
will  work  in  you ;  be  willing  to  be  worked  upon.  0,  Spirit  of  the  Lord, 
vork  in  our  hearers  this  good  will.  Drop  yourselves  like  plastic  clay,  at 
the  potter's  feet»  and  he  will  put  you  on  the  wheel  and  mould  you  at 
^  pleasure.  Be  willing,  it  is  idl  ne  asks  you ;  be  trustful,  it  is  all  his 
^^  requires  of  you,  and  indeed,  both  will  and  trust  he  gives  you. 
"If  ye  be  willing  and  obedient  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land."  Be 
iniling  to  let  go  the  sin  which  ruins  you,  be  willing  to  learn  the  truth 
vhidi  will  renew  you ;  be  willing  to  sit  at  Jesus*  feet,  be  willing  to  accept 
a  finished  salvation  at  his  hands ;  and  all  the  power  that  is  wanted  to 
^  you  from  this  place  to  the  starry  gates  of  heaven  is  waiting  to  be 
shed  upon  yon.  God  give  you  to  know  this,  and  so  to  rest  in  Jesus  and 
be  flayed. 

n.  The  last  word  is  to  be  upon  the  second  head :  why  we  wish 
YOU  TO  8EK  AND  KNOW  ALL  THIS.  I  havc  in  effect  been  all  along  en- 
forcing this  second  head  as  the  sermon  has  progressed,  and  so  I  shall  not 
^  to  detain  you  many  minutes,  except  with  a  practical  recapitulation. 
We  want  you  to  know  the  hops  of  his  ealling  that  you  may  not 
^lect  it,  nor  set  anything  in  competition  with  it.  I  tried,  as  my 
P?or  words  enabled  me  to  tell  you,  what  a  hope  the  calling  of  €k)a 
&veg  the  Christian.  I  charge  you,  do  not  let  it  go.  I  shall,  probably, 
^^x  meet  the  most  of  you  agam,  and  if  any  shall  say  to  you  afterwards, 
J^^^Qf  what  said  the  man?"  I  would  like  you  to  be  compelled  to  say. 
He  said  this — that  there  is  a  future  before  us  of  such  glory  that  he 
charged  us  not  to  lose  it.  There  are  the  possibilities  of  such  intense 
delight  for  ever  and  ever  that  he  besought  us  to  ensure  that  delight  by 
accepting  Christ  and  his  way  of  salvation." 

.  Next  we  want  you  to  believe  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inherifance 

^  llie  sainis,  that  you  may  see  where  your  hope  lies.    Your  hope  lies 

^  not  being  your  own  any  more,  but  in  being  the  Lord's,  and  so  realizing 

^  riches  of  the  glory  of  God's  inheritance  in  the  saints."    The 

,     ^ts  belong  to  their  Lord :  your  salvation  will  be  found  in  experi- 

I     ''lentttlly  knowing  that  you  are  not  your  own,  because  you  are  bought 

]^^^  a  price;  yea,  in  admitting  at  this  moment  that  your  honour  and 

^ppiness  is  found  in  being  the  Lord's.     If  you  are  your  own  you 

\    ^^11  spend  yourself  and  be  ruined,  but  if  you  are  Christ's  he  will  take 

^  of  you.    Oh,  if  I  thought  that  I  had  a  hair  of  this  head  that  be- 

Gouged  to  myself  alone  I  would  tear  it  out ;  but  to  be  owned  by  Jesus 

^%ether,  spirit,  soul,  and  body ;  to  be  Christ's  man  in  the  entireness 


W3  mktropolttak  TABBHNACLB  1»ULPIT. 

of  my  bein  J,  this  is  glory,  and  immortality,  and  cfcrnal  life.'  Bo  your  own, 
wul  you  will  bo  lost :  be  Christ's,  and  you  are  Bared. 

Tlie  closing  thought  is  this.    We  want  you  to  know  ihe. exceeding 
areatfiess  ef  GotPs  poioer,  that  yon  may  not  doubt,  or  deq)ond,  or  despair, 
but  come  now  and  cast  yourselves  upon  the  incarna^  Ood,  and  let 
him  save  you.    Yield  yourselves  nnto  him,  that  the  great  glory  of  his 
powqr  may  be  manifest  in  you  as  ih  the  rest  of  his  people.     I  am. 
loth  that  you  should  go  till  you  have  really  hidden  these  things  in 
your  hearts  to  ponder  them  in  after  days.    I  set  bread  before  yon,  do . 
not  merely  look  at  it,  but  eat  a  portion  now  and  carry  the  rest  home  to 
eat  in  secret.    Oar  preaching  is  often  too  much  like  a  fiddler's  playings 
People  come  to  see  how  it  is  done,  and  then  they  pass  round  the  question, 
*'Wnat'Oxink  ye  of  him?"    Now,  I  do  not  care  two^stra^^rs  wliat  yoa 
think  of  nie^  but  I  do  care  a  whole  world  what  yon  think  of  Christ  and  of 
yourselves,  and  of  your  future  fitate.  I  pray  you  forget  the  way  in  which 
1  put  things,  for  that  may  be  very  blundering  and  fkalty ;  bit  if  there 
be  anything  in  the  things  themselves  consider  them  with  care.    If  you 
lodge  the  Bible  to  be  a  frand,  and  that  there  is*  no.  heaven  to  be  had, 
then  go,  sport  and  laugh  as  you  please,  for  you  will  only  act  consistently 
with  your  erroneous  imagination ;  but  if  you  believe  wod's  word  to  be 
true,  and  that  there  is  a  glorious  hope  connected  widi  the  Christian's  high 
calling,  then  in  the  name  of  prudence  and  common  sense  why  do  you  not 
seek  it  ?    Give  no  sleep  to  your  eyes  nor  slumber  to  your  eyelids  till 
you  find  it.    I  ask  the  Lord's  people  here  present,  and  I  know,  that  there 
are  many  such  in  the  audience  to-night,  to  pray  that  this  appeal  may  have 
an  eflPect  upon  many  in  this  great  crowd,  that  they  may  seek  the  Lord 
at  once  with  fall  purpose  of  heart.    0  Spirit  of  God,  work  it,  for  Jesus 
Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


PoETioir  OF  ScBiPTUBE  Read   BEFORE  Sebmon — Ephesiaus  1.9  and 

chapter  ii.  1st  verse. 


IlY:ttNS  FBOM  "Our  Own  Hy^in  Book" — 176,  757,  728. 


LETTER  FROM  MR.  SPURGEOX. 

Dbaa  Frtknds, — Accept  my  most  loving  salntatiooa.  May  all  grace  abound 
towards  each  one  of  you,  and  may  your  joy  and  peace  be  multiplied  thereby. 

I  feel  daily  improving  in  health  and  strength  ;  only  my  knees  remain  feeble. 
I  still  adhere  to  my  determination,  if  the  Lord  will,  to  preach  on  Lord's>day, 
April  13.     May  his  presence  then  be  with  us. 

I  earnestly  entreat  the  prayers  of  all  who  know  how  to  plead  with  God  that 
when  I  return  among  you  it  may  be  in  the  fulness  of  the  power  of  tbe  Holy 
Spirit,  and  that  my  usefulness  may  be  increased  a  hundredfold.  jSardy  all  the 
suffering  I  liave  endured,  and  all  the  rest  I  have  enjoyed,  should  bring  forth 
some  fruit  unto  God.  Yet  so  feeble  are  we  that  we  profit  nothing  unless  the 
Spirit  of  the  Loixl  quicken  us.  By  all  the  affectionate  interest  which  you  have 
hitherto  shown  in  my  ministry,  intercede  for  me,  I  beseech  you,  that  I  may  yet 
be  made  a  blessing  to  myria-is.  Yours  in  heartiest  lore, 

Mentone.  March  27.  C.   H.  SPURGEON. 


^^ti[i)50litmi  ^uhmmk  ftiljjtt 


THE  OIL  AND  THE  VESSELS. 


%  ^^m$t{ 


C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


"  And  it  Cftne  to  pan,  when  the  TewelB  were  AiH,  that  ihe  laid  imto  her  aon. 
Bring  me  yet  a  veMel.  And  he  said  onto  her.  There  is  not  a  yessel  more.  And 
the  oil  aUyed.''^2  KiDgs  iv.  6. 

So  long  as  there  were  yessels  to  be  filled  the  miracnlons  flow  of  the  oil 
eontinnedy  and  it  only  ceased  when  there  were  no  more  jars  to  contain 
it.  The  prophet  spoke  no  word  to  stay  the  mnltiplying  process,  and 
the  Lord  did  not  set  any  bonnd  to  the  bonntifnf  marvel ;  the  poor 
widow  was  not  straitened  in  Ood,  bnt  in  her  sapply  of  empty  yessels. 
Nothing  else  in  the  nniyerse  restrained  the  flow  of  the  oil :  bat  the  want 
of  yessels  to  receive  it  stayed  it  at  once.  The  vessels  failed  before  the 
oil ;  onr  powers  of  receiving  will  give  ont  long  before  God's  power  of 
bestowing. 

This  is  tme  in  reference  to  oun  providi&ntul  dBOUMSTANOBS.  So 
long  as  we  have  needs  we  shall  have  supplies,  and  we  shall  find  onr 
necessities  exhausted  &r  sooner  than  the  divine  bonnty.  In  the  wilder- 
ness there  fell  more  manna  than  the  tribes  could  eat,  and  there  flowed 
more  water  than  the  hosts  could  drink,  and  so  long  as  they  were  in  a 
desert  land  and  required  this  provision  it  was  continued  to  them :  when 
they  reached  Canaan  and  fed  on  the  old  com  of  the  land  the  special 
supplies  ceased,  but  not  till  then.  In  the  same  manner  also  the  Lord 
will  feed  his  people  till  they  need  no  more. 

The  widow's  apparent  source  of  supply  was  only  one  pot  of  oil,  but 
this  continued  to  stream  forth  as  vessel  by  vessel  was  placed  underneath 
it ;  so  shall  the  little  with  which  the  Lord  endows  his  poor  people  con- 
tinue to  furnish  sufficient  from  day  to  day,  till  the  last  day  of  hfe,  like 
the  last  vessel,  shall  have  been  filled.  Some  are  not  content  with  this, 
but  would  have  the  oil  run  beyond  the  last  vessel,  even  after  their 
deaths,  never  resting  till  they  have  hoarded  their  thousands,  and  have 
buried  their  hearts  in  gold  dust.  If  the  oil  will  but  run  till  the  last 
vessel  is  full,  what  more  do  we  want?  If  providence  secures  us  food 
and  raiment  till  we  end  this  mortal  life,  what  more  can  we  require  ? 

Doubtless  in  the  dispensation  of  wealth  and  other  talents  U>  his  ser- 
vants the  Lord  considers  their  capacities.  If  they  had  more  vessels 
they  should  have  more  oil.  The  infinitely  wise  Ood  knows  that  it  is 
better  for  some  men  to  be  poor  than  rich ;  thev  would  not  be  able  to 
bear  prosperity,  and  so  the  oil  does  not  flow,  because  there  is  not  a 
vessef  to  fill.  If  we  are  able  to  receive  an  earthly  gift,  it  will  then  be  a 
No.  1,467. 


194  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

^ood  thing  to  ils,  and  the  Lordilias  declared}  tHat;  he-  will  not  withhold 
any  ^(ood  thing  from  those  who  walk  uprightly ;  but  a  talent  which  we 
oonld  not  reeeiFe  so  aa  to  mr  it  properly  wonid  be  only  a  curse  to  us, 
and  hence  he  does  not  burden  us  with  it.  All  that  we  can  hold  we 
shall  have  :  all  that  we  really  need,  all  that  we  shall  be  sure  to  employ 
to  his  glory,  all  that  will  minister  to  our  highest  good,  God  will  ponr 
forth  from  his  inexhaustible  fulness,  and  only  when  he  sees  that  the 
gifts  would  be  wasted  by  faeeoDHng  superfluities,  or  burdensome  respon- 
sibilities, or  occasions  for  temptation,  will  he  restrain  his  power,  and 
the  oil  shall  be  stayed.  Iteat  asaured  that  God's  bounty  will  keep  pace 
with  your  true  capacity,  and  "  verily  thou  shalt  be  fed." 

The  same  principle  holds  good  with  regard  to  the  bestowal  of 
SAYING  GBACB.  In  a  Congregation  the  gospel  is  as  the  pot  of  oil,  and 
those  who  receire  from  it  are  needy  souls,  desirous  of  the  grace  of  God. 
Of  these  we  have  always^  too  few-  in  our  assemblies.  Many  are  the 
vessels  of  oil,  filled  to  the  brim*  and- listened  down — ^the  full  Pharisee, 
the  self-satisfied  professor,  and  the  proud  worldling  are  such  :  for  these 
the  miracle  of  graoe  haa  no;  multiplying  power,  for  they  are  ready  to 
overflow  evm  now.  Ai  full  Ghriii  ia  for  empty  sinners^  and  for  empty 
sinners  only,  and  afrlbng  aa.theie  is  a  reallv  empt^  soul  in  a  congrega- 
tion so  long  will  a  htessing  go«  fbntk  mth  the  word^  and  no  longer.  It 
is  notour  emptiness^. but  our  fnlnos  whioh  can  hinder  the  outgoings  of 
ftBB  graces  While  there*  \m  one  soul  consoioua-  of  sin  and  eager  for 
pardon,  graee  will  flow ;.  yaa^  whtlorthere  ia  one  heart  weary,  of  indiiler- 
enoe  and  anxious  to,  be  woo&ded,  grace  will  flowv  '*  I  feel,"  saith  one, 
**  exceedingly  unfit  to  be  saved."  You  are  evidently  empty,  and  there 
is  room  in  you  for  tfaeoil  of  grace.  **  Alas/'  eries  a  second,  *'  I  feel 
nothing  at  all.  Even  my  own  unfitness  do€»  not  distress  me.*'  This 
only  shows  how  utteriyempty  you  are,  and  in  you  alao  the  oil  will  find 
space  for  its  flow.  '^  Ah;"  sighs  a  thirds ''  I  have  beeome  soeptical,  un- 
bdief  has  made  me-  hanl>  aa  the.nether  mill-stone."  In  you  also  there 
irltoge  storage  forgraeat^  Only  be  willing  to  receive.  Stand  like  the 
oil-jar  with  opened  moutb^.waiting  for  tlie  oil  to  pour  forth  from  the 
miraculoua  pot*.  If*  the  Lord  hathi  made  thee  willing  to  receive  he  will 
not  be  long  before  he  has  given  thee  grace  upon  grac&  0  that  we 
could  meet  with  moss  emptied  souls !  Why  should  the  Lord's  wonders 
be  cnfe  ahort.forlaoki  of  persons  who  need  to  have  them  wrought  upon 
them  ?  Arethere  no  neady  souls  about?  Have  allmen  waxed  rich,  or 
is.  it  a  vaiu'  piee«unption>  which  possesses  so  many  hearts?  Hidden 
away  in  oomerft  where*  thej\  weep  their  eyes  out  because  thay  cannot 
weep,  and. break;  their  heafl8il)eoauae  their  hearts  will  not  break,  and  cry 
before  tbe  Lmrd  .because  they  feel  they  cannot  pray,  or  feel,  or  hate  sin ; 
— Chidden:  away*  in.  oornem,  I  say,  tliere  are  truly  empty  souls,  and  for 
these  the  heavenly-oil  is*,  running'  still,  ia  rnnning  now,  ''Blessed  are 
they  that  do  hnnger  sjftd  thirst,  after  rigliteousness,  for  they  shall  be 
filled."  No  exception:  in<  tiie  narrative  before  us  was  taken  to  any 
vessel  so  long  as  it  was  empty ;  there  was  one  qualification,  and  only 
one,  the  power  to  reeoive  inaicated  by  emptiness.  Come,  then,  ye  needy 
^nis,  oome  to  the  eternal  fountain  and  receive  a.wealth  of  blessing,  freely 
^e  ?uf "^  ^®  ^^^  **'  *^  because  the  Lord  Jesus  loves  to  bestow  it. 
®  i»  true  w^Uh  regard  to  othhb  spirixual  blbssings.    All 


THE  OIL  Am)  THE  VESSELS.  195 

ibfaiese  dwells  in  onr  Lord  Jeans,  and,  as  he  needs  not  grace  for  himself, 
ic  is  stored  up  in  him,  that  he  may  give  it  out  to  believers.  The  saints 
with  one  voice  confess,  '^  Of  his  lEhlness  have  all  we  received."  The 
limit  of  his  outpouring  is  onr  capacity  to  receive,  and  that  limit  is  often 
Eet  by  onr  straitened  prayers ;  ''  we  have  not  because  we  ask  not,  or 
becanse  we  ask  amiss."  If  our  desires  were  more  expanded,  onr  receipts 
irould  be  more  extended*  We  fail  to  bring  empty  vessels,  and  therefore 
the  oil  is  stayed.  We  do  not  sufficiently  see  our  poverty,  and  do  not 
therefore  enlarge  our  longings.  0  for  a  heart  insatiable  for  Christ,  a 
soul  more  greedy  than  the  grave  itself,  which  is  never  satisfied :  then 
would  rivers  of  the  heavenly  oil  flow  in  upon  us,  and  we  should  be 
filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God. 

Frequently  we  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  by  our  unbeliet 
Nothing  hinders  grace  like  this  impoverishing  vice.  ^'  He  did  not  many 
mighty  works  there  because  of  their  unbelief."  Unbelief  declares  it 
to  be  impossible  that  more  oil  should  come  from  the  oil-pot,  and  so 
refuses  to  bring  more  vessels  under  the  pretence  of  a  humble  fear  of 
presumption,  thus  robbing  the  soul  and  dishonouring  the  Lord.  Shame 
on  thee,  thou  mother  of  famine,  thou  drier  upof  flowing  wells !  What 
shall  be  done  unto  thee,  thou  lyin^  traitor !  What  coals  of  juniper  are 
fierce  enough  for  thee,  thou  wicked  unbelief?  We  mourn  that  our  joy  is 
deputed,  that  our  graces  languish,  that  our  usefolness  is  restrained. 
Whose  fault  is  this  ?  Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ?  Are  these 
his  doings  ?  Nay,  verily,  we  have  ourselves  stayed  the  bottles  of  heaven. 
May  infinite  mercy  save  us  from  ourselves,  and  lead  us  now  to  ''  bring 
hither  vessels,  even  emptv  vessels  not  a  few." 

Pride  also  has  a  horrible  power  to  stay  the  divinely  given  oil.  When 
on  our  knees  we  feel  no  pressing  necessity,  no  urgent  want,  no  special 
danger ;  on  the  contrary,  we  are  rich  and  increased  in  goods,  and  have 
need  of  nothing.  Do  we  wonder,  then,  that  we  are  not  refreshed  and  feel 
no  delight  in  the  holy  exercise  ?  Have  we  not  heard  the  Lord  saying, 
'^  Bring  me  yet  a  vessel"?  And  as  we  have  answered, ''  There  is  not  a 
vessel  more,"  need  we  be  surprised  that  the  oil  is  stayed  ?  The  Lord 
save  us  from  the  parching  mfluence  of  self-conceit.  It  will  turn  an 
Eden  into  a  wilderness.  Soul-poverty  leads  to  fulness,  but  carnal  se- 
curity creates  barrenness.  The  Holy  Spirit  delights  to  comfort  every 
hungry  heart,  but  the  full  soul  loatheth  the  honeycomb  of  his  consola- 
tions, and  he  leaves  it  to  itself  till  it  is  famished  and  cries  out  for 
heavenly  bread.  Of  this  one  thing  let  us  be  sure,  that  there  is  abund- 
ance of  grace  to  be  had  so  long  as  we  hunger  and  thirst  after  it,  and 
never  shall  a  single  willing  heart  be  forced  to  cry,  ^  The  oil  is  stayed," 
so  long  as  it  has  an  empty  vessel  to  bring. 

The  same  truth  will  be  proved  in  reference  to  the  purposes  op 
GRACE  IN  THE  WOBLD.  The  fulucss  of  diviuc  grace  will  be  equal  to 
every  demand  upon  it  till  the  end  of  time.  Men  will  never  be  saved 
apart  from  the  atonement  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  but  never  will  that  ransom 
price  be  found  insufficient  to  redeem  the  souls  that  trust  in  the  Redeemer. 

^  Dear  dying  Lamb,  thy  precious  blood . 
Shall  never  lose  its  power, 
Till  all  the  ransomed  church  of  God 
Be  saved  to  sin  no  more.*' 


196  METBOPOLITAN  TABBRNACLB  PULPIT. 

Neither  will  hisr  iub^tsession  lose  any  of  its  pre7alence  for  those  who 
oome  to  Qod  by  him.  To  the  last  hour  of  time  it  shall  never  be  said 
that  a  single  sinner  has  sought  his  face  in  vaan,  or  that  an  empty  vessel 
baa  at  last  been  found  which  Jesus  cannot  filL 

The  power  of  the  Holy  ^irit  to  convict,  convert,  console,  and  sanctify 
shall  also  abide  the  same  to  the  end  of  the  age.  Never  shall  there  bo 
found  a  weeping  penitent  whom  he  cannot  cheer  with  a  lively  hope  and 
lead  to  Jesus  for  eternal  salvation,  nor  a  struggling  believer  whom  he 
caimot  lead  on  to  certain  and  comFplete  victory.  Perfection  itself,  be 
shall  always  be  abte  to  work  in  all  the  saints,  even  meetncss  for  their 
holy  heritage  above.  None  of  us  should  despond  when  we  discover  anew 
our  own  natural  inability  and  deadncss.  Our  hope  was  never  based  on 
created  power;  a  lively  hope  has  its  foundation  in  the  omnipotence  ol 
tlie  Holy.  Spirit,  and  that  oannot  be  tlie  subject  of  qudstion  or  of  change. 
For  the  salvation  of  all  the  elect  the  sacred  Trinity  will  work  together 
till  all  shall  be  aocomiHished. 

Whatever  remaiias  behind  as  to  the  piorpesea  of  God  he  has  power  to 
achieve.  If  there  should  stand  before  us- a  row  of  empty  vessels  bearing 
the  names  of  Babylon  overthrown,  the  Jews  converted,  the  nations 
«rangelized,  the  idols  abolished,  and  so  forth,  we  must  by  no  means  be 
disheartened,  for  all  these  x'cssels  of  promise  shall  be  filled  in  due  time. 
The  church  of  the  present  day  is  feeble,  and  her  supplies  are  quite  in- 
adequate to  the  enterprise  before  her,  yet  as  out  of  one  oil-pot  many 
vessels  were  filled  which  w^*e  far  greater  than  itself,  so  by  his  poor  and 
despised  church,  through  the  foolishness  of  preaching,  the  Lord  will 
fulfil  his  augast  designs  and  fill  the  universe  with  praise.  "  Fear  not, 
little  flock ;  for  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  king- 
dom." With  this  assurance  believing  men  may  boldly  go  forth  among  the 
heathen.  The  nations  are  empty  vessels^  and  there  are  not  a  few  of 
them ;  Grod  has  given  us  his  blessing  upon  our  cruse  of  oil,  and  all  wc 
have  to  do  is  to  pour  out  and  continue  to  pour  out  till  thei'e  is  not  ii 
vessel  more.  We  are  very  far  from  that  consummation  yet.  In  our  con- 
gregations all  are  not  saved ;  even  in  our  families  many  are  not  con- 
verted :  we  cannot  say  *^  there  is  not  a  vessel  more,"  and,  blessed  be 
God,  neither  may  we  suspect  that  the  oil  will  bo  stayed.  AVith  hopeful 
earnestness  let  us  bring  the  empty  vessels  beneath  the  sacred  outflow, 
that  they  may  be  filled. 

How  glorious  will  be  the  consummation  when  all  the  chosen  shall  be 
gathered  in !  Then  there  shall  not  remain  a  seeking  soul  to  be  saved, 
nor  a  praying  heart  to  be  comforted,  nor  a  wandering  sheep  to  be  sought. 
Not  a  vessel  shall  be  found  throughout  the  universe  needing  to  be 
filled,  and  then  shall  the  oil  of  mercy  cease  to  flow^  and  justice  hold  her 
court  alone.  Woe  unto  the  ungodly  in  that  day,  for  then  the  empty 
vessels  shall  be  broken  to  shivers  ;  as  they  would  not  receive  the  oil  of 
love  they  shall  be  each  one  filled  with  the  wine  of  wrath.  From  which 
terrible  doom  may  iuiiuite  grace  preserve  each  one  of  us.    Amen. 


piftijfljnlifan  ilaScimcIe  iulpit 


TWO  SOETS  OF  HEAEEliS. 


%  ^m\n 


DEIJVERED  BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    MKTROFOLITAN    TADERNACliE,    NBWINGTOK. 


"  Bat  be  ye  doen  •£  the  word,  and  not  hearers  only,  deceiving  your  own  lelves 
For  if  any  be  a  hearer  of  the  word,  and  not  a  doer,  he  is  like  unto  a  mtai  beholding 
his  vatnral  faoe  in  a  glue :  For  he  beholdeth  hiaielf,  end  goeth  hie  way.  Meal 
ifeni|phtway  focgetteih  whatmaBiier  of  man  he  has.  Bmt  whoao  looheth  into  the 
perfect  law  of  Ubetty,  and  oontinueih  therein,  he  being  not  a  focgetful  hearer,  hut  a 
doer  of  the  work«  this  man  ihall  he  blessed  in  his  deed/* — James  i.  22^25. 

JixwR  has  no  speealatioTHi.  *^Bj  ihair  firnits  ye  «hdl  tknow  them/' 
seems  to  have  taken  possession  of  faistniind,  oofilhe  is  always  demanding 
practical  holiness.  He  is  not«ati6fied  .i?ith  the:bnd8  of  htariog,  he  wonts 
tbefrnits  of  obedience.  We  need  more  of  bis^wacbical^pirit  in  this  age, 
for^ere  are  certain  ministers  who  are  not  ^content  with  sowing  the  old 
seed,  the  selfsame  seed  which,  from  the  ^hand  of  apostks,  confessoESy 
&theiSy  reformeiSy  and  martyrs,  produced  a  harrest  nnto  God ;  but  they 
spend  their  time  in  speculating  as  to  whether  .the  ^seed  of  tares  grown 
imder  certain  circnmstances  may  not  bring  forth  wheat.;  whether,  at  any 
rate,  good  wheat  would  not  be  the  better  lor  the  admixture  of  just  a 
Uttle  sprinkling  of  tare  seed.  We  want  somebody  to  take  these  various 
pivadhmente,  pat  them  into  a  canldnm,  boil  them  down,  and  see  what 
is  the  essential  praetical  prodnct  of  them.  :i3onie<  of  you  may  baye  seen 
in  the  newspi^rs  a  short  time  a^o  an  artide'which  £u8tened  itself  upon 
my  mind — ^an  article  with  regard  to  the  mocal  state  of  Germany.  I'he 
writer,  himself «  German,  says  that  the  scepticism  of  the  professed 
preachers  of  the  word,  the  continual  doubts  which  have  been  suggested 
by  mentffic  men  and  more  especially  by  professedly  religious  men  as  to 
rereiatfon,  have  now  produced  upon  tlic  German  nation  the  most  fright- 
ful consequences.  The  picture  which  he  giree  makes  us  fear  that  our 
Germanic  frieuds  aretreading  upon  a  volcano  which  may  explode  beneath 
their  feet.  The  authority  of  the  government  has  been  so  severely  exer- 
cised that  men  begin  to  be  wejiry  of  it ;  and,  meanwhile,  the  authority 
of  God  has  been  put  so  much  out  of  the  question  that  the  basis  of 
society  is  undermined.  I  need  not,  however,  ground  my  remarks  upon 
that  article,  for  the  Frencii  revolntion  at  the  end  of  the  last  century 
remains  in  liistory  as  an  enduring  warning  as  to  the  drend  effects  of 


198  HETBOPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

philosophy  when  it  has  cast  suspicion  upon  all  religion  and  creafced  a 
nation  of  infidels.  I  pray  God  that  the  like  may  not  happen  here ; 
bnt  the  party  of  '*  modern  thonght "  seem  resolved  upon  repeating  the 
experiment.  So  greatly  is  the  just  severity  of  God  ignored,  and  so 
trifling  an  evil  is  sin  made  out  to  be,  that  if  men  were  to  be  doers  of 
what  thev  hear,  and  to  carry  out  what  has  been  taught  from  certain 
professedly  Christian  pulpits,  anarchy  would  be  the  result.  Free-thinking 
always  leads  that  way.    God  keep  us  from  it. 

While  preachers  too  often  toy  with  preaching,  how  much  there  is 
among  hearers  of  the  same  fashion.  Hearing  is  often  merely  a  critical 
exercise,  and  the  question  after  a  sermon  |s  not ''  How  was  that  truth 
fitted  to  your  case?"  but  "How  did  you  like  him?"  as  if  that  had 
anything  to  do  with  it.  When  you  hear  music,  do  you  ask,  "How  did 
you  like  the  trumpet?"  No,  it  is  the  music — not  the  instrument, 
that  your  mind  thinks  about ;  yet  will  persons  always  consider  the 
minister  rather  than  his  message.  Many  contrast  one  preacher  with 
another,  when  they  had  better  contrast  themselves  with  the  divine  law. 
Thus  hearing  the  gospel  is  degraded  into  a  pastime,  and  judged  to  be 
little  better  than  a  tneatrical  entertainment.  Such  things  must  not 
be.  Preachers  must  preach  as  for  eternity,  and  look  for  fruit ;  and 
hearers  must  carry  out  what  they  hear,  or  otherwise  the  sacred  ordi- 
nance of  preaching  will  cease  to  be  the  channel  of  blessing,  and  will 
rather  bo  an  insult  to  God  and  a  mockery  to  the  souls  of  men.  I 
shall,  not  at  any  very  great  length,  but  I  hope  with  much  earnestness, 
speak  of  two  classes  of  hearers,  the  first,  the  unblessed  class^  and  the 
second,  the  class  who^  according  to  the  text,  are  blessed  m  their  deed. 

I.  First,  THE  UNBLEST  CLASS.  They  are  hearers,  but  they  are 
described  as  hearers  who  are  not  doers.  They  hear — ^some  of  them 
pretty  regularlv,  others  of  them  only  now  and  then  just  to  while  away 
an  hour ;  and  they  hear  with  considerable  attention,  because  they 
appreciate  good  speaking.  They  are  interested  in  doctrine,  perhaps, 
having  some  little  knowledge  of  the  Christian  system,  and  they  l&e 
to  discuss  a  point  or  two.  Moreover,  they  are  anxious  to  be  able 
to  say  that  they  heard  such  a  one  preach,  of  whom  a  fame  has  gone 
abroad.  But  as  to  doine  what  they  hear,  that  has  not  entered  their 
minds.  They  have  heard  a  sermon  on  repentance,  but  they  have  not 
repented.  They  have  heard  the  gospel  cry,  "Believe!"  but  they 
have  not  believed.  They  know  that  he  who  believes  purges  himself 
from  his  old  sins,  yet  they  have  had  no  purging,  but  abide  as 
they  were.  Now,  if  I  address  such,  let  me  say  to  them, — ^it  is  clear 
that  you  are  and  must  be  unblest.  Hearing  of  a  feast  will  not  fill  you ; 
hearing  of  a  brook  will  not  quench  your  thirst.  The  information 
that  there  is  gold  in  the  Bank  of  England  will  not  enrich  you ;  you 
need  cash  in  your  own  pocket.  The  knowledge  that  there  is  a  shelter 
from  the  storm  will  not  save  the  ship  from  the  tempest.  The  informa- 
tion that  there  is  a  cure  for  a  disease  will  not  make  the  sick  man 
whole.  No :  boons  must  be  grasped,  blessings  must  be  appropriated 
and  made  use  of,  if  they  are  to  be  of  any  value  to  us.  0  sirs,  you  know 
what  you  should  do,  but  you  have  not  done  it !  You  have  been  half 
inclined  to  attend  to  eternal  things,  but  you  have  let  them  go,  and  still 
you  are  among  those  unblest  hearers  who  hear  in  vain. 


TWO  SOBTS  OF  HEABERS.  199 

Kext,  these   hearers  are  described  as  deceiving  themselves.      '^De- 

eefring  your  own  selyes,"  says  James.    What  did  they  deoeiye  them- 

sekes  abont?    Why,  probably,  they  thought  tbey  were  considerably 

better  for  being  hearers:  mnch  to  be  commendea  and  sore  to  get  a 

[   Uessin^.     They  wonld  not  have  been  happy  if  they  had  not  heard  the 

word  on  Sunday,  and  they  look  with  disgast  upon  their  neighbours 

who  make  nothing  of  the  8abbath«    They  themselyes  are  very  superior 

people  becanse  they  are  regular  church-goers  or  chapel*goers.    They 

hare  a  sitting,  and  a  hymn-book,  and  a  Bible :  is  not  that  a  good  deal  ? 

If  they  stay^  away  from  a  place  of  worship  for  a  month  they  would  be 

T€Ty  nneasy ;  but  though  they  do  not  belieye  that  going  to  a  place  of 

wor^ip  wiU  save  them,  yet  it  quiets  their  conscience,  and  they  feel 

themselYes  more  at  ease.    I  should  like  to  feed  you  for  a  month  on 

joor  theory.    I  would  rattle  the  plates  in  your  ears,  and  see  whetheryou 

would  be  fed.    I  would  not  accommodate  you  with  a  bed  at  night.  Why 

should  I  ?    I  would  preach  you  a  discourse  upon  the  benefit  of  sleep. 

Nor  need  I  eyen  giye  yon  a  room  to  occupy:  I  would  read  you  an 

eloquent  dissertation  upon  domestic  architecture,  and  show  you  what  a 

house  shonld  be.    You  would  yery  soon  quit  my  door,  and  call  me 

inhospitable,  if  I  gave  you  music  instead  of  meat ;  and  yet  you  deoeiye 

jourselres  with  the  notion  that  merely  hearing  about  Jesus  and  his 

great  salyation  has  made  you  better  men.    Or,  perhaps,  the  deceit 

runs  in  another  line :  you  foster  the  idea  that  the  stem  truths  which 

you  hear  do  not  apply  to  you.    Sinners  ?    Yes,  certainly,  the  preacher 

addresses  sinners,  and  may  they  get  good  out  of  it ;  but  you  are  not  a 

sinner,  at  least  not  in  any  special  sense,  so  as  to  need  looking  after. 

B/q)entanoe  ?    Most  people  ought  to  repent,  but  you  do  not  see  any 

reason  why  you  should  repent.   Looldng  to  Christ  for  salyation  ?    '*  Ex- 

oeilent  doctrine,"  you  say,  "  Excellent  doctrine !"    But,  somehow,  you 

do  not  look  to  him  for  salvation.    Here  is  the  scriptural  yerdict  upon 

this  opinion  of  yours — "  Deceiying  your  own  selyes,"    The  gospel  does 

not  deoeiye  you ;  it  tells  you  **  Ye  must  be  bom  again,  ye  must  believe 

in  Jeans  Christ,  or  be  lost."    The  preacher  does  not  deceive  you ;  he 

never  said  half  a  word  to  support  the  notion  that  coming  to  this  place 

would  be  of  any  service  to  you  unless  yon  would  yield  your  hearts  to 

Christ.    No,  he  has  leamt  to  speak  plain  English  about  such  matters. 

You  deceive  your  own  selves  if,  being  hearers  and  not  doers^  you  derive 

comfort  from  that  which  you  hear. 

And  then,  again,  according  to  our  text,  these  people  are  superficial 
hearers.  They  are  said  to  be  like  to  a  man  who  sees  his  natural  face 
in  a  glass.  Now,  even  a  casual  hearer  will  often  find  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  to  be  like  looking  in  a  glass  and  seeing  himself.  When  a 
glass  is  firet  exhibited  to  some  fresh  discovered  negro  tribe,  the  chief- 
tain as  he  sees  himself  is  perfectly  astonished.  He  looks,  and  looks 
again,  and  cannot  make  it  out.  So  is  it  in  the  preaching  of  the  word : 
the  man  says,  **  Why,  those  are  my  words :  that  is  my  way  of  feeling." 
I  have  often  known  hearers  exclaim,  "  Why,  that  is  the  very  expression 
I  used  as  I  was  coming  along."  They  feel  hke  her  of  old  who  said, 
'*  Come,  see  a  man,  which  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  did."  Such  a 
person  reads  his  Bible,  and  he  says,  *'  Come,  see  a  book,  which  tells  me  all 
things  that  ever  I  did.   Is  not  this  God's  book?"    The  fact  is  that  the 


200 


METBOPOLITAir  TABERKACLIS  PULPIT. 


'^ 


\ 


Z^- 


word  of  Ood  is  a  disc^mer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  As 
yon  have  seen  hanging  np  in  the  bntcher's  shop  the  carooses  of  animaift 
cut  right  down  in  the  centre,  so  the  word  of  Cod  is  **  qnick  and  powerful^ 
piercing  to  the  dividing  of  soul  and  spirit,  of  joints  and  marrow."  It 
opens  up  a  man  to  himself,  and  makes  him  see  himself.  He  is  qaite 
astonished,  and  cannot  make  it  out.  I  have  no  doubt  many  of  you  who 
are  unconverted  here  have  felt  this  under  a  searching  sermon.  When 
you  have  been  reading  the  Scriptures  you  have  beenticrfectly  astonished 
at  the  way  in  which  you  have  been  revealed  to  yourselves;  but  it  has 
been  superficial  work.  If  a  man  looks  at  himself  in  a  glass,  and  then  puts 
down  the  mirror  and  goes  his  way,  he  has  made  but  very  poor  use  of  it, 
for  it  was  intended  to  lead  him  to  'remove  spots,  and  improve  his  per- 
sonal appearance  by  washing.  Looking  in  the  glass  and  noticing  a 
black  mark  on  your  forehead  is  mere  child's  play  if  you  do  not  wask 
the  spot  away.  To  see  yourself  as  Ood  would  have  you  see  yourself  in. 
the  glass  6f  Scripture  is  something,  but  you  must  aflierwards  go  to 
Christ  ibr  washing  or  your  looking  is  very  superficial  work.  Ckid 
grant  that  if  you  are  made  to  feel  the  revealing  power  of  the  word  of 
God  you  may  at  once  come  to  the  practical  ^oint  and  ^'  wash  and  foe 
clean.** 

The  text  accuses  these  persons  of  being  ka^ty  hmnr^-^**  he  beholdeth 
himself  and  goeth  his  way."  They  hear  a  sermon,  and  they  are  off. 
They  never  giv^  the  word  time  to  operate,  they  are  badi:  to  business, 
back  to  talk  and  idle  chit-chat,  the  moment  the  service  ends.  En- 
quirers' meetings  are  often  eminently  useful,  because  they  :give  people 
a  little  opportunity  to  think  over  what  they  have  heard;  but'mnchrsf 
hearing  is  not  followed  up  wrth  thought,  and  so  it  is  inefiPectnal.  We 
get  much  more  out  of  meditation  than  out  of  hearing.  Like  the  cattle, 
we  must  chew  the  cud,  if  we  would  get  nutriment  from  ^spiritual  food: 
but  few  do  this.  It  is  a  great  mercy  for  us,  considering  the  quantity 
of  nonsense  there  is  in  the  world,  that  we  have  two  ears  so  that  we  cau 
let  idle  words  go  in  at  one  ear  and  out  at  the  other ;  but  it  is  a  great 
pity  that  we  should  use  those  two  ears  in  such  a  way  in  reference  to  the 
word  of  God.  Lee  it  have  a  lodgment,  dear  friend.  Do  not  let  the 
gospel  come  in  at  one  ear  and  out  at  the  other.  How  are  you  to  prevent 
it?  Why  let  it  come  in  at  both  ears.  Let  it  have  two  roads  right 
down  to  the  soul,  and  shut  your  ears  when  the  truth  has  thoroughly 
entered  in»  and  compel  it  to  abide  in  the  chamber  of  your  soul.  How 
much  of  blessing  would  come  to  men  if  they  carried  the  word  home 
with  them ;  if  tiiey  took  the  text  to  pieces,  weighed  it,  and  considered 
it,  and  prayed  for  a  personal  application  of  it.  Then  they  would  become 
spiritually  wise  by  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But,  alas,  tliej  are 
hasty  hearers :  they  look  in  the  glass  snd  go  their  way. 

One  other  thing  is  said  about  them,  namely,  that  they  arc  Vfry  far^ 
g^ifai  AflttTw*— they  forget  what  manner  of  men  they  are.  They  have 
heard  the  discourse,  and  there  is  an  end  of  it.  You  know  the  story  of 
Donald's  coming  home  a  little  sooner  from  kirk  than  usual,  and  his  wife 
enquiring, ''What!  Donald!  is  the  sermon  all  done?"  He  replied, 
"  No,  no  ;  it  is  all  mid^  but  it  has  not  began  to  be  done  yet.''  Bat 
while  it  has  not  began  to  be  done,  it  olten  happens  that  the  si^rmon  has 
ended  with  many  hearers.    They  have  listened  to  it,  but  it  has  ruu 


wro  sovza  of  hbabsbs.  201 

chnsnjrh  them  like  water  throix«^h  a  sieve,  and  thej  will  recollect  no  more 
of  i&  till  fehe  jadgment^day.    There  is  no  sia  ia  having  a  bad  meniorj, 
bnt  there  is   great  sin  in  rcfasing  at  once  to  obey  the  gospel.      If 
ton  caanofe  recollect  tiu3  text,  or  even  remember  the  subject  to*morn>w 
morning,  I  shall  not  blame  you;  bnt  the  recollection  of  the  spirit  of 
the  whole  thing,  the  drinking  in  and  absorption  into  yourself  of  the 
tn^h, — that  is  the  main  matter,  and  the  carrying  of  the  truth  into 
practice  is  the  eaeenoe  of  the  business.     That  travelling  dealer  did 
well  who,  while  listening  to  Mr.  William  Dawson,  when  he  was  speaking 
about  di^onesty,  stood  up  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation  and  broke 
a  GCfrtain  yard  meaanre  with  which  he  had  been  in   the  habit   of 
f^ealing^  hia  cnstomersi     That  woman  did  well  who  said  that  she 
forgqt  what  the  preacher  talked,  about,  but  she  remembered  to  bnrn 
her  boBhel  when  she  got  home,  for  that  too  bad  been  short  in  measure* 
HeTer    raitsi  abent  remembering  the  sermon,   if   you  remember  at 
eooe  to  practise  it.   Yon>may  foiiget  tiie  wordain  which  the  truth  was 
eonehed,  if  yoa  will,  but  let  it  purify  your  life.    It  reminds  me  of  the 
grackma  woman  who  nsed  to  earn  her  living  by  washing  wool.  When  her 
mmister  called  upon  her  and  asked  her  about  his  sermon,  and  she  con- 
fessed that'  she  bad  forgotten  the  text^  he  said,  ''What  good  could 
it  httVB  done  yon?"    She  took  him  into  herbaok  place,  where  she  was 
oartTnig  on  hex  trade.    She  put  the  wool  into  a  sieve,  and  then  pnmped 
on  it.     *'  There,  shr/'  she  said, "  your  sormon  is  like  that  water.    It  runs 
tfamngh  my  ndnd,  sir;  jnst  as  the  water  mns  through  the  sieve ;  bnt 
dmi  the  wat^  washes  the  wool,  sir,  and.  so  the  good  word  washes  my 
sonh'^     David  in  the  hundred  and  third  psalm  speaks  of  those  who 
remember  the  Lord's  commandments  to  d9  them,  and  that  is  the  best 
of  memory.    Mind  that  yon  have  it. 

Thus  I  have  described  certain  hearers,  and  I  fear  we  have  many  such 
in  sdl  congregationB ;  admiring  hearers,  affectionate  hearers,  attached 
bearers,  bnt  all  the  while  nnblest  hearers,  because  they  are  not  doers 
of  the  work.  We  have  wondered  how  it  was  that  they  never  confessed 
themselves  to  be  followers  of  Christ,  but  we  suspect  that  they  have  never 
made  snch  a  confession  because  it  would  not  be  true ;  and  yet  they  are 
very  good,  very  kind,  helpful  to  the  good  cause,  and  their  livee  are  very 
upright  and  commendable,  but  we  grieve  that  they  are  not  decided 
Christians.  One  thing  they  lack — they  have  no  faith  in  Christ.  It 
does  surprise  me  how  some  of  you  am  be  so  favourable  to  everything 
diat  has-  to  do  with  divine  things,  and  yet  have  no  personal  share  in  the 
good  Lreasnre.  What  wonld  you  say  of  a  cook  who  prepared  dinners 
for  other  people  and  yet  died  of  starvation  ?  Foolish  cook,  say  yon. 
Foolish  hearer,  say  J.  Are  you  going  to  be  like  Solomon's  friends  the 
Tyrians,  who  helped  to  build  the  temple  and  yet  went  on  worshipping 
their  idols?  Sirs,  are  yon  going  to  look  on  at  the  table  of  mercy  and 
admire  it,  and  yet  refuse  its  proviaiona?  Does  it  give  yon  a. thrill  of 
pleasore  to  see  so  many  taken  irom  the  highways  and  the  hedges  and 
bmuglit  in,  and  will  yon  stand  outside  and  never  partake  yourself?  I 
always  pity  the  poor  little  boys  on  a  cold  winter  night  who  stand  out- 
side a  steaming  cook-shop  window  and  look  in  and.  see  others  fea&ting, 
but  have  none  themselves.  I  cannot  understand  yoa;  all  things  are 
mkly,  and  yon  are  bidden  and  persuaded  to  come^  and  yet.  you  are 


S02  METBOFOLITAK  TABERNAOLB  PULPIT. 

content  to  perish  with  hnnger.  I  pray  you  bethink  yourselves,  and  I 
ask  the  Spirit  of  God  to  make  you  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers 
only,  deceiving  your  own  selves. 

ll.  But,  now,  a  few  minutes  for  those  who  are  blessed  keauebs 
— those  who  get  the  blessing.  Who  are  they  ?  They  are  described  in 
the  twenty-fifth  verse, — "  Sat  whoso  looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of 
liberty,  and  continueth  therein,  he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a 
doer  of  the  work,  this  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed.*' 

Now,  notice  that  this  hearer  who  is  blest  is,  first  of  all,  an  earnest, 
eager,  humble  hearer.  Note  the  expression.  He  does  not  look  upon 
the  law  of  liberty  and  go  his  way,  but  he  looketh  into  it.  It  is  the  same 
word  which  is  used  in  the  passage,  *^  which  things  the  angels  desire  to 
look  into,"  and  the  Oreek  seems  to  imply  a  sort  of  stooping  down  to 
look  intently  into  a  thing.  Thus  is  it  with  the  hearer  who  obtains  the 
blessing.  Me  hears  of  the  gospel,  and  he  says,  *^  I  will  look  into  this. 
There  is  a  something  here  worth  attention."  He  stoops  and  becomes  a 
little  child  that  he  may  learn.  He  searches  as  men  do  who  are  looking 
after  diamonds  or  gola.  *^  I  will  look  into  it,"  he  says.  ^'  My  mother 
used  to  tell  me  that  there  was  something  charming  in  it,  and  my  father 
died  triumphantly,  through  the  influence  of  it :  I  will  investigate  it. 
It  shall  not  be  for  want  of  examination  that  I  let  it  slip."  Such  an 
individual  hears  intently  and  earnestly,  laying  his  soul  open  to  the  in* 
finences  of  the  truth,  desiring  to  feel  its  holy  power,  and  to  practise  its 
divine  commands.  That  is  the  right  kind  of  hearer — an  earnest  listener 
whose  senses  are  all  aroused  to  receive  and  retain  all  that  can  be  learned. 

It  is  implied,  too,  that  he  is  a  thoughtful,  etudioue,  searching  hearer — 
he  looks  into  the  perfect  law.  I  call  you  back  to  the  figure.  As  a  man 
will  put  an  insect  under  a  glass,  and  inspect  it  again  and  again  through 
the  microscope^looking  at  the  win^,  at  each  joint  of  the  back,  and 
at  every  part  of  the  creature  under  his  eye — so  a  hearer  who  desires  a 
blessing  looks  closely  into  the  word.  He  is  sacredly  curious.  He  en- 
quires :  he  pries.  He  asks  all  those  who  should  know.  He  likes  to  get 
with  old  Christians  to  hear  their  experience.  He  loves  to  compare 
spiritual  things  with  spiritual,  to  dissect  a  text  and  see  how  it  stands  in 
relation  to  another,  and  to  its  own  parts,  for  he  is  in  earnest  when  he 
hears  the  word.  Alas,  dear  friends,  as  I  have  said  before,  many  hearers 
are  too  superficial ;  they  listen  to  what  is  said,  and  there  is  an  end  of  it, 
they  never  search  for  the  marrow  of  the  bones.  The  hearer  who  obtains 
a  blessing  first  gives  his  whole  heart  up  to  attention,  and  afterwards 
keeps  his  heart  saturated  with  the  truth  by  an  earnest,  diligent,  search- 
ing study  of  it,  and  so  by  the  Spirit's  teaching  he  discovers  what  is  the 
mind  of  God  to  his  soul. 

Then  this  hearer  goes  further.  Looking  so  steadily  he  discovers 
that  the  gospel  is  a  law  of  liberty:  and  indeed  it  is  so.  Blessed  is  the 
condition  of  those  who  are  free  from  the  law  of  Moses,  and  have  come 
under  law  to  Christ,  who  emancipates  the  soul  from  every  form  of 
bondage.  There  is  no  joy  like  the  ]oy  of  pardon,  there  is  no  release  like 
release  from  the  slavery  of  sin,  there  is  no  freedom  like  the  liberty  of 
holiness,  the  liberty  to  draw  near  to  God.  He  who  hears  the  gospel 
aright  soon  discovers  that  there  is  that  in  it  which  will  remove  every 
fetter  from  his  souL    He  looks,  and  looks,  and  at  last  loves  that  perfect 


TWO  SORTS  OF  HEARERS.  203 

]mm  of  liberty  which  setfr  his  heart  at  lai^  to  rnn  in  the  wajr  of  God*8 

command&     WquIcI  God  that  all  of  yoii  understood  it,  and  had  a 

diare  iiL  ita  benefited    Hhis  is  the  mm  who.  ia  bleat  while,  he  heanu 

But  it  is  added,  thatr  ?ie  coniinuM  thorsm..   If  you, hear  the  gospel 

and  it  does  not  bless  you*  hoar  it.agsdn.    If  you  have  read  the  word  of 

God  and  it  faas>  not  savod  yon^^iead.  it  BgB\xu    It  is  able  to  save  your 

sooL     Have  yon  been,  searohing:  through,  one  gxacions,  earnest  book, 

and  did.  it  not-soenii  to  fit  your  oaae  ?    Trj^  another.    Oh,. if  men  would 

aarch  for  salration  asthey  search  after  hidden  treasure  they  would  not 

be  long  before  they  found  it.    I  remember,  when  I  was  seeking  Christy 

bow  I  read  tfarougfa  Doddridge's''  Bise  and  Progress  of  Beligion"  with 

an  aridity  such  as  I  shoired  when  as  a.  boy  I  r^  some  merry  tale,  for 

I  deToored  eachipage  greedilyv    When  I  had  done  with  Doddridge  I 

read  Baxter's. ''Qair  to  the?  Unconverted,"  which  did  me  good,  but 

yielded  me  no  comfiirtL    I  naad  each  page,  and  drank  in  erery  word, 

though  the  book  was  exceedingly  bitter,  to  me;    I  wanted  Christ,  and 

if    I   ooold  find  him,,  and   eternal   life    through    him,  it  did   not 

matter  to  me  how  often  my  eyes  grew  weary  with  want  of  sleep  while 

reading.     Oh,  if  you  come  to  that — that  you  must  hare  Jesus ;  you 

iball/uwe  hnm    If  your  soul  is>  brought  to  feel  that  you  will  search 

hearea  and  earth  throughy  if  needful,  but  you  will  find  the  Saviour, 

that  Saviour  will  soon  appear  to  you*    The  hearer  who  gains  salvation 

*'  looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,"  and  cantinueth  therein. 

Lastly^  it  is  added  that  this  man  is  not  a  foi^etful  hearer,  but  a  doer 
ijf  the  wordy. djid.  he  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed. 

Is  he  bidden  to  pray  ?  He  prays  as  best  he  can.  Is  he  bidden  to 
repent  ?  He  asks  God  to  enable  him  to  repent.  Is  he  bidden  to  be- 
here  ?  He  says,  **  Lord,  I  believe :  help  thou  mine  unbelief."  He 
tarns  everything  that  he  hears  into  practice.  I  wish  that  we  had 
thousands  of  hearers  of  that  sort.  I  remember  reading  of  a  certain 
poson  who  heard  of  gnving  a  tenth  of  our  substance  to  God.  *^  Well," 
laid  he,  *^  that  is  rigtit,  and  I  will  do  it'':  and  he  kept  his  promise. 
He  heard  that  Daniel  drew  near  to  God  three  times  a  day  in  prayer. 
He  said,. '^  That  is  right;  I  will  do  it":  and  he  practised  a  threefold 
approach  to  the  throne  of  grace,  each  day.  He  made  it  a  rule  every 
tune  he  heard  of  something  that  waa  ejocellent  to  practise  it  at  once. 
Thus  he  formed  holy  habits,  and  a  noble  character,  and  became  a  blessed 
hearer  of  the  word*. 

Now,  dear  friends,  our  text  does  not  say  that  such  a  man  is  blessed 
for  the  deed,  but  it  says  that  such  a  man  is  blessed  in  the  deed. 
He  who  does  what  God  bids  him  shall  not  be  blest /or  it,  but  he  shall 
be  blest  in  it.  The  happy  result  will  come  to  us  in  the  act  of  obedience. 
May  God  grant  you  grace  henceforth,  whenever  the  gospel  is  preached, 
to  stir  yourself  up  with  the  energy  which  God's  Spirit  infuses  into  you, 
and  say,  '*  I  will  do  it  I  will  not  dream  about  it,  or  talk  about  it,  or 
question  about  it,  or  say  I  will  do  it  and  put  it  off,  but  now  at  once  the 
act  commanded  shall  be  done." 

I  finish  with  this  practical  suggestion.  The  remaining  portion  of  life 
is  short  with  some  of  you  who  hear  me  this  day.  Grey  hairs  are  upon 
jDu  here  and  there,  and,  according  to  the  course  of  nature,  you  must 
soon  stand  before  your  Judge.    AVould  it  not  be  well  that  you  thought 


204  XETBOPOLrrAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

about  another  world,  and  considered  how  yon  shall  face  yonr  Lord  at  the 
last  great  day  ?  The  gospel  says,  *'  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ/* 
which  in  other  words  means  ''Trnst  him."  Sepent;  confess  yonr  sin, 
forsake  it  and  look  to  Christ  for  cleansing.  That  is  the  way  of  salva- 
tion, — **  He  that  belicyeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  You  faiow 
all  about  the  way  of  life.  I  am  telling  you  a  tale  which  you  have 
heard  a  thousand  times,  but  the  question  is,  whm  is  it  going  to  he  dons? 
**  Soon,  sir/'  you  say.  But  were  you  not  here  when  this  Tabernacle  was 
opened  ?  **  Yes,"  you  say,  '*  I  think  I  was."  You  said  "  soon  "  then, 
and  you  say  ''soon"  now.  You  will  say  ''soon"  I  expect  until  that 
word  " soon"  will  be  met  with  the  heavy  sentence,  '*  Too  late,  too  late  ; 
ye  cannot  enter  now."  Take  heed  that  this  be  not  your  case  before 
this  day  has  closed.  Some  men  die  very  suddenly.  A  sister  came  to 
me  this  morning  and  said,  **  VLj  father  is  dead :  he  was  well  in  the 
morning,  he  came  home  irom  the  shop,  seemed  a  little  ill,  and  died  on  a 
sudden/'  Seeing  that  life  is  so  precarious,  would  it  not  be  best  that 
you  should  immediately  seek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  and 
call  upon  him « while  he  is  near?  I  would  suggest  that  vou  do  not 
begin  gossiping  and  talking  on  the  way  home  to-day,  but  tnat  you  get 
alone  a  little  while  quietly.  Do  you  reply  that  you  have  no  place 
where  you  can  be  alone :  this  is  not  true,  you  can  find  some  place  or 
other.  I  recollect  a  sailor  who  used  to  find  his  prayer  closet  at  the 
masthead :  nobody  came  up  there  to  disturb  him.  I  knew  a  carpenter 
who  used  to  get  down  a  sawpit  to  pray.  There  are  many  such  places. 
The  streets  of  London  when  crowaed  are  about  as  lonely  as  anywhere, 
and  Cheapside  maybe  as  good  as  the  mountain  side  if  your  heart 
desires  real  solitude. 

Some  of  you,  I  fear,  never  think  at  all.  As  far  as  thinking  goes,  if 
your  brains  were  taken  out,  many  of  you  would  get  on  almost  as  well 
without  them.  The  brains  of  some  people  are  only  useful  as  a  sort  of 
salt,  to  keep  them  from  rotting  by  death.  Little  thinking  is  done  by 
the  great  mass  of  the  people  except  the  thought,  '^  What  shall  we  eat 
and  what  shall  we  drink?"  Do,  I  pray  you,  think  a  little.  Pause 
and  consider  what  Ood  the  Lord  sets  before  you.  Be  a  doer  of  the 
work.  Do  what  God  bids  you.  As  he  bids  yon  repent,  repent ;  as  he 
bids  you  believe,  believe ;  as  he  bids  you  pray,  pray;  as  he  bids  you 
accept  his  grace,  God  helping  you,  do  it.  Oh,  that  it  might  be  done  at 
once,  and  to  the  Lord  shall  be  praise  world  without  end.    Amon. 


Portion  op  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — James  i. 


Hymns  prom  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 483,  538,  992. 


If  those  who  profit  h^  these  sermons  will  promote  their  circalation  ihey  may  be 
doing  as  mnich  good  as  if  they  preached  themselves.  The  preacher  in  returning  to 
his  polpit  would  feel  greatiy  cheered  if  he  found  that  the  circulation  of  the  sermons 
largely  increased.  A  judicious  word  may  gain  a  subscriber  to  whom  the  reading 
may  be  useful.  Would  not  some  of  our  readers  find  the  distribution  of  the  discoorseft 

Msy  and  efficient  mode  of  Christian  lerYioe  ? 


^^ti[0plto  S^at^made 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  AND  PROPRIETY  OF 

ABUNDANT  PRAISE. 


%  ^mn 


Dbutebed  oir  Lobd's-Day  Mobnik&»  Apbil  18th,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THS  MBTBOPOLITAIT  TABBBNACLE,  ^nSWIKGTON. 


*'Th6jjr  shall  abondantly  otter  the  memoxy  of  thy  great  goodness,  and  shall  sing 
of  thy  nghteousnesSb" — Psalm  cxlv.  7. 

This  is  called  ^'David's  Psalm  of  praise,"  and  you  will  see  that  all 
throngh  it  he  is  inflamed  by  a  strong  desire  that  God  may  be  greatly 
magnified.  Hence  he  uses  a  variety  of  expressions^  and  repeats  himself 
in  his  holy  yehemence.  Ban  your  eye  down  the  psalm  and  notice  such 
w<«d8  as  these  :  " I  will  extol  thee  " ;  "I  will  bless  thy  name  ";  "  Every 
dOTwill  I  bless  thee";  "I  will  praise  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever"; 
**  Great  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be  praised  ";  *^  One  generation  shall 
pnuse  thy  works  to  another";  "I  will  speak  of  the  gl(»iouB  honour  of 
thy  majesty  ";  "  Men  shall  speak  of  the  might  of  thy  terrible  acts,"  and 
ouier  words  of  like  import,  down  to  the  last  verse  :  ''  My  mouth  shall 
speak  the  praise  of  the  Lord :  and  let  all  flesh  bless  his  holy  name  for 
ever  and  ever."  David  is  not  content  witii  declaring  that  Jehovah  is 
worthy  of  praise,  or  witii  pleading  that  his  praise  ought  to  be  felt  in  the 
beart,  but  he  will  have  it  publicly  spoken  of,  openly  declared,  plainly 
uttered,  and  joyfully  proclaimed  in  song.  The  inspired  Psalmist,  moved  by 
the  Holy  GhosI,  calls  upon  all  flesh,  yea,  and  upon  all  the  works  of  God 
to  sound  forth  the  praises  of  the  Most  High.  Will  we  not  heartily 
leroond  to  the  call  ? 

In  following  out  his  design  of  praise,  David  had  spoken  in  verse  five  of 
the  majesfy  of  God,  the  glorious  King.  His  eye  seems  to  be  dazzled  by 
the  glorious  sf^ndour  of  the  august  throne,  and  he  cries, "  I  will  speak 
of  the  glorious  honour  of  thy  majesty."  Then  he  bethinks  himself  of 
the  power  of  that  throne  of  majesty  and  of  the  force  with  which  its  just 
decrees  are  carried  out,  and  so  in  verse  six  he  exclaims,  ^  Men  shall  speak 
of  the  might  of  thy  terrible  acts,  and  I  will  declare  thy  greatness."  Here 
he  epeaks  in  brief  both  as  to  the  majesty  and  the  might  of  the  dread 
Supreme,  but  when  he  turns  his  thoughts  to  the  divine  goodness,  he 
enlarges  and  uses  words  which  indicate  the  stress  which  he  lays  upon 
No.  1,468. 


20G  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  subject,  and  his  desire  to  linger  over  it.  "They  shall  abundantly 
utter,"  saith  our  text,  "  the  memory  of  thy  great  goodness."  Now,  our 
desire  this  morning  is  that  we  also  may  praise  and  magnify  the  name  of 
the  infinite  Jehovah  without  bound  or  stint,  and  may  especially  have  our 
hearts  enlarged  and  our  mouths  opened  wide  to  speak  abundantly  of  hia 
great  goodness.  0  that  in  the  whole  of  this  congregation  the  text  may 
become  true — *'  They  shall  abundantly  utter  the  memory  of  thy  great 
goodness";  and  having  uttered  it  in  plain  speech  may  we  all  rise  a  stage 
higher,  and  with  gladsome  music  sing  of  his  righteousness. 

You  see  our  object,  an  object  in  which  I  trust  you  all  sympathise. 
Come,  one  and  all,  and  praise  the  Lord.  Is  the  invitation  too  wide? 
Observe  the  ninth  verse:  "The  Lord  is  good  to  all:  and  his  tender 
mercies  are  over  all  his  works.  All  thy  works  shall  praise  thee,"  I  will 
not  limit  the  invitation  of  the  Lord ;  since  you  all  drink  of  the  river  of 
his  bounty,  render  to  him  all  of  you  sucli  praises  as  you  can. 

But  there  is  a  special  invitation  to  his  saints.  Come  ye  and  hUss  his 
name  with  spiritual,  inward,  enlightened  praise.  "  Bless  the  Lord,  O 
house  of  Israel.  Ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  bless  the  Lord."  In  your  heart 
of  hearts  extol,  adore,  and  make  him  great,  for  it  is  written — "  Thy 
saints  shall  bless  thee."  Verily  this  shall  not  be  written  in  vain,  for  our 
souls  shall  bless  the  Lord  this  day  as  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  move  within  ns. 

V\^e  shall  speak  upon  two  things  that  we  may  promote  the  object  we 
/"^ve  in  view.     The  first   iSi   ihe   fMtJwd  of  securing  the  abundant 
/«r  Ocof / *. .^  r  n^/p^  vram  a^  '^  his  goodness;  ojid,  eeconilj,  the  motives 
I.    The  mbthod  ot'^is  abto^^nt  utterance. 

BJYmE  PEAWB    OOKCEBNljcCtJ^^^  '^^^  ABUNDANT  UTTERANCE  OP  THB 

mental  philosophy  of  abounai^  his  ooodness.  Our  text  gives  us  the 
such  praise  may  be  secured.  ^  prf^^^'  ^^^  ^^^^  "®  *^^®  P^*^  ^J  ^h^* 
philosophy  approves.  First,  irekh^J  ^^^\  ^re  such  as  the  bestnaentel 
careful  observation.  Nofcinp  the  text  all  be  helped  to  abundant  praise  by 
memory  of  thy^fc^So«  ''    t  x -"  T^^ey  shall  abundantly  utter  the 

^t  of'all  bS'obSatf^Tman  dU  ^  '^^'  ^  ^'''^hr  ""' 
tnew ;  this  is  dear  tr^^u)]  \r.A  Ju   \^^Ji6  not  remember  what  he  never 

*e  text     In;l^^K'r^So?rfh^Pointi«->^a^^^ 
•he  mmd,  in  tliat  proportion  if  it  Mkely  to  ab^es.an  impression  upon 
ron  hear  a  sermnn    f».Vf     v^  i    '  ""^  ^-™K--%de  W  ^  memorv.    If 
vhi,.u    ' -.  ^'^"!??'  *nat  which  yon  remember  tf^i...^.^-  ,-.  f.i,«'««,Vf 


our  p^^c  lor  nrmemoJtT^  ^"'"^  '"•T''.'  '"^.Twhether  you  use 
er  tablets     It  "a  so  wi?h7K°^^V^°°'  ln\^^  ""^V-efl  »  ^^  "Pon 

.ust  tiy  ffrei^VoTie'^K^^^^^ 

he  impre^on  being  dearlj  and  deeply  nuSwHUot^iSVi^L^"^ 

It  wc  shall  see  it  after  many  dan.    Tlurfii-* VkJ  noc  easily  Atftde  away, 

«  plentiful  praising  ?fSwJUltflSS^;;fi^iSA  ^""^ 
Now,  see  what  it  is  that  ira «B^^^Bkfa^'.    ^S?^m 
any  aie  Uind,^  *j..rlll!^^^^1 »  god  s  goodne^  Too 
ZgrniMLg^  ""^y  ^■pOBiTa  the  bounti  igg  of 


W 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  AND  PROPRIETY  OP  ABUNDANT   PRAISE.       207 

woTidence  but  they  do  not  see  the  hand  of  God  in  them.  They  are  fed  by 
£is  liberaJity  and  gnided  by  his  care,  but  they  attribute  all  that  they 
receive  to  themselyes,  or  to  secondary  agents.  God  is  not  in  all  their 
thoughts,  and  consequently  his  goodness  la  not  considered.  They  have 
no  memory  of  his  goodness  because  they  have  no  observation  of  it.  Some^ 
indeed,  instead  of  observing  the  goodness  of  God,  complain  of  his  un- 
kindness  to  them,  and  imagine  that  he  is  needlessly  severe.  Like  the 
unprofitable  servant  in  the  parable,  they  say,  "  I  Imew  thee,  that  thoa 
art  an  austere  man."  Others  sit  in  judgment  upon  his  ways,  as  we  find 
tiiem  recorded  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  dare  to  condemn  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth.  Denyiag  the  goodness  of  Jehovah,  they  attempt  to  set  up 
another  God  ^an  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  ana  Jacob,  who  for  this 
enlightened  nineteenth  century  is  a  God  much  too  sternly  just.  In  this 
house,  however,  we  worship  Jah,  Jehovah  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
and  none  other  than  he.  In  many  a  place  of  worship  at  this  day  they 
adore  new  gods,  newly  come  up,  which  our  fathers  knew  not ;  not  like 
unto  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament,  who  in  the  opinion  of  modem  philo« 
flophers  is  as  much  out  of  date  as  Jupiter  himself.  This  day  we  say  with 
David,  '*  This  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever."  "  0  come  let  ua 
wor^p  and  bow  down;  let  us  kneel  before  Jehovah  our  Maker.  For 
he  is  our  God,  and  we  are  the  people  of  his  pasture,  and  the  sheep  of  his 
hand."  As  we  find  the  Lord  revealed  both  in  the  Old  and  the  New 
Testament,  making  no  division  in  the  revelation,  but  regarding  it  as  one 
grand  whole,  we  behold  abundant  goodness  in  him.  Mingled  with  that 
awful  justice  which  we  would  not  wish  to  deny,  we  see  surpassing  grace, 
and  we  delight  that  God  is  love.  He  is  gracious  and  full  of  compassion  ; 
dow  to  anger,  and  of  great  mercy.  We  have  no  complaints  to  make 
against  him,  we  wish  to  make  no  alteration  in  his  dealings  or  in  his 
eharacter ;  he  is  our  exceeding  joy ;  our  whole  heart  rejoices  in  the 
contemplation  of  him.  ''Who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  God  ?  Among  the 
gods  who  is  like  unto  thee  ?"  We  are  then  to  consider,  what  many  will 
not  so  much  as  believe,  that  there  is  great  goodness  in  Jehovah,  the  God 
of  creation,  providence,  and  redemption;  the  God  of  Paradise,  of  Sinai, 
and  of  Calvary.  We  are  thorou^y  to  acquaint  ourselves  with  him  as 
he  has  made  himself  known,  and  we  are  continually  to  consider  his  great 
goodness,  that  we  may  retain  the  memory  of  it.   . 

If  we  are  willing  to  see  we  shall  not  lack  for  opportunities  of 
behdding  his  goodness  every  day,  for  it  is  to  be  seen  in  so  many 
acts  that  I  wiU  not  commence  the  catalogue,  since  I  should  never  com- 
plete it.  His  goodness  is  seen  in  creation ;  it  shines  in  every  sunbeam, 
glitters  in  every  dewdrop,  smiles  in  every  flower,  and  whispers  in  every 
breeze.  Earth  and  sea  and  air,  teeming  with  innumerable  forms  of  life, 
are  all  full  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  Sun,  moon,  and  stars  affirm 
tliat  the  Lord  is  good,  and  all  terrestrial  things  echo  the  proclamation. 
His  goodness  is  aleo  to  be  seen  in  the  providence  which  ruleth  over  alL 
Let  rebellions  spirits  murmur  as  they  may,  goodness  is  enthroned  in 
Jehovah's  kingdom,  and  evil  and  suffering  are  intruders  there.  God  is 
good  towards  all  his  creatures,  and  especially  towards  the  objects  of  liis 
eternal  love,  for  whom  all  things  work  together  for  good.  It  is,  how- 
ever, in  the  domain  of  grace  that  the  noblest  form  of  divine  goodness  is 


208  HBTROPOLITAV  TABBRNACLB  PULPIT. 

seen.  Begin  with  the  goodness  which  shines  in  onr  election,  and  follow 
the  silver  thread  through  redemption,  the  mission  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  calling,  the  adoption,  the  preservation,  the  perfecting  of  the  chosen, 
and  yon  will  see  riches  of  goodness  which  will  astonnd  you.  Dwell 
where  yon  may  within  the  kingdom  of  redemption,  and  yon  will  see 
rivers,  yea,  oceans  of  goodness.  I  leave  your  own  minds  to  remember 
these  things,  and  your  own  lips  abundantly  to  utter  the  memory  of  the 
Lord's  great  goodness  in  the  wonders  of  his  salvation;  for  it  is  not  my 
design  to  speak  for  you,  but  to  stir  you  up  to  roeak  for  yourselves. 

The  point  which  struck  the  Psalmist,  and  should  strike  us  all,  is 
the  greatness  of  the  goodness.  The  greatness  of  the  goodness  will  be 
seen  by  the  contemplative  mind  upon  a  consideration  of  the  person  upon 
whom  the  goodness  lights.  '' Whence  is  this  to  me?"  will  often  be  the 
utterance  of  a  grateful  spirit.  That  God  should  be  good  to  any  of 
his  people  shows  his  mercy,  but  that  he  should  make  ma  to  be  one  of 
his,  and  deal  so  well  with  me,  herein  his  goodness  doth  exceed  itself! 
Whence  is  this  to  me  ?  Is  this  the  manner  of  man,  0  Lord?  What 
am  I,  and  what  is  my  Other's  house?  It  is  great  goodness  since  it 
visits  persons  so  insignificant,  yea  more,  so  guilty  and  so  deserving  of 
wrath.  Blessed  be  God  that  he  is  good  to  persons  so  ungrateful,  to 
persons  who  cannot  even  at  the  best  make  any  adeauate  return,  who,  alas, 
do  not  even  make  such  return  as  they  could.  Ah,  Lord,  when  I  consider 
what  a  brutish  creature  I  am  it  is  easy  to  confess  the  greatness  of  thy 
goodness. 

The  greatness  of  the  goodness  becomes  apparent  when  we  think  of 
the  greatness  of  Ood  the  benefactor.  **  What  is  man  that  thou  art  mindful 
of  him,  or  the  son  of  man  that  thou  visitest  him  ?  '*  That  God  himself 
should  bless  his  people,  that  he  should  come  in  the  form  of  human  flesh 
to  save  his  people,  that  he  should  dwell  in  us,  and  walk  in  us,  and  be  to 
us  a  God,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble,  is  a  miracle  of  love.  Is  not  this 
great  goodness  ?  I  can  very  well  understand  that  the  infinity  of  hia 
benevolence  should  commit  us  to  the  charge  of  angels,  bat  it  is  amazing 
that  it  should  be  written, ''  I  the  Lord  do  keep  it :  I  will  water  it 
every  moment :  lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day."  Oh, 
the  greatness  of  such  personal  condescension,  such  personal  care.  0  heir 
of  heaven,  from  the  fountain  of  all  goodness  shalt  thou  drink,  and  not 
from  its  streams  alone.  God  himself  is  th^  portion,  and  the  lot  of 
thine  inheritance ;  thou  art  not  put  off  witb  creatures,  the  Creator 
himself  is  thine.  Wilt  thou  not  remember  this,  and  so  keep  alive  the 
memory  of  his  goodness  ? 

The  greatness  of  the  goodness  is  on  some  occasions  made  manifest  by 
the  evil  from  which  H  rescues  us.  Nobody  knows  so  well  the  blessing  of 
health  as  he  who  has  but  lately  been  tortured  in  every  limb ;  then  for 
his  restoration  he  blesses  Jehovah  Bophi,  the  healing  Lord.  None  know 
what  salvation  from  sin  means  like  those  who  have  been  crashed  beneath 
the  burden  of  guilt,  and  have  been  racked  by  remorse.  Did  you  ever  feel 
yourself  condemned  of  God,  and  cast  out  nrom  his  presence  ?,   Did  the 

Cgs  of  hell  commence  within  your  startled  conscience  ?  Did  your  soul 
J  for  death  rather  than  life,  while  thick  clouds  and  darlmess  en- 
shrouded your  guilty  spirit  ?  If  so,  when  the  Lord  has  put  away  your 
sin,  and  said,  **  Thou  shalt  not  die ; "  when  he  has  brought  you  tbrth 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  AND  PBOPRIETY  OF  ABUNDANT  PRAISE.       2U9 

from  the  prison-honsey  and  broken  yonr  bonds  asunder,  and  set  your  feet 
upon  a  rock,  then  has  the  new  song  been  in  your  mouth,  even  praise  for 
evermore.  Then  have  you  known  it  to  be  great  goodness  which  thus 
deUvered  you.  We  may  imagine  what  the  bottom  of  the  sea  is  Uke,  and 
conceive  what  it  must  be  to  be  borne  adown  the  lower  deeps  where  the 
weeds  are  wrapped  about  the  dead  men's  brows ;  yet  I  warrant  you 
that  our  imagination  but  poorly  realizes  what  Jonah  experienced  when 
the  floods  compassed  him  about,  and  he  went  down  to  the  bottom 
of  the  mountains.  When  the  Lord  brought  up  his  life  from  corruption 
then  had  he  a  strong  and  vivid  memory  of  the  great  goodness  of  God, 
seeing  he  had  been  delivered  from  so  great  a  death.  It  is  in  the 
storm-life  that  we  learn  to  praise  the  Lord  for  his  goodness,  and  for 
his  wonderful  works  to  the  children  of  men.  If  I  might  have  it 
flo,  I  could  wish  my  whole  life  to  be  calm  as  a  fair  summer's  evening, 
when  scarce  a  zephyr  stirs  the  happy  flowers ;  I  could  desire  that  nothing 
might  again  disturb  the  serenity  of  my  restful  spirit :  but  were  it  to  be 
so  I  suspect  I  should  know  but  little  of  the  great  goodness  of  the  Lord.  ^ 
The  sweet  singer  in  the  one  hundred  and  seventh  psalm  ascribes  the  r 
song  of  gratitude  not  to  dwellers  at  home,  but  to  wanderers  in  the  wil- 
derness ;  not  to  those  who  are  always  at  liberty,  but  to  emancipated  cap- 
tives ;  not  to  the  strong  and  vigorous,  but  to  those  who  barely  escape 
from  the  gates  of  death;  not  to  those  who  stand  upon  a  sea  of  glass, 
but  to  those  who  are  tossed  in  tempest  upon  a  raging  ocean.  Doubtless  * 
so  it  is :  we  should  not  perceive  the  greatness  of  goo^lness  if  we  did  not 
see  the  depth  of  tiie  horrible  pit,  from  which  it  snatches  us.  Ton  were 
almost  ruined  in  business,  friend,  but  you  escaped  as  with  the  skin  of 
yonr  teeth,  then  you  praised  God  for  his  great  goodness.  Your  dear 
child  was  given  up  of  the  physicians,  your  wife  apparently  sickened  for 
death,  but  both  these  have  been  spared  to  you,  and  herein  you  see  the  I 
heights  and  depths  of  mercy.  Now,  therefore,  lav  up  this  great  goodness  I 
in  your  memory  to  be  the  material  for  future  psalms  of  praise.  J 

Nor  is  this  <£e  only  way  of  estimating  God's  great  goodness :  you  may 
estimate  it  by  ^  actual  greatness  of  the  benefits  bestowed.  He  giveth 
like  a  Idng ;  nay,  he  giveth  like  a  God.  Behold,  your  God  has  not  given 
yon  a  few  minted  coins  of  gold,  but  he  has  endowed  you  with  the  mines 
themselves :  he  has  not,  as  it  were,  handed  to  you  a  cup  of  cold  water, 
but  he  has  brought  you  to  the  flowing  fountain,  and  made  the  well  itself 
your  own.  God  Idmself  is  ours.  "  The  Lord  is  my  portion,  saith  my 
soul."  If  you  must  have  a  little  list  of  what  he  has  given  you,  ponder 
the  following  items : — He  has  jgiven  you  a  name  and  a  place  among  his 
people ;  he  mis  given  you  the  rights  and  the  nature  of  his  sons ;  he  has 

fiven  you  the  complete  forgiveness  of  all  your  sins,  and  you  have  it  now; 
e  has  given  you  a  robe  of  righteousness,  and  you  are  wearing  it  now;  he 
has  given  you  a  superlative  loveliness  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  you  nave  it  now ; 
he  has  given  you  access  to  him,  and  prevalence  at  the  mercy-seat ;  he  has 

S'ven  you  this  world  and  worlds  to  come ;  he  has  given  you  all  that  he 
\s;  he  has  riven  you  his  own  Son,  and  how  shall  he  now  refuse  you 
anything  ?  Oh,  he  has  given  like  a  God.  The  greatness  of  his  goodness 
this  tongue  can  never  hope  to  tell,  and  so  I  ask  you  to  think  it  over  in  a 
quiet  hour  at  home.  As  for  myself  I  will  speak  of  my  Lord  as  I  And 
him,  for  the  old  proverb  bids  us  do  so.  Whatever  you  shall  say,  men  and 


210  UETROPOLITAK  TABERKACIiE  PTTLPIT. 

brethren,  I  have  nought  to  speak  bat  what  is  good  of  my  God,  my  King; 
from  my  ohildhood  until  now.  He  amazes  me  with  his  mercy ;  he  nfcteriy 
astonni^B  me  with  his  lovingkindness ;  he  caxises  my  spirit  almost  to 
swoon  away  with  delight  b^ieath  the  sweetness  of  his  love.  Tet  hath  he 
not  spared  me  the  rod,  nor  will  he,  and  blessed  be  his  name  for  that  also. 
**  Sh^l  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  we  not  also 
receive  evil  ?"  said  the  patriarch ;  bnt  we  will  go  beyond  that,  and  assert 
that  evil  is  no  evil  when  it  comes  from  his  hand — everything  is  ^ood 
which  he  ordains.  We  may  not  see  it  to  be  so  at  the  time,  bnt  so  it  is. 
Our  heavenly  Father  seems  to  rise  from  good  to  better,  and  from  better 
'to  yet  better  still  in  infinite  progression :  he  causes  the  roadway  of  our 
life  to  rise  higher  and  higher,  and  carries  it  over  lofty  mountains  of 
lovingkindness.  Our  life-path  winds  ever  ui>ward  to  yet  higher  summits 
of  al^unding  jnercj :  thercfore  let  his  praise  incraase,  and  the  name 
of  the  Lord  be  greater  and  greater  still. 

I  want  to  urge  you,  dear  friends,  to  observe  the  goodness  of  God  care- 
fully for  your  soute'  good.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  eyes  and 
no  eyes ;  yet  many  have  eyes  and  yet  see  not.  God's  goodness  flows 
before  them,  and  they  say,  "  Where  is  it?  "  They  breathe  it  and  they 
say,  "  Where  is  it  ?  "  They  sit  at  the  table,  and  they  are  fed  upon  it; 
they  wear  it  upon  their  limbs :  it  is  in  the  very  beating  of  their  heart, 
and  yet  they  say,  "Where  is  it?"  Be  not  thus  blind.  "The  ox 
kttoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib,"  let  ns  not  be  more 
sottish  than  beasts  of  the  field,  bnt  let  ns  know  the  Lord  and  consider 
weU  the  greatness  of  his  goodness. 

I  have  said  that  the  text  contains  the  philosophy  of  great  praise,  and 
we  see  this  in  the  second  stage  of  the  process,  namely,  diUgent  memory. 
That  which  has  made  an  impression  upon  the  mind  by  observation  is 
fastened  upon  the  memory.  Memory  seems  to  lie  in  two  things — ^first  in 
retaining  an  imprcssion,  and  then  in  recollecting  it  at  a  future  time.  I 
suppose  that,  more  or  less,  everything  that  happens  to  ns  is  retained  in 
the  mind,  bnt  it  is  not  easy  to  reproduce  the  fiiinter  impressions  when 
yon  wkhtodo  60.  I  know  in  my  own  mind  a  gi»at  many  things  that 
I  am  sore  I  remember,  but  yet  I  cannot  always  recollect  them  imme- 
diately. Give  me  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  nm  through  a  certain 
arrangement  of  ideas,  and  I  shall  say,  "  Oh  yes,  I  have  it.  It  was  in  my 
mind,  but  I  could  not  recall  it  at  the  time.  Memory  collects  fieusts  and 
afterwards  fMsoUeets  them.  The  matters  before  ns  are  recorded  by 
memory,  bnt  the  tablet  ma^y  be  mislaid  :  the  perfection  of  memoir  is  to 
preserve  the  tablet  in  a  well-known  place,  from  which  you  ccm  fetch  it 
forth  at  the  moment.  I  have  dwelt  rather  longer  upon  observation 
with  the  view  that  yon  may  begin  aright  from  the  beginning,  and,  by 
getting  vivid  impressions,  may  h^  the  l^ter  able  to  retain  and  to  recall 
them.  We  cannot  utter  what  we  have  forgotten  ;  hence  the  use  of  close 
observation  to  make  a  strong  memory  touching  the  Lord's  great 
goodness. 

How  are  we  to  strengthen  our  memory  as  to  God's  goodness  ?  'Pint, 
we  should  be  well  acquainted  with  the  documents  in  which  his  good- 
ness is  recorded.  A  man  may  be  said  to  keep  in  memoir  a  fact  which 
did  not  happen  in  his  own  time,  but  hundrcds  of  years  oeforc  he  was 
born  :  he  rcmembers  it  because  he  has  seen  the  document  in  which  tho 


THE  PHn/}80PHT  AlID  PROPEIETY  OF  ABUNDANT  PRAISE.       211 

&ct  ifi  reoorded.  In  a  certain  sense  this  is  Triihin  the  range  of  memory; 
it  is  within  the  memory  of  man,  the  united  memory  of  the  race. 
Beloved,  be  familiar  with  the  Word  of  God.  Store  yoor  memory  with 
Jhe  ancient  records  of  his  great  goodness  :  drink  in  the  whole  narrative 
i>f  the  evangelists,  and  despise  not  Moses  and  the  prcmhets ;  lie  a-soak  in  | 
the  Psalms  and  the  Song  of  Solomon,  and  such  like  books,  till  yon  come  \ 
to  know  the  well  reoorded  goodness  of  the  Lord.  Have  his  words  and 
deeds  of  goodness  arranged  and  ready  to  hand ;  let  them  be  as  it  were  at 
your  fingers'  ends  because  they  are  in  your  heart's  core,  and  then  yon 
will  be  sure  abundantly  to  utter  the  memory  of  his  goodness,  for  "  out  of 
the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh." 

Next,  if  you  would  strengthen  your  memory,  right  diligently  observe 
ihe  memorials.  There  are  two  in  the  Christian  Church.  There  is  the 
memorial  of  your  Saviour's  death,  burial,  and  resuirection  which  is  set 
forth  in  betievers'  baptism,  wherein  we  are  buried  and  risen  with  the 
Lord  Christ.  Forget  not  that  memorial  of  his  deep  anguish,  when  he 
was  immersed  in  grief  and  plunged  in  agony  ;  for  he  oids  you  observe  it. 
And  as  for  the  Holy  Supper,  never  neglect  it,  but  be  often  at  the  table^ 
where  again  you  set  forth  his  death  till  he  come.  He  has  bidden  you 
do  this  in  remembrance  of  him ;  cherish  devoutly  tiie  precious  memo* 
rial.  Great  ereHts  in  nations  h^ve  been  pieaerrid  np^n  the  memory 
of  future  generations  by  some  ordained  ceremonial,  and  the  Lord's 
Supper  is  of  that  kind  ;  therefore  observe  ye  well  the  table  of  the  Lord, 
that  ye  forget  not  his  great  goodness.  See  how  the  Jews  kept  their 
Exodus  in  mind  by  means  of  the  Paschal  Lamb;  how  they  ate  it 
after  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood ;  how  they  talked  to  their  children 
and  told  them  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  abundantly  utteiing 
the  memory  of  God's  goodness,  and  then  after  supper  they  sang  a  hymn, 
even  as  our  text  bids  us  sing  of  the  righteousness  of  €rod.  Strengthen 
yoor  memories,  then,  by  reverent  attention  to  the  historical  documents 
and  the  memorial  ordinances. 

Still,  the  most  important  is  the  memory  of  what  has  happened  to 
jonrseM^  your  own  personal  eoEpmencs.  I  will  not  give  a  penny  for  your 
religion  unless  it  has  taken  effect  upon  yourself.  The  power  of  prayer  I 
What  of  that  ?  Did  you  ever  receive  an  answer  to  prayer  ?  Did  you  ever 
wrestle  with  the  angel  and  come  off  victorious  ?   What  do  you  know  about 

Srayer  if  you  never  did  ?  You  are  very  orthodox.  Yes,  but  unless  the 
octrines  of  grace  have  brought  to  your  soul  the  grace  of  the  doctrines,  and 
you  have  tasted  andhandled  them,  what  do  youknow  about  them  ?  Nothing 
certainly  to  remember.  0,  dear  heart,  wert  thou  ever  bom  again  ?  Then 
thou  wilt  remember  his  great  goodness.  Wert  thou  ever  cleansed  from  thy 
sin  and  justified  in  Clmst  ?  Thou  wilt  remember  his  great  goodness. 
Hast  thou  been  renewed  in  heart  so  as  to  hate  sin  and  live  in  holiness? 
If  so,  thoa  wilt  remember,  because  thou  knowest  something  which 
flesh  and  blood  have  not  revealed  unto  thee.  Let  every  personaJ  mercy 
be  written  upon  your  personal  memory. 

I  have  heard  that  the  science  of  mnemonics,  or  the  strengthening  of 

the  memory,  for  which  I  have  not  a  very  high  esteem,  lies  in  the  follow- 

I       ingof  oertoin  methods.    According  to  some,  you  link  one  idea  with 

another ;  you  recollect  a  date  by  associating  it  with  something  that  you 

can  see.    Practise  this  method  in  the  present  case.    Remember  God's 


212  HETBOPOLITAK  TABERKACLS  PULPTT. 

goodness  by  the  objects  aronnd  yon  which  are  associated  with  it.  For 
instance,  let  yonr  bed  remind  yon  of  God's  mercy  in  the  night  watches, 
and  your  table  of  bis  goodness  in  supplying  your  daily  needs.  My 
garments  when  I  put  them  on  this  morning  reminded  me  of  times  when 
my  hand  was  unequal  even  to  that  simple  task.  All  around  us  there 
are  memoranda  of  God's  love  if  we  choose  to  read  them.  The  memory 
of  some  deed  of  divine  goodness  may  be  connected  with  every  piece  of 
furniture  in  your  room.  There  is  the  old  arm-chair  where  you  wrestled 
with  God  in  great  trouble,  and  received  a  gracious  answer ;  you  cannot 
forget  it;  you  do  not  prav  so  well  anywhere  else  as  you  do  there;  you 
have  become  attached  to  that  particular  chair.  That  thumbed  Bible, — 
that  particular  one  I  mean :  it  is  getting  rather  worn  now,  and  is  marked 
a  good  deal ;  but,  nevertheless,  out  of  that  very  copy  the  promises  have 
gleamed  forth  like  the  stars  in  heaven,  and  therefore  it  helps  your  memory 
to  use  it     I  remember  a  poor  man  giving  me  what  I  thought  great 

E raise.  I  visited  him  in  the  hospital,  and  he  said,  "  Ah,  you  seem  to 
ave  hung  this  room  round  with  your  texts,  for  everything  reminds  me 
of  what  I  have  heard  you  say,  and  as  I  lie  here  I  recollect  your  stories 
and  your  sayings."  In  much  the  same  way  we  should  recollect  what 
God  has  done  for  ns,  by  looking  at  all  the  various  places,  circumstances, 
times,  and  persons  which  were  the  surroundings  of  his  mercy.  0  for  a 
dear  remembrance  of  the  goodness  of  God. 

Memory  is  sometimes  helped  by  classification.  Ton  send  a  servant  to 
a  shop  for  a  variety  of  artides :  she  will  forget  some  of  them  unless  you 
80  arrange  the  order  that  one  suggests  another.  Take  care,  then,  to  set 
God's  mercies  in  order  before  you,  and  reckon  them  up  in  number,  if  you 
can,  and  so  fix  them  in  your  memory. 

At  other  times,  when  persons  have  very  bad  memories,  they  like  to 
figure  down  on  a  bit  of  paper  that  which  it  is  important  to  remember.  I 
have  often  done  so,  and  have  placed  the  paper  where  I  have  never  found  it 
again.  A  thread  around  the  finger,  or  a  knot  in  a  handkerchief,  and  many 
other  devices  have  been  tried.  I  do  not  mind  what  it  is,  so  long  as  you 
try  and  recollect  God's  mercy  to  you  by  some  means  or  other.  Do  make 
some  record  of  his  goodness.  You  know  the  day  in  which  you  lost  that 
money,  do  you  not?  "Yes,  very  well."  You  recollect  the  day  of  the 
month  of  Black  Friday,  or  Black  Monday,  up  in  the  City ;  you  have 
evil  days  indelibly  noted  in  the  black  pocket-book  of  memory :  do  you 
remember  as  well  the  days  of  God's  special  lovingkindness  to  you  ?  x  ou 
should  do  80.  Take  pains  to  make  notes  of  notable  benefits,  and  to 
mark  remarkable  blessings,  so  shall  you  in  future  days  utter  the  memory 
of  God's  great  goodness. 

The  first  two  processes  for  securing  abundant  praise  are  observation  and 
remembrance.  The  next  is  utterance;  ''They  shall  abundantly  t«//«r." 
The  word  contains  the  idea  of  boiling  or  bubbling  up  like  a  fountain.  It 
signifies  a  holy  fluency  about  the  mercy  of  (xod.  We  have  quite  enough 
fluent  people  about,  but  they  are  maiiy  of  them  idlers  for  whom  Sataa 
'finds  aoundant  work  to  do.  The  Lord  deliver  us  firom  the  noise  of  fluent 
women :  but  it  matters  not  how  fluent  men  and  women  are  if  they  will 
be  fluent  on  the  topic  now  before  us.  Open  your  mouths;  let  the  praise 
pour  forth ;  let  it  come,  rivers  of  it.  Stream  away !  Gush  away,  all  that 
you  possibly  can.  "  They  shall  abundantly  utter  the  memory  of  thy  great 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  AND  PROPRIETY  OP  ABUNDAHT  PRAISE.      218 

goodness.'*  Do  not  stop  the  joyful  speakers,  let  them  go  on  for  ever. 
They  do  not  exaggerate,  they  cannot.  Ton  say  they  are  enthusiastic,  but 
they  are  not  ha&  up  to  the  pitch  yet ;  bid  them  become  more  excited 
and  speak  yet  more  fervently.  Oo  on,  brother,  go  on  ;  pile  it  up  :  say 
something  greater,  grander,  and  more  fiery  still !  Yon  cannot  exceed  the 
truth.  You  have  come  to  a  theme  where  your  most  fluent  powers  will 
fail  in  utterance.  The  text  calls  for  a  sacred  fluency,  and  I  would  exhort 
you  liberally  to  exercise  it  when  you  are  spe^dng  of  the  goodness  of 
God- 

**  They  shall  abundantly  utter  it " — that  is,  they  shall  constantly  be 
doing  it :  they  shall  talk  about  Qoi's  goodness  all  day  long.  When 
you  step  into  their  cottages  they  will  begin  to  tell  you  of  Gkxl's 
goodness  to  them ;  when  you  bia  adieu  to  them  at  night  you  shall 
near  more  last  words  upon  the  favourite  theme.  Very  likely  they 
will  repeat  themselves,  but  that  does  not  matter ;  yon  cannot  have  too 
much  of  this  truly  good  thing.  Just  as  the  singers  in  the  temple  repeated 
^ain  and  again  the  chorus,  "  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever,  so  may  we 
repeat  our  praises.  Some  of  Gk)d's  mercies  are  so  great  and  sweet,  that 
if  we  never  had  another  throughout  eternity  the  recollection  of  the 
single  favour  might  for  ever  remain.  The  splendour  of  divine  love  is 
80  great,  that  a  single  manifestation  of  it  is  often  all  that  we  can  bear : 
to  have  two  such  revelations  at  once  would  be  as  overpowering  as  though 
Qod  should  make  two  suns  when  one  already  fills  the  world  with  light. 
Oh,  praise  ye  the  Lord,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  with  boundless  exulta* 
tion :  rouse  all  your  &culties  to  this  divine  service,  and  abundantly 
utter  the  memory  of  his  goodbess. 

Yon  cannot  praise  abundantly  unless  your  memory  supplies  materials, 
and  on  the  other  hand  your  memory  will  lose  strength  unless  you 
utter  what  you  know.  When  you  went  to  school  and  had  a  lesson 
to  learn  you  found  out  that  by  reading  your  lesson  aloud  you  learned 
it  more  quickly,  for  your  ear  assisted  your  eye.  Uttering  the  divine 
goodness  is  a  great  help  to  the  memory  of  it.  By  teaching  we  learn ;  by 
giving  the  truth  expression  we  deepen  its  impression  upon  our  minds. 

Now  I  come  to  the  last  part  of  this  admirable  process.  When  we  have 
abnndantly  uttered,  then  we  are  to  sing.  In  the  old  Oreek  mythology 
Mnemosynd,  the  goddess  of  memory,  is  the  mother  of  the  Muses,  and  surely 
where  there  is  a  good  memoiy  of  God's  lovingkindness  the  heart  wiu 
soon  produce  a  song.  But  what  is  surprising  in  the  text  is  that  when  the 
joy  is  described  as  mounting  from  plain  utterance  to  song  it  takes  another  I 
tbieme — **  Sing  of  thy  righieoiwiess"  When  the  heart  is  most  adoring, 
and  selects  the  grandest  theme  for  reverent  song,  it  chooses  the  meeting 
of  goodness  and  righteousness  as  its  topic.  How  sweet  is  that  can-| 
tide—''  Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together,  and  righteousness  and  peacej 
have  kissed  each  other."  The  atonement  is  the  gem  of  the  heart'sl 
poet^.    Do  not  your  hearts  bum  within  you  at  the  very  mention  of  the^ 

?:loriou8  deed  of  Jesus  our  great  Substitute?  Parnassus  is  outdone  by 
/alvary;  the  Castalian  spring  is  dried  and  Jesus'  wounded  side  hasi 
opened  another  fount  of  song.  The  goodness  of  the  Lord  to  us  in  all  I 
the  blessings  of  his  providence  we  gladly  chant,  but  when  we  tell  of  the' 
grace  whicn  led  our  Lord  Jesus  to  bleed  and  die,  ''the  just  for  the' 
unjust  to  bring  us  to  God,"  our  music  leaps  to  nobler  heights.    Incom-  j 


214  KBTBOPOLITAir  TABEBKAGLS  PULPIT. 

parable  wisdom  ordained  a  way  in  which  €k>d  should  be  righteous  to  ihe 
sternness  of  severity,  and  yet  should  be  good,  illimitably  good,  to  those 
that  put  their  trust  in  him  ;  lift  up  then  your  music  till  the  golden  harps 
shall  find  themselves  outdone. 

Thus,  then,  we  have  explained  the  method  of  securing  an  abundant 
utterance,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  help  us  to  carry  it  out. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  we  sluJl  veiy  briefly  note  the  motives  fob 
THIS  ASUSDAST  UTTBBANOB.  These  lie  very  near  to  hand.  The  first 
is,  because  we  cannot  help  it.  The  goodness  of  God  demands  that  we 
should  speak  of  it.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  should  charge  his  people 
to  be  silent  as  to  his  goodness  they  would  scarcely  be  able  to  obey  the 
oommand.  They  would,  like  the  man  tiiat  was  healed,  blaze  abroad  the 
mighty  work  that  he  had  done.  But»  bless  his  name,  he  has  not  told  us 
to  be  quiet ;  he  allows  us  to  utter  abundantly  the  memory  of  his  great 
goodness.  The  stones  of  the  street  would  cry  out  as  we  went  along  if 
we  did  not  speak  of  his  love.  Some  of  you  good  people  seldom  speak  of 
the  goodness  of  God ;  how  is  this  ?  I  wonder  you  can  be  so  coldly  quiet. 
**  Oh,"  said  one  in  his  first  love,  "  I  must  speak  or  I  shall  burst";  and 
we  have  sometioies  felt  the  same,  when  the  restrained  testimony  was  as 
fire  within  our  bones.  Is  it  not  a  sacred  instinct  to  tell  out  what  we  feel 
within  ?  The  news  is  too  good  to  keep.  Indulge  to  the  fiill  the  holy 
propensity  of  your  renewed  nature,  xour  soul  says,  *^  Speak,"  and  if 
etiquette  says,  "  Hush,  they  will  think  you  a  &natic,"  regard  it  not,  but 
sp^  aloud,  and  let  cJiem  thmk  ^ou  a  jGuiatic  if  they  please.  Sir,  play 
the  organ  very  softly  when  the  subject  is  your  own  praise ;  but  when  you 
come  to  the  praises  of  God,  pull  out  all  the  stops ;  thunders  of  music 
are  all  too  little  for  his  infinite  deservings. 

Another  motive  for  abundantly  uttmng  the  praises  of  God  is  that 
other  voices  are  clamorous  to  drown  it.  What  a  noisy  world  this  is,  with 
its  conflicting  and  discordant  cries.  ''  Lo  here,"  cries  one ;  "  Lo  there," 
shouts  another.  This  uproar  would  drown  the  notes  of  God's  praise 
unless  his  people  uttered  it  again  and  yet  again.  The  more  there  is  said 
against  our  God  the  more  should  we  speak  for  him.  Whenever  you  hear 
a  man  curse,  it  would  be  wise  to  say  aloud,  "  Bless  the  Lord."  Say  it 
seven  times  for  every  time  he  curses,  and  make  him  hear  it.  Perliaps 
he  will  want  to  know  what  you  are  at,  and  you  will  then  have  an 
opportunity  of  asking  what  he  is  at,  and  he  will  have  more  difGlculty 
in  explaining  himself  than  you  will  ia  explaining  yourself.  Do  try  if 
you  can  to  make  up  for  the  injuries  done  to  the  dear  and  sacred  name 
of  God  by  mulCiplying  your  praises  in  proportion  as  you  hear  him  spoken 
ill  of.  I  say,  unless  you  give  forth  abundant  utterance,  Gk)d*s  praise  will 
be  buried  under  heaps  of  error,  blasphemy,  ribaldry,  nonsense,  and  idle 
talk.    Abundantly  utter  it  so  that  some  of  it,  at  least,  may  be  heard. 

Praise  the  Lord  abundantly  because  it  will  benefit  you  to  do  so.  How 
bright  the  past  looks  when  we  begin  to  praise  God  for  it.  We  say,  '*  I 
am  the  man  that  hath  seen  afiOUction,"  and  we  are  to  fill  the  cap  of 
memory  with  gall  and  wormwood,  but  when  we  see  the  goodness  of  God 
in  it  all,  we  turn  the  kerchief  with  which  we  wiped  our  tears  into  a  flag 
of  victory,  and  with  holy  praise,  in  the  name  of  our  God^  we  wave  the 
banneret. 

As  for  the  present,  if  you  think  of  God's  mercies,  how  different  it 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  AND  PROPRIETY  OP  ABUNDANT  PRAISE.       215 

seems.  A  man  comes  to  his  dinner  table,  and  does  not  enjoy  what  is 
there,  because  he  misses  an  expected  dainty  ;  but  if  he  were  as  poor  as 
gome  people  he  would  not  turn  nis  nose  up,  but  would  bless  the  goodness 
which  has  given  him  so  much  more  than  he  deserves.  Some  I  know 
even  among  Christians  are  growlers  in  general  always  finding  fault.  The 
best  things  in  the  world  are  not  good  enough  for  them.  Ah,  my 
brother,  abundantly  utter  the  memory  of  Gkxl's  goodness  and  you  will 
find  nothing  to  grumble  at,  nothing  to  complain  about^  but  everything 
to  rejoice  in. 

As  for  the  future,  if  we  remember  God's  goodness  how  joyfully  we  shall 
march  into  it.  There  is  the  same  goodness  for  to-morrow  as  for  yester- 
day, and  the  same  goodness  for  old  age  as  for  youth ;  the  same  God  to 
bless  me  when  I  grow  grey  as  when  I  was  a  babe  upon  my  mother's 
breast.  Therefore,  forw^  to  the  fiiture  without  hesitation  or  suspicion, 
abnndanUy  uttering  the  lovingkindness  of  the  Lord. 

Again,  I  think  we  ought  to  do  this  because  of  the  good  it  does  to  other 
people.  If  you  abundantly  talk  of  God's  goodness  you  are  sure  to  benefit 
your  neighbours.  Many  are  comforted  when  they  hear  of  God's  goodness 
to  their  friends.  Draw  a  long  &ce,  and  lament  the  trials  of  the  way ; 
sit  down  with  sombre  brethiren,  and  enjoy  a  little  comfortable  misery, 
and  see  whether  crowds  will  ask  to  share  your  vinegar-cruet. 

''  While  here  our  various  wants  we  moum. 
United  groans  ascend  on  high,** 

says  Dr.  Watts,  and  I  am  afraid  he  speaks  the  truth,  but  very  few  will 
be  led  in  this  way  to  resolve — "  We  will  go  with  these  people,  for  we  per- 
ceiye  that  God  is  with  them."  Is  it  go(A  reasoning  if  men  say,  ^'  These 
people  are  so  miserable  that  they  must  be  on  ;the  way  to  heaven"?  We  ; 
may  hope  they  are,  for  they  evidently  want  some  better  place  to  live  in ; 
but  then  it  may  be  questioned  if  sucn  folks  would  not  be  wretched  even 
in  heaven.  You  smile,  dear  friends,  as  if  you  said  you  would  not  be  much 
attracted  by  sanctimonious  misery,  nor  do  I  think  you  would.  Therefore 
do  not  try  it  yourselves,  but  on  the  contrary  talk  much  of  the  goodness  | 
of  the  Lord,  and  wear  a  smiling  &ce,  and  let  your  eyes  sparkle,  and  go 
through  the  world  as  if  after  m  you  are  not  slaves  under  the  lash,  or 
prisoners  in  bonds,  but  the  Lord's  fi:ee  men.  We  have  glorious  reasons 
for  being  happy ;  let  us  be  so,  and  soon  we  shall  hear  persons  asking, 
**  What  is  this  ?  Is  this  religion  ?  I  always  thought  religious  people 
felt  bound  to  be  down  in  the  dumps,  and  to  go  mourning  and  sighmg  all 
their  days."  When  they  see  your  joy  they  will  be  tempted  to  come  to 
Christ.  There  is  a  blessed  seductiveness  in  a  holy,  happy  life.  Praise 
then  his  name,  praise  his  name  evermore ;  abundantly  utter  the  memory 
of  his  great  goodness,  and  yon  will  bring  many  to  Ohrist.  -^ 

Such  happy  utterance  will  help  also  to  comfi)rt  your  own  Christian 
fiiends  and  fellow-sufferers.  There  is  a  deal  of  miseiy  in  the  world — 
just  now  more  than  usual.  Many  are  sorrowing  from  various  causes ; 
therefore,  my  dear  finends,  be  happier  than  ever  you  were.  That  ven- 
erable man  of  Gk)d,  now  in  heaven,  our  dear  old  father  Dransfield,  when 
it  was  a  very  foggy  morning  in  November,  used  always  to  come  into  the 
Testry  before  the  sermon  and  say,  *^  It  is  a  dreary  morning,  dear  pastor; 
we  must  rejoice  in  the  Lord  more  than  usual.    Things  around  us  aie 


216  HETllOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

dark,  but  within  and  above  all  is  bright.  I  hope  we  shall  have  a. very 
happy  service  to-day."  He  would  shake  hands  with  me  and  smile,  till 
he  seemed  to  carry  us  all  into  the  middle  of  summer.  What  if  it  is  bad 
weather  ?  Bless  the  Lord  that  it  is  not  worse  than  it  is.  We  are  not 
altogether  in  Egyptian  darkness :  the  sun  does  shine  now  and  then,  and 
we  are  sure  it  is  not  blown  out.  So,  when  we  are  sick  and  ill,  let  us 
thank  God  that  we  shall  not  be  ill  for  ever,  for  there  is  a  place  where 
the  inhabitants  are  no  more  sick.  And  now  to-day,  if  your  harps  have 
been  hanging  on  the  willows,  take  them  down  :  if  you  have  not  praised 
the  Lord  as  yon  should,  begin  to  do  so.  Wash  your  mouths  and  get  rid 
of  the  sour  flavour  of  murmuring  about  bad  trade  and  bad  weather. 
Sweeten  your  lips  with  the  pleasant  confection  of  praise.  I  will  tell 
you  this,  brethren,  if  any  of  you  shall  confess  to  me  that  you  have 
sinned  by  going  too  far  in  blessing  God,  I  will  for  once  become  a  priest, 
and  give  you  absolution.  I  never  tried  my  hand  at  that  business  before, 
but  I  think  I  can  manage  so  much.  Praise  Qod  extravagantly  if 
you  can.  Try  it.  I  wish  you  would  say  within  yourself,  "  I  will  go 
beyond  all  bounds  in  this  matter";  for  there  are  no  bounds  to  the 
deservings  of  an  ever  blessed  God. 

Lastly,  let  us  praise  and  bless  God  becanse  it  is  the  way  in  which  he 
is  glorified.  We  cannot  add  to  his  glory,  for  it  is  infinite  in  itself;  but 
we  can  make  it  to  be  more  widely  known  hj  simply  stating  the  tratb 
about  him.  Do  you  not  want  to  give  honour  to  God?  Would  you  not 
lay  down  your  life  that  the  whole  earth  might  be  filled  with  his  glory  ? 
Well,  if  you  cannot  cover  the  earth  with  lus  praise  as  the  waters  cover 
the  sea,  you  can  at  least  contribute  your  portion  to  the  flood.  Oh,  keep 
not  back  your  praises,  but  bless  and  magnify  his  name  from  the  rising  of 
the  sun  to  the  going  down  of  the  same.  It  will  lift  earth  upward  and 
heavenward  if  we  can  all  unite  in  praise :  we  shall  see  it  rising  as  it  were 
beneath  our  feet^  and  ourselves  rising  with  it,  until  we  shall  stand  as 
upon  the  top  of  some  loftiest  Alp  that  has  pierced  the  vault  of  heaven, 
and  we  shall  be  among  the  angels,  feeling  as  they  feel»  doing  as  they  do, 
and  losing  ourselves  as  they  lose  themselves  in  the  eternal  nallelujith  of 
*'  Glory,  and  honour,  and  majesty,  and  power,  and  dominion,  and  might, 
be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever 
and  ever." 


PoETiON  OF  ScmPTURK  Ebad   bbpobk  Sebmon— Psalm  cxlv. 


Hymns  feom  "Oub  Ows  Hymn  Book"— 136,  175,  142. 


^i^^siSAm  i^abmtacle  BvUpL 


PEAYEB  PERFUMED  WITH  PEAISB. 


%  ^^mifVi 


Deutebed  ok  Lobd's-Dat  Mobkino,  APBiXi  20th,  1879i  st 

C.   H.  SPURGE  ON, 

iT   THE   METBOPOLITAR   TABEBNACLE,    NEWIEGTOHi 


'*  In  flreryiliing  1>3r  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests 
be  made  known  onto  dod.*' — ^Philippians  iv.  6. 

AoooBDiNG  to  the  text,  we  are  both  bj  prayer  and  supplication  to  make 
known  our  requests  unto  God.  If  any  distinction  \k  intended  here,  I 
suppose  that  by  prayer  is  meant  the  general  act  of  devotion  and  the 
mention  of  our  usual  needs;  and  by  supplication  I  think  would  be 
intended  our  distinct  entreaties  and  special  petitions.  We  are  to  offer 
the  general  prayer  common  to  all  the  saints,  and  we  are  to  add  thereto 
the  special  and  definite  petitions  which  are  peculiar  to  ourselves.  We  are 
to  worship  in  prayer,  for  God  is  to  be  adored  by  all  his  saints,  and  then 
we  are  to  bes^h  his  favours  for  ourselves,  according  to  the  words  of  the 
text,  letting  our  requests  be  made  known  unto  God.  Do  not  forget  this 
second  form  of  worship.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  generalizing  in  prayer, 
and  God  forbid  that  we  should  say  a  word  against  it,  so  &r  as  it  is  sin- 
cere worship,  but  we  want  to  have  more  of  specific,  definite  pleading 
with  Grod,  asking  him  for  such-and-such  things,  wifch  a  clear  knowledge 
of  what  we  ask.  Ton  will  hear  prayers  at  prayer-meetings,  in  which 
everything  is  asked  in  general  but  nothing  in  particular,  and  vet  the 
reality  and  heartiness  of  prayer  will  often  be  best  manifested  by  the  put- 
ting up  of  requests  for  distinct  blessings.  See  how  Abraham,  when  he  went 
to  worship  the  Lord,  did  not  merely  adore  him,  and  in  general  pray  for 
his  glory,  but  on  a  special  occasion  he  pleaded  concerning  the  promised 
heir,  at  another  time  he  cried,  *'  0  that  Ishmael  might  live  before  thee," 
and  on  one  roecial  occasion  he  interceded  for  Sodom.  Elijah,  when  on 
the  top  of  Garmel,  did  not  pray  for  all  the  blessings  of  providence  in 
generaJ,  but  for  rain,  for  rain  there  and  then.  He  knew  what  he  was 
driving  at,  kept  to  his  point,  and  prevailed.  So,  my  beloved  friends, 
we  have  many  wants  which  are  so  pressing  as  to  be  very  distinct  and 
definite,  and  we  ought  to  have  just  so  many  clearly  defined  petitions 
which  we  offer  unto  God  by  way  of  supplication,  and  for  the  divine 
answers  to  these  we  are  bouna  to  watch  with  eager  expectancy,  so  that 
when  we  receive  them  we  may  magnify  the  Lord. 
ISoB.  1,469-70. 


218  XETROPOUTAN  TIBERNAOLE  PULPIT. 

The  point  to  which  I  irould  draw  your  attention  is  this :  that  whether 
it  be  the  general  prayer  or  the  specific  supplication  we  are  to  offer 
either  or  both  "  with  thanksgiving.  We  are  to  pray  about  everything, 
and  with  every  prayer  we  must  blend  our  thanksgivings.  Hence  it 
follows  that  weought  always  to  be  in  a  thankful  condition  of  heart :  since 
we  are  to  pray  without  ceasing,  and  are  not  to  pray  without  thanks- 
giving, it  is  clear  that  we  ought  to  be  always  ready  to  give  thanks  unto 
the  Lord.  We  must  say  with  the  Psalmlsti  "Thus  will  I  bless  theo 
while  I  live,  I  will  lift  up  rav  hands  in  thy  name."  The  constant  tenor 
and  spirit  of  our  lives  should  be  adoring  gratitude,  love,  reverence,  and 
thanksgiving  to  the  Most  High. 

This  blending  of  thanks  with  devotion  is  always  to  be  maintained. 
Always  must  we  offer  prayer  and  supplication  toifh  thanksgiving.  No 
matter  though  the  prayer  should  struggle  upward  out  of  the  depths,  yet 
must  its  wings  be  silvered  o'er  with  thanksgiving.  Though  the  prayer 
were  offered  upon  the  verge  of  death,  yet  in  the  last  few  wo^s  which  the 
trembling  lips  can  utter  there  should  be  notes  of  gratitude  as  well  as 
words  of  petition.  The  law  saith, "  With  all  thy  sacrifices  thou  shalt  offer 
salt,"  and  the  gospel  says  with  all  thy  prayers  thou  shalt  offer  praise. 
"  One  thing  at  a  time  "  is  said  to  be  a  wise  proverb,  but  for  once  I  must 
venture  to  contradict  it,  and  say  that  two  tilings  at  a  time  are  better, 
when  the  two  are  prayer  and  thanksgiving.  These  two  holy  streams 
flow  from  one  common  source,  the  Spirit  of  life  which  dwells  within  us  ; 
and  they  are  utterances  of  the  same  holy  fellowship  with  God;  and 
therefore  it  is  right  that  they  should  mingle  as  they  fk)w,  and  find  ex- 
pression in  the  same  holy  exercise.  Supplication  and  thanksgiving  so 
naturally  run  into  each  other  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  keep  them 
separate :  like  kindred  colours,  they  shade  off  into  each  other.  Our  very 
language  seems  to  indicate  this,  for  there  is  small  difference  between  the 
words  "  to  pray,"  and  "  to  praise."  A  psalm  may  be  either  prayer  or 
praise,  or  both  ;  and  there  is  yet  another  form  of  utterance  which  is  cer- 
tainly prayer,  but  is  used  as  praise,  and  is  really  both.  I  refer 
to  that  joyous  Hebrew  word  which  has  been  imported  into  all 
Christian  languages, "  Hosanna,"  Is  it  a  prayer  ?  Yes.  "  Save,  Lord." 
Is  it  not  praise  ?  Yes ;  for  it  is  tantamount  to  "  God  save  the  king," 
and  it  is  used  to  extol  the  Son  of  David.  While  we  are  hero  on 
earth  we  should  never  attempt  to  make  such  a  distinction  between  prayer 
and  praise  that  we  should  either  praise  without  prayer  or  pray  without 
praise  ;  but  with  every  prayer  and  supplication  we  should  mingle  thanks- 
giving, and  thus  make  known  our  requests  unto  God. 

This  commingling  of  precious  things  is  admirable.  It  reminds  me  of 
that  verse  in  the  Canticles  where  the  king  is  described  as  coming  up  from 
the  wilderness  in  his  chariot,  ^Mike  pillars  of  smoke,  perfumed  with 
myrrh  and  frankincense,  with  all  powders  of  the  merchant."  There 
is  the  myrrh  of  prayer,  and  the  fhmkincense  of  praise.  So,  too,  tho 
holy  incense  of  the  sanctuary  yielded  the  smoke  of  prayer  which  filled 
the  holy  place,  but  with  it  there  was  the  sweet  perfume  of  choice  spices, 
which  may  be  compared  to  praise.  Prayer  and  praise  are  like  the  two 
dierubim  on  the  ark,  they  must  never  be  separated.  In  the  model  of 
prayer  which  our  Saviour  has  given  us,  saying,  "  After  this  manner  pray 
ye,"  the  opening  part  of  it  is  rather  praise  than  prayer ; — "  Our  Father 


P&ATICE  PERFUMED  WITH  PBAI8B«  21D 

irhich  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name,"  and  the  closiag  part  of  it 
is  praise,  where  we  say,  "  For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  power,  and  the 
glory,  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.*'  Da^id,  who  is  the  great  tutor  and 
exemplar  of  the  church  as  to  her  worship,  being  at  once  her  poet  and 
her  preacher,  takes  care  in  almost  every  psalm,  though  the  petition 
may  dc  agonising,  to  mingle  exquisite  praise.  Take,  for  instance,  that 
psalm  of  his  after  his  great  sin  with  Bathshcba  There  one  would 
think,  with  sighs  and  groans  and  tears  so  multiplied,  he  might  have 
almost  forgotten  or  have  feared  to  offer  thanksgiving  while  he  waa 
trembling  under  a  sense  of  wrath  ;  and  yet  ere  the  psalm  that  begins 
"  Have  mefcy  upon  me,  0  Qod,"  can  come  to  a  conclusion  the  psalmist 
has  said,  "  0  Lord,  open  thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth  shall  show  forth 
thy  praise,"  and  he  cannot  pen  the  last  word  without  beseeching  the 
Lora  to  build  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  adding  the  promise,  ''then  shalt 
thou  be  pleased  with  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness,  with  burnt  offering 
and  whole  burnt  offering :  then  shalt  they  oiler  bullocks  upon  thine 
altar."  I  need  not  stop  to  quote  other  instances,  but  it  is  almost 
always  the  case  that  David  by  the  fire  of  prayer  warms  himself  into  praise. 
He  begins  low,  with  many  a  broken  note  of  complaining,  but  he  mounts 
and  glows,  and,  like  the  lark,  sings  as  he  ascends.  When  at  first  his  harp 
is  muffled  he  warbles  a  few  mournful  notes  and  becomes  excited,  till  he 
cannot  restrain  his  hand  from  that  well-known  and  accustomed  string 
which  he  had  reserved  for  the  music  of  praise  alone.  There  is  a  passage 
in  the  eighteenth  Psalm,  at  the  third  verse,  in  which  indeed  he  seems  to 
have  caught  the  very  idea  which  I  want  to  fix  upon  your  minds  this 
morning.  ''  I  will  call  upon  the  Lord,  who  is  worthy  to  be  praised :  so  shall 
I  be  saved  irom  mine  enemies."  He  was  in  such  a  condition  that  he  says, 
"  The  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me,  and  the  floods  of  ungodly  men 
made  me  afraid.  The  sorrows  of  hell  compassed  me  about :  the  snares 
of  death  prevented  me."  Driven  by  distress,  he  declares  that  he  will 
call  upon  the  Lord,  that  is,  with  utteranccs*of  prayer ;  but  he  does  not 
alone  regard  his  God  as  the  object  of  prayer,  but  as  one  who  is  to  be 
praised.  ** I  will  call  upon  the  Lord,  who  is  worthy  to  be  praised";  and 
then,  as  if  inspired  to  inform  us  of  the  fact  that  the  blending  of  thanks- 
giving with  pra^xr  renders  it  infallibly  effectual,  as  I  shall  have  to  show 
you  it  does,  nc  adds,  "  So  shall  I  be  saved  from  mine  enemies." 

Now,  if  this  habit  of  combining  thanksgiving  with  prayer  is  found  in 
the  Old  l\jstaniont  saints,  we  have  a  right  to  expect  it  yet  more  in  New 
Tcstanieht  believers,  who  in  clearer  light  perceive  fresh  reasons  for 
thanksgiving;  but  I  shall  give  you  no  instance  except  that  of  the  writer 
of  rov  text.  Does  he  not  tell  us  in  the  present  chapter  that  those  things 
which  we  have  seen  in  him  we  are  to  do,  tor  his  life  was  agreeable  with 
his  teaching  ?  Now,  observe,  how  frequently  he  commences  his  epistles 
with  a  blending  of  supplication  and  thanksgiving.  Turn  to  the  Bomans, 
and  note  in  the  first  chapter,  at  the  eighth  and  ninth  verses,  this  fusion 
of  the  precious  metals — ''  First,  I  thank  my  God  through  Jesus  Christ 
for  you  all,  that  your  faith  is  spoken  of  throughout  the  whole  world. 
For  God  is  my  witness,  whom  I  serve  with  my  spirit  in  the  gospel  of  his 
Son,  that  without  ceasing  I  make  mention  of  you  always  in  my  prayers." 
There  is  *'  I  thank  my  God,"  and  "  I  make  mention  of  you  always  in  my 
prayers."    This  wras  not  written  with  a  special  eye  to  the  precept  of  our 


220 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPTF. 


^ 


text ;  it  was  natural  to  Paul  so  to  thank  Ood  when  he  prayed.  Look  at 
the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  in  the  first  chapter,  at  the  third  verse,  "  We 
give  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  praying 
always  for  you."  To  the  same  effect  we  read  in  the  first  Epistle  to  the 
Thessalonians,  chapter  i.,  verse  2 — "  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you 
all,  making  mention  of  you  in  our  prayers."  Look  also  at  the  second  of 
Timothy,  i.  8 — "  I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  from  my  forefathers  with 
pure  conscience,  that  without  ceasing  I  have  remembranoe  of  thee  in  my 
prayers  night  and  day."  And  if  it  be  so  in  other  epistles  we  are  not  at  all 
surprised  to  find  it  so  in  the  Philippian  epistle  itse&,  for  so  we  read  when 
we  turn  to  its  first  chapter,  at  the  third  and  fourth  verses — "  I  thank  my 
God  upon  every  remembrance  of  you,  always  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for 
you  all  making  request  with  joy."  Nor  need  I  confine  you  to  the  language 
of  Paul's  epistle,  since  it  is  most  noteworthy  that  in  Philippi  itself  (and 
those  to  whom  he  wrote  must  have  remembered  the  incident)  Paul  and 
Silas  prayed  and  sang  praises  unto  God  at  midnight,  so  that  the  prisoners 
heard  them.  It  is  clear  that  Paul  habitually  practised  what  he  here 
enjoins.  His  own  prayers  had  not  been  offered  without  thanksgiving ; 
what  God  hath  joined  together  he  had  never  put  asunder. 

With  this  as  a  preface,  I  invite  you  to  consider,  carefully  and  prayer- 
fully, first,  ^  grounds  of  thanksgiving  in  p-ayer;  secondly,  ihs  evil  of 
its  absence;  and  thirdly,  Uis  result  of  its  presence. 

I.  First,  then,  there  are  reasons  for  minoling  THANKSGiviNa 
WITH  PRAYER.  lu  the  natui^e  of  things  it  ought  to  be  so.  We  have 
abundant  cause,  my  brethren,  for  thank^iving  at  all  times.  We  do  not 
come  to  Gk)d  in  prayer  as  if  he  had  left  us  absolutely  penniless,  and  we 
cried  to  him  like  starving  prisoners  begging  through  prison  bars.  We 
do  not  ask  as  if  we  had  never  received  a  single  farthing  of  God  before, 
and  hardly  thought  we  should  obtain  anything  now ;  but  on  the  contrary, 
having  been  already  the  recipients  of  immense  favours,  we  come  to  a  God 
who  abounds  in  lovingkindness,  who  is  willing  to  bestow  good  gifts  upon 
us,  and  waits  to  be  gracious  to  us.  We  do  not  come  to  the  Lord  as 
slaves  to  an  imfeeling  tyrant  craving  for  a  boon,  but  as  children  who  draw 
nigh  to  a  loving  Mher,  expecting  to  receive  abundantly  fiom  his  liberal 
hands.  Thanksgiving  is  the  right  spirit  in  which  to  come  before  the 
God  who  daily  loadeth  us  with  benefits.  Bethink  you  for  awhile  what 
cause  you  have  for  thanksgiving  in  prayer. 

And  first  you  have  this,  that  such  a  thing  as  prayer  is  possible,  that  a 
finite  creature  can  speak  with  the  infinite  Creator,  that  a  sinful  being 
can  have  audience  with  the  thrice  holy  Jehovah.  It  is  worthy  of  thanks- 
giving that  God  should  have  commanded  prayer  and  encouraged  us  to 
di-aw  near  unto  him ;  and  that  moreover  ne  should  have  supplied  aU 
things  necessary  to  the  sacred  exercise.  He  has  set  up  a  mercy  seat, 
blood  besprinkled ;  and  he  has  prepared  a  High  Priest,  ever  living  to 
make  intercession  ;  and  to  these  he  has  added  the  Holy  Ghost  to  help 
our  infirmities  and  to  teach  us  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought. 
Everything  is  ready,  and  God  waits  for  us  to  enquire  at  his  hands. 
He  has  not  only  set  before  us  an  open  door  and  invited  us  to  enter, 
but  he  has  given  us  the  right  spirit  with  which  to  approach.  The 
grace  of  supplication  is  poured  out  upon  us  and  wrought  in  us  by 


"-he  Holy  Ghost.     What  a  blessing  it  is  that  we  do  not  attempt 


PBA7BB  PICHFUHBD  WITH  PBAISH.  221 

prayer  with  a  peradventnre,  as  if  we  were  making  a  donbtfd  experi- 
ment, nor  do  we  come  before  God  as  a  forlorn  hope,  desperately  afraid 
that  he  will  not  listen  to  oar  cry;  but  he  has  ordained  prayer  to 
be  the  ordinary  commerce  of  lieaven  and  earth,  and  sanctionea  it  in  the 
most  solemn  manner.  Prayer  may  climb  to  heayen,  for  God  has  himself 
prepared  the  ladder  and  set  it  down  just  by  the  head  of  his  lonely  Jacob, 
so  Uiat  though  that  head  be  pillowed  on  a  stone  it  may  rest  in  peace. 
Loy  at  the  top  of  that  ladder  is  the  Lord  himself  in  his  covenant  capacity, 
receiving  our  petitions  and  sending  his  attendant  angels  with  answers  to 
our  requests.    Shall  we  not  bless  God  for  this  ? 

Let  us  praise  his  name,  dear  friends,  also  especially  that  you  and  I  are 
still  spared  to  pray  and  permitted  to  pray.  What  if  we  are  greatly 
afflicted,  yet  it  is  of  the  Lord's  mercy  that  we  are  not  consumed.  If  we 
hod  received  our  deserts  we  should  not  now  have  been  on  praying  ground 
and  pleading  terms  with  him.  But  let  it  be  for  our  comfort  and  to  God's 
praise  that  still  we  may  stand  with  bowed  head  and  cry  each  one,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  Still  may  we  cry  like  sinking  Peter, 
'*  Lord  save,  or  I  perish."  Like  David,  we  may  be  unable  to  go  up  to  the 
temple,  but  we  can  still  go  to  our  God  in  prayer.  The  prodigal  has  lost 
his  substance,  but  he  has  not  lost  his  power  to  supplicate.  He  has  been 
feeding  swine,  but  as  yet  he  is  still  a  man,  and  has  not  lost  the  &culty  of 
desire  and  entreaty.  He  may  have  foi^otten  his  Father,  but  his  FaUier 
has  not  forgotten  him ;  he  may  arise  and  he  may  go  to  him,  and  he  may 
poor  out  his  soul  in  his  Father  s  bosom.  Therefore,  let  us  give  thanks  unto 
God  that  he  has  nowhere  said  unto  us  "  Seek  ye  my  face  in  vain."  If  we 
find  a  desire  to  pray  trembling  within  our  soul,  and  if  though  almost  ex* 
tinct  we  feel  some  hope  in  the  promise  of  our  gracious  God,  if  our  heart 
still  groans  after  holiness  and  after  God,  thoagh  she  hath  lost  her  power 
to  pray  with  joyful  confidence  as  once  she  did,  yet  let  us  be  thankful  that 

Lwe  can  pray  even  if  it  be  but  a  little.    In  the  will  and  power  to  pray  J 
there  lies  the  capacity  for  infinite  blessedness :  he  who  hath  the  key  of 
!)rayer  can  open  heaven,  yea,  he  hath  access  to  the  heart  of  God;  there- 
ore,  bless  God  for  praver. 

And  then,  beloved,  beyond  the  fact  of  prayer  and  our  power  to 
exercise  it,  there  is  a  further  ground  of  thanksgiving  that  we  have  already 
received  greac  mercy  at  Grod*s  hands.  We  are  not  coming  to  God  to 
ask  fiskvours  and  receive  them  for  the  first  time  in  our  nves.  Why,  t 
blessed  be  his  name,  if  he  never  granted  me  another  favour,  I  have  i 
enough  for  which  to  thank  him  as  long  as  I  have  any  being.  And  this, 
moreover,  is  to  be  recollected,  that  whatever  great  things  we  are  about  to 
ask,  we  cannpt  possibly  be  seeking  for  blessings  one-half  so  great  as 
those  which  we  have  already  received  if  we  are  indeed  his  chil(fren.  If 
thoQ  art  a  Christian,  thou  hast  life  in  Christ.  Art  thou  about  to  ask  for 
meat  and  raiment  ?  The  life  i^  more  than  these.  Thou  hast  already 
obtained  Christ  Jesus  to  be  thinp,  and  he  that  spared  him  not  mH  deny 
thee  nothing.  Is  there,  I  was  about  to  say,  anything  to  compare  with 
the  infinite  riches  which  are  already  ours  in  Christ  Jesus?  Let  us  per- 
petually thank  our  Benefactor  for  what  we  have  while  we  make  request 
for  something  more.  Should  it  not  be  so?  Shall  not  the  abundant 
utterances  of  the  memory  of  his  great  goodness  run  over  into  our  re- 
quests, till  our  petitions  are  baptized  m  gratitude.    While  we  come 


2itt 


llTBTBOPOLITAK  TIBEBKACLE  PULPIT. 


before  God,  in  otie  aspect,  empty  handed  to  receive  of  his  goodness,  on 
the  other  hand  we  should  never  appear  before  him  empty,  bat  come  with 

J}he  fiett  of  oar  sacrifices,  offering  praise  and  glori^ng  God. 

\  Furthermore,  there  is  this  to  be  remembered,  that  when  we  come 
before  Gtod  in  the  hour  of  tronble,  remembering  his  great  goodness  to  na 
in  the  past,  and  therefore  thanking  him,  we  onght  to  have  faith  enough 
to  believe  that  the  present  trouble,  about  which  we  are  praying,  is  sent 
in  love.  Ton  will  win  with  Ood  in  prayer  if  you  can  look  at  your  trials 
in  this  light : — *'  Lord,  I  have  this  thorn  in  the  fledi,  I  beseech  thee,  de- 
liver me  from  it,  but  meanwhile  1  bless  thee  for  it ;  for  though  I  do  not 
understand  the  why  or  the  wherefore  of  it,  I  am  persuaded  Siere  is  love 
within  it ;  therefore,  while  I  ask  thee  to  remove  it,  so  &r  as  it  seemeth 
evil  to  me,  yet  wherein  it  may  to  thy  better  knowledge  work  my  good,  I 
bless  thee  for  it,  and  I  am  content  to  endure  it  so  long  as  thou  seest  fit." 
Is  not  that  a  sweet  way  of  praying  ?  "  Lord,  I  am  in  want,  be  pleased 
to  supply  me ;  but,  meanwhile,  if  thou  do  not,  I  believe  it  is  better 
for  me  to  be  in  need,  and  so  I  praise  thee  for  my  necessity  while  I  ask 
thee  to  supply  it.  I  glory  in  mine  infirmity,  even  while  I  ask  thee  to 
overcome  it.  I  triumph  before  thee  in  mv  affliction,  and  bless  thee  for  it 
even  while  I  ask  thee  to  help  me  in  it  and  to  rescue  me  out  of  it."  This 
is  a  royal  way  of  praying :  such  an  amalgam  of  prayer  and  thanksgiving 
is  more  precious  tnan  the  gold  of  Ophir. 

""  Furthermore,  beloved,  whenever  we  are  on  our  knees  in  prayer,  it  be- 
comes us  to  bless  God  that  prayer  has  been  answered  so  manv  times 
before.  Here  thy  poor  petitioner  bends  before  thee  to  ask  again,  but  ere 
he  asks  he  thanla  thee  for  having  heard  him  so  many  times  before.  I 
know  ttiat  thou  hearest  me  always,  therefore  do  I  continue  still  to  cry  to 
thee.  My  thanksgivings  urge  me  to  make  fresh  petitions,  encouraging 
me  in  the  full  confidence  that  thou  wilt  not  send  me  away  empty.  Why, 
many  of  the  mercies  which  you  possess  to-day,  and  rejoice  in,  are  answers 
to  prayer :  they  are  dear  to  you  because,  like  Samuel,  whom  his  mother  so 
named  because  he  was  "  asked  of  God,"  they  came  to  yon  as  answers  to 
your  supplications.  When  mercies  come  in  answer  to  praver  they  have  a 
double  delight  about  them,  not  only  because  they  are  good  in  themselves, 
but  because  they  are  certificates  of  our  &vour  with  tiie  Lord.  Well, 
then,  as  God  has  heard  us  so  often  and  we  have  the  proofe  of  his  hearing, 
should  we  ever  pray  with  murmurings  and  complainings  ?  Should  we 
not  rather  feel  an  intense  delight  when  we  approach  the  throne  of  grace, 
a  rapture  awakened  by  sunny  memories  of  the  past  ? 

Again,  we  ought  to  pray  with  thanksgiving  in  its  highest  of  all  senses, 
by  thanking  God  that  we  have  the  nieri^  which  we  seek.  I  wish  we 
could  learn  this  high  virtue  of  &ifch.  When  I  was  conversing  lately 
with  our  dear  friend  George  Mttller,  he  frequently  astonished  me  with  the 
way  in  which  he  mention^  that  he  had  for  so  many  months  and  years 
asked  for  such  and  such  a  mercv,  and  praised  the  Lord  for  it.  He 
praised  the  Lord  for  it  as  though  he  had  actually  obtained  it.  Even  in 
praying  for  the  conversion  of  a  person,  as  soon  as  he  had  begun  to  in- 
tercede he  began  also  to  praise  God  for  the  conversion  of  tlmt  person. 
Though  I  tlunk  he  told  us  he  had  in  one  instance  alreadv  prayed  for 
thirty  years  and  the  work  was  not  yet  done,  yet  all  the  while  he  had  gone 
on  thanking  God,  because  he  knew  the  prayer  would  be  answered.    He 


F&ATSB  PERFUKED  WITH  PRAISE.  223 

believed   that   he   had  his  petition,  and  commenced    to  ma^iify  the  1 
Giver  of  it.    Is  this  unreasonable  ?    How  often  do  we  antedate  our 
gratitude  among  the  sons  of  men  I    If  you  were  to  promise  some  poor 
person  that  you  would  pay  his  rent  when  it  came  due,  lie  would  thank 
you  directly,  though  not  a  farthing  had  left  your  pocket.    We  have 
enough  feith  in  our  fellow-men  to  thank  them  beforehand,  and  surely  we  ' 
may  do  the  same  with  our  Lord.    Shall  we  not  be  willing  to  trust  God  ; 
for  a  few  months  ahead,  ay,  and  for  years  befoi'ehand,  if  his  wisdom  bids  j 
us  ivait.    This  is  the  way  to  win  with  him.    When  ye  pray  believe  that 
ye  receive  the  boons  ye  ask,  and  ye  shall  have  them.    "Believe  that  ye  ; 
have  it,"  says  the  Scripture,  "  and  ye  shall  have  it."    As  a  man's  note  of 
hand  stands  for  the  money,  so  let  God's  promise  be  accounted  as  the 
performance.    Shall  not  heaven's  bank-notes  pass  as  cash  ?    Yea,  verily, 
they  shall  have  unquestioned  currency  among  believers.    We  will  bless  the 
Lord  for  giving  us  what  we  have  sought,  since  our  having  it  is  a  matter  of  j 
absolute  certainty.    We  shall  never  thank  God  bv  faith  and  then  find  j 
that  we  were  befooled  ;  he  has  said  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask , 
in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive."    And  therefore  we  may  rest] 
assured  that  the  thanksgiving  of  faith  shall  never  bring  shame  into  the  j 
&oe  of  the  man  who  offers  it. 

Once  again,  and  then  I  will  say  no  more  upon  these  grounds  of 
thanksgiving ;  surely,  brethren,  if  the  Lord  do  not  answer  the  prayer  which 
we  are  offering,  yet  still  he  is  so  good,  so  supremely  good,  that  we  will 
blcfis  him  whether  or  no.  We  ought  even  to  praise  him  when  he  does 
not  answer  us,  ay,  and  bless  him  for  refusing  our  desires.  How  devoutly 
might  some  of  us  thank  him  that  he  did  not  answer  our  prayers  when 
we  sought  for  evil  things  in  the  ignorance  of  our  childish  minds.  We 
asked  for  flesh,  and  he  might  have  sent  us  quails  in  his  anger,  and  while 
the  flesh  was  yet  in  our  mouths  his  wrath  might  have  come  upon  us ;  but 
in  love  he  would  not  hear  us.  Blessed  be  his  name  for  closing  his  ear  in 
pity  I  Let  us  adore  him  when  he  keeps  us  waiting  at  his  doors  ;  thank 
'him  for  rebufls,  and  bless  him  for  refusals,  believing  always  that  Ralph 
Erakine  spoke  the  truth  when  he  said : 

**  Vm  heard  when  answered  soon  er  late. 
Yea,  heard  when  I  no  answer  get : 
Yea,  kindly  answered  when  refused, 
And  treated  well  when  harshly  used.** 

Faith  glorifies  the  love  of  God,  for  she  knows  that  the  Lord's  roughest 
usage  is  onlv  love  in  disguise.  We  are  not  so  sordid  as  to  make  our 
songs  depend  upon  the  weather,  or  on  the  fulness  of  the  olive-press  and 
the  wine-fat.  Blessed  be  his  name,  he  must  be  right  even  when  beseems 
at  cross  purposes  with  his  people ;  we  are  not  going  to  quarrel  with  him, 
like  silly  babes  with  their  nurses,  because  he  does  not  happen  to  grant  us 
every  desire  of  our  fooUsh  hearts.  Though  he  slay  us  we  will  trust  in  him, 
much  more  if  he  decline  our  requests.  We  ask  him  for  our  daily  bread, 
and  if  he  withhold  it  we  will  praise  him.  Our  praises  are  not  suspended  upon 
his  answers  to  our  prayers.  If  the  labour  of  the  olive  should  foil,  and  the 
field  should  vield  no  iruit ;  if  the  flock  should  be  cut  off  from  the  fold, 
and  the  herd  from  the  stall,  yet  still  would  we  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and  joy 


224  METROPOLITAN  TABEENAOLE  PULPIT. 

in  the  God  of  our  Balvation.    Blessed  Spirit;,  raise  ns  to  this  state  of  grace 
and  keep  us  there. 

Of  that  which  we  hare  spoken  this  is  the  sum :  under  every  condition, 
and  in  every  necessity,  draw  nigh  to  God  in  prayer,  but  always  bring 
thanksgiving  with  you.  As  Joseph  said  to  his  brethren,  "  Ye  shall  not 
see  my  face  unless  your  younger  brother  be  with  you,"  so  may  the  Lord 
say  to  you, "  You  shall  not  receive  my  smile  unless  you  bring  thankful- 
ness with  you."  Let  your  prayers  be  like  those  ancient  missals  which 
one  sometimes  sees,  in  which  the  initial  letters  of  the  prayers  are  gilded 
and  adorned  with  a  profusion  of  colours,  the  work  of  cunning  writers. 
Let  even  the  general  confession  of  sin  and  the  Litany  of  mournful  petitions 
have  at  least  one  illuminated  letter.  Illuminate  your  prayers ;  light  them 
up  Avith  rays  of  thanksgiving  all  the  way  through ;  and  when  you  come 
together  to  pray  forget  not  to  make  meloidy  unto  the  Lord  with  psalms^ 
and  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs. 

IL  Secondly,  I  shall  drive  at  the  same  point,  while  I  try  to  show  thb 
EVIL  OP  THE  ABSENCE  OP  THANKSQiviNQ  in  our  prayers. 

First  and  foremost,  we  should  be  chargeable  with  ingratitude.  Are  we 
to  be  fJways  receiving  and  never  to  return  thanks  ?  Aristotle  rightly 
observes,  "a  return  is  required  to  preserve  friendship  between  two 
pcreons,"  and  as  we  have  nothing  else  to  give  to  God  except  gratitude,  let 
us  abound  therein.  If  we  have  no  fruit  of  the  field,  let  us  at  least  render 
to  him  the  fruit  of  our  lips.  Have  you  no  thanks  to  bring  ?  How,  then, 
can  you  expect  further  favours  ?  Does  not  liberality  itself  close  its  hand 
wlion  ingratitude  stands  in  the  way  ?  What,  never  a  word  of  gratitude 
to  him  from  whom  all  blessings  flow  I  Then  may  even  the  ungodly 
despise  you. 

Next,  it  would  argue  great  selfishness  if  we  did  not  combine  praise 
with  prayer.  Can  it  be  right  to  think  only  of  ourselves,  to  pray  for  bene- 
fits and  never  honour  our  Benefactor?  Are  we  going  to  import  the  detest- 
able vice  of  avarice  into  spiritual  things,  and  only  care  for  our  own  souls* 
good?  What,  no  thougnt  for  God*s  glory !  No  idea  of  magnifying  his 
great  and  blessed  name  !  God  forbid  that  we  should  fSall  into  a  spirit  so 
mean  and  narrow.  Healthy  praise  and  thanksgiving  must  be  cultivated, 
because  they  prevent  prayer  from  becoming  overgrown  with  the  mildew  of 
selfishness. 

Thanksgiving  also  prevents  prayer  from  becoming  an  exhibition  of  the 
want  of  faith  ;  for  indeed  some  prayer  is  rather  a  manifestation  of  the 
absence  of  faith  than  the  exercise  of  confidence  in  God.  If  when  I  am 
in  trouble  I  still  bless  the  Lord  for  all  I  suffer,  therein  my  fiiith  is  seen. 
If  before  I  obtain  the  mercy  I  thank  God  for  the  grace  which  I  have 
not  yet  tasted,  therein  mv  faith  is  manifest.  What,  is  our  faith  such  that 
it  only  sings  in  the  sunshine  ?  Have  we  no  nightingale  music  for  our 
God  ?  Is  our  trust  like  the  swallow,  which  must  leave  us  in  winter  ? 
Is  our  faith  a  flower  which  needs  the  conservatory  to  keep  it  alive? 
Can  it  not  blossom  like  the  gentian  at  the  foot  of  the  frozen  glacier, 
where  the  damp  and  chill  of  adversity  surround  it?  I  trust  it  can, 
it  ought  to  do  so,  and  we  ought  to  feel  that  we  can  praise  and  bless 
God  when  outward  circumstances  appear  rather  to  demand  sighs  than 
songs. 

tiot  to  thank  God  in  our  prayers  would  argue  wilfulness,  and  want  of 


J^kAYEE  i>BEFtm£I>  WITH  PBAISB.  225 

feutmission  to  his  will.  Must  everything  be  ordered  according  to  our 
mind?  To  refuse  to  praise  unless  we  have  our  own  wav  is  great  pre- 
Bumption,  and  shows  that  like  a  naughty  child  we  will  sulk  if  we  cannot 
be  master.  I  might  illustrate  the  wilfulness  of  many  a  supplication  by 
that  of  a  little  boy  who  was  very  diligent  in  saying  his  prayers,  but  was 
at  the  same  time  disobedient,  ill-tempered,  ana  the  pest  of  the  house. 
His  mother  told  him  that  she  thought  it  was  mere  hypocrisy  for  him  to 
pretend  to  pray.  He  replied,  *•  No,  mother,  indeed  it  is  not,  for  I  prtfy 
God  to  lead  you  and  father  to  like  my  ways  better  than  you  do/' 
Numbers  of  people  want  the  Lord  to  Hke  their  ways  better,  but  they  do 
not  intend  to  follow  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  Their  minds  are  contrary  to 
God  and  will  not  submit  to  his  will,  and  therefore  there  is  no  thanksgiving 
in  them.  Praise  in  a  prayer  is  indicative  of  a  humble,  submissive,  obedient 
spirit,  and  when  it  is  absent  we  may  suspect  wilfulness  and  self-seeking. 
Very  much  of  the  prayer  of  rebellious  hearts  is  the  mere  growling  of  an 
angry  obstinacy,  tne  whine  of  an  ungratified  self-conceit.  Gk>d  must 
do  this  and  he  must  do  that,  or  else  we  will  not  love  him.  What  baby 
talk !  What  spoiled  children  such  are !  A  little  whipping  will  do  them 
good.  "  I  have  never  beUeved  in  the  goodness  of  God,'*  said  one, 
*'  ever  since  he  took  my  dear  mother  away."  I  knew  a  good  man  whose 
child  was  on  the  verge  of  the  grave ;  when  I  went  to  see  her  he  charged 
me  not  to  mention  death  to  her,  for  he  said,  "  I  do  not  believe  Qod  could 
do  such  an  unkind  action  as  take  my  only  child  away."  When  I 
assured  him  that  she  would  surely  die  within  a  few  days,  and  that  he  must 
not  quarrel  widi  the  will  of  the  Lord,  he  stood  firm  in  his  rebellion.  He 
prayed,  but  he  could  not  bless  God,  and  it  was  no  marvel  that  his  heart 
sank  within  him,  and  he  refused  to  be  comforted,  when  at  last  his  child 
died,  as  we  all  felt  sure  she  would.  He  became  afterwards  resigned,  but 
his  want  of  acquiescence  cost  him  many  a  smart.  This  will  not  do ; 
this  quarrelling  with  God  is  poor  work  I  iKesignation  comes  to  the  heart 
like  an  angel  unawares,  and  when  we  entertain  it  our  soul  is  comforted. 
We  may  ^  for  the  child's  life,  but  we  must  also  thank  the  Lord  that 
the  dear  life  has  been  prolonged  so  long  as  it  has  been,  and  we  must  put 
the  child  and  everything  else  into  our  Father's  hands  and  say,  "  If  thou 
shouldest  take  all  away,  yet  still  will  I  bless  thy  name,  0  thou  Most 
High."  This  is  acceptable  prayer,  because  it  is  not  soured  by  the  leaven 
of  self-will,  but  saltea  with  thankfulness. 

We  must  mingle  our  thanksgivings  with  our  prayers,  or  else  we  may  I 
fear  that  our  mind  is  not  in  harmony  with  the  divine  will.    Becollect,  f 
dear  friends,  that  prayer  does  not  alter  the  mind  of  God :  it  never  was  ' 
the  intent  of  prayer  that  it  should  attempt  anything  of  the  kind.  Prayer 
is  the  shadow  of  the  decrees  of  the  Eternal.    God  has  willed  such  a 
thing,  and  he  makes  his  saints  to  will  it,  and  express  their  wUl  in  prayer. 
Prayer  is  the  rustUng  of  the  wings  of  the  angels  who  are  bringing  the 
blessing  to  us.    It  is  written, ''  Delight  thyself  in  the  Lord  and  he  will  give 
thee  the  desire  of  thine  heart."  It  is  not  said  that  he  will  give  the  desire  of 
his  heart  to  every  Jack  and  Tom,  but  you  must  first  delight  in  the  Lord, 
and  when  your  mind  finds  all  her  joy  in  God  then  it  is  clear  that  God 
and  you,  as  far  as  it  can  be,  are  standing  on  the  same  plane  and 
moving  in  the  same  direction,  and  now  you  shall  have  the  desire  of  your 
heart  because  the  desire  of  your  heart  is  the  desire  of  God's  heart. 


^ 


226  UBTBOPOUTAN  TABIfiRKAOLB  PULPIT. 

Character,  as  mnch  as  &ith,  lies  ab  the  basis  of  prevalence  in  prayer.   I  do 
not  mean  in  the  case  of  the  prayer  of  the  sinner  when  he  is  seeking 
1  mercy,  bnt  I  mean  in  the  habitual  prayers  of  the  godly.    There  are  some 
i  men  who  cannot  pray  so  as  to  preyail,  for  sin  has  made  them  weak,  and 
i  God  walks  contrary  to  them  because  they  walk  contrary  to  him.    He 
j  who  has  lost  the  light  of  Gh>d's  countenance  has  also  lost  much  of  the 
prevalence  of  his  prayers.    You  do  not  suppose  that  every  Israelite  could 
have  gone  to  the  top  of  Garmel  and  opened  the  windows  of  heaven  as 
Elijah  did.    No,  he  must  first  be  Elijah,  for  it  is  the  effectual,  fervent 
prayer,  not  of  every  man,  but  of  a  righteous  man,  that  availeth  much ; 
and  when  the  Lord  has  put  your  heart  and  my  heart  into  an  agreement 
with  him  then  we  shaU  pray  and  prevail.    What  did  our  Lord  say — "  If 
ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will, 
and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  Doubtless  many  lose  power  in  prayer  be- 
cause their  lives  aregrievous  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he  cannot 
smile  upon  them,     mil  any  father  listen  to  the  requests  of  a  child  who 
has  set  himself  up  in  opposition  to  parental  authority  ?    The  obedient, 
tender,  loving  child,  who  would  not  wish  for  anything  which  you  did 
not  think  right  to  give,  is  he  whose  requests  you  are  pleased  to  consider 
and  fulfil ;  yea,  more,  yon  even  anticipate  the  wishes  of  such  a  child,  and 
before  he  calls  yon  answer  him.    May  we  be  such  children  of  the  great 
God. 
III.    And  now,  in  the  third  place,  let  ns  consider  the  besult  of 

THE  PBBSBNOE  OF  THIS  THAKKSGIVIXa  IN  OQNNEOTION  WITH  PBAYEB. 

According  to  the  context,  the  presence  of  thanksgiving  in  the  heart 
together  with  prayer  is  productive  of  peace.  "In  everything  by 
prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made 
known  unto  God,  and  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding, 
shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus."  Now  that 
peace,  that  conscious  calm,  that  divine  serenity,  which  is  described  as 
the  peace  of  God,  is  not  produced  by  prayer  alone,  but  by  prayer  with 
thanksgiving.  Some  men  pray,  and  therein  they  do  well ;  but  for  lack 
of  mixing  thanksgiving  with  it  their  prayer  agitates  them,  and  the^  come 
away  from  the  closet  even  more  anxious  than  when  they  entered  it.  If 
they  mingled  in  their  petitions  that  sweet  powder  of  the  merchants,  which 
is  called  praise,  and  mixed  it  after  the  art  of  the  apothecary,  in  due  pro- 

fortions,  the  blessing  of  God  would  come  Vfith  it,  causing  repose  of  heart, 
f  we  bless  our  gracious  Lord  for  the  very  trouble  we  pray  against; 
if  we  bless  him  for  the  very  mercy  which  we  need,  as  though  it  had 
already  come ;  if  we  resolve  to  praise  him  whether  we  receive  the  boon  or 
not,  learning  in  whatsoever  state  we  are  therewith  to  be  content,  then 
"  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  uudei^tanding,  will  keep  our  heaits 
and  minds  by  Christ  Jesus."  Brethren,  as  you  value  this  divine  rest 
of  spirit,  as  you  prize  constant  serenity  of  soul,  I  beseech  yon  mingle 
praises  with  your  prayers. 

The  next  effect  of  it  will  be  this :  the  thanksgiving  will  often  warm  the 
soul,  and  enable  it  to  pray.  I  believe  it  is  tiie  experience  of  many  who 
love  secret  devotion  that  at  times  they  cannot  pray,  for  their  heart  scenis 
hard,  cold,  dumb,  and  almost  dead.  Do  not  pump  up  unwilling  and 
formal  prayer,  my  Lrcthren ;  but  take  down  the  hymn-book  and  sing. 
While  you  praise  the  Lord  for  what  you  have,  you  will  find  your  rocky 


PRAYBH  PEBFUMBD  WITH  PSIISB. 


227 


heart  begin  to  dissolye  and  flow  in  riyera.  You  will  be  encouraged  to 
plead  with  the  Lord  becanse  yon  will  remember  what  you  have  afore- 
time received  at  his  hand.  If  you  had  an  empty  waggon  to  ndae  to  the 
month  of  a  coal-pit,  it  might  be  a  very  difficult  task  for  you  ;  but  the 
work  is  managed  easily  by  the  oommon-senfle  of  the  mmers.  They 
make  the  fiill  waggons  as  they  run  down  pull  the  exaptj  waggons  up 
the  incline.  Now,  when  your  heart  is  loaded  with  praise  for  mercy 
received  let  it  ran  down  the  incline,  and  draw  up  the  empty  waggon  of 
your  desires,  and  you  will  thus  find  it  easy  to  pray.  Gold  ana  chill 
prayers  are  always  to  be  deplored,  and  if  by  so  simple  a  method  as 
entreating  the  Lord  to  accept  our  thanksgiving  our  hearts  can  be  warmed 
and  renewed,  let  us  by  all  means  take  care  to  use  it 

Lastly,  I  believe  that  when  a  man  begins  to  pray  with  thanki^ving 
he  is  upon  the  eve  of  receiving  the  blessing.  Ood's  time  to  bless  you  has 
come  when  you  begin  to  praise  him  as  well  as  pray  to  him.  God  has  his 
set  time  to  favour  us,  and  he  will  not  grant  ns  our  desire  until  the  due 
season  has  arrived.  But  the  time  has  come  when  you  begin  to  bless  the 
Lord.  Now,  take  an  instance  of  this  in  the  second  Book  of  Chronicles, 
twentieth  chapter  and  twentieth  verse.  Jehoshaphat  went  out  to 
fight  with  an  exceeding  great  army,  and  mark  how  he  achieved  the 
victory.  ''They  rose  early  in  the  morning  ai)d  went  forth  into  the 
wilderness  of  Tekoa :  and  as  they  went  forth,  Jehoshaphat  stood  and 
said.  Hear  me,  0  Judidi,  and  ye  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem ;  believe  in 
the  Ix)rd  your  God,  so  shall  ye  be  established ;  believe  his  prophets,  so 
shall  ye  prosper.  And  when  he  had  consulted  with  the  people  he  ap- 
pointed " — what  ?  warriors,  captains  ?  No,  that  was  all  done,  but  he 
*'  appointed  singers  unto  the  Lord,  and  that  should  praise  the  beauty  of 
holiness,  as  they  went  out  before  the  army,  and  to  say.  Praise  the  Lord ;  for 
his  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  And  when  they  began  to  sing  and  to  praise, 
the  Lord  set  ambushments  against  the  chUdren  of  Ammon,  Moao,  and 
mount  Seir,  which  were  come  against  Judah ;  and  they  were  smitten." 
Victory  came  when  they  began  to  sins  and  to  praise.  You  shidl  get  your 
answers  to  prayer  when  you  multipy  your  thanksgivings  in  all  your 
pr^ers  and  supplications:  rest  you  sure  of  that. 

Our  thanksgiving  will  show  that  the  reason  for  our  waiting  is  now 
exhausted ;  that  the  waiting  has  answered  its  purpose,  and  may  now  come 
to  a  joyful  end.  Sometimes  we  are  not  in  a  fit  state  to  receive  a  blessing, 
but  when  we  reach  the  condition  of  thankfulness  then  is  the  time  when  it 
is  safe  for  God  to  indulge  us.  A  professing  Christian  came  to  his  minister 
once  and  said,  *'  Sir,  you  say  we  should  always  pray."  "  Yes,  my  fiiend, 
undoubtedly."  "  But  then.  Sir,  I  have  been  praying  for  twelve  months 
that  I  might  enjoy  the  comforts  of  religion,  and  I  am  no  happier  than 
before.  I  have  made  that  my  one  perpetual  prayer,  thac  I  might  enjoy 
the  comforts  of  religion,  and  I  do  not  feel  joy  nor  even  peace  of  mind ; 
in  fact,  I  have  more  doubts  and  fears  than  ever  I  had."  *'  Yes,"  said  his 
minister,  "  and  that  is  the  natural  result  of  such  a  selfish  prayer.  Why, 
dear  friend,"  ho  said,  "come  and  kneel  down  with  me,  and  let  us 
pray  in  another  manner,  '  Father,  glorify  thy  name  1  Thy  kingdom 
come.'  Now,"  said  he,  "  go  and  offer  those  petitions  and  get  to  work 
to  try  to  make  it  true,  and  see  if  you  do  not  soon  enjoy  the  comforts 
of  religion."    There  is  a  great  deal  in  that  £act :  if  you  will  but  desire 


228  KETBOFOLITAV  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

doi  to  be  glorified,  and  aim  at  glorifying  him  yourself,  then  shall  the 
joys  of  trne  godliness  come  to  you  in  answer  to  prayer. 

The  time  for  the  blessing  is  when  you  begin  to  praise  God  for  it. 
For,  brethren,  you  may  be  sure  that  wnen  you  put  up  a  thanksgiving  on 
the  ground  that  Ood  has  answered  your  prayer,  you  really  have  prevailed 
with  God.  Suppose  you  had  promised  to  some  poor  woman  that  you 
would  give  her  a  meal  to-morrow.  You  might  forget  it,  you  know ;  but 
suppose  when  the  morning  came  she  sent  her  little  girl  with  a  basket  for 
it,  me  would  be  likely  to  get  it  I  thmk.  But,  suppose  that  she  sent  in 
addition  a  little  note  in  which  the  poor  soul  thanked  you  for  your  great 
kindness,  could  you  have  the  heart  to  say,  "  My  dear  girl,  I  cannot  attend 
to  you  to-day.  Come  another  time"?  Oh  dear  no,  if  the  cupboard  was 
bare  you  would  send  out  to  get  something,  because  the  good  soal  so 
believed  in  you  that  she  had  sent  you  thanks  for  it  before  she  received 
your  gift.  Well,  now,  trust  the  I^rd  in  the  same  manner.  He  cannot 
run  back  from  his  word,  mv  brethren.  Believing  prayer  holds  him,  but 
believing  thanksgiving  binos  him.  If  it  is  not  in  your  own  heart,  though 
jon  be  evil,  to  refuse  to  give  what  you  have  promised  Avhen  that  promise 
IS  so  believed  that  the  person  rejoices  as  though  he  had  it;  then  depend 
upon  it  the  good  God  will  not  find  it  in  his  heart  to  refuse.  The  time  for 
reception  is  fiiUy  come  because  thanksgiving  for  that  reception  fills  your 
heart.  I  leave  the  matter  with  you.  If  you  are  enabled  to  pray  in 
that  fashion,  ^eat  good  will  come  to  yourselves,  and  to  the  Church  of 
God,  and  to  the  world  at  large  by  such  prayers. 

Now,  I  think  I  hear  in  this  auoience  somebody  saying,  "  But  I  cannot 
pray  so.  I  do  not  know  how  to  pray.  Oh,  that  I  knew  how  to  pray  !  I 
am  a  poor,  guilty  sinner.  I  cannot  mix  any  thanksgiving  with  my  sup- 
pUcations."  Ah,  m^  dear  soul,  do  not  think  about  that  just  now.  I  am 
not  BO  much  preachmg  to  you  as  I  am  preaching  to  the  people  of  God. 
For  you  it  is  quite  enough  to  say, /'God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 
And  yet  I  will  venture  to  say  that  there  is  praise  in  such  a  ptition.  You 
are  implicitly  praising  the  justice  of  God,  and  you  ai'e  praismg  his  mercy 
by  appealing  to  him.  When  the  prodigal  returned,  and  he  began  his 
prayer  by  saying,  "  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son,"  there  was  in 
that  confession  a  real  praise  of  the  father's  goodness,  of  which  he  was 
unworthy  to  partake.  But  you  need  not  think  about  this  matter  at 
present,  for  just  you  have  to  find  Jesus,  and  eternal  life  in  him.  Go  and 
plead  the  merit  of  Jesus,  and  cast  yourself  upon  the  love  and  mercy  of 
God  in  him,  and  he  will  not  cast  you  away :  and  then  another  day,  wlieu 
you  thus  have  found  and  known  him,  take  care  that  the  thanksgiving 
'  tor  your  salvation  never  ceases.  Even  when  you  are  most  hungry,  and 
!  poor,  and  needy  in  the  future  continue  to  bless  your  saving  Lord,  and 
1  say,  "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard  him :  and  because  the 
;  Lord  inclined  his  ear  unto  me  I  will  praise  his  name  as  long  as  I  live.'' 
!      God  bless  you,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scriptu&k  Read  before  Sermon— Philippians  iv. 


Hyhhs  from  *'Oua  Own  Hymn  Book"— 18  (Vers.  I.),  lOOl,  982. 


^titaplikn  i^ahpacle  inlgti 


■"g^^— ^■^"»™™»" 


A  QUESTION  FOB  HABD-HEABTED  HEABEBS. 


t  I 


DELIYSBSD  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   TUB   XSTBOPOLITAK   TABERNAOLK|   NSWINQTOV. 


**  Shall  hones  mn  upon  the  rockP  will  ontplongh  there  with  oxen  ("•'-AmoB 
TI.  12. 

These  expressions  are  proverbs,  probably,  taken  fi!om  the  familiar 
adages  of  the  country,  but,  anyhow,  right  worthy  to  be  used  as 
proverbs.  The  wiser  men  become  the  more  sententious  are  their  utter- 
ances, the  more  terse  and  full  of  meaning  are  their  sayings ;  and,  hence, 
the  wisdom  of  the  wise  condenses  into  proverbs,  and  the  language 
of  prophets  is  sure  to  abound  in  them,  ^ut  a  proverb  is  generally  a 
sword  with  two  edges,  or,  if  such  a  metaphor  mio;ht  be  tolerated,  it 
has  many  edges,  or  is  all  edge,  and  hence  it  may  Be  turned  this  way 
and  that  way,  and  its  back  stroke  will  be  as  sharp  as  its  direct  cut ; 
for  every  part  of  it  will  have  force  and  point.  A  proverb  has  often 
man^  bearmgs,  and  you  cannot  always  tell  what  was  the  precise  meaning 
of  him  who  uttered  it,  except  by  the  connection.  Now,  I  believe  that 
the  connection  would  abundantly  tolerate  two  senses  in  this  place.  An 
ancient  commentator  asserts  that  there  are  seven  meanings  of  it,  and 
that  any  one  of  them  would  be  consistent  with  the  context.  I  cannot 
deny  the  assertion,  for  if  it  be  correct  it  is  only  one  amon^  many  in- 
stances of  the  manifold  wisdom  of  the  Word  of  God.  Like  those 
carious  carved  Chinese  balls  in  which  there  is  one  ball  within  another, 
so  in  many  a  holy  text  there  is  sense  within  sense,  teaching  within 
teaching,  and  each  one  worthy  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

The  first  sense  of  the  text  I  would  say  just  a  word  or  two  upon  is 
this  :  the  prophet  is  expostulating  with  ungodly  men  upon  their  pursuit 
of  happiness  where  it  never  can  be  found.  They  were  endeavouring  to 
grow  rich  and  great  and  strong  by  oppression.  The  prophet  says, 
**  ye  have  turned  judgment  into  gall,  and  the  fruit  of  righteousness  into 
hemlock."  They  had  transformed  the  judgment  seat  into  a  place  where 
justice  was  bought  and  sold,  and  the  book  of  the  law  was  made  to  be 
the  instrument  of  chicanery,  and  high-handed  fraud.  **  Yet,"  says  the 
prophet,  **  there  is  no  gain  to  be  gotten  this  way — ^no  real  profit,  no 
true  happiness.    As  weU  may  horses  run  upon  a  rock,  and  oxen  plough 


-J 


280  lOBTBOPOLITAir  TABSBNAOLE  FHIiPrr. 

the  arid  sand :  it;  is  a  foolish  attempt ;  it  is  labour  in  vain.'*    And 
truly,  dear  hearers,  if  there  are  any  of  yon,  and  probably  thera  are, 
who  try  to  content  yourselves  with  this  world,  and  hope  to  find  a  heaven 
in  the  midst  of  your  business  and  your  familv  without  looking  upward 
for  it,  you  labour  in  vain.    If  any  of  you  endeavour  to  find  pleasure  in 
sin,  and  think  that  it  will  go  well  with  you  if  you  despise  the  law  of 
Ood,  and  seek  your  own  pleasure  by  breaking  the  natural  laws  which 
concern  your  boidv,  you  will  find  that  you  have  made  a  great  mistake. 
You  might  as  well  seek  for  roses  in  the  grottoes  of  the  sea,  or  look  for 
pearls  on  the  bare  pavements  of  the  city.    You  will  find  what  your 
Boul  requires  nowhere  but  in  6od«   To  seek  after  happiness  in  evil  deeds 
is  to  plough  a  rock  of  granite.    To  labour  after  true  prosperity  by  dis- 
honest means  is  as  useless  as  to  till  the  sandy  shore.    "  Wherefore  do 
you  spend  your  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread,  and  your  labour  for 
that  which  satisfieth  not  ?"    Young  man,  you  are  killing  yourself  with 
ambition,  and  if  your  object  were  worthy  we  might  not  be  so  grieved, 
but  your  ambition  is  selfish,  you  seek  only  your  own  honour  and  emolu- 
ment, and  this  is  a  poor,  poor  object  for  an  immortal  soul.     And  you 
too,  sir,  are  wearing  out  your  life  with  care ;  your  mind  and  body  both 
fail  you  in  endeavouring  to  amass  riches,  as  if  a  man's  life  consisted  in 
the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesses.    You  are  ploughing  a 
rock ;  vour  avarice  will  not  bring  you  joy  of  heart  or  content  of  spirit, 
but  will  end  in  failure.    And  you,  too,  who  labour  to  weave  a  righteous- 
ness by  your  works  apart  from  Christ,  and  fancy  that  with  the  diligent 
use  of  outward  ceremonies  you  may  be  able  to  do  the  work  of  the  Holv 
Spirit  upon  your  own  heart,  you  too  are  ploughing  thankless  sand. 
No  harvest  will  ever  repay  your  self-elected  toils.    Merit  can  no  more 
spring  fVom  liuman  hands  than  fruit  from  an  iron  rod.    The  strength 
of  fallen  nature  exerted  at  its  utmost  can  never  rescue  a  soul  from  the 
storm  of  wrath  which  awaits  the  guilty.    You  may  row  hard  to  bring 
that  galley  of  yours  to  shore,  but  it  shall  be  broken  by  the  fierce  tem- 
pest.   Why,  then,  attempt  the  impossible  when  faith  would  in  a  moment 
calm  the  sea  and  bring  the  ship  to  shore.    Woe  unto  those  who  kindle 
a  fire  and  compass  themselves  with  sparks,  and  delight  themselves  iu 
the  blaze  of  their  own  kindling,  for  they  shall  have  this  of  the  Lord, 
that  tbey  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow. 

So  far,  I  beUeve,  I  have  nob  misread  the  text,  but  have  mentioned  a 
very  probable  meaning  of  the  words  as  they  stand  in  the  context ;  but, 
still,  another  strikes  me,  which  I  think  equally  suitable,  and  upon  it 
I  shall  dwell  by  God's  help. 

It  is  just  this.  God  will  not  always  send  his  prophets  to  warn 
people,  or  employ  his  ministers  to  call  them  to  repentance.  When  it 
turns  out  that  men's  hearts  remain  obdurate,  and  they  do  not  and  will 
not  repent,  then  God  will  not  always  deal  with  them  in  mercy.  ''My 
Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man."  There  is  a  time  of  plough- 
ing, but  when  it  comes  to  be  quite  evident  that  the  heart  is  wilfully 
hardened,  then  wisdom  itself  suggests  to  mercy  that  she  should  give 
over  her  efforts.  **  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock  ?  will  one  plough 
there  with  oxen  ?"  No,  there  is  a  limit  to  the  efforts  of  kindness,  and 
in  fulness  of  time  the  labour  ceases,  and  the  rock  remains  a  sterile 
Tock,  unploughed  henceforth  and  for  ever. 


A  QUXSTION  FOB  HABD-HSABTBD  HBABEBS.  231 

L  Taking  that  sense  we  shall  speak  upon  it  and  remark,  first,  that 
lONiSTEBS  LABOUB  TO  BBSAK  UP  mbn's  hbabts  :  this  is  the  first 
effort  of  the  wise  preacher.  The  servant  of  Christ  who  teaches  the 
gospel,  whatever  he  may  be  called,  is  a  sower  of  seed ;  and  though  it 
may  appear  useless  to  sow  seed  upon  rocks,  we  are  bound  while  acting 
as  evangelists  to  sow  our  seed  everywhere.  Broadcast  is  our  Master's 
rule :  *'  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature." 
Hence  in  our  Lord's  parable  a  handfiil  fell  upon  the  highway  where  the 
birds  devoured  it ;  and  another  handful  fell  upon  the  rocky  soil,  where 
it  sprung  up,  but  to-morrow  perished  because  it  had  not  depth  of  eartk 
It  was  no  business  of  the  sower  to  select  the  soil.  He  was  to  sow  as  he 
went  along,  for  so  his  Master  bade  him.  But  methinks  he  would  not  be 
blamed,  but  commended  if  he  threw  double  handfuls  over  there  where 
the  soil  was  evidently  rich  and  well  prepared.  As  a  sower  he  was 
to  BOW  broadcast,  and  leave  the  seed  to  fall  where  it  might,  under  the 

faardian  care  of  him  who  sent  him  to  sow ;  but  when  he  became  a 
usbandman,  he  would  have  further  duties,  and  among  the  rest  that  of 
breaking  up  the  fallow  ground  that  he  might  no  longer  sow  among 
thorns.  We  have  so  often  sown  on  the  rock,  and  have  been  so  fre- 
quently disappointed  because  of  the  hardness  of  the  unrenewed  heart, 
that  much  time  must  be  spent  by  the  pastor  as  a  lover  of  men's  souls 
in  trying  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  break  up  the  hard  earth- 
pan,  to  make  it  so  that  it  will  be  receptive  of  the  seed,  and  ready  to 
nurture  the  living  grain  after  it  has  fallen  there. 

There  are  many  truths  which  are  used  in  this  ploughing,  and  driven 
in  like  sharp  ploughshares  to  break  up  the  heart.  Men  must  be  made 
to  feel  that  they  have  sinned,  and  they  must  be  led  to  repent  of  sin. 
They  must  receive  Christ,  not  with  the  head  only  but  with  the  heart ; 
for  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness.  There  must  be 
emotion  ;  wc  must  cut  into  the  heart  with  the  ploughshare  of  the  law. 
A  farmer  who  is  too  tender-hearted  to  tear  up  and  harrow  the  land  will 
never  see  a  harvest.  Here  is  the  filing  of  certain  divines,  they  are 
afraid  of  hurting  anyone's  feelings,  and  so  they  keep  clear  of  all  the 
truths  which  are  likely  to  excite  fear  or  grief.  They  have  not  a  sharp 
ploughshare  on  their  premises,  and  are  never  likely  to  have  a  stack 
in  their  rickyard.  They  angle  without  hooks  for  fear  of  hurting 
the  fish,  and  fire  without  bullets  out  of  respect  to  the  feelings  of  the 
birds.  This  kind  of  love  is  real  cruelty  to  men's  souls.  It  is  much 
the  same  as  if  a  surgeon  should  permit  a  patient  to  die  because  ho 
would  not  pain  him  with  the  lancet,  or  by  the  necessary  removal  of  a 
limb.  It  is  a  terrible  tenderness  which  leaves  men  to  sink  into  hell 
rather  than  distress  their  minds.  It  is  a  diabolical  love  which  denies 
the  eternal  danger  which  assuredly  exists  and  argues  the  soul  into  pre- 
sumption, because  it  thinks  it  a  pity  to  excite  terror,  and  so  much  more 
pleasant  to  prophesy  smooth  things.  Is  this  the  spirit  of  Christ  ?  Did 
he  conceal  the  sinner's  peril  ?  Did  he  cast  doubts  upon  the  unquench- 
able fire  and  the  undying  worm  ?  Did  he  lull  souls  into  slumber  by 
dulcet  notes  of  flattery?  Nay,  but  with  honest  love  and  anxious 
concern  he  warned  men  of  the  wrath  to  come,  and  bade  them  repent  or 

Erish.    Let  the  servant  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  this  thing  follow  his 
aster,  and  plough  deep  with  a  sharp  plougiisharc,  which  will  not  be 


232  HETBOPOLTTAN  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

balked  by  the  hardest  clods.  This  we  mnst  school  onrselves  to  do.  It 
may  be  contrary  to  our  impulses,  and  painfid  to  onr  feelings ;  bat  it 
must  not  be  left  undone  to  gratify  our  Iotc  of  ease,  and  our  desire  to  please 
our  hearers.  If  we  reaUy  loye  the  souls  of  men,  let  us  prove  it  by  honcsc 
speech  which  costs  us  pain,  by  earnest  warning  which  it  is  more  grievons 
to  us  to  utter  than  to  others  to  hear;  for  this  part  of  our  work  is 
essential  to  man's  welfare,  and  can  by  no  means  be  omitted.  The  hard 
heart  must  be  broken,  or  it  will  still  refuse  the  Sayiour  whose  glory  lies 
very  much  in  his  being  sent  to  bind  up  che  broken-hearted.  There  are 
some  things  which  men  may  or  may  not  haye,  and  yet  may  be  sayed ; 
but  those  things  which  go  with  the  ploughing  of  the  hearc  are  indis- 
pensable, and  therefore  men  must  haye  them  or  perish  hopelessly.  The 
heart  must  be  broken  up :  there  must  be  a  holy  fear  and  a  humble 
trembling  before  God.  There  must  be  an  acknowledgment  of  offences 
committed,  and  a  penitent  petition  for  mercy.  There  must,  in  a  word^ 
be  a  thorough  ploughing  of  the  soul  before  we  can  expect  that  the  seed 
should  bring  forth  &uit 

II.  But  the  text  indicates  to  us  that  at  times  ministers  labour 
IN  VAIN.  "  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock  ?  Will  one  plough  there 
with  oxen  ?"  There  are  some  hearts,  there  are  some  in  this  house  to- 
night, there  are  some  who  are  always  here,  who  are  very  hard  soil. 
When  the  ploughman  ploughs  he  soon  discovers  what  he  is  at  work 
upon.  I  do  not  suppose  that  anybody  but  a  minister  with  considerable 
experience  will  understand  what  I  say  when  I  declare  that  there  is 
a  sympathy  between  the  preacher  of  the  gospel  and  his  hearers  of  a 
very  intimate  kind,  even  as  there  is  a  mutual  action  between  the  soil 
and  the  ploughman.  Though  our  hearers  are  silent  they  probably 
speak  more  to  the  preacher  than  he  does  to  them.  In  a  short  time  a 
ploughman  feels  whether  the  plough  will  go  or  not,  and  so  does  the 
minister.  He  may  use  the  very  same  words  in  one  place  which  he  has 
used  in  another,  or  they  may  seem  to  him  to  be  so,  but  he  feels  ia 
the  one  place  great  joy  and  hopefulness  in  preaching,  while  with  another 
audience  he  has  heavy  work,  and  little  hope  mingles  with  it.  The 
plough  in  the  last  case  seems  to  jump  out  of  the  furrow ;  and  a  bit  of  the 
share  is  broken  off  every  now  and  then.  He  says  to  himself, ''  I  do 
not  know  how  it  is,  but  I  do  not  get  on  at  this,"  and  he  becomes 
conscious  that  his  Master  has  sent  him  to  work  upon  a  particularly 
heavy  soil.  The  people  were  so  far  attentive  that  nobody  was  asleep  ; 
they  seemed  to  drink  in  every  word,  and  yet  they  were  as  unmoved  as 
80  many  statues.  They  did  not  feel,  and  cUd  not  appear  as  if  thejcoukl 
feel  anything.  The  preacher  was  ready  to  stop  and  burst  into  tears  to 
see  how  utterly  unfeeling  his  audience  had  become  ;  but  that  did  not 
alter  them.  He  hoped  it  was  no  vain  regard  for  his  own  reputation 
which  distressed  him,  but  that  a  sincere  desire  for  their  good  and  for 
the  honour  of  the  truth  moved  him  to  holy  jealousy;  but  he  felt 
a  kind  of  heart-breaking  coming  over  him  because  he  could  make  no 
headway.  He  was  doing  his  best.  The  very  same  that  he  had  done  in 
other  places  with  abounding  success  and  with  a  sense  of  joyous  ease, 
he  was  now  doing  in  heaviness  of  spirit,  conscious  that  he  was  wasting 
effort,  and  that  his  pleadings  were  lost  upon  the  people.  All  labourers 
for  Chi'ist  know  that  this  is  occasionally  the  case.   You  must  have  found 


A  QUESTION  FOE  HARO-HSABTBD  HBABERS.  283 

it  SO  in  a  Sanday-school  class.  Ton  mnsfc  have  known  ik  to  be  so  in 
a  cottage  meeting  or  in  any  other  gathering  where  yon  have  tried  to 
teach  and  preach  Jesns.  Yon  hare  said  to  yonrself  every  now  and  then, 
'*  Now  I  am  ploughing  a  rock.  Before,  I  tnmed  np  rich  monld  which 
a  yoke  of  oxen  might  plongh  with  ease,  and  a  horse  might  eyen  run  at 
the  work ;  hut  now  the  horse  may  tug,  and  the  oxen  may  wearily  toil 
till  they  gall  thoir  shoulders,  but  they  cannot  cut  a  furrow ;  the  rock  ia 
Btnbbom  to  the  last  degree." 

There  are  such  hearers  in  all  congregations.  They  are  as  iron,  and  yet 
the^  are  side  by  side  with  a  fine  plot  of  ground.  Their  sister,  their  brother, 
their  son,  their  daughter,  all  these  have  readily  felt  the  power  of  the 
gospel,  but  ihey  do  not  feel  it  They  hear  it,  respectfully  hear  it ;  and 
they  so  far  allow  it  free  course  that  they  permit  it  to  go  in  at  one  ear 
and  out  at  the  other,  but  they  will  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  it. 
They  would  not  like  to  be  Sabbath  breakers  and  stop  away  from 
worship;  they,  therefore,  do  the  gospel  the  questionable  compliment 
of  coming  where  it  is  preached  and  then  refusing  to  regard  it.  They 
are  hard,  hard,  hard  bits  of  rock,  the  plough  does  not  fbrrow  them. 

Many,  on  the  other  hand,  are  equally  hard  ;  but  it  is  in  another  way. 
The  plough  seems  to  touch  them  when  they  hear  the  word  of  Ood 
preached,  but  it  is  in  seeming  only ;  the  impression  is  not  deep  or  per- 
manent. They  receive  it  with  joy,  but  retain  it  not.  They  listen, 
apparently,  with  deep  attention,  and  they  are  ready  enough  to  go  to  a 
place  of  worship  as  often  as  ever  you  like,  but  then  it  never  comes  to 
practice  with  them.  They  will  hear  about  repentance,  but  they  never 
repent.  They  hear  about  faith,  but  they  never  believe.  If  we  were  to 
preach  anythmg  other  than  the  truth  they  would  be  indignant,  for  they 
are  very  good  judges  of  what  the  gospel  is ;  but  they  have  never 
accepted  the  gospel.  They  will  not  eat,  but  still  they  insist  that  good 
bread  shall  be  put  on  the  table.  They  will  not  wash,  bnt  they  will  have 
the  bath  continually  open  before  them.  They  are  great  sticklers  for  the 
very  things  which  they  personally  reject.  They  are  moved  to  feeling ; 
they  shed  tears  occasioually.  A  sentimental  tale  would  make  them 
weep  fast  enough,  and  sometimes  the  pathos  of  the  preacher  stirs  them 
in  tne  same  manner  for  a  time ;  but  still  their  hearts  are  not  really 
broken  up  by  the  word.  They  go  their  way,  and  forget  what  manner 
of  men  they  are.  Their  transient  feeling  is  rather  an  illustration  of 
their  hardness  than  an  instance  of  true  emotion.  They  are  hard,  hard, 
hard,  rocky-hearted  through  and  through.  They  are  stony-souled 
enough  to  mock  the  word  by  feeling,  and  yet  not  feeling ;  by  the  imita- 
tion of  a  sensibility  which  never  amounts  to  spiritual  sensation.  We 
have  such  in  this  congregation;  the  Lord  have  mercy  upon  them. 
^Vliile  I  am  speaking,  1  hope  the  description  will  come  home  to  them, 
and  that  each  one  of  them  may  listen  for  himself,  and  feel  the  plough- 
share tearing  its  rough  but  useful  way. 

Now,  all  this  is  the  worse,  because  certain  of  these  people,  these  rocky- 
hearted  people  have  been  ploughed  for  years,  and  they  become  harder 
instead  of  softer.  Once  or  twice  ploughing,  and  a  broken  share  or  two, 
and  a  disappointed  ploughman  or  two,  we  might  not  mind,  if  they 
would  yield  at  last ;  but  these  have  since  their  childhood  known  the 
gospel  mi  never  given  way  before  its  power.    It  is  a  good  while  since 


2a4  HBTBOPOLITiJr  TABBBKAOLB  PULPIT. 

their  childhood  now  with  some  of  them.  Their  hair  is  turning  groj, 
and  they  themselves  are  getting  feeble  with  years.  I  am  addressing  those 
who  have  heard  the  word  preached  in  sincerity  and  earnestness  now 
scores  and  hundreds  of  times.  You  have  heard  waggon-loads  of  sermons. 
You  have  been  entreated  and  persuaded  times  beyond  number.  You 
have  had  invitations  and  expostulations  multiplied  ad  infinitum.  Yes^ 
and  you  have  been  prayed  over  and  wept  over,  but  your  hearts  are 
rocky  still ;  labour  has  been  lost  upon  you.  In  fact,  you  used  to  feel  the 
word,  in  a  certain  fashion,  far  more  years  ago  than  you  do  now.  The 
sun  which  softens  wax,  hardens  clay,  and  the  same  gospel  which  has 
brought  others  to  tenderness  and  repentance  has  exercised  a  contrary 
effect  upon  yon,  and  made  you  more  thoughtless,  moi*e  hardened,  more 
worldly,  and  more  contemptuous  of  divine  things  than  you  were  in  your 
youth.  We  knew  it  would  be  so,  we  told  you  so  years  ago ;  for  though 
we  are  always  unto  God  a  sweet  savour,  we  are  among  men  a  savour  of 
death  unto  death  as  well  as  of  life  unto  life :  and  I  fear  that  this  sad 
i^esnlt  is  being  illustrated  in  your  case. 

Why  are  certain  men  so  extremely  rocky  ?  Some  are  so  from  a  peculiar 
stolidity  of  nature.  There  are  many  people  in  the  world  whom  you  cannot 
very  well  move.  You  would  have  to  put  a  piece  of  dynamite  under  them 
before  you  could  alarm  them  much,  they  are  so  very  quiet  and  cool 
about  everything.  They  are  the  same  in  business :  there  is  nothing^ 
sanguine  about  them,  no  excitability,  no  possibility  of  stir  or  emotion. 
They  have  a  great  deal  of  granite  in  their  constitution,  and  are  more 
nearly  related  to  Mr.  Obstinate  than  to  Mr.  Pliable.  Now,  I  do  nob 
think  very  badly  of  these  people,  because  one  knows  what  it  is  to  preach 
to  an  excitable  people  and  to  get  them  all  stirred)  and  to  know  that  at  the 
end  they  are  none  the  better,  but  relapse  into  inaction ;  whereas  some 
of  the  more  stolid  and  immovable  people  when  they  are  moved  are 
moved  indeed ;  when  they  do  feel  they  feel  intensely,  and  they  retain  any 
impression  that  is  made.  A  little  chip  made  in  granite  by  very  hard 
blows  will  abide  there,  while  the  lashing  of  water,  which  is  easy  enough^ 
will  leave  no  trace  even  for  a  moment.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  get  hold 
of  a  fine  piece  of  rock  and  to  exercise  faith  about  it.  The  Lonl's  own 
hammer  has  mighty  power  to  break,  and  in  the  breaking  great  glory 
comes  to  the  Most  High. 

Worse  still,  certain  men  are  hard  because  of  their  infidelity — 
not  heart-infidelity  all  of  it,  but  an  infidelity  which  springs  out  of  a 
desire  not  to  believe,  which  has  assisted  itself  by  manufacturing  doubts 
and  discovering  difficulties ;  which  difficulties  exist,  and  were  meant  to 
exist,  for  there  were  no  room  for  faith  if  everything  were  as  plain  as 
the  nose  on  one's  fiice.  These  people  have  gradually  oome  to  doubt,  or 
to- think  that  they  doubt  essential  truths,  and  this  renders  them  imper- 
vious to  the  gospel  of  Ohnst^another  sad  means  of  hardening  the 
heart  till  it  rivals  adamant. 

A  much  more  numerous  body  are  very  orthodox  people,  but  very  hard- 
hearted people  for  all  that.  Worldiiness  hardens  a  man  in  every 
way.  It  often  dries  up  all  his  charity  to  the  poor,  because  he  must 
make  money,  and  he  thinks  that  the  poor-rates  are  quite  sufficient 
excuse  for  neglecting  the  offices  of  charity.  Uow  comfortable  poor 
people  are  when  they  are  attended  to  by  relieving  officers !     He  pretends 


A  QUBSTIOK  FOB  HABD-HBABTED  HBABEBS.  285 

to  believe  that  our  union  houses  are  perfectly  palatial  establishments, 
and  that  it  would  be  wicked  to  give  away  a  peuny,  because  he  might 
be  helping  an  imposter  and  encouraging  idlenesa  At  any  rate,  it  is  better 
for  him  to  take  care  of  his  worthy  self,  and  give  the  penny  to  number 
one  I  Worldliness  hardens  him  in  that  way,  and  so  it  does  with  regard 
to  other  things.  He  has  no  time  to  think  of  the  next  world ;  he  must 
spend  all  his  thoughts  upon  the  present  one.  Money  is  tight,  and 
therefore  he  must  hold  it  tight ;  and  when  money  brings  in  little  interest 
he  finds  therein  a  reason  for  being  the  more  niggardly.  He  has  no 
opportunity  for  prayer,  he  must  get  down  to  the  counting-house.  He 
has  no  time  for  reading  his  Bible,  his  ledger  wants  him.  Ic  is  of  no 
avail  to  speak  to  him  about  things  eternal,  for  he  is  thoroughly  en- 
grossed with  the  affairs  of  time.  You  may  knock  at  his  door,  but  his/^ 
heart  is  not  at  home ;  it  never  is  at  home,  it  is  always  in  the  counting-  P 
house ;  therein  he  lives  and  moves  and  has  his  being.  His  god  is  hit/ 
gold,  his  bliss  is  his  business,  his  all  in  all  is  himself.  What  is  the 
use  of  preaching  to  him  ?  As  well  may  horses  run  Mpon  a  rock,  or  oxen 
drag  the  plough  across  a  field  sheeted  with  iron  a  mile  thick. 

With  some,  too,  there  is  a  hardness,  produced  by  what  I  might 
almost  call  the  opposite  of  stem  worldliness,  namely,  a  general  levity. 
Some  are  naturally  butterflies — ^they  never  think,  or  want  to  think. 
Half  a  thought  exhausts  them,  and  they  must  needs  be  diverted  or 
their  feeble  minds  will  utterly  weary.  They  live  in  a  round  of  pleasure 
and  amusement.  Their  chief  delight  is  giggling ;  it  does  not  amount 
to  laughter,  for  it  is  downright  earnest  men  that  laugh,  but  these  are 
too  silly,  too  frivolous  for  anything  but  mere  childish  giggling.  They 
go  through  the  world  as  if  it  were  a  stage,  and  all  the  men  and  women 
only  players.  It  is  very  little  use  preaching  to  them ;  there  is  no  depth 
of  earth  in  their  superficial  nature ;  beneath  a  sprinkling  of  shifting, 
worthless  sand  lies  an  impenetrable  rock  of  utter  stupidity  and  sense- 
lessness. I  might  thus  multiply  reasons  why  some  are  harder  than 
others,  but  it  is  a  well-assured  fact  that  they  are  so,  and  there  I  leave 
it  to  notice  a  third  point. 

III.  I  shall  now  ask  everybody  to  judge  whether  this  running  of 
horses  upon  a  rock,  and  this  ploughing  there  with  oxen,  shall  always 
be  continued  ?  I  assert  that  it  is  UNREASoyABLit  to  expbot  that 
God's  sebvants  should  always  coictinue  to  labour  in  vadt. 
These  people  have  been  preached  to,  taught,  instructed,  admonished, 
expostulated  with,  and  advised;  shall  this  unrecompensed  work  be 
always  performed  ?  We  have  given  them  a  fair  trial ;  what  do  reason 
and  prudence  say  ?  Shall  we  be  bound  to  continue  till  we  are  worn 
out  by  this  unsuccessful  work  ?  We  will  ask  it  of  men  of  business ;  we 
will  ask  it  of  men  who  plough  their  own  farms ;  do  they  recommend 
perseverence  when  failure  is  certain?  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock  ? 
Shall  one  plough  there  with  oxen  ?    Surely  not  for  ever. 

I  think  we  shall  all  agree  that  labour  in  vain  cannot  be  continued  for 
ever  if  we,  first  of  all,  think  of  the  ploughman.  He  is  not  much,  and 
he  does  not  want  to  bo  much  considered,  but  still  his  Master  will  think 
of  him.  See  how  weary  he  grows  when  the  work  discourages  him.  He 
^B  to  his  Master  with,  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report,  and  to  whom 
18  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  ?    Why  hast  thou  sent  me/'  says  he. 


236  UETBOPOLItAN  TABEBNAOLE  PULPIT. 

''  to  a  people  that  hare  ears  bnt  hear  not  ?  They  sit  as  thy  people 
Bit,  and  they  hear  as  thy  people  hear,  and  then  they  go  their  way  and 
they  forget  every  word  that  is  spoken,  and  they  obey  not  the  voice  of 
the  Lord  by  his  servant."  See  how  disappointed  the  preacher  becomes. 
It  is  always  hard  work  when  you  appear  to  get  no  forwarder,  although 
you  do  your  utmost  Nobody  likes  doing  work  which  will  not  pay,  and 
from  which  nothing  comes.  I  once  looked  over  a  military  prison,  and 
I  saw  the  soldiers  carrying  shot  from  one  end  of  a  yard  to  the  other, 
and  it  was  remarked  to  me  by  the  warder  that  some  time  ago  they  mado 
the  men  pile  the  shot  at  one  end  in  a  pyramid,  and  then  take  it  back 
to  the  other  end  of  the  yard  and  pile  it  there ;  but  as  that  gave  them 
some  kind  of  amusement  the  work  was  not  thought  sufficiently  irksome, 
and  so  they  made  the  culprits  carry  a  shot  to  one  end  of  the  yard  and 
bring  it  back,  and  thus  no  pile  was  formed  at  either  end.  The  growing 
of  the  little  pyramid,  though  they  knew  they  would  have  to  move  it  again, 
afforded  a  measure  of  interest  to  the  prisoners ;  and  as  the  work  was  to 
to  be  a  matter  of  punishment,  and  not  of  interest,  even  that  was  denied 
them.  How  frequently  we  have  felt  like  those  poor  soldiers  in  prison, 
for  we  have  carried  the  gospel  and  brought  it  back  again,  seemg  no 
result  to  our  endeavours.  W^ith  many  of  you  our  work  has  been  all 
wasted,  all  useless.  Now,  will  God  keep  his  servants  to  such  work  ?  If 
they  were  his  prisoners  in  a  military  prison,  it  would  be  natural  he 
should ;  but  they  are  not :  they  are  his  sons,  and  he  loves  them.  Will 
he  keep  them  to  such  weary  work  as  this  ?  Must  they  always  do  that 
which  discourages  and  disappoints  them?  No  man,  whoever  he  may 
be,  likes  to  be  set  upon  work  which  appears  to  be  altogether  a  waste  of 
time  and  effort.  To  his  own  mind  it  seems  to  have  a  touch  of  the 
ridiculous  about  it,  and  he  fears  that  he  will  be  despised  of  his  fellows 
for  aiming  at  the  impossible.  Shall  it,  then,  always  be  our  lot  to  treat 
with  hard-hearted  men  and  women  ?  Will  the  great  Husbandman  bid 
his  ploughmen  spill  their  lives  for  nought  ?  Must  his  preachers  con- 
tinue to  cast  pearls  before  swine  ?  Shall  they  continue  to  speak  to  deaf 
ears  ?  Must  they  always  expostulate  with  stones  and  prophesy  to  those 
who  are  less  sensible  than  the  beasts  of  the  field  ?  If  the  consecrated 
workers  are  so  bidden  of  their  Ijord  they  will  persevere  in  their 
painful  task ;  but  their  Master  is  considerate  of  them,  and  I  ask  i^u  also 
to  consider  whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  a  zealous  heart  to  be  for 
ever  occupied  with  the  salvation  of  those  who  never  respond  to  its 
anxietv?  Shall  the  horses  always  plough  upon  the  rock?  Shall  the 
oxen  always  labour  there  ? 

Then  think  again,  there  is  the  Master  to  be  considered.  The  Lord — 
is  he  always  to  be  resisted  and  provoked  and  yet  to  continue  to  have 
patience  ?  Many  of  y^ou  have  had  eternal  life  set  before  you  as  to  be 
received  by  simply  believing  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and  you  have  refused  to 
believe.  Now,  my  Lord  might  have  said  to  me,  '*  Gro  home,  you  have 
done  your  duty  with  them ;  never  set  Christ  before  them  again,  I  am  not 
going  to  have  my  Son  insulted."  If  you  offer  a  beggar  in  the  street  a 
shilling  and  he  demurs,  and  will  not  have  it,  you  cheerfully  put  it  into 
vonr  purse  and  go  your  way ;  you  do  not  stand  there  begging  him  to 
have  his  wants  relieved :  but,  behold,  our  Uod  in  mercy  has  l^en  begging 
sinners  to  come  to  him,  imploring  them  to  accept  his  Son.    In  his 


A  QUESTION  FOB  HARD-HEARTED  HEARERS.  287 

condescension  he  lias  even  come  down  to  this — to  be  like  a  salesman 
in  the  market,  crying,  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the 
-waters,  and  he  that  hath  no  money,  come  bny  wine  and  milk,  withont 
money  and  withont  price."  In  another  place  he  says  of  himself, ''  All 
day  long  have  I  stretched  out  my  hands  to  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying 

Eneration.'*  Well,  if  the  Lord  of  mercy  has  been  refdsed,  and  the 
)rd  of  love  has  been  despised  so  long  in  the  sight  of  yon  who  reverence 
him,  does  not  some  indignation  mingle  with  your  pity,  and  while  yoa 
love  sinners  and  would  have  them  saved,  do  you  not  feel  in  yonr  heart 
that  there  must  be  an  end  to  such  insulting  behaviour,  and  such  match- 
less patience  ?  You  cannot  always  be  pleading  with  those  who  will  not 
be  persuaded,  for  he  that  refuseth  you  refaseth  him  that  sent  you. 
I  ask  those  whose  hearts  are  hard  to  think  of  the  matter  in  this  light, 
and  if  they  do  not  respect  the  ploughman,  yet  let  them  have  regard 
to  his  Master. 

And  then,  again,  there  are  so  many  other  people  who  are  needing  the 
gospel,  and  who  would  receive  it  if  they  had  it,  that  it  does  seem  as  if 
it  would  be  wise  to  leave  off  wearying  oneself  about  these  people  who 
will  not  have  it.  What  did  our  Lord  say  ?  He  said  that  if  the  mighty 
things  which  had  been  done  in  Bethsaida  and  Chorazin  had  been  done 
in  Tyre  and  Sidon,  they  would  have  repented.  What  is  more  wonder- 
ful still,  he  says  that  if  he  had  wrought  the  same  miracles  in  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  which  he  wrought  in  Capernaum,  they  would  have  repented  in 
sackcloth  and  ashes.  Well,  then,  does  it  not  occur  to  us  at  once  to 
give  the  word  to  those  who  will  have  it,  and  leave  the  despisers  to 
perish  in  their  own  wilfulness  ?  Does  not  reason  say, ''  Let  us  send 
off  this  medicine  for  the  sick  where  there  are  sick  people  who  will 
valne  it,  for  these  people  refase  it "?  There  are  thousands  of  people 
willing  to  hear  the  gospel.  See  how  they  crowd  wherever  the  preacher 
goes — how  they  tread  upon  one  another  in  their  anxiety  to  listen  to 
him  ;  and  if  these  people  who  hear  him  every  day  will  not  receive  the 
message  of  God,  ''in  God's  name/'  saith  he,  'Met  me  go  somewhere 
else  where  there  is  a  probability  of  finding  soil  that  can  be  ploughed." 
*'  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock?  Will  one  plough  there  with  oxen?" 
Must  I  work  always  where  nothing  comes  of  it  ?  Does  not  reason  say, 
let  the  word  go  to  China,  to  Hindostan,  or  to  the  utmost  parts  of  the 
earth,  where  they  will  receive  it,  for  those  who  have  it  preached  in  the 
comers  of  their  streets  despise  it,  and  think  it  a  common  thing,  if  not 
an  utter  nuisance. 

I  shall  not  lengthen  out  this  argument,  but  shall  just  put  the  question 
again.  Would  any  one  of  you  continue  to  pursue  an  object  when  it 
proved  to  be  hopeless  ?  Have  you  ever  attempted  to  make  a  child  who 
has  been  in  a  pet  and  fretful  happy  and  gooa  tempered  ?  You  have 
said  many  kind  and  gentle  things,  and  you  have  used  a  few  sharp 
words  too,  but  as  my  little  lord  would  not  come  round  you  have 
said  to  yourself,  "  Then  even  let  him  sulk  until  he  has  had  it  out." 
And  if  the  Lord  has  sent  his  servants  to  speak  kind,  gracious,  tender 
things,  and  men  will  not  hear,  do  you  wonder  if  he  should  say,  "  Let 
them  alone.  They  are  joined  unto  their  idols.  Let  them  alone." 
There  is  a  limit  to  the  patience  of  men,  and  we  soon  arrive  at  it ;  and 
assuredly  there  is  a  limit,  though  it  is  long  before  we  outrun  it,  to  the 


238  METEOPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PXJLFIT. 

patienoe  of  God.  "  At  length,"  he  says,  *'  it  is  enoii*rh.  My  Spirit 
shall  no  longer  strive  with  them.  Now  will  I  henceforth  let  tnem 
alone."  If  the  Lord  does  this,  can  any  of  ns  blame  him  ?  Is  not  this 
the  way  of  wisdom  ?  Does  not  prudence  itself  dictate  it  ?  If  we  pnt 
it  to  any  man  of  thoughtful  mind  here,  he  will  say,  "  Ay,  ay,  it  cannot 
always  be  that  the  rock  should  be  ploughed  by  the  oxen." 

IV.  Fourthly,  there  must  be  an  alteration,  then,  and  that 
speedily.  Can  this  be  altered  ?  Can  the  oxen  be  taken  off  from  the 
rock  ?  Yes,  it  can  be  easily  done,  and  very  likely  it  will  happen  ere  long 
to  some  hard  hearts  now  before  me.     It  can  bo  done  three  ways. 

First,  the  person  can  be  taken  away  so  that  the  unprofitable  hearer 
shall  no  more  hear  the  gospel  from  the  lips  of  his  best  approved  minister. 
There  is  a  preacher  who  evidently  touches  the  man  a  little,  and  has  some 
sort  of  power  over  him,  but  as  he  rejects  his  testimony,  and  remains  im- 
penitent, he  shall  be  removed  to  another  town,  he  shall  hear  monoto- 
nous discourses  which  will  not  touch  his  conscience,  nor  disturb  his 
lethargy.  Ho  shall  go  into  a  lone  village,  or  a  foreign  land,  where  he 
shall  be  no  longer  persuaded  and  entreated ;  and  there  he  will  sleep  him- 
self into  hell.  That  may  be  readily  enough  done,  perhaps  some  of  you 
are  making  arrangements  even  now  for  your  own  removal  from  the 
house  of  hope. 

Another  way  is  to  take  away  the  ploughman.  He  has  done  his  work 
as  best  he  could,  now  call  him  off  n'om  nis  hopeless  task.  Let  him  go 
home.  He  is  weary  :  let  him  go  home.  The  soil  would  not  break  up ; 
but  he  could  not  help  that,  let  him  have  his  wage.  He  has  broken 
his  plough  at  the  work;  let  him  go  home  and  hear  his  Lord  say,  "Well 
done."  He  was  willing  to  keep  on  at  the  disheartening  labour  as  long 
as  his  Master  bade  him,  but  it  is  evidently  useless,  therefore  let  him  go 
home,  for  his  work  is  done.  He  has  been  sore  sick,  let  him  die,  and 
enter  into  his  rest.    This  is  by  no  means  improbable. 

Or,  there  may  happen  something  else.  The  Lord  may  say,  "  NoW, 
that  piece  of  rock  shall  never  trouble  the  ploughman  any  more.  I 
will  take  it  away."  And  he  may  take  it  away  in  this  fashion  :  the  man 
who  has  heard  the  gospel  but  rejected  it  will  die.  I  pray  my  Master 
that  he  will  not  suflfer  this  to  happen  in  the  case  of  any  one  of  you — 
that  you  should  die  in  your  sins — die  impenitent ;  for  then  we  cannot 
reach  you  any  more,  or  indulge  the  faintest  hope  for  you.  No  prayers  of 
ours  can  follow  yon  into  eternity.  The  most  ardent  lover  of  vour  souls 
cannot  hope  that  there  shall  be  an  escape  for  you  after  death.  There 
is  one  name  by  which  you  may  be  saved,  and  that  name  is  sounded 
in  your  ears — the  name  of  Jesus ;  but  if  you  reject  him  now,  even  that 
name  will  not  save  you,  for  he  shall  be  your  terror.  Prom  his  face  you 
shall  flee  away  and  your  great  cry  shall  be,  "  Rocks,  hide  me  !  Moun- 
tains, fall  upon  me  !  Hide  me  Kom  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  upon 
the  throne  and  from  the  face  of  the  Lamb."  You  will  dread  him,  and 
well  you  may  dread  him,  though  at  this  hour  he  waits  to  be  gracious  to 
you.  I  pray  you  do  not  destroy  your  own  souls  by  continuing  to  be 
obstinate  against  almighty  love.  Oh  that  the  Lord  might  do  for  you 
what  we  cannot.  May  he  make  you  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power ; 
>r  otherwise,  as  surely  as  you  live,  and  God  lives,  if  it  comes  to  close 

^rters  with  you  and  your  offended  Qod,  i^ith  no  Christ  between  to  be 


A  QTTBSTIOK  FOB  HABD-HSABTED  HEABEBS.  239 

the  mediator,  it  will  go  hard  with  you.  "  Beware,"  says  he,  *'ye  that 
forget  God,  lest  I  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver  you." 
Do  not  mind  anything  that  I  say  of  my  own,  but  look  at  the  word  of 
God  for  yourselves,  and  you  shall  find  that  the  inspired  Scripture  has 
in  it  terrible  threatenings  against  impenitent  sinners ;  and  there  is  no 
imagery  (though  borrowed  from  the  mediiCYal  times,  against  which 
oar  adversaries  make  so  much  noise))  there  is  no  imagery  that  at  all 
exa^erates  the  terror  which  must  actually  fall  upon  every  soul  that 
commits  suicide  by  rejecting  the  Saviour,  and  spits  into  the  face  of 
God's  own  Christ  by  saying,  "  I  would  sooner  be  lost  than  have  him  to 
save  me,"  for  that  is,  virtually,  what  every  unbelieving  soul  is  saying, 

God  grant  that  some  better  thing  may  happen.  I  close  by  saying,  is 
there  any  alternative  to  all  this?  Can  nothing  else  be  done  ?  This 
soil  is  rock ;  can  we  not  somehow  sow  it  without  breaking  it  ?  No, 
it  must  be  broken.  ''  Ye  must  be  born  again."  '*  Except  a  man  receive 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  as  a  little  child  he  can  in  no  wise  enter 
therein."  There  must  be  repentance,  for  without  repentance  there  is  no 
remission  of  sin.  But  is  there  not  a  way  of  saving  men  somehow 
without  the  gospel,  and  without  the  grace  of  God  ?  The  Lord  Jesus 
did  not  say  so ;  he  told  us  to  preach  as  follows, ''  He  that  believeth  and 
ifl  bsuptised  shall  be  saved,  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned." 
He  does  not  hint  at  a  middle  course  or  hold  out  a  "  larger  hope,"  but 
he  says, ''  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned,"  and  so  he  must  he. 
God  grant  that  no  soul  here  may  dream  that  there  may,  perhaps,  be 
some  back  door  to  heaven,  for  the  Lord  has  provided  none.  What 
then  ?  Shall  the  preacher  be  permitted  to  continue  his  fruitless  toil  of 
ploughing  ?  Yes,  he  is  willing.  He  is  willing  if  there  is  only  half  a 
hope  left  him,  willing  to  go  on  and  say,  "  Hear  ye  deaf,  and  see  ye 
blind,  and  look  ye  dead."  He  will  even  so  speak  this  day,  for  his  Master 
bids  him  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  ;  but  it  will  be  hard  work 
to  repeat  the  word  of  exhortation  for  years  to  those  who  will  not  hear  it. 

Happily,  there  is  one  other  turn  which  affairs  may  take.  There  is  a 
God  in  heaven.  Let  us  pray  to  him  to  put  forth  his  power.  Jesus  is  at 
his  side,  let  us  invoke  his  interposition.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  almighty,  let 
us  call  for  his  aid.  Brothers  who  plough,  and  my  brethren  and  sisters 
who  help  us  as  we  plough  and  long  for  our  success,  cry  to  the  Master 
for  help.  The  horse  and  the  ox  evidentlv  fail,  but  there  remains  One 
above  who  made  both  ox  and  horse,  ana  who  is  able  to  work  great 
marvels.  Did  he  not  once  speak  to  the  rock,  and  turn  the  flint  into 
a  stream  of  water  ?    Let  us  pray  to  him  to  do  the  same  now. 

And,  oh,  if  there  is  one  who  feels  and  mourns  that  his  heart  is  like  a 
piece  of  rock,  I  am  so  glad  he  has  come  so  far  as  feeling  it,  because  he 
who  feels  that  his  heart  is  a  rock  gives  some  evidence  that  the  flint  is 
beginning  to  be  transformed.  0  rock,  instead  of  smiting  thee  to-night, 
as  Mofies  smote  the  rock  in  the  wilderness  and  erred  therein,  I  would 
speak  to  thee.  0  rock,  wouldest  thou  become  like  wax  ?  0  rock, 
wonldest  thou  dissolve  into  rivers  of  repentance  ?  0  rock,  fall  down 
with  that  wish  ;  echo  to  the  voice  of  exhortation  !  0  rock,  break  with 
that  good  desire !  0  rock,  dissolve  with  that  longing  for  God  begins ; 
he  is  working  upon  thee  now.  Who  knows  but  at  this  very  moment 
t  hoa  shalt  begin  to  crumble  down.    Dost  thou  feel  the  power  of  the 


240        '  HETBOPOLITAlfr  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Word  ?  Did  the  sharp  plong^hshare  touch  thee  jost  now,  and  didst  thou 
begin  to  break  np  ?  Break  and  break  again,  till  by  contrition  then  art 
broken  in  pieces  all  asunder,  for  then  will  the  good  seed  of  the  gospel 
come  to  thee  and  then  shalt  receire  it  into  thy  bosom,  and  we  shall  all 
behold  the  fmit  thereof. 

And  so  I  will  fling  one  more  handful  of  ^ood  com,  and  have  done. 
If  thou  desirest  eternal  life,  trust  Jesus  Chnst,  and  thou  art  sared  at 
once.  *'  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,"  says 
Christ,  "  for  I  am  Ood,  and  beside  me  there  is  none  else.'*  He  that 
belicveth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life.  "  lAke  as  Moses  lifted  up  the 
serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up,  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life." 

0  Lord,  break  up  the  rock,  and  let  the  seed  drop  in  among  its  broken 
substance,  and  get  thou  a  harvest  from  the  dissolved  granite,  at  thia 
time,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


POBTIOH  OF  SCBIPTUBE  BEAD  BEFORE  SEBUOK-^Luke  Xlii. 


Hymns  from  "Otrn  Own  Hymn  Book" — 489,  527,  526. 


yonos.^PoBsibly  some  of  our  readers  may  not  be  aware  that  VLr,  Bpwgion 
Isaaee  a  Monthly  Magazine,  which  is  generaUy  admitted  to  be  remarkable  for  the 
Tigorous  and  interesting  style  of  its  articles.  The  various  works  under  Mr. 
8purgeon*s  care  here  find  a  permanent  record,  hut  the  periodical  is  not  limited  to 
such  matters ;  it  takes  a  wide  rang^,  and  touches  upon  any  suhject  which  ooncema 
comhat  with  sin  and  lahonr  for  the  Lord.  The  magazine  is  known  as  Ike  Stvord 
and  the  Ihnvel,  and  is  published  by  Messrs.  Passmore  and  Akbasteri  price  Sd* 


JR^tttoptttan  ^r&ttmAt  Intpt 


CONCEALING  THE  WOEDS  OP  GOD. 


%  I 


Deuvebed  OS  Lobd's-Dat  Mobbhtg,  Ann.  27th,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  UBTBOFOLITAK  TABBBNAOLS,  NBWIKGTOV. 
(On  lehalfo/the  BapHtt  Missionary  Society,) 


"I  hare  not  concealed  the  worda  of  the  Holy  One.*' — Job  Ti.  10. 

Job's  dire  distress  was  aggravated  by  the  remarks  of  his  friends.  Eliphaz 
the  Temanite  opened  fire  against  him  in  snch  words  as  these :  ''  Behold, 
thon  hast  instructed  many,  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  weak  hands. 
Thy  words  have  npholden  him  that  was  fisdling,  and  thou  hast 
strengthened  the  feeble  knees.  Bat  now  it  is  come  upon  thee,  and  thon 
faintest;  it  toncheth  thee,  and  thon  art  troubled."  As  much  as  to  say, 
yon  can  preach  but  you  cannot  practise.  Where  now  your  sermons  and 
advices  to  others  ?  It  was  a  shameful  thing  thus  to  mrow  in  the  good 
man's  teeth  his  testimonies  in  former  days ;  but  Job,  who  under  all  his 
sorrow  always  retained  his  clearness  of  intellect  and  singular  shrewdness, 
took  the  words  of  Eliphaz  and  used  them  for  his  own  comfort.  They 
were  bread  and  meat  to  him,  though  brought  in  a  raven's  mouth. 
"  Yes,"  says  he,  "  I  have  comforted  many,  and  my  words  have  instructed 
the  ignorant  and  strengthened  the  feeble,  and  this  is  so  much  my  comfort 
in  the  hour  of  my  affliction  that  I  dare  even  ask  God  to  let  loose  his 
hand  upon  me  and  end  my  life.  Let  him  not  spare  me,  for  I  have  the 
testimony  of  my  conscience  that  I  have  not  been  disloyal  to  my  God. 
The  taunt  of  my  accuser  proves  that  I  have  not  concealed  the  words  of 
the  Holy  One."  It  is  always  well  to  be  able  thus  to  turn  the  enemy's 
guns  upon  himself,  and  to  extract  comfort  from  that  which  was  meant  to 
grieve  us. 

Job  made  no  idle  boast  when  he  said  that  he  had  not  concealed  the 
words  of  the  Holy  One,  for  we  know  from  his  history  that  he  had  been  a 
bold  confessor  of  the  truth  of  God.  We  are  informed  that  he  was  care- 
fully watchful  as  to  his  own  family  that  the  words  of  the  Holy  One 
should  be  there  esteemed  and  known,  especially  that  grandest  of  ail  holy 
words  concerning  sacrifice  and  atonement :  for  we  read  that  when  his 
children  had  kept  birthdays  at  each  other's  houses  and  had  fulfilled  their 
days  of  feasting,  ''Job  sent  and  sanctified  them,  and  rose  up  early  in  the 
morning,  and  offered  burnt  offerings  according  to  the  numoer  of  them 
No.  1,471. 


242  MmtOPOLITAK  TABERHAOLE  PULPIT. 

an  :  for  Job.said,  it  mft^  be  thafc  ix^  tons  have  sinned  and  caraed^Ood  in 
their  hearts.    Thus  did  Job  continnallj."    He  was  earnest  for  £he 
pniity  id  im  faouly  and  the  keeping  up  of  Uie  sacrifices  which  were 
t^ical  of  the  cleansing  of  sin;  and  thus  he  made  known   to  his 
descendants  the  central  word  of  all  the  words  of  the  Holy  One.    Even  in 
the  time  of  his  affliction  the  patriarch  had  not  spoken  other  than  accord- 
ing to  the  mind   of  Grod.    TV^at  said  he  when  he  had  lost  all  his 
possessions,  and  was  left  without  a  child?    ^' Naked  came  I  out  of  my 
mother's  womb,  and  nak^  shall  I  return  thither :  the  Lord  gave,  and 
the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  and  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord.''  And 
when  his  wife,  seeing  him  covered  with  a  loathsome  disease,  bade  him 
curse  Ghod  and  die,  he  did  not  withhold  his  testimony  from  her,  but  said, 
"  What?  shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall  we  not  re- 
ceive evil  ?"    These  were  words  given  him  of  the  Lord  in  the  moment 
of  his  need,  and  he  shunned  not  to  utter  them  with  all  his  heart.    The 
inspired  testimony  about  this  holy  man  is  that  **in  idl  tbia  did  not  Job 
sin  with  his  lips." 

It  is  clear  that  in  his  prosperity  Job  was  a  most  faithful  witness  for 
Ood.   We  will  not  speculate  about  the  time  or  the  place  in  which  he  lived ; 
but  wherever  he  lived  he  was  a  man  of  great  influence,  and  was  held  in 
high  esteem.    He  says,  "  When  I  went  out  to  the  gate  throngh  the  city, 
when  I  prepared  my  seat  in  the  street,  the  young  men  saw  me,  and  hid 
tiiemselves :  and  the  aged  arose,  and  stood  up.    The  princes  refrained 
talking,  and  laid  their  hand  on  their  mouth."    This  influence  was  always 
exerted  for  the  canse  of  truth  and  righteousness,  which  is  always  the 
cause  of  Qoi.    In  the  twenty-ninth  chapter  he  says  of  himself,  "  When 
the  ear  heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me ;  and  when  the  eye  saw  me,  it  gave 
witness  to  me  :  because  I  delivered  the  poor  that  cried,  and  the  fatherless, 
and  him  that  had  none  to  help  hinu    The  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready 
to  perish  came  upon  me  :  and  I  caused  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy. 
I  put  on  righteousness,  and  it  dothed  me  :  my  judgment  was  as  a  robe 
and  a  diadem."  He  was  thus  by  his  conduct  a  perpetual  protest  against  sin, 
a  continued  proclamation  of  iustioe,  righteousness,  mercy,  and  love,  in  the 
age  in  which  he  lived ;  and  he  could,  therefore,  say  without  any  word  of 
egotism,  **  1  have  not  concealed  the  words  of  tiie  Holy  One."    This  was 
now  a  comfort  to  him  when  all  other  comforts  £Edled :  he  knew  that  his 
affliction  was  not  the  fruit  of  a  treacherous  departure  from  Grod,  or  a 
cowardly  concealment  of  his  &ith.   He  felt  that  he  could  face  death,  and 
even  long  for  it,  becanse  he  had  been  loyal  to  his  Gk)d,  and  faithful  to 
the  light  which  had  been  vouchsafed  him  from  on  high.    It  was  not 
self-righteousness  which  led  Job  to  speak  thus,  but  only  such  a  use  of  the 
sure  evidences  of  grace  as  would  be  natural  and  proper  in  any  godly  man 
in  the  hour  of  his  extremity.   It  is  the  nature  of  obedience  to  yield  peace 
to  the  heart,  and  no  one  can  be  blamed  for  enjoying  that  peace.    It  can- 
not be  wrong  for  our  consciences  to  bear  testimony  to  the  sincerity  and 
Enrity  of  our  lives,  nor  wrong  that  when  our  hearts  condemn  us  not  we 
ave  confidence  cowards  God.    He  who  is  most  undivided  in  his  faith  in 
Jesus  may,  nevertheless,  derive  comfort  from  having  been  enabled  to  be 
loyal  to  his  God.    Did  not  Paul  bless  God  for  much  the  same  faith- 
fulness as  Job  claimed  when  he  said, ''  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have 
finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  £uth  "?    Happy  slmll  he  be  who  has 


•  CONGEALINa  THE   WORDS  OF  GOD.  248 

a  clear  testimony  within  his  soul  that  he  has  declared  the  truth  of  God 
in  all  honesty  and  earnestness^  even  to  the  end. 

Job  had  not  refrained  from  an  open  confession  of  his  own  faith  in  God : 
he  had  been  known  in  the  gates  of  the  city  as  a  worshipper  of  the  Lord, 
a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that  feared  God  and  eschewed  evil.  He 
had  never  hidden  nis  faith,  but  had  owned  one  God  whom  he  here  calls 
the  Holy  One.  While  gods  many  and  lords  many  divided  the  fealty  of 
nations.  Job  was  true  to  the  one  only  God ;  and  beueved  his  words  as  they 
were  revealed  to  him.  Nor  was  he  content  with  an  open  confession  of  his 
own  faith,  Job  had  made  a  continued  communication  of  what  he  knew  to 
othera.  He  had  taught  his  fiunily, — there  all  teaching  should  begin.  He 
had  taught  his  fellow-dtizens,  by  his  example — the  most  powerful  of  all 
teaching.  Never  had  he  wandered  into  idolatry,  or  worshipped  the  sun 
when  it  shined,  or  kissed  his  hand  to  the  queen  of  heaven ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  he  had  avowed  the  one  and  only  Lord  without  fear.  He  asks, 
*'  Did  I  fear  a  great  multitude,  or  did  the  contempt  of  fiunilies  temfy  me 
that  I  kept  silence  ? ''  So  faithful  had  he  been  that  he  cries,  "Let  me 
be  weighed  in  an  even  balance,  that  God  may  know  mine  integrity." 
This  was  high  ground  to  take,  but  it  evidently  strengthened  the  good 
man's  heart  to  heBT  his  troubles,  and  it  will  do  the  same  for  us  if  we  can 
win  the  same  witness  from  our  consciences. 

Now,  brethren,  this  is  a  comfort  we  ought  to  seek  after.  It  should 
be  onr  care  that  when  we  come  to  die,  we  may  not  have  to  cry,  **  I  was 
ashamed  of  Jesus,  and  now  I  shall  find  him  ashamed  of  me  :  I  hid  his 
truth  in  unrighteousness,  wrapping  my  talent  in  a  napkin ;  what  shall  I 
do,  or  whither  shall  1  turn?  A  servant  unfaithful  to  his  trust,  I  have 
to  give  an  account  of  my  stewardship,  and  I  cannot  do  it !  Woe  is 
me  I  **  God  grant  that  we  may  be  able  to  say  with  Job,  "  I  have  not 
concealed  the  words  of  the  Holv  One."  Many  professors  will  need  greatly 
to  alter  their  ways,  or  they  will  be  covered  with  confusion  in  the  day  of 
the  Lord.  Ble^ed  and  holy  is  he  who  can  declare  with  David,  or  rather 
with  David's  son,  "I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my  heart; 
I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvation :  I  have  not  concealed 
thy  lovingkiudness,  and  thy  truth  from  the  great  congregation."  (Psalm 
il.  10). 

We  have  more  of  the  words  of  the  Holy  One  than  Job  had,  and  should 
therefore  be  the  more  anxious  to  make  them  known.  I  suppose  he  had 
no  inspired  book  to  read  :  he  could  not  have  had  any  more  than  the 
Books  of  Moses,  probably  he  had  not  those  ;  but  the  Lord  spoke  to  him 
as  he  often  spoke  to  the  prophets  in  the  olden  time,  and  he  had  also 
learned  those  truths  which  had  been  handed  down  from  the  earliest  days 
from  &ther  to  son.  Now  we  have  a  vast  mass  of  sacred  literature,  and 
we  have  besides  that  the  Word  himself,  who  is  the  hope  of  our  souls  and 
the  Lord  of  onr  hearts.  0  brethren,  if  we  wickedly  hide  what  God  has 
revealed  to  us  we  shall  be  veiling  a  great  light,  and  we  shall  heap  up 
guilt  like  the  hills.  When  we  come  to  die  we  shall  feel  a  misery  propor- 
tionate to  the  enormity  of  our  crime ;  we  shall  be  tortured  with  agonizing 
thoughts  for  having,  as  &r  as  we  were  able,  quenched  the  Spirit  and 
blotted  out  the  testimony  of  the  Most  High.  God  forbid  tliat  we  should 
be  guilty  of  such  an  enormity. 

Job,  according  to  the  language  of  our  text,  evidently  had  a  great 


244  MBTfiOFOLITAH  TABBSNAOLE  PULPIT. 

rererenoe  for  eTery  word  of  the  Lord.  He  would  not  have  med  that 
term,  "  the  Holj  One/'  if  he  had  not  felt  the  holiness  of  the  words 
themselves,  and  if  he  had  not  stood  in  solemn  awe  of  him  who  spake 
them.  He  felt  that  they  must  not  be  ooncealed^  beoaose  the  words  of 
the  Holy  One  ^onld  have  fifee  oourse,  and  be  published  abroad.  Should 
not  the  vf(xd  of  a  king  be  circulated  through  me  length  and  breadth  of 
his  dominions?  Have  you  and  I  audi  a  reverenos  for  every  revealed 
tmth  ?  Do  we  stand  in  awe  of  every  word  of  Ood?  If  we  do  it  will 
be  well  for  us  if  we  practically  express  our  homQ£;e  after  the  fashion  of 
David,  who  said,  ^^  With  my  lips  nave  I  declarea  all  the  judgments  of 
thy  mouth.''    The  words  whidi  God  speaks  are  uttered  that  we  may 

E)ak  them.  It  is  the  best  homage  to  a  word  to  hear  it  and  to  repeat  it. 
t  us  prodaim  Ood'is  words  abroad :  they  are  light  and  are  not  meant 
to  be  hidden.  Sach  oandles  ought  never  to  be  put  under  a  bushel.  To 
hide  the  diviiie  words  would  be  a  great  sin  agamst  the  Most  High,  and 
to  warn  you  against  it  will  be  the  aim  of  this  morning's  discourse.  I 
shall  speak  with  the  earnest  prayer  that  both  to  myself  and  to  each  one 
of  you  there  may  be  a  personal  voioe  from  Go^  stirring  every  conscience 
as  to  this  matter,  and  making  each  one  of  us  enquire  whether  or  no  we 
idso  can  say, ''  I  have  not  conoealed  the  words  of  the  Holy  One." 

We  shall  divide  our  subject  thus.  First,  we  shall  have  a  little  to  say 
about  the  8vt  4if  be  aveided:  then  we  will  give  some  strong  argtamnts 
for  avoiding  it:  and,  thirdly,  suggest  some  methods  by  which  we  may  be 
enabled  to  avoid  U. 

I.  Here  is  A  fiiir  to  bb  ▲voided— concealing  the  words  of  the  Holy 
One.  Now,  we  can  conceal  those  words  from  oursehvee  as  well  as  from 
others.  ^' How  conceal  them  from  ourselves?"  say  you.  I  think  that 
very  great  strsss  must  be  laid  upon  this  form  of  the  evil,  which  lies  at 
the  root  of  the  second  shape  of  it  We  can  conceal  the  word  of  God  &om 
ourselves  in  many  ways.  The  law  of  G^  speaks  with  searching  and  threat* 
ening  voioe :  it  tells  us  of  our  sin,  it  forewarns  us  of  the  punishment,  and 
it  sets  onr  danger  both  present  and  future  before  our  mind's  eye :  but 
there  are  thousands  of  persons  who  never  give  the  law  an  opportunity  of 
being  heard  in  their  hearts :  they  turn  a  de^  ear  to  anything  which  is  un- 
pleasant to  them ;  they  do  not  like  to  face  the  honest  truth.  You  know 
why  this  is.  Whj  does  not  a  man  who  is  a  bankrupt  in  business  take 
any  pleasure  in  his  books  ?  Why  is  it  that  he  postpones  all  settlements 
and  endeavours  to  foi^  his  affairs?  Is  it  not  because  his  ruin  is 
near  at  hand  ?  If  there  is  any  truths  my  friend,  that  you  are  a&aid  of, 
you  have  cause  to  be  a&aid  of  it ;  but  let  me  forewarn  you  that  there  is 
no  escaping  from  a  fiust  by  endeavouring  to  forget  it.  Every  honest 
man,  every  brave  man,  every  man  who  is  truly  a  man,  would  like  to  face 
his  true  condition,  and  see  what  and  where  he  is.  One  of  the  prayers 
which  I  command  to  your  frequent  use  is  this,  '^  Lord,  let  me  kuow  the 
very  worst  of  my  case,  that  I  may  not  be  living  upon  vain  pretensioiis, 
and  may  not  be  pluming  myself  with  being  in  a  happy  condition  while 
all  the  while  I  am  in  awful  danger."  Let  it  never  be  said  of  any  one  of 
you  that  you  conoealed  the  words  of  the  Holy  One  about  yourselves  by 
refusing  to  £9el  their  ferce  kst  they  should  end  the  flattenng  visions  of 
your  fond  conceit.  Love  truth  even  though  it  cut  you  to  the  quick. 
Ask  God  to  sectfch  you  and  try  you,  and  to  make  you  sensible  of  sin  and 


OOSrOEALINO  THB  WOBDB  OF  GOD,  24A 

of  judgment  to  come :  this  is  the  part  of  honesty  and  oommon  seBSS* 
Yon  will  indeed  be  foolish  if  yoti  conceal  the  words  of  the  H0I7  One  from 
yonr  conscience,  and  so  flatter  your  sonl  into  destruction. 

Others  conceal  the  ffospel  word,  that  word  which  speaksof  the  free  gift 
of  pardoning  mercy,  which  is  of  many  offences  unto  jnstifloation.  They 
go  about  to  find  out  some  way  of  their  own  for  self-salvation^  and  do  not 
submit  themselves  unto  the  righteousness  of  Ood,  Beloved^  do  pray  the 
Lord  to  help  you  to  know  the  gospel  thoroughly ;  and  to  understand  its 
glorious  simplicity,  its  sweet  freeness  and  boundless  ftthaess.  Do  not 
put  out  the  light  which  alone  can  lead  yon  to  eternal  life.  Do  not  shut 
Your  eyes  to  the  lamp  divine;  do  not  conceal  from  yourselves  those 
humbling  but  yet  soul-saving  doctrines,  which  make  for  your  souls 
eternal  peace.  Shut  not  against  yourselves  the  one  gate  of  paradise.  Hide 
the  gospel  in  your  heart  by  all  means,  but  hide  it  not  Jwm  yonr  hearty 
lest  you  sin  against  your  own  soul. 

I  ought,  also,  to  warn  every  brother  here  of  concealing  any  of  ihe 
words  of  God  fh)m  himself,  by  accepting  half  the  truth  and  rejecting  the 
rest  Beceive  ihe  whole  of  revelatum.  Some  professors  have  &voitrite 
texts  and  choice  portions  of  Scripture,  and  they  regard  other  parts  of  the 
word  with  aversion,  avoiding  them  as  mudi  as  possible,  beeauae  they  do 
not  agree  with  their  system  of  divinity,  and  need  much  squaring  before 
they  mil  fit  in  with  their  foregone  condnsions.  They  do  not  rrad  such 
passages,  or  read  them  carelessly,  or  a  commentator  is  sought  out  who»  by 
the  exercise  of  much  ingenuity,  will  impute  another  meaning  than  the 
true  one  to  the  words  of  God.  Brethren,  open  your  souls  to  divine  light. 
Give  the  word  of  God  free  admittance  into  your  spirits.  Lay  no  embiu?go 
upon  any  form  of  truth ;  demand  no  toll  fbr  the  commodities  of  heaven. 
Let  your  mind  be  an  open  port,  carrying  on  a  free  trade  in  the  treaties 
of  the  gospel.  Believe  whatever  God  says,  because  God  says  it»  though  you 
may  not  always  see  its  why  and  wherefore  or  perceive  its  internal  oon- 
astency.  Be  prepared,  and  even  anxious,  to  know  the  whole  truth 
as  far  as  you  can  know  it,  and  let  it  pervade  yonr  entire  being  with  its 
holy  influence.  It  will  be  a  terrible  thing  if  one  of  these  days  you 
AM  have  to  say,  "  I  rejected  a  great  truth.  I  had  a  sospidon  that 
it  was  so,  but  I  did  not  wish  to  believe  it,  and  so  I  shut  my  ears  to  its 
evidence.  I  had  a  leaning  towards  the  opposite  view  and  L  felt  com- 
mitted to  it,  and  so  refused  to  alter."  Open  both  your  ejses,  my  brethren. 
If  you  cannot  see  everything,  yet  see  all  you  can  see,  and  pray  the  Lord 
to  take  each  scale  away  that  you  may  know  all  the  truth,  am  so  the  truth 
may  make  you  wholly  free. 

There  is,  again,  a  oonoealtng  of  the  feruth  from  ourselves  in  one  other 
respect,  namely,  when  we  try  to  avoid  the  word  of  eommantL  There  be 
aome  professed  Ghristiaos  of  peculiar  doctrinal  opinions  to  whom^  the 
word  '*  duty  "  is  something  dreadful,  and  if  the  preaoher  dwells  upon 
gospel  precept  they  call  him  "  legaL"  I  am  not  much  in  awe  of  that 
word  mysdf,  for  being  interpret^Ml  it  means  lawful,  and  none  of  us  would 
like  to  be  unlawful  preachers.  These  folks  insinuate  that  the  preaching 
of  the  practical  precepts  of  the  gospel  is  in  coaAict  with  the  grace  of 
God,  and  is  little  better  than  preaching  up  human  merit ;  whereas  the 
doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  is  always  a  doctrine  according  to  holiness, 
and  good  works  are  the  sure  results  of  true  &ith.    True  gospel  preaohing 


246  METSOFOLITAK  TABEBNAOLB  FULPIT. 

does  not  decry  holj  living ;  nay,  it  sets  np  the  highest  possible  standard 
and  declares  the  way  to  reach  it.  Beware  of  picking  and  choosing  in 
reference  to  the  commands  of  Christ.  Some  professors  object  to  mnch  of 
the  teaching  of  him  whom  they  call  Master  and  Lord.  The  forgiving  of 
injuries  as  we  hope  to  be  forgiven,  the  non-resistance  principle  of  turning 
the  other  cheek  when  one  is  smitten, — these  are  very  objectionable  to 
ordinary  religionists.  Such  precepts  are  denounced  as  impracticable, 
and  it  is  asserted  that  they  cannot  be  carried  out.  Doing  unto  others  as 
ye  would  that  they  should  do  to  you  is  regarded  as  a  golden  precept  for 
9ther  people  to  practise  towards  our  dear  selves,  but  not  at  all  a  practical 
maxim  from  us  to  the  general  public.  When  persons  speak  of  our  Lord's 
precepts  as  good  but  impracticable,  they  make  him  out  to  be  an  amiable 
simpleton.  Is  this  their  reverence  for  the  incarnate  wisdom  ?  I  need 
not  stop  to  quote  examples,  but  there  are  many  such  things  in  the  word 
of  Gh>d  as  precepts  which  good  men  decline  to  see,  which,  indeed,  they 
declare  that  they  cannot  see.  If  yon  put  a  gold  piece  over  the  boldest 
printed  verse  in  the  Bible  you  will  not  be  able  to  see  the  passage ;  and 
there  are  some  whose  profits  in  business,  whose  position  in  life,  above  all, 
whose  ''  respectability  "  will  not  allow  them  to  see  certain  precepts,  aud 
so  they  do  not  see  them,  and  they  pass  through  life  without  obeying  the 
plain  command  of  the  Lord.  I  pray  you  do  not  so,  for  wilful  ignorance 
IS  no  excuse  for  disobedience.  It  is  written,  *'  He  that  knew  his  Master's 
will,  and  did  it  not,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes ;"  and,  mark  you, 
he  that  did  not  know  his  Master's  will,  but  might  have  known  it  and 
deliberately  declined  to  know  it,  shall  take  his  place  with  those  who  bear 
the  heavier  punishment.  The  plea  of  ignorance  shall  not  avail  such 
persons  except  it  be  to  make  them  also  take  their  place  with  the  man  who 
I'eceives  the  few  stripes,  and  so  they  shall  partake  in  both  the  greater 
and  the  lesser  scourging,  inasmuch  as  they  are  worthy  to  range  with 
both  kinds  of  offenders.  Try  to  know  what  God  would  have  you  do,  and 
pray  that  by  his  Holy  Spirit  when  you  know  it  you  may  put  it  into 
speedy  and  cheerful  practice,  and  this  shall  be  a  comfort  to  you. 

StiU,  the  point  I  want  to  bring  out  is  that  the  holy  man  in  our  text 
had  noi  concealed  Ood^s  truth  from  others.  We  can  do  this  in  many 
ways.  We  can  conceal  the  words  of  the  Holy  One  by  not  confessing  the 
truth  at  all  A  Christian,  but  he  never  said  so !  He  hid  himself  along 
with  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  although  he  never  offered  his  new  tomb  to 
his  Lord.  He  justified  himself  by  the  example  of  Nicodemus,  though  he 
never  brought  spices  for  his  Lord's  burial  I  There  was  a  time  when 
there  might  be  secret  disciples  of  Christ,  but  that  was  before  the  cross  was 
lifted  np ;  but  it  is  written  concerning  our  Lord's  death  that  the  thoughts 
of  many  hearts  shall  be  revealed  by  it,  and  now  Christ's  followers  follow 
him  openly.  I  should  not  like  to  be  among  those  who  expect  to  slink 
into  heaven  by  a  back  door,  some  dark  night,  and  intend  never  to  dis- 
close themselves  till  they  throw  off  the  mask,  and  stand  before  the 
wondering  eyes  of  angels.  Christians  who  passed  through  the  world  dis- 
guised as  nnregenen^  men.  No,  no ;  our  Lord  has  said,  "  He  that 
confesseth  me  l^fore  men,  him  will  I  confess ;  but  he  that  dcnieth  me, 
him  will  I  deny."  Do  not  run  risks  upon  that  score.  If  you  love  the 
>rd,  say  so ;  if  yon  expect  him  to  own  you,  own  him. 

Te  may  conceal  the  words  of  the  Holy  One,  although  we  have  made  an 


CONOXALDfO  THE  WORDS  07  GOD.  247 

open  confession,  by  a  sinful  tilence  about  the  gospel  towards  others,  I  am 
afraid  I  should  not  be  too  censorious  if  I  said  that  there  are  many  pro- 
cessors of  religion  who  nexer  talk  of  Christ  to  others,  and  never  seek  the 
SRlvation  of  anybody.  Are  there  any  such  people  here  now — in  this 
^llery,  or  down  below  in  this  area  ?  You  have  found  a  medicine  which  has 
healea  your  soul,  but  you  never  mention  it  to  the  thousands  who  are  sick 
aronnd  you !  You  have  not  even  named  it  to  your  own  children  !  Can 
such  cruelty  be  possible  ?  Where  do  you  sit  ?  Are  you  there  ?  No, 
«^ood  people  do  not  move  away  from  him  I  He  has  something  human 
ubout  him  I  hope  still,  though  certainly  not  much  that  is  humane. 
You  were  hungry  and  you  have  found  bread,  and  you  have  eaten  it ; 
and  yet  though  around  you  thousands  are  perishing  with  hunger,  you 
have  no  pity  on  them !  Many  loaves  are  in  your  stores  at  home,  but  you 
spare  none  for  these  starving  ones.  You  eat  your  morsel  alone ;  and  all 
the  while  thousands  are  dying  outside  your  window,  yea,  they  are  perish- 
ing by  millions.  Do  you  care  nothing  for  their  woes?  Are  you  a  man 
or  a  demon  ?  The  Lord  have  mercy  upon  you  I  I  will  say  no  more  than 
this,  for  I  think  I  need  not  prove  that  it  must  be  an  atrocious  sin  for  a 
man  to  know  the  words  of  the  Holy  One  and  not  to  make  them  known 
to  others.  This  sin  is  easily  committed  by  a  silence  which  pleads 
modesty,  but  which  ought  to  confess  to  cowardice,  therefore  be  aware  of 
the  cheat. 

Some  who  speak  often,  nevertheless  conceal  the  words  of  the  Lord  by 
fheir  awn  words.  The  Soman  Catholic  Church  stands  convicted  of 
concealing  the  words  of  the  Holy  One,  by  the  use  of  the  Latin  tongue  in 
the  daily  service.  Whatsoever  there  is  of  good  in  the  mass,  ought  to  be 
spoken  m  such  language  that  everybody  can  understand  and  receive  it ; 
but  instead  thereof  the  people  stand  and  look  on  and  know  not  what  is 
being  done,  and  if  there  be  aught  that  might  edify  and  instruct,  they 
are  not  cognizant  of  it,  because  it  is  hidden  from  them  by  words  un- 
known to  them.  Protectants !  you  condemn  this  practice,  but  are  not' 
many  of  you  guiltyyourselves  ?  Did  you  listen  to  tnat  splendid  sermon  ? 
What  rhetoric !  What  oratory  I  But  those  poor  people  in  the  aisles  did 
not  understand  a  word,  or  if  they  did  they  only  comprehended  disconnected 
sentences,  and  lost  the  soul  of  the  discourse.  Is  this  right  ?  Is  this 
according  to  the  Scriptural  idea  of  preaching?  "Oh,  but,"  you  say, 
'Hhe  great  man  does  not  preach  to  that  class  of  people."  But  his  Master 
did,  and  he  bade  men  take  note  that  in  the  gospel  dispensation  the  poor 
have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them.     He  would  have  his  ministers 

E reach  so  that  thev  can  be  understood  of  all  men.  It  is  a  pity  when  you 
nng  the  cross  with  your  artificial  flowers  until  you  hide  the  wounds  of 
Christ.  Down,  down,  down  with  all  your  tawdry  rhetoric  I  Your  so- 
called  eloquence  deserves  a  curse,  since  it  robs  the  simple  of  a  blessing. 
Few  things  have  so  much  damaged  the  church  of  God  as  "  the  wisdom 
of  words."  A  sweet  and  solemn  simplicity  which  a  child  can  comprehend 
is  after  the  fashion  of  our  Master,  therefore  let  us  aim  at  it.  When  you 
talk  about  Jesus  Christ,  make  your  speech  very  plain,  lest  under  the  or- 
naments of  your  language  you  should  conceal  the  words  of  the  Holy 
One. 

The  thing  can  be  done  again  by  clouding  the  truth  with  error.    There 
h  audi  a  thing  as  laying  a  substratum  of  truth,  and  then  overlaying  it 


248  mBTROFOLITAV  TABSBKAOIiH  FUWXT. 

with  hnman  opinions,  after  the  manner  of  tiie  boastfol  echool  of  modem 
thought,  whose  noTdties  are  set  before  ns  as  the  matured  fmit  of  the  culture 
of  tiie  nineteenth  century  :  this  also  is  ooncealing  the  words  of  the  Holy 
One.  You  may,  perhaps,  have  seen  ancient  parchments  containing 
words  of  holy  writ,  which  have  been  covered  over  and  then  re-written 
with  popish  legends  :  these  palimpsests  (that  is  their  technical  name)  are 
the  types  and  symbols  of  the  discourses  of  the  philosophical  divines  of 
the  school  of  culture.  The  gospel  of  Jesns  Christ  is  hidden  by  their  so- 
called  "  thought," — their  awn  thoughts  are  set  before  the  thoughts  of 
God.  What  shdl  we  say  to  such  thinking  but  that  it  is  a  presamptaona 
setting  up  of  human  intellect  above  the  revelation  of  &e  Lord  ?  What 
shall  we  say  of  such  culture  but  that  it  cultivates  a  pride  which  had  better 
have  been  cut  up  by  the  roots?  It  conceals  the  words  of  the  Holy  One 
that  fallible  man  may  sit  upon  the  throne  of  wisdom^  and  make  his  own 
religion,  and  be  his  own  God. 

We  may  yet  further  conceal  the  words  of  God  by  an  incomisient  Ufe^ 
Yon  have  often  heard  it  said  i^at  the  worldling  does  not  read  his  Bible, 
but  he  reads  professing  Christians ;  he  never  troubles  to  read  a  chapter, 
but  he  reads  his  godly  relatives.  Many  a  man  has  found  Christ  through 
reading  some  dear  and  venerated  mother,  whose  living  and  dying 
experience  has  been  God's  testimony  to  his  soul.  See,  Sien, — if  our 
lives  are  crooked,  perverse,  unkind,  ungenerous,  unholy,  selfish,  un- 
Christly  we  conceal  the  words  of  God;  for  men  will  not  read  a  true 
eospel  in  us,  nor  have  a  true  idea  of  our  religion.  They  will  not  care  to 
hear  a  gospel  which  produces  such  characters  as  ours,  if  those  characters 
are  unlovely.  Men  lay  all  our  faults  at  the  door  of  onr  Master :  and 
thus  we  crucify  him  afiresh.  They  say,  '*  That  is  your  religion,"  though 
they  must  know  better.  They  will  aJwBys  say  so,  for  after  this  manner 
the  enemies  of  God  have  always  gloried  over  Xsrael.  He  who  lives  not 
after  a  godly  and  hol^  sort  is  guilty  of  concealing  the  words  of  the  Holy 
One  in  the  most  injurious  manner.  Let  us  a&  tty  to  avoid  this  sin, 
because  it  is  coutrury  to  (he  practical  genius  of  OhristioBity,  which 
commands  godly  men  to  shine  as  lights  in  the  worid.  Sinful  silence,  as 
to  the  blessed  word  of  grace,  is  rebellion  against  our  Lord's  last  com- 
mand— ''  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  t^e  gospel  to  every  creature" ; 
therefore,  be  not  chargeable  with  so  grave  a  crime. 

II.  In  the  second  place  we  will  give  a  mere  outline  of  the  abouhkntb 
FOR  AvomiKG  THIS  SOT.  The  subject  is  wei^ty  and  deserves  a  longer 
consideration,  but  time  compels  me  to  condense.  And  first,  the  man 
who  conceals  the  word  of  G^  is  out  of  order  with  God.  God  spedES 
that  he  may  be  heard,  and  that  his  mind  may  be  known.  The  evident 
design  of  words  is  to  make  known  the  speaker's  mind.  To  ran  parallel 
with  his  wish,  therefore,  is  to  give  his  words  finee  oourse  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth.  0  thou  who  profiessest  to  be  a  child  of  God,  wilt  thou  run 
counter  to  the  design  of  the  Most  High,  and  when  he  speaks  wilt  thou 
by  concealing  his  words  make  him  to  ]^  as  thougl)  he  spuce  not  ?  Such 
a  silence  is  out  of  gear  with  the  whole  course  of  nature.  '*  The  heavens 
are  telling  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  showeth  his  handiwork : 
day  unto  day  uttereth  speech,  and  night  unto  night  showeth  knowledge." 
The  whole  creation  after  its  own  inarticulate  manner  proclaims  its  Maker 
and  Preserver.    Bocks  find  a  voice,  and  waters  have  a  tongue.    Stars 


tx>iioxALnra  tbb  woBDa  ov  qod.  249 

fling  bj  shining,  and  darkness  preaches  by  its  sotenmiiy.  Shall  man 
alone  be  dumb  ?  God  forbid  that  he  should  be  creation's  silent  chord 
when  eTery  other  string  is  Tibcatiog  with  praise.  No ;  let  ns  pray  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  put  ns  into  order  with  God  and  with  his  UDiYecaef  and  let 
OS  no  more  oonoeal  his  words. 

If  yon  widi  to  see  the  sin  of  concealing  the  gospel,  think  <^  the  eon- 
aeqnenoes  which  would  have  followed  if  others  had  done  so.  If  the 
apostles  had  never  risked  their  lives  to  preach,  what  had  tiie  nations 
been  ?  If  martyrs  had  never  yielded  their  blood  in  testimony,  would 
not  thick  darkness  have  brooded  over  the  nations  still?  Imagine 
die  consequences,  if  you  can,  if  Luther  had  taken  the  advice  of  his 
godlv  but  timid  fiieod,  when  he  said,  **  Get  thee  to  tixy  cell  and  pray: 
meddle  not  with  tiin^  too  high  for  thee."  Imagine  wmit  hidtory  would 
have  been  if  Wycline,  and  Tyndal,  and  Calvin,  and  Zwingle,  and  all 
those  lights  of  the  world,  had  hidden  themselves  tlurongh  oowaniice.  They 
had  be«i  gaiiiy,  bnt  we  had  been  miserable.  Now,  what  would  have 
been  criminal  in  them  must  be  evil  in  us,  also,  in  proportion  to  oar 
degree.  We  owe  it  to  coming  generations  that  we  hand  on  the  torch  of 
truth  as  it  has  been  handed  <bwn  to  ua;  let  nsnot  be  unflEdthfiil  to  our 
trust. 

If  we  conceal  the  words  of  the  Holy  One,  we  shall  evidently  err, 
because  the  motive  for  so  doing  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  be  other  than 
sinfuL  If  we  conceal  God's  truth,  it  will  probably  be  out  of  cowardice, 
and  to  be  a  cowssd  under  the  command  of  such  a  Captain  as  ours  is 
treason.  Probably,  srif-love  will  be  the  ruling  motive,  but  we  are  told 
expressly  that  he  who  loves  his  life  shall  lose  it,  and  that  Christ  is  to  be 
better  loved  than  life  itself.  Those  who  love  tb»  word  of  God,  are  often 
moved  to  do  so  by  pride,  whkix  cannot  stoop  to  be  despised  ;  or  fear, 
which  dreads  Tidiciue ;  or  love  of  the  world,  which  seeks  the  applause  of 
men.  Is  it  not  atrocious  ingratitude  to  him  who  was  derided  and  spit 
upon  for  our  sakes  if  we  hide  his  glory  to  escape  from  shame  ?  I  feel 
it  difficult  to  conceive  an  argnmoit  for  concealing  God's  word  which 
would  hold  water  for  asnigle  moment ;  oertainly  I  can  invent  none  which 
will  bear  the  test  of  the  great  trial  day  to  which  we  all  must  come.  If 
then  the  motive  of  sndi  concealment  is  evil,  it  must  itself  be  eviL 

I  have  aheady  hinted  that  common  humanity  requires  that  if  we  have 
reoeived  the  precious  truth  of  God,  we  should  not  conceal  it.  I  feel  as 
if  your  natures  responded  to  the  remark,  and  that  I  needed  not  again 
enforce  it,  having  oone  so  already.  If  you  love  men,  if  you  would  make 
them  happy  here,  if  yon  would  save  them  from  perismng  hereafter,  I 
beseech  you  make  known  to  them  with  holy  earnestness  the  way  of 
salvation  contained  in  the  words  of  the  Holy  One.  For  if  not^ 
be  it  known  unto  you  that  all  the  results  of  concealment  will  be  charge* 
able  upon  yon.  If  the  next  generation  should  become  more  wicked  than 
tiie  present,  and  still  more  ignorant  of  the  gospel,  the  &ct  will  be 
chargeable  upon  those  who  conceal  the  words  of  Gtoi  to-day.  If  the 
masses  through  not  knowing  the  gospel  reject  it  and  continue  in  their  sii^ 
tiie  calamity  and  crime  will  be  charged  upon  those  dumb  lips  which  never 
^peak  of  Jesus.  If  sinners  sink  to  hell,  passing  oui»  of  this  world  unsavedL 
and  they  have  come  into  contact  with  Christian  men  who  gave  them  no 
warning, on  whose  skirts  will  their  blood  be  found?  Yea»moi)e;  recollect 


250  ICBTROPOLITAK  TABEBKACLB  PULPIT. 

that  even  if  sinners  be  saved  by  some  other  agency  it  does  not  exonerate 
those  who  nep^lected  to  warn  them ;  for  since  the  silence  natarallj  tended  to 
destmction  ttiose  who  were  guilty  of  it  shall  be  jadged  as  if  the  nnin- 
Btructed  were  destroyed,  even  thongh  by  God's  interposition  it  is  not  so. 
If  the  natural  result  of  any  line  of  conduct  is  prevented  by  divine  inter- 
ference its  criminality  is  by  no  means  lessened.  The  conduct  itself  may  be 
judged  by  what  it  would  naturally  result  in  if  it  were  left  to  itself. 
Many  a  man  has  been  guilty  of  murder  who  nevertheless  did  not  actually 
spill  his  fellow's  blood,  because  he  did  that  which  he  knew  would  kill ; 
and  it  is  no  praise  of  his  that  death  did  not  come  of  it.  So,  if  a  corrupt^ 
unholy  silence  would  slay  a  soul,  even  thongh  that  soul  be  saved,  the 
wickedly  silent  one  is  guilty  of  soul  murder  all  the  same.  Ton  are  diift- 
ing  uneasily  in  vour  seats,  some  of  you ;  this  is  a  good  sign,  for  many 
might  do  so  without  being  too  sensitive. 

How  again,  dear  friends,  can  any  man  prove  his  loyaltv  to  his  God  or 
his  likeness  to  the  Saviour,  if  he  continues  to  conceal  the  words  of  the 
Holv  One  ?  What  canst  thou  do  for  God  but  obey  him,  and  when  he  roeaka 
to  tnee  gladly  make  known  to  others  the  truth  which  has  soun<fed  in 
thine  ears  ?  How  canst  thou  be  like  to  Jesus,  thy  professed  Master,  if 
thou  hast  no  witness  to  bear  for  the  good  of  men  ?  He  went  about  doing 
good,  his  life  was  transparent,  he  wore  the  gospel  on  his  sleeve,  spoke 
it  with  his  eves,  and  revealed  it  in  his  daily  life.  How  canst  thou  be 
like  him  if  thou  dost  smuggle  away  the  gospel  as  if  it  were  contraband 
goods  to  be  hidden  away  from  all  eyes  ?  How  canst  thou  bury  the  price* 
less  truth  like  a  miser  who  hoards  up  his  cankered  gold?  Tell  out  the 
heavenly  message !  Tell  it  all  around !  Tell  it  so  long  as  voice  remains ! 
If  thou  art  a  true  servant  of  God  thou  canst  not  stifle  the  voice  of  Jesus, 
who  out  of  heaven  cries  to  the  sons  of  men. 

Now,  think  once  more  and  we  shall  see  the  sinfulness  of  the  conduct 
we  denounce.  What  will  it  be  to  meditate  upon  a  dying  bed  on  having 
known  the  truth,  but  having  never  in  any  way  assisted  to  spread  it  ?  What 
will  it  be  to  lie  with  eternity  just  before  you,  and  to  reflect, ''  I  have 
been  a  member  of  a  church  many  years,  but  I  have  never  brought  in  a 
single  convert.  I  sat  in  my  pew,  and  I  knew  the  divine  secret,  but  I 
never  told  even  a  child  of  it.  Neither  by  pen  nor  tongue  did  I  make 
Jesus  known.  I  left  that  to  the  minister.  I  Iniew  there  were  ^ood  people 
about  who  cared  for  men's  souls,  but  I  had  no  such  feeling :  I  kept  myself 
to  myself,  and  felt  no  anxiety  about  my  neighbour&  I  had  very  little 
care  as  to  whether  souls  were  saved  or  not.  I  was  glad  when  I  heard  of 
an  increase  to  the  church,  but  not  very  particularly  so ;  I  was  rather 
sorry  when  things  were  down, — ^not  so  sorry  that  I  lost  my  appetite, 
or  lay  awake  ten  minutes.  I  did  not  trouble  myself  more  than  1  could 
help,  for  I  was  foolish  enough  to  dream  that  the  best  thing  I  could 
do  was  to  consult  my  own  interests,  and  I  fancied  that  mv  chief  end 
was  to  enjoy  myself  for  ever."  Now,  I  can  imagine  such  a  person 
sore  beset  with  horrors  when  he  comes  to  die,  and  struggling  hard  to  get 
anything  like  a  glimpse  of  ho^.  His  whole  life  has  been  that  of  selfish- 
ness, how  can  he  be  a  Christian  ?  Conscience  will  ask  him,  **  Is  this 
Christlike,  this  keeping  back  of  the  divine  bread  from  the  perishing 
millions,  this  conceiving  of  the  light  of  God  ?  Surely  you  are  no  follower 
of  the  Crucified !" 


OOKOBAUJia  THB  WQK0S  OF  GOD.  251 

How  wiD  flQch  conduct  look  at  the  last  great  day  ?  The  Lord  Jeans 
will  say  to  some,  *'  I  was  aa  handed  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat :  I  was 
thirsty  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink.  Now  mark,  these  sentences  refer  to 
temporal  bread  and  water,  but  they  must  be  more  emphatic  still  when 
they  relate  to  spiritual  things.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  say,  ''  There 
were  hungering  souls,  and  you  professed  to  know  the  gospel,  but  yon 
nve  them  no  meat :  there  were  thirsty  aouls.  and  you  professed  to  have 
drank  of  the  water  of  life,  and  you  gave  them  no  drink,"  can  there  be 
any  answer  ?  Will  not  such  persons,  stand  speechless  dumbly  confessing 
the  justice  of  the  sentence,  **  Depart,  ye  cursed  *'? 

III.  I  shall  close  by  mentioning  one  or  two  !BOBThods  by  whioh  ws 
iCAT  AVOID  THIS  SDr.  I  am  specLking  now  to  you  who  have  believed  in 
Jesus  and  are  truly  his  own  disciples. 

First,  take  care  that  you  make  an  open  profession  of  vour  &ith.  Come 
oat  from  the  world  ana  unite  with  tne  people  of  God.  If  you  do  not 
make  a  profession,  I  do  not  see  how  you  can  be  found  innocent  of  the 
charge  of  ooncealing  the  Lord's  words. 

When  you  have  done  that,  keep  yourself  clear  of  sinful  silence  by  very 
often  speaking  to  others  of  the  things  of  God.  I  was  greatly  pleased  this 
week  when  a  brother  minister  said  to  me,  "  A  man  has  just  joined  our 
church,  a  rough  man,  who  mixed  in  company  that  was  not  likely  much 
to  improve  him,  and  yet  he  has  been  really  made  a  new  man.  He  was 
aocnstomed  to  go  round  to  houses  with  small  casks  of  beer  for  a  large 
brewery^  and  among  the  rest  he  called  at  a  certain  house  where  the 
servant  is  a  member  at  the  Tabernacle.  She  had  not  seen  him  more 
than  once  or  twice  before  she  bqgan  to  ask  him  whether  he  knew  the 
Saviour,  and  to  question  him  alwut  his  soul,  and  when  he  called  each 
month  she  spoke  to  him  again,  till  at  last  he  who  had  never  thought  of 
religion,  nor  entered  a  place  of  worship  at  all,  was  brought  to  the  ieet  of 
Jesus,  and  to  become  an  honour  to  the  church  of  which  he  is  a  member." 
This  minister  said,  ''I  hope  all  your  members  do  as  that  servant  does." 
I  told  him  I  knew  a  great  many  of  you  did,  but  no  doubt  some  of  you  did 
not  You  who  do  not  may  well  fidget  upon  your  seats,  as  you  take  home 
the  hint  Henceforth  at  every  opportunity  speak  of  Jesus  to  those  around 
you,  lest  you  be  found  guilty  of  concealing  the  words  of  the  Holy  One. 

Some  of  you  cannot  speak  very  much  because  you  are  naturally  diffi- 
dent and  slow  of  speech.  Try  and  overcome  the  infirmity,  but  if  you 
cannot  do  so,  do  not  conceal  the  words  of  the  Most  High  on  that  account, 
but  write  letters  of  personal  entreaty.  You  can  do  this,  cannot  you? 
Some  of  you  can  write  very  well  indeed,  and  write  so  much  that  you  have 
to  cross  your  letters,  which  is  much  essier  for  you  to  write  than  for  friends 
to  read.  As  you  can  write  so  well,  do  write  for  Jesus  Christ.  Do  not  cross 
your  letter  lest  you  conceal  your  meaning,  but  write  earnestly  and 
lovingly  for  Jesns.  You  can  also  circulate  what  has  been  written  by 
other  people,  though  I  do  not  think  it  so  good  a  thing  to  do  as  writing 
yourself.  You  may  send  tracts  and  sermons,  but  let  them  be  such  as 
you  may  hope  that  people  will  read.  Sometimes  you  may  write  out  part 
of  a  tract,  and  it  will  attract  them  all  the  more  for  being  your  own 
handwriting. 

Another  thing  may  be  done.  If  you  feel  that  when  you  have  spoken 
and  written  you  have  still  not  done  much,  help  other  people  who  have 


/ 


252  XKTBOPOLITAK  TABBRKAOLE  PULPIT. 

greater  gifts.  A  great  deal  ma^  be  done  by  imitating  Aqnila  and 
Priflcilla,  who  helped  ApoUos.  It  is  not  given  to  everybody  to  preach  to 
large  nnmbers,  or  to  preach  at  all,  bnt  yon  can  often  pick  up  a  yonng 
man  and  say,  "  I  will  help  him  in  his  edncation  and  enconn^  him  in 
his  first  efforts."  You  can  always  help  young  men  by  filling  the  offering 
box  which  supports  the  College. 

I  married  a  gentleman  on  ttiis  platform  some  time  ago  who  said  to  me, 
**  I  wish  I  could  preach ;  but  I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  do,  I  will  keep 
a  man  to  preach :  I  will  find  the  money  and  you  will  find  the  man."  I 
told  him  I  must  have  him  speak,  too,  as  best  he  could.  He  said  he 
would,  but  he  wished  to  have  somebody  to  speak  better.  Men  of  wealth 
should  copy  this  example.  Help  the  colporteurs,  help  the  city  mission* 
aries,  help  all  those  who  publish  the  word  of  the  Lord. 

And  lastly,  and  this  morning  most  to  the  point,  there  are  the  heathen 
perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge.  Millions  ojf  voices  call  out  of  the  dark- 
ness to  you,  "  Come  over  and  help  us !  You  have  the  light,  bring  it  to 
ns !    You  have  the  bread,  come  and  feed  us  I    We  perish,  we  perish,  we 

rsrish."  Brethren,  the  heathen  are  perishing.  Will  yon  let  them  perish  ? 
wish  that  some  young  men  here  would  go  for  missionaries.  One  of  the 
leaders  of  a  missionary  society  cheered  my  heart  last  week  when  he  took 
out  of  his  pocket  an  old  sermon  of  mine,  marked  and  crossed  and  scored. 
He  said,  "  xou  will  like  to  see  that,  Mr.  Spurgeon."  "  What  about  it?" 
'*  That  was  given  to  me  by  a  young  man  who  has  joined  our  mission. 
He  read  that  sermon,  and  marked  uie  passages  which  touched  his  heart, 
and  now  he  is  at  work  in  China.  I  looked  upon  that  sermon  with  great 
delight.  I  think  I  felt  more  pleased  with  that  old  sermon  than  if  I 
had  received  a  wreath  of  gold.  I  felt  gratified  that  I  had  brought  a 
youDg  and  fervent  heart  to  devote  itself  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Give 
me  like  joy  each  of  you ;  and  if  you  cannot  go  among  the  heathen 
personally,  help  others  to  do  so.  Give  this  morning  a  liberal  collection, 
and  may  God  accept  it  at  your  hands  for  Christ's  s&e. 


Portion  op  Sceipturb  Bead  before  Sermon — ^Luke  xi.,  44 — 54 ; 

xii.  1—12. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 208,  96,  900. 


Mr.  Spurgeon  hu  iafaed  a  reyised  edition  of  *'  Noroott  on  Baptism.*'  It  is  a 
qoftint,  clear,  forcible  tittle  work.  Those  who  do  not  agree  with  it  will  be  none  tho 
worse  for  reading  its  argaments,  and  those  who  already  acknowledge  "  Believers* 
Baptism  *'  wiU  be  glad  of  such  a  soUd  oonfirmation  of  their  fiiith.  The  price  is  one 
shilUng  for  a  bound  copy,  and  sixpence  for  the  same  in  paper  coTcr.  Pablishers» 
Passmore  and  Alabaster.    Any  bookseller  will  get  it  for  yoo. 


^fi\tt$oVim  ^TsibmMt  ^pnt^it. 


THE   GLOET,  UNITT,  AlfD  TEIUMPH  OF  THE  CHURCH. 


%  ^tmn 


Deliyeeed  on  Lobd*s-Dat  Mobnikg,  Mat  4th,  1879,  bt 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  TnB   HETHOPOLITAN   TABERNACTiE,   newinqtoh. 


^  And  the  glory  whieh  thou  gavest  me  I  liave  given  tbem ;  that  they  may  be  one, 
eren  as  we  are  one :  I  in  them,  and  then  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in 
one ;  and  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me^  and  hast  loved  them,  as 
thon  hast  loved  me."— John  xvii.  22— & 

SoHE  words  serve  diverse  uses  and  have  many  meanings.    We  are  veiy 
apt  to  make  mistakes  if  we  give  the  same  sense  in  all  places  to  the  same 
-word.    The  word  "  world "  throughout  Scripture  is  used  with  a  very 
remarkable  variety  of  meaning,  and  one  had  need  to  have  his  wits  abont 
him,  and  to  read  careMly,  in  order  to  know  what  is  the  precise  force 
of  the  term  in  each  place  where  it  occurs.    In  the  text  before  as  it  is 
evident  that  Christ  had  a  view  to  the  world :  he  desiied  thatt  the  world 
might  know  that  the  Father  had  sent  him,  and  might  also  know  that 
God  had  loved  his  people  even  as  he  had  loved  his  -Son.    From  the  some- 
what altered  expression  in  the  twenty-first  verse  we  feel  convinced  that 
our  Lord  did  not  limit  his  desires  for  the  world  to  its  having  a  bare 
knowledge  of  these  facts,  but  wished  that  it  should  also  beUevB  them, 
for  thus  runs  the  verse — ^'That  the  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast 
sent  me."    He  wished  then  that  this  **  world  "  might  do  exactly  what  he 
elsewhere  says  his  own  disciples  had  already  done :  "  O  righteous  Father^ 
the  world  hath  not  known  thee :  but  I  have  known  thee,  and  these  have 
known  that  thou  hast  sent  me."    Certainly  there  is  a  world  for  which 
Jesus  did  not  pray,  for  he  said,  "  I  pray  for  them :  I  pray  not  for  the 
world  " ;  yet  here  there  is  a  world  for  which  if  he  does  not  actually  pray,  he 
yet  prays  that  certain  gracious  events  may  occur,  in  order  that  certain  re- 
sults may  be  produced  upon  that  world.  I  say  again,  the  word  **  world" 
therefore  has  many  shades  of  meaning,  ranging  from  that  jet-black  meaning 
in  which  the  "  world  lieth  in  the  wicked  one,"  and  that  other, "  love  not  the 
world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world,"  upward  to  the  milder 
senses  in  John  i.  10,  *'  He  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made  by 
him,  and  the  world  knew  him  not " ;  and  yet  higher  to  the  brighter  meaning, 
*'  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  oi 
his  Christ."    It  is  not  in  the  worst  sense  that  our  text  speaks  ot  the  world, 
but  in  the  same  manner  as  we  find  it  used  in  such  passages  as  these^ 
No.  1,472. 


254  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

*'  The  Lamb  of  God,  vhich  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,"  **  Ood 
was  in  Christy  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  their 
trespasses  unto  them ";  and  again  in  1  John  ii.,  ''And  he  is  tlie  propiti- 
ation for  our  sins :  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world."  It  is  certain  that  ''God  so  loved  tiie  world,  that  he  gava 
his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life,"  and  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  great  Be- 
deemer  would  refuse  to  pray  for  those  for  whom  he  was  given.  I 
understand  in  this  particular  place  by  the  word  "  world  "  the  whole  mass 
of  mankind  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  who  are  not  as  yet  converted  ; 
among  them  there  is  an  elect  part,  for  our  Lord  spesJcs  of  some  men  who 
shall  yet  believe  on  him  through  the  word  of  his  servants,  but  these  at 
this  present  moment  are  undistinguished  from  the  rest.  I  understand 
'  here  oy  the  word  "world  "  all  as  yet  unrenewed  out  of  the  whole  living- 
family  of  man ;  and  on  account  of  these  our  Lord  would  have  his  believing- 
people  brought  into  that  admirable  condition  which  we  shall  now  at- 
tempt to  describe.  For  the  sake  of  the  world  he  would  have  the  church 
in  a  high  state  of  holy  beauty  and  strength.  May  his  gracious  prayer 
be  answered  in  all  of  us  by  the  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I  trust  that  I  may  say  of  all  of  you,  my  beloved  in  Christ,  that  yoa 
are  living  with  this  object:  at  any  rate,  I  know  that  you  desire  to  live 
for  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  and  the  salvation  of  men.  We  would 
make  all  men  see  what  is  the  fellowship  of  this  mystery ;  for  we  would 
have  all  men  to  be  saved  and  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Our 
wish  is  to  bring  multitudes  to  the  Saviour,  and  to  conquer  province  after 
province  of  this  revolted  world  for  King  Jesus.  "Let  the  whole  earth  be 
nlled  with  his  glory  "  is  a  prayer  which  we  cannot,  dare  not,  would  not^ 
straiten.  Half  the  world  would  be  a  poor  reward  for  the  Bc^leemer's 
travail — **  The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof."  Even  here^ 
where  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  our  Lord  must  reign  with 
fulness  of  glory,  having  dominion  from  sea  to  sea  and  from  the  river 
even  to  the  endis  of  the  earth.  This  is  the  consummation  towards  which 
we  are  tending  by  the  grace  of  God,  striving  earnestly  for  it,  according 
to  his  working,  which  worketh  in  us  mightily.  Daily  we  labour  to  biing 
others  into  subjection  to  that  blessed  sovereignty  under  which  we  delight 
to  dwell. 

In  this  place  our  Lord  tells  us  that  this  desirable  end  is  to  be  brought 
about  by  a  marvellous  unity  which  is  described  in  our  text — a  unity  of 
men  with  Christ,  a  unity  of  these  men  in  Christ  with  one  another,  and 
the  unity  of  Christ  himself  with  the  eternal  Father.  "  I  in  them,  and 
thon  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one."  Let  us  speak  about 
this  unity  this  morning,  always  keeping  in  mind  the  drift,  end,  and 
object  of  it,  namely,  that  the  world  may  believe  that  God  has  sent  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

First,  then,  let  us  think  upon  iJie  great  means  of  that  uniiy,  and  then» 
secondly,  upon  fJie  unity  itself.  Lastly,  let  us  more  fully  consider  the 
effect  to  be  produced  by  it. 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  reflect  upon  the  great  means  op  the  unity 
which  Christ  proposes  here.  It  lies  in  a  nutshell — "  The  glory  which 
thou  gavest  me  I  •have  given  them;"  with  tliis  object,  "that  they 
may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one."    Here  our  blessed  Lord  does  not  speak 


THE  OLOST,  X7NITT,  ASD  TAIUMPH  07  THE  CHUBCH.  255 

of  Tfhat  he  will  give  to  his  discii^es,  though  there  is  a  glory  which  is 
had  np  for  them  which  the  Mfehfiu  shall  receiye  at  the  last ;  but  he  men- 
tions  a  glory  widch  he  has  already  given  them.  This  could  not  be  the 
inoommunicable  gloiy  of  his  Qodheaa^  for  that  was  his  by  nature,  and  not 
by  the  Father^s  gifb«  He  speaks  thronghout  the  whole  of  his  prayer 
in  the  capaciirf  of  the  Mediator,  who  is  both  God  and  man  in  one 
person ;  and  the  glory  which  he  says  he  had  given  to  his  people  is  a 
glory  which  the  Fat^r  had  given  to  him  in  his  com^ez  person  as 
incarnate  God.  We  are  to  regard^  tberefoiei  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as 
speaking  here  as  Immanoel,  Gi^  with  US|  who,  though  he  counted  it  no 
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  had  made,  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
taken  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant.  He  appeared  on  earth  as  the 
Son  of  man,  the  Son  of;  God ;  hot  even  in  that  condescending  capacity 
he  was  surrounded  with  a  gkorv  of  which  John  speaks  in  his  first  chapter, 
^*  And  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  and  we  beheld  his 
glorv,  the  gk)rv  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  full  ot  grace  and 
tratb."  As  the  Word  .made  ficih  the  Father  has  given  our  Lord  an 
exceeding  glcnry. 

The  ezplane^ons  of  the  words  before  us  are  as  many  as  the  words 
themselves,  and  I  suppose  there  is  a  measure  of  truth  in  each  of  them. 
I  do  not  think  it  possible  in  one  sermon,  perhaps  not  in  a  hundred,  nor 
even  in  a  thonsand,  to  l»ing  out  all .  that  is  intended  here ;  therefore  I 
shall  not  attempt  any  such  a  task,  but  shall  only  fallow  one  narrow 
track  of  practical  thought,  even  as  one  passes  through  a  field  of  com 
akmg  a  narrow  pathway,  gathering  a  few  ears  as  he  moves  along.  It 
seems  to  me  that  a  main  part  of  the  glory  of  our  Lord  when  on  earth  lay 
in  the  moral  and  spiritual  ^ory  of  his  character.  He  was  indeed 
gkvions  in  holiness^  and  this  is  evidently  the  glory  which  he  transfers 
to  us.  See  the  second  epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  the  third  chapter  and 
eighteenth  verse,  **  But  we  all,,  with  open  face  beholding  as  in  a  glass 
the  gl<»y  of  the  Lord,  ^TO  changed  into  the  same  image  from  gloiy  to 
gtory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  tine  Lord."  To  the  like  effect  are  Peter's 
words  in  his  first  epistle,  "  If  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  Chrot, 
haroy  are  ye;  for  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resteth  upon  you." 

The  essence  and  cause  of  the  glory  which  the  Father  gave  the  Son, 
was  first  of  all  tbaJb  He  endowed  him  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  God 
giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto  him ;  the  Father  loveth  the  Son 
and  hath  given  ail  things  into  his  hand."  (John  iii.  84,  35.)  The  Holy 
Ghost  descended  upon  our  Lord  in  his  baptism  and  abode  upon  him,  so 
that  in  the  power  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  he  lived,  and  spake,  and  acted, 
and  in  all  that  he  did  the  Spirit  of  God  was  manifest.  In  him  was  ful- 
filled the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet  Isaiah,  ^'  And  there  shall  come 
forth  a  Bod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jeaee,  and  a  Branch  shall  gi^ow  out  of  his 
roots :  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  hun,  the  Spirit  of 
wisdom  and  understanding,  the  Spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the  Spirit  of 
knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord ;  and  shall  ma&  him  of  quidc 
nnderslandiDg  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  In  this  Spirit  there  is  glory, 
for  the  prophet  fiirther  says,  ^  his  rest  shall  be  glorious.  Now  this  glory 
our  Loid  Jesus  has  given  to  all  his  disciplss.  Upon  each  true  disciple 
the  S|Hrit  of  God  resto  according  to  his  measure.  If  we  have  not  Uie 
anointing  to  the  fiiU.it  is  either  firom  want  of  capacity  or  by  reason  of 


256  METBOPOUTAN  TABKBNACLB  PULPIT. 

oor  own  Bin,  for  the  Spirit  of  Ood  is  given  to  the  saints  :  he  dwelleth  with 
ns  and  shall  be  in  ns  evermore.  My  brethren,  I  wonld  to  God  we 
realized  this,  that  the  glory  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  was  given  nnta 
Christ  is  also  given  nnto  us,  so  that  it  is  onrs  to  think,  to  feel,  to  speak, 
to  act  under  his  guiding  influence  and  supernatural  power.  What  are 
we  of  ourselves  apart  from  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  How  can  we  hope  to  convince 
even  one  man,  much  less  the  world,  that  God  hath  sent  his  Son,  apart 
from  the  Holy  Spirit  being  with  us  ?  But  if  he  will  come,  and  I  trust 
he  has  come  upon  many  of  us ;  if  he  will  take  possession  of  every  faculty^ 
and  rule  and  reign  in  us  in  all  the  splendour  of  his  holiness,  then  we  shall 
indeed  become  a  power  for  the  conversion  of  mankind.  Behold  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  given  ns  this  Spirit,  and  in  that  power  let  us  henceforth  hve. 

Owing  to  this  endowment  of  the  Holy  Spirit  there  rested  upon  Jesus 
Christ  a  wondrous  glory  in  many  respects.    One  of  his  first  glories  was 
that  as  man  he  knew  the  name  and  character  of  God.    He  knew  what 
no  man  knoweth,  unless  it  be  revealed  unto  him  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
namely,  the  nature,  attributes,  and  mind  of  God.    ''The  pure  in  heart 
shall  see  God,"  and  those  pure  ejes  of  his  had  seen  Qoi  to  the  full.    Has 
he  not  given  us  that  same  vision  of  the  Father?    Yes,  for  he  tells  us, 
*^  He  tl^t  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father  ";  and  again  in  the  sixth 
verse, ''  I  have  manifested  thy  name  unto  the  men  which  thou  gavest  me 
out  of  the  world."    Oar  eyes  have  been  opened  by  the  blessed  Spirit  of 
God  to  see  the  invisible,  and  our  understandings  have  been  strengthened 
to  know  the  incomprehensible.    Now,  according  to  the  language  of  the 
apostle,  we  ''know  God,  or  rather  are  known  of  God."    "No  man  hatik 
seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  onlv  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom 
of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him."    Not  to  the  full  have  we  beheld 
the  Father,  but  still,  according  as  we  have  received  this  glory  which  rested 
upon  Christ  we  have  been  made  to  know  the  Father,  and  now  we  have 
access  to  the  heavenly,  we  are  &miliar  with  the  divine,  we  speak  with 
the  Most  High,  and  delight  ourselves  in  the  Lord.    As  we  gaze  into  th& 
unspeakable  glory  we  discern  somethine;  of  the  holiness,  the  justice,  and 
the  wisdom  of  Jehovah;  and  we  behold  yet  more  of  his  great  mercy  and 
abounding  love.    We  were  once  blinded,  but  now  it  is  our  glory  that  we 
see  and  know  the  Lord  our  Qod.    Henceforth  we  become  hKC  our  Lord 
in  another  beam  of  his  gloiy :  for  we  also  begin  to  manifest  the  divine- 
name  unto  the  sons  of  men  who  dwell  around  us.    The  church,  like  the^ 
moon,  reflects  the  glory  of  the  great  Father  of  lights,  and  so  is 
glorious  with  the  borrowed  splendour  which  her  Lord  puts  upon  her. 
Christ's  knowledge  of  the  Father  is  given  to  us,  and   we  endeavour 
to  make  it  known  to  others.    If  men  would  see  God  let  them  look  at 
Jesus,  for  there  is  he  to  be  seen ;  and,  with  bated  breath,  we  add,  let  them 
look  at  Christ's  people,  for  there  also  is  God  revealed.    It  is  the  glory  of 
the  saints  that  they  are  the  mirrors  of  the  divine  character,  and  when  they 
wear  the  glory  which  Jesus  has  given  them  they  manifest  the  eternal 
name  unto  those  whom  the  Lord  has  ordained  to  bless  by  their  means. 

The  glory  of  our  Lord  consisted  next  in  the  power  of  the  ^irit  in  his 
receiving,  keeping,  and  giving  forth  the  word  of  God.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
was  a  full  revelation  of  the  mind  of  God.  "  The  law  was  given  by  Moses^ 
but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  He  knew  the  plan  of  God,, 
that  blessed  method  of  infinite  love ;  and  he  imparted  it  to  his  followers, — 


THK  GLOBT,  UNITTy  AND  TRIUICPH  OF  THB  CHUBCH.  257 

•*'I  hare  given  unto  them  the  words  which  thon  garest  me;  and 
they  have  received  them."  The  depository  of  the  divine  word  was 
"Christ,  and  this  was  greatly  to  his  glory.  Is  not  the  logosy  the  word, 
one  of  the  brightest  of  his  titles  ?  But  now  this  day  he  Iiath  given  nnto 
ns  the  wordy  n)eddng  it  unto  our  souls^  and  henceforth  we  are  to  hold 
-forth  the  word  of  life  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation. 
Would  you  know  the  mind  of  God?  It  is  not  merely  in  a  book,  it  is 
-3till  incarnated  in  men  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  present  Still 
-doth  the  Lord  make  known  his  mind  and  will  by  the  earnest,  fervent 
teachings,  pleadings,  and  lives  of  those  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells. 
Do  you  thmk  this  to  be  a  small  glory  ?  Why,  my  beloved,  the  glory  of 
assessing  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  glory  of  knowing  the  eternal  Gk)d,  the 
:glory  of  having  received  his  word  is  such  as  distinguishes  the  chosen 
man  above  his  fellows  infinitely  more  than  all  the  crowns,  and  titles,  and 
decorations  which  monarchs  can  bestow.  Tell  me  not  of  your  stars  and 
CTrters,  your  ribbons  and  vonr  crosses,  to  be  made  partakers  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  guardians  of  the  truth  of  God  is  a  greater  glory  than  the 
princes  of  this  world  can  so  much  as  imagine. 

This  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus  lay  also  in  the  sanctification  of  his  blessed 
^rson.  He  saith,  "  For  their  sakes  I  sanctifv  myself."  Look  at  him 
now  consecrated  to  God  he  was  from  his  childhood  till  he  said,  **  It  is 
finished  I "  What  holiness  shone  upon  his  very  brow,  where  a  guileless 
«oul  unveiled  itself  in  brave  sincerity !  You  could  not  have  been  with 
Jiim  at  a  funeral  or  at  a  marriage  banquet^  in  a  sick  chamber  or  in  the 
midst  of  a  crowd,  in  the  presence  of  carping  adversaries  or  in  the  bosom 
of  his  family  of  twelve,  without  being  charmed  by  that  divinity  of  holiness 
which  hedged  him  round  about.  There  was  about  him  a  sweetness  of 
unspeakable  affection  and  a  majesty  of  unsullied  purity  which  made 
him  glorious  above  all  the  sons  of  men.  His  enemies  spat  upon  him, 
but  that  very  i^ittle  was  the  unconscious  homage  which  malignant  evil 
pays  to  conquering  goodness.  The  ungodly  crucified  him,  but  even  in 
that  very  act  there  was  a  sort  of  confession  that  they  were  bafQed  and 
confounded,  and  could  not  stand  before  him.  They  cried,  **  Omcify  him, 
omcify  him,"  because  his  perfect  purity  rendered  their  own  wickedness 
inexcusable,  and  lashed  then:  consaenoe  with  reflections  which  could  not 
be  borne.  Our  Lord's  moral  glory  was  great,  for  he  was  the  pattern  and 
paragon  of  evervthing  that  is  lovely  and  of  good  repute,  and  he  was 
wholly  sanctified  unto  God.  This  is  the  gloiy  which  he  gives  to  us. 
His  prayer  is,  "  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth :  thy  word  is  truth." 
His  disciples  live  unto  holiness,  and  ^xq  known  as  a  people  zealous  of  good 
works.  I  have  to  speak  as  I  find  matters  laid  down  in  the  word  of  God, 
and  if  you  do  not  find  them  to  be  so  in  yourselves,  my  brothers  and  sisters, 
then  you  must  judge  yourselves  by  the  word,  that  ye  be  not  judged  at  the 
h&t  and  condemn^.  So  it  is  that  those  who  have  truly  received  Christ 
become  a  special,  marked,  and  separated  people.  They  are  as  much  oon- 
«ccr»tcd  to  God  as  the  priests  were  under  the  old  dispensation,  and  hence- 
forth they  live  for  God,  they  Uve  nnto  God,  and  then:  whole  being  is  sub- 
jected to  the  mind  of  God.  This  is  a  high  state  of  grace,  but  nothing 
kss  tbau  this  ought  to  content  any  Christian  man.  The  glory  of  sanctity 
Christ  has  given  to  his  people  with  an  eye  to  the  convincement  of  the  world. 

Well,  then,  our  great  Master  gives  us  next  the  glory  of  his  own 


258  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

mission.  "  As  thou  haafc  sent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  also  sent 
them  into  the  world."  It  is  the  glory  of  Jesos  that  he  is  the  Messiah — 
the  sent  one  ;  and  now,  behold,  he  sends  all  his  servants  to  be  messiahs 
or  missionaries  to  mankind.  Christ  Jesus  was  sent  to  reveal  the 
Father,  sent  to  reclaim  the  wandering  souls  of  men,  sent  to  seek  and  to 
save  the  lost :  and  this  is  exactly  what  every  tnie  Christian  is  sent  into  I 
the  world  to  do  ;  he  is  commissioned  to  reveal  God  in  his  every  act  and 
word,  commissioned  to  win  back  rebellious  hearts,  commissioned  to  save 
the  sons  of  men,  and  bring  them  up  out  of  the  horrible  pit  into  which 
their  sins  have  cast  them.  This  is  a  glory  indeed,  ibr  they  that  turn 
many  to  righteousness  shall  sliine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever.  AVhat 
a  promise  is  that, ''  And  saviours  shall  come  up  on  mount  Ziou,  and  the 
kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's."  Every  Christian  man,  according  to  his 
measure,  becomes  among  his  race  what  Jesus  was  when  he  was  here 
below,  the  friend  of  men,  the  seeker  of  the  lost. 

Again,  I  say  I  trust  yonr  glad  hearts  appreciate  this  glory,  for  let  me  say 
it  is  such  a  glory  that  if  it  involves  much  stdrictneas  of  living,  and  much 
self-denial,  if  it  involves  much  obloquy,  misrepresentation,  and  reproach, 
and  even  should  it  invdve  death  by  martyrdom,  blessed  is  the  man  upon 
whom  all  these  things  come,  because  the  ^irit  of  glory  and  of  Christ 
doth  rest  upon  him.  The  true  glory  of  any  man  is  the  man  himself — 
the  character  w'hicli  he  bears,  and  not  the  estate  which  he  possesses. 
My  brother,  can  I  hope  that  you  have  a  resplendent  spiritual  character  ? 
Dare  I  hope  to  win  the  same  myself  ?  Let  us  look  again  at  this  glory  of 
the  Son  of  God.  Christ  Jesus  was  the  man  of  men,  the  model  man,  the 
most  manly  man  in  all  respects,  and  yet  he  was  of  all  men  the  most 
fully  subordinated  to  the  ^vinelaw,  and  the  most  obedient  in  all  things 
to  the  Father's  will.  See  your  calling,  my  brethren !  Y^u,  too,  are 
not  to  be  common  >men,  .nor  to  belong  to  the  herd  that  mn  foolishly  after 
their  own  lusts ;  but  you  arc  to  be  model  men,  manly  and  totve,  yet 
always  submissive  to  the  great  Father  of  your  spirits,  we  are  to  be  such 
men  that  those  who  look  upon  us  may  wish  that  there  were  more  such 
as  we  are. 

Jesus  especially  was  a  model  in  his  perfect  self  ab&egatlDn.  What  did 
he  seek  for  Mnsielf  ?— 4^  kingdom?  Yes,  but  a  kin^om  whose  crown 
was  made  of  thorns — a  kingdom  of  suflfering  love.  What  did  he  live 
for? — ^that  he  might  be  glorified? — ^Ay,  but  that  he  might  be  glorij&ed 
by  saving  others  while  refusing  to  save  himself  His  orowning  glory 
is  that  he  humbled  himself  and  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
became  obedient  to  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  Such  diall 
you  and  I  be,  if  we  have  the  glory  of  Christ  treating  upon  us:  we 
shall  give  up  for  ever  all  self^eeking,  all  desire  to  shine,  all  wish  to  bo 
great,  all  craving  to  be  rich ;  and  we  shall  live  hencefortb  not  unto  our- 
selves, but  unto  him  that  died  for  us.  For  God's  ^lory,  and  for  Christ's 
purpose  in  the  convincement  of  the  world,  we- are  to  live,  and  if  we  do  so 
the  spirit  of  glory  will  be  resting  upon  us. 

The  matchdess  Man  of  Nazareth  had  this  ^ory,  that  he  was  one  with 
God:  the  objeets,:and  aims,  and  thoughts  of  God  weights  objects,  and 
aims,  and  thou^ts.  His  life  rah  parallel  with  ike  path  of  the  Most  High. 
This  man  was  accepted  of  God;  the  love  of  God  iever  rested  upon  hun. 
He  had  access  to  God;  he  could  speak  mtii  die  Father  when  he  would. 


THE  GLOBT,  UKITY,  AND  TEIUMPH  OF  THE  CHURCH.  259 

and  flnsweiB  ont  of  tihe  exeeUent  gloiy  were  vonchsafed  him.  He  was 
prevalent  with  ^Qody  fot^  his  prayers  biroaght  down,  and  still  bring  down, 
comntless  blessings 'Opon  the  sons  i>t  men.  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  and 
he  overcame  the  world  in  the  power  of  his  sonship.  Now,  this  gloiy 
which  the  Faliher  gave  him  he  has  given  ns,  that  we,  too,  may  t^  ac^ 
oepted  ;  that  we,  too,  may  have  acoess ;  that  we,  too,  may  have  preva- 
lence in  prayer ;  that  we,  too,  mav  have  the  spirit  of  adoption ;  and  that 
we,  too,  may  trample  npon  sin  and  overoome  the  hosts  of  darkness.  This 
ifl  the  glory  which  rests  npon  all  the  faithfaL 

Ma^  yon  well,  that  wherever  this  glory  is  seen  trne  nnity  is  developed. 
Soj^se  I  were  to  find  a  man,  living  in  &e  likeness  of  Christ,  with  this 
spiritnal  glory  conspionons  npon  himi  it  may  be  that  he  would  be  poor 
and  illiterate,  bnt  what  of  that  ?  Suppose  he  is  a  ooalheaver,  the  glory 
of  his  oharaoter  will*  be  none  the  less  conspionons  amid  the  dust.  Then, 
let  ns  find  another  man  on  whom  the  same  spiritual  glory  rests,  and  we 
will  suppose  that  he  ia.an  ead, »  supposition  which,  thank  Ood,  is  not  an 
impossible  one ;  the  glory  wHl  be  none  the  more  dim  because  of  the  good 
man's  hononis.  There  then  ace  the  two-— ooalheaver  and  coroneted 
earl :  does  it  need  half  aneye.to  see  that  the  glory  of  each  is  one  ?  The 
hdy  consecration  in  each  case  is  the  same,  and  the  degrees  of  rank  do 
not  affect  the  essential  beauty  of  either.  Is  it  not  the  same  life  which 
dwells  in  all  saintly  bosoms,  and  the  same  love  which  prompts  each  holy 
deed?  In^a  pidncess  or  in  a  dairyman's  daughter,  in  a  scnolar  or  in  a 
peasant,  the  .gk«y  of  a  high  character  is  one.  If  yon  found  among  a 
savage  tribe  a  smgle  convert,  truly  oonseorated  to  Christy  and  living 
nnto  Ood  accordiBg  to  the  measure  of  his  light,  his  manners  might  be 
mde  and  his  knowledge  slender,  bat  there  would  be  upon  him  the  same 
kind  of  gloiy  which  yon  would  mal^k  as  adorning  a  polished,  educated 
Christian  lady  who  in  tiie  midst. of  her  circle  egema  a  lovely  life  for 
Jesus.  Should  the  imtntored  convert  die  by  the  spear  of  the  savage 
whose  sonl  he  sought  to  bltm,  hei  is  written  in  the  same  bead-roll  of 
martyrs  as  that  which  beam  the  names  of  bishops  and  apostles.  Holiness 
is  every  whore  most  preoioas;  nnflelfisbness  is  in  any  instance  beyond  all 
prioe.  Give  ns  to  see  lore  to  Qod  and  love  to  men,  and  they  are  every- 
where alike,  and  reveal  a  oneness  of  inward  life,  in  &ct,  oneness  with 
him  who  is  the  tone  life  of  men. 

If  yon  bring:  a  commmy  of  eonunon  Christians  together  and  they 
begin  discoursiiig  and  cBacuBatog,  I  daze  say  they  will  jangle  and  deb^;e 
world  without  mdi ;  bnt  if  you  ooidd'  select  a  number  of  those  upon 
whom  the  glory  rests  which  the  Falser  gave  to  his  Son,  I  will  warrant 
yon  this,  tbsit  within  ^  short  time  they  will  be  all  on  their  knees  together, 
or  singing  together,  or  engi(ged  in  somo  form  of  loving  fellowship.  The 
people  who  are  not  one  with  leaoh  other  ace  those  who  are  (not  one  with 
CSirist;  bnt  once  filled  with  his  Spirit  we  are  one  of  necessity.  Yon 
cannot  help  it,  it  is  soaioely  a, matter  of  duty,  it  becomes  a  matter  of 
necessity,  that  you  ^ho  htive  the  love  of  Christ  within  you  should  love 
the  brotherhoda.  -Spintoal  onen.  are  so  essentially  one  that  like  two 
drops  which  lie  dose  together  they  have  an  iucmasiag  tendency  to  unite. 
Spiritnal  men  may.  wear  different  denominational  names,  and  may  differ 
in  their  conscientiona  anrviotionS'  on  some  matters,  but  these  things  do 
not  hinder  nnion,  Jmt  give  a  Mst  to  it.    If  the  glory  which  the  Father 


260  HBTROPOLITAK  TABBBKACLS  PULPIT. 

gave  to  Obrist  is  resting  upon  these  they  hare  discerned  the  mystical 
tinity  which  encompasses  them  all,  and  they  are  delighted  to  acknowledge 
it  by  deeds  of  brotherly  Iotc,  rendered  with  spontaneous  alacrity,  blessing 
him  who  performs  them  and  those  who  reoeive  the  benefits. 

Beloveo^  those  in  whom  Christ  lives  are  fwt  tmifarmy  but  one.    Uni- 
fbrmity  may  be  found  in  death,  but  this  unity  is  life.    Those  who  are 

3nite  uniform  may  yet  have  no  love  to  each  other^  while  those  who 
itfer  widely  may  still  be  truly  and  intensely  one.  Our  children  are 
not  uniform,  but  they  make  one  family.  Sons  bom  at  tiie  same  birth 
may  exhibit  a  remarkable  dirergenoe  of  character,  and  yet  the  father 
may  be  seen  in  both,  and  they  may  be  equally  one  in  the  &mily  circle, 
and  in  all  the  love  which  makes  home  the  aoode  of  happiness.  So  it  is 
with  all  believers :  bom  of  the  same  everlasting  Father,  they  are  one  in 
spirit,  one  in  character,  one  in  object,  one  in  aim,  yea^  one  in  the  fullest 
sense.  At  this  moment,  despite  apparent  differences,  die  whole  host  of 
the  spiritual  are  one,  and  they  press  forward  as  with  the  tramp  of  one 
man  against  the  common  foe.  I  speak  not  of  professors,  I  speak  not  of 
the  external  church,  I  speak  not  of  the  mixed  multitude  that  come  up 
out  of  Egypt  and  debase  the  character  of  our  Israel ;  but  I  sneak  of 
those  of  whom  Christ  could  say  to  his  Father,  '^  The  glory  whic&  thou 
bast  given  me  I  have  given  them  "  :  these  are  onu  r^  the  Father  and  the 
Son  are  one,  but  mere  professors  are  not  so. 

II.  Time  flies  too  rapidly,  alas,  and  therefore  we  must  with  great 
brevity  think  upon  the  second  point,  namely,  the  unitt  itself.  As  I 
bave  remarked,  it  is  not  uniformity.  This  our  Lord  says  nothing  of. 
Though  we  are  one  body  in  him,  yet  all  the  members  have  not  the  same 
'  oflSce  ;  the  eye  is  very  cQfferent  from  the  ear,  and  the  foot  has  not  the 
same  form  as  the  hand.  Neither  does  he  speak  of  any  formal  organiza- 
tion by  which  unity  is  to  be  secured.  How  many  have  tried  to  create  a 
mechanical  union  and  have  made  confusion  worse  confounded.  Their 
eagerness  for  unity  has  threatened  to  dash  everything  to  shivers.  The 
very  first  step  towards  a  visible  unity  of  the  churdb  is  with  most  mea 
that  they  shall  fix  a  standard  of  what  the  church  ought  to  be,  and  cut 
off  everybody  who  will  not  conform  thereto.  See  how  certain  brethren^ 
to  show  how  they  hate  sectarianism,  invent  a  new  sect  and  diligently 
earn  from  their  fellow-believers  the  character  of  being  more  bitter  and 
bigoted  than  any  other  profbssors.  The  vagaries  of  non-sectarians  are 
the  scandal  of  the  age.  They  have  talked  of  union  and  scattered  the 
^ints  right  and  left.  Let  us  follow  practical  methods,  and  wc  shall  find 
them  in  the  unity  which  the  text  describes. 

First,  it  is  written — "  1  in  them."  Christ  lives  in  his  people,  and 
we  are  so  to  act,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost^  that  onlookers  shall 
say,  **  Surely  Christ  lives  again  in  that  man,  for  he  acts  out  the  precepts 
of  Jesus.  Did  you  notice  how  he  bore  the  insult?  Did  you  notice  how 
be  laid  himself  out  to  oblige  and  to  serve  ?  Did  you  observe  how,  with- 
out introducing  reUgious  talk,  he  gradually  steered  the  conversation 
towards  that  ^ich  is  to  edification?  Do  vou  see  how  if  he  stays  in  a 
hotel,  or  if  he  sojourns  in  a  family,  or  if  he  sits  in  a  work-room,  his 
presence  is  soon  felt  by  the  pleasure  which  he  diffuses,  the  confidence 
which  he  inspires?  '*  He  is  everyone's  firiend  when  he  is  needed :  the  servant 
of  all,  the  example  of  alL    His  voice  is  ever  for  peace,  and  if  he  does  now 


THE  GLOBY,  TTNITTy  AlO)  TBIUUPH  OF  THB  GHTTKCH.  261 

and  tihen  speak  npbraidindy  men's  oonscienoes  admit  fchat  he  is  jnst.  Sach 
a  man  honours  his  Lord  by  reminding  men  of  him.  Oar  first  considera- 
tion shonld  not  be,  **  Now  I  am  here,  now  can  I  be  comfortable  ?"  but  **  I 
am  here,  how  can  I  please  others  for  their  good  ?  How  can  I  relieve  the 
distressed,  help  the  weary,  or  cheer  the  sad  ?"  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  do 
good  in  little  ways.  It  is  a  glory  to  be  the  sweetener  of  life  at  home, 
the  self-forgetting  friend  of  all  around.  The  world  ere  long  confesses  that 
Christ  is  in  such  a  man.  The  true  Christian  is  Jestu  Bedivwus.  His 
name  implies  this, — ^how  is  he  a  Christian  who  is  not  like  Christ  ?  We 
commonly  sajr  that  the  oil  upon  the  head  runs  down  to  the  skirts  of  the 
garment :  is  it  so  ?  Is  the  We  of  Jesus,  the  generosity  of  Jesus,  the  zeal 
of  Jesus,  the  gentleness  of  Jesus,  the  consecration  of  Jesus  to  be  seen  in 
US  ?  for  if  so  the  glory  of  Jesus  rests  on  us ;  and  if  not  we  have  need  to 
be^  again  and  do  our  first  works. 

The  next  point  of  ttie  union  is — "  Thou  in  me.'*  That  is,  God  is  in 
Christ.  This  is  manifestly  true,  for  you  cannot  read  the  life  of  Christ 
without  seeing  God  in  him.  '*  Come,  now,"  said  one  to  an  unbeliever, 
*'  what  think  you  of  the  life  of  Christ?  "  "  I  am  fi»e  to  confess,"  said 
the  other,  "  that  it  seems  to  me  to  be  a  very  marvellous  life,  and  in  every 
way  worthy  of  praise."  "  You  do  not,  however,  think  Jesus  Christ  to 
be  God  ?  "  «  No,  I  do  not."  "  But  suppose,"  said  the  Christian,  "  that 
God  had  been  here  among  men  in  human  form,  could  he  have  acted  more 
purely  or  more  benevolently  ?  "  **  No,"  said  the  other,  **  if  I  admit  the 
possibility  of  such  a  thing,  I  am  not  able  to  conceive  of  anything  more 
divinely  good."  **  Why,  then,"  said  the  Christian,  "do  you  not  see  that 
in  very  deed  God  was  in  Christ  Jesus  and  he  was  one  with  God  ?  "  So  we 
believe,  and  we  rejoice  greatly  to  hear  our  Lord  say,  "  I  and  my  Father 
are  one."     See,  then,  the  unity  of  Christ  in  us  and  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 

This  brings  about  the  union  of  believers  with  the  Father :  being  one 
with  Christ,  and  Christ  being  one  with  the  Father,  the  point  is  reached 
for  which  our  Lord  prayed, ''  That  they  all  may  be  one;  afl  thou,  Father, 
art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us :  that  the  world 
may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me."  Couple  this  mth.  believers  being 
one  with  each  other  and  you  get  the  being  "  made  perfect  in  one  "  of 
which  our  text  speaks.  If  you  and  I  are  one  in  Christ,  and  one  with 
Christ,  then  are  we  one  with  God,  seeing  Christ  is  one  with  God ;  and 
thus  not  in  some  few  characteristics  are  we  alike  and  one  in  name,  but  in 
life,  in  aim,  and  in  desire  we  are  one.  Brethren,  if  you  and  I  are  living 
for  the  same  design  which  our  Lord  lived  for,  and  if  the  very  life  which 
quickens  us  is  the  life  of  Jesus,  then  since  Jesus  lives  evermore  for  the 
self-same  thing  which  God  puiposes  and  works  out,  then  surely  there  is 
a  grand  unity,  the  like  of  which  is  not  found  in  the  universe.  This  has 
great  depths  in  it,  which  is  grounded  upon  a  mystical,  spiritual  union, 
but  I  leave  the  depths  of  doctrine,  just  now,  to  speak  upon  the 
experimental  and  practical  truths,  which  grow  out  of  the  matter  of 
fact  Moved  by  the  same  love  of  holiness,  insmred  by  the  same  spirit  of 
love,  and  tenderness,  and  kindness,  the  eternal  Father  s  wOl  is  the  will  of 
the  Son,  and  the  Spirit  worketh  in  us  also  to  will  and  to  do  according  to 
the  good  pleasure  of  the  Lord.  According  to  the  measure  of  grace 
the  members  of  the  body  feel  and  move  in  union  with  the  Head,  who  also 
is  m  union  with  the  Father.     ''Thy  kingdom  come"  is  God's  will 


2G2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

thrilling  throngh  all  the  members  of  the  bodj  of  Christ.  Death  to  sin, 
destruction  of  strife/ the  ending  of  iujastice^  the  chasing  away  of  every 
form  of  error — these  are  the  common  objects  of  the  Father,  and  of  all  those 
whom  he  has  begotten.  The  propagation  of  truth,  the  increase  of  love,  the 
reign  of  gentleness  and  peace  among  men — these  are  the  mind  of  Grod, 
the  mind  of  Ohrist,  ana  the  mind  of  all  the  saints,  and  so  are  we  one 
with  each  other  bj  ties  spiritual  and  divine. 

III.  I  could  not  enlarge  upon  that  subject  though  I  wished  to  do  so, 
for  I  must  now  notice  tub  effect  which  this  produces,  according 
to  our  Lord's  prophecy  and  prayer. 

First,  it  will  convince  the  world  of  the  truth  of  Christ's  mission : — 
'^  That  the  world  may  know  that  thou  Yissi  sent  me."  How  will  they 
know  it  ?  Why,  when  they  see  such  characters  as  I  have  so  feebly 
tried  to  paint ;  when  they  see  men  who  are  no  longer  selfish,  hard,  un- 
generous, men  no  longw  governed  by  their  passions,  men  no  longer 
earth-bound, — ^when  they  see  loving  men,  men  who  desire  that  which  is 
holy,  just,  and  good,  men  living  to  God — then  the  world  will  say,  **  Their 
Master  must  have  been  sent  of  Ood."  Such  men  as  these,  alas,  are  so 
uncommon,  and  they  are  so  predous  when  we  find  them,  that  if  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  created  such  by  hu  teaching  and  his  Spirit,  by  his  fruits  may  we 
know  him,  even  as  we  know  his  people,  and  he  is  manifestly  sent  of  God. 

And  then,  brethren,  not  only  will  their  characters  convince,  but  their 
unity  will  convince,  because  the  ungodly  world  will  say, "  We  see  the  glory 
of  Christianity  in  the  jpoor  man,  and  we  see  the  same  in  the  rich  man.  liVe 
see  a  glory  about  a  Ouristian  prince,  and  we  see  the  like  glory  about  a 
Ciiristian  needlewoman ;  and  we  observe  tliat  when  these  people  meet 
each  other  there  is  a  divine  freemasonry  among  them,  for  they  are  one. 
Surely  their  Master  must  be  sent  of  God."  Christian  people  have  things 
to  talk  about  which  others  do  not  understand,  and  they  pursue  one 
common  object  which  others  disregard ;  whether  they  have  little  or 
much  they  yield  their  aU  to  one  common  cause  and  object ;  whether 
possessed  of  little  ability  or  great  ability  they  are  alike  consecrated. 
One  spirit  breathes  in  them.  See  how  they  love  one  another  !  Even 
the  world  can  see  that,  while  its  great  ones  are  always  contending, 
these  dwell  in  love ;  while  common  men  emulate  each  other  and  strive 
as  to  who  shall  be  tiie  greatest,  these  only  strive  to  serve  the  common 
cause,  to  help  each  oth^  and  to  stoop  for  their  fellows'  good.  The  world 
cannot  help  perceiving  the  divinity  of  the  mission  of  Christ  which  has 
produced  this  perfect  love  and  union  among  his  followers.  Then  do  they 
say,  ^  assuredly  God  must  have  sent  their  leader,  Christ  Jesus,  or  he  could 
not  have  produced  such  results."  Do  you  ask  me  where  we  see  this  ? 
I  reply  that  it  is  far  too  little  seen,  but  when  we  shall  see  it  in  the  whole 
church  then  will  the  world  be  convinced.  Oh,  my  brethren,  only  fancy  a 
church  of  the  sise  of  this,  put  down  in  this  south  of  Lond(m,  made  up  of 
holy  men  and  holy  women  like  Christy  who,  with  all  their  imperfections, 
as  to  the  general  b^t  and  current  of  their  lives  are  living  unto  God 
and  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  and  for  the  good  of  their  fellow-men ;  picture 
such  a  church  in  perfect  unity,  and  I  tell  you  it  would  present  an 
argument  for  Christianity  which  would  infinitely  surpass  all  the  books 
of  analogy  and  evidence  which  have  ever  been  written.  This  would  be  a 
nut  which  the  adversary  could  not  crack :  it  would  baffle  all  his  criticisms 


THE  GLOBT,  UNITY,  AND  TRIUMPH  OF  THB  OHUBCH.  263 

and  syllogisms.  One  indiTidnal  Christian  has  often  presented  to  the 
most  desperate  nnbeliever  a  difficulty  which  has  staggered  him.  ''I 
could  he  altogether  an  atheist,"  said  one,  ''if  it  were  not  for  my  aged 
mother,  but  while  I  see  her  peace  of  mind,  her  holy  living,  her  gentle, 
quiet  temper,  I  cannot  but  beueye  that  there  is  a  power  in  religion  which 
I  cannot  understand."  If  we  would  eonyinoe  the  world,  my  brethren,  it 
must  be  by  the  glory  which  Ood  has  given  to  his  Son  resting  upon  each 
and  all  of  us  and  so  compacting  us  together,  ftuung  us  into  one  mass  of 
living  union.  By  the  phalanx  of  unity  in  Christ  the  battle  must  be  won. 

But  the  world  is  also  to  be  convinced  of  the  Father's  love  to  us  :^-> 
''And  hast  loved  them  as  thou  hast  loved  me."  Shall  we  ever  convince 
them  of  that?  Yes,  when  the  world  sees  bodies  of  truly  consecrated 
men  and  women  living  together  in  holy  love,  then  they  will  also  see 
much  joy,  much  peace,  mudh  mutual  consolation,  and  they  will  perceive 
that  the  very  stars  in  heaven  fight  for  them,  that  the  providence  of  God 
makes  all  things  work  together  for  their  good,  and  that  the  Lord  has  a 
special  care  over  them  as  a  shepherd  hath  over  his  flock.  Then  will 
tney  say, ''  These  are  the  people  tnat  God  has  blessed.  S^  how  he  lovea 
them."  They  perceive,  however,  that  they  have  to  suffer,  and  that  they 
are  afflicted  and  despised,  and  so  they  come  to  say — "  God  seems  to 
love  them  just  as  he  loved  his  Son,  whom  he  did  not  spare  from  suffering 
and  pain  and  grie^  but  whom  he  upheld  under  all" ;  so  that  thev  learn 
that  God  has  the  same  special  regara  for  those  Christlike  ones  that  he 
has  for  their  Master  and  Lord.  They  shall  be  made  to  see  this,  it  will 
be  forced  upon  them.  Moreover,  as  these  men  and  women  grow  more 
and  more  hke  Jesus  the  world  will  conclude  that  since  God  loved  Jesus, 
he  must  love  those  who  are  like  him.  Why,  do  not  even  the  ungodly, 
though  they  would  be  loath  to  confess  it,  take  a  kind  of  delight  in  a  high 
and  noble  character  ?  They  have  an  admiration  for  it,  and  their  con- 
science tells  them  that  God  admires  those  in  whom  his  Christ  has  produced 
it.  They  cannot  avoid  the  feeling  that  God  does  love  holy  and  loving 
people,  and  that  it  is  great  love  on  his  part  to  make  them  what  they 
are.    So  &r  the  world  oecomes  convinced. 

But  somebody  may  say,  "  What  does  our  Lord  mean  by  the  world's 
knowing  and  beueving  this  ?"  I  answer  that  doubtless  a  part  of  the  world 
will  be  convinced  that  Christ  was  sent  of  God,  and  convinced  that  God 
loves  his  people,  and  yet  they  will  stand  out  in  obstinacy  against 
God,  for  to  the  end  even  the  gospel  itself  will  be  a  savour  of  death  unto 
death  to  soma  Well,  you  and  I  have  answered  the  purpose  of  God 
even  upon  such  characters  when  it  comes  to  pass  that  they  are  without 
excuse.  But  it  is  evident  from  this  chapter  that  there  is  another  part 
of  the  world  who  will  not  only  know  ana  believe  historically,  but  will  do 
this  spiritually, — that  part  of  the  world  comprehended  in  our  Lord's 

Erajer, — *'  Neither  pray  I  for  those  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shaU 
elieve  on  me  through  their  word."  And  I  take  it,  brethren,  that  when 
the  day  shall  come  that  Christians  are  Christians,  then  we  shall  see  great 
masses  of  the  world  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  and  large 
numbers  of  the  world  suppliant  at  Jesa*s  feet  The  Christianity  whidi 
is  presented  to  the  public  gaze — I  would  not  be  unduly  censorious,  but  I 
fear  it  is  often  a  Christianity  which  the  world  does  well  to  despise. 
When  the  Jew  went  to  Rome  and  asked  for  Christianity,  ho  saw  the 


264  HETROPaLITAir  TABERlfACLB  PULPIT. 

Christians,  so  called,  worshipping  fche  Yirgin  Mary,  and  images  of  saints, 
and  relics  and  bones,  and  I  know  not  what ;  and  he  jnstly  said — ^^'  The 
Lord  hath  said  to  Israel,  *  The  Lord  thj  God  is  one  Ood,'  and  '  thon  shalt 
not  make  unto  thyself  any  grayen  image,  nor  the  likeness  of  anything  that 
is  in  heaven  above  nor  in  the  earth  benetddi.;  thoa  shale  not  bow  down 
to  them  nor  worship  them/  "  On  the  stmngth  of  such  revelation  the  Jew 
rejected  the  Ohristianity  of  Borne,  and  he  did  well.  Say  you  not  so  ? 
Now,  here  comes  another  Ohriatianity  which  has  lately  di^layed  itself  to 
many  heathen  nations.  It  comes  with  the  Bible  in  its  knapsack,  and  the 
Martini- Henry  rifle  in  its  hand.  Is  not  this  a  fine  combination  for  con- 
version? Jesus  comes  before  the  Zulu  riding  upon  a  Gatling  gun.  Of 
coarse,  these  poor  heathen  know  nothing  aboat  our  political  com- 
binations, but  they  suppose  that  Ohristians  are  invading  their  land— > 
will  they,  therefore,  love  Christ?  Missionaries,  here  is  a. difliculty  for 
yon  to  explain,  how  will  you  deal  with  it?  You  come  firom  a  Christian 
nation,  a  nation  whioh  enjoys  the  unspeakable  privilege  of  a  national 
church,  a  nation  which  salutes  the  savages  in  Christ's  name  with  shot  and 
shell !  Will  they  receive  Christianity  coming  in  such  guise  ?  If  they 
do  not,  small  blame  can  we  pour  upon  them>  they  will  be  only  acting 
according  to  the  light  of  reason  and  common  sense. 

If  there  shall  ever  come  a  Chcistianity  wliic^  suflfereth  long  and  is  kind, 
which  doeth  no  evil  but  seeketh  good  to  its  neighbour,  which  teacheth 
love  to  God  and  love  to  man ;  which  seeketh  not  itaown,  but  lays  itself 
out  for  others,  then  I  do  not  say  that  an  ungodly  world  will  be  enamonved 
of  it  if  left  to  itself,  but  I  do  believe  that  the  Spirit  of  God  will  go  forth 
with  ity  and  will  convince  men  of  sin  and  of  risfateousness  and  of  jndg* 
ment,  and  th^i  shall  the  scattered  fieunily  of  Adam  accept  the  one  tme 
fiuth,  and  enter  into  a  league  of  amity  with  each  other,  and  there  shall  be 
glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  on  earth  peace,  good*will  towards  men. 

Love  conquers  all.  Love  is  the  logic  which  convinces.  Xotioe  two 
passages  of  Scripture  with  which  I  finish.  One  thing  yon  want  the 
world  to  know  is  that  you  are  the  disciples  of  Chriak.  **  By  this.shall 
all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  toaaother."  Does 
our  Lord  wish  the  world  to  be  convinced,  how  does  he  himself  act  ? 
Hear  him — "  But  that  the  world  may  know  that  I  love  the  Father ;  and 
as  the  Father  gave  me  commandment,  even  so  I  do.  Arise,  let  us  go 
hence."  Love,  you  see  again,  proves  the  unity  of  the  Son  with  the 
Father  ;  and  here  again  in  this  seocmd  t^t  it  is  the  love  of  the  Father  to 
the  chosen  which  is  to  be  the  sign  unto  the  world.  Thereforoi  let  love 
abound.    Let  it  be  all  the  weapons  of  our  war. 

I  know  I  have  preached  very  feebly  to  you  this  morning  upon  such  a 
theme.  The  subject  is  a  great  deal  too  much  for  my  limited  capacity, 
but  it  is  good  for  us  to  feel  how  little  we  are,  how  low  we  are.  It  is 
good  to  look  above  our  strugghng  sdves  to  something  much  beyond  our 
present  attainments.  I  lie  prostrate  on  my  &ce  before  the  Lord,  and 
ccmfess  that  I  have  not  yet  attained  all  that  I  have  set  tortii  to  you,  and, 
I  suspect,  that  your  confession  is  very  like  my  own.  Let  us  not  be  dis- 
couraged, for  by  grace  we  are  on  the  way,  and  we  will  not  rest  till  we 
reach  the  goal.  0  for  grace  so  to  live  unto  God  in  Christ  Jesus  that  the 
world  shall  never  be  able  to  answer  the  argument  of  our  lives.  Help  us, 
O  Spirit  of  the  Lord. 


* 


FOBTS  DEMOLISHED  AND  PBISONEBS  TAKEN. 


%  ^tm$t{ 


Delivered  or  LobdVDat  Mobking,  May  IIth,  1879,  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THB   METBOPOUTAN    TABSBNACfLBy    NBWINOTOV. 


"  Gutiiig  down  imagiTifctionii,  and  ereiy  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  agdntt  the 
knowledge  of  God,  and  bringing  into  captiyity  eyery  thought  to  the  obedience  of 
Ghiiat^"— 2  Oorinthians  z.  6. 

This  chapter  presents  the  remarkable  spectacle  of  a  minister  of  the  gospel 
of  peace  going  forth  to  war.   At  first  sight  we  wonder  how  the  meek  and 

Entle  Paol  shonld  speak  about  warring  and  talk  of  palling  down  strong- 
Mb,  and  '*  having  a  readiness  to  revenge  all  disobedience."  The  sur- 
prise is  all  the  greater  because  he  is  going  to  war  in  the  church :  a 
shepherd  entering  the  fold  with  a  sword  One  would  not  so  much  marvel 
that  he  carried  his  weapons  against  the  outside  world,  but  on  this 
occasion  it  is  within  the  church  at  Corinth  that  he  is  iAx)ut  to  commence 
a  campaign.  Yet  observe  how  earnestly  he  deprecates  the  conflict^  how 
he  beseeches  them  by  the  meekness  and  gentleness  of  Christ  to  spare  him 
a  task  which  was  so  unpleasant  to  his  feeUngs  as  to  deal  sternly  with 
those  whom  he  would  rar  rather  have  commended.  But  ^e  wonder 
ceases  when  we  find  that  the  shepherd  fights  onlv  with  grievous  Moires, 
and  even  in  that  conflict  declares,  "  thougli  we  walk  in  the  flee^  we  do  not 
war  after  the  flesh.''  Note,  moreover,  that  his  weapons  are  of  a  peculiar 
kind,— ^*'  The  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal."  He  is  not  about  to 
assault  his  antagonists  in  the  church  with  bitter  words  of  railing  sudh  as 
ibey  used  against  himself;  he  is  not  about  to  meet  the  phQoeophers  with 
such  philosophies  and  sophisms  as  those  with  which  they  assailed  the  gospel; 
neither  is  he  coming  forth  with  any  kind  of  temporal  weapon  to  inflict 
aught  of  injurr  upon  the  leaders  in  error;  hisweapcms  areof  a  ve^  dif- 
ferent sort.  They  are  not  carnal,  but  q)iritual.  Trials  under  a  Public  * 
Worship  Act  he  knew  nothing  of,  an  appeal  to  Csesar  upon  church  matters 
never  crossed  his  mind.  For  the  church  of  QoA  ever  to  avaQ  itself  of  force 
or  compulsion  in  order  to  propagate  its  doctrines  would  be  clean  contrary 
to  the  spirit  of  Christianity:  for  the  Christian  bishop  to  become  a 
soldier,  or  employ  the  secular  arm,  would  seem  to  be  the  verv  climax  of 
oontnidictioiL  A  warrior  ambassador  is  a  dream  of  folly.  I  remember 
a  stoiy  which  illustrates  that  absurdity.  When  a  certain  bishop-prince 
No.  M78. 


'206  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

in  the  olden  times  went  forth  himself  personally  to  battle,  and  was  taken 
prisoner,  the  Pope  sent  word  to  the  king  who  had  captured  him  that  he 
was  to  set  him  at  liberty  at  onoe,  for  he  was  a  son  of  the  church.  TIic 
king,  with  considerable  wit,  sent  back  to  the  Pope  the  coat  of  armour 
which  the  birfiop  had  worn  on  the  field  with  this  message,  "  This  have 
we  found :  know  now  whether  it  be  thy  son's  coat  or  no."  And  so  we 
might  send  back,  I  think,  to  the  nominal  church  the  black  and  blood- 
stained gown  of  the  Inquisition,  the  garb  of  the  headsman  and  the  hang- 
man, the  smoke-browned  raiment  of  those  who  lighted  the  Smithfield 
fires,  and  even  the  parchm^ts  on  which  are  written  the  Test  and 
Corporation  Acts,  and  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  and  say,  "  Know  now 
whether  these  be  thy  sons'  coats  or  no."  Is  the  raiment  of  a  man  of 
war  the  restment  of  a  seiTant  of  the  Lord  ?  Are  robes  of  legal  authority 
the  adornments  of  heralds  of  peace?  Jesus  Christ  did  not  thus  array 
his  apostles  when  he  sent  them  forth  to  the  war,  and  not  with  such 
weapons  did  Paul  arm  himself  when  he  entered  the  conflict. 

"  The  weapons  of  our  warfere  are  not  carnal ";  yet  the  spiritual  weapons 
which  can  be  wielded  by  the  Christian  minister,  and  indeed  by  every 
Christian  man,  are  not  to  be  despised,  for  while  not  fleshly,  they  are 
mighty  through  God.  God  is  in  them  ;  God  is  with  those  who  use  them. 
The  sword  of  the  Spirit/  which  is  the  word  of  God,  the  aiTows  of  truth 
which  pierce  the  consciences  of  men,  the  weapon  of  all  prayer,  the 
influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost — that  divine  power — such  weapons  as  these 
are  by  God's  power  made  mighty  to  the  ovei-throw  of  spiritual  princi- 
palities and  powers.  Truth  and  holiness  are  the  appointed  engines  for 
the  pulling  down  of  the  castles  of  evil.  Blessed  is  he  who  in  every  con- 
flict for  God  takes  heed  to  use  none  other  weapons  than  those  which  the 
Lord  hath  hung  up  in  the  tower  of  David^  builded  for  an  armoury, 
wherein  do  hang  a  thousand  buoklers,  all  shields  of  mighty  men.  Those 
only  can  fight  the  Lord's  battles  successfully  who  come  to  him  to  be 
armed  for  the  fight,  and  reject  all  fleshly  force.  The  spiritual  shall  be 
victorious,  but  others  must  faU. 

The  passage,  if  I  were  to  confine  it  to  its  immediate  connection,  would 
represent  Paul  as  dealing  with  those  lofty  ones  who  had  usurped  autho- 
rity in  the  church  at  Oorinthy  who  denied  his  apostleship,  and  set  them- 
selves up  as  8uperiQa>  to  him,  while  they  themselves  preached  error,  and 
led  the  people  astray.  Paul  declared  that  when  he  came  among  them 
armed  with  the  power  with  which  God  had  clothed  him,  he  should  over- 
throw every  proud  opposition,  and  convince  them  all  of  the  truth  to 
their  conversion  or  to  their  confusion.  But  I  shall  speak  rather  of  a  war- 
fare earned  on  in  individuals,  a  warfare  in  our  own  souls,  for  what  is  true 
of  the  triumphs  of  the  gospel  in  the  mass  is  true  because  it  gains  the 
like  conquest  over  individuals.  While  I  am  speaking  of  the  war  of  the 
gospel  against  sin  within  the  heart  of  man,  may  you  who  have  never  felt 
its  power  be  praving  that  it  may  conquer  even  you,  and  may  those  who 
have  experienoea  its  sacred  omnipotence  be  pleading  to  be  yet  more  com- 
pletely subjugated  to  its  sway. 

Great  King  of  Grace,  onr  hearto  subdue, 
May  we  be  led  in  triumpb  too, 
As  williiiff  capdres  to  our  Lord, 
To  sing  w  victorie*  of  his  word.** 


F0BT8  DEMOLISHED  AND  PRIB0HER8  TAKEN.  267 

There  are  three  things  in  the  text  worthy  of  our  obfleryation.  The 
first  is  fortresses  demolished — *'  casting  down  imaginations,  and  e^ery  high 
thing  Uiat  ezalteth  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  Qod  " ;  then,  secondly, 
prisoners  seized — "bringing  into  captivity  every  thought"  ;  and  thirdly, 
jprisoners  led  away  captive — ^for  such  is  the  force  of  the  Oreek  "  bringing 
into  captivity  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ,'* — as  if  the  cap- 
tured ones  were  taken  away  and  put  under  new  service  to  the  anointed 
Prince. 

I.  First,  let  us  look  at  fortbesses  dekolished.  When  the  gospel 
endeavours  to  penetrate  the  human  heart  it  meets  with  earthworks  of 
prejudice,  whicn  men  have  cast  up  to  screen  their  minds  from  the  force 
of  the  trutL  Many  things  are  opposed  to  the  knowledge  of  Qod.  The 
object  sought  for  is  that  men  may  be  brought  to  know  God,  to  know  who  he 
is  and  what  he  is,  to  know  their  relation  to  him  asfiJlenmen,  toknow  his 
plan  of  restoration,  to  know  him  in  Ohrist  Jesus,  and  so  to  know  as  to  love 
tiim,  to  obey  him,  and  to  become  like  him.  lliis  is  the  great  object  for 
which  the  gospel  is  sent  into  the  world,  that  the  knowledge  of  the  gloiy 
of  God  may  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  But  men  desire 
not  the  knowledge  of  God's  ways,  and  shut  up  their  hearts  against  the 
entrance  of  divine  light  by  many  reasonings  and  imaginings. 

Some  are  garrisoned  against  the  knowledge  of  God  by  tne  feeling  that 
ihey  do  not  want  to  know  Ood,  The  masses  of  our  fellow-countrymen  are 
not  so  much  opposed  to  the  gospel  as  indifferent  to  it.  They  pass  by  our 
places  of  worship  and  they  see  tneir  neighbours  entering,  and  they  some- 
times say,  **  Who  preaches  there  ?  ";  but  **  What  is  preached  there  ?  *'  is  a 
question  seldom  asked.  Beligious  enquiry  seems  to  be  very  dull  at  the 
present  time.  Time  was  when  the  announcement  of  evangelical  doctrine 
excited  universal  attention,  though  at  the  same  time  aunost  universal 
opposition:  that  opposition  was  better  than  a  state  of  stagnation 
luce  the  present.  Men  nowadays  pass  by  the  cross  as  if  a  dying 
Saviour  were  nothing  to  them.  Graceless  zealots,  as  thev  call  them,  may 
fight  about  their  creeds :  as  for  them,  they  have  something  more  prac- 
tical to  think  of.  ''What  shall  we  eat?  what  shall  we  drink?  and 
wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed  ?*'  are  for  more  important  questions  to 
them,  than  *'  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  This  entrenchment  has 
to  be  carried,  and  the  gospel  does  carry  it  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  for  it  flashes  conviction  on  the  soul,  creates  alarm,  arouses  appre- 
hension, and  so  storms  the  stronghold  of  indifference  and  utterly 
demolishes  it.  When  the  Holy  Gnost  convinces  a  man  of  sin,  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment  to  come,  he  is  indifferent  no  longer. 
We  call  him  an  **  enquirer,"  and  the  name  is  correct,  for  he  does  enquire 
about  the  weightiest  matters,  which  concern  eternity,  and  God,  and 
heaven,  and  hell,  and  his  own  immortel  destiny.  He  wants  to  know  at 
first  more  than  he  is  at  that  time  capable  of  learning:  he  questions  about 
high  mysteries  which  are  for  men  m  Ohrist  rather  than  for  babes;  but 
most  of  all  he  wants  to  know  ^'How  can  I  be  at  peace  with  €k)d?"  If 
like  Holy  Spirit  does  but  applv  to  a  man's  heart  such  a  truth  as  this, — 
that  he  is  condemned  alreaay  because  he  hath  not  believed  in  Ohrist, 
then  indifference  is  as  a  bowing  wall,  and  as  a  tottering  fence.  Even 
if  a  man  had  no  other  sin  whatsoever,  it  is  quite  sufficient  to  con- 
demn him  for  ever,  that  he  neglecto  his  God  and  turns  away  |rom  his 


2C8  METROrOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

SftTiour;  for  nnbelief  is  an  act  of  high  treason  against  the  divine 
majesty,  plackiug  at  the  crown  jewel  of  Jehovah's  trathtulness.  Hence 
<<  the  wicked  shall  he  turned  into  hell  with  all  the  nations  that  forget 
Qod.'^  Laj  this  Krupip  gun  in  proper  position,  and  let  it  be  fired 
by  the  Eternal  Spirit  againat  the  indifference  of  the  human  heart  and  it 
soon  casts  down  the  wall  of  carelessness.  Then  the  sinner  discovers  that 
if  he  does  not  know  hia  God  it  were  better  for  him  that  he  had  never 
been  born.  He  finds  out  that  if  he  does  not  know  his  Saviour  he  is 
doomed  to  endless  woe,  and  this  makes  him  cry  out  in  angui&h  of  heart : 
**  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?*' 

Amongst  the  other  '' imaginations"  with  which  man  fortifies  himself 
is  the  idea  of  many  that  th^  know  alr$ady.  Trained  from  their  child- 
lK)od  in  false  doctrine,  they  hold  &8t  to  it^  and  defy  the  gospel  to  reaeh 
them.  They  are  Christians  fay  birth,  they  say,  forgetting  uie  inspired 
declaration, — *^  that  which  is  bom  of  the  filedi  is  flesh ;  and  that  which  is 
bom  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  Others  make  up  their  minds  as  to  what  the 
knowledge  of  God  ought  to  be,  and  of  course  they  quarrel  with  God's 
view  of  things.  They  tehion  a  god  and  a  gospel  after  their  own  fond 
notions,  and  then  they  dream  that  Uiey  have  reached  the  sum  of  wisdom. 
They  refuse  to  go  to  school  to  Christ,  and  when  he  says,  '^  Except  ye 
be  converted  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  in  no  wise  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  they  turn  from  him  with  disdain.  They 
know  quite  enough,  and  ace  resolved  to  learn  no  more.  A  large  pro- 
portion of  our  fellow  men  are  in  this  condition,  and  are  perfectly  content 
and  satisfied  to  remain  as  they  are.  Graduates  in  the  university  of  self- 
importance,  full  of  ignoranoe  and  equally  full  of  pride,  they  scarcely 
deign  to  give  Christ  a  hearing,  and  hardly  go  as  rar  as  the  Athenians 
who  said,  ''What  will  thia  babbler  say?"  Nothing  shuts  the  heart 
ntore  completely  against  the  knowledge  of  God  than  the  conceit  that 
we  tmow  already  and  need  no  teaching  from  above.  It  is  written  of  the 
troe  church,  "  idl  thy  children  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord,"  but  many 
are  not  such  children,  for  they  mb  wise  in  their  own  eyes  and  refuse  in- 
sftroction.  But,  0  sirs,  how  the  Holy  Spirit  casts  down  this  imagination 
when  he  makes  men  feel  that  they  are  blind  by  nature,  and  lets  them 
know  that  the  natural  man  nnderstandeth  not  the  things  which  be  of 
Qod,  for  they  are  q)iritual  and  must  be  spirituallv  discerned.  A  little 
heavenly  light  suffices  to  reveal  to  men  their  darkness,  for  if  they  will 
but  think  Uicy  must  admit  that  if  God  deigns  to  teach  us  in  the  Scrip- 
tores  it  must  be  because  apart  from  them  we  are  ignorant.  There  is  no 
need  of  revelation,  and  the  Bible  is  worthless ; .  there  is  no  need  of  an  in* 
carnate  deity,  and  Calvary  is  a  superfluity,  if  men  already  know  God  apart 
from  the  liord  Jesus,  and  the  word  by  which  he  is  pleased  to  reveal 
himself.  Let  but  the  Holy  Spirit  bring  this  home  to  a  man's  heart  and 
he  begins  to  cry  out  against  his  own  pride,  he  bemoans  his  own  blind- 
UMS,  and  he  is  quite  willing  to  become  a  fool  that  he  may  be  wise,  a 
child  that  he  may  sit  at  Jesua'  feet. 

Another  entrenchment,  behind  which  many  are  hiding  securely,  is  the 
idea  that  if  they  do  not  know  God  they  can  find  him  out  without  his  helj?. 
This  is  a  very  g^oeral  notion  nowadays.  Scientific  thought  is  supposed 
to  be  the  way  for  finding  out  God  himself,  and  the  old  Scnpture  is  out  of 
date  whiq^says^^'Inoline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me:  hear,  and  your  soul 


FOBTS  DEXOrJBHED  iUlD  PRISONERS  TAKEN.  260 

shall  liTe.*'  Plain  troth  is  in  this  wonderfhl  cehtary  of  small  aoconn t ;  men 
crave  to  be  mystified  by  their  own  cogitations.  Many  glory  in  being  too 
intdlectaal  to  receiye  anything  as  absolute  certainty :  they  are  not  at 
all  inclined  to  submit  to  the  authority  of  a  positive  revelation.  God's 
'iroid  is  not  accepted  by  them  as  final,  but  they  judge  it  and  believe 
what  they  like  of  it.  This  is  madness.  I  speak  to  those  who  believe 
in  the  Scriptures,  and  I  say  if,  indeed,  there  be  a  revelation,  it  becomes 
us  to  be  silent  before  it,  and  accept  it  without  dispute.  The  Tx)rd 
knows  what  he  is  better  than  \9e  can  ever  know,  and  if  he  has  been 

E leased  to  speak  in  his  Word  plainly  and  solemnly,  it  is  ours  to 
elieve  what  he  says,  because  he  says  it.  It  may  be  all  very  well  to 
prove  that  such  and  such  a  revelation  of  God  is  consistent  with  reason, 
0(»isi8tent  with  analogy,  consistent  with  a  thousand  things  ;  but  the 

Spirit  which  needs  sudi  argument  is  a  spirit  of  rebellion  against  God. 
f  Uiere  be  a  revelation,  every  part  of  it  is  of  authority,  and  must  be 
believed.  Human  thought  is  not  the  arbiter  of  truth,  but  the  infallible 
Word  is  the  end  of  all  strife.  It  is  not  onrs  to  say  what  the  truth  must 
be,  or  what  we  think  it  should  be,  or  what  we  would  like  it  to  be,  but 
TBverently  to  sit  down  with  open  ear  and  willing  heart  to  receive  what 
God  has  spoken.  If  an  astronomer  were  to  forb^ff  to  examine  the  stars, 
and  teach  an  astronomy  invented  in  his  own  brain,  he  would  be  an  idiot : 
and  those  who  treat  theology  in  like  fiwhion  are  not  much  better. 
"Surely,"  saith    one,  ''we  ought  to   modify  our   beliefe  by  public 

9iinion,  and  the  cnrr^t  of  thought."  I  Buj'^no**  a  thousand  times. 
he  incorruptible  word  of  God  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever,  and  is  inca- 
pable of  modification.  To  modify  is  to  adulterate  uid  nullify  it,  aad 
vender  it  of  none  effect,  so  that  it  becomes  another  gospel,  and,  indeed, 
no  gospel.  The  thought  of  tampering  with  reveal^  truth  is  vicious, 
and  ought  not  to  be  tolerated  by  any  Christian  for  a  seoond.  The 
gospel  of  Jesus  Ohrist  is  not  a  thing  which  is  to  be  moulded  according 
to  the  fashion  of  the  period :  it  is  '*  Jesus  Christ  the  same  yesterday,  to- 
day, and  for  ever."  Whether  the  Greek  phiksophy  rules  or  is  exploded, 
whether  some  more  modern  theory  blazes  up  or  smoulders  down,  is  small 
concern  of  ours,  for  we  are  set  to  preaoh  the  one  unvarying  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ,  Irith  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  No  man  was 
ever  led  to  a  saving  faith  by  our  meeting  him  half  way,  and  consenting 
to  his  unbelief.  N'o  real  faith  was  ever  wrought  in  man  by  Eis  own 
thoughts  and  imaginations ;  he  must  receive  the  gospel  as  a  revelation 
from  God,  or  he  cannot  receive  it  at  all.  Faith  is  a  supernatural  work 
wherever  it  is  foimd,  and  if  we  think  that  we  can  beget  faith  in  ourselves 
or  others  hj  the  nse  of  the  fleshly  weapons  of  phitosophv  we  riiall  oer* 
tainly  be  foiled.  The  Scriptures  pressed  home  by  the  Hdy  Ghost  are 
God's  power  unto  salvation,  and  not  men's  cogitations  and  imaginations. 
There  is  the  revealed  gospel,— reject  it  at  your  peril ;  there  is  Jehovah's 
revelation  of  himself  to  men,-— receive  it  or  be  lost;  this  is  the  ground 
to  go  upon  if  we  would  speak  as  tiie  oracles  of  Go(L  God  grant  that 
proud  thinkers  may  oome  upon  this  ground  and  become  believers. 

Here  we  are  boldly  met  by  some  who  say,  **  We  do  not  want  this 
doctrine  which  you  call  the  knowledge  of  God :  we  know  of  aomBiking 
Mter  already.  We  tell  you  that  your  gospel,  about  which  yon  make 
anch  a  fuss,  is  outworn  and  done  wiui."    Twat  it  so,  sirs,  and  perish,  if 


td 


S70  lUTIBOFOLrrlV  tibibsaolx  folpit. 

TOO  will,  bnt  as  for  as,  we  will  monm  da;  and  night  over  jout  nnbelief. 
You  will  Burely  destroy  yonr  souls  in  rejecting  the  divine  testimon;',  bat 
in  BD  doing  you  will  prove  that  word  to  be  tme,  which  aaith  that  the 
gospel  is  a  savonr  of  death  unto  death  aa  well  aa  of  liffe  nnto  life.  Yoa 
know  better,  yon  aay ;  bat  how  can  this  be  ?  Do  yon  know  God  better 
than  God  knows  himself  7  Do  jou  know  more  abont  hta  way  of  reoon- 
ciling  men  to  liimself  than  his  own  messenger,  the  Lord  Jesna  Ohtiet, 
laiows?  Do  yon  profess  to  know  better  than  the  Eternal  Spirit  who 
inspired  the  Scriptures  ?  It  is  to  those  Scriptures  that  we  craTe  yoar 
reverent  attention,  and  not  to  any  assertions  of  onia  j  we  pray  yoa  do 
not  reject  them.  I  heard  one  say  the  other  day  that  he  never  felt  any 
desire  to  pray,  and  never  had  prayed  in  all  his  life ;  and,  though  I  looked 
at  him  with  sorrow,  I  could  only  say  to  him,  "  Dead  men  never  cry :  you 
sre  dead  in  sin,  and  so  have  not  the  breath  divine.  Ton  have  not  been 
.bom  again,  you  have  not  a  new  nature  or  a  right  spirit ;  if  yon  had  yon 
.could  not  help  praying  and  believing."  To  me  his  statements  were 
.oonfirmations  of  Bible  teaching  oonceming  the  real  state  of  all  onr^ene- 
rate  men.  The  gospel,  aa  we  have  said  before,  wherever  it  creates  &ith 
be^ts  it  by  its  own  power,  and  by  the  power  of  the  Btemal  Spirit 
convincing  men  of  the  truth,  and  enlightening  those  whom  the  Lord 
our  Godluth  chosen.  Now,  where  the  gospel  comes,  it  undermines  and 
overturns  ev^thine  which  opposes  the  truth  of  God,  and  makes  a  man 
feel  that  of  himself  ne  knows  nothing,  until  the  Lord  reveals  it  to  bim. 
Find  a  sinner  made  conscious  of  sin  and  you  have  found  a  man  who  does 
not  know  better  than  his  God ;  find  a  man  with  an  awakened  conscience, 
and  you  have  found  a  man  who  does  not  know  better  than  his  Ood ;  find 
one  who  believes  in  Christ,  and  sits  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  the  more  he  learns 
the  more  surely  have  yon  found  in  hipi  a  man  who  does  not  know  better 
than  his  God,  but  who  still  cries  out  to  be  taught  more,  that  he  may 
possess  to  the  full  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesua 
Christ. 

There  is  yet  another  entrenchment  behind  which  some  hide  themselves 
"trom  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  that  is  "/  mver  can  know,  I  do  not 
iknow,  and  I  never  can  know.  I  despair  of  ever  being  able  to  know 
Uie  Lord."  In  this  despair  the  rebel  entrenches  himself  as  in  a  very 
Ualakoff,  and  becomes  desperate  in  his  resistance  to  the  gospel.  Yet 
even  this  rampart  is  cast  down  by  mighty  grace.  When  the  Holy  Ghost 
comes  with  the  word  of  reconciliation  the  sinner  catches  at  the  idea  of  an 
atonement  by  a  substitute.  He  is  charmed  by  the  truth — "  I  am  lost  in 
myself,  but  saved  in  Christ.  I  am  in  myself  jndged  and  condemned  for 
sin,  but  in  Christ  I  see  my  sin  laid  on  another  and  pot  away."  He 
catches  at  that  truth,  so  simple,  so  sublime,  and  aa  he  believe  it  he 
to  know  bitn  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal.  The  Spirit  of  God, 
' '  les  wltJi  light  divine  into  the  soul,  soon  sweeps  away  the  Egyptian 
of  despair,  and  in  the  li^ht  of  God  the  man  sees  b'ght. 
w  what  my  drift  is.  It  is  just  this,  that  there  are  certain  walls 
jings,  reckonings,  thinkings, — our  version  calls  them  "imagina- 
|hich  are  to  be  cast  down,  and  the  gospel  does  this  when  used  by  the 
ost.  Nor  ia  this  all,  for  with  the  walls  the  battlements  ftH. 
ing  devised  the  fortress  of  reasoning,  erectd  thereon  towers  of 
■«iicn  the  apostle  calls  "high  things,"  of  which  he  says  that  the 


rOBTB  DEMOLISHED  AND  PBIBOKSBS  TAKEN.  271 

power  of  God  casts  down  ^'eyeTT  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against 
the  knowledge  of  God."  These  lofty  castles  are  sach  as  the  following : — 
**  I  haTe  a  noble  nature  within  me :  my  instincts  are  towards  right.  I  haye 
not  done  much  amiss.  I  am  as  good  as  my  neighbours.  I  can  oyercome 
any  temptation.  I  am  persuaded  that  I  can  fi^ht  my  own  way  into 
eternal  felicity," — and  all  such  yain  ideas.  Let  out  the  gospel  come 
witii  power,  and  all  these  citadels  are  laid  low.  Away  they  go,  like 
Jericho's  old  bulwarks,  rocking  and  reeling,  till  in  a  cloud  of  dust  they 
thunder  to  their  &11.  In  how  many  cases  we  haye  seen  this  to  be  so ! 
Fine  men  haye  come  into  tins  place,  men  that  knew  a  great  deal  better 
than  anything  they  could  find  m  the  Bible,  quite  confident  that  nothing 
would  eyer  alter  them.  These  haye  sat  down  like  ancient  knights,  maUed 
from  head  to  foot,  inyulnerable  to  any  shafts  of  ours,  but  the  blessed 
Spirit  has  found  an  arrow  in  some  simple  saying  that  we  haye  gathered 
from  God's  blessed  word,  and,  lo,  the  proud  warriors  haye  fallen  in  the 
dust.  Gonyinced  that  they  were  ignorant  and  foolish,  the  formerly  proud 
boasters  haye  begun  to  cry,  **  What  must  we  do  to  be  sayed  ?"  and  ere 
long,  made  champions  of  the  faith,  it  has  been  their  delight  humbly  to  yield 
judgment  and  will  and  heart  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  0  that  the 
Lora  would  thus  storm  the  prejudices  and  self-conceits  of  all  my  un- 
oonyerted  hearers  and  sweep  them  away  by  his  mighty  loye. 

U.  After  a  breach  has  been  maae  and  the  city  has  been  taken, 
PBISONEBS  ABE  MADE :  this  is  our  scooud  point.  The  text  runs  thus, 
"  Bringing  into  captiyity  eyery  thought."  The  word  translated  "  thought " 
has  a  yery  broad  meaning,  but  its  best  explanation  is  that  which  is  placed 
fixst  in  the  lexicon,  "  eyerything  which  comes  from  the  mind."  The 
mind  is  like  a  city,  and  when  it  is  captured  the  inhabitants  which  swarm 
its  streets  are  the  thoughts,  and  these  are  taken  prisoners.  Look  at  the 
process,  which  I  will  rapidly  describe.  The  gospel  comes  with  power  to 
the  heart  of  a  man,  and  he  begins  to  fear  the  wrath  of  God  and  the 
judgment  to  come.  See  how  he  trembles.  Christ  has  captured  his 
thoughts  of  self-security.  He  no  more  says,  ''Though  I  add  drunken- 
ness to  thirst,  it  shall  surely  be  well  with  me."  On  the  contrary  he 
cries, ''  I  am  guilty ;  I  haye  broken  God's  law,  and  I  am  condemned." 
The  Lord  has  captured  his  thoughts  of  self-righteousness.  This  is  the 
man  who  yesterday  boasted  in  himself  that  he  was  righteous :  the  pure 
and  holy  law  of  Gfod  has  come  near  his  conscience,  and  he  feels  himself 
guilty,  and  therefore  sues  for  merpy.  Now  he  begins  to  pray, ''  God  be 
mercifrd  to  me  a  sinner,"  and  it  is  clear  that  nis  thoughts  of  inde- 
pendence, his  ideas  that  he  could  do  without  his  God,  are  made 
prisoners.  His  thoughts  of  pleasure  in  alienation  from  the  Great  Father 
are  now  slain,  for  he  desires  to  draw  near  to  the  Most  High.  See  I  a 
little  hope  begins  to  dawn,  he  hopes  that  there  may  be  i^yation  for 
hinu  His  thoughts  of  rebellious  despair  are  led  captiye  in  fetters  of 
iron.  Praise  ye  the  Lord  I  Watch  him  still  further.  The  Spirit  of 
God  encourages  him,  and  he  comes  to  belieye  in  Jesus :  his  self-trust 
is  a  prisoner.  That  Jesus  died  for  sinners  is  a  truth  which  he  accepts, 
and  he  casts  himself  upon  it ;  his  proud  intellect  is  a  captiye,  and  he 
gladly  bows  at  the  Redeemer's  feet  Hear  him  as  he  sings,  ^'  I  am  for- 
|;iyen :  God  assures  me  of  it.  I  am  justified  because  I  haye  belieyed 
in  Jesus.    Oh,  how  I  loye  his  precious  name."    His  inmost  heart  is 


272  VETnOPOLITAK  TABEBNACfLB  PULPIT. 

captnredy  aQ  the  thonghts  of  hiB  love  are  now  rabdned,  and  the  SaTioar 
whom  he  onoe  despised  he  now  adores.  See  how  with  gratitade  he  brings 
his  alabaster  box  to  break  it,  and  ponr  the  sweet  perfnme  on  the  Sarioar's 
feet.  Jesos  has  won  his  heart,  and  holds  it  in  a  willing  captiTitj,  and 
Henceforth  the  man  consecrates  himself  to  Christ,  to  live  and  to  die  for 
him.  Thus  the  whole  mind  of  the  man,  yea,  the  whole  man,  has  thrown 
down  its  rebellions  weapons  and  sorrendered  nnconditionallj  to  the  con- 
quering arm  of  the  Lord  Jesns. 

I  dwell  very  briefly  npon  this  point,  because  I  wish  to  enlarge  npon 
the  last. 

III.  These  prisoners  are  to  be  led  away  into  CAPrnmr,— 
"  Bringing  erery  thought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ." 
Monarchs  of  the  olden  times,  such  as  the  kings  of  Assyria  and  lE^bylon, 
when  they  subdued  a  country,  removed  the  people  to  a  distance  away  fnm 
their  old  haunts,  to  find  new  homes.  Now,  when  the  Lord  captivates 
the  thonghts  of  our  mind  he  leads  them  all  away,  conducting  them  to 
another  region  altogether.  The  offspring  of  the  mind  he  guides  into  the 
spiritual  realm,  wherein  they  delight  in  the  Lord,  and  bow  themselves 
before  him.  Let  us  see  this  procession  of  captives  led  away  to  grace  the 
triumph  of  the  conqueror  and  to  settle  down  in  another  region  under 
another  King  than  they  ever  knew  before.  From  the  highest  to  the 
lowest  all  the  fstculties  of  the  soul  are  made  to  pass  under  the  yoke.  I 
shall  not  attempt  a  list  according  to  mental  science,  but  mention  them  as 
they  occur  to  me.  He  who  being  made  conscious  of  his  sin  believes  in 
Jesns  Christ  submits  all  the  thoughts  of  his  judgment  and  undirstandmg 
to  the  obedience  of  Christ,  and  this  is  a  great  point  gained.  Before, 
he  put  bitter  for  sweet  and  sweet  for  bitter,  darkness  for  h'ght  and  light 
for  darkness :  but  now,  when  he  is  in  difficulty  about  a  moral  question  he 
asks  his  Lord ;  now,  if  pleasure  tempts  him  he  judges  whetiier  it  besweet 
by  the  question  whether  it  would  be  sweet  to  his  Lord;  now,  if  a  certain 
doctrine  is  stated  he  weighs  it  not  in  the  balances  of  his  own  t^oufj^ts, 
much  less  in  the  scales  of  popular  opinion,  but  he  asks,  "  What  did  nry 
Master  say  ?  How  would  the  Lord  Jesus  think  of  this  ?  "  He  suspends 
his  own  judgment  npon  his  Master's  judgment.  He  docs  not  say  '^  I  am 
a  law  unto  myself,"  out  he  says,  "  Christ  is  the  way,  and  in  his  steps  I 
desire  to  follow."  Thus  his  reason  is  led  into  captivity  to  the  higher  reason 
and  understanding  of  his  supreme  Lord.  If  there  be  a  truth  which  he  does 
not  know  he  tries  to  learn  it,  if  his  Lord  sets  it  before  him  as  a  lesson, 
and  if  it  be  hidden  from  him,  he  is  content  not  to  know.  His  prayer  is, 
**  Lord,  teach  me,  for  else  I  shall  never  learn.  I  wish  to  have  my  under- 
standing developed  to  the  full,  but  let  it  be  under  thy  sweet  light.  Let  my 
mind  blossom  and  open  all  its  flowere  beneath  the  sunlight  of  thy  divine 
instruction."  I  know  it  is  not  so  with  some  professed  Christians,  for  they 
too  often  invent  their  own  doctrines,  and  think  out  th^r  opinions  apart 
from  their  Master.  To  think  is  admirable,  but  not  if  we  mean  thereby  to 
supplement  the  teachings  of  Christ,  or  to  improve  upon  them,  or  to 
accommodate  them  to  popular  theories  in  science  and  philosophy.  For 
my  part^  tme  science  may  say  what  it  will,  and  never  lack  for  an 
attentive  listener  while  I  live :  the  more  loudly  it  shall  speak  the  better, 
if  it  will  speak  facts  and  not  theories,  if  it  will  tell  me  what  €k)d  has 
done  and  not  what  man  has  dreamed.    All  that  true  science  ever  can 


TGR7B  JOMOhSBBSD  ASD  FBIflONXBS  TAKEN.  278 

diacover  must  tally  with  the  word  of  levelation,  for  Qod  speaks  in  nature 
no  lie,  but  the  selfeame  trath  as  he  has  written  in  the  holy  Scriptures. 
Let  our  wise  men  ransack  earth  to  its  centre,  and  climb  to  heaven  and 
make  inquisition  throngh  every  star,  the  testimony  of  universal  nature 
if  heard  aright  shall  never  contradict  the  inspired  utterances  of  the 
Holy  Glioflt.  The  evil  is  tiia^  the  w^se  men  ada  their  own  inferences  to 
die  facts  as  if  they  were  of  equal  anthority.  What,  then»  is  to  be  done  ? 
Shall  we  alter  the  dednotions  of  the  fallible,  or  iarj  to  shape  the  decluu* 
tions  of  the  infallible?  The  question  is  not  hard  to  answer.  We  are 
not  to  revise  the  statements  of  the  Book,  but  the  inferences  of  the 
philosophecs.  When  philosophy  contradicts  revelation,  what  say  I  ? 
So  much  the  worse  for  philosophy.  The  Word  of  God  is  no  lie ; 
the  lie  is  on  the  other  side.  In  spite  of  the  perpetu^  restlessness  which 
I  see  in  many  who  are  fcft  ever  mending  that  which  is  perfect  in  itself, 
my  understanding  is  happy  to  delight  in*  the  infallible  testimonies  of 
Jebovah.  Let  those  feUows  alter,  we  shall  not !  Let  them  come  up 
to  us;  verily,  bdievers  in  God's  revelation  will  never  go  down  to 
them,  for  that  would  be  to  be  disloyal  to  our  Master  Christ,  whose 
teachings  are  too  sacred  for  us  knowingly  to  alter  a  letter  of  them. 
Whatever  others  may  do,  it  is  the  delight  of  those  who  have  felt  the  over- 
whelming power  of  the  divine  Spunt  to  find  in  Clirist  the  wisdom  with 
which  t&ir  intellect  is  moie  thtai  content. 

The  same  pow^  of  truth  and  of  tiie  Holy  Ghost  leads  captive  the  will. 
My  Lord  Will-be*will,  as  Bunyan  describes  him,  is  a  very  stout  fellow. 
In  some  men  he  is  exceedingly  obstinate, — *^  I  will,  and  I  will,  and  I 
will,*' — ^and  by  no  means  can  they  be  made  to  yield.  In  truth  the  will 
has  a  wondemil  power  over  all  the  &culties,  and  rules  them  like  a 
despot.  It  is  boasted  that  the  will  of  man  is  free,  yet  was  Luther  quite 
oorreot  when  he  called  it  aslave.  Never  is  it  so  much  a  slave  as  when  it 
brags  of  its  own  liberty.  Let  the  Spirit  of  God  come  into  the  heart  and 
apply  with  power  the  goepol  of  Jesua  Christ,  and  tiiie  human  will  no  longer 
glories  in  its  freedom,  but  surrenders,  and  is  subjugated.  It  remains  a 
wiD  still,  but  the  will  of  God  is  supreme  over  it.  Hear  it  describe  itself,- — 
"Lord,  this  is  my  will,  or  what  I  want  to  be  my  will — ^*Not  as  I  will, 
but  as  thou  wilt."'  See  how  the  will  wears  its  golden  fetters,  and  kisses 
them  with  happy  lips,  so  glad  to  find  true  freedom  in  being  subdued  to 
the  obedience  of  Christ. 

It  is  very  beautiful  also  to  see  how  human  Jwpes  are  spell-bound  by 
grace.  These  winged  things  were  wont  to  flutter  no  higher  than  the 
tainted  atmosphere  of  this  poor  world;  but  now  they  find  stronger 

?inions  and  soar  aloft  to  things  not  seen  as  yet,  eternal  in  the  heavens, 
'he  man's  fears,  too,  all  nestled  in  the  ruins  of  his  sinful  joys,  or  were 
aroused  by  the  voices  of  his  Mow  man,  but  now,  ennobled  by  grace, 
they  ascend  into  another  sphere,  they  oover  their  faces  with  their  wings 
before  the  tinone  of  God,  while  the  man  fears  to  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit, 
feara  to  offend  against  the  Father's  love,  fears  to  do  anything  which 
would  dishonour  the  Saviour.  His  joys  and  sorrows  are  now  found 
where  they  never  went  before ;  he  rejoices  in  the  Lord,  and  he  sorrows 
after  a  godly  sort.  His  tMmory  also  now  retains  the  precious  things  of 
diTine  truth,  which  once  it  rejected  for  the  trifles  of  time,  and  hispowers 
of  fnedOalian  and  oonsideraticni  keep  within  the  cirde  of  truth  and 


274  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACIiE  PULPrT. 

holiness^  finding  green  pastares  there.  This  done,  yoa  shall  see  the  same 
enthralment  cast  over  the  Christian  man's  desires  and  aspirations.  He 
has  flung  away  his  old  ambitions,  and  aspires  to  nobler  things.  He  is 
not  without  his  longings,  but  he  longs  for  heavenly  blessings.  His 
wishes  and  desires  fly  to  Christ  as  doves  to  their  windows.  His  affec* 
tion,  which  is  no  longer  set  upon  things  upon  the  earth,  but  on  things 
above,  draws  upward  his  desires.  He  pines  for  holiness,  for  usefulness, 
for  the  glory  of  God.  His  own  glory  he  discards,  and  is  willing  to  be 
of  no  repute,  so  long  as  he  may  but  make  the  name  of  Jesus  funons 
among  the  sons  of  men.  I  would  to  Ood,  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  that 
this  sacred  vassalage  would  be  more  fully  felt  by  every  motion  of  the 
mind,  so  that  no  desire  would  dare  to  wander  beyond  bounds  even  for  a 
moment. 

The  same  blessed  servitude  binds  the  mBtn^B  plots  and  designings.    He 
plans  still,  but  it  is  not  for  his  own  aggrandisement :  his  grandest  design 
is  to  bring  jewels  to  the  crown  of  Christ    He  arranges  his  life  now  with 
circumspection  and  with  diligence,  but  not  with  cunning  and  craftiness, 
for  holiness  is  his  policy,  and  his  scheme  of  life  is  sanctity.    Does  not 
this  talk  of  mine  sound  rather  like  sarcasm  to  some  who  profess  to  be 
Christians  ?    If  it  does,  stand  convicted,  for  it  is  not  I  that  am  wrong  in 
this,  but  you ;  for  every  thought  is  to  be  brought  into  captivity  to  the 
obedience  of  Christ,  and  even  when  we  are  thinking  about  common 
things,  matters  that  have  to  do  with  busmess,  we  are  to  be  serving  our 
Lord,  for  "  every  thought,"  not  some  thought,  is  to  be  bowed  nnto  the 
obedience  of  Christ.    It  is  a  wicked  error  to  conceive  that  so  much  of 
our  life  ought  to  be  religious  and  so  much  to  be  secular.    A  Christian's 
whole  life  is  to  be  his  religion,  and  his  religion  is  to  saturate  his  whole 
life.    You  are  as  religiously  to  eat  your  meals  as  you  eat  at  the  sacred 
supper,  as  religiously  to  speis^  the  truth  in  your  parlour  as  you  would  in 
the  pulpit.    Whether  you  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  you  do,  it  is  all  to 
be  done  to  the  glory  of  God.    The  great  thought  you  are  to  have  in 
opening  your  shops,  in  trading,  in  toiling,  in  furnishing  your  houses,  in 
nursing  your  children,  and  even  in  taking  recreation,  is  still  to  be,  ''How 
can  I  glorify  God  in  all  this  ?"    All,  all  must  be  brought  into  captivity 
to  Christ.  When  a  man  yields  himself  to  Jesus  he  should  comprehend  his 
house,  his  money,  his  body,  his  time,  his  wife,  his  children,— everything 
in  the  deed  of  surrender ;  for  he  who  bought  us  with  his  precious  blood 
did  not  buy  us  with  a  reserve  and  leave  the  devil  a  mortgage  upon  us, 
but  we  are  our  Lord's  unencumbered  freehold  for  ever.    We  are  his  own 
conquered  portion,  which  he  took  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Amorite  with 
his  sword  and  with  his  bow,  and  therefore  over  the  whole  of  our  being 
he  has  an  absolute  and  undivided  right  of  property. 

The  renewed  man's  hve  and  hate  are  both  held  captive  by  the  power 
of  grace.    He  loves  Jesus  truly  and  intensely ;  he  hates  sin  with  his  whole 


FORTS  DSH0LI8HSD  AND  PBlfiOKX&S  TAKSK.  275 

ctonl.  Indigimtion  is  a  hard  thing  to  tamei  but  to  mj  mind  it  is  a  grand 
thing  to  see  a  man's  anger  made  the  switor  of  Christ,  so  that  he  only 
grows  indignant  when  he  wars  with  that  whioh  is  mean,  cmel,  unjast, 
mfr-Gheistlike.  Then hedotii  well  to  be  angrjt  &r  his  anger  is  but  yirtue 
on  a  blaze.  It  is  a  fidr  sight  to  see  Christ's  sacred  bands  worn  bj  our 
iasUSf  which  axe  80  volatile  and  havd  to  eonsttain.  Concerning  tastes  it 
ia  never  wise  to  disj^nte^  bnt  Jesns'  love  oveateaa  delioaoy  of  mind,  a  dis- 
oonment  <^  that  whi^  is  tender  and  gentle,  ^d  pure  and  faeaveni j,  an 
abhorrence  of  that  which  is  evil»  so  that  the  Lord's  redeemed  become 
THj  oonaoissenrs  in  things  moral  and  divine.  The  fancy,  too,  that 
impalpable  dood,  painted  as  by  the  setting  son,  that  wiU-o'-th'-wisp  of 
the  spiriti  even  this  is  imprassed  into  royal  service,  and  made  to  wear 
the  Jiveiy  of  Christ,  so  that  ix^w.  even  dream  eternal  hfe.  When  godly 
men  give  their  imagination  rein  even  Pegasm  bears  a  royal  bnrden,  and 
in  his  flight  from  the  aetual  to  the  imaginative  he  feels  the  golden  bridle 
of  the  Kiag^s  rale  resttaining  and  directing  all  his  airy  motions.  Yes^ 
tbD  Holy  Spirit  wins  an  undisputed  sway,  **  bringing  into  captivity  every 
thoBght  to  the  obedienoe  of  <%risit." 

Do  yon  not  wish  for  this  complete  subjection,  you  to  whom  Jesos  is 
Ch>d  and  Lord  ?  I  know  yon  do,  and  what  is  more,  I  am  sure  you  wish 
for  the  time  when  that  whidi  is  wrought  in  yourselves  shall  be  aocom- 
pliabed  in  all  mankind.  Chhst's  gospejl  has  not  oome  into  the  world  to  be 
oo-eqnal  with  o^her  fiutha  and  share  a  divided  kingdom  with  diffiaring 
creeds.  False  gods  ntay  stand  face  to  faoo  to  each  other  in  one  Pantheon, 
and  be  at  peace,  foor  they  are  aU  &l8e  together,  but  where  Christ  comes, 
Dagon  must  go  down,  not  even  th^  stiimp  of  him  must  stand*  Truth 
is  of  necessity  intolerant  of  falsehood,  love  wars  with  hate,  and  justice 
battles  with  wrong.  Christ  Jesus  will  be  all  in  all,  and  sit  upon  the 
throne  alone.  May  the  day  come  in  whidi  obedience  to  Christ  shall  be 
universal.  What  a  scene  would  present  itself  if  every  thought  of  every 
human  being  were  in  holy  subjection  to  Christ !  Not  a  poor  woman 
would  muse  beneath  her  lowly  roof  of  thatch  without  rendering  holy 
adoration,  while  on  the  throne  neither  queen  nor  prince  would  purpose 
anything  but  what  should  be  for  the  glory  of  Jesus.  No  council  chamber 
would  know  a  policy  which  would  be  contrary  to  the  Prince  of  love,  nor 
would  the  freest  thinker  think  aught  contrary  to  the  thoughts  of  Jesus. 
The  wild  men  of  the  plain  would  cease  to  forget  the  Lord,  and  the 
civilized  dwellers  in  cities  would  no  longer  cast  off  his  fear.  The 
conmion  people  would  seek  unto  him  in  multitudes,  and  the  nobles 
wonld  study  how  to  honour  him.  How  happy  will  the  time  be 
when  an  inventive  genius  shall  own  the  sway  of  Jesus,  and  man 
shall  desire  no  more  to  fiuhion  weapons  of  war,  but  only  to  design  that 
which  shall  minister  to  the  well-being  of  mankind ;  when  art  with  pencil 
nnd  chisel  shall  refrain  from  all  which  excites  lascivious  thoughts  and 


276  KSTROPOLITAK  TABBBKACLB  PULPIT. 

perpetaates  the  memory  of  blood  and  daughter,  and  shall  bow  at  JeBos' 
feet  to  honour  God  by  setting  nature's  beauties  before  reverent  ejes; 
when  learning  poring  over  its  classic  tomes  shall  find  in  human  wisdom 
trophies  for  the  surer  wisdom  of  Jesus  $  and  study,  searching  by  the 
midnight  lamp,  shall  seek  out  the  heights  Ud  depths  of  love  divine. 
It  charms  me  to  think  of  every  poet  singing  divine  songs  for  earth's 
great  King,  drinking  no  more  from  the  Gastalian  founts  but  finding  all 
his  springs  in  God  alone.  Then,  too,  shall  music  compose  her  most 
harmonious  symphonies,  and  pour  forth  her  richest  notes  in  worship  of 
the  redeeming  Lord ;  while  eloquence,  no  longer  declaiming  in  the  de- 
fence of  wrong,  shall  spend  her  force  in  the  maintenance  of  peace  and 
righteousness,  and  in  the  extolling  of  the  Lord.  Dawn  even  now,  aoa- 
picious  day.  Why  hangs  the  night  so  heavy  7  Why  bides  the  darkness 
around  us  for  so  many  ages  ? 

Great  Captain  of  salvation,  thou  canst  achieve  the  victory.  We  have 
compassed  this  Jericho  these  many  days,  but  stOl  the  walls  fiill  not  Up, 
thou  mighty  man  of  war,  for  thou  art  such,  and  come  thou  to  the  battle 
and  then  the  battlements  of  sin  will  M.  ''The  Lord  is  a  man  of  war  : 
Jehovah  is  his  name."  Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,  0  arm  of  the 
Lord;  awake  as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the  generations  of  old.  Art 
thou  not  it  that  hath  cut  Bahab  and  wounded  the  dragon?  Because  of 
truth  and  righteousness,  ride  forth^in  thy  majesty.  For  peace  on  earth 
and  glory  to  (}od  in  the  highest^  come  forth  in  the  glory  of  thy  might 
with  the  everlasting  gospel,  ''Casting  down  imaginations,  and  every 
high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  bring- 
ing into  captivity  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ." 


POBTIOK  OF  SORIPTUBB  BlAD  DEPOU  SSBMOK— 2  Corinthisns  X. ; 

zi.  1—8. 


Hyxkb  fbox  "Cub  Owv  Hvuk  Book"— 968,  515,  449. 


Mb.  Spubqioii's  TatTiMOHiAL. — On  Tuesday,  May  20th,  the  testimonial 
will  be  presented  to  Mr.  Spuxgeon.  All  subscribers  can  obtain  tickets  of  early 
admission  by  application  to  the  Tabernacle.  After  6.30  the  doors  will  be 
open  to  the  public.  It  is  hoped  that  all  who  helped  will  be  present.  Mr. 
Blackshaw,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  will  forward  tickets  to  sabscribers  who 
send  their  addresses. 


^dpplttmi  0akiiim:k 


.-— 1_ 


THE  MIDDLE  PASSAQK 


^1 


ttm\{ 

Demykred  on  Lobd's-Day  Mobnino,  May  IStu,  1879,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THB  METUOPOMTAN  TABERNACLE,  NBWINGTON. 

CIn  commemoration  of  the  completion  of  the  Tvoenttf-fifth  Year  of  hit  Ministry 

over  the  Church  meeting  in  the  Tabernade.J 


'*  O  Lord,  I  bare  heard  thy  ipeech,  and  was  afraid  ;  0  Lord,  revive  thy  woxk  in 
the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known ;  in  wrath  remember 
meicy."— Habakkuk  ui.  2. 

Habakkuk  had  the  sadness  of  living  at  a  time  when  true  religion  was 
in  a  very  deplorable  state.  The  nation  had  to  a  great  extent  departed 
from  the  living  God ;  there  was  a  godly  party  in  the  kingdom,  but  the 
ungodly  and  idolatrous  fi&ction  was  exceedingly  strong.  The  Lord 
threatened  judgment  on  the  people  on  account  of  this,  and  it  was 
revealed  to  the  prophet  that  an  invasion  by  the  Chaldeans  was  near  at 
hand.  The  jprophet,  therefore,  was  filled  with  anxiety  as  to  the  future  of 
his  country,  because  he  saw  ibs  sinful  condition  and  knew  where  it  must 
end.  The  book  of  his  prophecy  begins  with  the  earnest  question  of  inter- 
cession, *'  0 Lord,  how  long?  His  spirit  was  stirred  within  him  at  the 
sin  of  the  people,  and  his  heart  was  broken  by  a  yision  of  the  chastise- 
ment which  the  Lord  had  ordained.  It  becomes  all  who  bear  witness 
fur  God  thus  to  be  stirred  in  soul  when  they  see  the  name  of  God  dis- 
honoured, and  have  reason  to  expect  the  visitations  of  his  wrach.  A 
man  without  bowels  of  compassion  is  not  a  man  of  God. 

Yet  Habakkuk  was  a  man  of  strong  faith,  a  happy  circumstance  indeed 
for  him  in  enl  times,  for  if  &ith  be  wanted  in  the  fairest  weather  much 
more  is  it  needed  when  the  storm  is  gathering ;  and  if  the  just  must  live  by 
iaith  even  when  the  morning  begins  to  brecS:,  how  much  more  must  they 
do  60  when  the  shadows  arc  deepening  into  night  ?  Those  who  have 
tender  hearts  to  weep  over  the  sins  of  their  fellows  need  also  brave  hearts 
to  stay  themselves  upon  God. 

Haoakkuk's  name  by  interpretation  is  the  emhacer^  and  I  may  say  of 
him  truly  that  he  was  one  who  saw  the  promises  afiur  off,  and  was  per- 
suaded of  them  and  embraced  them.     He  took  &st  hold  upon  the 
goodness  of  the  Lord  and  rested  there.     In  reading  his  prophecies 
Ko.  1,474. 


278  MBTROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

one  is  struck  by  the  way  in  which  he  realised  the  jpresonce  of  God. 
Fitly  does  he  entitle  his  l>ook  ''  the  burden  which  Habakkuk  the  prophet 
did  see,'*  for  in  the  vividness  of  his  apprehension  he  is  eminently  a 
"eeer."  He  perceives  the  presence  of  God,  and  bids  the  earth  keep 
silence  before  nim.  He  beholds  the  divine  ways  in  the  history  of  the 
chosen  people,  and  feels  rottenness  entering  into  his  bones,  and  a  trembling 
seizing  nim.  God  was  very  real  to  him,  and  the  way  of  God  was  very 
conspicuous  before  his  mental  eye.  Hence  his  faith  was  as  vigorous  as 
his  reverence  was  deep.  It  is  in  his  propheqy  that  we  read  that  wonderful 
gospel  sentence  upon  which  Paul  preaches  many  sermons, ''  The  just  shall 
live  by  faith";  and  it  is  in  this  prophecy  too  that  we  find  that  notable 
resolution  of  faith  when  under  the  worst  conceivable  circumstances  she 
says  or  sings,  *'  Although  the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fniit 
be  in  the  vines ;  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall 
yield  no  meat ;  the  fiock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there  shall 
be  no  herd  in  the  stalls  :  Yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the 
God  of  my  salvation."  Now,  beloved,  it  will  be  well  for  us  if  we  have 
much  of  Habakkuk*6  sp^irit,  and  are  grounded  and  settled  by  a  strong 
confidence  in  God;  for  if  so,  while  we  may  have  sombre  "views  both  as 
to  the  present  and  the  future,  we  shall  be  freed  from  all  despondency  by 
casting  ourselves  upon  him  whose  ways  are  everlasting.  His  goings 
forth  of  old  were  so  grand  and  glorious  that  to  doubt  him  is  to  slander 
him,  and  his  nature  is  so  unchangeable  that  to  reckon  upon  the  repeti- 
tions of  his  gracious  deeds  is  but  to  do  him  the  barest  justice. 

In  the  text  which  I  have  selected  this  morning  with  an  eye  to  the  cele- 
bration of  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  our  happy  uniou  as  pastor  and  people, 
I  see  three  points  upon  which  I  wish  to  dwell.  The  first  is  thepropheVs 
fear, — "0  Lord,  I  have  heard  thv  si)eech,  and  was  afraid  ";  the  second 
is  the  propJiet's  praijevy  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the 
years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known";  and  the  third  is  the 
prophefs  plea, — "  In  wrath  remember  mercy,"  coupled  with  the  rest  of 
the  chapter  in  which  he  practically  finds  a  plea  for  God's  present  working 
in  the  repoi-t  of  what  he  had  done  for  Israel  in  the  olden  times. 

I.  First,  then,  I  want  you  to  notice  the  prophet's  fear  :  **  I  have 
heard  thy  speech,  and  was  afraid."  It  is  the  fear  of  solemn  awe ;  it  is 
not  dread  or  terror,  but  reverence.  Read  it  in  connection  with  the 
twentieth  verse  of  the  preceding  chapter :  "  But  the  Lord  is  in  his  holy 
temple :  let  all  the  earth  keep  silence  before  him.  O  Lord,  I  have  heard 
thy  speech,  and  was  afrnid."  All  else  w'hB  hushed,  and  then  amid  the 
solemn  silence  he  heard  Jehovah's  voice  and  trembled.  It  is  not  possible 
that  mortal  men  should  be  thoroughly  conscious  of  the  Aivine  presence 
without  being  filled  with  awe.  I  suppose  that  this  feeling  in  unfiilien 
Adam  was  less  overwhelming  because  he  had  no  sense  of  sin,  but  surely 
even  to  him  it  must  have  been  a  solemn  thing  to  hear  the  Lord  God 
walking  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day.  Though  filled  with  a 
childlike  confidence,  yet  even  innocent  manhood  must  have  shrunk  to  the 
ground  before  that  majestic  presence.  Since  the  fall,  whenever  men  have 
been  favoured  with  any  special  revelation  of  (Jod  they  have  been  deeply 
moved  with  fear.  There  was  great  truth  in  the  spirit  of  the  old  tradition 
that  no  man  could  see  God's  face  and  live ;  for  such  a  sense  of  nothing* 
is  produced  in  the  soul  by  consciousness  of  Deity  that  men  so 


THE  MIDDLE  PA6SA6K.  279 

highly  farouTcd  hare  found  themselves  unable  to  bear  up  under  the  load 
of  blessing.  Isaiah  cries,  **  Woe  is  me !  for  I  am  undone ;  for  mine  eyes 
have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts";  Daniel  pays,  ''There  remained 
no  strength  in  me  ";  Ezckiel  declares, "  When  I  saw  it,  I  fell  upon  mv  fiice"; 
and  John  eon fespcs,  **  When  I  saw  ]n'm,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead.  Ton 
remember  how  Job  cried  unto  the  Lord :  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the 
hearing  of  the  ear :  but  now  mine  eye  sceth  thee.  Wherefore  I  abhor 
myself,  and  repent  in  dnst  and  ashes."  Angels,  who  climb  the  ladder 
which  Jacob  saw,  veil  tlieir  faces  when  they  look  on  God ;  and  as  for 
us  who  lie  at  the  foot  of  that  ladder,  what  can  we  do  but  say  with 
the  patriarch,  "  How  dreadful  is  this  place "?  Albeit  that  it  is  the 
greatest  of  all  blessings,  yet  is  it  an  awful  thing  to  be  a  favourite  with 
God.  Bles^  among  women  was  the  Virgin  Mother,  to  whom  the 
Lord  manifested  such  high  ihvour,  but  for  this  very  reason  to  her  it  was 
foretold,  **  Yea,  a  sword  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul  also."  Blessed 
among  men  was  he  to  whom  God  spoke  as  a  friend,  but  it  must  needs 
be  that  a  horror  of  great  darkness  should  come  upon  him.  It  is  not 
given  to  such  fi*ail  creatures  as  we  are  to  stand  in  the  full  blaze  of 
Godhead,  even  though  it  be  tempered  by  the  mediation  of  Christ,  without 
crying  out  with  the  prophet — **  I  was  afraid."  '*  Who  would  not  fear 
thee,  0  King  of  nations?" 

Habakkuk's  awe  of  God  was  quickened  by  the  ''speech"  which  he* 
had  heard — ^"0  Lord,  I  have  heani  thy  srecxsh,"  which  is  by  some  ren- 
dered  "report,"  and  referred  to  the  gospel  of  which  Isaiah  saith,  "  Who- 
hath  believed  our  report?"  But  surely  the  meaning  should  rather  be- 
looked  for  in  the  context,  and  this  would  lead  us  to  interpret  the  "  re* 
port"  as  relating  to  what  God  had  done  for  his  ancient  people,  when  he 
came  from  Teman,  cleaving  the  earth  with  rivers,  ana  threshing  the 
heathen  in  anger.  The  prophet  had  been  studying  the  history  of  Israel, 
and  had  seen  the  hand  of  God  in  every  stage  of  that  narrative,  from  the 
passage  of  the  Bed  Sea  and  the  Jordan  on  to  the  casting  out  of  the 
heathen  and  the  settlement  of  Israel  in  Canaan.  He  had  heard  the 
speech  of  God  in  the  story  of  Israel  in  the  silence  of  his  soul ;  he  had 
seen  the  deeds  of  the  Lord  as  though  newly  enacted,  and  he  was  filled 
with  awe  and  apprehension,  for  he  saw  that  while  God  had  a  great 
favour  to  his  people  yet  he  was  provoked  by  their  sins,  and  thou^  he 
passed  by  their  transgressions  many  and  many  a  time,  yet  still  he  did 
chasten  them,  and  did  not  wink  at  their  iniquities.  The  prophet  re- 
membered how  God  had  smitten  Israel  in  the  wilderness  till  the  graves 
of  lust  covered  many  an  acre  of  the  desert;  how  he  had  smitten  them 
in  Canaan,  where  tyrant  after  tyrant  subdued  them  and  brought  them 
very  low.  He  recollected  the  terrible  judgments  which  the  C)rd  had 
sent  one  after  another  thick  and  threefold  upon  his  guilty  people,  ful- 
filling that  ancient  word  of  his  "  You  only  have  I  known  of  sll  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  your  iniquities."  He  saw 
that  burning  text,  "  I  the  Lurd  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,"  written  in 
letters  of  fiie  all  along  the  history  of  Jehovah's  connection  with  his 
elect  people,  and  so  he  cried,  "  0  Lord,  I  have  heard  thy  speech,  and  was 
afraid." 

Probably,  however,  Habakkuk  alludes  to  another  source  of  appre- 
hension, namely,  the  sUent  speech  of  God  within  his  prophetic  bosom« 


280  METIIOPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULTIT. 

where,  unheard  of  men,  there  were  intimations  of  coming  vengeance 
which  intimations  he  afterwards  put  into  words  and  left  on  record  in  the 
first  chapter  of  his  book.  The  Chaldeans  were  coming  up,  a  people 
fierce  and  strong,  a  bitter  and  a  hastj  nation,  terrible  and  dreadful ; 
swifter  than  leopards  and  fiercer  than  evening  wolves.  These  were 
hastening  towards  Judah  as  mighty  hunters  hurry  to  the  prey,  and  in 
the  spirit  of  prophecy  Habakkuk  saw  the  land  parched  beneath  the  fire- 
hoofe  of  the  invading  horses,  princes  and  kings  led  away  into  captivity, 
the  garden  of  the  Lord  turned  into  a  desolate  wilderness,  and  Lebanon 
itself  shorn  of  its  forests  by  the  hand  of  violence.  The  fear  of  this 
frightful  calamity  made  him  tremble,  as  well  it  might,  for  Jeremiah  him- 
self scarce  found  teare  enough  to  bewail  the  Chaldean  woe.  Now,  my 
brethren,  when  the  Lord  leads  his  servants  to  look  irom  their  watch- 
towers,  and  to  guess  the  future  by  the  past,  we  also  are  afi-aid.  When 
we  see  God's  chastisement  of  a  sinful  people  in  years  gone  by,  and  are 
led  therefrom  to  prognosticate  the  pi'obable  future  of  a  sinful  people  in 
the  present  day,  then  do  our  hearts  fail  us  for  fear  lest  the  Lord  should 
avenge  himself  upon  the  guilty  nation  in  which  we  dwell.  We  are  a&aid 
for  ourselves  also  with  great  fear,  for  we  also  have  sinned. 

Thus,  you  see,  the  prophet's  fear  was  made  up  of  these  three  things : 
first,  a  solemn  awe  inspired  by  the  near  preseuce  of  the  Lord,  who  cannot 
took  upon  iniquity,  lest  haply  he  should  nreak  forth  upon  the  people  as  a 
consuming  fire ;  secondly,  an  apprehension  drawn  from  the  past  report 
of  God's  ways  which  he  made  known  to  Moses,  and  his  acts  to  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel,  lest  he  should  again  smite  the  erring  nation ;  and  then, 
thirdly,  a  further  apprehension  which  projected  itself  into  the  future, 
that  the  Lord  would  exeoute  the  threatenings  which  he  had  so  solemnly 
uttered  by  his  prophets,  and  permit  the  Chaldeans  to  treat  his  people  as 
tiiough  they  were  so  many  fii^es  of  the  sea^  to  be  taken  in  their  net,  and 
devoured. 

Putting  those  three  things  together,  I  advance  to  the  prophet's  special 
subject  of  fear,  which  has  been  generally  overlooked  but  is  very  con- 
spicuous in  the  text.  The  prophet  was  afraid  because  of  the  paiticular 
period  of  national  life  through  which  his  people  were  passing.  They  had 
come,  if  1  read  his  prayer  aright,  to  "  the  midst  of  the  years,"  or  the 
middle  period  of  their  history.  Habakkuk's  ministry  was  not  exercised 
in  the  first  ages  when  Moses  and  Samuel  prophesied,  nor  yet  in  these  latter 
days  wherein  we  live,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  earth  have  come.  He 
probably  ministered  six  hundred  years  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  some- 
where in  the  very  centre  of  human  history,  if  that  history  is  to  make 
a  week  of  thousands  as  to  its  years  as  many  have  imagined.  With 
regard  to  the  Israelitish  people,  they  were  now  far  removed  from  the 
day  "  when  Ephraim  was  a  cMld  ";  they  were  in  their  middle  life  when 
the  best  things  ought  to  have  been  developed  in  them.  The  heroic  age 
was  gone,  and  that  unpoetical,  matter  of  fact  era  was  come  in  which  men 
laboured  in  the  very  fire,  and  wearied  themselves  for  very  vanity  ;  and 
therefore,  like  a  tender  intercessor,  the  prophet  cries,  "  0  Lord,  revive 
thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make 
known."  The  application  to  ourselves  which  I  want  to  make  this  morn- 
ing is  drawn  from  the  &ct  that  we  also,  as  a  church,  have  reached  ''  the 
midst  of  the  years."    Under  the  present  pastorate  we  are  like  mariners  in 


TnB  MIDDLE  PASSAGE.  281 

mid  ocean,  distant  twenty-five  leagues,  or  rather  years,  from  the  place  of 
our  departure,  and  making  all  sail  for  the  further  shore.  As  to  any 
service  we  may  expect  personally  to  render  we  are  certainly  in  the  midst 
of  the  years,  if  not  near  to  their  end-  In  the  course  of  nature  we  could 
not  expect  that  more  than  another  twenty-five  years  of  service  could  be 
compassed  by  us,  nor  are  we  so  foolish  as  to  reckon  even  upon  that :  we 
have  at  any  rate  come  to  middle  life  in  our  church  relationship,  now  that 
we  celebrate  our  silver  wedding. 

Brethren,  there  is  about  "  the  midst  of  the  years  **  a  certain  special 
danger,  and  this  led  the  prophet,  as  it  shall  lead  us  at  this  time,  to  pray, 
"  O  Lord,  revive  thy  wort  in  Hie  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the 
years  make  known.''  Touth  has  its  perils,  but  these  are  past ;  age  has 
its  infirmities,  bat  these  we  have  not  yet  reached ;  it  is  ours  then  to  pray 
against  the  dangers  which  are  present  with  us  '*  in  the  midst  of  the  years. ' 
The  middle  passage  of  life  with  us  as  individuals,  and  with  us  as  a  church 
is  crowded  with  peculiar  perils. 

Have  yon  never  noticed  how  previous  dispeuisations  have  all  passed 
away  in  their  prime,  long  before  they  had  grown  grey  with  years. 
Upon  the  golden  age  of  paradise  and  perfection  the  sun  went  down  ere 
it  was  yet  noon.  The  patriarchal  period  saw  a  few  of  its  hoary  fathers 
wearing  the  veneration  of  centuries,  but  in  a  few  generations  men  with 
lengthened  lives  had  grown  so  skilled  in  sin  that  the  flood  oame  Bjxd 
swept  away  the  age  ere  yet  it  had  began  to  lade.  Then  came  the  Jewish 
state  with  its  judges  and  its  kings,  and  scarcely  have  we  read  that 
Solomon  built  a  great  house  for  the  Lord>  ere  we  perceive  that  Israel  has 
gained  the  zenith  of  her  glory^,  and  her  exoellence  declines.  Even  so  was 
it  in  the  Christian  church  of  the  first  ages,  so  £Ar  as  it  was  a  visible 
organization.  It  began  well,  what  did  hinder  it?  It  was  in  fullest 
health  and  strength  when  it  defied  the  lions  and  the  flames,  and  laughed 
emperors  to  soom,  but  ere  long  Ccmstantine  laid  his  royal  hand  upon  it, 
and  the  church  became  sick  of  thQ  king's  evil,  the  crudest  of  all  diseases 
to  the  church  of  God.  This  mfllady,  Uke  a  canker,  ate  into  her  very 
heart  and  defiled  her  sonl,  so  that  what  should  have  beea  a  spiritual 
empire,  chastely  wedded  to  the  Lord  Christ,  became  the  mistress  of  the 
kings  of  the  earth.  Her  middle  i^s  were  a  night  of  darkness,  which 
even  yet  casts  its  dread  shade  across  the  nations.  It  seems  as  if  the 
middle  passage  of  conimimities  cannot  be  safisly  passed  except  by  a 
miracle  of  grace.  The  moming  o<«nflS  with  a  dawn,  of  bright  beams  and 
sparkling  dews,  but  ere  long  the  sun  is  hot  and  the  fields  are  parched, 
or  the  sky  is  black  with  clouds,  and  the  glory  of  the  day  is  marred.  This 
is  a  matter  of  constant  anxiety  to  the.  lover  of  his  race,  who  knows  the 
jealousy  of  Ood  and  the  frailty  of  his  people,  lest  in  the  midst  of  the  years 
the  people  should  turn  aside  from  their  Mthfulness  and  forget  their  first 
love,  and,  therefore,  the  Lord  should  be  proToked  to  remove  their  candle- 
stick and  leave  them  to  their  own  devices.  0  Lord,  my  God,  grant 
this  may  not  happen  unto  this  thy  church. 

What,  then,  acre  the  dangers  ef  this  middle  passage  ? 

Firsts  there  is  a  certain  spur  and  stimulus  of  novelty  about  religious 
moTCments  which  in -a  few  years  is  worn  out.  I  well  recollect  when  we 
were  caQed  '*  a  nine  days'  wonder,"  and  our  critics  prophesied  that  our 
work  would  speedily  collapse.    Such  excitement  had  been  before  and  had 


282  METBOPOLITAX  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

passed  a^aj,  and  this  would  be  one  among  other  bubbles  of  the  hour. 
The  nine  &jb  hare  lasted  oonsiderablj  long — may  nine  such  days  foUow 
them  in  Goas  infinite  mercy.  Now,  whatever  detractors  might  say,  we 
know  that  there  was  then  a  life,  an  energy,  a  freshness  about  everything 
which  was  done  by  ns  as  a  church  which  we  could  hardly  expect  to  con* 
tinue  with  us  for  all  these  years.  Youthful  novelty  has  certainly  gone, 
and  the  danger  is  that  a  community  should  be  greatly  weakened  by 
the  ceasing  of  that  force,  which  in  some  cases  has  been  all  the  power 
possessed.  Lady  Huntingdon,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Berridge,  deplored 
the  ^t  that  every  new  work  after  a  season  seemed  to  grow  lifeless, 
and  Berridge  remarks  that  in  this  the  primitive  churches  were  much 
like  our  own,  and  that  after  the  former  rain  which  falls  at  seed-time 
there  is  often  a  dry  interval  until  the  latter  rain  descends.  I  fear  the 
good  man's  remarK  is  sadly  correct.  From  an  admirable  fervour  many 
cool  down  to  a  dangerous  chill.  This  is  to  be  bemoaned  where  it  has 
occurred,  and  it  is  to  be  feared  where  as  yet  it  has  not  happened,  for  such 
is  the  natural  tendency  of  things.  Beloved  brethren,  I  nave  prayed  to 
<jod  that  when  what  is  called  the  esprit  de  corps  is  gone  from  ns  the  Esprit 
de  Dieu  may  still  abide  with  us :  that  when  the  spirit  which  grows  out 
of  our  association  with  each  other  declines  we  may  be  sustained  by  the 
Spirit  which  unites  us  all  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 

The  middle  passage  becomes  difficult,  then,  because  things  grow  ordi- 
narv  and  oommon-pTaoe  which  aforetime  were  striking  and  remarkable. 
I  do  not  know  that  this  would  matter  much  if  it  were  not  too  often 
the  case  that  with  the  stimulus  of  novelty  certain  other  excitements  vanish 
also.  We  tremble  lest  the  people  who  praved  mightily  at  first  should 
restrain  ppyer  before  the  Lord ;  lest  those  who  made  many  self-sacrifices 
fihould  think  that  they  have  done  enough  ;  and  lest  those  who  have  con- 
secrated themselves  unto  the  Lord  should  imagine  that  they  began  upon 
too  high  a  key  and  cannot  keep  up  the  music  to  such  a  pitoh.  A  people 
who  have  loved  the  souls  of  men  and  have  been  like  mighty  hunters  oeforc 
the  Lord  after  sinners,  may  suddenly  dream  that  they  are  excused  from 
further  effort,  and  may  leave  others  to  do  mission  work  for  their  Lord. 
It  is  an  ill  day  when  a  feeling  of  satisfaction  begins  to  creep  over  us, 
but  this  is  one  of  the  perils  of  "  the  midst  of  the  years." 

I  have  always  been  afraid  lest  that  spirit  of  simple  reliance  in  which 
we  began  should  ever  depart  from  us.  It  often  happens  in  the  com- 
mencement of  religious  movements  that  men  are  weak  and  few  and 
feeble  and  despised,  and  they  trust  in  God,  and  so  they  grow  strong,  but 
their  strength  becomes  their  overthrow.  The  tendency  of  our  prond 
nature  is  to  cease  firom  childlike  confidence  in  God  when  once  it  feels 
strong  enough  to  rely  upon  itself.  The  Lord  saveth  not  by  many  nor 
by  few,  and  if  even  for  a  moment  we  should  glory  in  our  numbers  and 
think  that  now  we  are  powerfiil  for  the  achievement  of  any  work 
which  we  may  undertake  we  shall  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  he  may 
in  holy  jealousy  leave  ns  to  barrenness.  This  is  to  be  dreaded  beyond 
all  things.  My  brethren,  it  is  a  glorious  thing  to  be  weak  that  we  may 
have  the  strength  of  God  resting  on  us ;  it  is  a  glorious  thing  to  be  poor 
and  mean,  and  despised,  that  the  Lord  may  take  such  weak  instruments 
and  get  unto  himself  glory  by  the  use  of  them ;  but  it  is  a  grievous 
evil  &  in  the  mid-day  of  prosperity  the  church  should  vex  the  Spirit 


TUK  MIDDLE  PABSAOB.  283 

of  God  by  scIf-confideTice    and   canse  him   to  withdraw  his  sacred 
succours. 

Another  danger  arises  out  of  the  pride  of  achieTement.  When  men 
are  bejjinning  to  work  for  Christ  they  feel  that  they  cannot  do  anything 
Avithout  him,  and  they  trust  in  Ood  to  give  them  strength,  and  ho 
answers  their  humble  cry,  and  does  great  things  by  them.  But  when  a 
good  work  is  wrought  we  are  apt  to  feel,  '*  We  have  won  our  laurels.  Wc 
hare  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  and  we  may  now  rest." 
This  is  fatal  to  progress.  We  shall  do  no  more  when  we  imagine  that  wc 
have  done  enough.  You  know  the  story  of  the  painter  who  broke  his 
palette  and  put  down  his  brush,  and  told  his  wife  that  he  should  never 
paint  again,  for  the  artistic  faculty  had  departed  from  liim.  When  she 
enquired  how  he  was  aware  of  the  sad  fact,  he  answered,  '*  The  last  pic- 
ture I  produced  realized  my  ideal  and  satisfied  me,  and  therefore  I  am 
certain  that  I  have  lost  my  power  as  a  painter."  It  certainly  is  so,  that 
we  are  fit  for  Christ's  service  so  long  as  we  feel  that  we  have  as  yet  done 
nothing,  and  are  merely  at  the  beginning  of  our  purposed  senice.  Those 
who  pine  for  greater  exploits  have  not  yet  spent  themselves,  but  the 
danger  lies  in  saying,  '*  I  have  finished  my  day's  work.  Soul,  take  thine 
ease."  From  my  heart  I  dread  the  middle  hour  of  h'fe's  day,  both  for 
myself  and  you,  for  therein  so  many  think  it  no  ill,  like  the  Italians,  to 
take  a  siesta,  or  mid-day  sleep,  and  then  it  is  that  the  enemy  is  upon 
them. 

There  is,  too,  a  pride  of  experience  which  is  apt  to  grow  upon  churches 
and  individuals,  hke  moss  upon  old  fruit  trees,  when  men  are  *'in  tlic 
midst  of  the  years."  They  feel — "  We  are  not  now  the  young,  simple, 
silly  people  that  we  once  were,  we  are  not  now  to  be  overcome  by  tempt- 
ation or  misled  by  error;  we  shall  beyond  all  doubt  remain  sound  in 
fiiith  and  pure  in  life  even  to  the  end."  It  is  fix)m  the  egg  of  carnal 
security  that  the  canker-worm  of  backsliding  is  hatched ;  therefore  we 
must  mind  what  we  are  at ''  in  the  midst  of  the  years." 

Besides,  I  think,  dear  brethren,  all  Christians  must  be  conscious  that 
after  a  continuance  in  well  doing  we  are  apt  to  be  assailed  by  weariness. 
Apart  from  our  Lord's  promised  aid  we  faint,  we  die  in  the  Ions;  race 
which  he  has  set  before  us.  Labour  leads  to  lassitude,  and  suffenng  to 
impatience.  Grace  is  needed  to  prevent  the  decays  of  nature,  mien 
the  natural  spirits  sink,  we  grow  depressed  and  complnin  that  our  warfare 
is  hard  and  our  travail  bitter ;  and  with  this  there  is  apt  to  mingle  a 
sense  of  disappointment^  because  we  have  not  achieved  all  that  our 
sanguine  hopes  expected.  We  scarcely  rejoice  that  something  has  been 
done,  because  so  much  remains  unaccomplished.  When  the  mind  is 
thus  wearied  the  spirit  faints  at  the  prospect  of  a  further  and  perhaps  a 
heavier  strain,  ana  this  makes  the  central  regions  of  life  wonderfully 
trying  to  Zion's  pilgrims.  We  are  apt  to  be  slack  in  the  service  of  God 
by  reason  of  what  we  have  already  done,  though  that  we  must  confess  is 
little  enough.  Satan  knows  how  to  take  ^vantage  of  our 'fainting 
moments,  to  make  cowards  of  us  if  he  can,  therefore  be  ye  aware  of  his 
devices. 

If  we  have  stood  like  watchmen  on  the  walls  for  years  the  tendency  is 
to  relax  our  vigilance.  If  we  have  borne  a  protest  for  many  years  the 
thought  will  suggest  itself  that  it  m\i  be  folly  to  be  singular  any  longer. 


284  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  wise  to  yield  to  the  current  of  the  times.  Then  the  enemy  snecr- 
ingly  whispers,  "Who  art  thou,  and  what  hast  thou  done  with  all 
thy  testifying  and  separate  walking  and  Puritanic  precision  ?  All  that 
thou  hast  accomplished  is  insignificant  enough  !  The  world  still  lietli 
in  the  wicked  one,  and  error  is  still  rampant.  Give  up  the  battle,  for 
thou  canst  not  win."  In  the  midst  of  the  yean,  what  with  weariness  and 
want  of  faith,  the  heart  is  apt  to  yield  to  the  infernal  snggostion  ;  there- 
fore, brethren,  let  a  mighty  prayer  go  up  from  the  whole  church  to  our 
Redeemer  God — '*  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  in 
the  midst  of  the  years  make  known." 

II.  Thus  have  I  indicated  the  prophet's  fear,  and  now  I  would  con- 
duct you,  secondly,  to  consider  the  prophet's  prayer:  "O  Loid, 
revive  thy  work."  His  first  request  is  for  revival.  He  means,  "  Lord, 
put  new  life  into  us.  Thy  cause  began  with  life,  but  the  tendency  of  all 
around  it  is  to  make  it  die ;  therefore.  Lord,  qnicken  it  anew,  give  it 
another  birthday,  and  restore  all  the  force  and  energy  of  its  fbrst  love. 
Give  a  new  Pentecost,  we  beseech  thee ;  give  all  the  spiritual  endowments 
which  came  with  the  tongues  of  fire,  and  so  enrich  us  anew.  Revive  xxa  I 
Help  us  to  begin  again ;  start  us  anew  in  life."  That  is  the  petition, 
and  it  seems  to  me  to  be  one  of  the  wisest  leqaests  that  ever  fell  even 
from  prophetic  lips.  Let  us  use  it.  Lord,  now  that  we  liave  been 
twenty-five  years  together,  let  us  feel  as  fresh  as  if  the  race  were  now 
beginning.  Give  us  back  the  dew  of  our  youth  that  we  may  do  our  first 
works,  and  sometliing  more.  Let  us  have  with  the  maturity  of  age  the 
freshness  of  youth,  and  let  us  run  without  weariness  in  thy  wc^s,  because 
thy  Spirit  has  quickened  us.  Our  dependence  is  upon  thee  even  for  life 
itself;  breathe  thou  on  us  once  more. 

And  that  life,  as  I  understand  it,  is  to  come  upon  God's  people  them- 
selves,— "  Revive  thy  work.'*  What  is  God's  work?  Why,  it  is  Ghod*s 
people;  for  we  are  his  workmanship.  True  revival  must  first  come 
upon  the  churches  themselves.  In  all  churches  there  is  much  that  is  not 
God's  work,  and  we  do  not  ask  to  have  it  revived,  but  rather  that  it  may 
be  put  away :  but  wherever  there  is  anything  that  is  God's  work,  any  of 
the  mind  of  Christ,  any  sincere  prayer,  anv  faith,  any  hope,  any  love, 
any  consecratiou,  we  earnestly  cry,  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  woric,"  Living 
saints  alone  are,  in  the  exact  sense  of  the  word,  capable  of  revival;  we 
cau  only  revive  those  in  whom  life  is  already  found.  0  Lord^  quickea 
thy  people  1 

He  means  God's  work  in  each  one  of  us,  for  we  each  want  reviviiil ;. 
may  the  Lord  send  it  to  us  now,  so  that  if  grey  hairs  are  upon  us  here 
and  there,  and  we  know  it  not,  we  may  become  young  again  through  his 
free  Spirit.  If  the  fountain  of  our  life  runs  low,  may  the  Lord  touch 
the  secret  springs  and'  flood  us  again  with  holv  zeal.  To  save  us  from 
the  perils  of  **  the  midst  of  the  years"  we  need  to  have  life  anew  im- 
parted to  us. 

But  the  prophet  also  refers  to  Grod's  work  dy  his  people  as  well  as  in 
them.  May  tlio  Lord  put  new  life  into  his  cause.  It  is  an  awful 
thing  to  see  a  dead  church.  I  have  seen  such  a  thing  with  mv 
own  eyes.  I  recollect  very  well  preaching  in  a  chapel  where  the  church 
had  become  exceedingly  low,  and  somehow  the  very  building  looked  like 
*v  sepulchre,  though  crowded  that  one  night  by  those  who  came  to  hear 


i 


THB  MIDDLE  PASSAGE.  .  285 

«.•  • 

the  preacher.  The  slngerB  drawled  out  a  dirge,  while  the  members  sat 
like  mutes.  I  found  it  hard  preaching ;  there  was  no  go  in  the  eermon,  I 
seemed  to  be  driving  dead  horses.  After  sermon  I  saw  two  deacons,  the 
pillars  of  the  church,  leaning  against  the  posts  of  the  vestry  door 
in  a  listless  attitude,  and  I  said,  "  Are  jou  the  deacons  of  this  church  ?" 
They  informed  me  that  thej  were  the  only  deacons,  and  I  remarked  that 
I  thought  so.  To  jnyself  I  added  that  I  understoo4  as  I  looked  at  ihem, 
several  things  which  else  would  have  been  a  riddle.  Here  was  a  dead 
church,  comnarable  to  the  ship  of  the  ancient  mariner  which  was  manned 
by  the  deaa.  Deacons,  teachers,  minister,  people,  all  dead,  and  yet 
wearing  the  semblance  of  life. 

**  The  helmsman  stcei*ed,  the  ship  moved  on, 

Yet  never  a  breeze  np  blew  ; 
The  mariners  all  *gan  work  the  ropes, 

Where  they  were  wout  to  do. 
They  raised  tiieir  limbs  like  lifeless  tools — 

We  were  a  ghastly  crew." 

The  Lord  save  us  from  becoming  such  a  ghastly  crew.  Now,  to  prevent 
our  getting  into  that  state,  and  we  easily  may,  so  that  instead  of  devotion 
there  shall  be  routine,  instead  of  life  and  energy  there  shall  be  dead 
orthodoxy  and  dull  propriety,  we  must  cry,  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work 
in  the  midst  of  the  years." 

The  prophet  further  asks  for  a  fresh  revelation  of  the  Lord — ^*  In  the 
midst  of  the  years  make  known."  When  thou  hast  made  us  live  then 
shall  we  have  power  to  know,  and  therefore  make  the  truth  known  unto 
ns.  Did  he  not  intend  by  this  petition  that  the  Lord  should  make  known 
that  the  work  was  his  own  ?  "  Eevive  thy  work ;  in  the  midst  of  the 
years  make  known,"  that  men  may  not  say,  **  this  was  only  an  excite- 
ment which  the  spirit  of  the  people  carried  on  for  a  few  years,"  but  may 
be  forced  to  cdntess  that  this  is  the  finger  of  God  because  it  continues 
and  abides.  0  Lord,  in  our  case  make  the  world  know  that  it  is  thy 
work,  because  thou  dost  not  forsake  it.  Again,  convert  multitudes, 
build  np  the  church  again,  increase  the  people  again,  multiply  the  joy 
again,  pour  out  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  thy  witnesses  again  with  signs 
following. 

But  I  think  he  chiefly  means — make  kno\sii  thyself.  In  the  midst  of 
the  years  make  kno^^Ti  thyself,  0  Jehovah  ;  i^veal  in  the  midst  of  thy 
chnrch  thy  power  to  save.  Make  known  the  person  and  sacrifice  of  the 
Well-beloved  in  whom  thy  grace  and  vengeance  strangely  join.  Make 
known  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  convinces  of  sin  and  after- 
wai'ds  comforts  by  leading  the  sinner  to  the  cross.  Make  ^own  thyself 
Eternal  Father  as  thou  dost  receive  prodigals  into  thy  bosom  and  kiss 
them  with  the  kiss  of  love,  and  make  high  festival  concerning  theii* 
return  to  thee.  The  prophet  longed  that  God  would  be  seen  in  the 
midst  of  his  people,  and  tnis,  above  all  things,  is  our  hearts'  desire. 
Oh,  my  brethren,  it  is  vain  and  idle  for  us  to  think  that  any  good  can 
come  of  human  speech  or  human  song  or  human  worship  of  any  kind 
apart  from  God  himself  being  there.  There  must  be  supernatural 
power  put  forth  or  men  will  never  turn  from  darkness  to  light,  nor  rise 
from  death  to  life.    What  is  the  church  worth  if  the  Lord  be  not  known 


286  XETBOPOUTAN  TABEItKACLE  PULPIT. 

in  the  midst  of  her  ?    Write  ye  Ichabod  upon  her  walls,  for  the  gloiy 
has  departed  when  her  God  has  gone. 

The  prophet  virtaally  prays  that  Ood  would  do  for  his  charcfa  again 
what  he  did  for  her  in  the  olden  time.  We  have  jost  read  the  wBole 
chapter,  what  a  wonderful  poem  it  is  I  We  can  only  in  a  verr  prosaic 
way  condense  its  meaning.  First,  with  the  prophet  we  exult  in  the  mani- 
festation of  the  divine  glory.  *'  His  glory  covered  the  hearens,  and  the 
earth  was  full  of  his  pi-aise,  and  his  brightness  was  as  the  light ;  he  had 
horns  coming  out  of  his  hand."  Thus  was  Jehovah  seen,  and  our  heart's 
prayer  is  '*  Lord,  show  thyself  in  this  way  again.  Once  more  display  thy 
glory.  Stretch  out  that  hand  of  thine  wmch  hath  the  horns  of  power 
going  forth  out  of  it.  Exalt  thyself  in  the  conversion  and  the  salvation 
of  men  that  the  multitude  may  see  how  glorious  is  the  Lord  our  God." 

Observe  how  the  prophet  speaks  of  God's  power  against  his  enemies. 
The  Midianites  came  up  upon  Israel  in  such  numbers  that,  like  grass- 
hoppers, they  could  not  oe  counted ;  but  the  Lord  smote  them  and  utterly 
cut  them  off.    Hear  how  the  prophet  describes  their  overthrow :  *'  I  saw 
the  tents  of  Cushan  in  affliction :  and  the  curtains  of  the  land  of  Midian 
did  tremble."    And  well  they  might  when  Jehovah  came  forth  to  smite 
them.    Now  our  prayer  is  that  the  Lord  would  shine  forth  so  gloriously 
iu  the  midst  of  his  church  that  the  powers  of  superstition  and  scepticism 
may  be  made  to  tremble  at  his  presence.    I  nave  looked  upon  their 
tents,  wherein  I  have  seen  them  multiplying  their  idols  and  their  gods  ^ 
I  have  looked  upon  their  curtains,  within  which  they  have  spoken  proud 
words  of  carnal  wisdom  against  the  Most  High,  and  my  heart  has  said, 
**  Let  the  Lord  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Ins  people  and  manifest  his  power  as 
m  former  ages,  and  these  tents  shall  be  in  affliction  and  utterly  pass  away." 
^Moreover,  the  prophet  sees  all  nature  and  providence  subservient  to 
God,  and  so  he  grandly  sings,  "  Was  the  Lora  displeased  against  the 
rivers  ?  was  thine  anger  against  the  rivers  ?  was  thy  wrath  against  the 
sea,  that  thou  didst  ride  upon  thine  horses  and  thy  chariots  of  salvation?" 
If  God  be  with  his  people  all  things  are  on  their  side,  the  stars  in  the 
heavens  fight  for  them,  the  wheels  of  everlasting  providence  full  of  eyes 
revolve  with  w?tchful  wisdom,  working  out  purposes  of  benediction. 
''  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  who 
are  tJic  called  accor(&ng  to  his  purpose."    And  all  this  he  says  was  done 
for  the  saving  of  his  people.    Pharaoh  and  his  horses  were  drowned  in  the 
sea,  but  as  for  Jehovah  when  he  went  to  save  his  people,  the  seas  could  not 
overwhelm  him, — "  Thou  didst  walk  through  the  sea  with  thine  horses, 
through  the  heap  of  great  waters."    Can  vou  not  see  the  horses  and  the 
chariot  ploughing  through  the  midst  of  the  sea,  while  the  Eternal  King 
darts  his  arrows  on  either  side,  that  he  may  deliver  his  people  ?    This  is  the 
language  of  imagery,  but  the  facts  surpass  all  poetry.    God  can  be  with  a 
people,  and  he  can  leave  them,  but  when  he  is  with  them  their  horn  is 
exalted  by  his  power  and  majesty,  and  the  truth  which  they  uphold  is  as  a 
banner  borne  aloft  to  continuous  victory.    Only  we  must  wait  upon  the 
Lord  in  prayer,  and  seek  his  fece  in  faith,  crying  from  our  hearts,  **  O 
Lord,  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the 
years  make  known." 

III.    In  the  third  place,  let  us  consider  the  prophet's  plea,  that  it 
may  be  our  own  this  moniing. 


THE  UIDDLE  PASSAOB.  287 

He  had  first  this  plea  :  "  Lord,  it  is  thy  work ;  therefore  revive  thy 
work."  We  take  the  words  out  of  his  mouth  and  pray  in  like  manner, 
**  Lord,  if  this  is  our  work,  end  it ;  if  it  is  man's  work,  break  it  do^n  ; 
but  if  it  be  thy  work,  reyive  it."  Have  we  not  said  unto  our  souls  that 
we  will  preach  and  we  will  believe  nothing  but  what  is  revealed  of  God 
in  the  Scripture,  but  we  will  not  yield  one  hair's  breadth  to  the  opposers 
of  revelation,  because  of  their  so-called  science  and  thouglit  ?  Is  it  not 
even  so  ?  We  have  lifted  the  old  banner  of  our  fathers  and  preached 
the  doctrines  of  the  grace  of  God,  whereof  the  very  centre  is  Christ  cruci- 
fied, a  substitute  for  beUeving  men.  This  has  been  our  one  theme,  our 
staple  subject  in  preaching  and  ministering  at  all  times.  Now,  Lord,  if 
this  be  not  thy  truth,  for  thy  name's  sake  blight  it,  and  let  us  follow  it 
no  more  ;  but  if  it  be  thy  truth,  set  thy  seal  to  it  here  and  in  every  other 
place  where  the  name  of  Jesus  is  proclaimed.  This  is  good  pleading. 
"  It  is  thy  work.  We  cannot  do  it,  we  will  not  attempt  .to  do  it,  but 
Lord,  if  it  be  thine,  thou  must  do  it,  we  hold  thee  to  it  by  humble 
faith." 

But  the  best  plea  is  the  one  he  mentions,  "In  wrath  remember  mercy ;" 
that  is  a  plea  which  suits  everyone  of  us — mercy,  mercy,  mercy.  Thou 
mightest  well  smite  both  the  shepherd  and  the  sheep,  but  have  mercy  ! 
Thou  mightest  well  take  away  the  candlestick  and  leave  us  in  the  dark- 
ness, but  in  wrath  remember  mercy  !  Thou  seest  the  coldness  of  heart 
and  the  inconsistency  of  life  of  some  of  thy  professed  people,  and  thou 
mightest  therefore  give  up  thy  Zion  to  desolation,  but.  Lord,  remember 
mercy !  Remember  it,  for  thou  knowest  it ;  for  mercy  is  a  dear 
attribute  of  thine.  Remember  thy  mercy  in  the  everlasting  cove- 
nant when  thou  didst  choose  thy  people.  Kemember  thy  mercy  in  the 
geal  of  that  covenant  when  thy  only  beeotten  Son  was  given  up  to  death. 
Remember  all  the  mercy  thou  hast  had  upon  us  these  many  years  of  our 
provocation  ;  remember  mercy  and  still  favour  us,  not  because  we  have 
any  good  thing  in  us  or  about  us  that  can  deserve  thy  love,  but  for  thy 
mercy's  sake.  Out  of  thy  free  rich  sovereign  grace,  for  mercy's  sake, 
still  **  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years."  It  is  good  pleading ;  be 
Bare  to  use  it. 

One  more  plea  is  implied  in  the  rest  of  the  chapter,  namely, "  Thou  hast 
wrought  great  wonders,  0  Lord,  do  this  again  in  the  midst  of  the  yeai-s." 
Here  hast  thou  heard  our  prayers ;  Lord,  hear  our  prayers  in  the  midst  of 
the  years ;  hear  them  now.  Here  hast  thou  helped  the  feeble  against  the 
strong ;  Lord,  strengthen  us  yet  again.  Here  hast  thou  brought  the  chief 
of  sinners  to  Jesus'  feet ;  Lord,  do  the  like  again !  That  is  our  prayer. 
By  all  thy  glorious  marchings  through  the  wilderness  when  thou  didst 
lead  thy  people  and  scatter  their  foes  before  them,  when  the  rocks  gave 
them  water  and  the  heavens  dropped  with  bread ;  by  all  the  wondera  of 
thy  grace  to  thy  people  of  old,  since  they  are  still  thy  people,  "revive  thy 
work  in  the  midst  of  the  years." 

With  this  I  finish,  observing  that  when  the  prophet  had  pleaded, 
and  his  soul  was  at  rest,  he  sat  him  down,  and  there  were  three 
things  which  remained  upon  his  mind.  Peering  into  the  future  he 
saw  the  sheen  of  the  Ohaldean  helmets  and  the  brightness  of  their 
criiel  swords.  He  saw  the  whole  land  turned  into  a  wilderness,  and  as 
he  watched  he  saw  that  the  fig-trees  did  not  blossom,  the  vines  brought 


288  METUOrOLITAIT  TABEUKACLB  PULPm 

foith  no  fruit,  the  oHrcs  withered,  lowing  of  cattle  there  was  none,  bleat- 
ing of  sheep  was  hushed,  famine  covered  all  the  laud,  and  he  said,  **  Lord, 
let  it  all  come  as  I  have  seen ;  but  thj  ways  are  everlasting,  and  iii  the 
thick  darkness  thou  hast  always  wrought  thy  will.  Thou  liast  never 
Ix^n  defeated,  and  thou  hast  never  failed  thy  people ;  therefore,  aa  for 
me  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Loi-d,  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvationL*'  That 
is  the  posture  in  which  I  want  you  all  to  be  found.  We  have  been  assured 
by  people  who  think  they  know  a  great  deal  about  the  future  that 
awful  times  are  coming,  be  it  so ;  it  need  not  alarm  us,  for  the  Lord 
reigneth.  Stay  youi-sclf  on  the  Lord,  my  brother,  and  you  can  rejoice 
in  his  name.  If  the  worst  oomes  to  the  worst,  our  refuge  is  in  God ;  if 
the  heavens  shall  fall  the  God  of  heaven  will  stand ;  when  God  cannot 
tike  care  of  his  people  under  heaven  he  will  take  them  above  the 
heavens,  and  there  shall  they  dwell  with  him.  Therefore,  as  far  as  you 
arc  concerned,  rest ;  for  you  shall  stand  in  your  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days. 

Aud  then  there  came  over  Habakkuk  a  second  spirit.  Now,  said  he, 
seeing  God  hath  wrought  all  these  wonders  of  old,  and  is  capable  of 
doing  them  over  again,  I  will  go  back  to  my  work  despite  the  lowering 
clouds,  for  *'  the  Lord  God  is  my  strength,  and  he  will  make  mj  feet 
like  hinds'  feet,*' — like  the  gazelle's  feet  uiwn  the  crags  of  the  mouutaius 
— "  and  he  will  make  me  to  walk  upon  mine  high  places."  0  for  this 
assurance  of  safety  and  strength  in  the  Lord!  We  are  in  the  mifldle 
passage,  but  if  we  have  faith  in  God  all  is  safe.  We  may  go  and  leap 
in  our  duties  over  the  mountains  and  the  hills,  and  not  be  afraid  that 
our  foot  shall  slip.  We  fall  without  our  God,  but  with  God  our  feet  shall 
never  slide.  He  kecpcth  the  feet  of  his  saints,  and  when  the  wicked 
shall  be  silent  in  darkness  then  shall  the  strength  of  the  Jjord  be  seen. 

Havnig  thus  felt  that  he  could  always  trust  God  whatever  might 
happen,  and  that  he  should  be  upheld  whatever  might  occur,  what  does 
Habakkuk  say  ?  He  goes  home  about  his  business,  aud  what  is  the  one 
business  he  is  set  upon  ?  He  indicates  it  in  his  last  sentence  which  is 
not  a  sentence  at  all,  but  the  final  words  of  his  prayer.  "  To  the  chief 
singer  on  my  stringed  instruments."  He  seems  to  say,  "  All  that  remains 
for  me  is  but. to  love  and  sing,  and  wait  until  the  angels  come  to  bear 
me  to  their  King."  "  All  that  1  have  to  do  now,"  he  seems  to  say,  and 
I  want  you  to  say  the  same,  '*  is  just  to  feel  that  all  is  safe  in  the  Eternal 
bands."    As  for  me — 


'f 


1*11  pmac  Lim  wbllc  he  leads  me  breath. 
Ana  wlicii  my  voice  u  lost  in  death, 

"Pi*aisc  shall  employ  my  nobler  powci*8  ; 
]My  days  of  praise  shall  ne'er  be  past, 
While  life,  and  thorg'if,  aud  being  last. 

Or  immortality  endures.** 


Portion  of  Scriptuub  nE.u)  BEFoaE  Sermon -Habakkuk  i.  ii,  iii. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Uvmn  Book. "—114,  886,  057,  117. 


^tttsfplUm  ilafrepacte  fntpt. 


CROWNING  BLESSINGS  ASCRIBED  TO  GOD. 


%.     ^mn 


Deli?ered  on  Lord's-day  Evekino,  Mat  18th,  1879,  bt 

C.   H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THK  METROPOUTAV  TABKRHAOLV,  NEWINOTOK. 

^  7%«  second  Sermon  in  commemoration  of  the  compleiion  of  Ttcenty-five  years  of 
hie  Ministry  in  the  midst  of  the  Church  assembling  in  the  Tahernack)* 


^Thou  crowneat  the  year  with  ISiy  goodness.*'— Psalm.  Ixr.  11. 

>  • 

CrODLT  men  in  olden  times  felt  Ood  to  be  very  near  them,  and  they 
attribated  everything  they  saw  in  nature  to  the  direct  operation  of  bis 
liand.  They  were  not  accustomed  to  sneak  of  **  the  laws  of  matter," 
and  ''  the  operation  of  natural  forces,  and  '^  the  outcome  of  divei'S 
canses";  but  they  thoudit  more  of  the  First  Cause,  the  foundation  and 
pillar  of  all  existence,  and  they  saw  him  at  work  on  all  sides.  Hear  how 
the  Psalmist  sings,  "  Thou  makest  the  outgoinga  of  the  morning  and 
evening  to  rejoice.  Thou  visitest  the  earth  and  waterest  it  Thau  pre- 
IMresc  them  com  when  thou  hast  so  provided  for  it.  Thou  waterest  the 
ridges  thereof  abundantly ;  ihau  settlest  the  furrows  thereof :  thou  makest 
it  soft  with  showers ;  thou  blessest  the  springing  thereof.  Thau  crovmest 
the  year  with  ihy  goodness."  God  was  very  near  in  those  days.  As 
Ilerbcrtsays: — 

"  One  might  have  songht  and  found  thee  presently 
At  some  fiur  oak,  or  bush,  or  cave,  or  well.*' 

If  the  result  of  our  philosophy  h^  been  to  put  Qod  farther  off  from  tlie 
consciousness  of  his  creatures,  God  save  us  from  such  philosophy,  and 
let  us  get  back  again  into  the  simple  state  in  which  we  were  chilcben  at 
home,  and  God,  our  great  Father,  wrought  aU  things  for  u&  Let  us  note 
the  distinct  mention  of  God  throughout  the  psalm,  for  it  is  well  worthy 
of  notice;  and  let  our  speech  be  more  after  the  olden  sort,  with  less  of 
our  supposed  knowledge  in  it,  and  a  good  deal  more  concerning  the 
presence  and  the  goodness  of  God. 

I  am  not  about  to  use  our  text  in  reference  to  the  outside  world  and  to 

the  husbandry  of  man,  but  we  shall  see  how  true  it  is  within  the  churchy 

which  is  the  husbandry  of  God.    The  language  was  meant  to  describe 

(he  field  of  nature ;  but  it  is  equally  true  of  the  garden  of  the  church* 

No,  1,475. 


290  IIETBOPOLITAH  TABBUVAOLE  PCTL?IT. 

I  am  |;oing  to  use  die  text  in  this  way,  beeanee  of  the  peculiar  cireutii- 

stances  under  which  we  taieet,  oeleorating,  as  we  do,  the  twenty- 
fifth  year  of  oar  happy  union  together  as  pastor  and  flocl, — a  period 
whicn  has  to  the  fullest  extent  been  crowned  with  the  goodness  of  the  Lord. 
If  I  use  the  text  for  spiritual  purposes  I  shall  not  err,  for  there  is  always 
a  most  striking  analogy  between  the  world  of  grace  and  the  world  of 
nature,  so  that  it  wouM  be  hard  to  find  anything  said  by  inspiration  con- 
cerning the  visible  world  which  might  not  be  correctly  spoken  with  regard 
to  the  spiritual  world.  But  I  &  not  depend  upon  that  &ct  for  my 
justification,  I  refer  you  to  the  psalm  itself.  It  is  clear  that  it  was 
written  to  praise  Qod,  not  alone  for  his  works  in  the  harvest-field  and 
abroad  upon  the  sea,  but  for  his  wonderM  goodness  towards  his  people, 
for  thus  the  psalm  begins — ^'  Praise  waiteth  &r  thee,  0  God,  iti  Sioiu'* 
It  is  Zion's  hymn  wh£h  lies  befi>re  us ;  and  therefore  the  church  which 
Zion  represented  may  well  appropriate  the  language  and  use  it  for 
herself  and  say,  concerning  all  the  Lord's  mercy  to  her,  in  her  plough- 
ing, her  sowing,  her  watSiing,  and  the  glad  harvest  of  her  spiritual 
husbandry,  **Thou  crownest  the  year  with  thy  goodness."  The  spirit  of 
the  text  is  joyful  gratitude,  and  my  soul  is  so  filled  therewith  that  I 
do  not  want  so  much  to  preach  to  you  as  to  lead  you  into  holy  adoration 
of  Qod  for  the  great  mercies  with  which  he  has  surrounded  us  as  a  church 
and  congregation  firom  the  first  day  even  until  now. 

I.    £ad  so  our  first  head  is  piyike  goodness  adored.    ^'Thou 
crownest  the  year  with  thy  goodness." 

Whatever  of  acceptable  service  we  have  rendered,  and  whatever  of 
real  success  we  have  achieved,  has  come  from  the  Lord  of  hosts  who  has 
wrought  all  our  works  in  us.  Whatever  of  holy  result  may  have  followed 
from  earnest  effort,  and  whatever  of  honour  has  redounded  unto  God 
therefix)m,  is  the  Lord's  doings,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes.  ''Not 
unto  us,  not  unto  us,  0  Lora,  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory,  for  thy 
mercy,  and  for  thy  truth's  sake."  Thy  goodness,  and  not  ours,  has 
crowned  the  work ;  thy  goodness,  indeed,  it  is  which  makes  every  good 
work  good,  and  gives  to  every  good  its  crown.  Prom  its  first  con- 
ception even  to  its  ultimate  conclusion  all  virtue  is  of  thee.  From  blade 
to  full  com  all  the  harvest  is  of  thee,  0  Lord,  and  to  thee  let  it  be 
as<tibed.  Let  us,  therefore,  praise  the  Lord  with  all  our  hearts  for 
twenty-five  years  of  prayer  and  effort^  of  planning  and  working,  of  be- 
lieving and  rejoicing,  which  he  has  crowned  with  his  goodness. 

We  will  try  to  folk>w  the  run  of  the  psalm,  and  our  first  note  shall  be 
this— ^at>0  must  be  for  Ood  alone,  *'  Praise  waiteth  for  ihee,  0  God,  in 
Sion";  not  for  men,  nor  for  priests,  nor  for  pastors,  presbyters,  bishops, 
ministers,  or  whatsoever  you  choose  to  call  them  :  "  Praise  waiteth  for 
Ihee,  O  Gk)d,  in  Sion."  whosoever  shall  have  done  well  in  the  midst 
of  the  church  let  him  have  the  love  of  his  brethren,  but  let  all  the 
praise  be  unto  thee,  0  thou  Most  High.  Far  be  it  for  the  axe  to 
exalt  itself  and  forget  him  that  felleth  therewith,  or  for  the  sword  to 
deprive  the  conqueror  of  his  glory.  Praise  is  silent  while  the  best 
of  men  are  passmg  by ;  it  lays  its  finger  on  its  lips  till  the  Lord  ap- 
proaches, ana  then  bursts  forth  in  gladbome  song  because  Ite  appears. 

Whatever  else  vou  do,  my  brethren,  be  sure  that  your  soul  magnifies 
the  Lord  and  abnors  the  veiy  idea  of  self-glorification.     If  the  Lord 


CUOVKIKO  BLESSDTGS  ASOBIBED  TO  GOD.  291 

has  blessed  jroQ,  sbake  off,  as  Pftol  shoak  off  ihe  viper  ft*om  his  hand,  any 
idea  of  ascribing  praise  to  yonrself.  We  are  mere  Tanity,  and  to  ns 
belong  shame  and  oonfosion  of  &ce — ^these  are,  so  to  speak,  our  beloi^- 
ings,  the  only  dowry  our  &thers  have  left  to  us.  What  are  we  that  the 
Lord  should  bless  us  ?  Did  you  bring  a  soul  to  Christ  the  other  day? 
Bless  the  Holy  Spirit  who  helped  you  by  his  power  to  do  so  divine  a  dead. 
Did  ^ou  bear  bold  testimony  for  the  truUi  but  yesterday?  Bless  him 
who  IS  the  faithful  and  true  witness  that  at  his  feet  you  learned  how 
to  be  true,  and  bv  his  Spirit  were  enabled  to  be  brave.  ''Not  unto 
us !  Not  unto  us !  With  vehemence  we  deprecate  Uie  idea  of  honouring 
ourselves.  Again  and  again  we  put  away  the  usurper's  crown  which 
Satan  proffers  us.  How  can  we  endure  the  base  proposal  ?  Shall  we 
rob  Ood  of  his  glory  ?  Even  he  &om  whom  we  derive  our  very  existence  ? 
Perish,  0  pride,  abhorred  of  God  and  man.  0  Lord,  keep  thou  me  from 
the  approach  of  that  shameful  evil.  Brother,  if  thou  hast  any  esteem 
among  men,  cast  thy  crown  at  Jehovah's  feet,  and  there  let  it  lie.  All 
honour  be  to  God  only. 

In  this  spirii  every  acUm  of  the  CJiristian  church  ought  to  be  doiw, 
for  what  says  the  second  clause  of  the  psakn  ?  ''  Unto  thee  shaU  the 
TOW  be  performed."  Brothers  and  sisters,  we  ought  to  praise  God  in  all 
that  we  do,  by  doing  it  to  his  praise.  There  must  be  no  motive  of  this 
kind — "  I  must  give  because  others  give.  I  must  attend  at  such  and 
such  a  meeting  because  oth^wise  I  should  be  missed."  Cast  away  from 
jou,  I  pray  you,  the  service  of  any  master  but  your  Lord  in  heaven, 
for  two  masters  you  cannot  serve.  Honour  ye  the  Lord  in  all  that  ye  do. 
Whether  ye  teach  the  classes  of  the  school,  or  stand  up  at  the  comer 
of  the  street,  or  hand  a  tract  to  a  passer-by,  or  preach  to  the  multitude^ 
let  the  vow  be  performed  as  unto  the  Lord.  It  is  wonderful  how  sweet  it  is 
to  do  service  when  it  is  expressly  done  to  hm,  I  do  not  marvel  that  the 
woman  broke  the  alabaster  box  over  him.  Breaking  precious  boxes,  and 
dpilliuff  priceless  nard,  may  be  hard  work  of  itself  to  selfish  flesh  and 
blood,  hut  it  becomes  a  self-gratifying  luxuryto  do  it  unto  him.  When 
all  our  hfe  shall  be  doing  service  unto  the  Well-beloved,  whom  to  serve 
]&  honour  and  delight,  for  whom  to  die  were  a  bUss  unspeakable^then 
flhall  we  have  learned  how  to  live.  Lord,  thou  crownest  the  year  with  thy 
goodness,  and  therefore  we  would  do  all  things  as  unto  thee,  expecting 
thy  grace  to  assist  our  service,  thy  love  to  accept  it,  thy  pit^  to  for- 
give it,  and  thy  power  to  make  it  effectual  to  thine  own  glory.  Oh,  that  I 
had  but  power — and  God  the  Holy  Ghost  has  that  power — ^first  to  take 
away  from  each  of  us  all  thought  of  self-glorification,  and  then  to  conse- 
•crate  our  entire  being,  even  to  om*  pulse  and  breath,  to  his  praise  whose 
love  has  made  us  what  we  are ! 

Further,  brethren,  in  praising  God,  we  may  be  helped  to  do  so,  and  to 
fiee  how  he  crowns  the  year  with  his  goodness,  when  we  recollect  our 
answered  prayers  as  a  church.  What  saith  the  second  verse  ?  *'  0  thoa 
that  hearest  prayer,  unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come."  I  say  it — ^and  there 
IB  no  boasting  in  the  saying  of  it,  but  there  is  a  glorying  in  God — ^that 
praters  have  been  heard  which  have  been  put  up  bv  this  church  in  ways 
ana  manners  which  have  not  been  less  than  marvellous.  Such  of  you  aa 
have  been  with  us  from  the  beginning  will  remember  times  when,  in 
•our  weakness  and  iu  our  poverty,  we  cried  to  the  Lord  for  help,  bccwise 


292  METROPOLITAN  TABERKACLB  PULPIT. 

of  our  need,  and  he  heard  us.  Especially  was  this  the  case  concerning 
the  building  of  the  house  in  which  we  are  now  assembled.  Ah,  how 
speedily  he  helped  us !  how  liberally !  how  like  a  Ood  !  When  we  have 
needed  means  to  feed  the  children  of  our  Orphanage,  the  Prayer  Meeting 
on  Monday  night  has  been  followed  by  a  response  before  the  week  has 
gone  rouno.  When  two  or  three  of  us  have  met  together,  unknown  to 
all  the  rest,  to  lay  special  siege  to  heaven  upon  the  appearance  of  troubles 
which  we  did  not  wish  to  tell  to  others,  we  have  seen  the  arm  of  God 
made  bare  among  us,  and  we  could  no  more  doubt  it  than  we  could 
doubt  our  own  existence.  Oh,  you  that  have  had  your  prayers  an- 
swered, praise  ye  the  Lord  who  crowns  your  supplications  with  his 
acceptance.  Remember  that  it  is  because  of  prayer  that,  as  a  church, 
we  have  continued  to  advance  from  strength  to  strength ;  and  shall  not 
our  praises  balance  our  prayers?  If  the  Liord  gives  goodness,  shall  not 
we  give  gratitude  ?  Our  prayers  confessed  our  dependence,  we  felt  that 
our  years  could  never  be  crowned  nnless  the  Lord  crowned  them ;  and, 
now  that  the  blessing  has  come,  let  our  praises  prove  our  thankfolncss 
while  we  cry,  "  Thou  crownest  the  years  with  thy  goodness." 

And,  beloved  friends,  it  may  greatly  increase  our  praise  of  Ood  for  all 
his  goodness  if  we  ihtnk  of  our  many  sins.  Have  we  tried  to  serve 
him  ?  Alas,  how  often  have  we  fiuiled.  The  iniquities  of  oiir  holy 
things  might  long  ago  have  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath.  Among  us 
has  there  not  been  much  that  his  pure  and  holy  eyes  must  have  grieved 
over  ?  The  watehers  of  the  church  have  sometimes  come  together  in 
sore  dismay  over  this  and  that  which  they  have  seen  amongst  the 
brotherhood,  and  they  have  cried  to  Ood  that  he  would  pat  away  the 
evil  thing  from  among  us,  or  help  us  to  overcome  the  evil  one,  and 
reclaim  the  wandering.  Nobody  knows  but  Ood  all  the  cares  and 
anxieties  which  sunx)und  those  that  wateh  over  such  a  flock  as  this. 
Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  Have  we  been  made  sufficient  ?  Then 
infinite  grace  has  done  the  dec3.  The  best  of  us,  whoever  they  may  be, 
will  be  the  first  to  lie  low  before  the  Lord,  and  those  among  us  who 
have  exhibited  a  Ghristly  character,  and  have  served  the  cause  of  Christ 
heartily  will  the  most  deeply  feel  that  if  the  Lord  had  taken  the  candle- 
stick out  of  its  place  ana  left  us  in  the  darkness,  we  had  well  deserved 
it.  Eternally  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Ever  Merciful,  when  wc 
have  sinned  we  have  always  had  an  Advocate  before  the  throne,  and  the 
Mood  of  sprinkling  has  ever  been  upon  us  to  make  us  clean  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord.  Blessed  be  his  name,  mough  "  iniquities  prevail "  against  us, 
yet,  as  for  our  transgressions,  he  has  purged  them  awav,  and  still  does  his 
church  lift  up  her  face  and  live  in  the  smile  of  his  love  rejoicing  and 
triumphant.  Beloved,  this  ought  to  make  us  praise  Ood  with  all  our 
hearts,  and  the  psalmist  manifested  the  wisdom  of  inspiration  in  reminding 
us  of  it. 

And  once  more,  the  sacrsd  primleges  which  infinite  tnetxy  has  hesiowed 
tmn  vs  should  compel  us  with  glad  alacrity  to  magnify  the  name  of 
Ood.  See  how  the  psalm  pro^eds!  ''Blessed  is  the  man  whom 
thou  choosest,  and  cansest  to  aTO)roach  onto  thee,  that  he  may  dwell  in 
thy  courts.  We  shall  be  satiflfied  with  the  goodness  of  thy  house,  even 
of  thy  holy  temple."  Many  now  present  first  learned  in  this  house  their 
election  of  Ood^  for  here  they  were  called  by  almighty  grace,  and  enabled 


CBOWVIKG  BLE88IXG8  ASCBIBEO  TO  GOD.  29d 

to  approach  unto  their  heavealy  Flither.  Blessed  be  the  chooeing  and 
calling  Lord  who  now  gives  us  aooees  to  himself  and  nearness  to  his 
person.  You  reoollect  when  first  you  drew  near  to  him  with  weeping 
eyes  and  melting  hearts,  because  his  loye  had  broken  down  yonr  rebellious 
wills.  Oh,  it  was  a  sorrowful  coming,  but  it  was  a  true  coming, 
for  God  was  calling  yon.  And  do  yon  remember  afterwards  when 
you  came  to  him  with  glad  hearts  and  rejoicing  eyes,  for  the  Lord  had 
put  away  your  sin,  and  you  stood  **  accepted  in  the  BeloTed  "?  Oh>  that 
glad  day !    Last  Sunday  we  sang — 

"  Happy  day,  happy  day,*' 

And  we  may  sing  it  every  day  and  every  morning  and  evening  of  our 
lives,  and  not  sing  it  too  often.  The  Lord  who  chose  us  and  called  ua 
and  made  us  to  approach  unto  him  has  not  since  become  our  enemy,  for 
he  has  allowed  us  ever  since  to  dwell  in  his  house.  We  are  his  children ; 
we  have  not  called  upon  him  like  strangers,  but  we  have  dwelt  in  his 
house  as  sons.  He  has  been  abiding  with  us,  and  we  have  been  made 
to  abide  in  him.  Shall  we  not  praise  him  for  this  ?  This  very  house  of 
prayer  has  been  to  some  of  yon  a  quiet  resting-place.  Yon  have  been 
more  at  home  here  than  when  you  have  been  at  home.  I  will  be  bound 
to  say  that  you  recoUect  more  happy  times  that  you  have  had  here  than 
anywhere  else,  and  these  have  put  out  of  your  memory  the  sad  records 
of  your  hard  battling  in  the  world,  even  for  a  livelihood.  I  know  that  many 
of  yon  live  by  your  Sabbaths.  You  step  over  the  intervening  space  from 
Lord*8-day  to  Lord's-day,  as  if  the  Lord  had  made  a  ladder  of  Sabbaths 
for  yon  to  climb  to  heaven  by.  And  yon  have  been  fed  in  the  Lord's 
house  as  well  as  rested.  I  know  you  have,  for  he  who  deals  out  the 
meat  has  been  fed  himself,  and  when  he  is  fed  he  knows  that  others  have 
like  appetites,  and  need  like  food,  and  know  when  they  get  it.  You  have 
clappea  your  hands  for  very  joy  when  redeeming  grace  and  dying  love 
have  been  the  theme,  and  infinite,  sovereign,  changeless  mercy  has  been 
the  snbject  of  discourse.  Well  now,  by  every  happy  Sabbath  you  have 
had,  my  brethren ;  by  every  holy  Monday  evening's  prayer  meeting ;  by 
every  occasion  on  which  God  Ims  met  with  you  in  any  of  the  rooms  of 
this  building,  when  a  few  of  you  at  early  morning  or  late  in  the  evening 
have  met  tc^ther  for  prayer ;  by  every  time  in  i\'hich  the  visits  of  Jesus' 
love  have  charmed  your  soul  up  to  heaven's  gate,  bless  and  magnify  his 
name,  who  has  crowned  the  years  with  his  goodness.  There  had  been 
no  food  for  us  if  the  Ix)rd  had  not  given  us  manna  from  heaven.  There 
had  been  no  comfortable  rest  for  us  if  he'  had  not  breathed  peace  upon 
ns.  There  had  been  no  coming  in  of  new  converts,  nor  going  out  witli 
rapturous  joy  of  the  perfected  ones  up  to  the  seats  above,  if  the  Lord  had 
not  been  with  us,  and  therefore  to  him  be  all  the  praise* 

I  do  not  suppose  that  any  stranger  here  will  understand  this  matter. 
It  may  even  be  that  such  will  judge  that  we  are  indulging  inself-gratula- 
tion  under  a  thin  disguise ;  but  this  evil  we  must  endure  for  once.  You, 
mv  brothers  and  sisters,  who  have  been  together  these  many  years,  Imow 
what  is  meant,  and  you  know  that  it  is  not  within  the  compass  of  an 
angel's  tongue  to  express  the  gratitude  which  many  of  us  feel  who  for 
these  five-and-twenty  years  have  been  banded  together  in  closest  and 
heartiest  Christian  brotherhood  in  the  service  of  our  Lord  and  Master. 


201  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Strangers  cannot  guess  how  happy  has  been  our  fellowship,  or  how  true 
onr  loTe.  Eternity  alone  shall  reveal  the  mnltitade  of  mercies  with 
which  God  has  visited  ns  by  means  of  our  association  in  this  church  ;  it 
is  to  some  of  ns  friend,  nurse,  mother,  home — all  in  one.  If  we  sing 
more  heartily  about  ourselves  as  recipients  of  divine  mercy  than  some 
might  think  comely,  we  can  only  say  that  we  cannot  help  it.  If  yon 
drop  in  at  a  marria^,  and  there  is  much  said  at  the  wedding  feast  allout 
the  femily  and  its  history,  you  need  not  go  and  put  it  in  the  papers,  nor 
even  criticize  the  fomily  greetings  too  closely.  Very  likely  they  do  seem  to 
look  too  exclusively  at  home  affiurs ;  but  pray  pardon  them  for  once. 
Well,  whether  men  forgive  me  or  not,  I  must  ana  will  speak ;  but  all  I 
have  to  sav  is  to  ascribe  every  good  thing  unto  the  Lord  alone,  even  to 
the  God  of  Abraham,  "  the  Cfod  of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called." 
II.    Now  we  will  turn  to  a  second  point.    In  the  second  place,  thk 

SNCIRGLINa  BLESSING  OF  THE  DIYINB  GOODNESS  IS  TO  BE  CONFESSED. 

The  psalmist  sings — **  Thou  crownest  the  year  with  thy  goodness,"  as 
thou^  God  circled  the  year  and  put  a  coronet  about  its  nead,  a  gem 
for  every  month,  a  peari  for  everv  day — a  matchless  crown  of  unceasing 
^odness  which  surrounds  the  whole  year.  Now  I  venture  to  say  that 
oie  period  of  twenty-five  year^  or  a  whole  quarter  of  a  century,  wears  its 
crown  royal  even  more  conspicuously  than  any  single  year.  Prom  the- 
first  day  even  until  now  God  has  enclosed  the  Tmole  time  with  his  good- 
ness. 1  make  no  exception.  We  had  a  dark  day  once  when  we  were 
scattered  with  sorrow ;  out  as  I  read  the  fifth  verse  of  the  psalm,  it  is 
easy  to  work  it  into  our  praise — **  By  terrible  things  in  righteousness 
wilt  thou  answer  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation."  Standing  happily  among: 
you,  addressing  you  in  this  calm  and  quiet  manner,  I  recall  that  night 
in  which  the  multitude  seemed  to  be  taken  with  sudden  panic  and  to 
rush  madly  from  the  house,  and  then  we  heard  of  dead  and  wounded 
in  onr  congregation,  and  the  preacher's  heart  was  broken  till  he  felt 
it  would  be  well  to  die.  Yet  out  of  that  calamitv  with  all  its  un> 
gpeakable  grief  there  sprang  a  blessing,  the  fruit  of  which  we  have  con- 
fanned  still  to  reap.  Yes,  1  make  no  exception  to  anything.  Sick  and 
ill  oftentimes  has  the  preacher  been,  but  Tulued  lessons  have  thus  been, 
taught  to  him,  and  through  him  taught  to  the  people.  Sickness  has 
fiillen  here  and  there,  and  sometimes  affliction  and  poverty,  but  you 
have  all  of  you  learnt  something  under  the  rod,  and  yon  have  blessed  Gfod 
for  his  fotherly  discipline,  fraught  with  eternal  benefit.  Yes,  Lord,  it  i» 
true  in  our  case,  "  Thou  crownest  the  year  with  thy  goodness." 

Now,  let  us  just  look  at  this  all-encircling  goodness  of  the  Lord  whicb 
we  have  seen  from  the  first  dsj  till  now. 

I  saw  it  first  of  all  in  inspinns;  the  few  brethren  that  met  together  as- 
a  church  with  confidence  in  God  at  the  very  outset.  Our  first  meeting 
for  prayer  was,  I  think,  more  largely  attended  than  our  first  sermon.. 
The  church  was  minished  and  brought  low,  but  the  brethren  prayed 
with  great  reliance  upon  God  and  showed  no  sign  of  distrust.  They  did 
not  say  **Die";  they  did  not  beUeve  in  becoming  extinct,  but  every  matt 
seemed  resolved  to  set  his  &ce  like  a  fiint,  to  vm  prosperity  at  the^ 
hands  of  God,  and  for  this  I  thank  him.  Is  he  not  said  m  our  psalnv 
to  be  the  confidence  of  the  ends  of  the  earth  ?  This  confidence  was  the^ 
beginning  of  an  endless  chain  of  goodness.    Then  the  Lord  was  pleased 


OBOWNIN&  BLESSIKOS  ASCRIBED  TO  GOD.  295* 

ill  infinite  mercy  to  prepare  men's  hearts  to  hear  the  gospel.  It  was  not 
possible,  they  said,  tnat  great  places  oonld  be  filled  with  crowds  to  hear 
the  old^&shioned  gospel.  The  pulpit  had  lost  its  ^wer,  so  anbelieyers 
told  ns ;  and  ^et  no  sooner  did  we  oegin  to  preach  in  simple  strains  the- 
gospel  of  Ohnsty  than  the  people  fiew  as  a  clond,  and  as  doves  to  their 
windows.  And  what  listening  there  was  at  Park  Street,  where  we 
scai^y  had  air  enoagh  to  breathe !  And  when  we  got  into  the  larger 
plaoe^what  attention  was  manifest!  What  power  seemed  to  go  with 
eveiy  word  that  was  spoken.  I  say  it,  though  I  was  the  preacher ;  for  it 
was  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me.  There  were  stricken 
down  among  ns  some  of  the  most  unlikely  ones.  There  were  brought 
into  the  church  and  added  to  God's  people  some  of  those  that  had 
wandered  far  away  from  the  path  of  truth  and  righteousness,  and  these 
by  their  penitent  love  quickened  our  life  and  increased  our  zeal.  The- 
liord  gave  the  people  more  and  more  a  willingness  to  hear,  and  there 
was  no  pause  either  in  the  flowing  stream  of  hearers,  nor  in  the  incoming 
of  oonverts.  The  Holy  ^irit  came  down  like  showers  which  saturate 
tho  soil  till  the  clods  are  ready  for  the  breaking ;  and  then  it  was  not 
long  before  we  heard  on  the  right  and  on  the  left  the  cry,  *' What  must 
we  do  to  be  saved?"  We  were  busy  enough  in  those  days  in  seeing 
converts^  and  thank  God  we  have  been  so  ever  since.  We  had  some 
among  us  who  gave  themselves  up  to  watch  for  the  souls  of  men,  and  ^^e- 
have  a  goddly  number  of  such  helpers  now,  perhaps  more  than  ever  we 
had ;  and,  thiank  God,  these  found  and  still  find  many  souls  to  watch 
over.  Still  the  arrows  fly,  and  still  the  smitten  cry  out  for  help,  and  ask 
that  they  ma^  be  guided  to  the  great  healing  Lord.  Blessed  be  God*a. 
name  for  this.  Ue  went  with  us  all  those  early  days,  and  gave  us 
sheaves  even  at  the  first  sowing,  so  that  we  began  with  mercy ;  and  he- 
has  been  with  us  even  until  now,  till  our  life  has  become  one  long 
harvest-home. 

I  am  bound  to  acknowledge  with  deep  thankfulness  that  during  these 
twenty-five  years  the  word  has  been  given  me  to  speak  when  the  time  has 
come  for  preaching.  It  may  look  to  you  a  small  thing  that  I  should  be 
able  to  come  before  yon  in  due  time,  but  it  will  not  seem  so  to  my  brethren 
in  the  ministry  who  recollect  that  for  twenty-five  years  my  sermons  have- 
been  printed  as  they  have  been  delivered.  It  must  be  an  easy  thing  to- 
go  and  buy  discourses  at  sixpence  or  a  shilling  each  ready  hthographed 
and  read  tliem  off,  as  hirehngs  do,  but  to  (^peak  your  heart  out  every 
time  and  yet  to  have  something  fi-esh  for  twentv-five  years  is  no  child's^ 
play.  Who  shall  do  it  unless  he  cries  unto  God  for  help?  I  read  but 
the  other  day  a  newspaper  criticism  upon  myself  in  which  the  writer 
wondered  that  a  man  should  keep  on  year  after  year  with  so  few  themes,. 
and  such  a  narrow  ^;roove  to  travel  in :  but,  my  brethren,  it  is  not  so^ 
our  themes  are  infimte  for  number  and  fulness.  Every  text  of  Scripture 
is  boundless  in  its  meaning;  we  could  preach  fix)m  the  Bible  throughout 
eternity  and  not  exhaust  it.  The  groove  narrow?  The  thoughts  of 
God  narrow  ?  The  divine  word  narrow  ?  They  know  it  not,  for  his  com- 
mandment is  exceeding  brood.  Had  we  to  speak  of  politics  or  philosophy,. 
we  had  run  dry  long  ago,  but  when  we  have  to  preach  the  Saviour's 
everlasting  love,  the  theme  is  always  fresh,  always  new.  The  incarnate 
God,  the  atoning  blood,  the  risen  Lord,  the  coming  glory,  these  are 


20G  UKTHOPOLITAN  TABEKNACL£  PULPIT. 

subjects  Avhich  defy  exhaustion.  Yet  bless  we  the  Eternal  Spirit  who 
gives  both  seed  to  the  sower  and  bread  to  the  eater,  that  we  have  had 
spiritual  food  for  our  people  as  often  as  the  season  has  come  round.  I 
must  render  my  special  note;  and  if  at  any  time  you  have  been  blest  by 
the  word  I  have  spoken,  you  must  render  your  tribute  too.  All  these 
years  he  has  crowned  us  with  his  goodness  by  giving  us  the  good  word 
to  preach  in  his  name. 

Bnt,  dear  brethren,  I  am  most  happy  to  thank  (}od  for  crowning  the 
years  with  his  goodness  by  helping  us  in  the  reaping  and  ingathering  of 
souls.  I  say  ''us"  advisedly.  Here  we  have  had  a  church  which  from 
the  first  began  to  seek  the  souls  of  men.  If  any  of  you  do  not  work  for 
Christ  I  should  think  you  have  a  hard  time  of  it  among  us,  for  one  or 
another  is  pretty  sure  to  use  the  ox-goad  upon  you.  Both  by  example 
and  by  precept,  and  by  the  general  spirit  of  the  brotherhood,  idlers  stand 
rebukea.  Our  brethren  and  sisters  from  the  first  be^n  working  for 
the  good  of  men  as  best  they  could.  Not  in  a  fine,  artistic  manner ;  I 
do  not  think  we  ever  tried  that.  We  did  it  very  blunderingly,  but  we 
went  at  it  with  all  our  hearts.  Our  yoxmg  brethren  tried  their  hands  at 
teaching  and  preaching ;  very  likely  it  was  mtellectually  very  poor  preach* 
ing,  but  it  was  full  of  heart,  and  it  did  good  despite  its  imperfections. 
The  teaching  and  the  looking  after  converts,  the  trying  to  form  new 
churches,  the  opening  of  prayer-meetings,  and  all  sorts  of  holy  works 
were  not  done  after  any  set  fiishion ;  but  they  were  done  somehow,  and 
often  done  with  a  desperate  valour  and  a  simple  &ith  which  surprised  and 
cheered  me.  Often  and  often  have  I  brnshea  the  tears  from  my  eyes  when 
I  have  received  from  some  here  present  offerings  for  the  Master's  work 
which  utterly  surpassed  all  my  ideas  of  giving.  The  consecration  of 
their  substance  by  some  among  vou  has  been  apostolic.  I  have  known 
those  who  have  so  given  from  their  poverty,  that  they  have  sometimes 
given  all  that  they  had,  and  when  I  have  even  hinted  at  their  exceeding  the 
bounds  of  prudence  they  have  seemed  hurt,  and  pressed  the  gift  again  for 
some  other  work  of  the  Master  whom  they  love.  The  Lord  knows  every 
one  of  your  hearts :  wherein  ye  have  come  short  he  knoweth  and  may  his 
grace  forgive ;  but  wherein,  as  I  most  honestly  bear  witness,  many  here  have 
gone  up  to  the  measure  of  Uieir  ability  and  even  beyond  it^  he  knows 
and  will  reward.  For  your  zeal,  and  industry,  and  consecration  I  must 
bless  the  Lord  who  crocus  the  years  with  his  goodness. 

There  are  few  among  you,  I  should  think,  who  have  worked  for  the 
Master  who  have  not  seen  most  encouraging  results  in  the  conversions 
of  those  for  whom  you  have  cared.  Certainly  there  are  many  among 
you  between  whom  and  myself  there  might  pass  a  telegraphic  glance, 
awakening  glad  memories.  You  have  brought  to  me  one  after  another 
souls  that  you  have  won.  You  wanted  me  to  speak  to  them  personally 
because  you  liad  an  idea  that  I  might  be  more  tender  than  anybody 
else.  I  am  afraid  yon  think  too  hignly  of  me  in  this  respect ;  still  I 
have  been  right  glad  to  see  those  you  brought  to  me,  because  they  were 
your  children*  How  glad  I  have  been  that,  inasmach  as  I  brought  yon  to 
Christ  through  his  grace,  when  yon  have  brought  others  to  Clurist  I 
have  seemed  to  be  a  sort  of  graudsire  in  your  midst,  rejoicing  in  your 
joy,  triumphing  in  your  success.  And  I  shall  not  exceed  the  truth 
when  I  say  that  I  look  upon  many  of  you  with  an  intense  love,  and  > 


CBOWNDTG  BLESSINGS  ASCRIBED  TO  GOD.  297 

satisfiiciion,  becanse  God  has  made  yoa  great  winners  of  sonls.  Yon 
have  not  sat  here  to  listen  to  me  and  to  enjoy  your  Snndays,  but  yoa 
have  been  sowers  of  the  good  seed.  You  have  many  times  denied  your- 
selres  the  privfleges  of  &)d's  house  that  you  might  go  and  look  after 
others,  ana  the  I^rd  has  given  you  your  wages.  How  many  you  have 
brought  back  whose  feet  had  almost  gone !  How  many  you  have  helped 
by  sweet  encouragement  when  they  have  been  depressed !  I  know  not 
all  your  labours  of  love,  but  God  knows.  This  much  I  know,  that  the 
pastorate  of  this  church  is  practically  carried  out  by  the  church  itself* 
celoved  elders  labour  with  a  diligence  which  I  cannot  too  much  com* 
mend,  still  it  were  impossible  with  five  thousand  persons  to  care  for  that 
a  few  men  should  fulfil  the  service.  You  watch  over  one  another  in  the 
Lord,  and  for  this  I  bless  him,  to  whom  must  be  rendered  all  the  praise. 
I  feel  the  more  free  to  speak  about  what  he  has  wrought  by  you  and  in  you, 
because  you  will  not  take  any  glory  to  yourselves  but  lay  it  at  his  feet* 
Lord,  thou  hast  blest  us  exceedingly,  beyond  what  we  asked  or  even 
thought,  and  in  return  we  Mess  thee !  When  I  recollect  how  as  a  boy  I 
stood  among  you  and  feebly  began  to  preach  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  how 
these  twentynfive  years  without  dissension,  ay,  without  the  dream  of 
dissension,  in  perfect  love  compacted  as  one  man,  you  have  gone  on  ftx)m 
one  work  of  God  to  another,  and  have  never  halted,  hesitated  or 
drawn  back, — ^I  must  and  will  bless  and  magnify  him  who  hath  crowned 
theae  years  with  his  goodness. 

III.  Now  I  come  to  my  closing  point.  It  is  this : — the  CRowNiica 
BLEsanro  is  confessed  to  be  of  6oD-*not  only  the  encircling  bless* 
ing,  but  the  crowning  blessing. 

What  is  the  crown  of  a  church  ?  Well,  some  churches  have  one 
crown  and  some  another.  I  have  heard  of  a  church  whose  crown  was 
its  organ — ^the  biggest  organ,  the  finest  organ  ever  played,  and  the 
choir  the  most  wonderful  choir-  that  ever  was.  EverylxMly  in  the  dis- 
trict said,  ''Now,  if  you  want  to  go  to  a  place  where  you  will  have  fine 
music,  that  is  the  snot."  Oar  niusical  friends  may  wear  that  crown 
if  they  please.  I  wul  never  pluck  at  it  or  decry  it ;  I  feel  no  tempta* 
tion  in  that  direction.  I  have  heard  of  others  whose  crown  has  been 
their  intellect.  There  are  very  few  people  indeed,  not  as  many  people 
by  one-tenth  as  there  are  sittings,  but  then  they  are  such  a  select  people, 
the  SUtef  the  thoughtful  and  intelligent!  The  ministry  is  sncn  that 
only  one  in  a  hundred  can  possibly  understand  what  is  said,  and  the  one 
in  the  hundred  who  does  understand  it  is  therefore  a  most  remarkable 
person.  That  is  their  crown.  Again  I  sav  I  will  not  filch  it.  Whatever 
there  may  be  that  is  desirable  about  it,  the  brother  who  wears  it  shall  wear 
it  all  his  days  for  me.  I  have  heard  of  other  crowns ;  amongst  the  rcst^ 
that  of  being  ^*  a  most  respectable  church."  All  the  people  arc  respect- 
able. The  minister  of  course  is  reiroectable.  I  believe  ne  is  **  Beverend," 
or  **  Very  reverend,"  and  everyboay  and  thing  about  him  is  to  tlic  last 
degree  '^  respectable."  Fustian  jackets  and  cotton  gowns  are  warned 
off  by  the  surpassing  dignity  of  ever^rthing  in  and  around  the  place. 
As  for  a  working  man,  such  a  creature  is  never  seen  on  the  premises,  and 
could  not  be  supposed  to  be ;  and  if  he  were  to  come  he  would  say,  "  Tho 

Ereacher  preaches  double  Dutch  or  Greek,  or  something  of  the  sort ;" 
e  would  not  hear  language  which  he  could  understand.    This  is  not  a 


k/ 


298  3IETR0F0LITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

very  brilliaut  crown — ^thia  crown  of  respectability;  it  certainly  never 
flashed  ambition  into  my  bouL  Bat  our  crown  under  Ood  haa  been 
this, — ^the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them,  Bonla  are  saved, 
€ind  Christ  is  glorified.  0  my  beloved  church,  hold  feiat  that  thoa  hast, 
that  no  man  Uike  this  crown  away  from  thee !  As  for  me,  b^  God's  help, 
the  first  and  last  thing  that  I  long  for  is  to  bringmen  to  Christ.  I  caie 
nothing  about  fine  language,  or  about  the  pretty  specu]ati<ms  of  prophecy, 
or  a  hundred  dainty  things ;  but  to  break  the  heart  and  bind  it  up,  to 
lay  hold  on  a  sheep  of  Christ  and  bring  it  back  into  the  fold,  is  the  one 
thing  I  would  live  for.  You  also  are  of  the  same  mind,  are  yon  not? 
Well,  we  have  had  this  crownii^  blessing  that,  as  nearly  as  I  can  estimate, 
more  than  nine  thousand  persons  have  joined  this  church.  If  they 
were  all  alive  now,  or  all  with  us  now,  what  a  company  they  would  be. 
Some  have  fallen  asleep,  and  many  are  m^nbers  with  other  chorches, 
working  for  the  Master  where  they  are  probably  more  influential  than 
they  could  have  been  at  home.  Some  of  our  members  we  were  glad  to 
lose,  because  our  loss  was  the  gain  of  the  universal  church.  We  sent 
them  out  to  colonize  and  so  to  increase  the  Master's  kingdom.  For 
these  nine  thousand  and  more  let  Qoi  be  praised.  It  is  a  crown  in 
which  we  must  and  will  rejoice. 

But  another  crown  to  any  church  I  think  is  when  its  members  ai^ 
maintained  in  their  profession.  If  many  are  added  and  then  they  are 
scattered  again,  if  they  do  but  come  to  go,  if  they  are  found  and  then 
straightway  lost,  what  is  the  benefit  of  it  ?  But  tms  has  been  our  crown 
of  rejoicing,  that  we  have  seen  the  young  converts  matured  in  grace. 
The  blade  has  become  the  ear,  and  the  ear  has  become  the  full  oavn  in 
the  ear,  for  which  God  be  thanked.  And  there  has  been  tins  about  it, 
that  as  wo  builded  together  as  living  stones,  so  we  luive  renuuned 
together.  I  have  a  gi*eat  many  faults,  and  I  often  wonder  how  it  is  you 
you  put  up  with  me,  but  we  have  not  thought  of  parting ;  the  mortar 
which  holds  us  together  in  the  building  is  very  binding.  I  am  not  so 
much  surprised  that  I  put  up  with  you,  for  it  is  my  duty  and  office  to 
bear  with  all,  and  none  of  you  have  caused  me  grief,  except  such  as  have 
walked  unworthily  and  grieved  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  have  gone  on  well 
together  under  Ghod's  blessing  these  many  years,  and  have  no  hesitation 
about  continuing  in  the  same  loving  unity. 

During  these  twenty-five  years  I  have  had  to  attend  to  the  quarrelii 
and  differences  of  scores  of  little  churches  where  their  w^ness  aheuld 
have  been  the  strongest  argument  for  union.  Men  usually  divide  when 
they  are  already  too  few  tor  the  work,  and  this  is  a  grievous  evil,  under 
the  sun.  Chui*ches  rent  with  contention  have  )aid  uie  wretched  diflfer- 
•ences  before  me,  and  I  have  had  many  a  heavy  burden  to  carry  while 
trying  to  set  things  right :  but  I  have  not  had  to  spend  one  five  minutes 
in  seeking  to  heal  a  breach  in  this  church  or  maintain  its  unity. 
The  Lord  has  given  us  brotherly  love,  and  unto  his  name  be  praise. 
Brethren  who  have  been  members  of  other  churches  where  you  have  seen 
trouble,  you  know  what  a  comfort  it  is  to  be  connected  with  a  church 
wliere  we  endeavour  to  walk  in  love  to  one  another,  and  where  the  noise 
of  war  has  not  disturbed  our  gates.  Truly  I  must  say,  and  I  do  say  it, 
"'  0  Lord,  thou  givest  peace  in  our  borders  and  thou  fillest  us  with  the 
iiucst  of  the  xvlicat.    Thou  crowncst  the  years  with  thy  goodness." 


CROWNING   BLESSINGS  ASCRIBED  TO  GOD.  299 

Nor  18  this  all.  We  oright  to  bless  God  for  the  &uit-bearing  ones  that 
have  been  among  us.  Workers  of  all  sorts  are  found  for  the  different 
agencies  of  the  church  as  they  are  required^  aud  God  has  given  us  some 
whom  he  has  honoured  exceedingly,  wno  are  our  stren^h  for  home  work. 
But,  besides  that,  this  church  has  this  day  an  army  of  aoovc  four  hundred 
ministers  trained  at  her  side,  who  are  now  scattered  all  over  the 
globe  preaching  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  while  as  a  militia  we  hava 
some  eighty  or  more  colporteurs  disseminating  godly  books. 

Best  of  all,  we  have  a  growing  band  of  missionaries.  My  heart  leaped 
within  me  on  Monday  night  when  I  heard  the  young  people,  and  saw 
how  one  and  another  of  our  brethren  were  devoting  themselves  to  mission 
work.  This  I  reckon  to  be  the  brightest  crown  of  all.  If  the  Lord 
will  but  inftise  the  missionary  spirit  into  us  and  foree  out  many  to 
go  abroad  to  preach  the  gospel  of  J  esus  Christ  our  cup  will  run  over,  and 
we  shall  have  again  to  say,  "  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Sion, 
for  thou  crownest  the  years  with  thy  goodness." 

Last  of  all,  and  never  to  be  forgotten,  daring  these  twenty-five  years 
there  have  gone  from  us  to  the  upper  realms  about  eight  hundred  who 
had  named  the  name  of  Jesus.  Professiug  their  Mth  in  Christ,  living  in 
his  fear,  dying  in  the  faith,  they  gave  us  no  cause  to  doubt  their  sincerity, 
and  therefore  we  ma^  not  question  their  eternal  safety.  Many  of  them 
gave  us  in  life  and  ni  death  all  the  tokens  we  could  ask  for  of  their 
being  in  Christ,  and  therefore  we  sorrow  not  as  those  that  are  without 
hope.  Why,  when  I  think  of  them,  many  of  them  mv  sons  aud  daughters 
now  before  the  throne,  they  fill  me  with  solemn  exultation.  Do  you  not 
see  them  in  their  white  rolies  ?  Eight  hundred  souls  redeemed  by  blood. 
These  are  only  what  we  knew  of  and  had  enrolled.  How  many  there 
may  have  been  converted  here  who  never  joined  our  earthly  fellowship, 
bu^  nevertheless,  have  gone  home  I  cannot  tell.  There  probablv  have 
been  more  than  those  whose  names  we  know,  if  we  consider  the  wide  area 
over  which  the  printed  sermons  circulate.  They  are  gathering  home  one 
by  one,  one  by  one,  but  they  make  a  goodly  company.  Our  name  is  Gad, 
for  "a  troop  cometh."  Happy  shall  we  be  to  overtake  those  who  have 
outmarched  us  and  entered  into  the  promised  land  before  us.  Let  us 
remember  them,  and  by  faith  join  our  hands  with  them.  Flash  a  thought 
to  unite  the  broken  family,  for  we  are  not  for  from  them,  nor  are  they  far 
from  us,  since  we  are  one  in  Christ.    This  too  is  our  crown. 

And  now  I  want  one  thing  more.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  greed 
that  never  is  satisfied,  and  I  have  a  great  greed  upon  me  now.  I 
frankly  confess  my  covetousness.  Whenever  the  Lord  gives  us  anv  great 
spiritual  gift  we  want  more,  nor  are  we  blamed  for  this,  but  bidden  to 
covet  earnestly  the  best  gifU.  This,  then,  is  my  further  desire.  I  should 
be  rejoiced  beyond  measure  if  on  this  night,  and  during  the  next  two  or 
three  days  in  which  we  keep  holyday,  and  bless  the  Lord  for  his  good- 
ness, some  brethren  were  moved  bv  the  Holy  Ghost  to  undertake  some 
new  work  for  Christ  which  they  have  not  thought  of  before.  Come, 
my  brother,  may  the  Lord  crown  this  year  this  day  with  his  goodness 
by  putting  it  into  your  heart  to  break  up  new  soil,  and  sow  a  fresh 
field  for  Jesus.  Have  you  been  an  idler  ?  Buckle  to !  To-day  join 
the  labourers  and  leave  the  loiterers.  Get  to  the  Master's  work.  Have 
yoa  been  already  diligent?    I  have  more  hope  in  appealing  to  you. 


."iOO  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPiT. 

Brother,  Bister,  try  something  more — Bometiiiiig  mere  to-night.  Cast 
•over  in  voor  mind  what  there  is  that  is  left  undone  in  the  branch  of  bolv 
service  lor  which  yon  are  fitted,  or  for  which  yon  might  get  to  be  fitteo, 
•and  at  once  engage  in  it.  Gome  now.  Consecrate  yonraelf  to  the  Lord 
^new  to-night,  and  pray  him  to  lift  you  to  a  higher  platform^  and  into 
a  nobler  state  of  consecration.  That  were  a  Ueaaed  crowning  of  the 
years  with  his  goodness. 

And  what  if  some  young  men  here  were  to  say,  ''We  shall  prosper  in 
business,  no  doubt,  for  we  feel  up  to  the  mark  for  it  God  has  given  us 
brain  and  skill  and  a  fair  ooenmg ;  but  inasmuch  as  we  have  capacity 
we  will  consecrate  it."  I  near  the  sorrows  of  China  borne  on  tlic 
wailing  of  the  wind  and  the  sighing  of  the  sea!  Millions  upon  millions 
arc  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge :  will  no  one  pity  them  ?  The  need 
of  India's  teeming  population  cries  to  us  in  voices  which  pierce  the  heart ; 
will  no  one  listen  and  help?  A  voice  comes  forth  from  the  excellent 
glory — ^'^  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  eo  for  us?"  It  were  a 
«rown  to  end  the  year  with  if  there  came  from  this  and  that  set  of  useful, 
earnest  Christian  men  tlie  reply  of  individual  hearts,  "  Here  am  I :  here 
am  I ;  send  me."    The  Lord  give  us  this  crown. 

One  thing  more.  Oh,  if  some  hearts  would  yield  themselves  to  the 
Saviour  to-night,  if  some  were  converted  to-night,  what  a  crown  that 
would  be  to  finish  up  these  years  with.  Testimonial,  sirs  ?  No  testi- 
monial can  ever  be  given  to  the  preacher  Avhich  can  equal  a  soul  con- 
verted. These  are  the  seals  of  our  ministry  and  the  wases  of  our  hire. 
Socrates  on  his  birthday  had  a  present  given  him  by  m  his  students. 
Some  brought  less  and  some  brought  more.  Among  the  rest  there  was 
one  who  had  nothinff  in  the  world  to  brine,  and  so  he  came  to  Socrates, 
and  said,  "Master,  1  give  you  myself.  I  love  you  with  all  my  heart." 
The  sage  judged  this  to  be  the  most  precious  of  all  the  tributes.  Will 
not  some  of  you  cry,  "  I  do  not  know  that  I  could  be  a  missionary,  or 
that  I  have  any  gifts,  or  talents,  or  substance  that  I  could  contribute, 
but.  Lord,  I  give  my  heai*t  to  thee  to  be  renewed  by  grace"?  God 
bring  you,  poor  sinner,  to  Jesus'  feet,  to  surrender  your  whole  nature  to 
his  sway,  that  he  may  wash  it  in  his  blood,  fill  it  with  his  Spirit,  and 
use  it  for  his  glorv.  He  says,  "  My  son,  give  me  thy  heart,"  and  when 
the  heart  is  yielded  he  accepts  the  gift.  May  the  "Eternal  Spirit  lead 
many  to  give  themselves  thus  to  Jesus  this  night,  and  it  will  be  the 
crowning  joy  of  all  the  years.    Amen  and  amen. 


Portion  op  Scmptuub  head  before  Sermon — Psahn  kv. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book."— 104,  420,  140. 


IPle^a^otttmr  i^attemade  fulpt 


JESUS,    THE    JUDGE. 


i  I 


f^t\Ut[ 

Delivered  on  Lord's-Da*  Morning,  May  25th,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  HETBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINQTON. 


'*  And  he  commanded  ni  to  preach  nnto  the  people,  and  to  testifj  that  it  is  he  which 
ordained  of  Gk)d  to  be  the  Judge  of  qoick  and  dead.** — Acta  z.  42. 


Tou  will  notioe  thronghout  this  short  address  by  Peter  how  very  careful 
he  18  to  speak  uot  at  all  upon  his  own  authority,  but  wholly  upon  the 
aathority  of  the  Most  High.  He  commenoes  his  conTersation  by  saying 
that  Qod  had  shown  him  thac  it  would  be  right  for  him,  as  a  Jew,  to 
commune  with  (Gentiles.  God  had  shown  it  to  him ;  he  had  not,  there- 
fore, broken  through  Jewish  law  as  the  result  of  his  own  judgment, 
bat  nnder  divine  direction.  He  goes  on  to  commence  his  sermon  by 
flaying,  **  The  word  which  Qod  sent  unto  the  children  of  Israel."  H!e 
had  come,  therefore,  not  with  a  word  of  his  own  inventing,  but  with  a 
word  of  God's  sending;  ''That  word,  I  say,  ye  know.  Then  he 
^eaks  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  himself  as  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  with  power,  and  he  speaks  of  himself  and  his  fellow  apostles  as 
**  witnesses,"  bearing  testimony  to  what  the  Lord  Jesus  had  done.  Now, 
fchis  way  of  speaking  was,  perhaps,  rendered  the  more  necessary  by  the 
mistaken  reverence  which  Cornelius  had  rendered  to  his  person,  for  he 
fell  down  at  the  apostle's  feet  and  worshipped  him  ;  but  it  should  be  the 
constant  habit  of  all  the  ministers  of  Christ.  It  is  ours  to  keep  within 
the  bounds  of  our  commission,  and  shield  ourselves  behind  its  authority. 
What  are  we  that  we  should  of  ourselves  have  aught  to  say  unto  you, 
my  brethren  ?  What  is  our  authority,  and  by  what  right  can  we  speak 
of  ourselves  ?  Verily,  we  have  no  such  power  over  you ;  and  if  we  come 
nnto  yon  in  our  own  name,  bid  us  not  God  speed.  Every  true  minister 
must  speak,  because  he  is  commanded  to  speak ;  he  must  speak  what 
he  is  commanded  to  epeak ;  and  he  must  be  prepared  to  fall  back  upon 
the  authority  of  the  Word  of  God  continually.  *'  If  they  speak  not 
according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them  ;  but  if 
the  testimony  of  any  man  be  in  accordance  with  the  Word  of  God,  then 
is  God  with  nim,  and  it  would  be  perilous  to  reject  his  testimony. 

The  apostle  was  not  Ion?  in  his  address  before  he  came  to  the  doc- 
trine of  the  judgment  of  aQ  men  by  Jesus  Christ.    He  says  that  he  was 
No.  1,476. 


802  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

jOonunBiMkd  to  preadi  it,  and  thorefore  he  did  pnaech  it.  It  may 
not  be  called  ''the  gospel,"  but  it  is  oertaiiilj  a  most  important 
acoesscH'y  truth  to  the  gospel :  it  is  one  of  those  doctrines  without 
which  a  gospel  ministiy  would  not  be  complete.  I  mean  that  if  in 
any  testimony  concerning  Christ  the  doctrine  that  he  shall  come 
a  second  time  to  judge  the  world  were  utterly  neglected  such  a  tes- 
timony would  not  be  a  complete  gospel.  Hence  you  find  that  Paul,  when 
he  preached  to  the  famous  congregation  of 'the  Areopagites,  took  care 
to  insist  upon  this  truth.  In  Acts  xvii.  30,  31,  he  says,  "  The  times  of 
this  ignorance  God  winked  at;  but  now  commandeth  all  men  everywhere 
to  repent ;  because  he  hath  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  he  will  judge 
the  world  in  righteousness  by  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained ;  whereof 
he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from 
the  dead."  This  was  also  a  part  of  Paul's  subject  when  he  stood  before 
Felix;  "he  reasoned  of  ri^teousness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to 
come" ;  and  this  made  Felix  tremble,  for  there  is  great  force  of  convic- 
tion in  that  solemn  tmth.  The  doctrine  of  the  judgment  of  the  world 
by  Christ  was  used  by  Peter  and  Paul  and  other  apostles  as  a  sort  of 
preliminary  truth  which  they  insisted  upon  before  they  came  to  the 
essence  of  the  gospel,  which  consists  in  preaching  Jesus  Christ  as  a 
Saviour.  They  ploughed  with  this  doctrine  before  they  sowed  the  invi- 
tations of  the  gospel.  They  did  not,  however,  lay  the  axo  to  the  root 
and  then  forget  to  proclaim  the  word  of  grace ;  they  preached  the  teirors 
of  the  Lord,  not  in  a  legal,  but  a  gospd  manner,  reter  does  so  in  this 
case  ;  for  first  he  speaks  of  Christ  in  the  judgment,  and  then  in  veise 
forty-three  he  adds,  "  To  him  ^ve  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  through 
his  name  whosoever  believeth  m  him  shall  receive  remission  of  sine." 

This  morning,  in  obedience  to  the  same  command,  I  shall  try  to  speak 
first  of  all  upon  the  message ;  and,  secondly,  upon  ifie  evident  imperlanee 
to  be  aitacliMl  to  it,  which  we  shall  in  a  great  measure  gather  from,  the 
words  of  our  text.  May  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  in  Peter's  day  feU  on  all 
those  who  heard  his  word,  fall  also  iq>on  yon  as  you  are  led  to  beliwre  in 
the  Lord  Jesus. 

I.  First,  let  us  consider  thb  mbssagb  which  God  commands  all  his 
servants  to  declare.  That  message  begins  first  with  the  assurance  that 
ifiere  is  a  mm-al  government.  There  is  a  Judge  over  the  race  of  men :  we 
are  not  as  the  locusts,  of  whom  Solomon  savs  tliat  they  have  no  king. 
The  world  is  not  left  unobserved  of  God,  to  be  as  a  den  of  wild  beasts, 
or  a  pond  of  fishes,  wherein  everyone  devoureth  his  fellow,  and  none 
ctilleth  them  to  account.  Men  are  not  permitted  to  do  whatsoever  is 
right  in  their  own  eyes,  but  there  is  a  law,  and  a  Governor  over  them. 
God  hath  committed  at  this  day  all  authority  nnto  the  Son ;  and  Jesus 
Christ  at  this  moment  reigneth  and  ruleth  over  the  whole  race  of  men, 
taking  account  of  all  the  actions  that  are  done  in  their  bodies,  and 
making  note  of  everything  in  order  to  the  summing  up  of  all  things  by- 
and-by.  There  is  a  law,  there  ia  a  rule,  there  is  a  govemment»  over  the 
human  commonwealth.  The  race  is  not  left  to  anarchy :  Jesus  Christ  is 
head  of  all. 

That  being  announced,  we  have  to  go  on  to  say  that  there  will  be  a 
judgment  "  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  but  after  this  the 
judgment."    As  the  result  of  there  being  a  government  over  mankind; 


JB8US,  THE  JUDGE.  SOS 

an  assize  will  be  held,  wherein  cases  will  be  tried,  and  justice  will  be 
administered ;  this,  indeed,  is  the  sanction  and  support  of  the  law,  that 
it  will  call  men  to  account :  its  voice  of  power  proclaims,  '*  0  ye  house  of 
Israel,  I  will  judge  you  everyone  after  his  ways."  There  will  be  a  day  of 
final  account.  I  need  not  stop  to  quote  the  numerous  passages  of  Scripture 
which  assert  that  every  one  of  us  must  give  an  account  of  himself  before 
€rod,  fur  we  are  fiiUy  persuaded  that  ''we  shall  all  stand  before  the 
judgment  seat  of  Ghnst":  but,  my  brethren,  we  think  that  all  reason- 
able persons  will  conclude  that  there  must  be  a  judgment,  if  they  will 
only  consider  the  character  of  Ood.  Being  the  ruler  of  the  world,  he 
must  do  justice.  We  should  count  any  man  who  was  made  a  king  but 
a  miserable  counterfeit  of  a  monarch  if  he  never  administered  justice  at 
all.  If  we  had  a  state  without  laws,  or  laws  without  punishments  for 
those  who  broke  them,  we  should  be  indeed  in  a  wretched  condition,  and 
onr  king  would  be  the  mimicry  of  royalty.  But  such  is  not  the  case  in 
the  kingdom  of  him  who  ruleth  over  all.  It  is  said  of  our  Lord, 
''  Thou  lovest  righteousness  and  hatest  wickedness," — this  makes  us  feel 
that  he  wills  to  do  justice,  and  as  assuredly  he  hath  power  to  punish 
transgression  we  feel  certain  that  he  will  do  so.  There  will  come  a  day 
in  which  he  will  judge  the  acts  of  men,  because  his  character  is  not  such 
that  he  could  or  would  trifle  with  evil.  **  Be  not  deceived,  God  is  not 
mocked ;  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  **  The 
Father  who  without  respect  of  persons  judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
works  "  will  not  permit  offenders  to  insult  his  laws  with  impunity.  It 
is  wrapped  up  in  the  very  idea  of  God  that  he  is  Judge  of  all  the  earth, 
and  must  do  right ;  and  to  do  right  he  must  hold  a  final  court  in  which 
he  will  **  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds." 

The  character  of  man  equally  involves  a  judgment,  for  he  is  evidently 
a  responsible  being,  and  this  is  clear  to  anybody  who  cares  to  open  his 
eyes.  We  count  not  the  cattle  of  the  hills  or  the  fish  of  the  sea  respon- 
sible, let  them  do  what  they  may :  no  one  blames  the  wolf  that  he  ravens, 
or  the  lion  that  he  devours,  but  when  we  come  to  think  of  man,  we 
regard  him  as  a  creature  whose  actions  have  a  moral  quality  about 
them,  and  are  either  right  or  wrong :  in  fiust,  he  is  a  responsible  agent. 
Surely,  where  there  is  responsibility  there  is  a  law,  and  where  there  is  a 
law  there  must,  some  day  or  other,  be  rewards  for  well-doers,  and  punish- 
ments for  malefactors.  The  constitution  and  nature  of  man  inevitably 
require  this,  or  else  his  responsibility  is  given  to  him  in  vain.  Now,  the 
present  tangled  condition  of  the  world's  history  requires  that  there  should 
be  a  day  of  rectification  at  the  end  of  time.  At  this  moment  we  often 
see  the  wicked  prosper,  while  the  righteous  are  abased :  at  this  day  the 
mirth  and  the  jollity  are  often  connected  with  sin,  while  sorrow  and  grief 
go  hand  in  hand  iiith  godliness  in  many  and  many  an  instance.  Re- 
member how  the  wise  man  argued,  and  be  persuaded  by  his  reasoning : — 
*'  Moreover,  I  saw  under  the  sun  the  place  of  judgment,  that  wickedness 
was  there ;  and  the  place  of  righteousness,  that  iniquity  was  thei'e.  I 
said  in  mine  heart,  God  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  the  wicked." 
Since  the  actions  of  men  are  evidently  left  unpunished  now,  and  high- 
handed sin  holds  power,  there  must  come  a  righting  of  the  wrong  and  a 
clearing  of  the  just.  The  Judge  of  all'  the  earth  must  do  right,  and 
how  can  this  be  but  by  a  final  adjustment  in  which  it  shall  be  clearly 


904  insTROPOUTAir  t^j^erkaci^e  pulpit. 

Been  ihat  thongfa  the  wicked  prosper  for  a  vfaile,  they  are  as  billocks 
ftUeniug  for  ti^  slaughter;  and  though  the  righteous  suflfer  for  a  while, 
it  is  but  ae  the  gdd  BuSera  in  the  f umace,  that  it  may  come  forth  puii* 
fied^  Every  heart  that  bag  ever  groaned  under  the  oppieaaor'a  wrong, 
every  soul  that  has  ever  writhed  niuler  the  proud  maa's  contumely,  must 
feel  that  there  must  be  an^end  to  the  reuni  and  riot  of  evU,  and  a  time 
in  which  inauooence  shall  be  aveuged.  Every  Job  may  lift  up  himself 
before  his  false  accusers,  and  sav,  *'  I  know  that  my  avenger  liveth,  and 
that  he  will  stand  in  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth/' 

Moreover,  there  is  in  the  oonsdenoes  of  mostly  if  not  of  all,  men  ates- 
timony  to  a  coming  judgment.  I  will  not  say  of  all  men,  fer  I  beUeve 
that  some  manage  so  to  drug  their  self-consdousness  as  at  last  to  quiet 
all  their  fears;  but  yet  the  most  of  men  believe  in  a  judgment  to  come, 
and  in  their  more  thoughtful  moods  are  alarmed  thereat.  There  is  more 
fiuth  as  to  the  judgment  than  we  dream  in  those  who  are  most  pro&nely 
daring  in  their  speeches  against  God.  The  reason  why  they  speak  so 
exceeding  proudly  is  because  their  consdences  make  them  cowards,  and 
to  veil  their  cowardice  they  use  bombastic  words.  These  are  the  men 
that  tremble  first,  the  men  that  first  ciy  out  for  mercy  when  the  hand 
of  God  begins  to  touch  them.  How  very  seldom  do  you  find  a  man  die 
in  stolid  unbelief!  At  some  time  or  other  reason  will  speak  and  con- 
science will  be  heardi  and  then  that  "  dread  of  something  after  death  " 
makes  men  cling  even  to  the  most  wretched  state,  choosing  rather  to  bear 
the  ills  they  have  than  fly  to  others  that  they  know  not  of.  Universal 
conscience,  or  almost  universal  conscience,  speaks  like  a  prophet  withiu 
the  soul,  and  tells  of  a  throne  of  judgment,  a  heaven,  ana  a  hell. 

Now,  whether  we  had  or  had  not  this  argument  to  support  us  would 
make  not  one  jot  of  dUBTerence  to  those  of  us  who  believe  in  the  w(»d  of 
God.  What  Grod  says  would  always  be  enough  for  us,  even  if  the  nature  of 
things  and  the  apparent  force  of  reason  should  flatly  contradict  his  word. 
Yes,  I  will  even  put  it  in  that  harsh  way.  We  are  always  glad  when  we 
get  the  subordinate  help  of  arguments  fetched  &om  the  nature  of  things, 
and  so  forth ;  but  we  care  very  little  about  th^n :  we  have  accepted  the 
Bible  as  God*s  revelatioui  we  believe  the  teaching  of  tins  book  to  be  in* 
fiillible,  and  inasmuch  as  the  Scriptures  declare  that  there  iA  a  judgment 
to  come,  we  confidently  look  for  it. 

Now,  according  to  the  revelation  of  the  gospel^  fhisjtsdgmeni  mil  be 
conducted  by  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  God  will  judge  the  world ;  but  it  will 
be  through  his  Son,  whom  he  has  ordained  and  appointed  actually  to  carry 
out  the  business  of  that  last  tremendous  day.  He  who  shaJl  sit  upon  the 
throne  is  ''the  Son  of  man.''  He  will  be  thus  enthronedf  I  suppose, 
partly  because  it  is  involved  in  his  mediatorial  ofBce,  in  which  the  Lord 
hath  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  his  feet.  He  is  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,  ''  angels  and  authorities,  and  powers  being  made  subject  unto 
him."  God  has  been  pleased  to  put  the  world,  not  under  the  direct 
government  of  personal  deity,  but  under  the  government  of  the  Mediator, 
that  he  might  deal  with  us  in  mercy.  That  Mediator  is  both  prophet, 
priest,  and  king,  and  his  kingship  would  be  shorn  of  its  glory  if  the 
iving  had  not  the  power  of  life  and  death,  and  the  power  of  holding 
court  and  judging  his  subjects.*  Jesus  Christ,  therefore,  being  media- 
torial king  and  sovereign,  all  power  being  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and 


JESUS,  THR  JUDOR.  805 

in  earth,  he  will  take  nnto  himself  his  great  power  at  the  last,  and  will 
judge  the  nations.  This  high  position  is  also  awarded  to  our  Lord  as 
an  honour  from  the  Father,  by  which  shall  be  wiped  away  every  trace 
of  the  shame  and  dishonour  through  which  he  passed  among  the  Bons  of 
men.  The  kings  of  the  earth  stood  up  to  judge  him,  bat  they  sliall  stand 
before  him  to  be  judged :  the  rulers  took  connsel  together  to  condemn 
him,  but  the  rulers  shall  stand  at  his  bar  to  be  themsd^x»  condemned : 
Pontius  Pilate  and  the  chief  priests  shall  all  be  there,  and  Caesar,  and 
all  Ceesars  and  Czars  and  emperors  and  kings  and  princes  shall  do 
homage  before  hinf  in  lowliest  manner,  by  standing  before  his  judgmeiit'- 
seat  as  prisoners  to  be  tried  by  him.  There  will  be  no  recollection  of 
the  sceptre  of  reed,  for  he  shall  break  his  enemies  with  a  i*od  of  iron ; 
there  shall  be  no  marks  of  the  thom-crown^  for  on  bis  head  shall  be  many 
a  diadem.  Men  shall  not  then  be  able  to  think  of  him  as  the  Man  of 
tears,  with  visage  sadly  marred  by  grief  and  shame,  for  his  eyes  shall  \n 
as  a  flame  of  Are,  and  his  conntenanoe  as  the  sun  shining  in  its  strength. 
O  cross,  whatever  of  shame  there  was  about  thee  shall  be  wiped  out  for 
ever  among  the  sons  of  men,  for  this  man  shidl  sit  upon  the  throne  of 
judgment !  The  Father  designed  to  put  this  hononnr  upon  htm,  and  he 
hath  rig!)t  well  deserved  it.  Jesus  Christ  as  God  hath  a  glory  which  he 
had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was ;  bnt  as  God-man  he  hath  a 
glory  which  his  Father  hath  given  him  to  be  the  reward  of  that  labour 
of  life  and  death  by  which  he  hath  redeemed  his  people.  *'  Givte  unto  the 
Lord  glory  and  strength  "  is  the  ascription  of  all  his  taints,  and  God  the 
everlasting  Father  hath  done  this  nnto  his  Son,  concerning  whom  he 
hath  sworn  that  every  knee  shall  bow  before  hifn,  and  every  tongue  shall 
confess  that  he  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  ^'  Behold,  the 
Lord  Cometh  with  ten  thousands  of  his  saints,  to  execute  judgment 
upon  all,  and  to  convince  aU  that  are  ungodly  among  th^n  of  all  their 
ungodly  deeds  which  they  hare  nngodly  committed,  and  of  all  their  hard 
speeches  which  ungodly  sinneiB  hav«  spoken  against  him»" 

I  want  you  eqpecif^ly  to  remember  that  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  we  are 
pe^tnally  mninded  fai  referesioe  to  the  jidgmcnt  that  it  is  a  judgment 
by  ihs  man  Chriei  Jtsm,  There  must  be  npeaal  reason  for  thk  honour 
done  to  the  manhood  of  our  Lord,  or  it  would  not  be  so  coBtiBually  in*- 
sisted  upon.  Daniel  in  his  prophecy  (c^.  vii.  IS)  says:  ''I  aiw  is. 
the  night  visions,  and,  behold,  one  like  the  Son  of  man  came  With  the 
clouds  of  heaven,  and  came  to  the  Anoieitt  of  da^ys,  and  they  brougiit 
him  near  before  him."  The  coming  one  in  his  vidioit  was  '^  the  Son  of 
man,"  and  we  all  know  to  whom  mat  title  belongs.  Hence  our  Loni 
himself  very  early  in  his  mtnistiy  took  care  to  claim  for  himself  this 
power  of  governance  and  judgment  Tom  to  John  v.  22,  where  he 
says,  '*  The  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment 
unto  the  Son :  that  all  men  should  honour  the  San,  even  as  they  honour 
the  Fisher."  Then  in  verse  27  he  gives  us  the  reason  for  his  being  thus 
ordained  to  be  the  judge :  **  And  he  hatiii  given  him  authority  to  execute 
jud^ent  also,  beciumse  he  is  the  Son  of  man."  So  chat  not  only  doth 
Daniel  see  him  as  the  Son  of  man,  but  Jesus  Christ  bionelf  decfauKS  that 
the  anthorify  to  jadge  is  given  to  him  because  he  is  the  Son  of  man, 
there  being  in  thait  fact  a  peoaliar  reason  idiy  he  should  be  jndge  of  all 
mankind.    Your  memories  will  at  once  allow  you  to  recollect  that  in  the 


806  KSTROFOLITAK  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

&monfl  pictures  drawn  bj  oar  Lord  wherein  he  describes  the  jadgment 
(Matthew  zx7.  81,  82),  he  takes  care  to  begin  bv  saying,  "  When  the 
Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  gloiy,  and  all  the  hoi j  angels  with  him, 
then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  gloij :  and  before  him  shall  be 
gathered  all  nations :  and  he  shall  separate  them  one  from  another,  as  a 
^epherd  diTideth  his  sheep  from  the  goats."  He  does  not  call  hiinself 
the  Son  of  God  in  this  case,  bat  says, ''  The  Son  of  man  shall  come  in 
his  glory."  So  is  it,  too,  in  Matthew  xiii.  41 :  "  The  Son  of  maa  shall 
send  forth  his  angeli^  and  they  shall  gather  oat  of  his  kingdom  all  things 
that  offend."  This  it  was  which  seems  to  have  struck  m%  apostle  Paul 
so  much  when  he  q^uoted  from  the  Psalms,  and  applied  the  language  to 
Ohrist,  in  Hebrews  li. :  "What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him? 
or  the  Son  of  man,  that  thou  yisitest  him?  Thou  madest  him  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels;  thou  crownedst  him  with  dory  and  honour,  anil 
didst  set  him  over  the  works  of  thy  hands :  thou  hast  put  all  things  in 
subjection  under  his  feet"  Whereon  he  says,  "  We  see  Jesus  crowned 
with  ^lory  and  honour.*' 

It  IS  as  Son  of  man  as  well  as  Son  of  God  that  our  Lord  will  ju^ge  the 
world  at  the  last  great  day.  Be  ye  sure,  then,  of  his  impartiality.  He  is  God, 
yet  man,  having  an  intense  sympathy  both  witli  the  King  and  with  the 
subjects,  haying  manifested  his  grace  even  to  the  rebellious,  and  being  vet 
filled  with  intense  love  to  the  Father  and  his  law.  If  we  could  have  the 
election  of  a  judge,  what  being  could  we  suppose  more  impartial  or  so 
impartial  as  the  Lord,  who,  though  he  counted  it  not  robbery  to  be 
equal  with  God,  yet  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  him- 
self the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  tibe  likeness  of  siniul  flesh  ? 
O  blessed  Judge,  be  thou  at  once  enthroned  by  the  choice  of  the  whole 

,      creation ! 

*^  This  person  is  peculiarlr  suitable  to  be  judge  because  he  has  a  perfect 

knowledge  of  the  taw.  *^  Yea,  thy  law  is  my  delight,"  saith  he.  He  pat 
on  righteousness  as  a  garment.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  his  youth 
up  was  an  exceedingly  deep  scholar  of  tiie  kw  of  Ood  :  he  grew,  as  a 
child,  in  wisdom  concerning  the  will  of  Ood :  his  ear  was  openai  to  hear 
as  the  learned,  that  he  might  know  how  to  sp^ik  a  word  in  season  to 
them  that  are  weary.  He  knows  the  law,  for  he  mAde  himself  subject  to 
it  and  kept  it  in  all  its  parts.  This  is  the  first  requisite  in  a  judge, 
to  be  thoroughly  well  acquainted  with  the  statute-book.  Yet  further, 
he  knows  also  the  evil  of  law-breaking.  What  a  Judge  is  this  whom 
God  hath  appointed,  who,  strange  to  say,  has  himself  suffered  for  siu! 
Though  in  him  was  no  sin,  for  he  was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate 
firom  sinners,  yet  the  sting  of  sin,  which  is  death,  he  has  endured,  and 
the  curse  of  sin  has  passed  upon  him,  as  it  is  written, ''  Cursed  is  every 
one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  With  what  precision,  then,  can  he  judge 
who,  being  both  QkA  and  man,  and  knowing  well  the  law,  has  also  an 
intimate  acquaintance  with  all  the  heinonsness  and  wickedness  of  law- 
breaking  !  Well  did  the  Father  choose  him  to  be  the  Judge  of  the  qoicK 
and  deaid.    It  puts  jadgment  beyond  a  cavil  when  he  who  is  the  Fnend 

^      of  sinneiB  is  miMie  the  Judge  of  sinners. 

Thus  mnch,  then,  concerning  the  fieu^t  that  there  will  be  a  judgm^^' 
and  that  this  judgment  will  be  conducted  by  the  man  Ohrist  Jesus. 
Now,  observe,  that  fkU  judgment  will  concern  all  numkmd.    He  wl 


JESUS,  THE  JUDGE.  907 

judge  the  anick  and  dead ;  that  is,  those  who  will  be  alive  at  his  coming 
he  will  judge  as  well  as  those  who  have  already  died.  He  may  oome 
before  some  of  us  shall  die.  The  time  of  his  adrent  we  cannot  guess, 
but  we  shall  certainly  appear  before  his  judgment-seat  whenever  he  shall 
fix  the  assize.  The  summons  will  exempt  no  man ;  from  the  utmost 
ends  of  the  earth  shall  they  come.  None  will  be  able  to  hide 
themselves  in  solitary  places,  or  to  find  shelter  amongst  the  crowded 
cities.  Here  and  there  a  criminal  escapes  the  vigilant  eye  of  human 
law :  though  it  be  difficult  to  do  so,  yet  there  have  been  cunning  men 
who  year  after  year  have  managed  by  various  disguises  to  escape  recog- 
nition, and  have  continued  their  depredations  and  evaded  the  police; 
but  there  shall  be  no  such  instance  amon^  all  that  shall  be  ahve 
and  remain  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  And  as  for  the  dead  who 
have  died  past  ages,  they  ^aU  all  rise  again.  What  prodigious  multi- 
tudes! What  crowds  that  baffle  all  arithmetic!  let  s^U  they  all 
be  arraigned  and  tried — all  the  living  and  all  the  dead,  of  Christian 
lands  and  heathen  lands,  of  antediluvian  ages  and  of  ages  upon  which 
the  ends  of  the  earth  have  come.  Kings  ana  princes,  and  every  bondman, 
rich  and  poor,  small  and  great,  shall  all  stana  in  that  last  great  day  in 
Christ's  great  judgment  hall.  It  concerns  vou,  my  brother,  as  it  does 
me ;  it  concerns  you,  my  sister,  and  your  children,  as  well  as  those  who 
have  gone  before.  As  surely  as  the  Lord  liveth,  the  things  that  are  seen 
shall  pass  away,  mountains  and  hills  shall  flee  before  him,  and  rocks  shall 
be  melted  down  at  his  presence;  but  his  word  shall  never  nass  away; 
and  behold  he  cometh,  ''behold  he  oometh  with  clouds,  ana  every  eve 
shall  see  him,  and  they  also  which  pierced  him,  and  all  kindreds  of  the 
earth  shall  wail  because  of  him." 

Just  a  few  words  concerning  this  judgment.  When  he  doth  come, 
fJtat  judgment  mil  be  a  very  eminent  one.  It  will  be  a  judgment  fixed 
by  the  peremptory  ordinance  of  God,  for  the  text  saith  that  he  hath 
"ordained"  Jesus  to  sit  as  judge.  It  is  by  ordinance  and  decree  that 
Jeans  Christ  will  take  the  throne.  He  taketh  not  this  honour  upon 
himself  on  his  own  authority,  but  he  claims  the  throne  as  one  that  was 
ordained  of  Ood  as  was  Aaron.  In  all  his  offices  he  quotes  the  divine 
decree,  and  for  this,  the  last  of  all,  he  hath  the  ordinance  of  God  to  be 
the  judge  of  the  q^uick  and  dead.  Everything  done  will  be  by  divine 
authority :  there  will  be  the  stamp  and  seel  of  the  everlasting  God  set 
npon  everythine  that  shall  be  transacted  on  that  grand  occasion.  The 
wnole  trial  will  be  most  solenmly  conducted.  I  shall  not  for  a  single 
moment  attempt  a  description  of  the  scene.  There  is  room,  indeed,  for 
imagery  and  poetry,  but  we  have  none  of  these,  and  want  them  not 
this  morning.  Tins  will  suffice :  "  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend 
from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the 
tmmp  of  God :  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first.  (1  Thess.  iv. 
16.)  There  shall  be  shoutings  when  he  comes,  as  if  all  the  angdic 
bands  lifted  up  their  voices  in  acclamation,  and  above  them  all  one  voice 
shall  ring  out  most  majestically,  the  voice  of  the  archangel :  and  yet 
above  all  other  sounds  a  truinpet-call  shall  thunder  forth,  most  dreadful  to 
the  ears  of  ungodly  men.  Louder  than  ten  thousand  thunders  shall  it 
peal  o*er  earth  and  sea,  and  none  shall  be  able  to  resist  the  summons. 
Then,  in  his  descent,  the  Judge  shall  pass  into  the  region  of  the  clouds : 


808  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

upon  a  great  white  throne  shall  he  sit,  and  every  eye  shall  stx?  him,  ?m(l 
they  also  which  crucified  him.  His  coming  will  be  vrith  s^cat  jx)mp  ot 
angelic  splendour,  fit  for  the  state  of  such  a  King  and  for  the  solemnity 
of  such  a  day. 

That  judgment  will  be  rery  searching,  for  the  apostle  Paul  tells  us  in 
2  Corinthians  v.  10  that  we  shall  give  an  account  for  the  deeds  done  m 
the  body,  each  one  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good 
or  whether  it  be  bad ;  and  our  Saviour,  in  Matthew  xii.  36,  informs  us 
that  for  every  idle  word  that  man  shall  speak  he  must  give  account  in 
the  day  of  judgment ; — words,  therefore,  will  be  put  in  evidence  as  well 
as  actions.  Yea,  and  there  will  be  an  account  taken  in  that  day  of  things 
which  never  reached  the  publicity  of  words,  for  you  know  how  Solomon 
closed  up  the  book  of  JBcclesiastes  by  saying  that  "  God  ahII  bring 
every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good  or 
whether  it  be  evil."  Paul  also  says,  "  God  will  judge  the  secrets  of  men 
by  Jesus  Christ  according  to  my  gospel."  Such  things  as  were  never 
known  by  our  fellow-creatures,  and  were  forgotten  by  ourselves,  shall  be 
revealed  and  judged.  Imaginations,  lustings,  and  desires  of  the  soul, 
secret  thoughts  and  passions,  and  murmurings,  shall  be  laid  open  before 
all  men,  and  before  God  shall  a  reckoning  be  made. 

That  judgment  will  be  of  a  very  exact  kind.  It  will  proceed  upon 
evidence  and  documentary  testimony,  and  slander  and  hearsay  will  not  be 
mentioned  there.  No  condemnation  will  come  upon  good  men  through 
the  whisperings  of  malicious  tongues,  but  everything  shall  be  gone  about 
in  due  o^er  and  according  to  the  rales  of  the  court  of  heaven.  Listen  to 
this  :  "  And  I  saw  a  great  white  throne  and  him  that  sat  on  it,  from 
whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heavens  fled  away,  and  there  was  found  no 
place  for  them :  and  I  saw  the  dead  small  and  great  stand  before  God, 
and  the  books  were  opened," — documentary  testrmony  brought  into  court 
as  evidence — "  and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life ; 
and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  written  in  the 
books,  according  to  their  works."  See  you  not  that  the  judgment  will  be 
done  by  record,  and  solemn  aflidavit,  in  that  great  Court  of  Iviiii^'a 
Bench.  There  will  be  no  hurry,  no  passing  over  judgment  with  a  light 
hand,  but  all  will  be  done  in  truth  and  equity,  and  according  to  tacts 
recorded  by  the  infallible  omniscience  of  God. 

But  what  severity  of  justice  will  then  be  seen ;  for  things  will  not  \yo 
judged  by  their  outward  appearance,  but  put  to  thorough  test  and 
trial.  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord :  "  Every  man's  work  shall  l)e 
made  manifest :  for  the  day  shall  declare  it,  because  it  shall  be  revealed 
by  fire ;  and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is."  Well 
may  we  cry  with  Malachi,  "  But  who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming  ? 
and  who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth?  For  he  is  like  a  refiner's  fire, 
and  like  fuller's  soap." 

The  sentences  which  will  then  be  pronounced  will  be  so  just  as  to  be 
indisputable,  and  even  the  condemned  will  own  the  justness  thereof. 
At  the  last  great  day  not  one  of  the  condemned  shall  be  able  to  deny 
his  guilt,  nor  the  justice  of  the  sentence.  Though  sent  to  hell,  he  will  feel 
it  is  what  he  deserves.  You  remember  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the 
guests,  and  found  a  man  that  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment,  the  intruder 
could  make  no  excuse,  but  stood  speechless.    There  shall  be  an  assent  in 


iJmV^  THE  JUDW.  8Q9 

erezy  haman  mmd  to  die  sentanee  of  the  CliriBt  of  God;  it  shall  flash 
such  awfal  conTiction  into  the  soul  of  e\&nr  siimer,  that,  thourh  he  be 
damned,  his  own  loid  shall  -say  *'  Amen  "  to  we  condemnatioii.  Oh,  what 
a  jadgment-daj  wtU  that  be  in  which  every  one  shall  be  oertainy  even  in 
hk  own  sad  case,  that  the  verdici  of  the  Judge  is  bright  as  the  son  with 
righteouBoesB,  and  cannoi  be  araealed  against !  This,  surelj,  will  be  the 
bell  of  heU,  that  it  is  deserved  even  in  its  utmost  pang  and  bitterest 
pain.  Oh,  my  hearett,  wfll  any  of  you  have  to  saj  ^'  Amen  "  to  your 
own  condemnation  ?    I  piay  the  Lord  te  save  you  from  such  a  &te. 

That  venlict  will  Jbe  fiinl  and  irrev^sible.  When  Jeans  has  once 
pronoonoed  it,  there  will  be  no  appeal,  no  suing  out  of  a  writ  of  error, 
no  reversal  of  the  decree.  He  liimself  hath  said  it:  *' These  shall  go 
away  into  everiastinr  paoisfainent :  buii  the  righteous  into  life  etemaL" 
There  will  be  no  delay  in  execution,  nor  escape  from  the  doom.  There 
will  be  no  steeling  of  the  heart  to  endure  it,  and  no  outliving  the  doom. 
It  will  last  on  in  ail  its  teiror, — ^the  final  verdict  of  the  Judge  of  all  the 
earth,  pronounoed  by  the  Ohzist  of  love.  I  know  not  how  to  speak  upon 
such  a  theme  as  this,  but  must  leave  it  as  it  stands  before  you.  May 
the  Hohr  Ghost  impress  it  unon  your  minds. 

II.  1  desire,  in  the  second  place,  to  call  your  attention  for  a  little  while 
to  THE  BViDBNT  HfBOiciAHCX  OF  THIS  KS88AGS.  Its  importance  may  be 
gathered  from  the  t^t,  becanae  it  says,  ^'  He  oommanded  us  to  preach 
this."  Did  tiie  eternal  God  give  a  command  for  us  to  preach  this  trnth? 
Then  he  must  know  in  his  inlSnite  wisdom  that  there  is  a  great  necessity 
for  its  being  declared.  But  please  notice  the  way  in  which  the  conmiaud 
is  to  be  executed.  **  He  commanded  us  io  frtach^^  Now,  to  preach 
means  to  herald,  to  prodaim.  Lo,  we  this  day  precede  the  great  Judge, 
as  the  trumpeters  go  before  our  judges  on  assize*day,  and  this  is  our  cry, 
''  He  cometn !  He  cometh  I  He  oometh  I  The  Man  of  Nazareth,  Jesus 
the  crucified  is  coming,  appointed  Judge  of  quick  aud  dead !''  And  we 
are  to  cry  this  with  all,  that  loudness  of  voice  and  earnestness  of  tone,  and 
solemnity  of  manner  which  become  the  heralds  of  the  King  of  kings. 
Whether  ye  believe  it  or  not,  he  cometh  ;  whether  ye  trifle  with  it  or 
not,  whether  ye  are  rebels  or  loyal  subjects,  he  cometh,  and  that 
speedily.  He  cometh  to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  and  the  people 
in  equity.  Thus  we  make  solemn  proclamation  in  his  name,  declaring 
to  you  a  &ct  which  ye  do  well  to  hear  with  serious  hearts  and  thoughtful 
minds. 

But  then  it  is  added  that  we  are  ''  io  testify  that  it  is  he."  Having 
given  the  proclamation,  we  are  then  to  bear  witness  solemnly,  and  to  spei^ 
the  fiEict  over  and  over  again  for  God,  adding  our  own  belief  that  it  is 
surely  true.  In  the  Greek  this  word  ^  testify ''  is  very  forcible,  something 
like  the  affirmation  which  those  of  us  who  account  it  \iTong  to  take  an 
oath  are  wont  to  make  in  courts  of  law.  We  give  our  solemn  affirma- 
tion aud  truthful  testimony  that  it  is  so.  It  is  the  truth,  the  whole 
truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth  that  we  declare  when  we  tell  you  that 
Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  the  Son  of  man,  is  coming  upon  the  clouds  of 
heaven  to  judge  the  quiok  and  dead.  We  are  to  speak  of  this  as  a  thing 
we  know  and  are  certain  of;  and  we  are  to  stand  before  men,  and 
whether  they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  forbear,  testify  that  it  is 
even  so.    That  which  is  to  be  both  proclaimed  and  testified  in  obedience 


SIO  KETBOPOLITAN  TABSSNAOLB  PULPIT. 

to  the  divine  oommand  is  no  mean  matter.    Hearken  to  it  and  take  good 
heed,  I  beseech  yon. 

And  this  is  to  be  done^unio  the  people," — not  to  some  few,  but  to  all 
the  people,  to  the  Gentiles,  to  the  nations.  Wherever  we  go  this  is  to 
be  part  of  our  proclamation  as  the  heralds  of  Christ,  **  Behold,  he  oometh 
to  judge  mankind."  To  yon,  my  hearers,  even  to  yon  is  this  word  of 
warning  sent.    Will  ye  not  regard  it  ? 

Now,  brethren,  there  is  importance  in  this,  not  only  according  to  the 
text,  but  from  other  reasons.  If  yon  think  awhile  yon  will  see  that  it 
sheds  a  great  light  upon  the  future  of  the  ungodly.  Whatever  yon,  my 
brother,  choose  to  say  of  the  wrath  of  God  wmch  is  revealed  oonceming 
the  impenitent,  please  think  of  this.  It  may  be,  you  feel  troubled  about 
its  dread  severity  and  eternity ;  but  let  this  ease  your  perplexity,  that 
the  Judge  upon  whom  the  sentence  depends  is  Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour 
of  men.  I  feel  perfectly  safe  in  leaving  the  future  of  the  wicked  in 
such  hands  as  his ;  and  however  terrible  may  be  his  own  words,  and  Uiey 
are  terrible  to  the  last  degree,  about  the  future  of  the  lost,  I  for  one  can 
never  quarrd  with  km.  If  it  were  Moses  that  spoke,  if  he  spoke  for 
God,  I  dare  not  challenge  him,  yet  might  there  be  the  temptation ;  but 
when  he  speaks  who  is  the  Son  of  man,  let  all  the  earth  keep  silence 
before  him.  The  severity  which  he  exercises  must  be  inevitable  severity ; 
be  ve  sure  of  that.  If  there  be  pain,  and  anguish,  and  wrath  to  eveiy 
soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil,  then,  since  it  is  the  Christ  who  will  pro- 
nounce it,  it  will  be  because  it  must  be,  and  cannot  be  helped,  but  must 
be  so  in  the  nature  of  things.  Therefore  we  bow  before  the  dreadful 
doctrine  of  Scripture,  and,  instead  of  trying  to  quiet  men  in  their  sins, 
we  know  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  and  we  beseech  them  in  Christ's  stead 
that  they  be  reconciled  to  God. 

**  Ye  rinneni,  seek  his  fece, 

Whose  wrath  je  cannot  bear  ; 
Fly  to  the  shelter  of  his  cross, 

And  find  salvation  there.'* 

Fly  into  the  clefts  of  that  rock  which  otherwise  will  grind  you  to 
powder  when  it  falls  upon  you. 

This  doctrine,  too,  that  Christ  is  Judge,  ought  never  to  be  forgotten, 
because  it  reflects  great  glory  upon  him.  Ah,  sons  of  men,  ye  may 
despise  him,  but  he  is  your  Master  after  all :  ye  may  say,  *'  Let  us  break 
his  bands  asunder  and  cast  his  cords  from  us,"  but  Jehoyah'sown  decree 
hath  set  him  as  King  upon  his  holy  hill  of  Zion.  Te  may,  if  ye  will, 
bite  your  lips,  and  rage  and  rave  against  the  incarnate  God,  Jesus  our 
Lord  and  King ;  but  ye  shall  stand  before  him,  as  surely  as  ye  live,  to  con- 
fess the  blindness  and  the  futility  of  your  opposition,  and  to  be  made 
to  bow  your  knees  in  terror  if  ye  will  not  bend  them  now  in  reverence. 
Yes,  he  is  King.  The  world  may  say  what  it  wills,  and  there  may  come 
durker  times  than  tiiese,  but  the  lone  star  gleams  afar  with  undying 
brightness — the  Star  of  the  morning  which  ushers  in  the  eternal  day. 
Jesus  Cometh,  and  when  he  cometh  light  breaks  for  all  that  are  on  his 
side,  though  the  black  and  murky  darkness  of  an  endless  night  shall 
descend  on  all  that  are  his  foes. 

I  close  by  noticing  that  the  importance  of  this  doctrine  is  very  great, 
if  we  recollect  its  beneficial  effect  upon  our  everyday  life.    I  constautly 


JKSUSy  THB  JUDGE.  811 

hear  sillj  people,  wicked  p^sons,  saj, ''  Tell  the  people  about  something 
that  has  to  do  with  to-day,  about  cleanliness  and  honesty,  and  all  that." 
Ab  if  we  did  not  do  that,  and  as  if  we  were  not  the  fint  to  exhort  men  to 
fulfil  all  manner  of  social  duties.  Do  we  not  bid  them  think  on  what- 
soever things  are  pure,  honest,  temperate,  and  of  good  repute  ?  But  if  I 
want  men  to  hve  righteously,  soberly,  and  honestly,  I  know  of  no  motive 
that  can  have  greater  weight  with  them  than  this  of  a  judgment  to 
come.  TiJce  that  away  from  us,  what  have  we  to  urge  upon  the  sons 
of  men  at  all  ?  If  they  are  to  die  like  brutes,  they  will  live  like  brutes. 
If  there  be  no  hereafter,  they  do  well  to  say,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for 
to-morrow  we  die."  This,  though  it  looketh  like  a  future  thing,  is  one 
of  the  present-day  questions  of  every  hour.  You  are  stewards,  you  will 
have  to  give  in  joui  account, — ^your  Lord  will  come  and  question  you  as 
to  your  use  of  his  goods.  Will  anybody  in  his  senses  tell  me  that  this 
is  unpractical  ?  Surehr,  every  reasonable  man  will  admit  that  for  the 
promotion  of  right,  and  truth,  and  holiness  tins  is  one  of  the  most  prac- 
tical considerations  that  can  possibly  be  found.  If  God  will  judge  men 
at  the  last,  it  behoves  men  to  see  how  they  live  to-day. 

Another  special  benefit  of  this  truth  is  its  convincing  and  awakening 
power.  Men  tremble  when  they  hear  of  judgment  to  come,  and  they 
are  led  to  cry,  *'  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Men  be^n  to  confess 
their  sin  when  they  are  told  that  the  law  by  which  they  will  be  judged 
is  spiritual,  and  reaches  even  to  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart. 
"Then,"  say  they,  "who  can  stand  before  his  presence  when  once  he  is 
angry  ?  If  even  to  think  an  evil  thought,  or  to  lust  an  evil  desire  brings 
condemnation,  who  among  us  can  stand  when  the  heart-searching  God 
shall  sift  the  sons  of  men?"  This  is  the  reason  why  it  ought  to  be 
preached,  for  only  penitents  convinced  of  sin  are  likely  to  accept  the 
remission  of  sins.  This  is  the  plough  which  makes  furrows  for  the  good 
seed  ;  this  is  the  surgeon's  knife  which  prepares  for  the  reception  of  the 
healing  balm. 

And  0,  my  brothers  and  sisters,  you  all  know  how  quickening  this 
doctrine  is  to  Christians.  We  do  not  fear  the  day  of  judgment ;  we  do 
not  dread  the  thought  of  standing  before  our  Lord  Jesus,  because  we 
have  a  plea  which  we  know  will  answer  every  purpose.  Our  plea  is  this  : 
we  have  been  tried,  condemned,  and  punished  already.  Thou  Judge  of 
all,  thou  knowest  when  we  were  tried,  and  judged,  and  condemned  I  Lo, 
in  thy  hands  the  nail-prints  which  are  the  witnesses  that  thou  didst  bcnr 
our  sins  in  thine  own  body  on  the  tree.  Lo,  at  thy  side  thou  weareat 
the  ruby  gem  which  tells  how  thine  own  heart  made  expiation  for  the 
guilt  of  all  that  trust  in  thee.  We  are  not  afraid,  for  there  is  no  judg- 
ment for  him  who  is  judged  already,  no  punishment  for  him  who  is 
punished  already  in  a  Substitute  whom  God  has  accepted.  Yet  this  ex- 
pectation of  judgment  quickens  us  to  holy  duty ;  we  feel  that  since  tlic 
Master  comes  we  would  be  as  men  that  look  for  their  liord,  and  stand 
with  our  loins  girded,  doing  service,  expecting  to  hear  liis  footetep  at 
any  moment. 

"  O  watch'  and  pray !  the  Judge  is  at  the  door, 
Before  bis  flaming  bar  thou  soon  must  stand  ; 
O  watch!  and  keep  thy  garments  9potle;?s  pure, 
And  thou  shalt  then  be  found  at  his  right  hand." 


312  MKTROPOLITAH  TABERKACLK  PULPIT. 

I  shall  be  glad  if  any  word  that  I  have  qmkeii  upon  this  trath  shall 
strike  and  stick  and  abide  in  jonr  hearts,  and  make  those  think  who 
have  been  most  thoughtless  concerning  the  world  to  come.  Years  i^o  a 
gentlewoman  had  been  spending  an  afternoon  at  cards,  and  the  cTenin^ 
at  a  ball,  and  such-like  amusements:  she  came  home  very  late,  and 
found  that  her  maid-servant,  who  was  sitting  up  waiting  for  her,  was 
reading  a  book.  **  Ah,"  said  she,  "  are  you  still  poring  over  your  dull 
books  ?  They  make  you  moping  and  melancholy.  The  lady  retired  to 
her  chamber,  but  she  slept  not.  In  the  night  she  waa  troubled,  and  fell 
a-weeping.  Sleep  forsook  her.  She  tossed  to  and  fro ;  and  at  length 
she  called  her  maid.  She  said,  '*  Madam,  what  ails  you?  I  thought  I 
left  you  very  merry  and  well."  "  Oh,"  said  she, "  but  I  looked  over 
your  book,  and  I  only  saw  one  word,  but  that  word  stings  me :  I  cannot 
sleep ;  I  cannot  bear  it."  **  What  word  was  it,  madam  ?  **  **  It  was  that 
wora  *  ETEBKITT.'  Oh,  maid/'  said  she,  **  it  is  very  well  for  me  to  sport 
and  play,  and  waste  my  time  as  I  have  done,  but  oh,  eternity,  eteniitj, 
eternity!  How  can  I  face  etemitv?"  And  so  that  night  was  turned 
to  weeping  and  to  praver.  I  could  wish  the  like  might  happen  now  to 
many  of  you.  The  «iudge  is  at  the  door.  Jesus  comes  to  judge  you : 
will  you  have  him  now  to  be  vour  Saviour?  If  not,  his  coming  will 
cause  you  to  weep  and  wail,  and  that  throughout  eternity.  Remember 
that  word, — eternity.    God  bless  you  all.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  rkad  before  Sermon-— Acts  x.  24 — 48. 


Hthns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 846,  410,  364. 


JuMt  pvhlUhed^  kandtomcly  hound  in  Clothe  Demy  8eo.,  S6  pages. 

Price  One  ShilUnfc. 

THE  MEMORIAL  VOLUME,  containing  the  Sermons  and  Addresses  de- 
livered in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Newington,  in  connection  with 
the  Pbbsbmtation  or  a  TasTiiioiiiAL  to  PASToa  C.  U.  Spubgeoh,  u^Mn  the 
completion  of  tbb  TwKHTT-FirxH  YsAa  op  hib  Pastobatk,  with  Mn$ic  sung 
on  tne  occasion.    An  interesting  record  of  a  rare  event 

Passsiobs  it  Alabastbb,  4,  pAtemoster  Buildings;  and  all  BooksoUen. 


p:^j);^«tttmi:  ^Tsbtfmk  fulpt 


JESUS  *ADMIEED  IN  THEM  THAT  BELIEVK 


%  ^mn 


Delivebed  on  Lord's-Dat  Mobniko,  June  1st,  1870,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  UETBOPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLE,  NEWINGTOH. 


**  When  he  shall  oome  to  be  glorified  in  his  eaints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them 
that  believe  (because  onr  testmiony  among  yon  was  believed}  in  that  day." — 
2  Theaialonians  i.  10. 

What  a  difference  between  the  first  and  second  comings  of  our  Lord  I 
When  he  shall  come  a  second  time  it  will  be  to  be  glorified  and  admired, 
bat  when  he  came  the  first  time  it  was  to  be  despised  and  rejected  of 
men.  He  comes  a  second  time  to  reign  with  unexampled  splendour,  but 
the  first  time  he  came  to  die  in  circumstances  of  shame  and  sorrow. 
Liffc  np  your  eyes,  ye  sons  of  light,  and  anticipate  ihe  change,  wMch 
will  be  as  great  for  you  as  for  your  Lord ;  for  now  ye  are  hidden  even  as 
he  was  hidden,  and  misunderstood  even  as  he  was  misunderstood  when 
he  walked  amon^  the  sons  of  men.  *'  We  know  that,  when  he  shall 
appear,  we  shall  oe  like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  His  mani- 
festation will  be  onr  manifestation,  and  in  the  day  in  which  he  is  re- 
vealed in  glory  then  shall  his  saints  be  glorified  witn  him. 

Observe  that  our  Lord  is  spoken  of  as  coming  in  his  glory,  and  as  at 
ihe  same  time  taking  vengeance  in  flaming  fire  on  them  that  know  not 
God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel.  This  is  a  note  of  great  terror  to  all 
those  who  are  ignorant  of  God,  and  wickedly  unbelieving  concerning  his 
Christ.  Let  them  take  heed,  for  the  Lord  will  gain  gloir  by  the  over- 
throw of  his  enemies,  and  those  who  would  not  bow  before  him  cheerfully 
shall  be  compelled  to  bow  before  him  abjectly :  they  shall  crouch  at  his 
feet,  they  shall  lick  the  dust  in  terror,  and  at  the  glance  of  his  eyes  they 
shall  utterly  wither  away,  as  it  is  written,  they  ''  shall  be  punished  with 
everlasting  destruction  mm  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  trom  the  glory 
of  his  power."  But  this  is  not  the  main  object  for  which  Christ  will 
oome,  nor  is  this  the  matter  in  which  he  findeth  his  chieieBt  glory,  for, 
observe,  he  does  this  as  it  were  by  the  way,  when  he  comes  for  another 
purpose.  To  destrov  the  wicked  is  a  matter  of  necessity  in  which  his 
spirit  tekes  no  delight,  for  he  doth  this,  according  to  the  text,  not  so 
much  when  he  cometh  to  do  it  as  when  he  shall  come  with  another 
object,  namely,  **  To  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  them 
Uiat  believe. 
No.  1,477. 


314  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

The  crowning  honour  of  Ohriit  will  be  seem  in  his  people,  and  this  is 
the  doBiffn  with  which  he  will  return  to  this  earth  in  the  latter  days,  that 
he  may  be  illustrious  in  his  saints  and  exceedingly  magnified  in  them. 
Even  now  his  saints  glorify  him.  When  they  walk  in  holiness  they  do, 
as  it  were,  reflect  his  light ;  their  holy  deeds  are  beams  from  him  who  is 
the  Sun  of  righteousness.  ,When  they  believe  in  him  they  also  glorify 
him,  for  there  is  no  grace  which  pays  lowlier  homage  at  the  throne  of 
Jesus  than  the  grace  of  faith  whereby  we  trust  him,  and  so  confess  him 
to  be  our  all  in  all.  We  do  glorify  our  gracious  Lord,  but,  beloved 
brethren,  we  must  all  confess  that  we  do  not  this  as  we  could  desire,  for, 
alas,  too  often  we  dishonour  him,  and  grieve  his  Holy  Spirit.  By  our 
want  of  zeal  and  by  our  many  sins  we  are  guilty  of  discrediting  his 
gospel  and  dishonouring  his  name.  Happy,  happy,  happy  day  when  this 
shall  no  more  be  possible,  when  we  shall  be  rid  of  the  inward  corruption 
which  now  worketh  itself  into  outward  sin,  and  shall  never  dishonour 
Christ  again,  but  shall  shine  with  a  clear,  pure  radiance,  like  the  moon 
on  the  Passover  night,  when  it  looketh  the  sun  fiill  in  the  face,  and  then 
shines  upon  the  earth  at  her  best.  To-day  we  are  like  vessels  on  the 
wheel,  but  half  fashioned,  yet  even  now  somewhat  of  his  divine  skill  is 
seen  in  us  as  his  handiwork.  Still  the  unformed  clay  is  in  part  seen,  and 
much  remains  to  be  done  ;  how  much  more  of  the  great  Potter's  creating 
wisdom  and  sanctifying  power  will  be  displayed  when  we  shall  be  the 
perfect  products  of  his  hand !  In  the  bud  and  germ  our  new  nature 
brings  honour  to  its  Author ;  it  will  do  far  more  when  its  perfection 
manifests  the  Finisher.  Then  sliall  Jesus  be  glorified  and  admired  in 
every  one  of  us  when  the  days  of  the  new  creation  are  ended  and  God 
shall  usher  in  the  eternal  Sabbath  by  pronouncing  his  grace-work  to  be 
very  good. 

This  morning,  as  God  shall  help  me,  I  shall  speak  first  of  Um  special 
glorification  of  Christ  here  inietuM :  and,  secondly,  I  shall  conclude  the 
sermon  by  calling  your  attention  to  the  special  considerations  which  this 
grand  truth  suggests, 

I.    Let  us  consider  carefully  the    special  olorifioation  hebe 

INTENDED. 

And  the  first  point  to  note  is  the  time.  The  text  saith  "When  he 
shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints."  The  full  glorification  of  Christ 
in  his  saints  will  be  when  he  sliall  come  a  second  time,  according  to  the 
sure  word  of  prophecy.  He  is  glorified  in  tlicm  now,  for  he  saith, 
''All  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine ;  and  I  am  glorified  in  them"; 
but  as  yet  that  glory  is  perceptible  to  himself  rather  than  to  the  outer 
world.  The  lamps  are  being  trimmed,  they  will  shine  ere  long.  These 
are  the  days  of  preparation  before  that  Sabbath  which  is  in  an  infinite 
sense  a  high  day.  As  it  was  said  of  Esther,  that  for  so  many  months 
she  prepared  herself  with  myrrh  and  sweet  odiours  before  she  entered  the 
kingis  palace,  to  be  espoused  of  him,  even  so  are  we  now  being  purified 
and  made  ready  for  that  august  day  when  the  perfected  church  shall  be 
presented  unto  Christ  as  a  bride  imto  her  husband.  John  saith  of  her 
that  she  shall  be  "  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband."  This 
is  our  night,  wherein  we  must  watoh,  but  behold  the  morning  cometh,  a 
morning  without  clouds,  and  then  shall  we  walk  in  a  seven-fold  light 
because  our  Well-beloved  hath  come.    That  second  advent  of  his  will  be 


JESXTB  ADMIRED  IN  THEIC  THAT  BELIEYF.  315 

his  revelation :  he  was  nnder  a  doud  here,  and  men  perceived  him  not, 
save  only  a  few  who  beheld  his  glory ;  but  when  he  comes  a  second 
time  all  veils  will  be  removed  and  every  eve  shall  see  the  glory  of  his 
countenance.  For  this  he  waits  and  his  church  waits  with  him.  We 
know  not  when  the  set  time  shall  arrive,  but  every  hour  is  bringing  it 
nearer  to  ns,  therefore  let  us  stand  with  loins  girt,  awaiting  it 

Note,  secondly,  in  whom  this  glorification  of  Christ  is  to  be  found. 
The  text  does  not  say  he  will  be  glorified  **  by  "  his  saints,  but  *'  in  his 
saints."  There  is  a  shade  of  difference,  yea,  more  than  a  shade,  between 
the  two  terms.  We  endeavour  to  glorify  him  now  by  our  actions,  but 
then  he  will  be  glorified  in  our  own  persons,  and  character,  and  condition. 
He  is  glorified^  what  we  do,  but  he  is  at  the  last  to  be  glorified  m 
-what  we  are.  Who  are  these  in  whom  Jesus  is  to  be  glorified  and  ad- 
mired ?  They  are  spoken  of  under  two  descriptions :  ''  in  his  saints,"  and 
"  in  all  them  that  believe." 

In  **  his  saints  "  first  All  those  in  whom  Christ  will  be  dorified  are 
described  as  holy  ones  or  saints :  men  and  women  who  have  been  sancti- 
fied, and  made  pure,  whose  gracious  lives  show  that  they  have  been 
under  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  obedient  actions  prove 
that  they  are  disciples  of  a  Holy  Master,  even  of  him  who  was  ''  holy, 
harmless,  undefiled,  and  separotte  from  sinners."  But,  inasmuch  as  these 
saints  are  also  said  to  be  believers,  I  gather  that  the  holiness  which  will 
honour  Christ  at  last  is  a  holiness  based  on  &ith  in  him,  a  hoUness  of 
which  this  was  the  root, — ^that  they  first  trusted  in  Christ,  and  then, 
being  saved,  they  loved  their  Lord  and  obeyed  him.  Their  faith  wrought 
by  love  and  punfied  their  souls,  and  so  deansed  their  lives.  It  is  an 
inner  as  well  as  an  outer  purity,  arising  out  of  the  living  and  operative 
principle  of  faith.  If  any  tmnk  that  they  can  attain  to  holiness  apart 
from  faith  in  Christ  they  are  as  much  mistaken  as  he  who  should  hope 
to  reap  a  harvest  without  casting  seed  into  the  furrows.  Faith  is  the 
bulb,  and  saintship  is  the  delightfully  fragrant  fiower  which  cometh  of 
it  when  planted  in  the  soil  of  a  renewed  heart.  Beware,  I  pray  you,  of 
any  pretence  to  a  holiness  arising  out  of  yourselves,  and  maintained  by 
the  energy  of  your  own  unaided  wills ;  as  well  look  to  gather  grapes  of 
thorns  or  figs  of  thistles.  True  saintship  must  spring  from  confidence  in 
the  Saviour  of  sinners,  and  if  it  doth  not  it  is  lacking  in  the  first  elements 
of  truth.  How  can  that  be  a  perfect  character  which  finds  its  basis  in 
self-esteem?  How  could  Christ  be  glorified  by  saints  who  refuse  to  trust 
in  him? 

I  would  call  your  attention  once  again  to  the  second  description,  **  All 
them  that  believe."  This  is  enlarged  by  the  hint  that  they  are  believers 
in  a  certain  testimony,  according  to  the  bracketed  sentence — *'  because 
onr  testimony  amon^  you  was  believed."  Now,  the  testimony  of  the 
apostles  was  concemmg  Christ  They  saw  him  in  the  body,  and  they 
bore  witness  that  he  was  **  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  " ;  they  saw  his  holy 
life,  and  they  bore  witness  to  it ;  they  saw  his  death  of  grief,  and  they 
witnessed  that  ''God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself"; 
they  saw  him  risen  from  the  dead,  and  they  said, ''  We  are  witnesses  of 
his  resurrection";  they  saw  him  rise  into  heaven,  and  they  bore  witness 
that  God  had  taken  him  up  to  his  right  hand.  Now,  all  that  believe  this 
witness  are  saved.    '*  If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord 


816  XETBOPOLITAN  TABEIOrACLE  PCTIiPIT. 

JesHH,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  6Dom, 
the  dead,  thon  shalt  be  sayed."  All  who  with  a  simpk  futh  oome  fuid 
ccust  themselreB  npon  the  incarnate  Ood,  living  and  dying  for  men,  and 
ever  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  to  make  intercession  for  them>«— 
these  are  the  people  in  whom  Christ  will  be  glorified  and  admired  at  the 
last  great  day.  But  inasmndi  as  they  are  firat  said  to  be  ssmitSp  be  it 
never  forgotten  that  this  faith  mnst  be  a  living  faith,  a  faith  which  pro- 
daces  a  hatred  of  sin,  a  fstith  which  renews  the  charaoler  and  shapes 
the  life  after  the  noble  model  of  Christ,  thns  tamimg  simien  into  sunta. 
The  two  descriptions  nmst  not  be  violently  rent  asuidfir ;  yon  mnst  not 
say  that  the  favom^  people  are  sancti^d  wiUiont  r^nembering  that 
they  are  justified  by  faitn,  nor  may  you  say  that  they  are  justified  by  fi^th 
without  remembering  that  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord, 
and  that  at  the  last  die  people  in  whom  Christ  will  be  admired  will  be 
those  holy  ones  who  were  saved  by  faith  in  him. 

So  far,  then,  we  see  our  way,  but  now  a  question  arises  :  by  wham  will 
Christ  be  thus  glorified  and  admired  ?  He  shines  in  his  people,  hot  who 
will  see  the  glory  ?  I  answer  first,  that  his  people  will  see  it.  Every 
saint  will  glorify  Christ  in  himself,  and  admire  Christ  in  himself.  He 
will  say,  *^  What  a  wonder  that  sack  a  poor  creature  aa  I  am  should  be 
thus  perfected !  How  glorious  is  my  Lord,  who  hais  wrought  this  miracle 
upon  me ! "  Surely  our  consciousness  of  having  been  deansed  and  made 
holy  will  cause  us  to  fulfil  those  words  of  John  Berridge  which  we  sang 
just  now: — 

'<  He  checsrs  them  with  eternal  smile, 

The/  sing  hosaimaA  all  the  while ; 

Or,  overwhelm'd  with  rapture  sweet, 

Sink  down  adoring  at  his  feet.*' 

This  I  know,  that  when  I  personally  enter  heaven  I  shall  for  ever  admire 
and  adore  the  everlasting  love  which  brought  me  there.  Yes,  we  will 
all  glorify  and  admire  our  Saviour  for  what  he  has  wrought  in  us  by  his 
infinite  grace. 

The  saints  will  also  admire  Christ  in  one  another.  As  I  shall  see  you 
and  you  shall  see  your  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ  all  perfect,  you  will 
be  filled  with  wonderment,  and  gratitude,  and  delight.  You  will  be  firee 
from  all  envy  there,  and  therefiw-e  you  will  rejoice  in  all  the  beauty  of 
your  fellow  saints  :  their  heaven  will  be  a  heaven  to  you,  and  what  a 
multitude  of  heavens  you«wiIl  have  as  you  will  joy  in  the  joy  of  all  the 
redeemed !  We  shall  as  much  admire  the  Lord's  handiwork  in  others  as 
in  ourselves,  and  shall  each  one  praise  him  for  saving  all  the  rest.  You 
will  see  your  Lord  in  all  your  brethren,  and  this  will  make  you  praise 
and  adore  him  world  without  end  with  a  perpetual  amazement  of  ever- 
growing delight. 

Bnt  that  will  not  be  all.  Besides  the  blood-bought  and  raoaomed  of 
Christ  there  will  be  on  that  great  day  of  his  coming  all  the  holy  angels 
to  stand  by  and  look  on  and  wonder.  They  marvelled  much  when  first 
he  stooped  fVom  heaven  to  earth,  and  they  desired  to  look  into  those 
things,  which  then  were  a  mystery  to  them.  But  when  they  shall  see 
their  beloved  Prince  come  back  with  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  of 
the  ransomed  at  his  feet,  aft  of  them  made  perfect  by  having  washed  their 
robes  and  made  them  white  in  his  blood,  how  the  principalities  and 


J£SUB  ADtflBSD  IN  THEM  THAT  BELIEVE.  317 

poweiB  will  admire  him  in  every  one  of  his  redeemed  !  How  they  will 
praise  that  conquering  arm  which  has  hrouglit  home  all  these  spoils  from 
the  war  !  How  will  the  hosts  of  heaven  shout  his  ])raises  as  they  see 
him  lead  all  these  captives  captive  with  a  now  captivity,  in  chaios  of 
love,  joyftUy  gvaoing  his  triimiph  and  shi>wiog  forth  the  completeness  of 
his  victory ! 

We  do  sot  know  what  other  races  of  imiooent  creatures  tlicre  may  he. 
bat  I  think  it  is  no  stretch  of  imagination  to  believe  that,  as  this  world 
is  only  one  speck  in  the  creation  of  God,  there  may  be  millions  of  other 
races  in  the  countless  worldaaroand  us,  aud  all  these  may  be  invited  to 
behold  the  wonders  of  cedeeming  love  as  manifested  in  the  saints  in  the 
day  of  the  Lord.  I  seem  to  see  these  unfallen  intclUgenoes  encompassing 
the  saints  as  a  doud  of  witnesses,  and  in  ra{>t  vision  beholding  in  them 
the  love  and  grace  of  the  redeeming  Lord.  What  songs !  l^at  shouts 
shall  rise  from  all  these  to  the  praise  of  the  ever  blessed  God  !  What 
an  orchestra  of  praise  will  the  universe  become !  From  star  to  star  the 
hcij  hymn  shall  roll^  till  all  space  shall  ring  out  the  hosannas  of  wonder- 
ing spirits.  ''The  Wonderful,  the  (}oun^or,  the  Mighty  God,  the 
Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace/'  shall  have  brought  liome  all 
the  men  wandered  at^  and  tiiey  with  himself  shall  be  the  wonder  of 
eternity. 

Then  shall  Satan  and  his  deFeated  legions,  and  the  lost  spirits  of 
ungodly  men,  bite  their  lips  with  envy  and  rage,  and  tremble  at  the 
mtgesty  of  Jesus  in  that  oay.  By  their  confe^ed  defeat  and  manifest 
despair  they  shall  glorify  him  in  his  people,  in  whom  they  have  been 
utterly  overthrown.  They  shall  see  that  there  is  not  one  lost  whom  he 
redeemed  by  blood,  not  one  snatched  away  of  all  the  sheep  his  Father 
gave  him,  not  one  warrior  enlisted  beneath  his  banner  fallen  in  the  day 
of  battle,  but  all  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  them. 
What  despair  shall  seiae  upon  <uabo]ic  spirits  as  they  discover  their 
entire  defeat!  Defeated  in  men  who  were  once  their  slaves!  Poor 
dupes  whom  they  could  so  easily  beguile  by  their  craftiness, — defeated 
even  in  these !  Jesns  triumphant  by  taking  the  lambs  from  between  the 
lion's  jaws,  and  rescuing  his  feeble  sheep  from  their  power,  will  utterly 
put  them  to  shame  in  his  redeemed.  With  what  anguish  will  they  sink 
into  the  hell  prepared  for  them,  because  now  they  hear  with  anger  all  earth 
and  heaven  and  every  star  ringing  with  the  shout, — Hall^ujah,  Halle- 
Injah,  Hatteltt>ah,  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth,  and  the  Lamb 
hath  comfnered  by  his  blood. 

You  6fi8  then  that  there  are  enough  spectators  to  magnify  Christ  in 
his  aainta ;  and  so,  fourthly,  let  us  inquire  m  what  degree  will  the  Lord 
Jeans  be  glorified  ?  Our  answer  is,  it  will  be  to  the  very  highest  degree. 
He  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  sainte  to  the  utmost^  for  this  is  clear 
from  the  words,  '^  to  be  admired."  When  our  translation  was  made  the 
weed  ^'admired''  had  to  ordinary  Englishmen  a  stronger  flavour  of 
wonder  than  it  has  to  us  now.  We  ofix^n  speak  of  admiring  a  thing  in 
the  fiofter  sense  of  loving  it,  but  the  real  meaning  of  the  £nglii£  word,  and 
of  the  Cteaek  also,  is  tconder:  our  Lord  will  be  wondered  at  in  all  them 
that  believe.  Those  who  look  upon  the  saints  will  feel  a  sudden  wonder- 
ment of  sacred  delight ;  they  will  be  startled  with  the  surprising  glory  of 
the  Lord's  work  in  them ;  **  We  thought  He  would  do  great  things,  but 


318  KIETBOFOLITAN  TABERNACUB  PULPIT. 

this !  This  surpasseth  oonoeption ! "  Every  saint  will  be  a  wonder  to 
hinuielf.  "  I  thought  my  bliss  would  be  great,  bnt  not  like  this ! "  All 
Mb  brethren  will  be  a  wonder  to  the  perfected  believer.  He  will  say,  ''I 
thought  the  saints  would  be  perfect,  but  I  never  imagined  sadi  a 
transfiguration  of  excessive  glory  would  be  put  upon  each  of  them.  I 
could  not  have  imagined  my  Lord  to  be  so  good  and  gracious/*  The 
angels  in  heaven  will  say  that  they  never  anticipated  such  deeds  of  grace : 
they  did  know  that  he  had  undertaken  a  great  work,  but  Uiey  did  not 
know  that  he  would  do  so  much  for  his  people  and  in  his  people.  The 
first-bom  sons  of  light,  used  to  great  marvels  from  of  old,  will  be  en- 
tranced with  a  new  wonder  as  they  see  the  handiwork  of  Immannel's  free 
grace  and  dying  love.  The  men  who  once  despised  the  saints,  who  called 
them  canting  hypocrites  and  trampled  on  them,  and  perhaps  slew  them, 
the  kings  and  princes  of  the  earth  who  sold  the  righteous  for  a  pair  of 
shoes,  ^imat  wiU  they  say  when  they  see  the  least  of  the  Saviour's  followerB 
become  a  prince  of  more  illustrious  rank  than  the  great  ones  of  tiie 
earth,  and  t7hrist  shining  out  in  every  one  of  these  favoured  beings  ?  For 
their  uplifting  Jesus  will  be  wondered  at  by  those  who  once  demised 
both  him  and  them. 

My  next  point  leads  us  into  the  very  bowels  of  the  subject ;  m  what 
respects  will  Christ  be  glorified  and  wondered  at  ?  I  cannot  expect  to 
tell  you  one  tenth  part  of  it.  I  am  only  going  to  give  you  a  little  sample 
of  what  this  must  mean ;  exhaustive  exposition  were  quite  impossible  to 
me.  I  think  with  regard  to  his  saints  that  Jesus  wiU  be  glorified  and 
wondered  at  on  account  of  their  number — ^''a  number  that  no  man  can 
number."  John  was  a  great  arithmetician,  and  he  managed  to  count  up 
to  one  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  of  all  the  tribes  of  the  children 
of  Israel ;  but  that  was  only  a  representative  number  for  the  Jewish 
church :  as  for  the  church  of  God,  comprehending  the  Gentile  nations,  he 
gave  up  all  idea  of  computation,  and  confessed  that  it  is  ''a  number 
which  no  man  can  number."  When  he  heard  them  sing  he  says,  **  I 
heard  a  voice  like  the  voice  of  many  waters  and  like  great  thunder." 
There  were  so  many  of  them  that  their  song  was  like  the  Mediterranean 
sea  lashed  to  fury  by  a  tempest,  nay,  not  one  great  sea  in  uproar,  but 
ocean  upon  ocean,  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  piled  upon  each  other, 
and  the  Arctic  upon  these,  and  other  oceans  upon  these,  layers  of 
oceans,  all  thundering  out  their  mie^htiest  roar :  and  such  will  be  the 
song  of  the  redeemed,  for  the  crowdiB  which  swell  the  matchless  hymn 
will  be  beyond  all  reckoning.  Behold,  and  see,  ye  who  laughed  at  his 
kingdom,  see  how  the  little  one  has  become  a  thousand !  Now  look 
ye,  ye  foes  of  Christ,  who  saw  the  handful  of  com  on  the  top  of  the 
mountains ;  see  how  the  fruit  thereof  doth  shake  like  Lebanon,  and  they 
of  the  city  do  flourish  like  grass  of  the  earth.  Who  can  reckon  the  drops 
of  the  dew  or  the  sands  on  the  sea  shore  ?  When  they  have  counted 
these  then  shall  they  not  have  guessed  at  the  multitude  of  the  redeemed 
that  Christ  shall  brin^  to  glory.  And  all  this  harvest  from  one  grain  of 
wheat,  which  except  it  haa  fellen  into  the  ground  and  died  would  have 
remained  alone  I  What  said  the  Word  ?  '^  If  it  die,  it  shall  bring  forth 
much  frait"  Is  not  the  prophecy  fulfilled  ?  Oh  beloved,  what  a  harvest 
from  the  lone  Man  of  Nazareth !  What  fimit  from  that  glorious  man — the 
Branch  I    Men  esteemed  him  stricken,  smitten  of  Ck>d  and  afflicted ; 


JE6U8  ADMIRED  IN  THEU  THAT  BKTilETE.  SI 9 

and  thej  made  nothing  of  him,  and  yet  there  sprang  of  him  (and  he  as 
good  as  dead)  these  multitudes  which  are  many  as  the  stars  of  heaven. 
Is  he  not  glorified  and  wondered  at  in  them  ?  The  day  shall  declare  it 
"without  faO. 

But  there  is  quality  as  well  as  quantity.  He  is  admired  in  his  saints 
because  they  are  every  one  of  them  proofe  of  his  power  to  save  from 
evil.  My  eye  can  hardly  bear,  even  though  it  be  but  in  imagination,  to 
gaze  upon  the  glittering  ranks  of  the  white-robed  ones,  where  each  one 
outshines  the  sun,  and  they  are  all  as  if  a  sevenfold  midday  had  clothed 
them.  Tet  all  these,  as  I  look  at  them,  tell  me,  "  We  have  washed  our 
Tobes, — ^for  they  were  once  defiled.  We  have  made  them  white, — ^but  this 
whiteness  is  caused  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  These  were  heirs  of 
wrath  even  as  others,  these  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ;  all  these 
like  sheep  had  gone  astray  and  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ;  but 
look  at  them  and  see  how  he  has  saved  them,  washed  them,  cleansed 
them,  perfected  them !  His  power  and  grace  are  seen  in  all  of  them. 
If  your  eye  will  pause  here  and  there  you  will  discover  some  that  were 
supremelv  stubborn,  whose  neck  was  as  an  iron  sinew,  and  yet  he  con- 
quered tnem  by  love.  Some  were  densely  ignorant,  but  he  opened  their 
Dlind  eyes ;  some  grossly  infected  with  the  leprosy  of  lust,  but  he  healed 
them ;  some  under  Satan's  most  terrible  power,  but  he  cast  the  devil 
out  of  them.  Oh,  how  he  will  be  glorified  in  special  cases !  In  yon 
dnmkard  made  into  a  saint,  in  yon  blasphemer  tamed  into  a  loving 
disciple,  in  yon  persecutor  who  breathed  out  threatening  taught  to  sing 
everlastingly  a  hymn  of  praise !  He  will  be  exceedingly  glorified  in  such. 
Brethren,  l)eloved  in  the  Lord,  in  each  one  of  us  there  was  some  special 
difSculty  as  to  our  salvation,  some  impossibility  which  was  possible  with 
God,  though  it  would  have  been  for  ever  impossible  with  us. 

Biemember,  also,  that  all  those  saints  made  perfect  would  have  been  in 
hell  had  it  not  been  for  the  Son's  atoning  sacrifice.  This  they  will  re- 
member the  more  vividlv,  because  they  Tnll  see  other  men  condemned 
for  the  sins  with  which  they  also  were  once  polluted.  The  crash  of  ven- 
geance upon  the  ungodly  will  make  the  samts  magnify  the  Lord  the 
more  as  they  see  themselves  delivered.    They  wiU  each  feel, — 

*'  Oh  were  it  not  for  erace  divine, 
That  fate  mi  dreadml  had  been  mine.** 

In  each  one  the  memory  of  the  horrible  pit  whence  they  were  drawn 
and  the  miry  dskj  out  of  which  they  were  uplifted  shall  make  their 
Saviour  more  glonfied  and  wondered  at. 

Perhaps  the  chief  point  in  which  Christ  will  be  glorified  will  be — 
the  absolute  perfection  of  all  the  saints.  They  shall  .then  be  "  without 
spot  or  wrin^e  or  any  such  thing."  We  have  not  experienced  what 
perfection  is,  and  therefore  we  can  hardly  conceive  it;  our  thoughts 
themselves  are  too  sinful  for  us  to  get  a  full  idea  of  what  absolute  per- 
fection must  be ;  but,  dear  brethren,  we  shall  have  no  sin  left  in  us,  for 
they  are  **  without  &ult  before  the  throne  of  God,"  and  we  shall  have  no 
temaining  propensity  to  sin.  There  shaU  be  no  bias  in  the  will  towards 
that  which  is  evil,  but  it  shall  be  fixed  for  ever  upon  that  which  is  good. 
The  affections  will  never  be  wanton  again,  they  will  be  chaste  fur  Christ. 
The  understanding  will  never  make  mistakes.    You  shall  never  put 


820  MBTEOPOLITAjr  TABBRNACLB  PULPIT. 

bitter  f(dr  sweet,  nor  sweet  for  bitter ;  you  shall  be  "  perfect,  even  as  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect":  and  truly,  brethren,  he  who 
worketh  this  in  us  will  be  a  wonder.  Christ  will  be  admir^  and  adored 
because  of  this  grand  result.  0  mighty  Master,  with  what  strange  moral 
alchemy  didst  thou  work  to  torn  that  morose  dispositioncd  man  into  a 
mass  of  love !  How  didst  thou  work  to  lift  that  selfish  Mammonite  up 
from  his  hoarded  gains  to  make  him  find  his  gain  in  thee?  How 
didst  thou  overcome  that  proud  spirit,  that  fickle  spirit,  that  lazy  spirit, 
that  lustful  spirit, — ^how  didst  thou  contrive  to  take  all  these  away? 
How  didst  thou  extirpate  the  very  roots  of  sin,  and  every  httlc  rootlet 
of  sin,  out  of  thy  redeemed,  so  that  not  a  tiny  fibre  can  be  found  ?  **  The 
sins  of  Jacob  shall  be  sought  for  and  they  shall  not  be  found,  yea,  thej 
shall  not  be,  saith  the  Lord."  Neither  the  guilt  of  sin  nor  the  propen&ity 
to  sin, — both  shall  be  gone,  and  Christ  shall  have  done  it,  and  ne  will  be 
"  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  admired  in  them  that  believe." 

This  is  but  the  beginning,  however.  There  will  be  seen  in  every 
saint,  in  that  last  wondrous  day,  the  wisdom  and  power  and  love  of  Christ 
in  having  brought  them  through  all  the  trials  of  the  way.  He  kept  their 
£a.ith  alive  when  else  it  would  have  died  out ;  he  sustained  them  under 
trials  when  else  they  would  have  &inted;  he  held  them  fast  in  their 
integrity  when  temptation  soHcited  them,  and  they  had  almost  slipped 
with  their  feet.  Ay,  he  sustained  some  of  them  in  prison,  and  on  the 
rack,  and  at  the  stake,  and  held  them  fiuthful  still !  One  might  hardly 
wish  to  be  a  martyr,  but  I  reckon  that  the  martyrs  will  be  the  admiration 
of  us  all,  or  rather  Christ  wiU  be  admired  in  them.  However  they  could 
bear  such  pain  as  some  of  them  did  endure  for  Christ's  sake  none  of  us 
can  guess,  except  that  we  know  that  Christ  was  in  them  suffering  in  his 
members.  Eternally  will  Jesus  be  wondered  at  in  them  as  aU  intelligent 
spirits  shall  see  how  he  upheld  them,  so  that  neither  tribulation,  nor 
distress,  nor  nakedness,  nor  famine,  nor  sword,  could  separate  them  from 
his  love.  These  are  the  men  that  wandered  about  in  sheep*skins  and  goat- 
skins, destitute,  afflicted,  tormented,  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy, 
but  now  they  stand  arrayed  as  kings  and  priests  in  surpassing  glory  for 
ever.    Verily,  their  Lord  shall  be  admired  in  them.    Say  you  not  so  ? 

Recollect,  dear  friends,  that  we  shall  see  in  that  day  how  the  blessed 
Christ,  as  "  Head  over  all  things  to  his  church,"  has  ruled  every  provi- 
dence to  the  sanctification  of  his  people — ^how  the  dark  days  begat  showers 
which  made  the  plants  of  the  Lord  to  grow,  how  the  fierce  sun  which 
threatened  to  scorch  them  to  the  root,  filled  them  with  warmth  of  love 
divine  and  ripened  their  choice  frnit.  What  a  tale  the  saints  will  have 
to  tell  of  how  that  which  threatened  to  damp  the  fire  of  grace  made  it 
bum  more  mightily,  how  the  stone  which  threatened  to  kill  their  faith 
was  turned  into  bread  for  them,  how  the  rod  and  staff  of  the  Good  Shep- 
herd was  ever  with  them  to  bring  them  safely  home.  I  have  sometiBies 
thought  that  if  I  get  into  heaven  by  the  skin  of  my  teeth  I  will  sit  down 
on  the  glory-shore  and  bless  for  ever  him  who,  on  a  boards  or  on  a  broken 
piece  of  the  ship,  brought  my  soul  safe  to  land;  and  sorely  they  who 
obtain  an  abundant  entrance,  coming  into  the  fair  havens^  like  a  ^p  in 
fuU  sail,  without  danger  of  shipwreck,  will  have  to  praise  the  Lord  that 
they  thus  came  into  the  blessed  port  of  peace :  in  each  case  the  Lcmd 
will  be  specially  glorified  and  admired. 


JSS0S  ATWIiTRTiD  IK  THEM  THAT  BELISYE.  S2I 

I  caimot  stop  oyer  tiii%  bnt  I  mnat  heg  you  ix>  notice  that  as  a  king  is 
glorious  in  his  regalia,  so  wiH  Christ  pat  on  his  saints  as  his  personal  splen- 
dour in  that  day  when  he  shall  make  up  his  jewels.  It  is  with  Christ  as  it 
T¥flA  with  that  noble  Soman  matron,  who  when  she  called  at  her  Mends' 
houses  and  saw  their  trinkets,  asked  them  to  come  next  day  to  her  house, 
and  she  would  exhibit  her  jewels.  They  expected  to  see  ruby,  and  pearl, 
and  diamond,  but  she  called  in  her  two  boys,  and  said,  "  These  are  my 
jewels."  Even  so  will  Jesus  instead  of  emerald  and  amethyst,  and  onyx 
and  topaz,  exhibit  his  saints.  ''These  are  my  choice  treasures,"  saith 
he,  "  in  whom  I  will  be  glorified."  Solomon  surely  was  never  more  full 
of  glory  than  when  he  had  finished  the  temple,  when  all  the  tribes  came 
together  to  see  the  noble  structure,  and  confessed  it  to  be  *'  beautiful  for 
situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth."  But  what  will  be  the  glory  of 
Christ  when  all  the  living  stones  shall  be  put  into  their  places  and  his 
church  shall  have  her  windows  of  agates  and  her  gates  of  carbuncle, 
and  all  her  borders  of  precious  stones.  Then,  indeed,  will  he  be  Verified, 
when  the  twelve  foundations  of  his  new  Jerusalem  shall  be  courses  of 
stones  most  predous,  the  like  of  which  w^as  never  seen. 

Now,  inaamuoh  as  my  text  l&ys  special  stress  upon  Mieving,  I  invite 
you  just  for  a  minute  to  consider  how  as  believers  as  well  as  saints  the 
ssTed  ones  will  glorify  their  Lord. 

First,  it  will  be  wonderful  that  there  diould  be  so  many  brought  to 
faith  in  him :  men  with  no  God,  and  men  with  many  gods,  men  steeped  in 
ignorance,  and  men  puffed  up  with  carnal  wisdom,  great  men  and  poor 
men,  aU  brought  to  beUeve  in  the  one  Bedeemer  and  ^ivdse  him  for  his 
great  salvation.  Will  he  not  be  glorified  in  their  conunon  £iith  ?  It  will 
magnify  him  that  these  wiU  all  be  saved  by  &ith,  and  not  by  their  own 
merits.  Not  one  among  them  will  boast  that  he  was  saved  by  his  own 
good  works,  but  all  of  them  will  rejoice  to  have  been  saved  by  that 
blessedly  simple  way  of  "  Believe  and  live,"  saved  by  sovereign  grace 
through  the  atoning  blood,  looked  to  by  the  tearful  eye  of  simple  faith. 
This,  too,  shall  make  Jesas  glorious,  that  all  of  them,  weak  as  they  were, 
were  made  strong  by  faith ;  ail  of  them  personally  unfit  for  battle  were  yet 
made  triumphant  in  oonfiict  because  by  faith  they  overcame  through  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb.  All  of  them  shall  be  there  to  show  that  their  faith 
was  honoured,  that  Christ  was  fiiithful  to  his  promise,  and  never  allowed 
them  to  believe  in  vain.  All  of  them  standing  in  heavenly  places,  saved 
by  £aith,  will  ascribe  every  particle  of  the  glory  to  the  Lord  Jesus  only : — 

'^I  ask  them  whence  their  rictory  came? 
They,  widi  united  breath, 
Ascribe  their  conquest  to  the  Lamb, 
Their  triumph  to  his  death."' 

They  believed  and  were  saved,  but  faith  taketh  no  credit  to  itself;  it  is 
a  selMenying  graoe,  and  putteth  the  crown  upon  the  head  of  Christ,  and 
therefore  is  it  written  that  he  will  be  glorified  in  his  saintS;,  and  he  will 
also  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe. 

I  have  scarcely  skirted  the  subject  even  now,  and  time  is  failing  me.  I 
want  you  to  reflect  that  Jesus  will  be  glorified  in  the  risen  bodies  of  all 
his  saints.  Now,  in  heaven,  they  are  pure  spirits,  but  when  he  shall 
come  they  shall  be  clothed  again.  Poor  body,  thou  must  sleep  awhile, 
but  what  thou  shalt  be  at  thine  awaking  doth  not  yet  appear.    Thou  art 


^22  MSTBOFOLITAK  TABEBNACLB  PULPIT. 

now  the  shriTelled  seed,  bnt  there  is  a  flower  to  oome  of  thee  which  dmll 
be  lovely  beyond  all  thought.  Though  sown  in  weakness,  this  body  shall 
be  raised  in  power ;  though  sown  in  cormptiony  it  shall  be  raised  in  in- 
oormption.  Wealmess,  weariness,  pain,  and  death  will  be  banished  for 
ever;  infirmity  and  deformity  will  oe  all  unknown.  The  Lord  will  raise 
up  our  bodies  to  be  like  unto  his  glorious  body.  Oh,  what  a  prospect 
lies  before  us  I  Let  us  remember  that  this  blessed  resunection  will  oome 
to  us  because  he  rose,  for  there  must  be  a  resurrection  to  the  membezs 
because  the  Head  has  risen.  Oh,  the  charm  of  being  a  risen  man  perfect 
in  body,  soul,  and  spirit !  All  that  charm  will  be  due  to  Christy  and 
therefore  he  will  be  admired  in  us. 

Then  let  us  think  of  the  absolute  perfection  of  the  church  as  to 
numbers :  all  who  have  believed  in  him  will  be  with  him  in  glory.     The 
text  saith,  he  will  be  *' admired  in  all  them  that  believe."    Now,  if  some 
of  those  who  believe  perished  he  would  not  be  admired  in  them,  but  they 
will  all  be  there,  the  little  ones  as  well  as  the  great  ones.    You  will  be 
there,  you  poor  feeble  folk  who  when  you  say  "  Lord,  I  believe,'*  are 
obliged  to  add  '*  help  thou  mine  unbelief."    He  shall  be  admired  in  all 
believers  without  a  single  exception,  and  peradventure  there  shall  be  more 
wonder  at  the  going  to  heaven  of  the  weak  believen  than  at  the  stronger 
ones.    Mr.  Oreatheart,  when  he  comes  there  will  owe  his  victories  to  his 
Master  and  lay  his  laurels  at  his  feet;  but  fainting  Feeblemind,  and 
limping  Beady-to-halt  with  his  crutches,  and  trembling  Little-faith, 
when  they  enter  into  rest  will  make  heaven  ring  with  notes  of  even 
greater  admiration  that  such  poor  creeping  worms  of  the  earth  should 
win  the  day  by  mighty  grace.    Suppose  that  one  of  them  should  be 
missing  at  last !    Stop  the  harps !    Silence  the  songs !    No  beginning  to 
be  merry  while  one  child  is  shut  out  I    I  am  quite  certain  if  as  a  family 
we  were  ^ing  to  sin^  our  evening  hymn  of  joy  and  thankfulness,  if 
mother  said,  ''Where  is  the  little  mite  ?    Where  is  the  last  one  of  the 
fiimily  ?"    There  would  be  a  pause.     If  we  had  to  say — she  is  lost, 
there  would  be  no  singing  and  no  resting  till  she  was  found.    It  is  the 
gloiy  of  Jesus  that  as  a  shepherd  he  h^  lost  none  of  his  flock,  as  the 
Captain  of  salvation  he  has  brought  many  sons  to  glory,  and  has  lost 
none,  and  hence  he  is  admired,  not  in  some  that  beueve,  nor  yet  in  all 
but  one,  but  he  is  "  admired  in  all  them  that  believe." 

Does  not  this  delight  you,  you  who  are  weak  and  trembling,  that  he 
will  be  admired  in  you  ?  There  is  little  to  admire  in  you  at  present,  as 
you  penitently  confess ;  but  since  Christ  is  in  you  now,  and  will  be 
more  fully  manifested  in  you,  there  will  ere  long  be  much  to  admire. 
Mav  you  partake  in  the  excellence  of  our  divine  Lord  and  be  conformed 
to  his  likeness  that  he  may  be  seen  in  you  and  glorified  in  yon. 

Another  point  of  admiration  will  lie  the  eternal  safety  of  all  his  be- 
lieving people.  There  they  are  safe  from  fear  of  harm.  Ye  dogs  of  hell, 
you  howlea  at  their  heels  and  hoped  to  devour  them ;  but,  lo,  they  are 
clean  escaped  from  you  I  What  must  it  be  to  be  lifted  above  gun-shot 
of  the  enemy,  where  no  more  wateh  shall  need  to  be  kept,  for  even  the 
roar  of  the  Satanic  artillery  cannot  be  heard  ?  Oh  glorious  Christ,  to 
bring  them  all  to  such  a  state  of  safety,  thou  art  indeed  to  be  wondered 
at  for  ever. 

Moreover,  all  the  saints  will  be  so  honoured,  so  happy,  and  so  like 


JESUS  ADMIRED  IN  THEM  THAT  BELIEVE.  323 

their  Lord  that  themselves  and  everything  about  them  will  be  themes  for 
never-ending  admiration..  You  may  have  seen  a  room  hong  round  with 
mirrors,  and  when  yon  stood  in  the  midst  yon  were  reflected  from  every 
point :  you  were  seen  here,  and  seen  there,  and  there  again,  and  there 
again,  and  so  every  part  of  you  was  reflected ;  just  such  is  heaven,  Jesos 
is  the  centre,  and  all  his  saints  like  mirrors  reflect  his  glory.  Is  he 
human?  So  are  they !  Is  he  the  Son  of  God  ?  So  are  they  sona  of 
God !  Is  lie  perfect  ?  So  are  they !  Is  he  exalted  ?  So  are  they  I  Is 
he  a  prophet  ?  So  are  they,  making  known  mito  prmcipaliti4  and 
powers  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God.  Is  he  a  priest  ?  So  are  they !  Is 
he  a  King  ?  So  are  they,  for  he  hath  made  us  priests  and  kings  unto 
God,  and  we  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  Look  where  you  will  along 
the  ranks  of  the  redeemed,  this  one  thing  shall  be  seen,  the  gloiy  of 
Christ  Jesus,  even  to  surprise  and  wonder. 

n.  I  have  no  time  to  make  those  sxroaBBTiOKB  with  which  I  intended 
to  have  finished,  and  so  I  will  just  tell  you  what  they  would  have  been. 

First,  the  text  suggests  that  the  principal  subject  for  self-examination 
with  us  all  should  be, — ^Am  I  a  saint  ?  Am  I  holy  ?  Am  I  a  believer 
in  Christ  ?  Yes  or  no,  for  on  that  yes  or  no  must  hang  your  glorificaticoi 
of  Christ,  or  your  banishment  from  his  presence. 

The  next  thing  is — observe  the  small  value  of  hnman  opinion.  When 
Christ  was  here  the  world  reckoned  him  to  be  a  nobody,  and  while  his 
people  are  here  they  must  expect  to  be  judged  in  the  same  way.  "What 
do  worldlings  know  about  it  ?  How  soon  will  their  judgment  be  re- 
versed !  When  our  Lord  shall  appear  even  those  who  sneered  will  be 
compelled  to  admire.  When  they  shall  see  the  glory  of  Christ  in  every 
one  of  his  people,  awe-stricken,  they  will  have  nothing  to  say  against  us; 
nay,  not  even  the  folse  tongne  of  msdicious  slander  shall  dare  to  hiss  out 
a  serpent  word  in  that  (ky.  Never  mind  them,  then;  put  up  with 
reproach  which  shall  so  soon  be  silenced. 

The  next  suggestion  is  a  great  encouragement  to  enquirers  who  are 
seeking  Christ ;  for  I  put  it  to  you,  you  great  sinners,  if  Jesus  is  to  be 
glorifi^  in  saved  sinners,  would  he  not  be  glorified  indeed  if  he  saved 
you  ?  If  he  were  ever  to  save  such  a  rebel  as  you  have  been  would  it 
not  be  the  astonishment  of  eternity  ?  I  mean  you  who  are  known  in  the 
village  as  Wicked  Jack,  or  known  as  a  common  swearer — what  it'  my 
Master  were  to  make  a  saint  of  yon !  Bad  raw  material !  Yet  sup- 
pose he  transformed  you  into  a  precious  jewel,  and  made  you  to  be  as 
holy  as  God  is  holy,  what  would  you  say  of  him  ?  "  Say  of  him,"  say 
you,  "  I  would  praise  him  world  without  &id"  Yes,  and  you  shall  do 
so  if  you  will  come  and  trust  him.  Put  your  tinsc  in  him.  The  Lord 
help  you  to  do  so  at  onoe^  and  he  shall  be  Admired  even  in  you  for  ever 
and  ever. 

Our  text  gives  an  exhortation  to  believers  also.  Will  Jesus  Christ  be 
honoured  and  glorified  in  all  the  saints  ?  Then  let  us  think  well  of  them 
all,  and  love  them  all.  Some  dear  children  of  God  have  uncomely  bodies, 
or  they  are  blind  or  deformed,  or  maimed ;  and  many  of  these  have 
scanty  purses,  and  it  may  be  the  church  knows  most  of  them  as  ooming 
for  alms :  moreover,  they  have  little  knowledge,  httle  power  to  please, 
and  they  are  uncouth  in  manners,  and  belong  to  what  are  called  the 
lowest  ranks  of  society  :  do  not,  therefore,  despise  them,  for  one  day  our 


824  XETROPOLITAK  TiLBEBNAOLE  PULPIT. 

Lord  will  be  glorified  in  them.  How  he  will  be  admired  in  yond^  poor 
bedridden  woman  when  she  rises  from  the  workhonae  to  sing  hallelnjah 
to  God  and  the  Lamb  among  the  brightest  of  the  shining  ones.  IRiy, 
methinks  the  pain,  the  poverty,  the  weakness,  and  the  sorrow  of  saints 
below  will  greatly  gloriff  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  as  they  teU  how 
grace  helped  them  to  bear  their  burdens  and  to  rejoice  nnder  their 
afflictions. 

Lastly,  brethren,  this  text  ought  to  enoouraee  all  of  yon  who  love 
Jesus  to  go  on  talking  about  him  to  others  and  bearing  your  testimony 
for  his  name.  Ton  see  how  the  apostle  Paul  has  inserted  a  few  words 
by  way  of  parenthesis.  Draw  the  words  out  of  the  brackets,  and  take 
them  home,  *' Because  our  testimony  among  vou  was  believed."  Do 
you  see  those  crowds  of  idolatrous  heathen,  and  do  you  see  those  hosts 
of  saved  ones  before  the  throne  ?  What  is  the  medium  which  linked 
the  two  characters?  By  what  visible  means  did  the  sinners  become 
saints?  Do  you  see  that  insignificant  looking  man  with  weak  eyes? 
That  man  whose  bodily  presence  is  weak  and  whose  speech  is  con- 
temptible? Do  you  not  see  his  bodkin  and  needle  case?  He  has  been 
making  and  mending  tents,  for  he  is  only  a  tent-maker.  Now,  those 
bright  spirits  which  shine  like  suns,  flasmng  forth  Christ's  glory,  were 
made  thus  bright  through  the  addresses  and  prayers  of  that  tent-maker. 
The  Thessalonians  wero  heathens  plunged  in  sin,  and  this  poor  tent- 
maker  came  in  among  them  and  told  them  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his 
gospel ;  his  testimony  was  believed ;  that  belief  changed  the  lives  of  his 
hearers  and  made  them  holy,  and  they  being  renewed  came  at  length  to 
be  perfectly  holy,  and  there  they  are,  and  Jesus  Christ  is  glorified  in 
them.  Beloved,  wiU  it  not  be  a  delightful  thing  throughout  eternity 
to  contemplate  that  you  went  into  your  Sunday-school  class  this  afternoon, 
and  you  were  afraid  you  could  not  say  much,  but  you  talked  about  Jesas 
Christ  with  a  tear  in  your  eye,  and  you  brought  a  dear  girl  to  believe  in 
his  saving  name  through  your  testimony.  In  years  to  come  that  girl 
will  be  among  those  that  slune  out  to  the  glory  of  Christ  for  ever.  Or 
you  will  get  away  this  evening,  perhaps,  to  talk  in  a  lodging-house  to 
some  of  those  poor,  despised  tramps ;  you  will  go  and  tell  one  of  those 
poor  vi^rants,  or  one  of  the  feUen  women,  the  story  of  your  Lord's  love 
and  blood,  and  the  poor  broken  heart  will  catdi  at  the  gracious  word, 
and  come  to  Jesus,  and  then  a  heavenly  character  will  be  begun,  and 
another  jewel  secured  for  the  Beedemer  s  diadem.  Methinks  you  will 
admire  his  crown  all  the  more  because,  as  you  see  certain  stones  sparkling 
in  it,  you  wiU  say,  '*  Blessed  be  his  name  for  ever :  he  helpea  me  to 
dive  into  the  sea  and  find  that  pearl  for  him,"  and  now  it  adorns  his 
sacred  brow.  Now,  get  at  it,  all  of  you !  You  that  are  doing  nothing 
for  Jesus,  be  ashamed  of  yourselves,  and  ask  him  to  work  in  you  that 
you  may  begin  to  work  for  him,  and  unto  God  shall  be  the  glory,  for 
ever  and  ever.    Amen  and  amen. 


Portion  of  Soeiptube  bbad  befo&e  Sermon — 2  Thessalonians  i.  iL 


Hymns  peom  "Our  Own  Htmn  Book"— 92,  873,  861. 


^tinmtsSim  ^nibtrndt  |np. 


GEEATEE  THINGS  YET.    WHO  SHALL  SEE  THEM? 


%  ^^tmiti 


Deliysrsd  on  Lobd's-Dat  MoBiriNG,  Juke  8th,  1879,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  HSTBOFOLITAN  TABEBNACLX,  NBWINGTON. 


**  Jetns  answered  and  laid  unto  him,  Beoaiue  I  said  onto  thee*  I  saw  thee  under 
the  flg  tree,  beliereat  thou  F  thon  ahalt  see  greater  thinn  than  these.  And  he  aaith 
onto  hini,  YerQy,  yerily,  I  say  onto  too,  Hereafter  ye  ihall  see  heayen  open,  and  the 
angels  of  Qod  asoending  and  descending  npon  the  Son  of  man." — John  L  60,  61. 

Wb  cannot  help  making  a  few  remarks  npon  the  narrative  before  we 
proceed  to  the  distinct  subject  of  disconrse.    Oertain  catch  words  are 
ezceedmsly  worthy  of  notice,  since  th^  are  abundantly  foil  of  instrac- 
tion.     when  Nathanael  had  donbts  as  to  whether  the  Messiah  conld 
cozngfrom  Nazareth,  Philip  answered  him,  "  Gome  and  see."    Now^  those 
were  the  precise  words  which  the  Lord  Jesns  had  himself  nsed  to  his 
earliest  disciples  when  they  began  to  follow  him :  he  also  said  to  them, 
"  Oome  and  see."    It  is  always  safe  for  ns  to  use  over  again  words  which 
God  has  blessed.  Did  the  Master  say, "  Come  and  see  "  ?  Then  we  cannot 
do  better  than  say  what  Jesus  sai^  and  use  as  near  as  possible  the  in- 
spired expressions.    Was  that  short  sentence, ''  Come  and  see,"  made 
usefid  to  other  souls?  Then  those  who  would  win  souls  cannot  do  better 
than  use  such  gospel  nets  as  have  been  tried  and  proved  efficient  in  their 
own  cases.    Let  none  of  us  say  that  we  cannot  speak  to  otiierB  about 
their  souls.    There  was  one  passage  of  Scripture  wnich  was  the  means  of 
our  conversion,  and  we  cannot  do  better  than  repeat  it  in  hearty  tones 
to  others,  hoping  that  what  God  has  blessed  to  us  he  may  bless  to  others. 
Short  as  was  uie  inviting  word,  *'  Come  and  see,"  it  was  full  of  wis- 
dom.   Our  Lord  knows  the  philosophy  of  the  human  mind,  and  under- 
stands how  best  to  produce  £uth  in  doubting  hearts.    "  Come  and  see  " 
is  Qxe  sure  cure  for  unbelief.    Some  would  1^1  doubters  to  sit  down  and 
thiidc,  and  create  fidth  by  reflecting  on  the  nature  of  things.    We  may 
long  consider  the  state  of  man  and  the  condition  of  our  own  nature  be- 
fore we  shall  thereby  be  enlightened  as  to  the  wa^  of  salvation.    If  we 
would  judge  of  Christ  we  must  consider  Christ  himself.    He  is  his  own 
best  argument.    The  cobweb  spinnings  of  conceited  brains  are  easily 
broken  through,  but  the  &ct6,  the  indisputable  Acts  of  the  S&viour*s  life 
No.  1,478. 


320  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  death  hold  the  understaoidiag  and  the  hoart  as  with  iran  hcmisL  As 
our  Sayionr  said,  and  as  his  servant  Philip  said,  even -so  say  we  to  all 
who  wonid  know  Ohrist,  ^*  Gome  sod  aee/'  Be  not  blinded  bj  prejndices 
or  misled  by  preconceptions,  but  read  his  stoir  for  yourselves.  Seek  his 
&oe  for  yourselTVs^and  taste  aiodaee  that  the  Lord  isgood.  Personal  in- 
tercourse with  Jesus  is  still  the  best  evidence  of  his  personal  exceDence 
and  his  power  to  save.  Brother,  hast  thou  any  doubt  about  the  Master? 
**  Gome  and  see.'*  Dost  thou  say  within  thyself,  "  Can  he  save  such  an 
one  as  I  am  ?*'  *'  Oome  and  see.'*  Do  tljy  sins  cast  thee  down  and 
cause  thee  to  despair  beoanae  tihau  feareat  that  even  the  Redeemer's 
blood  cannot  cleanse  thee?  "  Come  and  aee."  See  him  as  the  Son  of 
God  and  the  Son  of  man,  in  his  life  of  holiness  and  in  his  death  of 
substitution;  or  see  him,  it  thoa  wilt,  ap  yonder  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  makiog  intercession  for  sinners ;  and  as  thou  art  looking  upon  him 
&ith  will  st^  in  upon  thee  through  tiie  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It 
is  the  mind's  eye  that  must  look,  and  by  that  look  repentance  and  faith 
find  entrance  to  the  soul.  **  Gome  and  see,"  for  nothing  will  save  a  man 
but  a  personal  sight  of  a  personal  Saviour.  Therefore,  ''Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  The  Lord  him- 
self saith,  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth." 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Ohrist  seems  so  to  have  approved  the  advioe  of  .Philip 
that  he  himself  followed  it  up,  and  kept  to  the  same  form  of  ezpresskm. 
Did  Philip  say,  "  Come  and  see"?  Ijien  the  Lord  Jesus  says, ''  Behre 
that  Philip  called  thee,  when  thou  wast  under  the  fig  tree,  /  saw  ihes : 
thou  hast  come  to  see  m^,  but  I  have  already  seen  ^ie»:  th^e  has  bem 
an  antecedent  kx>k  on  my  part :  I  saw  thee  before  thou  didst  know  any- 
thing about  me,  or  hadst  even  heard  of  me  fram  Philip."  Nor  does  Our 
Lord  change  his  note  even  to  the  end  of  the  conversation,  bat  closes  it 
by  saying, ''  Because  I  said  unto  thee,  I  saw  thee  under  the  fig  tree,  be- 
lievest  thoa  ?  thou  shalt  see  greater  things  &au  these."  Th^!e,  you  see, 
is  the  great  plan  of  salvation  as  it  is  wrought  in  us.  First  the  Saviour 
sees  us,  even  ^en  we  are  a  great  way  off ;  then  we  oome  and  see,  and 
our  hearts  find  rest  in  our  R^eemer ;  and  then  in  after  days  he  gives  us 
yet  brighter  and  clearer  views  of  himself  and  of  his  kiogd(»n.  Oh,  who 
would  not  oome  and  aee  if  this  be  so?  If  at  our  first  coming  and  seeing 
we  find  life  and  rest,  what  must  those  still  greater  things  be  which  are  yet 
to  be  revealed  ?  All  that  &ith  has  yet  dt»)oveced  is  bat  a  foretaste  and 
an  earnest  of  more  glonoas  sights  whidi  shall  yet  be  opened  up  before 
our  favoured  eyee^  for  Jesus  himself  saith, "  Thou  shaltsee  greater  things 
than  these." 

Other  parts  of  the  oonrersation  are  eqnaBy  wOTthy  of  notice,  as  show- 
ing how  fully  the  mind  of  the  childlike  Nathanael  and  the  holy  diild 
Jesus  responded  to  each  other,  as  all  true  and  childlike  minds -alirays  do. 
Our  Loftf,  as  soon  as  he  saw  Naldiaiiael,  called  him  ''  an  Israelite  indeed, 
in  whom  is  no  gmte."  He  knew  his  simple,  frank,  open-hearted  cha- 
racter, and  he  produced  sm,  exaniple  of  it,  for  Nathanael  did  not  blush 
and  with  mock  modesty  pretend  to  question  the  praise,  but  in  the  sim- 
plest and  most  nnaffiscted  Baanoier  he  tadtly  owned  the  description  to  be 
true,  and  said,  "  Whence  knowest  thou  me  ?  "  He  felt  in  his  own  con- 
science that  he  was  a  true  son  of  that  wrestling  Jacob  who  became  pre- 
vailing Israeli  and  in  owning  the  title  he  made  his  words  responsive  to 


OBBATEB  THINOS  YET.     WHO  SHALL  SEE  THEM?  327 

tbose  of  JesaSy  for  he  said  in  effect,  '^Trne,  I  am  an  Israelite,  but  tbon 
art  the  King  of  Israel."    To  this  our  Lord  seemed  to  reply,  "  Thou  art 
an  Israelite,  and  thou  hast  owned  Israel's  King ;  and  now  thou  shalt  have 
IsraeVs  privilege ;  for,  like  him,  thou  shalt  see  heaven  opened  and  the 
angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending  upon  the  Son  of  man."    Thus, 
as  in  water  face  answereth  to  &ce,  so  did  the  heart  of  man  to  man  in  the 
intercouTBe  of  these  two  guileless  spirits.    Their  thoughts  were  so  true 
that  thev  harmonized  like  the  parts  of  well  composed  music ;  their  words 
so  frankly  bespoke  their  hearts  that  they  answered  to  one  another  like  the 
echo  to  the  voice.    This  is  the  character  of  the  intercourse  betweisn  our 
Master  and  his  sanctified  ones.    He  saith,  '^I  am  the  Oood  Shepherd," 
and  the  heart  replies,  ''The  Lord  is  my  shepherd;  I  shall  not  want." 
The  q>ou8e  saith,  ''Tea,  he  is  altogether  lovely,"  and  her  bridegroom  re- 
plies, "  Thou  art  all  &ir,  my  love,  there  is  no  spot  in  thee."    Our  Lord 
calls  us,  "  My  love,  my  dove,  my  undefiled,"'and  we  being  in  full  com- 
munion with  him  reply,  "  My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his."    As  upon 
the  sea  in  time  of  storm  deep  (^eth  unto  deep,  so  within  the  sanctified 
heart,  in  heavenly  calm,  truth  calleUi  unto  truth ;  one  word  of  love  wakes 
up  another,  the  commendation  given  by  condescending  love  brings  forth 
the  praise  of  grateful  affection.    But  to  produee  this  mutual  sympathy 
there  must  be  a  common  character,  a  similar  absence  of  guile,  for  tnis  is 
the  great  condition  of  fellowship  with  Jesus.    God's  ways  towards  us  are 
made  to  meet  our  own  in  a  most  instructive  way.    "  With  the  merciful 
thou  wilt  show  th vself  merciful ;  with  an  upright  man  thou  wilt  show  thy- 
self upright;  with  the  pure  thou  wilt  show  thyself  pure;  and  with  the 
frx>wara  uiou  wilt  show  toyself  froward."    When  his  childb^n  open  their 
hearts  to  him  he  opens  his  mind  to  them ;  when  they  are  true  Israelites 
he  gives  them  the  true  Israel's  privileges ;  when  they  own  him  to  be 
a  great  and  glorious  King  he  makes  them  to  see  the  great  things  of  his 
kingdom.    May  it  be  ours  through  grace  to  be  as  little  children,  even 
as  Nathanael  was,  for  so  shall  we  behold  tixe  kingdom  of  God. 

With  those  prefisitory  remarks  we  come  at  length  to  consider  the  pro- 
mise of  our  Lord  Jesus  to  Nathanael.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  instruct  us 
thereby.  I  think  I  am  warranted  in  saying  that  this  is  the  Saviour's 
first  personal  word  of  promise,  and  it  is  instructive  that  he  gave  it,  not  to 
the  most  talented,  but  to  the  most  simple-hearted  of  his  disciples.  It 
was,  moreover,  no  mean  promise,  but  full  of  the  largest  conceivable 
meanings.  "  Thou  shalt  see  greater  thiugs  than  these."  Those  must 
be  very  great  things  which  were  greater  £an  what  Nathanael  had  seen 
already ;  there  is  room  for  boundless  expectation  in  the  words.  It  was 
apromise  which  brought  another  Unked  with  it  as  part  and  parcel  of  it. 
How  often  one  divine  blessing  is  like  a  link  of  a  chain  of  gold  and 
draws  another  with  it :  "Thou  shalt  see  greater  thincs  than  these"  is 
followed  by  "henceforth  ye  shfJl  see  heaven  open."  The  beauty  of  it  in 
this  instance  is,  that  albeit  Nathanael  obtained  a  promise  for  himself  at 
first,  "  thou  shalt  see,"  yet  this  drew  on  the  promise  for  aU  his  brethren, 
for  the  fifty-first  verse  does  not  run,  "  hereafter  or  henceforth  thou  shalt 
see  heaven  open,"  but  hereafter  "  shaJI  y$  see  heaven  open."  It  is  a 
great  thing  to  receive  a  personal  promise,  but  it  is  a  greater  thing  still 
to  secure  a  promise  for  all  our  Master's  household.  Happy  Nathanael  to 
have  been  the  occasion  for  the  proclamation  of  the  opening  of  heaven 


328  HETROFOLTTAK  TABEBNACLB  PULPIT. 

and  the  commerce  between  hearen  and  earth,  and  the  oommiuuoa  of 
saints  with  the  things  in  heaven  through  their  Mediator  and  Lonl.  This 
is  the  highest  form  of  blessing  when  we  are  not  only  &Tonred  ooraelres 
but  are  made  the  occasion  for  enriching  others.  Was  not  this  the  dioioc 
imheritaDce  of  Abraham,  '*  I  will  Mess  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  a  blessing  '*  ? 

In  considering  the  words  which  onr  Saviour  spake  to  Nathanael»  I 
shonld  like  yon  to  notice  fint,  ^favoured  man  to  whom  he  spake  them : 
then  the  gracious  reward  which  is  described  in  them,  and  lastly,  iks 
special  sight  comprised  in  that  reward.  In  all  this  may  we  bo  actual 
partakers,  and  not  mere  lookers  on. 

I.  Let  ns  think  of  this  favoured  uan.  Nathanael  was  ''an 
Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile."  He  was  one  of  those  who  were 
not  onlv  of  the  chosen  seed  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.  He  was 
noted  for  being  a  simple-minded,  unsophisticated  person,  as  honest  as 
the  day.  He  was  a  truthful  man,  who  ^ew  nothing  of  poticy,  or  cnafi, 
or  double  dealing,  or  reserve ;  a  man  oat  of  whom  all  the  twists  had 
been  taken,  an  upright  and  downright  man,  true  to  the  core,  and  trans- 
parent as  clear  glass !  Not  a  Jacobite,  a  child  of  the  crafty  snpplanter, 
but  an  Israelite,  an  Israelite  indeed,  with  the  Jacob  extracted  oat  of 
him ;  pure,  simple-hearted,  ingenuous ;  not  childish,  but  yet  thoroughly 
childlike.  To  such  a  man  the  word  was  given,  **  Thou  shalt  see  greater 
things  than  these," 

Notice,  first,  that  he  was  a  man  who  honesibj  made  engumes  whdeJi 
fairly  suggested  themselves.  Before  he  became  a  believer  he  did  not,  a«$ 
some  do,  invent  doubts  and  raise  questions,  which  questions  are  merely 
raised  for  question's  sake.  He  did  not  put  queries  to  Philip  which  he 
could  have  answered  himself,  nor  seek  to  entangle  his  instructor  by 
artful  speech.  Nothing  of  the  sort.  He  sought  truth,  not  controversy 
and  word-chopping.  The  two  questions  which  he  put  came  ocit  of  his 
heart,  and  were  points  which  seemed  to  him  to  be  vital.  He  did  not  go 
about  to  discover  difficulties,  but  they  occurred  to  him  there  and  then, 
and  he  spoke  them  out  with  honest  plainness.  He  was  told  that  the 
Messiah  had  been  found,  and  that  he  was  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  I  doubt  not 
he  was  well  acquainted  with  Holy  Writ,  and  he  did  not  recollect  a&y  text 
in  which  the  Christ  was  said  to  come  out  of  Nazareth,  and  therefore  he 
thought  within  himself,  '*  I  read  of  Bethlehem  £phratah  that  oet  of  it 
shall  he  come  forth  who  is  to  be  ruler  in  Israel,  but  I  do  not  remember 
a  word  concerning  Nazareth."  Without  a  moment's  hesitation,  he  put 
the  question,  "  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?"    It  was  a 

S)or,  miserable  little  place,  of  unsavoury  reputation.  This,  then,  was  a 
fficulty,  a  true  and  real  difficulty,  and  lie  stated  it,  and  was  content  to 
"  come  and  see."  >VTien  the  Saviour  met  him  with  the  words, "  Behold  an 
Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile,"  he  enquired,  "Whence  knowest 
thou  me  ?"  A  most  natural  question  to  ask,  for  on  its  answer  would 
depend  the  value  of  the  words.  Might  it  not  happen  that  this  accurate 
description  of  himself  might  have  come  to  Jesus  by  report  ?  If  a  cor- 
rect description  of  Nathanael's  character  had  reached  the  Saviour  by 
PhiUp  or  any  other  friend,  then  it  did  not  prove  anything ;  but  if  Jesus 
knew  it  by  his  own  perception,  and  could  read  the  character  of  a  man  to 
whom  he  was  a  stranger,  then  Nathanael  knew  what  conclusion  to  draw. 
So  he  only  asks  the  question  because  it  ought  to  be  asked,  and  does  not 


GREATER  THINGS  YET.      WHO  SHALL  SEE  THEM?  329 

lie  upon  the  catch.  How  I  love  to  meet  with  seekers  who,  though  they 
are  in  difficulties,  are  willing  to  be  led  out  of  them,  and  are  not  studying 
how  to  invent  more.  Some  of  you  cannot  find  peace  in  Christ  because 
you  wilfully  darken  the  atmosphere  around  yourselves ;  you  are  not 
assailed  by  doubt,  but  you  invite  doubt  to  assail  you.  You  believe  a 
great  deal  more  than  you  like  to  own  to ;  but  do  not  want  to  believe,  and 
are  fishing  for  excuses  for  your  unbelief.  It  is  a  sad  state  of  mind  for  a 
man  to  be  in,  to  be  trying  to  discover  reasons  why  he  should  not  be 
saved,  but  that  is  what  many  are  doing.  ITiat  is  a  wretehed  mind 
which  manufectures  difficulties,  and  complicates  plain  things,  because  it 
cannot  or  will  not  take  a  thing  in  its  straightforward,  simple  meaning, 
but  must  be  puzzled  and  perplexed.  Some  men  are  too  intellectual  to 
beUeve  Uie  poor  man's  gospel,  the  run  and  read  gospel,  the  goroel  of 
*'  Believe  and  live  ;"  they  must  needs  be  mystified,  or  excited,  or  driven 
to  despair,  or  else  they  refuse  to  believe.  There  is  a  craving  in  some 
men  for  something  that  will  appal  them  and  fill  them  with  despair.  Is 
not  this  folly  ?  Wait  not  for  such  sensations,  I  pray  you.  If  you  do, 
yon  will  miss  the  blessing ;  but  if,  even  while  as  yet  you  have  not  re- 
ceived full  &ith,  you  are  honest  enough  to  admit  of  none  but  honest 
difficulties,  there  is  in  you  some  good  thing  towards  the  Lord  God  ot 
Israel,  and  the  Lord  be  praised  for  it. 

Tlus  Nathanael  without  guile  was,  next,  a  man  who  honestly  yielded  to 
the  force  of  truth.  Omniscience  was  proved  to  be  an  attribute  of  Christ 
to  Nathanael  by  the  pointed  remark  which  Jesus  addressed  to  him.  What 
was  Nathanael  doing  under  the  fig  tree ?  "I  know,"  says  one,  " for  I 
have  heard  it  said  he  was  praying."  Well,  I  did  not  say  he  was  not 
praying,  but  I  will  defy  anybody  to  prove  that  he  was.  What  was 
Nathanael  doing  under  the  fig  tree?  We  frequently  read  in  the  Tal- 
mndic  writers  of  learned  rabbis  who  studied  the  law  under  the  fig  tree. 
Was  Nathanael  studying  the  law?  I  did  not  say  he  was  not,  but  I  will 
defy  anybody  to  prove  that  he  was.  What  was  he  doing  under  the  fig 
tree?  There  are  only  two  people  who  could  have  told  us,  and  both  of 
tliese  are  silent  on  the  matter.  Both  Jesus  and  Nathanael  knew,  but  no 
one  else.  What  he  was  doing  under  the  fig  tree  we  may  not  pretend  to 
gaess,  for  it  is  more  instructive  to  leave  it  in  the  dark :  our  Lord's  words 
were  a  kind  of  masonic  sign  to  Nathanael,  all  the  more  conclusive  because 
perfectly  unknown  and  uninterpreted  bv  the  rest  of  mankind.  Whether 
ne  was  going  to  be  baptized  by  John  the  Baptist,  and  sat  down  there  to 
think  of  what  he  was  doing;  or  whether,  havmg  been  baptized,  being  on 
the  way  home,  he  suddenly  felt  an  impression  that  he  must  sit  in  that 
place  and  wait,  he  knew  not  why — ^I  may  not  profess  to  know,  but  it  was 
an  important  movement  to  his  own  mind,  ana  he  remembered  it  as  such. 
As  soon  as  Jesus  said,  with  a  look,  "  When  thou  wast  under  the  fig  tree  '^ 
Nathanael  was  startled  into  a  conviction  that  his  secret  heart  was  known 
to  Jesus.  Under  that  tree  he  had  done,  or  said,  or  thought  a  something 
known  only  to  himself.  How  had  the  person  before  him  known  of  that 
deed  ?  It  was  true  that  his  deed,  or  word,  or  thought  under  the  fig  tree 
was  a  pure,  simple,  and  honest  one,  but  how  did  Jesus  know  ?  "  If  he 
knows  that  I  was  under  the  fig  tree,  and  knows  what  I  was  doing  there, 
and  read  my  simple-minded,  guileless  character  when  I  was  there,  then 
he  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  Kmg  of  Israel."    This  was  Nathanael's 


330  XETBOPOUTAN  TABEBNACLB  PFLPIT. 

immediate  oonclusiony  and  the  argument  was  yery  clear  and  complete. 
Similar  reasoning  was  used  br  others  soon  after  iNathanael's  conveision, 
and  with  the  same  resolt.  When  our  Lord  said  to  the  woman  of  Samaria^ 
*'  Oo,  call  thy  husband,  and  come  hither/'  and  she  replied.  *'  I  have  no 
husband/'  he  answered,  ''Thou  hast  well  said,  I  have  no  husband:  for 
iihou  hast  had  five  husbands ;  and  he  whom  thou  now  hast  is  not  thy 
husband :  in  t^t  saidst  thou  truly."  Then  the  woman  said,  "  Come, 
see  a  man,  which  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  did:  is  not  this  the  Christ?" 
It  was  good  argument,  for  omniscience  proves  Godhead.  An  omniscient 
one  here  in  human  fl^  amoi^  the  sons  of  men  must  be  the  Anointed 
of  God:  he  must  be  the  Lord's  Christ.  I  do  not  know  whether 
Nathanael  recollected  the  passage  of  Scripture,  but  this  was  the  kind  of 
argument  used  hj  the  great  God  himself  when  he  proved  himself  to  be 
G^  in  Isaiah  xhv.  5.  Notice  how  the  [passage,  in  many  of  its  words,  is 
parallel  to  our  text.  ''  One  shall  say,  I  am  the  Lord's ;  and  another  s^ 
call  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob ;  and  another  shall  subscribe  with  his 
hand  unto  the  Lord,  and  surname  himself  by  the  name  of  Israel.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  the  King  of  Israel,  and  his  redeemer  the  Lord  of  hosts ; 
I  am  the  first,  and  I  am  the  last;  and  beside  me  there  is  no  God."  And 
what  is  the  proof  of  it?  ''  Who,  as  I,  shall  call,  and  shall  declare  it,  and 
set  it  in  order  for  me,  since  I  appointed  the  ancient  people  ?  and  the 
things  that  are  coming,  and  shall  come,  let  them  show  unto  them."  He 
challenges  the  false  godR  to  tell  what  was  bein^  done  in  secret  places,  and 
what  was  to  be  done  in  the  future,  and  he  gives  this  as  a  proof  of  his 
Godhead.  The  heathen  oracles  attempted  prophecv,  because  tney  saw  how 
clearly  it  would  prove  the  existence  of  their  gods.  Our  Lord  is  a  dis- 
oemer  of  hearts,  reading  them  as  a  scholar  scans  his  book,  and  we  know 
him  to  be  our  God.  Nathanael  had  drunk  into  the  very  essence  of  that 
wonderful  139th  Psalm.  No  greater  proof  of  Godhead  can  be  given  than 
the  fact  that  all  things  are  ne^ed  ana  open  before  the  Lord.  *'  0  Lord, 
thou  hast  searched  me.  Thou  knowest  my  downsitting  and  mine  up- 
rising, thou  nnderstandest  my  thought  afar  off."  When  I  sat  under  the 
fig  troe  thou  didst  read  my  heart.  "  Thou  compassest  my  path  and  my 
lying  down,  and  art  acquainted  with  all  my  ways.  For  there  is  not  a  word 
in  my  tongue,  but,  lo,  0  Lord,  thou  knowest  it  altogether.  Thou  hast 
beset  me  behind  and  before,  imd  laid  thine  hand  upon  me.  Whither 
shall  I  go  from  thjr  spirit?  or  whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  presence?" 
All  this  you  see  is  a  manifestation  of  Ghxlhead.  Nathanael  therefore 
argued :  ^'  He  saw  me  when  nobody  else  did :  he  read  my  character  in  a 
simple  act,  an  act  which  other  people  might  have  misunderstood,  and 
thought  me  a  fool  for  it :  he  perceived  the  uprightness  of  my  heart,  and 
now  I  know  that  he  is  certainly  divine." 

Notice,  further,  the  blessing  of  our  text  comes  to  a  man  who  m 
simph  hmiesty  believes  much  upon  the  evidence  of  one  aseured  fact.  It  is 
proven  that  Christ  can  see  in  secret  and  read  men's  hearts :  and  from 
this,  in  addition  to  his  divinity,  Nathanael  infers  that  "he  is  a  great 
teacher,"  and  he  msikea  his  first  confession  of  &ith  by  calling  him 
"  Babbi."  He  is  sure  that  he  who  knows  all  things  is  worthy  to  be  a 
teacher,  and  he  gives  him  the  teacher's  title.  Then,  as  we  have  already 
said,  he  perceives  that  if  he  be  omniscient  he  is  divine,  and  he  makes 
the  confession,  "Thou  art  the  Son  of  God";  and,  not  satisfied  with  that. 


i-^' 


OBEATEB  THINGS  TET.     WHO  SHALL  SEE  THEH?  831 

he  flefis  that  if  he  be  indeed  the  Son  of  Ood,  he  must  be  Baler  and  Lord, 
and  therefore  he  calls  him  the  King  of  Israel.  See  here  how  he  drinks 
into  the  spirit  of  theseoond  psalniy  where  Son  and  King  are  the  two  great 
notes  of  harmony.  "  Yet  have  I  set  my  hmg  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion. 
I  will  declare  the  decree :  the  Lord  hath  said  nnto  me.  Thou  art  my  Son  ; 
this  day  have  I  begotten  thee.  Kiss  the  Son  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye 
perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little.  Blessed  are 
all  they  that  pnt  their  trost  in  him."  Gladly  does  Nathanael  submit 
hunself  to  the  Son,  and  proclaim  him  King  of  Israel.  Was  not  this  the 
first  time  that  onr  Lord  had  been  actuaUy  proclaimed  as  King  since  he 
had  come  into  his  public  ministry?  Was  not  this  the  answer  to  the 
wise  men's  question  when  the^  followed  his  star  from  regions  far  remote  ? 
Here  was  he  who  was  bom  Ejng  of  the  Jews.  This  ^leless  man,  who 
seemed  to  lack  in  shrewdness,  had  seen  more  than  his  fellows ;  h^  eye 
undimmed  by  fidsehood  or  suspicion  had  seen  the  King,  though  his 
humiliation  had  imdothed  him  of  his  royal  mantle,  and  taken  off  his 
crown. 

See,  then,  beloved,  the  gist  of  our  first  head  is  this.  It  is  the  pure  in 
heart  that  diall  see  God.  We  must  be  honest  and  sincere ;  we  must  be 
clear  of  all  subtlety  and  craft;  we  must  be  transparent  as  glass  before 
him,  or  else  the  Lord  wiU  not  reveal  himself  to  us  or  by  us.  He  loves 
the  guileless  and  the  true,  and  when  he  has  made  our  eye  single  he  will 
fill  us  with  light,  but  not  till  then. 

Note,  again,  that  those  who  are  ready  to  believe  upon  sure  evidence — 
for  Nathanael  wanted  that— are  the  men  who  shall  see  more  and  more. 
Nathanael  did  not  require  the  evidence  to  be  r^)eated  to  him  ag^n  and 
again,  he  saw  the  argument  at  once,  and  yielded  himself  to  it.  W  hen  a 
point  is  once  proved,  it  is  proved,  and  there  is  an  end  of  it.  One  con- 
clusive argument  is  as  gooa  as  twentyto  an  unsophisticated  mind.  Those 
who  are  willing  to  see  shall  see.  Heaven  is  open  to  those  from  whose 
eyes  the  scales  of  prejudice  are  removed.  The  Lord  manifests  himself 
to  those  who  manifest  themselves  to  him.  If  you  will  be  Ohristians  ot 
the  highest  type  you  must  be  true  to  the  core,  and  you  must  realise 
Ohrist  and  believe  in  him  with  that  mighty  &ith  which  sees  him,  and 
realises  him  as  close  at  hand.  The  presence  and  the  power  of  Jesus 
must  be  undoubted  by  your  soul,  it  must  be  as  much  a  matter  of  feet  to 
you  as  your  own  existence,  and  vours  shall  be  the  word  which  we  are 
now  about  to  consider — ^''Thou  shalt  see  greater  things  than  these." 

II.  Let  us  now  look  at  the  qraoious  bewabd.  Only  a  few  words 
n}>on  it  Because  this  simple-hearted  man  had  believed  upon  the  one 
argument  of  the  Lord's  discernment  of  his  heart  he  was  fevoured  with 
the  promise  of  seeing  greater  things.  By  these  words  onr  Lord  meant 
that  his  fereeptiona  would  become  more  vmcL  Behevest  thou  ?  thou 
tbalteee.  If  we  demand  to  see  first  we  shall  never  believe;  but  if  we  are 
willing  to  believe  we  shall  by-and*by  see.  There  is  a  growth  in  faith 
which  renders  it  not  the  less  feith,  and  yet  approximates  it  more  and 
more  nearly  to  sense.  I  mean  ^^ sense''  in  its  best  signification — so  that 
what  at  first  we  believe,  simply  upon  the  testimony  of  God,  we  come 
by-and-by  to  believe  upon  personal  experience.  We  believe  until  we  so 
leaUse  the  object  of  feith  that  we  look  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen 
led  see  him  who  is  invisible.    From  this  we  go  further  still,  until  we 


832  JIETEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

■ 

both  taste  and  handle  of  the  good  word  of  life,  and  faith  becomes  the 
substance  of  things  hoped  for.  From  looking  to  Christ  we  come  to  liye, 
and  move,  and  have  our  being  in  him.  The  eye  ot  faith  gathers  str^igtL 
At  first  it  sees  Christ  through  its  tears,  and  that  look  saves  the  soul, 
though  it  perceives  comparatively  httle  of  him  ;  but  in  after  days  the 
eye  of  faith  becomes  so  powerful  that  it  emulates  that  of  the  eagle, 
which  can  gaze  upon  the  sun  at  midday.  Thus  faith  becomes  a  second 
sight.  Eemember  our  Lord's  words  to  Martha,  ''Said  I  not  unto  thee, 
that  if  thou  wouldst  believe  thou  shouldst  see  the  glory  of  God  ?"  "  Be- 
lievest  thou  ?    Thou  shalt  see.'* 

This  was  not  all  our  Lord's  meaning.  He  virtually  promised  that 
Nathanael  should  discover  other  truths  than  lie  as  yet  knew.  ''Thoa 
shalt  see  greater  things  than  these."  Now,  what  is  there  greater  to  be 
seen  than  the  omniscience  of  Christ  ?  ''  Such  knowledge  is  too  wonder* 
ful  for  me :  it  is  high :  I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  Is  there  anything  greater 
than  this  ?  Yes,  so  the  Saviour  says.  I  suppose  he  means  this :  Firsts 
as  thou  hast  seen  mine  omniscience  in  thine  own  case  thou  shalt  go  on  to 
see  it  in  the  case  of  all  mankind,  for  by  my  cross  shall  the  thoughts  of 
many  hearts  be  revealed,  and  by  my  gospel  shall  men  be  revealed  unto 
themselves.  The  word  of  God  is  quick  and  powerful,  and  is  a  discemer 
of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart,  and  when  Nathanael  came  to 
preach  it  in  after  years  he  found  it  so,  and  saw  for  himself  that  Christ 
read  every  man's  heart.  How  wonderfully  do  we  know  this  to  be  true 
in  our  time,  and  in  this  place,  for  here  the  word  finds  us  out  and  lays  ns 
bare  to  our  own  consciences.  You  have  been  startled  in  your  seats  some- 
times ;  you  have  wondered  how  it  could  be,  that  not  only  in  the  grosB 
has  your  experience  been  set  before  you,  but  even  in  the  httle  details 
there  have  been  minute  touches  which  have  amazed  you  with  the  dis- 
tinctness  of  the  divine  knowledge.  Our  Lord  did  not  say, ''  I  saw  thee 
under  a  tree/'  as  if  it  might  have  been  an  oak  or  an  oHve,  but  he  spoke 
definitely  of  ''  the  fig  tree."  Even  so  does  he  cause  his  ministers  to 
be  very  minute  and  particular,  so  that  you  wonder  whence  their  know«- 
ledge  comes.  Now,  when  this  is  done  on  a  large  scale,  as  it  is  done 
whenever  Christ  is  preached,  then  is  it  true  that  we  see  greater  thio^ 
than  when  for  the  first  time  we  perceive  that  our  own  diaracter  is  le* 
vealed. 

He  would  see  '^  greater  things,"  next,  because  hs  would  see  mare  of 
the  Godheads  Didst  thou  see  omniscience  ?  Thou  shalt  see  omnipo- 
tence. Didst  thou  discover  that  I  could  read  thine  heart  ?  Thou  shalt 
learn  that  I  can  change  thy  heart.  Didst  thou  find  that  my  eye  could 
glance  into  the  secret  of  tiiy  soul?  Thou  shalt  find  my  word  casting 
out  devils,  and  healing  the  sick,  and  hushing  the  tempests.  Thou  shalt 
see  clearer  ensigns  of  my  Godhead  than  this  one  experiment  in  the 
reading  of  the  heart. 

The  Lord^  in  calling  himself  the  Son  of  man,  opens  up  to  Nathano/el 
one  of  those  greater  things.  He  had  perceived  him  to  be  the  Son  of 
God  by  his  reading  his  heart,  and  it  was  a  great  thing  to  perceive  the 
Godhead,  but  it  was  a  greater  wonder  still  to  see  that  Godhead  linked 
with  humanity.  Jesus,  as  Son  of  God,  is  glorious,  but  as  at  the  same 
time  Son  of  man  he  hath  a  double  glory.  Our  Lord  seemed  to  sav  to 
Nathanael,  '^  Thou  hast  believed  that  I  am  the  Son  of  God,  thou  shalt 


GBXATIB  THDOIS  YIT.     WHO  SHALL  SSS  THEM  ?  S83 

866  ttie  Son  of  man."  And  is  tins  a  greater  thing  ?  In  one  sense  it  is 
adesoentfor  Jesns  to  be  the  Son  of  man,  bat  yet  yon  who  know  how  to 
lead  the  riddle  aright  will  say  that  tiie  Qodhead  is  not  half  so  wonderM 
in  iiaelf  al<»ie  as  when  it  oomes  to  be  nnited  with  onr  hnmanity.  The 
incarnation  has  abont  it  a  mysteiy  which  is  not  seen  even  in  the  mysteiy 
of  the  Godhead.  That  there  ahonld  be  a  Qod  heathens  might  spell  ou^ 
bat  that  this  God  should  oome  in  homan  flesh  among  ns, — ^this  is  the 
mjBltery  which  angels  deaiied  to  look  into.  Nor  may  I  forget  that  the 
idea  of  onr  Lord  as  King  of  Israel  is  not  so  great  as  his  connection  witii 
all  nations,  which  is  dirobgned  in  his  titie  Bon  of  man.  He  is  not  con- 
fined in  Ids  grace  to  Isnel,  as  Nathanael  probably  thought,  but  he  is 
krotber  to  onr  entire  hmnamiy.    Here  was  another  of  the  greater  things. 

Note  finrthery  that  Nadumael  had  only  seen  an  opened  heart,  but  now 
he  was  to  see  an  apawd  hMuen.  He  had  seen  Christ's  eye  entering  into 
his  secrets,  but  he  was  now  to  see  commnnications  establidied  between 
die  lowly  hearts  of  men  and  flie  seqets  of  heaven.  He  saw  how  <%rist, 
as  Son  of  God,  dwelt  among  men ;  he  is  now  to  see  how  the  abodes  of 
God  and  man  shall  be  blen&d  in  one,  and  high  connnttnion  maintained 
between  earth  and  heaven. 

I  come  back  to  the  one  thought,  that  the  sight  of  greater  things  is 
reserved  for  guileless  believers.  To  those  who  already  ha?re  much  by 
£adth  more  shall  be  given.  Beloved,  as  a  dinrch  and  people,  we  have 
seen  great  things  in  this  place  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  amon^  us ;  and 
we  have  lately  celebrated  widi  mnch  joy  and  thankfolness  we  loving- 
kindness  of  the  Lord  to  ns :  let  us  make  this  a  new  starting  point,  and 
hear  the  Lord  say, ''  From  tiiis  day  will  I  bless  you."  We  desire  to  see 
much  greater  things  than  we  have  known,  and  in  order  to  this  we  must 
have  more  fiuth,  and  that  fidth  must  be  more  simple  and  childlike.  The 
rule  of  the  kingdom  is  that  according  to  onr  faith  so  shall  it  be  unto  us. 
Unbelief  bars  the  way  of  mercy.  We  tie  the  hands  of  Jesus  if  we  have 
not  faith.  Is  it  not  written,  **  He  could  not  do  many  mighty  works 
there  because  of  their  unbelief"?  We  must  believe  or  we  shall  not  be 
established,  nor  shall  onr  work  prosper.  Whatever  we  have  accomplished 
baa  been  wrought  by  faith,  but  we  believe  that  we  might  have  acne  a 
hundred  times  as  mnch  if  we  had  manifested  a  hundred  times  as  much 
&ath.  May  the  Lord  give  us  downright,  honest,  simple  faith,  and  then 
we  shall  see  greater  tfamgs  Aan  these,  for  all  obstacles  will  be  removed, 
and  eternal  love  will  work  wonders  amon^  ns.  Faith  makes  a  man  a  fit 
instrament  for  God  to  use,  and  hence  God  does  great  thtugs  by  him.  If 
yon  are  nnbelieving  God  will  no  more  use  you  than  a  warrior  would 
use  a  reed  for  a  weapon.  He  works  no  wonders  by  unbelieving  ministers 
and  unbelieving  churches,  for  these  are  not  prepared  to  be  blest ;  they 
are  not  vessels  fit  ibr  the  Master's  use ;  rust  is  upon  them  of  the  worst 
kind.  When  your  heart  is  resting  in  tiie  Lord,  expecting  to  see  his  arm 
made  bare,  and  quietly  waiting  to  see  how  he  will  donfy  himself  and 
fhJfil  his  pronnse,  then  will  yon  see  greater  things.  When  faith  fails  it 
disqualifies  ns  and  sets  us  aside  even  as  in  the  case  of  Moses  and  Aaron, 
to  whom  the  Lord  said, ''  Because  ye  bdieved  me  not,  to  sanctify  me 
in  the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel,  therefore  ye  shall  not  bring  this 
congregation  unto  the  land  which  I  have  given  them." 

We  must  have  faith^  for  fidUi  fulfils  die  condition  which  is  virtually 


\ 


834  XETBOFOLITAH  TABXBVAOLB  PITLFIT. 

appended  to  erery  promise.  Has  not  die  Lord  nromised  to  mtmet 
tne  prayers  of  those  who  cry  unto  him  believingly?  bat  as  for  tiie 
wavering  he  has  said,  **  Let  not  that  man  expect  to  reodye  anything  of 
the  Lord."  Is  not  feith  onr  very  life?  ''The  jost  shall  live  l^- 
faith."  Is  it  not  onr  entrance  into  blessedness?  For  we  see  that  Israel 
in  the  wilderness  oonld  not  enter  into  Canaan  because  of  unbelief.  All 
the  promises  are  for  believers,  and  none  for  unbelievers.  **  As  thou  hasfe 
believed  so  be  it  unto  thee/'  stands  as  the  measure  of  blessing ;  tiiete  is 
no  other  limit. 

Strong  faith  coupled  with  a  c:nOeless  character  brings  a  man  into  the 
special,  complacent  love  of  God ;  for,  albeit  that  he  loves  all  his  electa 
he  does  not  delight  in  all  alike.  There  were  i^postles  among  Ae  dis- 
ciples ;  there  were  three  choice  ones  out  of  the  twelve :  there  was  one 
peculiar  favourite  out  of  the  three.  He  is  dearest  to  Ood  who  trusts 
him  most  completely,  and  is  most  childlike  and  true.  Ood  will  do  most 
by  that  man  who  is  most  reliant  upon  him,  and  most  open  with  him. 
David,  who  makes  the  Lord  alone  to  be  his  confidence,  is  the  man  i^fter 
God's  own  hearty  and  Abraham,  who  in  &ith  could  even  give  up  hia  only 
son,  is  the  friend  of  God.  We  shall  never  be  full-grown  with  God  until 
we  become  too  little  to  dare  to  doubt,  too  insignificant  to  venture  to 
question,  too  true  to  suspect  the  liord.  Increase  in  faith  is  the  one 
tning  needful  to  our  advance  in  the  divine  life  and  work,  and  may  the 
Holy  Ghost  work  it  in  us  for  Christ's  name's  sake. 

III.  We  have  only  a  minute  or  two  in  which  to  mention  th« 
SPECIAL  SIGHT  which  was  promised  to  Nathanael.  He  was  to  see 
an  opened  heaven.  The  gates  of  glory  are  not  only  opened  now  to 
believers,  but  they  are  carried  right  away,  and  heaven  is  laid  open  to  all 
its  citizens,  even  to  those  who  dwell  below.  This  is  a  great  joy  to  the 
believing  heart,  for  free  intercourse  with  heaven  is  the  delight  of  onr 
spirit.  I  cannot  enlarge  upon  this,  which  is  worthy  of  another  sermon, 
but  I  may  not  say  less  than  this,  that  in  Christ  the  saints  are  brought 
very  near  to  God,  for  even  now  th^  have  come  to  the  heavenly  Jeru- 
salem. The  franchise  of  the  new  Jerusalem  is  extended  to  these  low- 
lying  regions  in  which  we  sojourn.  The  veil  is  rent,  and  we  have  access 
to  the  holiest ;  the  wall  of  separation  is  removed,  and  now  the  abode  of 
the  church  below  is  an  adjunct  of  heaven,  a  suburban  district  of  the 
metropolitan  city  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  The  gates  shall  not  be  shut» 
nor  a  division  created,  nor  intercourse  suBpen<ted  henceforth.  Is  not 
that  a  glorious  thing,  that  in  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus  heaven  is  laid 
open  to  earth,  and  ^rth  laid  open  to  communications  with  heaven.  Do 
vou  know  that^  beloved  ?  It  is  a  simple  thing  to  talk  o^  but  do  yon 
know  it?  Have  you  taken  up  your  citizenslup,  so  that  you  can  say, 
*'  Truly  our  citizenship  is  in  heaven"?  While  you  are  sitting  under  that 
fig  tree  do  you  know  what  it  is  to  sit  in  the  heavenly  places,  together 
with  Christ?  Are  you  risen  and  reigning  with  him  even  now?  If  so» 
this  is  a  joyful  state  of  things,  and  one  which  should  cause  us  much 
assurance.  We  are  now  dwemng  in  the  house  of  our  God,  or  at  the 
very  least  we  are  sitting  by  the  very  gate  of  heaven.  Our  condition  is 
known  to  the  Lord,  and  he  is  near  to  help  us ;  we  sufier  not  unseen,  and 
labour  not  unobserved.  Nothing  hinders  God  from  succouring,  nothing 
hinders  us  irom  securing  his  aid. 


GREATER  THINGS  YET.     WHO  SHALL  SEE  THEM?  835 

Then  the  Lord  went  on  to  promise  that  he  should  see  that  the  inter- 
course between  heaven  and  earth  by  the  way  of  the  Mediator  is  not  only 
peouble,  bat  actoaL  The  ladder  is  set,  and  there  are  angels  ascending  and 
descending  upon  it.  <3od  does  hear,  and  help>  and  speak  with  believing 
men  of  pure  heart. 

Observe  that,  according  to  the  text,  the  angels  ascend  first.  It  does 
flay,  **  Descending  and  ascending,"  as  we  might  naturally  suppose,  but 
they  ascend  first,  because  when  Jesus  was  on  earth  they  were  here 
already,  and  ascended  at  his  bidding  to  canj  his  upward  messages. 
IVhen  Jesus  Christ  was  here  he  was  never  without  his  bo^  guard  of 
angels,  and  these  were  his  messengers  to  the  courts  above.  We,  to-day, 
beloved,  are  sorroundied  by  the  forces  of  the  Eternal :  they  have  not  to 
oome  to  us  for  the  first  time ;  lo,  they  have  these  manv  years  kept  watch 
and  ward  aponnd  the  fold  of  the  redeemed ;  and  when  a  new  danger 
comes  they  are  prompt  to  do  the  part  of  watdiers  and  of  guardians,  and 
to  cany  tidings  to  the  sentinels  of  heaven.  Let  us  pray,  for  as  we  pray 
cur  prayers  ascend  to  heaven,  and  our  praises  too.  If  we  lead  an 
angeucal  life  our  thoughts  will  always  be  going  up  to  heaven,  or  re- 
turning thence.  Beloved,  have  you  realised  this, — that  as  you  have 
believ^  in  Christ  upon  the  testimony  of  his  word,  you  have  now  the 
right  of  access  to  the  eternal  throne  at  all  times  ?  You  have  but  to  speak 
and  God  will  hear  you.  Some  of  God's  people  do  not  know  much 
about  this.  Praying  is  a  religious  exercise  with  them,  a  very  proper 
ezerdse,  but  it  is  not  speaking  with  God;  it  is  not  doing  business  with 
God,  and  obtaining  supplies  at  his  hands.  It  is  a  ladder  without  angels, 
or,  if  you  please,  with  ascending  angels  only,  but  none  coming  down  with 
heavenly  gifts.  Beloved,  I  hope  you  have  not  Men  into  this  error. 
What,  is  not  prayer  real  with  you?  Do  you  expect  nothing  from  it? 
Would  you  send  an  ansel  on  a  fool's  errand  ?  Do  these  ascend  to  heaven 
in  mere  sport,  and  rudi  up  and  down  to  do  nothing?  Let  us  mean 
business  when  we  pray,  or  we  shall  be  mockers  of  the  divine  majesty. 
Too  many  come  before  God  and  ask  for  eveiything  in  general  but 
nothing  in  particular,  and  they  get  but  scant  answers  to  their  pointless 
prayers.  Many  more  are  very  slack  in  prayer,  and  hence  they  starve 
their  souls.  Many  angds  must  go  up  if  many  are  to  come  down. 
Prayer  must  be  constuit  and  real  with  us.  We  should  hve  as  if  we 
leaily  had  power  with  God,  as  if  like  Elias  we  could  go  the  top  of 
Oarmel  and  pray  a  faraaen  heaven  away  and  deluge  the  earth  with 
showers  of  blessings.  Are  yon  laable  so  to  live  ?  then  the  &ult  lies  at 
your  own  door. 

What  was  next  ?  Nathanael  was  to  see  angels  descending  upon  the 
Son  of  man,  that  is  to  say,  he  was  to  see  heavenly  spirits  and  blessings 
coming  down  to  man  by  Jesus  Christ.  He  who  truly  believes  in  Christ, 
and  is  without  guile,  shall  have  continue  succours  from  on  high :  all 
heaven  shall  be  opened  to  him.  God  wUl  help  him  by  nrovidence,  will 
help  him  by  grace,  will  help  him  by  actual  angels,  ana  will  help  him 
spiritually  by  the  all  power  which  he  has  given  unto  Christ  in  heaven 
and  in  eirth.  How  earnestly  do  I  desire  that  this  church  this  morning 
aiay  see  for  itself  what  my  eyes  have  seen  for  myself;  for  my  faith  sees 
heaven  opened  to  supply  tiie  needs  of  Christ's  work,  and  all  the  might  of 
God  worKing  to  achieve  his  purposes.    I  am  just  entering  upon  another 


9S6  HETROPOLITAH  TABSBHrACLB  PULPIT. 

work  for  God*  We  have  had  enough  of  these  enterprifles,  say  Bome, 
why  not  wait  ?  I  am  forced  to  go  forward  and  onward ;  I  mnst  go,  nor 
do  I  fear,  for  lo,  I  see  heaven  opened,  and  the  angels  of  God  ascending 
and  descending,  by  the  way  of  Christ  Jesos,  to  bring  ns  sncooor.  We 
may  venture.  There  is  no  ventare  in  it — ^we  may  trost  Ood  for  any- 
thing, we  may  trust  God  for  everything,  and  just  ^  straight  on.  it 
looks  like  walking  the  waters  sometimes  to  trust  Chnst,  espmaDy  about 
gold  and  silver  ;  but  we  need  not  fear,  the  waters  shall  be  a  sea  of  glass 
beneath  our  feet  if  we  can  but  simply  trust.  But  oh,  we  must  purge 
ourselves,  we  must  be  without  guile,  there  must  be  no  self-seeking ; 
there  must  be  a  simple-hearted  desire  for  God's  gloir,  and  for  nothmg 
else  ;  we  must  sink  sel^  and  Christ  must  reign,  and  then  we  must  trust 
and  so  forward.  I  hope  we  are  right  in  this  matter,  and  if  so,  we  shall 
see  the  salvation  of  Ghod.  Nothing  can  stop  us.  Behold,  this  day  all 
things  work  together  for  eood  to  &em  that  love  €rod.  The  stones  of 
the  field  are  in  league  wiui  us,  yea,  it  is  not  on  earth  alone  that  we  find 
allies,  but  the  stars  in  their  courses  fight  against  our  foes,  and  all  heaven 
is  on  the  stir  to  befiiend  us  in  the  service  of  Qoi.  See  how  the  ladder 
swarms  with  coming  and  going  angels!  Heaven  surrounds  those  who 
are  doing  heaven's  worL  God  hin^lf  is  with  us  for  our  Captain,  and 
his  host,  which  is  very  great,  is  round  about  us  even  as  horses  of  fire 
and  chariots  of  fire  were  round  about  the  prophet.  All  things  shall  be 
given  that  are  needed,  and  as  our  day  our  strength  shall  he.  Brace 
yourselves  up,  my  brethren,  for  a  new  endeavour.  Be  strong  in  the 
Lord  and  ye  shaU  see  greater  things  than  these.  Full  of  weatmess,  yet 
stand  ye  in  his  strength  each  one,  and  play  the  man.  Say,  *'  I  can  do  aU 
thin^  through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  me."  Omnipotence  is  waiting 
to  gird  your  loins.  Buckle  it  about  you,  and  become  mightf  through 
God.  Our  Head,  Christ  Jesus,  hath  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earSi, 
and  that  power  he  pours  into  all  his  members.  By  faith  I  commit 
myself,  and  I  trust,  also,  my  beloved  church  and  friends,  to  further  efibrts 
for  our  Ijord,  relying  upon  his  word,  '*  Thou  shalt  see  greater  things 
than  these,"  and  nilly  believing  that  through  Christ  Jesus  all  the  forces 
of  heaven  are  in  alliance  with  us,  and  the  will  of  the  Lord  shall  surely 
be  accomplished. 


PoBTiONS  OF  Scripture  Bead  before  Sermok— John  i.  85 — 51 ; 

Genesis  xxviii.  10 — ^22. 

f 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymh  Book" — 412,  386,  817. 


*  Mr.  SpTirgeon  alludes  to  the  Oirla'  Orphanage.  The  fimd  has  just  oommenoed, 
and  land  has  been  purchased.  A  large  amount  wiU  be  needed,  bat  there  is  a  great 
God  to  look  to. 


^ttt[j)$(rlttan  i^^^nmde  §ttp. 


THE  WORK  OF  GEACE  THE  WAEBANT  FOB  OBEDIENCE. 


% 


Delivebed  on  Lord*8-Day  MoBmsa,  June  ISth^  1879,  dy 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  HETROPOLITAK  TABEBNAOLB,  NEWIKGTOK. 
(On  hehalf  of  the  Mansion  House  Fund  for  the  Hospitals  of  London.) 


*'  He  that  made  me  whole,  the  same  said  nnto  me»  Take  np  thy  bed  and  walk,**— 
John  Y.  n. 

JuBT  a  few  observations  upon  the  narrative  itself.  It  was  a  feast  day, 
and  Jesus  Christ  came  np  to  Jerusalem  to  find  opportunities  for  doing 
good  among  the  crowds  of  his  countrymen.  I  see  all  the  city  glad ;  I 
hear  the  voice  of  rejoicing  in  every  house  as  they  hold  high  festival  and 
eat  the  &t  and  drink  the  sweet.  But  where  does  Jesus  keep  the  feast? 
How  does  he  spend  his  holiday?  He  walks  among  the  poor,  whom  he 
loves  so  well.  Behold  him  in  the  hospital.  There  was  one  notable  Beth- 
csda  or  house  of  mercy  in  Jerusalem :  it  was  a  poor  provision  for  the 
city's  abounding  sickness,  but  such  as  it  was  it  was  greatly  prized. 
There  was  a  pool  which  every  now  and  then  was  stirred  by  an  angel's 
wing,  and  wrought  an  occasional  cure,  and  around  it  charitable  persons 
bad  built  five  porches,  and  there  on  the  cold  stone  steps  a  number  of 
blind  and  halt  and  withered  folk  were  lying,  each  one  upon  his  own 
wretched  pallet,  waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  waters.  There  were  the 
weary  children  of  pain,  fainting  while  others  were  feasting,  racked  with 
pain  amid  general  rejoicing,  sighing  amid  universal  singing.  Our  Lord 
was  at  home  amid  this  mercy,  tor  here  was  room  for  his  tender  heart  and 
powerful  hand.  He  feasted  his  soul  by  doing  good.  Let  us  learn  this 
lesson,  dear  friends,  that  in  the  times  of  our  brightest  joys  we  should  re« 
member  the  sorrowful,  and  find  a  still  higher  ]oy  in  aoing  them  good. 
It  well  becomes  us  in  proportion  as  a  day  is  gladsome  to  ourselves  to  make 
it  so  to  the  sick  and  poor  around  us.  Let  us  keep  the  feast  by  sending 
portions  to  those  for  whom  nothing  is  prepared,  for  else  the  famishing 
may  bring  a  curse  upon  our  feasting.  When  we  are  prospered  in  busi- 
ness let  us  set  aside  a  portion  for  the  poor.  When  we  are  full  of  health 
and  strength  let  us  recollect  those  to  whom  these  privileges  are  denied, 
and  aid  those  who  minister  to  them.  Blessed  shall  they  be  who,  like  the 
Jiord  Jesus,  visit  the  sick  and  care  for  them. 
Coming  into  the  hospital  our  Lord  noticed  a  certain  man  whose  case 
Nos.  1,479-80. 


338  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

was  a  very  sad  one.    There  were  many  painful  cases  there,  bnt  he  singlecl 
ont  this  man,  and  it  would  seem  that  the  reason  for  his  choice  was  that 
the  poor  creature  was  in  the  worst  plight  of  all.    If  misery  has  a  claim 
on  pity,  then  the  greater  the  suflfercr  the  more  is  mercy  attracted  towards 
him.    This  poor  victim  of  rheumatism  or  paralysis  had  been  thirty-ei^bt 
years  bound  by  his  infirmity.    Let  us  hope  there  was  no  worse  case  in  all 
feethesda's  porches !    Thirty-eight  years  is  more  thah  half  the  appointed 
period  of  human  life.    One  year  of  pain  or  paralysis  has  a  weary  leng^th 
of  torture  about  it,  but  think  of  thirty-eignt !    We  may  well  pity  the 
man  who  endures  the  pangs  of  rheumatism  even  for  an  hour,  but  how 
shall  we  sufficiently  pity  him  who  has  not  been  free  from  it  for  hard  on 
forty  jeoxH  ?    Even  if  the  case  was  not  one  of  pain,  but  of  paralysis,  the 
inaoility  to  work  and  the  consequent  poverty  of  so  many  years  were  bj 
no  means  a  small  evil.    Our  Lord,  then,  selects  the  worst  case  to  bic 
dealt  ^ith  by  his  curing  hand,  as  a  type  of  what  he  often  does  in  the 
kingdom  of  grace,  and  as  a  lesson  of  prudence  to  us,  instructing  us  to 
give  our  first  aid  to  those  who  are  first  in  point  of  need. 

The  man  whom  Jesus  healed  was  by  no  means  an  attractive  charactor. 
Our    Saviour  said  to    him    when   he  was  healed,    ''Sin  no    more, 
lest  a  worse  thing  come  unto  thee,"  from  which  it  is  not  an  improbable 
in&renoe  that  his  first  infirmity  had  como  upon  him  by  some  deed  of 
vice  or  course  of  excess.    In  some  way  or  other  he  had  been  guilty  of 
that  which  brought  upon  his  body  the  suffering  which  he  was  enduring. 
Now,  it  is  considered  generally  to  be  a  point  beyond  all  dispute  that  we 
should  help  the  worthy  but  should  refuse  the  worthless, — that  when  a 
man  brings  a  calamity  upon  himself  by  wrong  doing  we  are  justified  in 
letting  him  suffer,  that  he  may  reap  what  he  has  sown.  This  cold  Pharisaic 
idea  is  very  congenial  to  minds  which  are  bent  upon  saving  their  coin.    It 
springs  up  in  many  hearts,  or  rather  in  places  where  hearts  ought  to  be, 
and  it  is  generally  regarded  as  if  i^  were  a  rule  of  prudence  which  it 
would  be  sinful  to  dispute,  an  axiom  infallible  and  universal.    Now, 
I  venture  to  say  that  our  Saviour  never  taught  us  to  confine  our  alms 
to  the  deserving.    He  would  never  have  bestowed  the  grand  alms  of 
grace  on  any  one  of  us  if  he  had  carried  out  that  rule  ;  and  if  you  and  I 
had  rooeived  no  more  at  the  hands  of  God  than  we  deserved,  we 
should  not  have  been  in  this  house  of  prayer.  We  cannot  afford  to  cramp 
our  charity  into  a  sort  of  petty  justice,  and  sour  our  almsgiving  into 
a  miniature  assizes.    When  a  man  is  suffering  let  us  pity  him,  however 
the  suffering  has  come.  When  a  man  had  been  m  misery  so  long  as  thirty- 
eight  years,  it  was  time  that  his  infirmity  should  be  more  considered 
than  his  iniquity,  and  that  his  present  sorrow  should  be  thought  ujwn 
more  than  his  former  fully.    So  Jesus  thought,  and  therefore  he  came  to 
the  sinner,  not  with  reproach,  but  with  restoration  ;  he  saw  his  disease 
rather  than  his  depravity,  and  gave  him  pity  instead  of  punishment. 
Our  Gk)d  is  kind  to  the  unthankful  and  to  the  evil ;  be  ye  therefore 
merciful,  as  your  Father  also  is  merciful.  Remember  how  our  Lord  said, 
*<  Pwf  for  them  that  despitefuUy  use  you,  that  you  may  be  the  children 
of  your  Fatiier  which  is  m  heaven  ;  for  he  makebh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the 
evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust** 
Let  ns  imitate  him  in  this,  and  wherever  there  is  pain  and  sorrow  let  it 
te  oar  joy  to  relieve  it. 


THE  WOBE  OF  OBAOB  THE  WABBAVT  FOB  OBEDIENCE.  839 

In  addition  to  the  sapposition  that  this  man  had  at  soroe  time  been 
grossly  guilty^  it  seems  pretty  clear  from  the  text  that  he  was  a  poor,  shift- 
less, discouraged,  inanimate,  stupid  sort  of  body.  He  had  never  manage^ 
to  get  into  the  pool,  though  others  had  done  so  who  were  as  infirm  as  him- 
self. He  had  never  been  able  to  win  a  friend  or  secure  a  helper,  though 
from  the  extreme  length  of  his  infirmity  one  would  have  thought  that  at 
acme  period  or  another  he  might  have  found  a  man  to  place  him  in  the 
pool  when  the  angel  gave  it  the  mystic  stir.  The  Saviour's  asking  him, 
*'  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?"  leads  us  to  think  that  he  had  falleu  into 
such  a  listless,  despairing,  heart-sick  condition,  that  though  he  came 
daily  to  the  edge  of  the  pool  as  a  matter  of  habit,  he  had  not  only  ceased 
to  hope,  but  had  almost  ceased  to  wish.  Our  Lord  touched  the  chord 
which  was  most  likely  to  respond,  namely,  his  will  and  desire  to  be  made 
whole,  but  the  response  was  a  yery  feeble  one.  His  answer  shows  K'hat 
a  poor  creature  he  was,  for  there  is  not  a  beam  of  hope  in  it,  or  even  of 
desire :  it  is  a  wail,  a  hopeless  dirge,  a  grievous  complaint :  "  I  have 
no  man,  when  the  water  is  troubled,  to  put  me  into  the  pool :  but  while  I 
am  coming,  another  steppeth  down  before  me.'*  But  the  utter  imbecility 
and  want  of  brain  of  the  poor  creature  is  most  seen  in  the  fact  that  like 
a  simpleton  he  went  to  Ohrist's  enemies  and  told  them  that  it  was  Jesus 
that  had  made  him  whole.  I  am  sure  there  was  no  mahce  in  his  thus 
informing  our  Lord's  enemies,  for  if  there  had  been  he  would  have  said, 
^*  It  was  Jesus  who  bade  me  take  up  my  bed,"  whereas  he  worded  it  thus, 
**  It  was  Jesus  which  had  made  him  whole."  I  hardly  dare,  however, 
to  hope,  as  some  do,  that  there  was  much  gratitude  about  this  testimony, 
though  doubtless  the  poor  soul  was  grateful ;  I  conceive  that  his  long 
endurance  of  pain,  acting  upon  a  weak  mind,  had  brought  him  to  a4 
almost  imbecile  state  of  mind,  so  that  he  spoke  without  thought.  Our 
Lord  did  not,  therefore,  require  much  of  him,  he  did  not  ask  even  for  a 
distinct  avowal  of  feith  from  him,  but  only  for  that  small  measure  of 
it  whidi  might  be  implied  in  his  answering  the  question,  **  Wilt  thou 
be  made  whole  ?'^  This  poor  man  evinced  none  of  the  shrewdness  of  the 
man  bom  blind,  who  answered  the  Pharisees  so  keenly ;  he  was  of  quite 
another  type,  and  could  do  no  more  than  state  his  own  case  to  Jesus. 
Thank  6od^  even  that  was  enough  for  our  Lord  to  work  with.  The 
Lord  Jesus  saves  people  of  all  sorts.  He  hath  among  his  disciples  men 
of  quick  and  ready  wit,  who  can  bailie  their  opponents,  but  quite  as  often 

*'  He  takes  the  fool  and  mnkes  him  know 
The  wonders  of  his  dying  love : 
To  bring  aspirin?  wisdom  low, 
And  dl  its  pride  reprove.** 

So  here  he  chose  this  poor  simpleton  of  a  creature  and  wrought  a  great 
marvel  upom  him,  to  the  exceeding  praise  of  his  condescending  grace. 

Note  well  that  this  man's  mind,  though  there  was  not  much  of  it,  Avas  all 
engrossed  and  filled  up  with  the  fact  that  he  had  been  made  whole .  Jesus  to 
him  was  **  he  that  made  me  whole."  Of  (lie  person  of  Jesus  he  knew  next 
to  nothing,  for  he  had  only  seen  him  for  an  instant,  and  then  be  wist  not 
that  it  was  Jesus :  his  one  idea  of  Jesus  was,  "  He  that  made  me  whole.'' 
Now,  beloved  brethren,  this  was  natural  in  his  case,  and  it  will  be  equally 
natural  in  our  own.   Even  when  the  saved  ones  are  more  intelligent,  and 


S40  HETROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PUL?IT« 

of  larger  mind  than  this  poor  paralytic^  they  mnst  still  chiefly  think 
of  the  Son  of  God  as  their  Saviour,  as  he  that  made  them  whole.  If  I 
do  not  know  mnch  about  the  Lord,  yet  I  do  know  that  he  has  saved  me. 
I  was  burdened  with  g:uilt  and  full  of  woes,  and  could  not  rest  day  nor 
night  until  he  gave  me  peace.  If  I  cannot  tell  another  much  con- 
cerning the  glory  of  his  person,  his  attributes,  his  relationsliips,  his 
offices,  or  his  work,  yet  I  can  say  ''one  thing  I  know,  whereas  I  was 
blinded  by  error,  now  I  see ;  whereas  I  was  paralyzed  by  sin,  I  am  now 
able  to  stand  upright  and  walk  in  his  ways."  This  poor  soul  knew  the 
Lord  experimentally,  and  that  is  the  best  way  of  knowing  him.  Actual  con- 
tact with  him  yields  a  surer  knowledge,  and  a  truer  knowledge,  than  all  the 
reading  in  the  world.  .In  the  kingdom  of  Christ  wonderful  &cts 
transpire,  such  as  conversion  and  finding  peace  with  Qod ;  and  happy 
are  they  to  whom  these  facts  are  personal  experiences.  When  men 
are  turned  from  the  error  of  their  ways,  and  when  their  heart  finds  rest 
and  peace  in  Christ  great  deeds  are  done  by  the  Lord  Jesus;  and  if  you  are 
acquainted  with  these  two  things,  even  though  you  should  be  ignorant  of 
a  great  deal  else,  be  not  afraid  of  exaggerating  their  importance,  bat  set 
your  mind  on  them,  and  call  Jesus  by  that  name, — '^  He  that  made  me 
whole."  Think  of  him  under  that  aspect,  and  you  will  have  a  very 
valuable  and  influential  idea  of  him.  You  shall  see  greater  things  than 
these,  but  for  the  present  let  these  happy  and  sure  facts  be  much  upon 
your  mind,  even  as  his  being  made  whole  was  upon  this  man's  mind. 

As  for  the  cavilling  Pharisees,  you  observe  that  they  took  no  notice  of 
the  glorious  &ctof  the  man's  cure ;  they  wilfully  ignored  what  Christ  had 
done,  but  they  fell  full  swoop  upon  that  little,  insignificant  circumstance 
that  it  had  been  done  on  the  Sabbath-day,  and  then  they  spent  all  their 
thoughts  and  emotions  upon  that  side  issue.    They  sav  nothing  of  the 
man's  being  restored,  but  they  rage  because  he  carried  his  bed  on  the 
Sabbath-day.  It  is  much  the  same  with  the  men  of  the  world  at  this  day. 
They  habitually  ignore  the  fact  of  conversion;  if  they  do  not  deny 
it  they  look  upon  it  as  being  a  trifle,  a  matter  not  worth  caring  about. 
What  though  they  see  the  harlot  made  chaste,  and  the  thief  made  honest, 
and  the  pro&ne  made  devout,  and  the  despairing  made  joyful,  and  other 
moral  and  spiritual  changes  of  the  utmost  practical  value,  they  forget  all 
this,  and  they  attack  some  peculiar  point  of  doctrine,  or  mode  of  speech, 
or  diversity  of  manner,  and  raise  a  storm  concemine  these.    Is  it  because 
the  facts  themselves,  if  fairly  looked  at,  would  establish  what  they  do  not 
care  to  believe  ?    The  fact  that  Christianity  is  doing  marvels  in  the  world, 
such  as  nothing  else  ever  did,  they  persistently  forget,  but  that  &ct  is 
just  what  you  and  I  must  as  persistently  rememb^.    We  must  dwell 
upon  what  Christ  has  by  his  Holy  Spirit  wrought  within  our  nature 
by  renewing  us  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds,  and  we  must  make  this  work 
of  grace  a  fountain  of  argument  which  shall  establish  our  &ith  and 
justify  our  conduct.    This  poor  man  did  so.    He  did  not  know  much 
else,  but  that  he  had  been  made  whole  he  did  know,  and  from  that  fact 
he  justified  himself  in  what  he  had  done.    "  He  that  made  me  whole, 
the  same  said  unto  me,  take  up  thy  bed  and  walk." 

This  is  the  truth  which  I  want  to  enlarge  upon  this  morning — ^first,  by 
saying  that  the  work  of  Christ  fiimishes  us  with  a  justification  for  our 
obedience  to  his  command — '*  He  that  made  me  whole,  the  same  said  to 


J 


THE  WORK  OF  GRACE  THIS  WARRA^'T  FOR  OB£DIKNCK.  341 

me" — ^that  is  our  complete  justification  for  what  we  do.  In  the  second 
place,  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  throws  upon  us  em  obligation  to  do 
what  he  bids  us — ^if  he  that  made  me  whole  says  to  me,  take  up  thy  bed 
and  w^alk,  I  am  bound  to  do  it,  and  I  ought  to  feel  the  obligation  of  his 
goodness  pressing  upon  me ;  and,  in  the  third  place,  it  is  not  only  a  jus- 
tification and  an  obligation,  but  the  deed  of  grace  becomes  a  constraint  to 
obedience — ^he  that  said  unto  me, ''  rise,"  and  so  made  me  whole,  by  that 
eame  word  of  power  made  me  take  up  my  bed  and  walk.  The  power 
which  saves  us  also  moves  us  to  obey  our  Saviour.  Not  with  our  own 
might  do  we  fulfil  the  will  of  our  Lord,  but  with  power  which  the 
Healer  gives  us  in  the  self-same  hour.  You  see  the  <mft,  therefore,  of 
our  discourse.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  us  into  the  power  of  this  truth, 
for  I  am  persuaded  that  a  sense  of  the  Lord's  work  within  us  is  a  great 
force,  and  should  be  excited  and  applied  to  the  highest  ends. 

I.  First,  then,  this  is  our  justification  for  what  we  do  when  we 
obey  Christ.  This  poor  man  could  not  defend  the  action  of  taking  up 
his  bed  and  walking,  for  his  enemies  were  learned  in  the  law  and  he 
was  not.  You  and  I  could  defend  it  very  easily,  for  it  seems  to  us 
a  very  proper  thing  to  do  under  the  circumstances.  The  weight  of 
his  bed  was  not  much  more  than  that  of  an  ordinary  great  coat,  it 
was  a  simple  rug  or  mat  upon  which  he  was  lying;  there  really  was 
no  violation  of  God's  law  of  the  Sabbath,  and  therefore  there  was 
nothing  to  excuse.  But  the  Rabbis  laid  down  rules  of  which  I  will  give 
you  but  one  specimen — "  It  is  unlawful  to  carry  a  handkerchief  loose  in 
the  pocket ; "  but  if  you  pin  it  to  your  pocket  or  tie  it  round  your  waist 
as  a  girdle  you  may  carry  it  anywhere,  because  it  becomes  a  part  of  your 
dress.  To  my  unsophisticated  mind  it  would  have  seemed  that  the  pin 
increased  the  ponderous  burden,  and  that  so  there  was  the  weight  of  the 
pin  more  than  was  necessary  I  This  was  quite  a  weighty  business  accord- 
ing to  Rabbinical  estimates.  The  most  of  the  Rabbinical  regulations 
with  regard  to  the  Sabbath  were  absolutely  ludicrous,  but  this  poor  man 
was  not  in  a  position  to  say  so  or  even  to  think  so,  for,  like  the  rest  of 
his  countrymen,  he  stood  in  awe  of  the  scribes  and  doctors.  These 
learned  pharisees  and  priests  were  too  much  reverenced  for  this  poor 
creature  to  answer  them  in  their  own  manner;  but  he  did  what  you 
and  I  must  always  do  when  we  are  at  all  puzzled; — he  hid  behind 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  pleaded,  '^He  that  made  me  whole,  the  same 
said  unto  me,  take  up  thy  bed."  That  was  quite  enough  for  him, 
and  he  quoted  it  as  if  he  felt  that  it  ought  to  be  enough  for  those 
who  questioned  him.  Truly  it  ought  to  have  been  so.  I  may  not  be 
able  to  find  in  my  own  knowledge  and  ability  an  autJiority  equal  to  the 
authority  of  learned  unbelievers,  but  my  personal  experience  oi  the  power 
of  grace  will  stand  me  in  as  good  a  stead  as  this  man's  cure  was  to 
him.  He  argued  that  there  must  be  in  the  man  who  made  him  whole 
enough  authority  to  match  the  greatest  possible  rabbi  that  ever  lived. 
Even  his  poor,  teeble  mind  could  grasp  that,  and  surely  you  and  I  may 
do  the  same,  we  can  defend  ourselves  behind  the  breastwork  of  our 
Saviour's  gracious  work,  and  the  consequent  authority  which  belongs 
to  him. 

There  are  certain  ordmanees  to  which  a  Christian  man  is  bound  to 
attend,  about  which  the  world  raises  a  storm  of  questions.    The  world 


312  jiETROpni.iTAK  TAF.KiixACLE  nrr.riT. 

docs  not  take  notioc  thiit  tin's  iiinu  was  onuo  a.  drtinkanl  .-iikI  has  throngh 
diviao  eracc  bcuoinc  stibcr,  niid  so  has  bcL-mnc  n  S'">i\  fathi-r,  and  a  good 
husband,  and  a  ^od  citizen.  It  lets  that  miracle  juias  by  unheeded, 
bnt  Ite  is  frying  to  bo  bnjitized,  ami  they  at  owe-  objt.t.'t  tu  the  ordiDonee, 
or  ho  is  ^'oing  to  join  a  Christian  clmrcii,  and  etraigiitHay  they  jeer 
at  hiui  na  a  I'msbyttTian,  or  a  ^k'thudi!<t,  na  if  it  mattera  ivhut  sort  (rf 
name  they  givu  liiiu  so  long  as  hu  is  a  better  man  than  themsclres,  and 
is  redeemed  from  sin,  and  taught  to  bo  upright,  and  chaste,  and  pun 
ill  the  sight  of  God.  The  worlt  of  grace  goes  for  nothing  with  tonn, 
but  jnst  the  peculiarity  of  sect,  or  the  peculiarity  of  rchgiooi  rite  is 
made  a  world  of.  Blind  creatures  to  despise  the  medicine  which  bodl 
because  of  tlic  bottle  which  contniiis  it,  or  the  label  by  which  itiBiunwd. 
However,  our  answer  is,  "  He  that  made  us  whole,    the  same  g^yt  w 


THE  WORK  OF  GRACE  THE  WABRAKT  FOB  OBEDIENCE.  848 

Paul  he  has  said  that  by  grace  are  men  saved  through  faith,  and  that  not 
of  themselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  He  hath  also  told  us  that  by  the 
works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified,  and  he  has  bidden  09 
declare  that  "the  just  shall  live  by  feith."  He  who  is  daily  by  his 
gospel  taming  men  from  sin  to  holiness  has  given  this  for  the 
Bnm  total  of  the  gospel  we  are  to  preach — ^^Look  unto  me,  and 
be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  If  this  gospel  does  not 
make  men  better,  and  change  their  evil  natures,  you  may  question  it  if 
^ou  like,  and  we  do  not  wonder  that  you  should ;  but  while  it  continues 
its  purifying  work  we  shall  not  blush  or  stammer  when  we  declare  the 
doctrines  which  are  its  essence  and  life.  Our  regeneration  proves  to  us 
oar  Lord's  authority,  and  upon  that  we  are  prepared  to  base  our  creed. 
To  us  the  best  of  evidence  is  his  work  within  us,  and  in  that  evidence 
we  place  implicit  faith. 

The  same  applies  also  to  all  the  precepts  which  the  Christian  is  called 
upon  to  obey.  For  instance,  if  he  is  true  to  his  colours,  he  keeps  him- 
self aloof  from  all  the  sinful  pleasures,  practices,  and  policies  of  the 
world,  in  which  others  take  delight,  and  consequently  the  ungodly  world 
says  that  he  is  singular,  precise,  and  self-opinionated.  This  is  the 
answer  for  all  Christians — "  He  that  made  ns  whole,  the  same  said  to 
OS,  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world.  Come  ye 
out  from  amon^  them  and  be  ye  separate,  touch  not  the  unclean 
ihin^,  and  I  will  receive  you."  If  you  follow  the  precepts  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  you  may  meet  all  charges  of  singularity  by  urging 
the  supremacy  of  the  Saviour,  whose  power  has  made  you  a  new  creature. 
Where  his  word  is,  there  is  a  power  to  which  we  bow  at  once.  It  is 
not  oars  to  question  our  Saviour,  but  to  obey  him.  We  are  cleansed  by 
his  blood,  we  are  redeemed  by  his  death,  and  we  live  by  his  life,  ana 
therefore  are  not  ashamed  to  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  him. 

This  apology  ought  to  suffice  even  those  who  oppose  us,  for  if  they  felt 
88  grateful  as  we  do  they  would  obey  also.  They  ought  at  any  rate  to 
say,  **  We  cannot  blame  these  men  for  doing  as  Jesus  bids  them,  because 
he  has  done  so  much  for  them."  Surely  the  poor  man  who  had  been 
thirty-eight  years  paralyzed  could  not  be  blamed  for  obeying  the  com- 
mand of  one  who  in  a  moment  restored  him  to  health  and  strength. 
If  he  became  his  servant  for  Ufe,  who  would  censure  him  ?  Who  would 
say  that  he  too  tamely  submitted  ?  Should  not  such  a  benefactor  exert 
a  boundless  influence  over  him  ?  What  could  be  more  natural  and  pro- 
per ?  Now,  you  unconverted  jpeople  must  excuse  us,  if  we,  in  obedience 
to  our  Lord  Jesus,  do  many  things  which  to  yon  seem  very  singular,  for 
though  we  would  not  needlessly  offend,  we  cannot  please  you  at  the  risk 
of  displeasing  our  Lord.  We  do  not  owe  so  much  to  you  as  we  owe  to 
him.  We  do  not  owe  so  much  to  the  whole  world  as  we  owe  to  the 
Lord  Jesus ;  in  fact,  truth  to  tell,  we  do  not  feel  that  we  owe  anytling 
to  the  world.  The  time  past  suffioeth  us  to  have  wrought  the  will  ot 
the  Gentiles,  for  when  we  are  asked  the  question,  ^*  What  fruit  had  ye 
then  in  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed?"  we  have  to  confess 
Ihat  we  had  no  fruit,  except  the  sour  grapes,  which  have  set  our  teeth 
on  edge.  Like  the  shipmen  who  put  out  to  sea  against  Paul's  advice, 
our  only  gain  has  been  loss  and  damage.  In  serving  the  world  we 
found  the  labour  weariness  and  the  wages  death ;  but  as  for  our  Lord 


844  METROPOLITAN  TABBBKACLB  PULPIT* 

JesQS,  we  owe  him  everything,  and  so  yon  mnst  excnse  ns  if  we  try  to 
follow  him  in  everything.  It  seems  to  ns  that  this  is  an  excnse  which 
you  onght  to  accept  from  us  as  covering  the  whole  gronnd,  bat  if 
yon  refhse  it  we  are  not  at  all  dismayed,  for  it  quite  suffices   us^ 

Jea,  more  than  suffices  us,  it  makes  us  glory  in  what  we  do.     Does 
esus  command?    Then  it  is  ours  to  obey.    Objectors  may  say  con- 
cerning one  of  his  ordinances,  it  is  unsuitable  to  the  ch'mate,  it  is  in- 
decent, it  is  needless,  it  is  I  do  not  know  what :  all  this  is  no  concern  of 
ours,  if  Jesus  bade  us  do  it,  his  command  stands  for  us  in  the  place  of 
reasoning.     He  who  made  us  whole  gives  us  sufficient   excuse   for 
obedience  in  that  very  fact.    '^  Oh,  but  it  is  contrary  to  what  the  Mhers 
teach,  and  to  what  the  church  teaches."    We  care  not  the  snap  of  oar 
finger  for  all  the  fathers  and  all  the  churches  under  heaven  if  they  go 
contrary  to  what  our  Lord  teaches,  for  they  did  not  make  us  whole,  and 
we  are  not  under  obligation  to  them  as  we  are  to  him.    The  anthoritj 
of  Jesus  is  supreme,  because  it  is  from  his  lips  that  we  received  the  word 
which  healea  the  sickness   of  our  sin.    This  satisfies  our  conscience 
now,  and  it  will  do  so  amid  the  solemnities  of  death.    How  can  we 
make  a  mistake  if  we  follow  the  words  of  Jesus  in  all  things?    Mj 
brethren,  we  can  plead  liis  precept  as  our  warrant  at  the  last  great  day, 
before  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.    What  better  plea  can  we  have  than 
this,  ^'^Thou  didst  make  us  whole  and  thou  didst  bid  us  do  this  "?   Such 
a  justification  of  our  conduct  will  make  our  death  pillow  soft  and  oar 
resurrection  bright  with  joy. 

Instead  of  admitting  that  this  is  not  an  ample  justification,  let  us  go 
further  still  in  the  strength  of  it.  If  the  world  has  accounted  us  vile 
for  obeying  our  Lord,  let  us  be  viler  still;  and  inasmuch  as  he  that 
made  us  whole  said,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel 
to  every  creature,"  let  us  endeavour  to  spread  abroad  everywhere 
the  savour  of  his  name,  consecrating  ourselves  body,  soul,  and  spirit  to 
the  extension  of  his  kingdom.  He  who  made  us  whole  will  make  the 
world  whole  yet  by  his  own  wondrous  power.  Have  we  not  abundantly 
shown  that  our  Lord's  command  is  a  solid  justification  of  our  conduct  ? 

II.  And  now,  secondly,  the  cure  brought  forth  an  obligation  : — "  He 
that  made  me  whole,  the  same  said  unto  me,  Take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk.** 
The  argument  takes  this  form :  first,  if  he  made  me  whole  he  is  divine, 
or  he  could  not  do  this  miracle ;  or,  to  say  the  least,  he  must  be  divinely 
authorised :  and  if  he  be  divine,  or  divinely  authorised,  I  must  be  bound 
to  obey  the  orders  which  he  issues.  Is  not  that  a  plain  argument  which 
even  the  poor,  simple  mind  of  the  paralytic  man  was  able  to  grasp  and 
wield?  Let  us  try  and  feel  the  force  of  that  argument  ouraelves. 
Jesus  who  has  saved  us  is  our  God ;  shall  we  not  obey  him  ?  Since  he 
is  clothed  with  divine  power,  and  majesty,  shall  we  not  scrupulously 
endeavour  to  know  his  will,  and  zealously  endeavour  to  carry  it  out  ia 
every  point,  as  his  Spirit  shall  enable  us  ? 

In  addition  to  the  divine  character  which  the  miracle  proved  and  dis- 
played, there  was  the  goodness  which  shone  in  the  deed  of  power  and 
touched  the  poor  man's  heart.  His  argument  was — **  I  must  do  what  my 
great  Deliverer  bids  me.  How  can  you  think  otherv^ise  ?  Did  be  not 
make  me  whole  ?  Would  yon  have  me,  whom  he  has  thus  graciously 
restored,  refuse  to  fulfil  his  desire  ?    Must  I  not  take  up  my  bed  the 


THE  WOBlC  OF  OBAOB  THE  WABBAKT  tOR  OBSDXEKOE.         848 

moment  he  gives  me  sfcreogth  to  do  it  ?  How  can  I  do  otherwise  ?  Is 
this  to  be  the  recompense  I  pay  to  my  good  Physician,  at  once  to 
refuse  to  do  what  he  asks  of  me  ?  Do  you  not  see  that  I  am  under  an 
obligation  which  it  would  be  shameful  to  deny  ?  He  restores  these  limbs, 
and  I  am  bound  to  do  with  them  what  he  orders  me  do  with  them.  He 
says '  walk/  and  since  these  once  withered  feet  have  been  restored,  shall  I 
not  walk  ?  He  bids  me  roll  up  my  bed,  and  since  I  could  not  have  used 
mv  hands  till  just  now  his  word  gave  them  life,  shall  I  not  use  them  to 
roll  up  the  bed-rug  at  his  bidding  ?  These  poor  shoulders  of  mine  were 
bent  with  weakness,  but  he  has  made  me  stand  upright,  and  since  he  now 
bids  me  carry  my  bed,  shall  I  not  throw  the  mattress  on  my  shoulders,  and 
bear  the  easy  load  which  he  lays  upon  me  ?"  There  was  no  answering  such 
reasoning.  Whatever  might  have  been  the  claim  of  Jesus  upon  others, 
he  clearly  had  an  indisputable  right  to  the  loyal  obedience  of  one  whom 
he  had  made  perfectly  whole. 

Follow  me  briefly  in  this,  brothers  and  sisters.  If  you  have  been 
saved  by  the  grace  of  Ood,  your  salvation  has  put  you  under  obligation 
henceforth  to  do  what  Jesus  bids  you.  Are  you  redeemed  ?  Then  ye 
are  not  your  own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price.  Have  you  been  in  con- 
sequence of  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  you  rescued  from  Satanic  slavery 
and  adopted  into  the  divine  family  ?  Then  it  clearly  follows  that,  because 
you  are  sons,  you  should  be  obedient  to  the  law  of  the  household ;  for  is 
not  this  a  first  element  of  sonship,  that  you  should  reverence  the  great 
Father  of  the  family  ?  The  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  put  away  your  sin, 
you  are  forgiven :  but  does  not  pardon  demand  amendment  ?  Shall  we 
go  back  to  the  old  sins  from  which  we  have  been  cleansed  ?  Shall  we 
live  in  the  iniquities  from  which  we  have  been  washed  by  the  blood  of 
onr  Lord  Jesus?  That  were  horrible  to  think  of.  It  would  be  nothing 
less  than  devilish  for  a  man  to  say,  "  I  have  been  forgiven,  and  therefore 
I  will  sin  again."  There  is  no  remission  where  there  is  no  repentance. 
The  guilt  of  sin  remains  on  that  man  in  whom  the  love  of  sin  still 
remains.  Let  us  practically  feel  the  force  of  this,  and  follow  after  pui'ity 
and  righteousness  henceforth. 

Brethren  and  sisters  upon  whom  Christ  has  wrought  his  great  work,  you 
have  experienced  the  love  of  God,  and  therefore,  if  God  has  so  loved  you, 
you  are  bound  to  love  him  in  return.  If  Grod  has  so  loved  you,  you  must 
also  love  your  brother  man  ?  Do  not  love  to  God  and  love  to  man  spring 
up  as  a  sure  consequence  of  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  ?  Does 
not  every  one  see  the  necessity  which  calls  for  the  one  love  to  follow  the 
other  ?  But  love  is  the  mother  of  obedience :  thus  everything  connected 
with  our  Lord  lays  us  under  obligation  to  obey  him.  There  is  not  a 
single  blessing  of  the  covenant  but  what  necessarily  entails  its  corre- 
sponding duty ;  and  here  I  scarcely  like  to  say  dut]/,  for  these  blessings 
of  the  covenant  make  duty  to  be  our  privilege  and  holiness  to  be  our 
delight.  Henceforth  redeemed  from  sin  we  would  live  no  longer  therein : 
henceforth  made  heirs  of  heaven  we  endeavour  to  lead  the  heavenly  life, 
so  that  even  while  we  are  below  our  conversation  may  be  in  heaven,  from 
whence  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Brethren,  h'c 
that  made  you  whole  has  commanded  this  and  that  to  be  done  by  you : 
I  counsel  you  to  keep  the  King's  commandment.  As  Mary  said  to  the 
waiters  at  the  wedding  at  Cana  so  say  I  to  you— "Whatsoever  he  saith 


846  XBTBOPOLITAir  TABBBlTAaiB  PULPIT. 

nnto  7on,  do  it."  Doth  he  bid  joa  pray,  then  pray  without  ceasing. 
Doth  he  bid  you  watch  as  well  as  pray,  then  guard  every  act,  and  thonghfc^ 
and  word.  Doth  he  bid  you  love  your  bret&en  ?  Then  love  them  with 
a  pure  heart  fervently.  Doth  he  bid  you  serve  them  and  humble  yourself 
for  his  sake?  Then  do  so,  and  become  the  servant  of  all.  Hath  be 
iaid,  ''Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy"  ?  Then  aim  at  this  by  his  Holy 
Spirit.  Hath  he  said, ''  Be  ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  which  is  in 
heaven  is  perfect?  "  Then  strive  after  perfection,  for  he  that  made  yon 
whole  has  a  right  to  direct  your  way,  and  it  will  be  both  your  safety  and 
your  happiness  to  submit  yourselves  to  his  commands. 

III.    Enough,  however,  upon  that ;  for  now  we  call  your  attention,  in 
the  third  place,  to  the  text  under  the  sense  of  oohstbaint — "  He  that 
made  me  whole,  the  same  said  unto  me,  take  up  thy  bed  and  walk."    He 
made  him  whole  by  saying,  "  Bise,  take  up  thy  bed."    The  carrying  of 
the  bed  was  part  and  parcel  of  the  cure.    The  first  part  of  the  healing 
word  was  **  rise,"  but  the  second  was  "  take  up  thy  bed."    Now,  it  was 
not  an  ordinary  word  which  Jesus  spoke  to  that  man — a  mere  word  of 
advice,  warning,  or  command ;  but  it  was  a  word  full  of  power,  like  that 
which  created  light  out  of  darkness.    When  the  Lord  said  to  the  poor 
man,  ''Bise,"  he  did  rise.    A  thrill  went  through  him;  those  stagnant 
blood  vessels  felt  the  life-blood  stir  and  flow,  those  dormant  nerves  were 
aroused  to  sensations  of  health,  those  withered  sinews  and  muscles 
braced  themselves  for  energetic  action,  for  omnipotence  had  visited  the 
impotent  man  and  restored  him.    Oh  it  must  have  been  a  wondrous 
joy  to  the  long   enenated,  nerveless,  powerless  frame  to  be  o^ble 
of  healthy  motion,  to  be  equal  to  bearing  a  happy  buiden.      The 
joyful  man  rolled  up  his  bed,  threw  it  on  his  back,  and  marched 
abroad  with  the  best  of  them.      The  bed-carrying  was  part  of  the 
cure,  and  proof  of  the  cure.    The  paralytic  man  had  not  been  called 
upon  to  deliberate  as  to  whether  he  should  rise  or  not,  but  Jesus 
said,  "  Rise,"  and  he  stood  upright :  the  same  word  said,  "  Take  up  thy 
bed,"  the  bed  was  up  at  once,  and  according  to  the  last  word  "  walk," 
the  man  walked  with  delight.    It  was  all  done  by  the  power  of  the  one 
thrilling  sentence,  which  tarried  not  to  be  questioned,  but  accomplished 
the  end  for  which  the  Lord  had  sent  it.  Not  unwillingly  did  the  restored 
man  carry  his  bed,  yet  he  did  it  of  constraint,  for  the  same  power  which 
made  him  whole  made  him  obedient.    Before  the  divine  energy  had 
touched  him,  he  seemed  scarcely  to  have  any  will  at  all,  and  the  Lord  had 
to  hunt  to  find  a  will  in  him,  saying,  "  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?" 
But  now  he  cheerfully  wills  obedience  to  his  benefactor,  and  in  the 
force  of  the  command  he  carried  out  the  Lord's  behest.    I  say  that 
his  taking  up  his  bed,  aud  walking,  was  done  by  Christ's  enabling,  and 
done  by  Christ's  constraining,  and  I  pray  that  you  may  know  by  expe- 
rience what  this  means.    What  I  want  you  to  feci  is  this — "  I  cannot 
help  obeying  Christ,  for  by  his  Holy  Spirit  he  has  spoken  me  into  a  life 
which  will  never  die  and  never  be  vanquished.    He  has  spoken  a  word 
in  me  which  has  a  continuous  force  over  me,  and  thrills  me  through  and 
through  continually.    I  can  no  more  help  seeking  to  obey  Christ  than 
this  man  could  help  carrying  his  bed  when  the  Lord,  by  a  word  of  power, 
had  bidden  him  do  so." 

Brethren,  look  at  this,  and  be  instructed  and  warned.     Do  you 


THE  WORK  OF  GRACE  THE  WARRAKT  IDR  OBEDIENCE.  847 

feel  reluctant  this  morning  to  enter  npon  jour  Lord's  servioe^  becan&e 
of  conscious  weakness?     Has  the  devil  tenmted  you  to  draw  back 
from  obedience,  because  of  your  unfitness  ?    Do  you  hesitate  ?  do  you 
tremble  F    Burely  you  need  to  draw  near  to  the  Lord  again,  and  bsar 
his  Toice  anew.    Take  your  Bibles  and  let  him  speak  to  you  again  out  of 
the  word,  and  may  the  same  thrill  whidi  awoke  you  out  of  your  death- 
sleep  wake  you  out  of  your  present  lethargy.    There  is  need  that  the 
living  word  of  God  should  come  home  to  your  inmost  soul  again  with  that 
same  miraculous  power  which  dwelt  in  it  at  first.    "  Lord,  quicken  thou 
me,"  is  David's  prayer,  but  it  suits  me  every  day,  and  I  think  the  most 
of  God's  people  would  do  weU  to  use  it  daily.    "  Lord,  speak  life  unto 
me  now  as  thou  didst  at  first.    Speak  power,  speak  spiritual  fbroe  into 
me."    "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineiin  us,"  says  the  apostle :  this  con- 
straint is  what  we  want  to  feel  more  and  more.    We  need  divine  life 
perpetually  to  bear  us  forward  to  acts  of  obedience.    We  do  not  want  to 
destroy  willinghood,  but  we  would  have  it  quickened  into  entire  subservi- 
ence to  the  will  of  the  Lord.    Like  Noah's  ark  on  dry  land,  the  will 
keeps  its  place  by  its  own  dead  weight ;  0  for  a  flood  of  grace  to  move, 
to  lift,  to  upbear  it ;  to  carry  it  away  by  a  mighty  current.    We  would 
be  borne  before  the  love  of  Christ  as  a  tiny  piece  of  wood  is  drifted  by 
the  gulf-stream,  or  as  one  of  the  specks  which  dance  in  the  sunbeam 
would  be  carried  by  a  rushing  wind.    As  the  impulse  which  began  with 
Jesus  found  the  poor  man  passive  because  utterly  unable  to  be  otherwise, 
and  then  impelled  him  on  to  active  movements  as  with  a  rush  of  power^  so 
may  it  ever  oe  with  us  throughout  lifie.    Mav  we  for  ever  vield  to  the 
divine  impulse.    To  be  pajssive  in  the  Lord's  hands  is  a  good  desire,  but 
to  be  what  I  would  call  actively  passive,  to  be  cheerfully  submissive, 
willingly  to  give  up  our  will,  this  is  a  higher  spiritual  mood.    We  must 
live,  and  yet  not  we,  but  Christ  in  us.    We  must  act,  and  yet  we  must 
say.  He  that  made  me  whole  bade  me  do  this  holy  deed,  and  I  do  it 
because  his  power  moves  me  thereunto.    If  I  have  done  well  I  lay  the 
honour  at  his  feet :  if  I  hope  to  do  well  in  the  future  it  is  because  I 
hope  for  strength  from  him  to  do  well,  believing  that  he  will  work  in 
me  by  that  same  power  which  converted  me  at  the  first.    Beloved,  en- 
deavour to  abide  under  this  influence.    May  the  Holy  Spirit  bring  you 
there! 

My  last  word  is  a  practical  lesson.  The  church  of  God  on  earth  at 
this  present  time  anxiously  desires  to  spread  her  influence  over  the  world. 
For  Christ's  sake  we  wisli  to  have  the  truths  we  preach  acknowledged, 
and  the  precepts  which  we  deliver  obeyed.  But  mark,  no  church  will 
ever  have  power  over  the  masses  of  this  or  any  other  land,  except  in  pro- 
portion as  she  does  them  good.  The  day  has  long  since  passed  in  which 
any  church  may  hope  to  prevail  on  the  plea  of  history.  *'  Look  at  what 
we  were,"  is  a  vain  appeal :  men  only  care  for  what  we  are.  The  sect 
which  glorifies  itself  with  the  faded  laurels  of  past  centuries,  and  is  con- 
tent to  be  inactive  to-day,  is  near  to  its  inglorious  end.  In  the  race 
of  usefulness  men  nowadays  care  less  about  the  pedigree  of  the  horse 
and  more  about  the  rate  at  which  it  can  run.  The  history  of  a  congre- 
gation or  a  sect  is  of  small  account  compared  with  the  practical  good 
which  it  is  doing.  Now,  if  any  church  under  heaven  can  show  that  it  is 
making  men  honest,  temperate,  pure,  moral,  holy,  that  it  is  seeking  out 


848  XXTBOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  ipiorant  and  instracting  them,  that  it  is  seeking  out  the  &IIen  and 
redaiming  them^  that  in  fi^t  it  is  turning  moral  wastes  into  gardens, 
and  taking  the  weeds  and  briars  of  the  wilderness  and  transforming  them 
into  predons  fruit-bearing  trees,  then  the  world  will  be  ready  to  hear  its 
claims  and  consider  them.    If  a  church  cannot  prove  its  usefulness,  the 
source  of  its  moral  strength  will  have  gone,  and,  in4eed,  something 
worse  than  this  will  hare  happened,  for  its  spiritual  strengUi  wiU  hare 
gone  too ;  for  a  barren  church  is  manifestiy  without  the  fruitful  Spirit 
of  God.    Brethren,  you  may,  if  you  will,  dignify  your  minister  by  the 
name  of  bishop,  you  may  give  to  your  deacons  and  elders  grand  official 
titles,  you  may  dil  your  place  of  worship  a  cathedral,  you  may  worship 
if  you  wffl  with  all  the  grandeur  of  pompous  ceremonial  and  the  adorn- 
ments of  music  and  incense  and  the  like,  but  you  shall  have  only  the 
semblance  of  power  over  human  minds  unless  you  have  something  more 
than  these.    But  if  you  have  a  church,  no  matter  by  what  name  it  is 
called,  that  is  devout,  that  is  holy,  that  is  living  unto  God,  that  does 
good  in  its  neighbourhood,  that  by  the  lives  of  its  members  spreads  holi- 
ness and  righteousness ;  in  a  word,  if  you  have  a  church  that  is  reallj 
making  the  world  whole  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  you  shall  in  the  long  run 
find  timt  even  the  most  carnal  and  thoughtless  will  say,  '^The  church 
which  is  doing  this  good  is  worthy  of  respect,  therefore  let  us  hear  what 
it  has  to  say.'*    Living  usefulness  will  not  screen  us  from  persecution, 
but  it    will   save  us    from   contempt.     A  holy  church   eoes   with 
authority  to  the  world  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  its  Lord,  and  this 
force  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  to  bring  human  hearts  into  subjection  to  the 
truth.    Oh,  that  the  church  of  G(^  would  believe  in  Jesus'  power  to  heal 
sick  souls.    KecoUect  this  man,  thirty-eie^ht  years  sick,  haa  been  longer 
ill  than  Christ  had  lived  on  earth.    He  had  been  seven  years  afflicted 
before  Christ  was  bom.    And  even  so  this  poor  world  has  been  long 
afflicted.    Years  before  the  Pentecost,  or  the  birth  of  the  present  visible 
church,  the  poor  sinful  world  lay  at  the  pool,  and  could  not  stir.    We 
must  not  be  hopeless  about  it,  for  yet  the  Lord  will  cast  sin  out  of  it.  Let 
us  go  in  Jesus  Christ's  name  and  proclaim  the  everlasting  gospel,  and 
say,  "  Rise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk,"  and  it  shall  be  done,  and  God 
shall  be  glorified  and  we  shall  be  blessed. 


Portion  of  Scriptueb  read  before  Sermon— John  v.  1—23. 


Hymnb  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 909,  831,  787. 


8pt)AaB0ii*s  T£8TXM0HiAL. — The  Sermons  and  Speeches  delivered  in  com- 
memoration of  the  25th  year  of  his  Pastorate.    Faasmore  and  Alabaster. 

At  our  express  desire  the  publishers  have  issued  this  handsome  volume  for  a 
shilling.  It  is  a  choice  memorial  of  a  rare  event,  and  every  one  of  om-  friends 
should  preserve  a  copy.    It  will  soon  be  out  of  print  and  unobtainable. 


^ 


^£ti[«^«]itmt  i^abtntade  fttlpt 


CONSTANT,  INSTANT,  EXPECTANT. 


%  I 


Deliybbed  ok  Lobd*s*dat  Mobkihg,  Juste  22in),  1879,  bt 

C.  H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THS  KETBOFOLITAK  TABEBKAOLE,  NSWINGTOK. 


'*Contintiiiig  ixutant  in  prayer/'^-Bomana  xii.  13. 

This  is  placed  in  connection  with  a  large  number  of  brief  but  very 
weighty  precepts.  Prayer  has  a  distinct  relationship  to  all  Christian 
duties  and  graces.  It  is  not  possible  for  us  to  cariy  out  the  holy  com- 
mands of  our  Lord  Jesus  unless  we  arc  abundant  in  supplication.  The 
Romans  at  the  time  that  Paul  wrote  to  them  were  subject  to  persecution, 
and  in  this  verse  he  mentions  two  remedies  for  impatience  under  such 
afilictions,  remedies  which  are  equally  effectual  under  all  the  trials  of 
life.  The  old  physicians  tell  us  of  two  antidotes  against  poison,  the  hot 
and  the  cold,  and  they  dilate  upon  the  special  excellence  of  each  of  these : 
in  like  manuer  the  apostle  raul  gives  us  first  the  warm  antidote — 
"  Rejoicing  in  hope,"  and  then  he  gives  us  the  cool  antidote,  "  Patient 
in  tribulation."  Either  of  these,  or  both  together,  will  work  wonderfully 
for  the  sustaining  of  the  spirit  in  the  hour  of  affliction  ;  but  it  is  to  be 
observed,  that  neither  of  these  remedies  can  be  taken  into  the  soul  except 
they  be  mixed  with  a  draught  of  prayer.  Joy  and  patience  are  curative 
essences,  but  they  must  be  dropped  into  a  glass  full  of  supplication,  and 
then  they  will  be  wonderfully  efficient.  How  can  we  "  rejoice  in  hope  " 
if  we  know  nothing  about  prayer  to  the  God  of  hope.  Whenever  your 
hope  seems  to  fail  you  and  your  joy  begins  to  sink,— the  shortest  method 
is  to  take  to  your  knees.  By  remembering  the  promise  in  prayer  hope 
will  be  sustained,  and  then  joy  is  sure  to  spring  from  it,  for  joy  is  the 
first-born  child  of  hope.  As  for  **  patience,"  how  can  we  be  patient  if 
we  cannot  pray  ?  Have  not  holy  men  of  old  always  sustained  themselves 
in  their  worst  times  of  grief  and  depression  by  betaking  themselves 
to  prayer  ?  Mind  that  you  do  the  same.  Impatience  will  be  sure  to 
follow  prayerlessness,  but  the  endurance  of  the  divine  will  grows  out  of 
communion  with  God  in  prayer.  I  like  that  beautiful,  though  sad,  pic- 
ture of  the  Norwich  martyr,  Hudson,  of  whom  Foxe  tells  us  that,  when 
he  stood  at  the  stake  with  the  chain  about  him  to  be  burnt,  he  fell 
under  a  cloud.  The  Lord  had  withdrawn  the  light  of  his  countenance 
from  him,  and  therefore  this  man  of  God  slipped  from  under  the  chain 


350  MiTEOPOLITAK  TABERNACLB  PULFTT. 

to  have  a  few  minutes  alone  with  Ood«  Some  thought  that  he  wasaboat 
to  recant,  and  his  Mow  martyns  began  exhorting  him  to  be  Bteadfiwt  and 
to  play  the  man,  but  this  dear  believer  knew  what  he  was  at,  and  when 
he  nad  spoken  with  his  God  he  oaihe  back  to  the  stake  with  a  bright  and 
beaming  countenance,  saying,  "  Now,  I  thank  God,  I  am  strong,  and  fear 
not  what  man  can  do  unto  me,"  and  stood  in  his  place  with  his  fellow 
sufPerers  and  there  burned  quick  to  the  death  without  fear.  Oh  the  power 
of  prayer !  If  we  do  but  know  how  to  get  into  contact  with  the  Eternal 
and  Omnipotent,  we  shall  be  joyful  and  patient  in  all  tribulationfi,  and 
bravely  endure  even  the  keen  edge  of  deatn. 

Prayer  is  to  be  exercised  in  all  things,  for  from  its  position  in  the 
present  context  we  are  taught  that  it  is  not  without  prayer  that  we  pro- 
ceed to  "  distribute  to  the  necessities  of  the  saints.  Because  we  have 
prayed  for  them  we  are  ready  to  befriend  them  by  deeds  of  love.  If  we 
have  not  been  accustomed  to  pray  for  the  brethren,  we  shall  not  be 
"  given  to  hospitality  ";  much  less  shall  we  "bless  them  which  persecute 
ns."  Prayer  is  the  life-blood  of  duty,  the  secret  sap  of  holiness,  the 
fountain  of  obedience.  Upon  prayer  as  spoken  of  in  the  text  may  the 
Holy  Spirit  help  us  now  to  meditate. 

Three  things  I  shall  speak  upon  which  will  be  remembered  the  better 
by  being  linked  with  three  words — Listanf,  constant,  expectant. 

I.    First,  then.  Instant — *'  Conlinuing  instant  in  prayer  J'    It  may  be 
proper  at  this  ste^  to  say  that  these  words,  though  I  shall  dwell  upon 
them  in  the  English,  are  not  identical  with  the  Greek,  in  which  there  is 
but  one  word.    I  do  not  know  that  a  better  translation  could  possibly  be 
given,  and  so  I  shall  content  myself  with  the  very  words  of  our  own 
version.    The  word  **  tJistant,'*  as  used  by  our  translators,  meant  pressing, 
urgent,  importunate,  earnest  The  Greek  word  is  said  to  have  the  significa- 
tion of  "  always  applving  strength  in  prayer,"  or  continuing  with  all  your 
might  in  prayer.    Our  prayer  is  to  be  full  of  strength  ;  "  blessed  is 
the  man  wnose  strength  is  in  thee."    Master  Brooks  saith  that  the  word 
is  a  metaphor  taken  from  hunting  dogs,  which  will  never  give  up  the 
game  till  they  have  got  it.    A  hunting  dog  when  in  pursuit  of  its  victim 
works  itself  into  full  motion,  using  every  limb  and  muscle  to  follow  as 
fast  as  possible.    If  you  catch  a  glimpse  of  it  you  will  see  that  it  throws 
itself  forward  with  intense  eagerness,  the  whole  body  and  soul  of  the  iog 
is  in  motion  towards  one  object ;  no  portion  of  him  lingers,  not  so  much 
as  a  glance  is  given  to  anything  else,  the  whole  creature  is  instant  after 
the  game  which  it  pursues,  urgently  pressing,  hot  foot,  as  we  say,  to 
overtake  the  prey.    Now,  this  is  the  way  in  which  we  are  to  pray. 
Prayer  as  a  mere  form  is  but  a  mockery ;  prayer  in  a  langiiid,  half-hearted 
manner  may  be  more  dishonouring  to  God  than  honouring  to  him ;  we 
ourselves  may  be  rather  injured  by  lukewarm  prayer  than  benefited  by  it. 
Prevalent  prayer  is  frequently  spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  an  agony — 
"striving  together  with  me  in  your  prayers."    AVe  frequently  speak  of 
it  as  "  wrestling,"  and  we  do  well,  for  so  it  is.    In  wrestling  a  man  hath 
all  his  mind  as  well  as  all  his  body  occupied  with  the  desire  to  overthrow 
his  antagonist.    Now  he  bends  and  twists,  and  anon  he  strains  and 
stretches :  now  he  uses  one  foot  and  then  another ;  he  tries  his  arm  and 
now  his  leg ;  he  shifts  his  ground,  he  takes  up  another  position,  and  he 
keeps  his  eye  ixjrpetually  open  lest  he  should  be  caught  unawares.     He 


coKSTAirr,  xssnuAJsrr,  expbotaht.  851 

hath  both  his  hands  eager  for  a  grip,  his  whole  body  ready  for  a  throw  s 
the  whole  man  is  in  his  wrestling.    After  saoh  a  manner  praj  ye ;  the 
whole  of  your  mind,  your  memory,  your  judgment,  youir  aroctiou,  your 
hopeH,  your  fears,  and  even  your  ima^nation  must  w  oonoentrated  upofa 
this  labour  of  prayer.    May  the  Holy  Ghost  work  in  you  this  compre- 
hensive  ardour,  thiA  energy  of  the  whole  man.  We  must  go  with  pur  whole 
Bonl  to  Ood  or  he  will  not  acoept  us.    It  will  be  ill  fbr  us  if  we  are 
half-hearted,   for  it  is  written,  *'  their  heart  is  divided  ;  now   shall 
they  be  found  foulty."     ''The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence, 
and  the  violent  take  it  by  force."    We  are  exhorted  to  "  knock,"  and  afi 
onr  model  we  are  directed  to  him  who  at  midnight  aronsed  his  slumber- 
ing friend.    We  are  exhorted  to  be  importunate,  like  the  widow  with  the 
unjust  judge.    We  are  to  pray  as  if  all  depended  ilpon  our  piayifag ; 
though  after  all  that  praying  is  in  itself  an  effect  of  a  oaus6  which  has 
existed  long  before.    We  are  to  be  as  importunate  as  if  God  were  un- 
willing, and  to  plead  as  earnestly  as  if  ne  did  not  already  know  far 
better  than  we  do  what  things  we  have  need  of.    Earnestness  must  be 
present  in  all  our  prayers  or  they  will  return  to  uk  unanswered :  this  is 
reasonable  enough.    Shall  God  be  expected  to  give  to  us  that  which  we 
do  not  value  ?    If  we  do  not  value  the  blessing  sufficiently  to  be  eager  in 
seeking  it,  is  it  not  right  that  he  should  withhold  it  until  we  are  in  a 
better  mind  ?    Are  we  to  worship  God  with  a  divided  reverence  ?    Are 
we  to  treat  him  as  though  it  were  quite  enough  for  him  if  we  gave  him 
a  stray  thought,  or  a  half-hearted  desire^  now  and  then,  as  a  sort  ot 
compliment  ?     Can  we  expect  that  he  will  receive  our  sacrifice  if  we 
lay  no  fire  under  it  ?    If  we  have  no  impetuous  earnestness  of  spirit, 
can  we  expect  that  we  shall  be  accepted  ?    He  loathes  the  lukewarm,  will 
he  not  loathe  our  prayers  ?    See  how  we  deal  with  our  fellow  men ;    it 
they  ask  a  favour  of  us  and  We  see  that  they  care  but  httle  about  it,  we 
are  in  no  great  haste  to  put  ourselves  about  to  do  them  the  turn,  but 
if  they  are  very  pressing,  we  yield  to  their  entreaties ;  and  so  doth  God 
in  his  mercy  yield  to  uie  entreaties  of  his  people.    As  one  hath  very 

Erettily  said,  the  nurse  when  she  hath  her  child  m  the  cradle,  though  it 
eginneth  to  cry  and  whinny  a  little,  she  leaves  it  and  continueth  at  her 
household  work,  and  when  it  cries  a  little  more,  and  a  little  more,  she  still 
hearkens,  but  she  lets  it  be  where  it  is.  But  when  at  last  the  babe  takes 
to  vehement  crying,  then  straightway  she  presses  it  to  her  bosom  with 
many  a  kiss  and  kindly  word.  Children  of  God,  you  must  cry  mightily 
unto  the  Lord,  and  pour  out  your  hearts  like  water  before  him,  and  then 
will  he  have  regard  unto  the  voice  of  your  cry,  and  it  shall  be  unto  you 
even  according  to  your  desire.  Instancy  in  prayer  is  needful ;  we  must 
be  fervent  or  bnmmg,  or  we  shall  not  prevail. 

How  are  we  to  attain  to  this  urgency  ?  God's  gracious  Spirit  must 
give  it  to  us,  but  what  are  the  methods  by  which,  under  his  direction, 
we  may  become  instant  in  prayer  ? 

I  answer  first,  let  ns  sttidi/  very  thoroughly  the  value  of  the  mercy 
which  we  are  seeking  at  OoiTe  hand.    Seeker,  take  heed  to  do  this. 

Whatever  it  is  that  thou  art  asking  for,  it  is  no  trifle.  Look  at  it. 
If  it  be  a  thing  about  which  thou  art  not  certain  that  it  would  be 
according  to  God* s  mind,  lay  it  aside  :  thou  hast  no  right  to  be  very 
fervent  about  that  which  is  of  questionable  necessity.    If  this  may  or 


S6S  lOBTBOPOIiITAN  TABEBHAOLS  PULFTT. 

TOBj  not  be  good  for  thee,  put  np  thy  requests  to  the  great  Father  gently 
onoe  or  twice,  and  then  lay  them  lightly  in  Jesns'  hand.  Kat  when  thon 
art  certain  that  the  blessing  sought  for  is  a  good  and  necessary  thing  for 
thy  sonl,  then  in  order  that  thy  spirit  may  te  strong  in  prayer  get  a  deep 
sense  of  its  value,  its  goodness,  and  its  necessity ;  examme  it  as  a  gold- 
smith inspects  a  jewd  when  he  wishes  to  estimate  its  worth.  A  man^s 
ardour  in  pursuit  will  be  in  proportion  to  his  consciousness  of  the  value 
of  that  wmch  he  pursues.  Get  thou  to  feel  what  a  precious  thing  grace 
is,  what  it  cost  the  Lord  to  bring  it  to  thee ;  what  blessings  it  brings  with 
it  for  time  and  for  eternity,  and  when  thy  heart  sees  that  it  seeks  idfcer  an 
unspeakably  precious  gift,  then  will  its  desire  be  stirred  up  to  pray  with 
intense  longines. 

When  thou  hast  done  this,  meditate  much  upon  thy  necessities  that 
thou  mayest  get  a  sense  of  thy  need  of  the  mercy  thou  art  seeking.  See 
thy  soul's  poverty  and  thine  own  undeservingness.  Look  at  what  will 
happen  to  thee  unless  this  blessiDg  come.  If  it  be  some  absolutely 
indispensable  spiritusl  blessing,  picture  to  thyself  where  thou  wilt  be  if 
Ood  should  withhold  it,  what  evils  will  spring  of  thy  continuing  in  want 
of  it,  and  what  further  wants  may  yet  beset  thee.  The  more  thy  need 
smites  thee  the  more  eagerly  wilt  thou  cry  unto  the  Lord  concerning  it. 
Art  thou  desirous  of  bread  for  thy  soul,  be  hungry,  and  let  thine 
hunger  eat  into  thy  heart.  Art  thou  desirous  of  the  water  of  life  ;  be 
thirsty,  and  let  thy  thirst  bum  thee  tUl  thou  art  dried  up  like  a  potsherd. 
Let  thy  necessities  have  liberty,  by  meditation,  to  seize  thee  and  to  dis- 
tress thee  with  a  sense  of  thine  emptiness  and  nothingness.  Nothing 
sets  a  man  more  eagerly  upon  prayer  than  a  deep  sense  of  his  need  of 
that  which  he  is  seeking  at  the  Lord's  hand.  He  will  eagerly  seek  for 
garments  who  shivers  in  his  nakedness  amid  the  winter's  blast.  He 
wiU  earnestly  long  for  home  who  feels  himself  lost  upon  a  moor  in 
the  midst  of  a  midnight  fog.  Get  thou  a  consciousness  of  where 
and  what  thou  art  apart  from  Christ  and  from  the  mercy  of  Ood, 
and  then,  when  thou  perceivest  well  thy  need,  thiSyi  with  a  sense  of 
the  greatness  of  the  blessing,  will  much  quicken  thecal  to  instancy  in 
prayer.  \ 

Endeavour  also  to  get  a  distinct  consciousness  of  the  fact  Z)^^  Ood  must 
give  thee  this  blessing,  or  thou  wilt  never  have  it.    It  reqdireB  time  to 
think  over  these  things,  therefore  set  thyself  apart  awhile  from  all  other 
occupations,  and  think  on  these  matters.    Say  to  thyself— JB[e)te  is  such 
and  such  a  q)iritual  mercy,  and  I  can  never  get  it  out  of  myself,  Yor  I  am 
a  dry  well.    Nothing  can  come  out  of  nothing,  and  I  am  nothing.    I 
cannot  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean,  and  I  am  unclean.\  This 
spiritual  blessing  I  cannot  obtain  from  my  feUow-man ;  nor  kinlsf  nor 
priest  could  bring  it  to  me.    I  cannot  climb  to  heaven  after  it,  no^  dive 
into  the  abyss  to  find  it ;  nor  earth  nor  heaven  can  yield  it,  nor  can  either 
time  or  eternity  produce  it.    God  alone  must  give  it  me,  and  he  is  a 
sovereign,  he  has  a  right  to  give  or  to  withhold.    I  cannot  claim  i?  of 
him  as  a  matter  of  right,  he  must  give  it  me  of  his  mere  mercy,  it  mist 
be  a  boon  of  undeserved  fovour.    Oh,  if  you  get  that  truth  well  wrou.'bt 
into  your  soul  you  will  pray  earnestly,  and  you  will  use  the  right  arg- 
ments, — "  Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  Grod,  according  to  thy  lovingkindnea 
according  unto  the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mercies."    Go*' 


C0N8TAKT,  INBTAKT,  EXPECTANT.  858 

help  you,  and  if  he  refuse  you  are  undone  for  ever,  therefore  cry  mightily 
unto  him. 

Further  to  make  you  instant  in  prayer  endeavour  eagerly  io  deeire  ike 
good  thing.  Stand  not  before  God  if  thou  wouldst  win  at  his  hands,  as 
one  who  will  be  content  whether  or  no.  Say  not "  Give  it  or  withhold  it,  it 
is  all  one  to  me.  I  knock  at  thy  door,  and  if  thou  open  I  will  be  some- 
what  pleased,  but  if  thy  door  be  shut  I  will  be  pleased  too."  Oh  no  ; 
Buch  hstlessness  will  never  prevail  with  God.  There  are  times  when  you 
must  be  brought  to  this  condition  that  you  will  not  be  -denied.  There 
is  a  holy  "  impudency,*'  as  the  Puritans  were  wont  to  call  it,  to  which 
we  must  be  brought,  in  which  we  shall  with  holy  boldness  dare  to  sav 
like  Jacob,  ^'I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me."  Sucn 
language  would  be  blasphemy  if  it  were  not  permitted,  it  would  be  pre- 
sumption if  it  were  not  encouraged  ;  but  there  is  little  fear  of  our  being 
too  oold,  for  in  these  times  men  are  more  inclined  to  keep  at  a  distance 
than  to  come  too  near.  We  are  permitted  to  use  the  Uberty  of  obedient, 
loving  children.  We  are  allowed  in  the  holy  confidence  of  faith  to  resolve 
that  we  will  seek  until  we  find,  we  will  ask  until  we  receive,  we  will  knock 
until  the  door  is  opened  unto  us.  Our  case  is  urgent,  and  we  must  needs 
press  it  till  our  suit  is  gained.  Never  was  a  man  brought  to  such  a  pass 
by  the  gracG  of  God  but  what  speedily  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  open  the 
hand  of  his  liberality  and  give  him  according  to  his  desire ;  but  this 
vehemence  must  be  manifested.  A  certain  person  is  mentioned  in  John 
Bnnyan*s  **  Holy  War,"  whose  name  is  Mr.  Desiresawake,  a  verjr  capital 
fellow.  Cultivate  his  acquaintance  !  alas,  there  are  some  who  five  next 
door  to  Mr.  Desiresasleep,  and  their  nrayers  lie  dormant  like  certain  wild 
beasts  in  winter ;  fain  would  I  stir  them  out  of  their  dens.  Wake  up, 
man,  wake  up  when  you  pray,  for  it  is  insulting  to  God  to  give  him  sleepy 
worship.  Dreaming  at  praying  and  playing  at  praying,  as  some  do,  are 
grievous  sins.  No,  no,  prayer  must  be  heart  work,  soul-work,  spirit 
work.  Prayer  ought  to  be  the  sweat  of  the  soul,  it  should  sometimes  be 
even  as  the  bloody  sweat  of  an  agonizing  heart,  crving  mightily  unto  the 
Lord,  as  Jesus  did  in  the  garden.  To  such  the  Lord  sende<h  down  his 
angel  to  strengthen  them  or  in  some  wav  heareth  their  pleadings  in  that 
oonoeming  which  they  were  filled  with  anguish.  Intensity  of  desire 
must  be  exhibited  or  else  it  may  come  to  pass  that  ^e  time  of  the 
bestowal  is  not  yet  come. 

I  will  suppose,  dear  brother,  that  you  have  followed  these  directions  so 
&r  by  the  help  of  God's  Spirit,  and  now  you  know  your  need  of  the 
mercy,  and  something  of  the  value  of  it ;  you  see  that  God  aJone  can  give 
it  you,  and  you  are  anxiously  desirous  to  have  it.  Now  comes  the  tug  of 
war ;  you  are  to  plead  with  all  your  might  Gather  up  all  your  faculties 
to  see  whether  this  thing  be  a  matter  of  promise  or  no.  Take  down  the 
Book,  your  charter  and  your  Father's  will,  and  see  if  there  be  any  part 
of  the  charter  which  promises  this  good  thing  to  you.  When  you  have 
found  the  promise  lay  your  finger  on  it.  Better  still,  with  your  spirit 
grasp  it  in  your  hand,  and  go  before  God  with  it.  If  prayer  be  as  Luther 
calls  it,  "  bombarda  Christianorum,''  the  Christian's  great  gun  with  which 
he  doth  bombard  heaven,  then  surely  the  promise  is  the  shot  which  he  sends 
forth.  Plead  the  promise  by  saying, "  Lord,  do  as  thou  hast  said.  Fulfil 
this  word  unto  thy  servant  upon  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope."    If 


854  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

you  do  not  seem  to  prevail  with  one  promise  seek  out  another  and 
plead  it.  This,  perhaps,  will  be  more  to  the  point, — a  promise  which 
your  very  soul  seems  to  suck  in  as  though  it  were  spoken  to  you  newly 
and  freshly,  as  if  never  another  man  had  ever  received  it.  Spread  this 
second  promise  before  the  Lord.  Nothing  pleases  him  more  than  seeing 
his  own  word  pleaded  by  his  own  children.  Try  this,  and  if  it  is  manifest 
that  you  have  not  succeeded  turn  to  yet  another  promise,  and  another 
and  another  and  another,  and  then  plead,  "  For  thy  name's  sake,  for  thy 
truth's  sake,  for  thy  covenant's  sake";  and  then  come  in  with  the 
greatest  plea  of  all,  "  For  Jesus'  sake  and  in  his  name,  for  the  blood's 
sake,  I  plead  with  thee,  my  God.  0  thou  that  hearest  prayer,  wilt  thou 
not  keep  touch  with  thine  own  word,  and  be  true  to  thine  own  Son  ?" 
You  have  prevailed  there.  By  that  sign  you  have  conquered.  Again  it 
shall  be  seen  that  the  Lord  hath  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  a  man. 

Still  there  is  one  thing  more  wanted,  and  that  is  strong  faith,  not  only 
that  God  is,  but  that  he  is  the  re  warder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him. 
You  cannot  be  instant  in  prayer,  nay,  you  cannot  offer  an  acceptable 
prayer  at  all  except  as  you  beUeve  in  the  prayer-hearing  God.  The 
modem  wise  men  assure  us,  with  a  patronizing  air,  that  prayer  is  a  pious 
exercise,  exceedingly  beneficial  to  ourselves,  but  quite  inoperative  with 
God.  They  are  kind  enough  to  allow  us  to  pray,  only  we  must  not  sup- 
pose that  it  has  the  slightest  effect.  And  do  they  think  that  we  are 
such  idiots  that  we  would  stand  and  whistle  to  the  wind  and  find  good 
for  our  souls  in  such  a  stupid  proceeding  ?  They  must  have  formed 
their  notion  of  our  mental  condition  from  their  own  if  they  imagine  that 
we  should  pray  if  we  knew  that  Gpd  did  not  hear  us,  and  would  not 
answer  us.  Prayer  apart  from  the  idea  of  a  hearing  God  is  not  praying ; 
it  is  soliloquizing,  or,  in  plainer  words,  a  silly  talking  to  yourself,  such 
as  one  sees  in  half-witted  old  persons  who  have  outlived  what  few  senses 
they  once  possessed.  You  must  believe  that  God  is,  and  that  there  is 
real  conmierce  between  your  soul  and  God,  and  that  your  pleadings  are  a 
part  of  the  divine  way  of  blessing  you,  or  else  you  are  not  praying  but 
maundering  and  chattering.  The  Lord  does  really  listen  to  the  pleadings 
of  his  people,  and  though  he  does  not  alter  his  ordinance  and  his  decree, 
yet  in  some  way  or  other  he  makes  the  prayers  of  his  people  to  be  an 
efficient  link  in  the  machinery  of  his  providence  and  grace,  so  that  not 
without  prayer  doth  he  bless  them,  out  with  it  he  doth  bless  them 
abundantly.  Dear  friends,  tnay  the  Lord  the  Holy  Spirit  stir  us  all  up 
to  be  instant  in  mighty,  energetic  prayer. 

II.  Now,  secondly,  comes  the  word  constant — "  continuing  instant 
in  prayer."  To  go  back  to  the  hunting  dog  with  which  we  set  out.  We 
saw  him  rusliing  like  the  wind  after  his  game,  but  this  will  not  be  enough 
if  it  only  lasts  for  a  little ;  he  must  continue  running  if  he  is  to  catch  his 
prey.  It  matters  not  how  Hast  the  stag-hound  goes  if  after  having  kept 
the  pace  awhile  he  begins  to  slacken — the  stag  will  escape  from  hiui. 
It  is  a  sign  of  failure  in  the  iron  trade  when  the  furnaces  are  blown  out; 
when  business  flourishes  the  fire  blazes  both  day  and  night ;  and  so  will 
it  be  with  prayer  when  the  soul  is  in  a  flourishing  state.  If  prayer  be 
the  Christian's  vital  breath,  how  can  he  leave  off  praying? 

We  must  maintain  the  ardour  of  prayer ;  we  must  be  intense  always. 
Prayer  is  not  to  be  a  thing  of  yesterday,  but  of  to-day,  and  to-morrow, 


CONSTANT,  INSTANT,  EXPECTANT.  355 

until  it  changefch  into  praise  above.    Perhaps  prayer  will  continue  eve^ 

ill  heaven.     Certainly  the  souls  under  the  altar  cry  "llow  long  ?"  and 

unfulfilled  prophecies  and  promises  yet  big  with  future  events  will  be 

]ilcaded  even  there.     Praise,  however,  is  the  chief  characteristic  of  the 

future  state,  as  prayer  is  the  characteristic  of  the  present  one.    We  are 

to  get  into  a  good  pace — "  instant  in  prayer,"  and  then  to  keep  it  up, — 

continuing  instant  in  prayer.    "  That  is  difficult "  says  one.    Who  said 

it  was  not  ?    All  the  processes  of  the  Christian  life  are  difficult;  indeed, 

tlicy  are  impossible  apart  from  the  abiding  help  of  the  divine  Spirit :  but 

**  the  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities."    Now  then,  brethren,  that  we  may 

be  helped  to  keep  up  our  fervency  in  prayer,  please  to  notice  that  prayer 

must  be  continuous,  because  U  is  so  singularly  mixed  up  with  the  whole 

gospel  dispensation.    As  the  incense  fiUeA  the  temple,  so  does  prayer  fill 

the  gospel  economy.     The  blood  was  upon  the  mercy  seat,  and  upon  the 

nitar,  and  the  laver,  and  the  candlestick,  and  the  book ;  it  was  sprinkled 

everywhere  in  the  Jewish  Tabernacle,  and  thus  atonement  was  the  most 

conspicuous  object  in  the  worship  prescribed  by  the  law  of  Moses ;  but 

next  to  this,  prayer  was  most  prominent  in  the  continual  calling  upon 

(jod,  and  in  the  smoke  of  the  incense  by  which  prayer  was  symbolized. 

It  is  the  high  privilege  of  those  who  are  believers  in  Jesus  to  draw  nigh 

unto  God  with  their  petitions  peipetudly.    The  whole  church,  like  the 

twelve  tribefe,  is  instantly  serving  God  day  and  night  in  prayer,  hoping 

for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  the  glorious  appearing,    "  Behola,  he 

prayeth  "  is  the  very  mark  of  the  individual  Christian,  and  the  unity, 

the  life,  and  the  spirituality  of  the  church  are  best  seen  in  prayer. 

*'  Nor  prater  is  made  on  earth  alone ; 
The  Holy  Sprit  pleads  ; 
And  Jesus,  on  the  eternal  tbrone. 
For  siuners  intercedes.*' 

Prayer  was  dear  to  Jesus  when  he  was  the  Man  of  Nazareth  upon  the 
mountain's  lonely  side  ;  and  prayer  is  dear  to  him  now  that  as  the  Son  of 
God  he  intercedes  in  glory.  Even  to  him  the  covenant  hath  this  condition 
of  prayer  appended,  ''  Ask  of  me,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  heathen  for 
thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  possession." 
Prayer  is  the  atmosphere  which  surrounds  Emanuersland  :  as  the  clouds 
hang  on  the  mountains,  so  doth  prayer  linger  over  every  great  mercy  of 
God. 

Prayer  is  connected  with  every  covenant  blessing.  Why,  beloved,  it  is 
to  him  that  calleth  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  that  the  promise  of 
salvation  is  given.  Our  heavenly  Father  gives  the  Holy  Spirit  to  those 
that  ask  him.  Justification  was  given  to  the  publican  rathe?  than  to  the 
Pharisee,  because  he  had  offered  humble,  believing,  acceptable  prayer ; 
whereas  the  Pharisee  asked  nothii>g,  but  only  glorified  himself.  Adoption 
begets  prayer,  for  it  brings  us  the  spirit  of  aaoption  whereby  we  cry,  Abba, 
Father.  From  election  right  onward  to  perfection  in  Christ  there  is 
no  blessing  of  the  covenant  but  what  is  understood,  received,  enjoyed, 
fed  upon,  and  practically  used  in  the  way  of  prayer.  Those  who  would 
safely  navigate  the  sea  of  life  must  pray  their  passage  to  heaven. 

Moreover,  beloved,  ^aj/^r  has  been  connected  with  every  living  spiritual 
es^ience  you  have  ever  had.    Will  you  kindly  look  back  to  the  hour 


356  lIETBOFOLITAir  TABEKNACLE  FVLTTI. 

vhen  yon  vere  nnder  the  fig  tree  and  Jesos  saw  yon.  Were  yon  not  at 
prajer  ?  When  you  first  arose  to  go  to  your  Father,  waa  not  yonr  first 
step  a  prayer  ?  Wben  yon  received  the  assurance  of  salvation,  i\-aB  it  not 
in  answer  to  prayer?  When  his  banner  over  you  has  been  love,  have 
yon  not  felt  it  sweet  to  pray  ?  When  yon  have  feasted  at  his  tabic,  and 
he  has  revealed  himself  to  you  as  he  doca  not  to  the  world,  have  yon 
not  then  been  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  ?  The  hill  Mizar  and  the  Hennon- 
itea — places  yon  never  can  fui^t,  those  dioiccst  of  spots,  which  eeem  as 
yon  look  back  along  the  vista  of  life  to  be  gleaming  with  a  supernatural 
splendour — has  not  prayer  been  connected  with  them  all?  There  has 
been  nothing  grandly  great  or  good  in  your  spiritual  life,  but  Jabbok 
has  flowed  near  it,  and  the  top  of  Carmcl  has  been  near  to  view,  where 
you  have  wrestled  with  God  and  prevailed. 

Now,  beloved,  we  are  commanded  to  be  constant  in  our  instancy.  Is 
not  this  right?  Is  there  any  time  when  we  can  afford  to  stacten 
prayer  f  Would  you  kindly  put  your  finger  on  the  map  of  the  way,  and 
tell  me  where  a  Christian  man  may  leave  off  praying?  Is  it  when  he 
prospers  ?  No,  for  then  he  needs  grace  to  carry  a  full  cup  with  a  steady 
hand.  Is  it  when  he  is  in  distress  7  Doth  not  nature  itself  teach  ua 
that  in  the  time  of  affliction  we  should  especially  draw  near  to  God  in 
prayer  ?  When  should  he  pray,  nay,  when  should  he  not  pray  ?  Where 
may  he  pray  ?  The  answer  is,  he  may  pray  everywhere,  for  as  one  has 
well  said,  a  man  who  carries  his  temple  about  with  him  is  always  in  a 
place  where  he  may  pray ;  and  know  yc  not  that  your  bodies  are  the 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Wherever  you  go  you  carry  your  temples 
with  you,  and  in  every  place  you  may  pray  and  should  pray,  and  need 
to  pray,  and  therefore  be  sure  that  you  do  pray.  If  you  are  on  the 
housetop  with  Peter  pray  there,  and  if  waiting  at  table  with  Nehemiah, 
pray  there  :  if  in  the  field  with  Isaac  or  on  the  mountain  with  the  Lord, 
or  in  the  sea  with  Jonah,  or  in  a  prison  with  Joseph,  or  in  the  article  of 
death  with  St^hen,  pray  there. 

"Long  as  thtj  live  should  Chrisd&r 


re  under  the  wings  of  the  chenibim  crying  nnto  God  at  his 
len  are  they  in  the  secretplace  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Most 
en  shall  they  abide  nnder  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty. 
Uy  we  ought  to  be  constant  in  prayer,  because  suchremari- 
B  vouchiafed  to  imporlunily.  God  often  gives  liberally  to 
it  speaks  but  once,  but  frequent  pleading  begets  abundant 
That  is  the  most  soul-enriching  prayer  which  is  long  in 
'ay  with  God.  When  prayers  like  great  ships  have  been  long 
e  yon  may  hope  that  they  have  gone  for  and  have  gathered 
nd  will  come  home  freighted  with  all  the  goodlier  merchandise. 


OONSTAKT,  INSTANT,  EXPECTANT.  357 

If  you  can  but  quietly  hope,  and  patiently  wait,  all  will  be  well.  The 
very  choicest  blessings  of  heaven  are  reserved  for  the  Elijahs  who  can 
say,  "  Oo  again  seven  tiroes,"  for  the  men  who  come  again  and  again  and 
again  and  never  &int.  Wait  then  upon  the  Lord  with  holy  importunity 
of  prayer,  and  your  reward  shall  more  than  repay  you.  It  is  good  for  us 
tx>  be  compelled  to  pray  like  this ;  it  exercises  the  faculties  of  the  soul ; 
it  makes  men  of  us ;  it  brings  us  up  from  spiritual  childhood  to  perfect 
manhood.  Therefore  be  ye  constant  in  prayer,  and  gather  strength  for 
importunate  pleadings. 

No  reason  can  be  given  why  we  should  not  continue  in  instant  prayer. 
I  can  suppose  one  brother  saying,  "  I  feel  I  cannot  pray."  When  you 
feel  you  cannot  pray,  be  sure  that  you  are  more  in  need  of  prayer  than 
ever.  Is  not  a  disinclination  to  prayer  one  of  the  saddest  marks  of  your 
soul's  condition,  one  of  those  reasons  which  ought  above  all  others  to 
drive  you  to  the  mercy-seat  ?  "  Would  you  say  the  same,  sir,  if  I  tell 
you  that  I  can  pray?"  Precisely  the  same,  for  now  when  the  wind  is 
favourable  you  should  hoist  all  sail.  If  you  cannot  make  progress  now, 
when  will  you  ?  Therefore  pray  when  you  can  pray,  and  pray  when  you 
cannot  pray.  "  Alas,  sir,  I  cannot  get  beyond  a  groan."  Brother,  be 
not  distressed,  for  the  best  praying  in  all  the  world  consists  of  "  groan- 
ings  that  cannot  be  uttered."  We  may  sometimes  have  a  doubt 
whether  the  Spirit  of  God  helps  us  to  pray  in  cheerful  prayers,  though 
I  do  not  say  that  there  is  any  need  for  the  doubt, — ^but  we  cannot 
have  a  question  about  our  sad  prayings,  for  it  is  expressly  said 
he  **maketh  intercession  for  us  with  groanings  which  cannot  be 
uttered."  Do  you  think  that  the  chief  end  of  a  Christian's  life  is 
to  be  comfortable?  It  is  often  more  good  to  us  to  mourn  like 
doves  than  to  sing  like  nightingales.  Sometimes  there  may  be  more 
prayer  in  a  sigh  than  in  a  long  oration.  Often  do  I  myself  personally 
look  back  upon  times  of  bondage  when  I  cried  to  God  with  all  my  soul, 
and  thought  I  did  not  pray,  and  I  wish  that  I  prayed  now  as  I  did  then. 
Therefore,  always  pray ;  whether  you  feel  in  a  mind  for  prayer  or  not, 
still  pray.  The  fishermen  at  Mentone  keep  on  fishing  with  their  great  net ; 
ay,  by  i^e  score  these  fishermen  take  it  out  and  haul  it  in  again,  and  fre- 
quently they  get  no  more  than  one  little  sardine  for  their  pains.  Many  and 
many  a  time  I  have  seen  no  more  than  they  could  hold  in  their  hand  as 
the  produce  of  a  net  which  covered  acres  of  the  sea.  But  why  do  they 
go  on?  Because  they  are  fishermen,  and  cannot  do  anything  else.  You 
and  I  are  praying  men,  and  there  is  nothing  else  we  can  do  but  wait 
upon  the  Lord.  So  if,  after  many  a  throw  of  the  net,  we  get  but  one 
small  answer,  we  will  try  again,  for  this  is  all  we  can  do.  "  Lord,  to 
whom  should  we  go  but  unto  thee  ?" 

Continue  in  prayer  because  ths  continuance  of  our  instancy  in  prayer  is 
ihs  test  of  the  reality  of  our  devotion.    Men  that  are  in  business  and  are  in 


358  HETROPOLITAN  TABEBKACLB  PULPIT. 

earnest  cannot  afiford  to  open  the  shop  and  do  a  little  occasional  trade, 
and  then  put  up  a  notice,  '^  The  proprietor  of  this  shop  has  gone  out  for  an 
excursion,  and  will  resume  his  business  when  he  feels  inclined  to."  This 
would  be  trifling,  and  not  trading ;  and  it  is  so  in  prayer  :  a  little  bit  of 
praying  and  then  a  stretch  of  neglect  will  prove  a  delusion  and  a  snare. 
A  poor  simpleton  who  bad  never  been  to  sea  before,  when  he  was  going 
to  Australia,  asked  a  fnend  on  board  the  vessel  what  the  sailors  did 
with  the  vessel  at  night.  "  Da  of  a  night,"  was  the  reply,  "  Why,  sail 
as  fast  as  they  can  go."  "  I  did  not  know,"  he  said,  "  they  worked  in 
the  night,  I  thought  they  stopped  the  ship,"  PTc  must  have  thought 
he  was  out  on  some  pleasure  excursion  along  the  coast,  and  that  the 
yacht  would  anchor  when  the  sun  went  do^^  ;  but  he  was  in  an  ocean 
clipper  which  was  out  for  work  and  not  for  play.  The  man  who  means 
business  must  sail  whether  it  is  dark  or  light ;  and  so  in  prayer  we  must 
serve  Gk)d  instantly,  both  day  and  night.  Beal  prayers  are  constant 
prayers.  There  is  a  fish,  you  know,  that  sometimes  attempts  to  fly,  but 
it  is  no  bird  for  all  that.  It  only  takes  a  little  flight  and  then  it  is  in 
the  water  again ;  but  a  true  bird  keeps  on  the  wing,  especially  if  it  is 
such  a  bird  as  the  eagle,  whose  untiring  wing  bears  it  above  the 
clouds.  Beware  of  prayers  which  leap  up  hke  a  grasshopper  and  are  soon 
down  again.  liCt  your  prayers  have  the  wings  of  a  dove,  let  them  fly 
away  from  earth  and  rest  in  Ood.  Hypocrites  pray  by  fits  and  starts,  the 
genuine  Christian  "  prays  without  ceasing." 

Beware  of  judging  yourselves  by  certain  spasms  of  prayer.  Wlien  I 
put  my  lamp  out  last  night,  as  I  thought,  it  flashed  up,  then  went  down 
again,  and  yet  again  flashed  up  ;  it  did  so  many  times,  as  I  stood  wait- 
ing, but  I  knew  it  must  go  out  ere  long.  Some  have  a  wW  of  flashing  a 
prayer  or  two,  but  their  piety  is  only  a  dying  light,  it  will  all  be  over 
soon.  Continue  instant  in  prayer,  it  shall  be  the  test  of  whether  your 
prayer  is  a  lamp  of  the  Lord  or  ^  dying  light  of  your  own  kind]ing. 

Beloved,  we  must  continue  in  prayer,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  alone  can 
enable  us  to  do  it.    We  may,  however,  be  much  helped  in  it  by  occa- 
sionally setting  apart  a  special  time.    Days  of  prayer  and  hours  of  prayer, 
and  set  seasons  of  prayer  are  very  helpful.    We  ought  to  have  qur  ap- 
pointed seasons  each  day,  but  special  times  over  and  above  our  r)&gi*)ar 
custom  may  stir  the  fire  and  enable  it  to  burn  more  brightly.    To  unit 
with  other  Christians  in  prayer  is  often  very  helpful.    Private  prayf 
is  more  important  than  pubUc  prayer  under  many  aspects,  and  is 
better  test  of  a  Christian  ;  still  public  prayer  often  reacts  upon  privat 
devotion,  and  when  two  or  three  are  together,  and  are  agreed  as  touchin 
the  kingdom,  their  supphcations  will  often  be  helpful  to  each  other  an 
obtain  the  thing  which  they  desire. 

III.    Our  last  word  is  expectant.    It  is  not  in  the  text  verbally,  bui 
it  must  be  there  really,  because  there  will  be  no  such  thing  as  instancy  o 


OOKSTANTy  IKSTAKT9  EXPECTANT.  859 

constancy  unless  there  is  an  expectation,  and  a  belief  that  God  can  and 
will  give  that  which  we  seek.  Let  us  go  back  to  our  dog  again  :  the 
dog  would  not  run  at  so  great  a  rate  if  he  did  not  expect  to  seize  his 
prey ;  but  see  how  every  limb  is  stretched  with  intensity,  and  he  goes 
over  hedge  and  ditch  aiter  his  game  because  he  has  almost  seized  it,  and 
though  it  flies  before  him  with  all  its  might,  yet  he  is  close  upon  it. 
There  is  no  praying  with  any  fervour  unless  there  is  faith  that  God  will 
hear  you  ;  a(i  least  if  instancy  can  be  felt  for  a  while,  constancy  cannot 
be  kept  up  long  without  it.  Expectancy  is  the  very  reason  of  prayer. 
Some  prefer  to  pray  because  it  is  their  duty  and  their  custom,  bat  real 
prayer  usually  springs  from  the  expectancy  that  God  will  hear.  I  was 
awakened  at  about  four  o'clock  this  morning  by  a  sharp,  shrill  sound. 
I  thought  it  was  a  swallow  screaming  by  the  window,  and  I  fell  asleep 
again.  But  I  was  soon  aroused  by  the  repetition  of  the  same  sharp 
Bound.  A  young  bird  had  found  its  way  into  my  room,  and  was  crying 
for  liberty.  I  left  my  bed  and  opened  the  window  to  let  the  captive  free. 
It  did  not  seem  to  know  its  way,  and  so  I  caught  it  and  gently  placed  it 
at  the  window,  and  in  a  moment  it  flew  to  the  oak  tree  close  by  and  sat 
itself  down.  I  watched  its  movement.  The  moment  it  had  perched  itself 
comfortably  it  began  to  utter  sharp  cries,  and  it  turned  its  little  head 
round  on  all  sides  as  if  looking  for  some  one.  It  was  crying  for  its 
mother,  and  why  ?  Because  it  expected  to  be  fed.  And  why  did  it  expect 
to  be  fed  ?  Became  it  had  been  fed  before.  If  it  had  been  a  full-grown 
bird,  it  would  not  have  called  for  food,  but  would  have  helped  itself ; 
but  this  poor  little  creature  had  been  nourished  by  its  parents,  and 
it  was  looking  round  to  be  supplied  again.  This  is  why  we  pray.  0  Lord, 
thou  hast  supplied  our  wants  so  long  and  so  often  in  answer  to  prayer, 
that  we  are  in  the  way  of  it ;  and  now  we  pray,  not  only  because  we  ought 
to  do  80,  but  because  it  has  become  natural  to  us  to  pray,  and  we  expect 
thee  to  hear  us.  When  thou  dost  hear  us  we  bless  thee,  but  we  are  not 
surprised^  as  though  it  were  a  strange  thing.  Thy  truth  causes  great 
admiration  but  no  astonishment,  for  it  is  like  thee  to  keep  thy  word. 
We  are  poor  dependent  children,  and  thou  a  wise  and  tender  Father ; 
thou  hast  never  left  us  and  thou  wilt  never  leave  us,  and  so  we 
continue  instant  in  prayer,  because  we  are  expectant  of  thy  grace. 
Some  professors  seldom  exercise  expectancy  in  prayer,  but  the  soul  of 
prayer  is  gone  when  you  have  no  expectation.  God  will  hear  the  cry  of 
your  desire,  but  the  hand  into  which  he  will  put  the  mercy  is  the  hand 
of  your  expectation.  You  must  believe  that  you  have  the  blessing,  or 
you  will  not  have  it  unless  it  be  by  some  extraordinary  mercy  beyond 
what  is  promised.  His  usual  way  is  to  raise  our  expectations  so  that  we 
look  out  for  the  favour,  and  then  he  sends  it.  If  some  people  looked  out  for 
answers  to  prayer  they  might  soon  have  them,  for  their  prayers  would  be 
answered  by  themselves.    I  was  reminded  of  that  by  a  little  boy  whose 


860  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

father  prayed  in  the  family  that  the  Lord  would  visit  the  poor  and  relieve 
their  wants.  When  he  had  finished,  his  little  boy  said, "  Father,  I  wish  I 
had  your  money."  "  Why  so  ?"  "  Because,"  he  said,  "  I  would  answer 
your  prayers  for  you."  "Which  prayers,  John?"  " Why,  fiither,  you 
prayed  that  the  poor  might  be  helped,  and  you  could  do  it  very  well  with 
your  own  money."  I  like  better  still  that  story  of  the  good  man  at  the 
prayer-meeting,  who  reading  the  list  of  prayers  found  one  for  a  poor 
widow  that  her  distress  might  be  reUcved,  so  he  began  to  read  it,  but 
stopped  and  added,  "  we  won't  trouble  the  Lord  with  that,  I  will  attend 
to  that  myself."  Numbers  of  prayers  are  of  that  kind  :  we  are  praying  God 
to  do  what  we  ought  to  do  ourselves,  and  that  is  sheer  impertinence.  It 
we  really  prayed  in  earnest,  expecting  to  be  heard,  our  answer  would 
often  come  in  this  venr  way,  oy  our  being  stirred  up  to  see  that  the 
Lord  had  heard  us.  The  Lord  might  well  say  to  us,  "  Thou  sayest. 
Thy  kingdom  come;  arise  and  help  to  make  my  kingdom  come! 
Thou  askest  that  my  name  may  be  hallowed ;  go  thyself  and  hallow  my 
name."  Oh,  that  we  had  the  expectancy  which  would  teach  us  prac- 
tical action,  so  that  we  should  find  the  answer  to  our  prayer  given  before 
we  asked,  according  to  the  promise,  "  Before  they  call  I  will  answer 
them,  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking  I  will  hear." 

I  had  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now,  for 
the  time  has  passed.  I  shall  close  by  recommending  to  all  of  you  one 
simple  but  very  comprehensive  prayer.  It  was  offered  by  a  poor  man 
in  Fife,  and  it  was  copied  out  by  the  Dachess  of  Gordon,  and  found 
among  her  papers  when  she  died.  "  0  Lord,  give  me  grace  to  feel  my 
need  of  thy  grace  I  Give  me  mce  to  ask  for  thy  grace !  Give  me 
grace  to  receive  thy  grace  I  And  when  in  thy  grace  thou  hast  given  me 
grace,  give  me  grace  to  use  thy  grace ! "  See  ye  not  what  scope  there 
is  for  prayer !  You  will  never  need  to  leave  off  pleading  for  want  o* 
subjects.    Continue,  therefore,  to  be  instant  in  it. 


Portion  of  Scripture  bead  before  Sermon — Romans  xiL 


Hymns  from  ''Our  Own  Hymn  Book." — 80,  981,  978. 


GiBLS*  Obphahagb.^Wc  have  purchased  "  The  Hawthorns,"  near  the  Boys' 
Orphanage,  for  £4,000,  in  order  to  commence  an  institution  for  fatherless  girls. 
We  earnestly  desire  to  pay  the  money  when  it  is  due,  namely,  on  the  15ch  of 
July  next  This  will  need  not  only  liberal  help,  but  help  given  upeediijf^  for 
the  time  is  very  limited.  Up  to  this  moment,  in  all  our  movements,  we  have 
paid  our  way  with  ready  money,  and  it  would  rejoice  our  heart  if  we  should  be 
enabled  to  do  so  now.    About  £1,200  has  been  given  or  promised. 

C.  H.  SruaoBOH. 


^^Df^titmt  ^isibtrmAt  ftrtpt* 


THE    BED    HEIFEB. 


i^ 


Dbliyebed  ok  Lohd's-Dat  Morning,  Juns  29th,  1870,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  TH£  KETBOPOLITAN  TABSRNACLE,  NXWINQTOX. 


**  For  if  ike  blood  of  balls  and  of  goati,  and  tlie  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinklins 
the  nndeao,  sanctifieth  to  the  puifying  of  the  flesh :  how  much  more  shall  the  blood 
of  Chtist,  who  through  the  etstnal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  spot  to  Gk>d,  ptxrge 
yonr  oonsotenoe  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  liTing  God  P  *' — Hebrews  ix.  IS,  14. 

BETX)yED  brethren  in  Ghrist,  you  dwell  in  great  nearness  to  Ood.  He 
calls  yon  ''a  people  near  unto  him/'  His  grace  has  made  you  his  sons 
and  daughters,  and  he  is  a  Father  nnto  you.  In  you  is  his  word  fulfilled, 
**  I  will  dwell  in  them  and  walk  in  them,  and  I  will  be  their  God,  and 
they  shaQ  be  my  people."  Bemember  that  your  favoured  position  as 
children  of  God  has  placed  you  under  a  peculiar  discipline,  for  now 
God  dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons,  and  sons  are  under  household  law. 
The  Lord  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  near  unto  him.  Special 
&YOur  involves  special  rule.  There  were  no  strict  laws  made  as  to  the 
behaviour  of  the  Amalekites,  Amorites,  and  Egyptians,  because  they 
were  far  off  firom  God,  and  the  times  of  their  ignorance  he  winked  at; 
bnt  the  Lord  set  Israel  apart  to  be  his  people,  and  he  came  and  dwelt 
in  the  midst  of  the  congregation ;  the  sacrea  tent  wherein  he  displayed 
his  presence  was  pitched  in  the  centre  of  the  camp,  aiid  there  the  great 
King  uplifted  his  banner  of  fire  and  cloud;  hence,  as  the  Lord  brought 
the  people  so  near  to  himself,  he  put  them  under  special  laws,  such  as 
belong  to  his  palace  rather  than  to  the  outskirts  of  his  dominion.  They 
were  bound  to  keep  themselves  very  pure,  for  they  bore  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord,  and  were  a  nation  of  priests  before  him.  They  ought  to  have 
been  holy  spiritually,  but  being  in  their  childhood  thev  were  taught  this 
by  laws  referring  to  external  cleanliness.  Bead  the  laws  laid  down  in 
lieviticus  and  see  what  care  was  required  of  the  favoured  nation,  and 
how  jealously  thev  were  to  keep  themselves  from  defilement. 

Just  as  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  were  put  under  stringent 

regulations  so  do  those  who  live  near  to  God  come  under  a  holy  discipline 

in  the  house  of  the  Lord.    "  Even  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."    We 

are  not  now  speaking  of  our  salvation,  or  of  our  justification  as  sinners. 

No.  1,481. 


ZG2  HETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

but  of  the  Lord's  dealings  iowardfl  m  as  MuitB.  6i  tkat  ivqiect  we 
laiiat  walk  carefully  with  him,  and  watch  our  steps,  that  we  oFf^nd  net 
Our  earnest  desire  is  so  to  behave  onrselyes  in  his  house  that  he  may 
always  permit  us  to  have  access  with  boldness  to  his  presence^  and  may 
never  be  compelled  to  reject  our  {Prayers  because  we  have  been  felling 
into  sin.  Our  heart's  desire  and  inwaid  longing  is  that  we  may  never 
lose  our  Father's  smile.  If  we  have  lost  fellowship  with  him,  even  for 
an  hour,  our  cry  is,  *'  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him,  that  I 
might  come  even  to  his  seat ";  for  when  we  arc  in  fellowship  with  Ood 
we  are  happ^,  we  are  strong,  we  are  full  of  heavenly  aspirations  and 
emotions.  Beneath  the  sky  ^ere  is  no  joy  Vke  that  of  communion  with 
Ood ;  it  is  incomparable  and  inexpressible,  and  therefore  when  we  lose 
the  presence  of  God,  even  for  a  little,  we  are  like  a  dove  bereaven  of  its 
mate,  which  ceases  not  to  grieve.  Our  heart  and  our  flesh  cry  out  for 
God,  for  the  living  God.    When  shall  we  come  and  appear  before  God  ? 

Now,  beloved,  in  order  that  we  may  learn  how  to  renew  our  fellow- 
ship with  God  whenever  we  lose  it  by  a  sense  of  sin,  I  have  selected  the 
subject  of  this  morning.  If  the  Holy  Spirit  will  graciously  enlighten  us, 
we  shall  see  how  the  conscience  can  be  kept  clean,  that  so  the  heart  may 
be  able  to  dwell  with  God.  We  shall  see  our  dmger  of  defilement  and 
the  way  by  which  our  uncleanness  can  be  put  away ;  may  we  have  grace 
given  to  avoid  the  pollutions  which  would  hind^  fellowship,  and  grace 
to  seek  the  purification  by  which  uncleanness  is  removed  and  fettowship 
restored.  I  shall  first  endeavour  to  deseribe  the  type  which  is  alluded  to 
by  the  apostle  in  the  words,  "  The  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  un- 
clean," and  then,  secondly,  we  shall  magnify  the  Antitype,  dwelling  upon 
the  words,  "  How  much  more  shall  the  Wood  of  Christ,  who  through 
the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  con- 
science from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God?" 

I.  Let  us  describe  the  type.  In  the  nineteenth  chapter  of 
Numbers  you  will  find  the  type ;  be  so  good  as  to  open  your  Bibles,  and 
refresh  your  memories. 

First,  the  type  mentions  ceremonial  defilements,  which  were  the  sym- 
bols of  the  uncleanness  caused  by  sin.  The  Israehtes  could  very  readily 
render  themselves  unclean,  so  as  to  be  unfit  to  go  up  to  the  tabernacle  of 
God.  There  were  uncleannesses  connected  both  Avifch  birth  and  with 
death,  with  meats  and  with  drinks,  with  garments  and  with  houses.  The 
rules  were  very  minute  and  all-pervading,  so  that  a  man  could  scarcely 
move  abroad,  or  even  remain  within  his  own  tent,  without  incurring  un- 
cleanness in  one  way  or  another,  and  becoming  unfit  to  enter  the  courts 
of  the  Lord  or  to  be  an  accepted  member  of  the  congregation.  In 
the  passage  in  Numbers  which  is  now  before  us,  the  one  source  of  defile- 
ment dealt  ^ith  is  death.  "Whosoever  toucheth  one  that  is  slain  with 
a  sword  in  the  open  fields,  or  a  dead  body,  or  a  bone  of  a  man,  or  a  grave, 
shall  be  unclean  seven  days."  Now,  death  is  peculiarly  the  symbol  of 
sin,  as  well  as  the  fruit  of  sin.  Sin,  like  death,  defaces  the  image  of 
God  in  man.  As  soon  as  death  grasps  the  body  of  a  man  it  destroys 
the  bloom  of  beauty  and  the  dignity  of  streuffth,  and  drives  forth  from 
the  human  form  divine  that  mysterious  something  which  is  the  token  of 
life  within.  However  comely  a  corpse  may  appear  for  a  time,  yet  it  is 
^faced ;  the  e^tcellence  of  life  has  departed,  and  alas,  in  a  few  liours,  or 


868 

at  longent  in  a  few  days,  the  image  of  Ood  begins  nUerly  to  pass  away ; 
comiption  and  the  wonn  oommence  their  desolating  work,  and  honor 
follows  in  their  train.  Abraham,  howerer  much  he  may  love  his  Sarah, 
soon  becomes  anzions  to  bury  his  beloTed  dead  ont  of  his  sight.  Now, 
what  death  does  for  the  **  hnman  &ce  divine,"  that  sin  does  for  the 
spiritual  image  of  Ood  upon  ns.  It  utterly  defiaces  it.  Human  nature 
in  perfection  is  a  coin  of  the  realm  of  God,  minted  by  the  great  King ; 
but  by  sin  it  is  battered  and  defiioed,  to  the  mat  dishonour  of  the  King 
whose  image  and  superscription  it  bears.  Hence  sin  is  most  obnoxious 
to  God,  and  death  is  obnoxious  as  the  type  of  sin. 

The  defilements  which  came  to  the  Israelite  by  death  must  have  been 
Teiy  frequent.  As  a  whole  generation  died  in  the  wfldemess,  most  ef 
the  inhabitants  must  again  and  again  have  come  under  the  law  of  un- 
deanness  on  account  of  tiie  death  of  parents  or  friends.  In  the  field  a 
man  might  dig  \xp  human  remains,  or  plough  over  a  ^ve,  or  find  a 
body  slain  by  accident,  and  he  was  at  once  undean.  How  frequent, 
therefore,  were  the  occasions  of  defilement!  But  ah,  my  brethren,  not 
80  frequent  as  the  occasions  of  pollution  to  our  consdences  in  such  a 
world  as  this,  for  in  a  thousand  ways  we  err  and  transgress. 

*^  Oh  for  a  lodse  in  some  vaat  wilderness, 
Some  boundless  contiguity  of  shade,** 

-where  never  sin  might  reach  my  soul  again !  But  it  is  in  Tain  to  sigh 
in  this  fashion,  even  if  we  could  escape  from  the  throng  of  men  we 
should  not  thereby  escape  from  sin.  The  Isradite  might  meet  with  de- 
filement even  in  his  tent.  I  have  already  reminded  you  that  these 
statutes  about  the  dead  present  to  us  only  a  part  of  the  occasions  of  de- 
filement which  surrounded  the  people  of  Israel :  they  were  much  more 
numerous  than  this.  A  man  might  become  undean  even  in  his  sleep ; 
80  dosely  did  the  law  track  him  into  his  most  secret  places,  and  surround 
his  most  unguarded  hours.  Even  thus  doth  sin  beset  us.  Like  a  dog 
at  one's  heeki,  it  is  always  with  us!  Like  our  shadow,  it  follows  us,  go 
where  we  may.  Tea,  and  when  the  sun  shines  not»  and  shadows  are 
gone,  sin  is  still  there.  Whither  shall  we  flee  from  its  presence,  and 
where  shall  we  hide  from  its  power?  When  we  would  do  good,  evil  is 
present  with  us.  How  humbled  we  ought  to  be  at  the  recollection  of 
this! 

The  Israelite  became  undean  even  in  the  act  of  doiug  good ;  for 
aesuredly  it  was  a  good  deed  to  bury  the  dead.  A  man  wodd  be  defiled 
if  ont  of  charity  he  hdped  to  inter  the  poor,  or  the  slain,  or  the  poor 
relics  of  mortali^  which  might  lie  exposea  upon  the  plain,  and  yet  this 
was  a  praiseworthy  action.  Alas,  there  is  sm  even  in  our  holy  things. 
A  morality  so  pure  that  no  human  eye  can  detect  a  flaw  may  yet  be 
fiudty  to  the  eye  of  God.  Brethren,  sin  stains  our  piety  and  pollutes 
our  devotion.  We  do  not  even  pray  without  needing  to  ask  Ood  to 
forgive  the  prayer.  Our  acts  of  ikith  have  a  measure  of  unbelief  in 
them,Yor  the  faith  is  never  so  strong  as  it  ought  to  be.  Our  penitential 
tears  have  some  grit  of  impenitence  in  them,  and  our  heavenly  aspira- 
tions have  a  measure  of  carnality  to  degrade  them.  The  evu  or  our 
nature  clingeth  to  all  that  we  do.  Who  shall  bring  a  clean  thing  out 
of  an  undean  ?    Not  one.    One  way  or  another  defilement  Tsill  come 


864  HETBOPOLIZAN  TABBEVAGUI  PULPIT. 

upon  lus.  We  haTe  been  cnoe  washed  ia  tbe  blood  of  Jems,  aad  we 
are  clean  before  the  bar  of  Ood,  and  yei  in  the  divine  fieunily  we 
need  that  onr  feet  be  washed  after  walking  awhile  in  this  dusty  world, 
and  there  is  not  one  disciple  who  is  above  the  need  of  this  washing. 
To  one  and  all  our  Lord  saith,  '^  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thoa  hast  no  part 
in  me." 

The  touching  of  the  dead  not  only  made  the  Bian  nnclean,  bat  he 
became  a  fountain  of  defilement.  '*  ijid  whatsoever  the  unclean  penson 
toucheth  shall  be  unclean ;  and  the  soul  that  toucheth  it  shall  be  unclean 
until  even."  While  a  man  was  anolaan  he  might  not  go  up  to  the 
worship  of  Grod,  and  he  was  in  danger  of  being  cue  off  from  amcmg  the 
congregation,  **  because,"  saith  the  law, ''  he  hath  defiled  the  sanctuary 
of  the  Lord."  Pollution  went  forth  from  the  polluted.  Do  you  and  I 
sufficiently  remember  how  much  of  evil  we  are  spreading  when  we  are  out 
of  communion  witii  God  ?  Every  ungenerous  temper  oceates  the  like  in 
others.  We  nevercast  a  proud  lock  without  exciting  resentment  and  bad 
feelings  in  others.  Somebody  or  other  will  ibllow  our  example  if  we  be 
slothful ;  and  thus  we  may  be  doing  great  mischief  even  when  we  are 
doing  nothing.  You  cannot  even  bury  your  talent  in  a  napkin  without 
setting  an  example  to  others  to  do  the  like,  and  were  that  example 
followed  by  all  how  dreadftd  would  be  the  consequences !  Observe  that 
I  am  not  now  speaking  of  outside  sinners,  but  of  the  saints  of  God.  As 
the  ordinances  in  the  chapter  before  us  were  for  Israel,  so  these  things 
are  spoken  to  those  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is.  My  soul's 
longing  is,  that  we  may  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  well  pleasing, 
and  may  not  become  unfit  for  communion  with  him. 

This  uncleanness  prevented  the  man  from  going  up  to  the  worship  of 
God,  and  it  separated  him  from  that  great,  permanent  congregation  which 
was  called  to  dwell  in  God's  house  by  resicUng  all  around  the  holy  place. 
He  was,  so  to  ^peak,  excommunicated,  suspended,  at  any  rate,  in  his 
commimion :  he  could  bring  no  offering,  he  could  not  stand  among  the 
multitude  and  view  the  solemn  worship,  he  was  unclean,  and  must  regard 
himself  so.  Do  children  of  God  ever  get  here  ?  Ah,  dear  friends,  so  £su: 
as  our  consciences  are  concerned  we  too  often  come  among  the  unclean. 
We  are  not  polluted  as  the  heathen,  nor  condemned  >\ith  the  world,  but  as 
children  of  Grod  we  &el  that  we  have  erred,  and  our  conscience  smites 
us.  Sin  is  already  put  away  from  us,  as  we  are  criminals  tried  before  a 
judge,  but  it  comes  upon  the  conscience  even  as  a  child's  fsixdta  cause 
him  to  grieve.  It  is  from  the  conscience  that  this  uncleanness  is  to  be 
purged,  and  our  whole  sermon  is  upon  that  matter.  I  speak  not  of 
the  actaal  taking  away  of  sin  before  God,  but  the  removal  of  its 
defilement  from  the  conscience,  so  that  communion  with  God  may  be 
possible.  Eemember  the  word  of  the  Lord,  "Your  iniquities  have 
separated  between  you  and  your  God,  and  your  sins  have  hid  his  face 
from  you  that  he  will  not  hear."  When  sin  is  on  your  conscience  it  wants 
no  law  to  prevent  your  communion  with  God ;  for  you  cannot  approach 
him,  you  are  afraid  to  do  so,  and  you  have  a  distaste  for  it.  XJuM  the 
pardoning  blood  speaks  peace  within  your  spirit,  you  cannot  draw  near 
unto  God.  The  apostle  saith,  "  Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart  in 
fall  assurance  of  faith,  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  con- 
"Haence,  and  our  bodies  washed  with  pure  water."     It  is  the  washing 


THE  BED  HEIFER.  865 

which  enables  us  to  draw  near.  We  shrink^  we  tremble,  we  find  com- 
munion impossible  nntil  we  are  made  clean. 

This  much  about  the  defilements  described  in  the  chapter;  now 
concerning  the  cleansing  which  it  mentions. 

The  defilement  was  ffcquent,  but  the  cleansing  was  always  ready.  At 
a  certain  time  all  the  people  of  Israel  brought  a  red  heifer  to  be  used  in 
the  expiation.  It  was  not  at  the  expense  of  one  person,  or  tribe,  but 
the  whole  congregation  brought  the  red  cow  to  be  slain.  It  was  to  be 
their  sacrifice,  and  it  was  brought  for  them  all.  It  was  not  led, 
however,  up  to  the  holy  place  for  sacrifice,  but  it  waa  brought  forth 
without  the  camp,  and  there  it  was  slaughtered  in  the  presence  of  the 
priest,  and  wholly  burnt  with  fire,  not  as  a  sacrifice  upon  the  altar,  but 
as  a  polluted  thing  which  was  to  be  made  an  end  of  outside  the  camp. 
It  was  not  a  regular  sacrifice  or  we  should  have  found  it  described  in 
LcTiticns;  it  was  an  ordinance  entirely  by  itself,  as  setting  forth  quite 
another  side  of  truth. 

To  return  to  the  chapter ;  the  red  heifer  was  killed,  before  the  un- 
eleanness  was  committed,  just  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  made  a 
corse  for  sin  long,  long  ago.  Before  you  and  I  had  lived  to  commit  the 
tmcleanness  there  was  a  sacrifice  provided  for  us.  For  the  easing  of  our 
conscience  we  shall  be  wise  to  view  this  sacrifice  as  that  of  a  substitute 
for  sin,  and  consider  the  results  of  that  expiation.  Sin  on  the  conscience 
needs  for  its  remedy  the  result  of  the  Redeemer's  substitution. 

The  red  heifer  was  slain :  the  victim  fell  beneath  the  butcher's  axe. 
It  was  then  all  taken  up — skin,  flesh,  Mood,  dung,  everything — ^no  trace 
of  it  must  be  left,  and  it  was  all  burnt  with  fire,  together  with  cedar 
wood,  and  hyssop,  and  scarlet  wool,  which  I  suppose  had  been  used  in 
the  previous  sprinkling  of  the  heifer's  blood,  and  so  must  be  consumed 
with  it.  The  whole  was  destroyed  outside  the  camp !  Even  as  our 
Lord,  though  in  himself  without  spot,  was  made  sin  for  us,  and  suffered 
without  the  camp,  feeling  the  withdrawings  of  God,  while  he  cried,  "  My 
€k>d,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  Ah,  what  it  cost  our  Lord 
to  come  into  our  place  and  to  bear  the  iniquities  of  men  I 

Then  the  ashes  were  ooUected  and  laid  in  a  clean  place  accessible  to 
the  camp.  Everybody  knew  where  the  ashes  were,  and  whenever  there 
was  any  uncleanness  they  went  to  this  ash-heap  ,and  took  away  a  small 
portion.  Whenever  the  ashes  were  spent  they  brought  another  red 
heifer,  and  did  the  same  as  they  had  done  beibre,  that  always  there 
might  be  this  purification  fer  the  unclean. 

Sut  while  this  red  cow  was  slaughtered  for  all,  and  the  blood  was 
sprinkled  towards  the  holy  place  for  all,  no  one  derived  any  personal 
benefit  iVom  it  in  reference  to  his  own  uncleanness  unless  he  made  a 
personal  use  of  it.  When  a  man  became  unclean  he  procured  a  clean 
person  to  go  on  his  behalf  to  take  a  little  of  the  ashes,  and  to  put  them 
in  a  cup  with  running  water,  and  then  to  sprinkle  this  water  of  purifica- 
tion upon  him,  upon  his  tent,  and  all  the  vessels  therein.  JBy  that 
?prin£ling,  at  the  end  of  seven  days,  the  unclean  person  was  purified, 
'here  was  no  other  method  of  purification  from  his  uncleanness  but 
this.  It  is  so  with  us.  To-day  the  living  water  of  the  divine  Spirit's 
sacred  influences  must  take  up  the  result  of  our  Lord's  substitution,  and 
this  must  be  applied  to  our  consciences.  That  which  remain  eth  of  Clirist 


366  XBTROPOLITAir  TABSIUrAOLX  PTTLPIT. 

after  the  fire  hath  paased  upon  him,  eren  the  eternal  merits,  the  enduring 
Tirtae  of  oar  great  sacrifice,  must  be  sprinkled  upon  ns  throngh  the 
Spirit  of  onr  (}k>d.  Then  are  we  clean  in  conscience,  but  not  tiU  then. 
We  have  two  degrees  of  purification  by  this  means,  as  in  the  type.  Onr 
Lord  rose  again  on  the  third  day,  and  blessed  are  they  who  receive  the 
third  day  justification  by  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord.  Thus  is  sin  re- 
moved from  the  conscience  ;  but  yet  as  long  as  we  are  here  in  this  body 
there  will  be  some  tremblings,  some  measure  of  unrest,  because  of  sin 
within ;  but  blessed  be  God  there  is  a  seventh  day  purification  coming, 
which  will  complete  the  cleansing.  When  the  eternal  Sabbath  fareab, 
then  shall  be  the  last  sprinkling  with  the  hyssop,  and  we  shall  be  clean, 
and  we  shall  enter  into  the  rest  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God, 
clean  every  whit.  We  shall  come  before  God  at  last  witiiout  spot  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  and  be  as  able  to  commune  with  him  as  if 
we  had  never  transgressed,  being  presented  fiEiultless  before  his  presence 
with  exceeding  great  joy. 

Thus  much  concerning  the  type,  with  which  we  have  already  mingled 
some  degree  of  exposition. 

II.  Let  us  magkify  the  great  Anti-ttpb.  ''  For  if  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heiter  sprinkling  the  nndean, 
sanctifieth  to  the  purification  of  the  flesh :  how  mudi  more  wall  the  blood 
of  Christ  ?  *'  How  much  more  ?  He  doth  not  give  us  the  measure,  but 
leaves  it  with  a  note  of  interrogation.  We  shall  never  be  able  to  tell 
how  much  more,  for  the  difference  between  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of 
goats  and  the  blood  of  Christ,  the  difference  between  the  ashes  of  a  red 
cow  and  the  eternal  merits  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  must  be  infinite.  Let  ns 
help  your  judgments  while  we  set  forth  the  exceeding  greatness  of  our 
jnighty  Expiator,  by  whom  we  are  reconciled  to  Qod. 

First,  then,  our  defihmmt  is  much  greater,  for  the  defilement  spoken  of 

in  the  text  is  on  the  conscience.    Now,  I  can  believe  that  the  Israelite 

when  he  was  rendered  unclean  by  touching  a  corpse  by  necessity,  or  a 

piece  of  a  bone  by  accident,  felt  nothing  on  his  conscience,  for  there  was 

no  sin  in  the  matter ;  he  was  only  ceremonially  unclean,  and  that  was  all. 

His  ceremonial  disability  troubled  him,  for  he  would  be  glad  to  go  up 

rto  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  and  hold  fellowship  with  the  hosts  of  Israel, 

.  but  there  was  nothing  on  his  conscience.    If  there  had  been,  the  blood 

.  of  bulls  and  goats  could  not  have  helped  him.    Beloved,  you  and  I 

.know  what  it  is  at  times  to  have  defilement  upon  the  conscience,  and 

to  go  mourning  because  we  have  erred  from  the  Lord's  commands.    The 

.ungodly  do  not  thus  sorrow :  their  conscience  by  fits  and  starts  accuses 

I  them,  but  they  never  listen  to  its  accusations  so  as  to  feel  their  inability 

.to  draw  nigh  to  God.    Nay,  they  will  even  go  with  a  guilty  conscience 

Ao  their  knees,  and  pretend  to  offer  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  prayer  and 

vof  praise,  while  still  they  are  unfor^iven,  alienated,  and  rebellious.    Yon 

*aua  If  if  we  are  indeed  the  Lord's  people,  cannot  do  this.    Guilt  on 

¥)nr  conscience  is  to  us  a  horrible  thine.    There  are  no  pains  of  body, 

there  are  no  tortures  inflicted  by  the  Inquisition  which  are  at  all  com- 

parable  to  the  whips  of  burning  wire  which  lash  the  guilty  conscience. 

7ou  hear  persons  speak  about  the  horrible  figures  of  mediaeval  ages 

with  regard  to  hell,  and  the  strong  metaphors  sometimes  used  by  Uie 

orthodox  to  this  day ;  let  them  remember  that  they  are  only  fignves,  and 


THE  BED  HEIFEB.  867 

then  let  any  man  who  has  felt  the  agonies  of  a  gailtj  oonscienoe  judge 
whether  the  fignres  can  poesihly  be  oyerdrawn.  It  is  an  awfiil  thing  to 
feel  yonraelf  guilty,  and  the  better  man  you  are,  the  more  will  it  grieve 
yon  to  be  consciously  in  a  wrong  state.  I  ask  any  truly  regenerate  man 
here,  who  at  bottom  has  an  assurance  that  his  sin  is  already  forgiven  before 
God,  whether  he  can  do  wrong  without  smarting  ?  Whenever  vou  have 
transgressed,  and  you  are  conscious  of  it,  though  you  do  not  doubt  the 
love  of  God  to  you,  are  you  not  hke  one  who  has  all  his  bones  broken  ? 
I  know  you  are,  and  the  better  man  you  are  the  more  intense  will  have 
been  the  terror  ofyour  spirit  while  guilt  has  been  upon  your  conscience 
in  any  degree.  Well,  now,  that  which  can  take  guilt  off  the  conscience 
must  be  infinitely  greater  than  that  which  can  merely  put  away  a  cere- 
monial defilement. 

Brethren,  guilt  on  the  conscience  is  a  most  effectual  bar  to  drawing 
near  to  QodL  The  Lord  bids  his  people  come  near  to  him,  and  there  is  a 
way  of  access  dways  open ;  but  as  long  as  you  are  conscious  of  sin  you 
cannot  use  that  way  of  access.  We  can  come  to  God  as  sinners  to  seek 
pardon,  but  we  cannot  come  before  the  Lord  as  dear  children  while  there 
is  any  quarrel  between  us  and  our  great  Father.  No,  we  must  be  clean, 
or  we  cannot  approach  our  God.  See  how  the  priests  washed  their  feet 
a'o  the  laver  before  they  offered  incense  unto  the  Lord.  We  cannot  have 
fellowship  with  God  while  there  is  a  sense  of  unconfessed  and  unforgiven 
ain  upon  ns.  '*  Be  ye  reconciled  to  God  "  is  a  text  tor  saints  as  well  as 
for  sinners :  children  may  quarrel  with  a  fiither  as  well  as  rebels  with  a 
king.  There  must  be  oneness  of  heart  with  God,  or  there  is  an  end  to 
communion,  and  therefore  must  the  conscience  be  purged. 

The  man  who  was  unclean  could  have  come  up  to  the  tabernacle  if  there 
had  been  no  law  to  prevent  it^  and  it  is  possible  that  he  could  have 
worshipped  God  in  spirit,  notwithstanding  his  ceremonial  disqualification. 
The  defilement  was  no  barrier  in  itself  except  so  &r  as  it  was  typical ; 
but  sin  on  the  conscience  is  a  natural  wall  oetween  Qoi  and  the  soul. 
Yon  cannot  get  into  loving  communion  until  the  conscience  is  at  ease ; 
therefore,  I  charge  you,  fly  at  once  to  Jesus  for  peace. 

Beloved,  if  our  consciences  were  more  fully  developed  than  they  are  we 
shonld  have  as  great  a  sense  of  the  frequency  of  our  uncleanness  as  ever 
the  thoughtful  Israelite  had  of  his  danger  of  ceremonial  uncleanness.  I 
tell  yon  solemnly  that  the  talk  which  we  have  heard  latelyabout  perfection 
in  the  flesh  cometh  of  ignorance  of  the  law  and  of  self.  When  I  nave  read 
expressions  which  seem  to  claim  that  the  utterers  were  free  from  sin  in 
thought,  and  word,  and  deed,  I  have  been  sorry  for  Uie  deluded  victims 
of  s^-conceit,  and  shuddered  at  their  spirit.  The  sooner  this  boasting  is 
purged  out  of  the  Church  of  God  the  better.  God's  true  people  have  the 
spirit  of  truth  within  them,  convincing  them  of  sin,  and  not  the  j^roud  and 
lying  spirit  which  leads  men  to  say  they  have  no  sin.  True  samts  abide 
in  the  place  of  penitence  and  constant  faith  in  the  atoning  blood,  and  dare 
not  exalt  themselves  as  the  Pharisee  who  cried,  **  God,  I  thank  thee  that  I 
am  not  as  other  men  are."  ''There  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth,  that 
doeth  good,  and  sinneth  not."  (Ecc  vii.  20.)  Why,  beloved,  according 
to  my  own  experience,  we  are  constantly  being  defiled  by  being  in  this 
polluted  worid,  and  going  up  and  down  in  it.  As  a  man  could  not  take 
a  walk  without  stumbling  over  a  grave,  nor  could  he  shut  himself  up  in 


S68  METROPOLITAH  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  honse  wiUiont  the  danger  of  deatk  entering  there,  bo  are  we  eveij- 
where  liable  to  dn.  It  seeoiB  all  bat  inevitable  so  long  as  we  are  in  this 
body  and  in  this  sinM  world  that  we  should  oome  into  contact  with  sin  in 
some  form  or  other,  and  any  contact  with  sin  is  defiling.  Oar  Lord  could 
live  among  sinners  and  remain  undefiled,  beoanse  there  was  no  evil  in  his 
heart ;  but  in  onr  case  sin  without  awakes  the  edioes  from  within,  and  so 
causes  a  measure  of  consent  and  defilem^t.  The  will  more  or  less  yields  ts 
the  temptation,  and  when  the  will  does  not  yield,  the  imagination  plays  the 
traitor,  and  the  afiections  parley,  and  so  betray  the  soul.  Altnough  it 
may  be  accompanied  with  a  resolve  not  to  £eiU  into  evil,  the  very  thought 
of  evil  is  sin.  Bin  does  not  cross  over  the  sensitive  plate  of  our  soul  as 
it  is  exposed  in  its  daily  camera  withoot  leaving,  even  if  we  do  not  see  it 
ourselves,  some  trace  and  stain  which  Ood  sees.  Onr  fdlow-men  are  a 
terrible  source  of  defilement  to  us.  Did  you  not  notice  in  the  chapter 
which  we  read  (Num.  xix.)  that  he  who  touched  the  dead  body  of  a 
man  was  unclean  seven  days?  Now,  if  you  look  in  Leviiacos  zi«  22  yoa 
will  see  that  whosoever  touched  ike  carcase  of  an  unclean  bmst  was  only 
nndean  until  the  evening.  Thus  a  dead  Bian  was  seven  times  more 
defiling  than  a  dead  beast.  Sudi  is  God's  estimate  of  iaUen,  UBiegenerate 
man,  and  it  is  a  just  one,  for  wicked  men  do  many  things  which  brute 
beasts  never  do.  All  nneodly  men  defile  us,  and  I  am  not  sure  that  I 
may  end  there,  tl^  truth  is  wider  still :  I  do  not  care  how  you  pick 
your  company,  and  you  ought  to  pkk  it  witii  great  choiceness,  but  even 
if  you  associate  with  none  but  saints  they  will  be  an  occasion  of  sin  to 
you  at  some  time  or  other:  there  will  he  something  aboot  them,  ay» 
even  about  their  holiness,  which  maj  raise  your  idolatry  of  them,  pr 
your  envy  of  them,  and  in  some  way  or  oth«r  cause  you  to  sin.  Ton 
cannot,  as  you  are  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  dwell  among  a  people  of 
unclean  lips,  be  altogether  without  uncieanness,  and  therefore  you  will 
always  have  need  to  use  the  way  of  desnsiflg  which  ^e  I^rd  has 
prepared  and  revealed. 

Kemember  that  in  the  type  tihe  least  toneh  defiled:  if  they  only 
picked  up  a  bone  the  Israelites  were  unclean ;  if  they  ooly  walked  over  a 
grave  they  were  unclean.  My  brethren,  the  best  of  you  can  hardly 
read  iu  the  newspaper  an  aeoonnt  of  a  crime  without  soooe  taint  clinging 
to  you.  You  cannot  see  sin  in  another  without  standing  in  feuful 
jeopardy  of  being  in  some  degree  infeeted  thereby.  Bin  is  of  so  subtle 
and  penetrating  a  nature  that  long  before  we  are  aware  it  tarnishes  our 
brightness  and  eats  into  onr  spirit.  The  pare  and  holy  Ood  alone  is 
undefiled;  but  as  for  Hie  best  of  his  saints  they  need  to  veil  their  fiaces 
in  his  presence  and  cry,  "  IJncIeafB,  mclBan." 

ITnciter  the  old  law  men  might  be  miolean  who  did  not  know  it.  A 
man  might  have  tcmcfaed  a  bone  and  not  be  aware  of  it,  yet  the  law 
operated  just  as  much :  he  might  walk  across  a  grave  and  not  know  it> 
but  he  was  unclean.  I  fear  that  our  proud  sense  of  what  we  think  to  be 
our  inward  cleanness  is  simply  the  stupidity  of  our  oonsoieiice.  If  our 
conscience  were  more  sensitive  and  toider,  it  would  perceive  sin  where 
now  we  congratulate  ourselves  that  everything  is  pore.  My  brethren, 
this  teaohing  of  mine  puts  us  into  a  very  lowly  place,  bnt  the  kmlier  our 
position  the  better  and  the  safer  for  us,  and  the  more  shall  we  be  able  to 
prize  the  expiation  by  which  we  draw  near  to  God. 


THfi  BED-  HEIFIfia.  369 

Since  the  stain  ia  upon  the  oonsdence^  its  removal  is  a  &r  greater 
vrork  than  is  die  rcmoyal  of  a  mere  ritaal  undeanness* 

Secondly  upon  this  bead,  our  sacrifice  is  greater  ist  Ueelf.  I  will  not 
dw^ell  upon  each  point  of  its  greatness  lest  I  wearj  you,  but  just  noticer 
tliat  in  the  slaughter  of  the  hei&r  blood  was  presented  ana  sprinkled 
to^vards  the  holy  place  seven  times,  though  it  came  not  actually  into  it ; 
BO  in  tlie  ;>tonement  through  w4iich  we  md  peace  of  conscience  there  is 
blood,  fur ''  without  shedding  of  Mood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin." 
That  is  a  settled  decree  of  the  Eternal  Government,  and  the  conscience 
Tvill  never  get  peace  till  it  understands  the  mystery  of  the  blood.  We 
need  not  only  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  but  the  death  of  Christ,  which  is 
8et  forth  by  his  blood.  The  fflibstitute  must  die.  Death  was  our  doom, 
and  death  for  death  did  Christ  render  unto  the  eternal  God.  It  is  by  a 
sense  of  our  Lord's  substitutionary  death  that  the  conscience  becomes 
purged  from  dead  works. 

Furthermore,  the  heifer  itself  was  offered.  Afber  the  blood  was 
sprinkled  towards  the  tabernacle  by  the  priestly  hand,  the  victim  itself 
was  utterljr  consumed.  Eead  now  our  t^t :  "  Christ,  who  through  the 
eternal  Spirit  offered  up  himself  without  spot  unto  God."  Our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  gave  not  merely  his  death,  but  his  whole  person,  with  all 
that  appertained  unto  it,  to  be  our  substitutionsury  sacrifice.  He  offered 
himself,  his  person,  his  glory,  his  holiness,  his  life,  his  very  self,  in  our 
stead.  But,  brethren,  if  a  poor  heifer  when  it  was  offered  and  consumed 
made  the  unclean  man  clean^  how  much  more  shall  we  be  cleansed 
by  Jesus,  since  he  gave  himself,  his  glorious  self,  in  whom  dwdt  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  ?    Oh  what  a  sacrifice  is  this ! 

It  is  added  that  our  Lord  did  this  "by  the  Eternal  Spirit."  The  heifer 
was  not  a  sypiritual  but  a  carnal  offering.  The  creature  knew  nothing 
of  what  was  being  done,  it  was  the  involuntary  victim  ;  but  Christ  was 
under  the  impulses  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  was  poured  upon  him,  and 
he  was  movea  by  him  to  render  up  himself  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  Hence 
somewhat  of  the  greater  efficacy  of  his  death,  for  the  willinghood  of  the 
sacrifice  greatly  enlianced  its  value.  To  give  you  another,  and  probably 
a  better,  interpretation  of  the  words,  there  was  an  eternal  spirit  linked 
with  the  manhood  of  Christ  our  Lord,  and  by  it  he  gave  himself  unto 
God.  He  was  God  as  well  as  man,  and  that  eternal  Godhead  of  his  lent 
an  infinite  value  to  the  sufferings  of  his  himian  frame,  so  that  he 
offered  himself  as  a  whole  Christ,  in  the  energy  of  his  eternal  power 
and  Godhead.  Oh,  what  a  sacrifice  is  that  on  Calvary !  It  is  by 
the  blood  of  the  man  Christ  that  you  are  saved,  and  yet  it  is  written, 
**The  church  of  God  which  he" — that  is  Sod — ^**hath  redeemed  with 
his  own  blood."  One  who  is  both  God  and  man  has  given  himself 
as  a  sacrifice  for  us.  Is  not  the  sacrifice  inconceivably  greater  in  the 
fact  than  it  is  in  the  type  ?  Ought  it  not  most  effectually  to  purge  our 
conscience  ? 

After  they  had  burnt  the  heifer  they  swept  up  the  ashes.  All  that 
could  be  burnt  had  been  consumed.  Our  Lord  was  made  a  sacrifice  for 
sin,  what  remains  of  him  ?  Not  a  few  ashes,  but  the  whole  Christ, 
which  still  remaineth,  to  die  no  more,  but  to  abide  for  ever  unchanged. 
He  came  uninjured  through  the  fires,  and  now  he  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  us.    It  is  the  application  of  his  eternal  merit  which 


370  XETBOFOLITAir  TABBRHACLB  PULPIT. 

makes  ns  clean,  and  is  not  that  eternal  merit  inoonoeiyably  greater  tiban 
the  adies  of  an  heifer  ever  can  be  ? 

Now,  my  brethren,  I  want  yon  for  a  moment  to  recollect  thai  onr 
Lord  himself  was  spotless,  pnre  and  perfect^  and  yet-Hspeak  it  with 
iMited  breath — Ood  **  hath  imde  him  to  be  sin  for  ns,"  even  him  who 
knew  no  sin.  Whisper  it  with  greater  awe  still,  **  He  was  made  a  corse 
for  US," — ^yes,  a  cnrse,  as  it  is  written,  **  Om^sed  is  eveiyone  that  hangeth 
on  a  tree.  That  red  heifer,  though  without  spot  and  never  having 
borne  a  yoke,  was  regarded  as  a  polluted  thing.  Take  it  out  of  the  campi 
It  must  not  live ;  kifi  it.  It  is  a  polluted  thing ;  bum  it  right  up ;  for 
God  cannot  endure  it.  Behold,  and  wonder  that  God's  own  ever  blessed, 
adorable  Son  in  inconceivable  condescension  of  unutterable  love,  took 
the  place  of  sin,  the  place  of  the  sinner,  and  was  numbered  with  the 
tran^H^essors.  He  must  die,  hang  him  up  on  a  cross ;  he  must  be  for- 
saken of  men,  and  even  deserted  oi  God.  "  It  nleased  the  Father  to  braise 
him ;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief;  he  shall  malce  his  soul  an  offering  for 
sin."  **  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray;  we  have  turned  eveiyone  to 
lus  own  way,  and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all," — 
not  the  punishment  merely,  but  the  iniquitv,  the  very  sin  itself  was  laid 
upon  the  Ever  Blessed,  llie  wise  men  of  our  age  say  it  is  impossible 
that  sin  should  be  lawfully  imputed  to  the  innocent;  that  is  what  the 
philosophers  say,  but  God  decmres  that  it  was  done :  **  He  hath  made 
him  to  be  sin  who  knew  no  sin."  Therefore,  it  was  possible ;  yea»  it 
is  done;  it  is  finished.  The  sacrifice  then  is  much  greater.  ''How  much 
more,"  we  may  cry  exultin^ly  as  we  think  of  it,  **  smdl  the  blood  of  Christ, 
who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge 
our  conscience  fix)m  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ?  " 

Now  we  will  take  a  step  further.  As  the  defilement  and  the  sacrifice 
were  greater,  so  ih$  purging  is  much  greater.  The  purifying  power 
of  the  blood  of  Christ  must  be  much  greater  than  the  purging 
power  of  the  water  mixed  with  the  ashes  of  uie  heifer.  For,  first,  that 
could  not  purge  conscience  from  sin,  but  the  application  of  the  atone- 
ment can  do  it,  and  does  do  it.  I  am  not  going  to  roeak  this  morning 
about  doctrine  at  all,  but  about  feet.  Did  you  ever  feel  the  atonement 
of  Christ  applied  bv  the  Holy  Ghost  to  your  conscience  ?  Then  I  am 
certain  of  it  that  the  change  upon  your  mind  has  been  as  sudden  and 
glorious  as  if  the  darkness  of  midnight  had  glowed  into  the  brightness 
of  noonday.  I  remember  well  its  effects  upon  my  soul  at  the  fiivt,  how 
it  broke  my  bonds  and  made  my  heart  to  dance  with  delight  But  I 
have  found  it  equally  powerful  since  then,  for  when  I  am  examining 
myself  before  God  it  sometimes  comes  to  pass  that  I  fix  my  eye  upon 
some  one  evil  which  I  have  done,  and  I  turn  it  over  until  the  memory 
of  it  eats  into  my  very  soul  like  a  caustic  add,  or  like  a  gnawing  worm, 
or  like  coals  of  fire.  I  have  tried  to  argue  that  the  feult  was  excusable 
in  me,  or  that  there  were  certain  circumstances  which  rendered  it  almost 
impossible  that  I  could  do  otherwise,  but  I  have  never  succeeded  in 
quieting  my  conscience  in  that  fashion ;  vet  I  am  soon  at  rest  when  I 
come  liifore  the  Lord,  and  cry,  **  Lord,  though  I  am  thine  own  dear 
child,  I  am  unclean  by  reason  of  this  sin  :  apply,  again,  the  merit  of  my 
Lord's  atoning  sacrifice,  for  hast  thou  not  saia— If  any  man  sin  we  have 
an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesos  Christ  the  righteous  ?    Lord,  hear 


TfiS  BSD  HEIFfiB.  871 

his  advocacy,  and  pardon  my  offences."  My  brethren,  the  peace  which 
thns  comes  is  very  sweet.  You  cannot  pray  acceptably  before  that  peace> 
and  you  may  thank  God  that  you  cannot  pray,  for  it  is  a  dreadfhl  thing 
to  be  able  to  go  on  with  your  devotions  as  wgU  under  a  sense  of  guilt  as 
when  the  conscience  is  at  rest.  It  is  an  ill  child  that  can  be  happy  while 
its  fiither  is  displeased ;  a  true  child  can  do  nothing  till  he  is  forgiven. 

Now,  the  sprinkling  of  the  ashes  of  the  heifer  upon  the  unclean  was 
not  comprehensible  as  to  its  effect  by  anybody  who  received  it.  I  mean 
ihat  there  was  no  obvious  connection  between  the  caose  and  the  effect. 
Sa|^)06ing  an  Israelite  had  been  unclean,  and  had  been  sprinkled  with 
this  water ;  he  might  now  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  but  would  he 
see  any  reason  for  the  change  ?  He  would  say,  *^  I  have  received  the 
water  of  separation  and  I  am  clean,  but  I  do  not  know  whv  the  sprink- 
ling of  those  ashes  should  make  me  clean  except  that  God  has  so  ap- 
pointed." Brethren,  you  and  I  do  know  how  it  is  that  God  has  made 
us  dc^m,  for  we  know  that  Christ  has  suffered  in  our  stead.  Substitution 
explains  the  mystery,  and  hence  it  has  much  more  effect  upon  the  con- 
science than  an  outward,  ritualistic  form  which  could  not  be  explained. 
Ck}nscience  is  the  understanding  exercised  upon  moral  subjects,  and  that 
which  convinoes  the  understanding  that  all  is  right  soon  gives  peace  to 
the  conscience. 

Time  presses,  and  therefore  I  will  only  just  say,  that  as  the  ashes  ot 
the  heifer  were  for  all  the  camp  so  are  Christ's  merits  for  all  his  people. 
As  they  were  put  where  they  were  accessible,  so  may  you  always  come 
and  partake  of  the  cleansing  power  of  Christ's  precious  atonement.  Aa 
a  mere  sprinkling  made  the  unclean  clean,  even  so  may  you  come 
and  be  cleansed  even  though  your  faith  be  but  little,  and  you  seem  to 
get  but  little  of  Christ.  0  brethren,  the  Lord  God  of  his  infinite 
mercy  give  you  to  know  the  power  of  the  great  sacrifice  to  work  peace 
in  you,  not  after  three  or  seven  days,  but  at  once;  and  peace  not 
merely  for  a  time,  but  for  ever. 

One  riddle  I  must  explain  to  you.  Solomon,  according  to  the  Jewish 
tradition,  declared  that  he  did  not  understand  why  the  ashes  of  the  heifer 
made  everybody  unclean  except  those  who  were  unclean  aheady.  You 
saw  in  the  reading  that  the  priest,  the  man  who  killed  the  red  cow,  the 
person  who  swept  up  the  ashes,  and  he  who  mixed  the  ashes  with  water 
and  sprinkled  them,  were  ^  rendered  unclean  by  those  acts,  and  yet  the 
ashes  purified  the  unclean.  Is  not  this  analagous  to  the  riddle  of  the 
brazen  serpent?  It  was  by  a  serpent  that  the  people  were  bitten,  and  it 
was  bv  a  serpent  of  brass  that  they  were  healed.  It  is  by  Christ's  being 
regaraed  as  unclean  that  we  become  clean,  and  the  operation  of  his  sacrifice 
is  just  like  that  of  the  ashes,  for  it  both  reveals  uncleanness  and  removes 
it.  If  you  are  clean,  and  you  think  of  Christ's  death,  what  a  sense  of 
sin  it  brings  upon  you  !  You  judge  of  the  sin  by  the  atonement.  If 
you  are  unclean,  drawing  near  to  Christ  takes  that  sin  away. 

**  Thus  while  his  death  my  sin  displays 
In  all  its  bliickest  hue, 
Such  is  the  mystery  of  grace, 
It  seals  my  pardon  too.*' 

If  we  think  we  are  unclean,  a  sight  of  the  atoning  blood  makes  us  see 


872  XETBOFOLITAS  TABE&NAOLS  PULPIT. 

how  andean  we  are  ;  and  if  we  jndge  onraelyes  andean,  then  the  appli* 
cation  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  gives  oar  conscience  rest. 

Now,  what  is  all  this  business  abont  ?  This  slain  heifer, — I  understand 
that,  for  it  admitted  the  andean  Israelites  to  the  courts  of  the  Lord ; — 
but  this  Christ  of  God  offering  himsdf  without  spot  by  the  eternal 
Spirit, — what  is  that  for  ?  The  object  of  it  is  a  tervice  far  higher:  it  is 
that  we  may  be  purged  from  dead  works  to  serre  the  living  Grod.  The 
dead  works  are  gone,  God  absolves  von,  yon  are  dean,  and  yon  feel  it. 
What  then  ?  Will  you  not  abhor  dead  works  for  the  fature  ?  Sin  is 
death.  Labour  to  keep  from  it.  Inasmuch  as  you  are  dehvered  from 
the  yoke  of  sin,  go  forth  and  serve  God.  Since  he  is  the  living  God, 
and  evidently  hates  death,  and  makes  it  to  be  an  undeanness  to  him, 
get  you  to  living  things.  Offer  to  God  living  prayers,  and  living  tears, 
love  him  with  living  love,  trust  him  with  living  fiiith,  serve  him  with 
living  obedience. 

Be  all  alive  with  his  life;  not  only  have  life,  but  have  it  more 
abundantly.  He  has  purged  you  from  the  defilement  of  death,  now  live 
in  the  beauty  and  glory  and  excellency  of  the  divine  life,  and  pray  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  quicken  you  that  you  may  abide  in  fiill  fellowship  with 
God.  If  an  andean  person  had  been  made  clean,  and  had  then  said, 
''I  will  not  worship  the  Lord,  neither  will  I  serve  him,"  we  shonld 
account  him  a  wretched  being !  And  if  any  person  here  were  to  say, 
"  My  sin  is  forgiven  and  I  Imow  it,  but  I  will  do  nothing  for  God," 
we  might  well  cry,  "  Ah,  wretched  man !"  What  a  hypocrite  and  a 
deceiver  such  a  person  must  be.  Where  pardon  is  received  at  the  hands 
of  the  Lord  the  soul  is  sure  to  feel  a  love  to  God  rising  within  itself. 
He  who  has  had  much  forgiven  is  certain  to  love  much^  and  to  do  much 
for  him  by  whom  that  forgiveness  has  been  obtained. 

The  Lord  bless  you  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


POBTION  OF  SoBiFTUUB  BEAD  BEFOBB  Sbruok— Numbers  six. 


HiHKB  FBOM  "OuB  OwN   Hymn  Book  "— 895,  501,  803. 


Spurgeon'8  Birthday  Book  and  Autographic  Register, 

Compiled  fiom  the  Works  of  C.  H.  STURGEON. 

«« Our  yovng  frieodi  delight  in  poBtMsing  birthday  albam*,  and  here  is  one  wbich 
is  fit  for  a  qoaen.  We  wiU  say  nothing  of  the  contents,  bat  the  binding  is  »imply 
gorgeous,  whether  in  cloth  at  2s.  Gd.,  or  in  a  more  loxarioos  form  at  6%^  this  is  a 
dainty  birthday  present,  and  is  equal  to  any  that  have  p^ne  before  it ;  we  think  we 
might  Yenture  to  say  that  it  is  second  to  none.  Facsimiles  of  the  autographs  of  tho 
Paslor  and  bis  wife  are  given  in  their  proper  places." — Tke  Sword  and  the  TtotceL 

Pabsmobb  a  Alabastih,  4,  Paternoster  Bmldings ;  and  aU  Booksellers. 


^«titfl|irlitmi  ^is&ttmdt 


OUR  CHANGE  OF  MASTERS. 


^1 


Deuvsbed  on  Lord's-Dat  Morning,  July  Gth,  1879,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  3IETR0P0LITAN  TABEKHrACLE,  NBWINGTON. 


*'Bdsg  tlieii  made  free  from  gin,  ye  became  the  servants  of  righteonanefle." 

Komana  vi.  18. 

yLtiS  was  made  to  rale.  In  the  divine  original  he  was  intended  for  a 
kine,  who  should  have  dominion  over  the  oeasts  of  the  field,  and  the 
fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea.  He  was  designed  to  be  the 
lord-Uentenant  of  this  part  of  creation,  and  the  form  of  his  body  and 
the  ddgniiy  of  his  countenance  betoken  it.  He  walks  erect  among  the 
^  animal,  while  they  move  upon  all-fours ;  he  subjugates  and  tames  them 
'  to  perform  his  will,  and  the  fear  and  dread  of  him  is  upon  all  creatures, 
i<9r  they  know  their  sovereign.  Yet  is  it  equally  true  that  man  was 
made  to  serve.  At  his  beginning  he  was  placed  in  the  garden  to 
keep  it,  and  to  dress  it,  and  so  to  serve  his  Maker.  His  natural  feeble* 
neas,  his  dependence  upon  rain,  and  sun,  and  dew,  his  instinctive  awe 
of  an  HBseen  and  omnipotent  spirit,  indicate  that  he  is  not  the  chief 
of  the  universe,  but  a  subordinate  being,  whose  lot  it  is  to  serve.  We 
find  within  man  various  powers  luid  propensities  seeking  to  get  dominion 
ow%T  him,  so  that  his  mind  also  is  capable  of  servitude.  The  appetites 
which  are  essential  for  the  sustenance  of  his  bodily  iVame,  even  such  aa 
eating  and  drinking,  endeavour  to  master  him,  and  if  they  can  they 
will  do  so,  and  reduce  him  below  the  level  of  the  swine.  Man  is  in 
part  spirit,  but  he  is  also  in  part  animal,  and  the  animal  strives  to 
get  dominion  over  the  spiritual ;  and  in  many,  many  men  it  does  so, 
till  ttiey  are  utterly  degraded.  Nothing  can  be  worse  than  a  soul 
enslaved  by  such  a  body  as  that  of  man.  The  brute  nature  of  man  is  the 
worst  sort  of  brute.  There  is  no  beast  in  wot^  or  lion,  or  serpent 
-*  that  is  so  brutish  as  the  beast  in  man.  Did  I  not  tell  you  last  Sabbath 
day  that  whereas,  according  to  the  Levitical  law,  he  that  touched  a 
dead  animal  was  unclean  tm  the  evening,  he  who  touched  a  dead  man 
was  nndean  seven  days,  for  man  is  a  seven  times  morcf  poUutiug  creature 
thaoi  any  of  the  beasts  of  the  field  when  his  animal  nature  rules  him. 

If  e^  aims  at  ruling  man  the  good  Spirit  also  strives  with  him. 
When  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  visits  man  by  his  Spirit,  that  Spirit  does 
No.  1,482. 


H7i  UETBOPOLITAK  TABEBNAGLE  PULPIT. 

not  come  as  a  neutral  power  to  dwell  qnietlj  within  man,  and  to  ahaie 
his  heart  with  the  Prince  of  Darkness,  but  he  enters  with  fall  intent  to 
leign.  Hence  there  is  a  conflict  which  cannot  be  ended  by  an  armistioe, 
but  must  be  carried  on  to  the  end,  and  that  end  will  be  found  either  in 
the  driving  out  of  the  evil  or  in  the  thrusting  out  of  the  good ;  for  one 
or  the  other,  either  the  Prince  of  Darkness  or  the  King  of  Light,  will 
have  dominion  over  man.  Han  must  have  a  master:  he  cannot  serve 
two  masters,  but  he  must  serve  one.  Of  all  sorts  of  men  this  has  been 
true,  and  it  has  perhaps  been  most  clearly  seen  in  those  who  were  evi- 
dently made  to  lead  their  fellow  men :  it  is  speciaUy  seen  in  such  a  man, 
for  instance,  as  Alexander,  a  true  king  of  men,  so  heroic  and  great- 
hearted that  one  does  not  wonder  t^t  armies  were  &ed  with  en- 
thusiasm by  his  presence,  and  drove  everything  before  them.  Alexander 
conquered  the  world,  and  yet  on  occasions  he  became  the  captive  of 
drunkenness  and  the  bondsman  of  his  passionate  temper.  At  sudi 
times  the  king  of  men,  the  vanquisher  of  armies,  was  little  better  than  a 
raving  maniaa  Look  for  further  illustration  at  the  busts  of  the  emperors 
of  Rome,  the  masters  of  the  world ;  study  their  faces,  and  mark  what 
grovelling  creatures  they  must  have  been.  Borne  had  many  slaves,  but 
he  who  wore  her  purple  was  the  most  in  bonds.  Ko  slave  that  ground 
at  the  mill,  or  died  in  the  amphitheatre,  was  more  in  bondage  than  such 
men  as  Tiberius  and  Nero,  who  were  the  bond-slaves  of  their  passions. 
High  rank  does  not  save  a  man  from  being  under  a  mastery :  neither 
does  learning  nor  phQosophy  deliver  men  from  this  bondage,  for  the 
teachers  of  liberty  have  not  themselves  been  free,  but  it  has  hap- 
pened as  the  apostle  saith,  "While  they  promise  them  liberty  they 
themselves  are  the  servants  of  corruption.''  Solomon  himself,  with  all 
bis  wisdom,  played  the  fool  exceedingly,  and  though  he  was  the  most 
sagacious  ruler  of  his  age  he  became  for  awhile  completely  subject  to  his 
fleshly  desires. 

Man  is  bom  to  be  a  servant,  and  a  servant  he  must  be.  Who  shall  be 
his  master  ?  That  is  the  question.  Our  text  proves  the  point  with  which 
I  have  started,  for  it  speaiks  of  "being  made  iceQ  from  sin,"  and  in  the 
same  breath  it  adds,  "  Ye  became  the  servants  of  righteousness."  There 
is  no  interregnum  :  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a  moment  left  for  an 
independent  state,  but  out  of  one  servitude  we  pass  into  another.  Do 
not  think  I  made  a  mistake  in  the  use  of  the  word  servitude  ;  I  might 
have  translated  the  Greek  word  by  that  of  slave,  and  have  been  correct. 
**  Being  made  free  from  sin,  ye  were  enslaved  to  righteousness."  The 
apostle  makes  an  excuse  for  using  the  figure,  and  says,  "  I  speak  after  the 
manner  of  men,  because  of  the  infirmity  of  your  flesh."  He  did  not 
know  how  else  to  describe  it,  for  when  we  come  from  under  the  absolute 
power  of  sin  we  come  at  once  into  a  like  subjection  to  righteousness  ;  as 
we  were  governed  and  swayed  by  the  love  of  sin,  so  we  become  in  a 
similar  manner  subject  to  the  forces  of  grace  and  truth.  As  sin  took 
possession  of  us  and  controlled  our  acts,  so  grace  claims  us  as  its  own, 
takes  possession  of  us,  and  rules  us  with  an  absolute  sway.  Man  passes 
from  one  master  to  another,  but  he  is  always  in  subjection.  Free  will  I 
have  often  heard  of,  but  I  have  never  seen  it.  I  have  met  with  will, 
and  plenty  of  it,  but  it  has  either  been  led  captive  by  sin  or  held  in 
blessed  bonds  of  grace.    The  passions  drive  it  hither  and  thither  like  a 


OUa  CHAKGB  OF  ILUSTBBS,  875 

rolling  thing  before  a  whirlwind ;  or  the  nndersta&ding  sways  it,  and 
then,  according  as  the  underatanding  is  darkened  or  enlightened,  the  will 
acts  for  good  or  evil.  In  any  case  the  bit  is  in  its  month,  luid  it  is 
gnided  by  a  power  beyond  itself. 

Howeyer,  I  leave  that  qnestion,  and  call  attention  this  morning  first 
of  all  to  cur  change  of  mastera — **  Being  made  i^  from  sin,  we  become 
the  servants  of  righteonsness":  seconmy,  to  thereoAonsfor  thai  clumgB; 
and  thirdly,  to  ih$  consequences  of  thai  change, 

I.  We  begin  with  ons  change  of  uabters.  We  must  have  a 
master,  bat  some  of  ns  by  divine  grace  have  made  a  change  of  masters 
infinitely  to  onr  advantage.  In  describing  this  inward  revolution  we 
wiU  begin  with  a  word  or  two  upon  onr  old  master.  The  apostle  says  in 
the  verse  preceding  onr  text,  **ie  were  the  servants  of  sin.*'  How  trne 
that  is !  Those  of  as  who  now  believe,  and  are  free  from  sin,  were  bXL 
without  exception  the  servants  of  sin.  We  were  not  all  alike  enslaved, 
but  we  were  all  under  bondage.  Sin  has  its  liveried  servants.  Did  you 
ever  see  a  man  dressed  in  the  fall  livery  of  sin?  A  fine  suit,  I  warrant 
you  I  Sin  clothes  its  slave  with  rags,  with  shame,  and  often  with  disease. 
When  frdly  dressed  in  Satan's  uniform  the  sinner  is  abominable,  even  to 
his  fellow  sinners.  If  you  want  to  see  sin's  liveried  servants  dressed  out 
in  their  best  or  their  worst,  go  to  the  prison,  and  you  will  find  them 
there ;  or  go  to  the  dens  of  in&my  in  this  great  city,  or  to  the  liquor* 
bars,  or  to  the  places  of  vicious  amusement,  and  you  will  find  them 
there.  Many  of  them  wear  the  badge  of  the  devil's  drndgcry  upon 
their  backs  in  poverty  and  rags,  upon  their  &ce&  in  the  blotches  bom 
of  drunkenness,  and  in  their  very  bones  in  the  consequences  of  their  vice. 
Satan  has  regimentals  for  his  soldiers,  and  they  are  worthy  of  the  service. 

But  great  folks  have  many  servants  who  are  out  of  livery,  and  so  has 
sin.  We  were  not  all  open  transgressors  before  our  new  birth,  though 
we  were  all  the  servants  of  sin.  There  are  many  slaves  of  evil  whom  you 
would  not  know  to  be  such  if  you  only  saw  the  surface  of  their  chai-ac* 
ters.  They  do  not  swear,  or  steal,  or  commit  adultery,  or  even  break  the 
Sabbath  outwardly ;  on  the  contrary,  they  are  most  moral  in  their  con- 
duct. They  are  the  servants  of  sin,  but  they  are  secretly  so,  for  fear  of 
rebuke ;  they  are  non-professing  sinners  and  yet  sincerely  in  love  with 
sin.  They  stood  up  and  sung  the  hymn  just  now,  they  bowed  their 
heads  in  Ujer,  Ji  they  are  now  listening'  to  the  ^ol,  and  no  one 
will  know  the  difference  between  them  and  the  servants  of  Christ  by 
their  exterior;  but  at  heart  they  reject  the  Son  of  God,  and  refuse  to 
believe  in  him,  for  they  love  the  pleasures  of  sin  and  the  wages  of  nn- 
lighteousness.  A  kind  of  selfish  caution  restrains  them  from  overt  acts 
of  transgression,  but  their  heart  loves  not  Ood,  and  their  desires  are  not 
towards  his  ways.  0,  my  dear  hearer,  if  thou  art  setting  up  thine  own 
righteousness  in  thy  soul  as  an  anti-Christ  against  God's  Christ,  if  thoa 
art  kicking  against  the  sway  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  if  thou  art  secretly 
living  in  sin,  if  thou  art  following  out  some  sweet  sin  in  secret,  even 
though  thou  darest  to  appear  in  we  livery  of  Christ,  yet  still  thou  art 
the  slave  of  sin.  Hypocrites  are  worse  slaves  than  any  others,  because 
they  are  laid  under  the  restraints  of  religious  men  without  enjoying  their 
consolations,  and  they  practise  the  sins  of  the  ungodly  without  their 
pleasures.    Every  hypooite  is  a  fool  and  a  coward ;  he  has  not  the  rill 


876  UETBOPOLITASr  TABKRHACLK  PULPIT. 

to  serve  the  Lord  and  yet  he  has  not  the  courage  to  serve  the  devil  out 
and  out  These  go-betweens  aie  of  all  sorto  of  people  the  most  to  be 
pitied  and  the  most  to  be  blamed. 

As  long  as  we  are  unbelievers  we  are  the  servants  of  sin,  but  we  are 
not  all  outdoor  servants  of  sin.  Sin  has  its  domestic  servants  who  keep 
quiet,  as  well  as  its  soldiers  who  beat  the  drum.  Many  keep  their  sin  to 
themselves:  nobody  hears  of  them  in  the  street,  they  raise  no  public 
scandal,  and  j^t  at  heart  they  are  the  futhful  followers  of  wickedness 
and  rebellion,  r  Their  idols  are  set  up  in  secret  chambers,  but  they  are 
heaaiily  loved.  Their  desires  and  aspirations  are  all  selfish,  but  they  try 
to  conceal  this  &ct  even  from  themselves ;  they  wiU  not  serve  God,  they 
will  not  bow  before  his  Son,  and  yet  they  would  shrink  from  avowing 
their  rebellion.  They  are  amiable,  adnurable,  and  excellent  in  their 
outward  deportment;  but  they  are  the  indoor  servants  of  Satan  for  all 
that,  and  their  heart  is  full  of  enmity  against  God.  Some  of  us  confess 
that  it  was  so  with  us.  When  none  found  fiftult  with  us  we  were,  never- 
theless,  rotten  in  hearL  We  used  to  pray,  but  it  was  a  mockery  of  God ; 
we  went  up  to  God's  house,  but  we  regarded  not  his  word,  and  yet  in  all 
this  we  prided  ourselves  that  we  were  righteous. 

There  are,  however,  many  believers,  who  were  once  outdoor  servants  of 
Satan,  sinning  openly  and  in  defiance  of  all-law.  I  thank  God  that  there 
are  some  here  who  are  new  the  servants  of  Christ,  upon  whom  I  can 
look  with  great  delight,  although  they  were  once  the  open,  overt,  zealous, 
diligent  servants  of  the  devil.  Now  they  are  washed,  renewed,  and 
sanctified.  Glory  be  to  Gk)d  for  it.  Oh  that  the  Lord  would  bring  some 
more  great  sinners  inside  this  house  and  turn  them  into  great  saints,  for 
bold  offenders  make  zealous  lovers  of  Jesus  when  he  puts  away  their  sins. 
Hiey  love  much  because  they  have  had  much  forgiven,  and  inasmuch  as 
they  desperately  sinned  so  do  they  devoutly  love ;  and  their  surrender  to 
Ohrist  is  as  entire  and  unreserved  as  their  former  surrender  to  the  service 
of  evil.  In  this  let  God  be  praised.  Still,  let  us  all  humbly  bow  before 
the  truth  we  are  now  speaMng  of,  and  own  with  great  humiliation  of 
spirit  that  we  were  the  servants  of  sin. 

In  passing  on  we  notice  next  the  expression  of  the  apostle,  ^*  Being 
made  free  from  sin"  Through  divine  grace  we  have  been  led  to  trust 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  eternal  salvation,  and  having  done  so  we  are 
at  this  moment  free  from  sin.  Come  you  who  trust  the  Saviour's 
name,  and  rejoice  in  the  words  before  us,  for  they  describe  you.  You  are 
made  free  from  sin — not  you  shaU  be,  but  you  are.  lu  what  sense 
is  this  true  ? 

First,  in  the  sense  of  condemnation.  The  believer  is  no  more  con* 
demned  for  sin.  Your  sin  was  laid  on  Christ  of  old,  and  he  as  your 
scapegoat  took  it  all  away.  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation 
to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  You  are  acquitted  and  justified 
through  the  Lord  your  righteousness.  Clap  your  han^s  for  joy !  It  is 
a  mercy  worth  ten  thousand  worlds.  You  are  made  free  from  the 
damning  power  of  sin,  now  and  for  ever. 

Next,  you  are  made  free  from  the  guilt  of  sin.  As  you  cannot  be  con- 
demned so  does  the  truth  go  further,  you  cannot  even  be  accused ;  your 
transgression  is  forgiven  you,  your  sin  is  covered.  **Aa  far  as  the  east  is 
fix>m  the  west^  so  tar  hath  he  removed  our  transgressions  from  us." 


OUB  OHAiraE  OF  MASTERS.  877 

''  Who  shaU  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  QoA's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that 
jostifieth.  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea 
rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who 
also  miaketh  intercession  for  ns."  You  are  delivered  from  sin's  guilt  at 
this  moment — ^^'made  free  from  sin." 

You  are  in  oonseqnenoe  free  from  the  pnnishment  of  sin.  You  shall  never 
be  cast  into  hell,  for  Jesus  has  sufferea  in  your  stead,  and  the  justice  of 
God  is  satisfied.  As  a  believer  in  Christ,  for  you  there  is  no  bottomless 
pit,  for  you  no  undying  worm,  for  you  no  fire  unquenchable ;  but,  guilty 
as  you  are  by  nature,  Christ  hath  made  you  so  completely  clean  that  for 
you  is  reserved  the  ^'  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  you  before  the  foundation  of  the  world." 

Nor  is  this  all.  You  are  made  free  from  sin  as  to  its  reigning  power, 
and  this  is  a  point  in  which  you  greatly  delight.  Sin  once  said  to  you, 
"  (3o,"  and  you  went:  it  says  " Go"  now,  but  you  do  not  go.  Some- 
times sin  stands  in  your  way  when  grace  says  "  Uo,"  and  then  you  would 
gladly  run  but  sin  opposes  and  hinders ;  and  yet  you  will  not  yield  to  its 
demands,  for  grace  holds  dominion.  You  push,  you  struggle,  you  resolve 
tiiat  sin  shall  not  be  lord  of  your  life,  for  you  are  not  under  the  law  but 
under  grace.  Sin  hides  itself  in  holes  and  comers  of  your  nature,  skulks 
in  the  dark  about  the  streets  of  Mansoul,  plots  and  plans  if  it  can  to 
get  the  mastery  over  you ;  but  it  never  shall :  it  is  cast  out  of  the 
throne,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  sits  there  ruling  your  nature,  and  there  he 
will  sit  until  you  shall  be  perfected  in  holiness,  and  shall  be  caught  up 
to  dwell  with  Christ  for  ever  and  ever. 

"  Made  free  from  sin."  I  wish  I  could  now  leave  ofiT  preaching,  and 
get  into  a  quiet  pew,  and  ait  down  with  you  and  meditate  upon  that 
thought ;  chewing  the  cud  as  you  &rmers  say,  and  getting  the  juice  out 
of  this  rich  pasturage.  "  Made  free  from  sin ! "  Why,  as  I  pronounce 
those  blessed  words  I  feel  like  an  escaped  negro  in  the  old  slave  days 
when  he  leaped  upon  British  soil  in  (Janada.  After  all  his  running 
through  the  woods,  and  crossing  of  hiUs  and  rivers,  he  was  free  !  How 
he  leaped  for  joy  I  How  he  cried  with  delight  1  Even  so  did  we  exult 
in  our  libertv  when  at  the  first  our  Lord  Jesus  set  us  free.  You  who 
were  never  smes,  and  never  felt  the  taskmaster's  lash,  you  do  not  know 
the  value  of  liberty  ;  and  so  in  spiritual  things,  if  you  have  never  felt  the 
slavery  of  sin,  and  have  never  escaped  therefrom  into  the  good  land  of 
^race  where  Christ  hath  made  you  iree  indeed,  you  do  not  know  the 
joy  of  the  redeemed.  I  am  free !  I  am  free  !  I  am  free  I — I  that 
was  once  a  slave  to  every  evil  desire  !  I  am  made  free  by  omnipo- 
tent bve!  I  have  escaped  from  the  taskmaster's  fetters,  and  I  am 
the  Lord's  free  man  !  Let  all  the  angels  praise  my  redeeming  Lord. 
Jiet  all  the  spirits  before  the  throne  praise  the  Lord,  who  hath  led 
his  people  out  of  bondage,  for  he  is  good,  for  his  mercy  endureth  for 
ever. 

Now,  how  came  we  to  be  free  ?  We  have  become  free  in  three  ways. 
First,  by  purchase,  for  our  Saviour  has  paid  the  full  redemption  monev  for 
ns,  and  there  is  not  a  hal^nny  due  upon  us.  Blessed  be  his  name,  there 
is  no  mortgage  on  his  inheritance;  the  price  is  all  paid  and  we  are 
Christ's  unencumbered  property  for  ever.  Here  we  stand  at  this  moment 
fi^e,  because  we  are  ransomed,  and  we  know  that  our  Bedcemer  livcth. 


878  UETBOPOLITAS  TABEKKACLE  PULPIT. 

Our  bod;,  soul,  and  spirit  are  alt  boagfat  with  a  price,  and  in  onr  com- 
plete manhood  we  are  Christ's. 

Next,  vc  are  free  bj  power  as  well  as  b;  purchase.  Jnat  ae  the  Israel- 
itea  were  the  Lord's  own  people,  but  he  had  to  bring  them  ont  of  Egypt 
with  a  high  hand  and  an  ontstretched  arm,  so  has  the  Lord  by  power 
broken  the  neck  of  sin  and  bronght  ns  up  from  the  dominion  of  the  old 
Pharaoh  of  evil  and  set  as  free.  The  Spirit's  power,  the  same  power 
which  raised  Christ  from  the  dead,  ay,  the  same  power  which  made  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  hath  delivered  ns,  and  we  are  the  lananoed  of 
the  Lord. 

And  then  we  are  free  by  prmUege.  "  Unto  as  many  as  believed  him, 
to  them  gave  he  tlic  privilege  to  become  the  sons  of  Gh>d."  God  has  de- 
clared ns  free.  His  own  royal,  majestic,  and  divine  decree  has  bidden 
the  prisoners  go  forth.  The  Lord  hinwelf  looseth  the  prisonera,  and 
declares  that  they  Bhall  no  more  he  held  in  captivity.  Price  and  power 
and  privilege  meet  together  in  our  liberty. 

How  came  we  to  be  free  ?  I  will  tell  yon  another  story.  "We  are  free 
in  a  Btraiige  way.  According  to  the  chapter  in  which  we  find  our  text 
we  are  free  because  we  have  died.  If  a  slave  dies  his  master's  posaeadon 
in  him  is  ended.  The  tyrant  can  mle  no  longer,  death  has  relaxed  his 
hold.  "  He  that  is  dead  is  fr«e  from  sin."  Sin  comes  to  me  and  asks 
me  why  I  do  not  obey  its  desires.  I  have  a  reply  ready.  "Ah,  Master 
Sin,  I  am  dead !  I  died  some  thirty  years  &m,  and  I  do  not  belong 
to  you  any  more.  What  have  you  to  do  with  me  ?"  Whenever  the 
Lord  brings  a  man  to  die  in  Christ  the  blessed,  heavenly  death  nntn 
Bin,  how  hath  sin  any  more  dominion  over  him  ?  He  is  clear  from  his 
old  master,  because  he  is  dead.  Cor  old  master  lives  to  ns,  bnt  we  do 
not  live  to  him.  He  may  make  what  suit  he  pleases,  we  will  not  acknow- 
ledge hia  right.  Some  of  ns  have  made  a  public  claim  of  our  freedom 
by  deatli,  fur  we  have  been  buried,  and  the  apostle  saith,  "  Know  ye  not, 
that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptised  into  Jesna  Christ  were  baptized  into 
his  death  ?  Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death : 
that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father, 
even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life."  We  do  not  trust  in  the 
burial  of  baptism,  for  we  know  that  there  wonld  have  been  no  tmth  in  it 
if  we  had  not  been  dead  first ;  but  still  it  is  a  blessed  sign  to  us  that  in- 
asmuch as  we  died  we  have  also  been  buried.  AVhenever  the  devil  comes 
to  us  we  can  each  one  say  to  him,  "  I  am  no  servant  of  youre,  I  died  and 
was  buried,  did  you  not  see  me  laid  in  the  liquid  tomb  ? "  Oh,  it  is  a 
blessed  thing  when  the  Lord  enables  ns  to  feel  a  clear  asssurance  that 
nnr  hnnKiBm  wfts  not  a  mere  form,  but  the  instructive  token  of  a  work 
)nl  wrought  by  the  divine  Spirit,  which  set  us  fr«e  from  the 
sin. 

ling  has  happened  tovB:  we  have  risen  again.  According  to 
ing  we  have  risen  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ :  a  new  life 
ven  to  ns  ;  we  are  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  are 
I  people  that  we  once  were ;  old  things  have  passed  away, 
lings  have  become  new.  If  some  of  yon  were  to  meet  yonr 
u  would  not  know  yourselves,  would  you  ?  My  old  self  does 
e,  and  cannot  make  me  out.  I  am  dead  to  him  as  to  his 
rer,  and  buried  too,  so  that  I  cui  never  be  his  subject,  nor 


^m, 


ouB  GEijraB  or  ma8teb&.  S79 

can  he  ever  be  the  bng  of  my  heart,  yet  he  straggles  to  dweU  within  me, 
and  seems  to  have  as  many  Uves  as  a  cat.  Ereiy  now  and  then  my  old 
self  sneeringly  cries  to  my  trae  self,  ^*  What  a  fool  you  are."  My  trae 
self  answers,  '^  No,  I  was  a  fool  when  yon  had  sway,  bat  now  I  have  come 
to  my  right  mind."  Sometimes  that  old  self  whispers,  ''There  is  no 
reality  in  faith,"  and  the  new  self  replies,  ''  There  is  no  reality  in  the 
things  which  are  seen.  This  world  is  a  shadow,  bat  heaven  is  etemaL" 
**  Ah,"  says  the  old  sel^  "  yon  are  a  hypocrite."  *'  No,"  says  the  new 
self,  **I  was  &Ise  when  I  was  onder  yoor  power,  bat  now  I  am  honest 
and  trae."  Xes,  brethren,  we  are  risen  witn  Christ :  with  him  we  died 
and  were  baried,  and  with  him  we  are  risen,  and  hence  we  are  free. 
What  slave  woold  remiun  under  the  dominion  of  a  master  if  he  coald 
say,  **  I  died,  sir :  you  cannot  own  me  now,  for  your  ownership  only 
extended  over  one  life.  I  was  buried ;  did  you  0¥ni  me  when  I  was 
buried?  I  have  risen  again,  and  my  new  life  is  not  youni;  I  am  not 
the  same  man  that  I  was,  and  yon  have  no  rights  over  me."  We  have 
undergone  this  wondrous  death  and  resurrection,  and  so  we  can  say  this 
morning  with  heartfelt  joy,  *'  We  are  made  fip»B  from  sin." 

We  are  also  free  from  sin  in  our  hearts :  we  do  not  love  it  now,  but 
loathe  the  thought  of  it.  We  ire  free  from  sin  as  to  our  new  nature : 
it  cannot  sin  because  it  is  born  of  Ood.    We  are  free  from  sin  as  to  Crod's 

Eurpose  about  us,  for  he  will  present  us  ere  long  blameless  and  &ultless 
efore  his  presence  with  exceeoing  great  joy.    We  do  not  belong  to  sin; 
we  refuse  to  serve  sin;  we  are  m»cie  free  from  it  by  the  grace  of  God. 

Now,  the  third  part  of  this  change  of  masters  is  this — ''  ye  became  the 
servants  of  righteousness'*  So  we  have  done,  and  we  are  now  in  the 
possession  of  righteousness  and  under  its  rule.  A  righteous  God  has 
made  us  die  to  sin:  a  righteous  God  has  redeemed  us:  a  new  and 
and  righteous  life  has  been  infused  into  us,  and  now  righteousness  rules 
and  reigns  in  us.  We  do  not  belong  to  ourselves,  but  we  yield  ourselves 
np  entirely  to  the  Bedeemer's  sway  through  his  Spirit,  and  the  more 
completely  he  rules  us  the  better.  The  text  says  we  are  enslaved  to 
righteousness,  and  so  we  wish  to  be.  We  wish  we  were  so  enslaved  that 
we  could  not  even  will  a  wrong  thing  nor  wish  an  evil  thing.  We  desire 
to  give  ourselves  up  wholly  and  absolutely  to  the  di^e  sway,  so  that  the 
right,  and  the  true,  and  the  good  may  hold  us  in  perpetual  bonds.  We 
abandon  ourselves  to  the  supremacy  of  God,  and  we  find  our  liberty  in 
being  entirely  subjected  to  the  wiU  of  the  Most  High.  This  is  a  chsoige 
of  masters  with  which  I  know  that  some  of  you  are  well  acquainted.  I 
am  afraid,  however,  that  others  of  yon  know  nothing  about  ic.  May 
the  Lord  grant  that  you  may  be  madus  to  know  it  before  you  go  to  sleep 
to-night.  May  you  be  delivered  from  the  black  ^ant  and  brought  into 
the  service  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  and  that  straightway. 

II.  Secondly,  let  us  survey  the  seasons  fob  our  change.  How  do 
we  justify  this  change  of  masters  ?  A  man  who  makes  frequent  shifts  is 
not  good  for  much.  But  we  changed  our  old  master  because  he  never  had 
any  ri^ht  to  us,  and  we  were  ille^y  detained  by  him.  Why  should  sin 
have  dominion  over  us  ?  Sin  did  not  make  us,  sin  does  not  feed  us,  sin 
has  no  right  to  us  whatever ;  we  never  owed  it  a  moment's  homage;  we 
are  not  debtors  to  the  flesh  to  live  after  the  fles^.  Our  old  master  cannot 
summon  us  for  desertion,  for  he  stole  our  services.    Besides,  our  old 


380  METBOPOLITAK  TABEBKACLB  PULPIT. 

master  was  as  bad  as  bad  could  be.  Ton  neTer  saw  his  porfcrait ;  bnt  he- 
that  woiild  paint  a  picture  of  sin  would  have  to  put  upon  the  canvas  aU  the 
monstrosities  that  ever  existed,  and  all  the  horrors  that  were  ever  imagined, 
and  these  would  have  to  be  exaggerated  and  condensed  into  one,  before 
they  could  fairly  depict  the  deformity  of  sin.  8in  is  worse  than  the  devil, 
for  sin  made  the  devil  a  devil ;  he  would  have  been  an  angd  if  it  had  not 
been  for  sin.  Oh,  who  would  serve  the  destroying  tyrant  who  of  old  cast 
down  even  the  stars  of  light  and  turned  angels  into  fiends  ?  We  ran 
away  from  our  old  master  because  we  had  never  any  profit  at  his  hands. 
The  apostle  says,  "  What  fruit  had  he  then  ? "  Ask  the  drunkard,. 
"  What  did  you  get  by  the  drink  ?  "  Who  hath  woe  ?  Who  hath  red- 
ness of  the  eyes  ?  Ask  the  spendthrift  what  he  gained  by  his  debauchery. 
He  would  hardly  like  to  tell  you,  and  I  certainly  should  not  like  to  repeat 
his  tale.  Ask  any  man  that  lives  in  sin  what  he  has  gained  by  it,  and 
you  win  find  it  is  all  loss  ;  sin  is  evil  and  only  evil,  and  that  continually. 
We  have  found  that  out,  and  therefore  we  have  quitted  the  old  master, 
and  taken  up  with  the  new.  Beside  that,  our  old  master,  sin,  brought 
us  shame.  There  was  no  honour  in  serving  him.  His  work  is  called  by 
Paul,  "those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed."  We  are  in  the  sight 
of  God,  ay,  and  in  our  own  sight,  ready  to  blush  scarlet  at  the  very 
thought  of  the  evil  in  which  we  once  took  delight.  Sin  is  a  grovelling, 
mean,  despicable  thing,  and  we  are  ashamed  of  having  been  connect^ 
with  it.  Moreover,  its  wages  are  death,  and  this  is  dreadfal  to  think 
upon.  Sin  at  one  time  was  pleasant  to  us,  but  when  we  found  out  that 
sin  led  its  servants  down  to  hell,  and  plunged  them  into  fire  unquench- 
able, we  renounced  its  rule,  and  found  another  lord. 

But  why  did  we  take  up  with  our  new  Master  ?  We  could  not  hdp  it, 
for  it  was  he  that  set  us  free ;  it  was  he  that  bought  us,  it  was  he  that 
fought  for  us,  it  was  he  that  brought  us  into  liberty.  Ah,  if  you  could 
see  him  you  would  not  ask  us  why  we  became  his  servants.  In  the  first 
place,  we  owe  ourselves  wholly  to  him ;  and  in  the  next  place,  if  we  did 
not,  he  is  so  altogether  lovely,  so  matchless,  and  so  charming,  that  if  we 
had  a  free  choice  of  masters  we  would  choose  him  a  thousand  times  over, 
for  he  is  the  crown  and  glory  of  mankind,  among  the  sons  there  is  none 
to  be  compared  to  him. 

If  you  want  us  to  justify  our  service  of  him,  we  tell  you  that  his  ser- 
vice IS  perfect  freedom  and  supreme  delight.  We  have  had  to  suffer  a 
little  sometimes  when  his  enemy  and  ours  has  barked  at  us,  and  the  un- 
godly have  called  us  ill  names,  but  we  count  it  honour  to  suffer  for  Jesos* 
sake :  for  he  is  so  sweet,  and  so  good,  that  if  we  had  a  thousand  lives, 
and  could  give  each  one  away  by  a  msoiyr's  death,  we  count  him  worthy 
of  those  lives,  so  sweet  is  he  to  our  hearts'  love.  Why  have  we  taken 
our  new  Master?  Why,  because  he  gives  us  even  now  a  present  pay- 
ment in  his  service,  if  there  were  no  hereafter  we  would  be  satisfied 
with  the  present  delight  he  gives  us,  but  in  addition  to  that  he  has 
promised  us,  as  a  future  reward,  life  eternal  at  his  right  hand.  We 
think,  therefore,  that  we  have  more  than  sufficient  reason  for  becoming 
the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  made  of  God  unto  us  nghteonsness. 
Dear  hearers,  how  I  wish  that  you  would  all  enter  my  Lord's  service  by 
faith  in  his  name. 

III.    In  the  third  place,  and  very  practically,  I  want  to  talk  to  those 


OUB  CHAKGB  OF  HA6TSA8.  £81 

who  are  servanta  of  God  upon  thb  ooksequences  of  this  change. 
Ye  have  become  the  servants  of  righteousness,  and  the  first  conse- 
4)i2enoe  is  that  you  belong  wholly  to  jonr  Lord?  Have  yon  recog- 
nized this?  I  know  numbers  of  Christian  people — I  hope  they  are 
Christian  people,  for  in  some  points  they  seem  as  if  they  were — ^but  if  I 
were  askea  to  look  at  their  lives,  and  give  an  opinion  as  to  whom  they 
belong,  I  should  be  compelled  to  say,  ^'They  seem  mostly  to  belong 
to  themselves."  To  whom  does  their  property  belong?  ''To  them- 
selves." To  whom  does  their  time  belong  ?  '' To  themselves."  To  whom 
does  their  talent  belong?  ''To  themselves."  As  fiskr  as  I  can  see  they 
lay  all  out  upon  themselves,  and  live  for  themselves.  And  what  do  they 
give  to  God?  If  they  are  rather  generous  they  give  him  the  candle- 
ends  and  the  parings  of  the  cheese,  and  Httle  odds  and  ends,  threepenny- 
bits,  and  things  they  do  not  want,  and  can  give  without  missing  them. 
There  are  hundreds  of  professors  who  never  gave  God  anything  that 
cost  them  a  self-denial ;  no,  not  so  much  as  going  without  a  dish  on  the 
table,  or  a  picture  on  the  wall,  or  a  ring  on  the  finger.  There  are  numbers 
of  professing  Christians  who  spend  a  deal  more  on  the  soles  of  their 
boots  than  on  Christ,  and  many  women  who  spend  more  on  the  feathers 
and  the  flowers  which  deck  their  bonnets  than  on  their  Saviour.  Yes, 
and  I  have  heard  of  men  who  said  they  were  perfect,  and  yet  th^  were 
worth  half  a  million  of  money,  and  were  hoarding  up  more  I  Sinners 
dying  and  being  damned  and  missionaries  without  support,  and  yet  these 
absolutely  perfect  men  are  piling  up  gold  and  letting  the  cause  of  Christ 
stop  for  means.  It  is  not  my  theory  of  perfection,  nay,  it  does  not  seem 
to  me  to  come  up  to  the  idea  of  a  common  Christian  who  says  he  is  not 
his  own.  If  you  are  really  saved,  brethren,  not  a  hair  of  your  heads 
belongs  to  yourselves :  Christ's  blood  has  either  bought  you  or  it  has  not, 
and  if  it  has,  then  you  are  altogether  Christ's,  every  bit  of  you,  and  you 
are  neither  to  eat  nor  drink,  nor  sleep,  but  for  Christ.  "  Whatsoever  ye 
do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  Have  you  ever  got  a  hold  of  that  ? 
Just  as  a  negro  used  to  belong  to  the  man  that  bought  him,  eveiv  inch  of 
him,  so  vou  are  the  slave  of  Christ ;  you  bear  in  your  body  the  brand  of 
the  Lora  Jesus,  and  your  glory  and  your  freedom  lie  therein.  That  is 
the  first  consequence  of  being  set  free  from  sin, — ye  became  the  servants 
of  righteousness. 

What  next  ?  Why,  because  you  are  Christ's  his  very  name  is  dear  to 
you.  You  are  not  so  his  slave  that  you  would  escape  from  his  service 
if  you  could ;  no,  but  you  would  plunge  deeper  and  deeper  into  it  Yon 
want  to  be  more  and  more  the  Lord's.  His  very  name  is  sweet  to  you. 
If  you  meet  with  the  poorest  person  who  belongs  to  Christ  you  love  him, 
ana  though  perhaps  some  who  are  like  Christ  in  other  respects  mayhave 
awkward  tempers,  von  i>ut  up  with  their  infirmities  for  his  sake.  Where 
there  is  anything  of  Chnst  there  your  love  goes  forth.  I  remember  when 
I  left  the  village  where  I  first  preached  I  felt  that  if  I  had  met  a  dog 
that  came  frx)m  Waterbeach  I  should  have  petted  him ;  and  such  is  the 
love  we  have  for  Christ  that  the  lowest  and  weakest  thii^  that  belongs  to 
him  we  love  for  his  sake :  the  very  sound  of  his  name  is  music  to  us,  and 
those  who  do  not  love  him  we  cannot  endure.  Haydn,  the  great  musician, 
one  day  walked  down  a  London  street  and  turning  into  a  music-seller's 
shop,  he  asked  the  salesman  if  he  had  any  select  and  beautiful  music  ? 


882  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

"  Well  sir,"  said  he,  "  I  have  some  sublime  music  by  Mr.  Haydn."  *^  Oh," 
said  Haydn,  "1*11  have  nothing  to  do  with  that."  "Why,  sir,  you 
come  to  buy  music  and  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  Mr.  Haydn's  com-^ 
position !  What  &ult  can  you  find  with  it  ?"  "  I  can  find  a  great  deal 
of  feult  with  it,  but  I  will  not  argue  with  you :  I  do  not  want  any  ot 
his  music."  "Then,"  said  the  shopkeeper,  "I  have  other  music,  but 
it  is  not  for  such  as  you,"  and  he  turned  his  back  on  him.  A  thorough 
enthusiajst  grows  impatient  of  those  who  do  not  appreciate  what  he  so 
much  admires.  If  we  love  Jesus  we  shall  sometimes  feel  an  impatient 
desire  to  get  away  from  those  who  know  him  not.  You  ao  not 
love  Christ  ?  What  kind  of  man  can  you  be  to  be  so  blind,  so  dead  ? 
You  can  be  no  friend  of  mine  if  you  are  not  a  friend  of  Christ's.  I 
would  do  anything  for  your  good,  but  you  cannot  yield  me  delight  or 
be  my  bosom  friend  unless  you  love  my  Lord,  for  he  has  engrossed  my 
heart  and  taken  entire  possession  of  my  spirit.  If  you  have  thus  become 
a  servant  of  righteousness  you  will  weary  of  that  which  does  not  help 
you  in  his  service,  but  the  name  of  your  Master  Tvill  be  as  choicest 
music  to  you. 

And  now,  dear  friends,  let  me  mention  another  result.    All  your 
members  are  henceforth  reserved  for  Christ.    What  does  the  apostle  say? 
"  When  ye  were  the  servants  of  sin  ye  were  free  from  righteousness." 
When  Satan  was  your  master  you  did  not  care  about  Clirist,  did  you  ? 
You  had  no  respect  for  him,  and  if  anybody  brought  the  words  of  Jesus 
before  you  you  said,  "  Take  them  away — I  do  not  want  to  hear  them." 
You  went  wholly  in  for  evil.    Now,  just  in  the  same  way  yield  yourself 
up  wholly  to  Christ,  and  say,  "  Now,  Satan,  when  I  was  yours  I  did  not 
yield  obedience  to  Jesus,  and  now  that  I  am  Christ's  I  can  yield  no  obe- 
dience to  you."   If  Satan  brings  sin  before  you,  say,  "  I  cannot  see  it :  my 
eyes  are  Christ's : "  and  if  he  would  charm  you  with  the  sweet  sound  of 
temptation  say,  "  I  cannot  hear  it :  my  ears  are  Christ's."    "  Oh,"  saith 
he,  "  seize  on  this  deUght."    You  answer,  "  I  cannot  reach  it ;  my  hands 
are  Christ's."    "  But  taste  this  sweet  draught,"  saith  he.     You  say,  "  I 
cannot  take  it,  my  hps  are  Christ's,  my  mouth  is  Christ's,  all  my  members 
are  Christ's."     **  Well,  but  you  can  form  a  judgment,  cannot  you,  about 
this  error  ?  "     "  No,  I  do  not  want  to  know  anything  about  it ;   my 
understanding  is  Christ's."    "  Oh,  but  hear  this  new  thing."      "  No,  I 
do  not  want  to  hear  it ;  I  have  found  Christ,  who  is  new  enough  for  me ; 
I  do  not  want  your  novel  discoveries ;  I  am  dead  to  them.    I  do  not  want 
to  be  worried  with  arguments  which  dishonour  my  Lord :  take  them  away. 
When  I  was  a  servant  of  sin  I  would  not  meddle  with  the  truth,  and  now 
that  I  am  a  servant  of  Christ  I  will  not  trifle  in  the  opposite  direction ; 
I  have  done  with  all  but  Jesus." 

Think,  my  brethren,  when  we  were  servants  of  sin  in  what  way  we 
served  it ;  for  just  as  we  used  to  serve  sin,  so  ought  we  to  work  for 
Jesus.  I  do  not  speak  to  all  here  present,  but  I  speak  to  many  who  were 
sinners  of  an  open  kind :  how  did  you  serve  sin  ?  I  will  answer  for 
them.  They  did  not  require  to  be  egged  on  to  it ;  they  did  not  want 
any  messenger  of  the  devil  to  plead  with  them  and  urge  them  to  unholy 
pleasures  and  unclean  delights.  Far  frx)m  it ;  some  even  of  their  own 
companions  thought  them  too  imprudent.  Now,  dear  friends,  you  oug^t 
not  to  want  your  ministers  or  Christian  friends  to  stir  you  up  to  good 


0T7B  CHANGE  OF  MASTERS.  388 

-works  ;  yon  ought  to  be  jnst  as  ea^r  after  holiness  as  you  were  after  sin. 
Evil  was  very  sweet  to  yon  once,  xou  used  to  watch  for  the  day  when 
yon  oonld  indulge  in  a  sweet  sin ;  did  yon  not  ?  When  the  time  was  coming 
round  when  yon  could  take  a  deep  draught  of  iniquity  you  took  the  almanack 
«nd  looked  for  it  as  a  child  for  his  holidays,  xou  did  not  mind  travel- 
ling from  town  to  town  to  make  a  round  of  dissipation.  Brother,  serve 
CHb^str  in  the  same  way.  May  his  Holy  Spirit  help  you  to  do  so.  Watch 
for  opportunities  of  doing  good;  do  not  need  whipping  to  duty.  In- 
stead of  requiring  to  be  urged  forward  in  evil  we  needed  holding  back : 
^d  we  not  ?  Our  parents  had  to  put  the  rein  upon  us !  Sometimes 
mother  would  say,  *^  John,  do  not  so/'  and  father  would  cry, ''  My  boy, 
do  not  this."  We  wanted  a  deal  of  restraint.  I  wish  I  had  a  band  of 
Christians  round  me  who  needed  holding  back  in  the  service  of  Christ : 
I  have  not  met  with  that  sort  yet.  I  am  prepared  with  any  kind  of  curb 
-when  I  meet  with  a  high-mettled  Christian,  who  goes  at  too  great  a  rate 
in  his  Lord's  service.  For  the  most  part  my  Master's  horses  are  fonder 
-of  getting  into  the  stables  than  out  into  the  hunting  field.  I  have  not 
met  with  one  who  has  done  too  much  for  the  Lord.  I  shall  never  be 
guilty  of  too  much  work  myself;  I  wish  I  could  go  like  the  wind  in 
serving  Jesus. 

Brethren,  be  just  as  hot  to  honour  Christ  as  you  once  were  to  dis- 
honour him.  ^  you  have  given  the  devil  first-rate  service,  let  Christ 
have  the  same.  You  recollect  in  the  days  of  your  sin,  some  of  yoa 
who  went  in  for  it  thoroughly,  that  you  never  stood  at  any  expense — 
did  you  ?    Oh  no,  if  you  wanted  pleasure  in  sin,  away  went  the  five 

Eunds,  and  the  hundreds.  How  often  do  I  meet  with  men,  particn- 
ly  those  given  to  drink,  who  get  pounds  in  their  pockets  and 
never  know  how  they  go ;  but  they  will  never  leave  off  till  all  is  spent, 
be  it  little  or  much,  roor  fools,  poor  fools.  Yet  I  wish  we  could  serve 
Jesus  Christ  thus  unstintedly.  Ko  expense  should  be  reckoned  so  long 
SB  we  can  honour  him  and  bless  his  name.  Bring  forth  the  alabaster 
box ;  break  it,  never  mind  the  chips  and  pieces ;  pour  out  the  oil,  and 
let  Jesus  have  it  alL  It  was  thus  I  served  Satan  aild  thus  would  I 
serve  Christ. 

Ay,  and  the  poor  slaves  of  sin  not  only  do  not  stop  at  expense,  but 
they  are  not  Mghtened  by  any  kind  of  loss.  See  how  many  lose  their 
cluuracters  for  the  sake  of  one  diort  hour  of  sin.  How  many  are  wring- 
ing their  hands  now  because  none  will  trust  them,  and  they  are  cut  off 
from  decent  society  because  of  one  short-lived  sin.  They  ruin  their 
jpeace  and  think  nothing  of  it.  A  <}uiet  conscience  is  the  brightest  of 
jewels,  but  they  fling  it  away  to  enjoy  their  sin.  They  will  lose  their 
health,  too,  for  the  sake  of  indulging  their  passions.  The  devil  says, 
^  Drink,  drink ;  drink  yourselves  blind ;"  and  they  do  it  as  eagerly  as  if  it 
were  for  their  good.  They  are  martyrs  for  Satan.  Never  did  a  Zulu  fling 
himself  upon  death  for  his  king  so  recklesdy  as  these  servants  of  Satan 
yield  themselves  for  his  service,  ^hey  will  do  anvthing;  they  wfll 
destroy  their  health,  and,  what  is  worst  of  all,  destroy  their  souls  for  ever 
for  the  sake  of  sin's  brief  delights.  They  know  that  there  is  a  hell,  they 
know  that  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  for  ever  on  guilty  men,  but  they 
lisk  all  and  lose  all  for  sin.  In  that  same  way  should  we  serve  our  Lora. 
Be  willing  to  lose  character  for  him ;  be  wilung  to  lose  health  for  him ; 


8M  HETBOPOLITAN  TABEBBAOLI  FCLFTT. 

be  billing  to  lose  liib  for  him ;  be  willing  to  lose  all,  if  by  any  means  70a 
mar  glorify  him  whose  servant  you  have  become. 

Oh,  vho  Trill  be  my  Master's  servant?  Here  he  oomee!  Bo  yon  not 
see  him  ?  He  wears  upon  his  head  no  diadem  but  the  crown  of  thorns ; 
ndown  his  cheeks  you  see  the  spittle  flowing,  his  feet  are  still  mbied  with 
their  wounds,  and  his  hands  are  stiU  bejewelled  with  the  marks  of  the 
nailii.  This  is  yonr  Master,  and  these  are  the  insignia  of  hia  love  for 
yon.  What  service  will  you  render  him  ?  That  of  a  mere  professor, 
who  names  his  name  bnt  loves  him  not?  That  of  a  cold  rehgiooiat,  who 
renders  unwilling  service  out  of  fear?  I  pray  you,  brethren,  do  not  so 
dishonour  him.  I  lift  the  standard  this  morning  to  euliBt:  beneath  the 
banner  of  Christ  those  who  will  henceforth  be  Christ's  men  from  head  to  ■ 
foot;  and  happy  shall  the  church  he,  and  happy  the  entire  Israel  of  Ood 
if  a  chosen  number  ahall  enlist  and  remain  true  to  their  oolours.  We 
need  no  more  of  your  nominal  ChristianB,  your  lukewarm  Christians, 
whom  my  Master  spuee  out  of  his  mouth ;  we  need  men  on  fire  with 
love,  all  over  consecrated,  intensely  devoted,  who,  by  the  slavery  from 
which  they  have  escaped,  and  by  the  liberty  into  which  they  have  entered, 
are  under  bond  to  spend  and  be  spent  for  the  name  of  Jeaos,  till  they 
have  filled  the  earth  witb  his  glory,  and  made  all  heaven  ring  with  bis 
praise.    The  Lord  bleas  yon,  beloved,  for  Jesos'  sake.    Amen. 


FOBTIOH  OF  SOBIPTUBB  BEAD  BEFCSB  SsBHOS — SomanS  vL 


HYJIN3  FBOM  "OUB  OWK  HtMH  BOOK."— 116  (SoBg  11.),  668, 
119  (Song  III.) 


I  have  to  pay  for  the  ground  for  the  Girls'  Orphtuage  the  anm  of  £4,000 
on  Jiily  I5di,  and  at  this  moment  (July  Slh)  I  have  barely  £700  in  hand. 
Speedy  and  liberal  help  ia  therefore  needed  if  the  enterprise  is  to  be  earned 
out  in  a  worthy  manner.— G.  U.  Spdmbom,  Nighlingide  Lftue,  Dalhun. 


JK«ti[fl50litmi  ^^tYtmk  f  wlpt. 


THE  PRESENT  CRISIS. 


t 


Deliybred  on  Loed's-Day  Morning,  Jult  18th,  187D,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


''I  wOl  go  and  return  to  my  place,  till  they  acknowledge  their  offence^  and  seek 
my  fiuae :  in  their  a£Qiction  they  will  seek  me  early." — Hoaea  y.  Id. 

The  Lord  does  not  always  tell  us  what  he  will  do.  "Verily  thou  art  a 
God  that  hidest  thyself,  0  God  of  Israel,  the  Saviour."  He  has  told  n& 
that  "  it  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing,"  and  our  Lord  Jesus 
has  said,  '*  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons,  which  the 
Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power."  When  he  does  make  known  to 
us  what  he  is  about  to  do,  it  is  not  to  gratify  our  curiosity  but  to  direct 
our  conduct.  In  this  case  the  Lord  speaks  aloud  concerning  his  inten- 
tions. He  had  grown  weary  with  chastening  his  people,  and  therefore  he 
was  about  to  withdraw  himself  from  them  and  leave  them  alone,  as  a 
man  leaves  a  hopeless  work,  or  as  a  judge  leaves  the  bench  and  gives  over 
the  prisoner  to  condemnation.  He  says,  "  I  will  go  and  return  to  my 
place,"  as  if  his  waiting  time  was  over,  and  he  would  no  longer  remain 
in  their  midst  to  be  provoked  by  their  obstinacy.  This  withdrawal  would 
occasion  the  non-acceptance  of  their  prayers  and  offerings,  even  as  he 
had  said  in  a  former  verse,  "  They  shall  go  with  their  flocks  and  with 
their  herds  to  seek  the  Lord ;  but  they  shall  not  find  him ;  he  hath 
withdrawn  himself  from  them."  This  he  tells  them,  in  order  that 
they  may  be  led  to  implore  him  to  remain  with  them ;  or  that  if  he  be 
alr^y  gone,  they  may  by  hearty  confession  of  their  sin,  and  an  imme- 
diate seeldng  of  his  face,  prevail  upon  him  once  more  to  visit  them  in 
his  grace.  If  God  is  about  to  go  then  all  is  going,  even  hope  itself  is 
removing.  The  divine  departure  is  the  worst  of  calamities,  and  there- 
fore it  is  but  right  that  those  who  are  threatened  with  such  a  judgment 
should  put  their  thoughts  together  and  consider  their  ways,  and  use  the 
best  means  to  hold  him  by  the  skirts  ere  vet  he  has  departed,  or  to  bring 
him  back  again  before  he  has  effectually  closed  the  door  between  him  and 
them.  There  ^ould  be  an  eager  desire  to  brin^  the  King  back  that  once 
more  the  heart  may  sun  itself  in  the  light  of  his  fieivour.  Dear  friends, 
I  shall  speak  this  morning  with  the  most  anxious  desire  to  be  practical ; 
longing  and  praying  in  my  heart  that  wherever  sin  has  began  to  separate 
No.  1,483. 


386  KETROPOLITAH  TABBRNJLOLE  PULPIT. 

between  us  and  Grod  we  may  be  stirred  up  to  acknowledge  our  offences 
and  to  seek  his  &oe,  and  tliat  where  such  a  separation  hais  long  existed 
there  may  arise  an  intense  desire  of  the  whole  soul  to  return  from  its 
banishment  and  draw  near  to  God. 

We  shall  this  morning  use  our  text  first  in  reference  to  owr  national 
troubles,  for  the  words  were  originally  spoken  with  regard  to  the  national 
troubles  of  Israel  and  Judah  ;  secondly,  we  shall  use  it  in  reference  to 
our  personal  trials  as  beUovers;  and  then,  thirdly,  in  its  relation  to  Me 
personal  trials  ofihs  unconverted.  Lessons  may  here  be  learned  instruc- 
tive in  each  of  the  three  cases.  May  the  Holy  Ghost  q)eak  the  truth 
home  to  the  heart. 

I.  And  first  with  regard  to  OUR  pbesbut  vationai.  troubles. 
I  desire  to  speak  of  these  thines  as  before  God  in  all  sincerity  and  sim- 
plicity. I  ^ow  it  is  impossible  to  touch  upon  such  a  subject  without 
being  suspected  of  political  bias,  but  I  can  truly  declare  that  from 
all  such  partiality  I  desire  to  be  freed,  that  I  may  not  speak  as  a  partisan, 
but  as  the  servant  of  the  living  God.  Calmly  and  solemnly  would  I 
speak  w«rds  of  soberness  and  truth  and  justice.  It  is  a  burden  to  my 
heart  to  speak  a  hard  word  of  my  own  beloved  country,  and  if  I  seem  to 
do  so  it  is  not  in  wantoimess,  but  because  of  a  pressure  upon  my 
conscience  whioh  will  not  let  me  be  silent. 

Surely  no  one  will  deny  that  our  country  is  passing  through  a  season 
of  great  and  grievous  adversity.  We  have  been  perplex^  for  many 
months,  and  even  for  years,  with  perpetual  rumours  of  wars.  For  a  long 
time  no  man  knew  when  he  went  to  rest  at  night  but  what  the  journal 
of  the  morning  would  inform  him  that  our  nation  had  plunged  into  war 
with  one  at  least  of  the  great  powers  of  Europe.  Our  poucy  has  been 
such,  whether  wise  or  unwise,  that  we  have  been  constantly  on  the  verge 
of  conflict.  It  is  wonderfrd  that  we  have  escaped  from  embroiling  our- 
selves in  long  and  serious  war,  for  many  a  time  the  flames  of  contention 
have  threatened  a  general  conflagration.  This  disquietude  of  itself  has 
been  a  serious  injury  to  the  prosperity  of  our  country,  for  trade  and  com- 
merce make  prosperous  voyages  upon  the  waters  of  peace,  but  even  before 
those  waters  are  disturbed  by  the  storms  of  actual  war,  while  only  the 
threat  of  battle  rufiles  the  sur&oe,  they  make  small  headway  or  are  driven 
back.  Commerce  is  timid  as  a  dove,  and  is  fluttered  by  every  turmoil 
or  whisper  of  coming  trouble.  In  a  thousand  ways  political  agitations 
stab  at  the  heart  of  national  prosperity. 

In  addition  to  this  we  have  been  actually  engaged  in  two  wars  at  the 
least,  wars  certainly  expensive  and  questionably  expedient.  In  these 
two  conflicts  it  was  impossible  for  us  to  gain  honour,  since  they  were 
cases  of  the  mighty  assailing  the  feeble.  Laurels  gained  from  nations  so 
far  inferior  to  us  would  have  been  unworthy  of  a  place  upon  the  brow  of 
a  brave  nation.  We  have  invaded  one  country  and  then  another  wiUi 
no  better  justification  than  the  law  of  superior  force,  or  the  suspicion 
of  future  dianger.  Disaster  has  followed  upon  the  heels  of  disaster,  and 
at  the  end  of  it  all  there  are  great  expenses  to  be  met.  Our  acts  of 
aggression  must  be  paid  for  not  only  with  the  blood  of  our  soldiers,  but 
with  the  sinews  and  sweat  of  our  working  men.  Besalts  of  industry 
^oh  ought  to  have  gone  to  support  the  arts  and  promote  the  comfort 
"^    '^vanoement  of  the  race  have  been  thrown  away  in  wasteful  fisats  of 


THE  PBBSENT  CRISIS.  887 

arms.  The  food  which  should  have  fed  our  children  has  been  flung  into 
ihe  mouth  of  the  lion,  to  be  deyouied  by  war,  that  its  evil  spirit  may 
become  yet  more  ravenous.  Wilful  waste,  it  is  to  be  feared,  will  be  fol- 
lowed by  woeful  want  unless  God  in  his  mercy  shall  interpose.  We  have 
meddled  in  many  things,  and  have  threatened  at  least  three  of  the  great 
quarters  of  the  globe  either  with  our  fleets  or  our  armies.  Nothing 
<x>uld  content  us  till  we  had  drawn  the  sword  against  a  braye  though 
tsayage  people,  whose  fighting  may  well  be  fierce,  since  it  is  for  their 
inyaded  fatherland.  These  wars^  whatever  their  issue,  are  serious 
calamities. 

On  the  back  of  all  this  war  has  come  depression  in  trade.  Eyerywhcre 
ihere  is  complaining,  and  not  without  cause.  Even  the  most  cheerful 
of  men,  who  Imye  always  been  rejoicing  when  others  have  lamented,  begin 
at  last  to  look  very  serious,  and  to  own  that  the  times  are  threatening. 
Striving  tradesmen  wonder  whether  they  shall  be  able  to  "  provide  things 
honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men."  Many  a  man  now  jplans  and  labours, 
but  his  care  and  toil  earn  but  a  scant  reward.  All  trade  is  dull,  and 
some  trade  is  dead.  Some  branches  of  industry  are  already  paralysed, 
and  there  is  but  little  prospect  of  their  ever  being  revived.  The  land 
mourns,  and  men's  hearts  sink  for  fear.  Matters  are  not  bo  bad  as 
despondency  would  paint  them,  but  even  hope  is  unable  to  draw  a  cheerful 
picture.  It  is  a  day  of  darkness  and  of  gloominess,  a  day  of  clouds  and 
of  thick  darkness. 

As  if  all  this  were  not  enough,  the  heavens  refuse  to  assist  the  processes 
of  husbandry.  For  the  most  part  the  crop  of  hay,  so  needful  for  the 
oaitle,  may  be  regarded  as  lost,  and  now  the  great  peiil  is  upon  the  com. 
In  some  places  the  com  is  too  backward  to  have  suffered  much  at  present, 
but  in  others  the  prospects  are  dark  indeed.  It  seems  certain  that  a 
oontinuance  of  this  constant  rain  must  deprive  us  of  the  most  precious 
iraits  of  the  earth.  Farmers  are  beginning  to  cry  out  bitterly,  and  there 
is  a  demand  that  prayer  should  be  offered  in  all  the  churches  for  fair 
weather.  May  God  be  pleased  to  look  upon  our  land  and  deliver  us  in 
this  hour  of  trouble,  for  mdeed  it  is  a  time  of  loss  and  ruin  to  thousands ! 
If  ever  prayer  was  needed  it  is  surely  at  this  hour.  You  who  live  in 
London  do  not  know  much  about  what  is  happening  to  the  crops,  and 
what  the  eye  does  not  see  the  heart  does  not  me,  but  to  our  agricultural 
fiiends  this  ill  weather  is  a  matter  of  most  serious  consideration,  and  they 
are  suffering  very  heavily.  No  one  can  doubt  that  the  badness  of  trade 
affects  the  farmer  in  common  with  the  rest  of  the  community,  and  now 
comes  the  further  burden  of  sunless  skies,  winter  in  summer,  and  the 
clouds  returning  after  the  rain. 

In  the  first  matter,  that  of  a  warlike  policy,  we  may  by  God's  goodness 
make  a  change.  It  may  be  possible  that  ere  long  better  principles 
will  come  to  the  front,  and  we  may  no  longer  be  made  to  appear  as  a  nation 
of  snarlers  and  growlers,  breathing  deSanoe,  and  delignting  in  war. 
<jod  grant  it  speedily  1  But  as  to  the  two  other  matters,  what  can  wo 
do  ?  We  are  powerless  to  quicken  trade,  we  are  certainly  powerless  to 
stay  the  bottles  of  heaven.  If  God  wills  it,  the  clouds  will  gather  from 
day  to  day,  and  drench  our  fields  with  their  pitiless  downpour.  Deluge 
will  follow  deluge  till  the  com  shall  rot  in  the  fields  if  God  so  determines. 
Prayer  is  therefore  desired,  and  well  it  may  be.    But  by  some  prayer  is 


888  ICETSOFOLITAK  TABEBKAOLB  PULPIT. 

desired  as  if  it  were  quite  certain  tliat  if  certain  pions  words  are  repeated 
the  rain  must  necessarily  cease  and  the  weather  become  &TonraUe.  I 
am  not  quite  so  sure.  Let  prajer  be  offered  by  all  means,  but  only  under 
certain  conditions  can  it  prove  effectual.  I  Imow  of  many  reasons  why 
it  may  be  possible  that  such  prayers  as  are  likely  to  be  offered  will  not  be 
heard,  but  instead  thereof  the  threatened  judgment  of  Gk)d  may  neyer- 
theless  come  upon  us.  I  desire,  this  morning,  to  speak  about  prayer  in 
the  way  of  warning,  lest  men  should  place  an  unwise  confidence  in  the 
formality  of  reading  a  form  of  prayer  m  churches,  or  uttering  extempore 
formalities  in  meeting-houses.  Few  men  believe  more  thoroughly  in  the 
power  of  real  prayer  than  I  do,  and  I  have  tested  and  proved  it  in  many 
remarkable  ways  so  fully  that  I  can  have  no  doubts  as  to  its  effioacy,  but 
heartily  magnify  the  name  of  our  prayer-hearing  God.  But  still  we 
must  use  our  understandings,  lest  we  be  deceived,  and  come  to  expect 
what  we  shall  not  receive.  I  would  call  to  your  recollection  the  fact 
that,  under  certain  circumstances,  God  does  not  answer  prayer.  Our 
text  says,  "I  will  go  and  return  to  my  place,  till  they  acknowledge  their 
offence'';  and,  if  this  be  the  case,  there  will  be  no  answering  of 
prayer  till  repentance  is  manifested.  Sometimes  the  heavens  are  brass, 
even  to  good  men,  and  their  cries  reverberate  and  come  back  into 
their  own  ears,  not  without  a  btessing  to  themselves,  but  still  without 
any  visible  reply  as  to  the  people  for  whom  their  intercessions  were 
offered.  It  is  not  every  sort  of  prayer  that  God  will  hear,  for  he 
saith  by  his  servant  Isaiah,  '^  When  ye  spread  forth  your  hands,  I  will 
hide  mine  eyes  from  you :  yea,  when  ye  make  many  prayers,  I  will  not 
hear :  i/our  Mnds  are  full  of  blood,"  (Is.  i.  1 5.)  Intercession  is  sometimes 
useless,  for  Jeremiah  tells  us,  *'  Then  said  the  Lord  unto  me,  Thon^ 
Moses  and  Samuel  stood  before  me,  yet  my  mind  could  not  be  tow^ 
•this  people."  (Jer.  xv.  1.)  Ezekiel  also  warns  us  that  the  presence  of 
the  godly  may  not  at  all  times  avert  judgment,  for  thus  saith  the  Lord, 
**  Son  of  man,  when  the  land  sinneth  against  me  by  trespassing  grievously, 
then  will  I  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  it,  and  will  break  the  staff  of 
the  bread  thereof,  and  will  send  famine  upon  it,  and  will  cut  off  man 
and  beast  from  it:  though  these  three  men,  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job, 
were  in  it,  they  should  deliver  but  their  own  souls  by  their  righteous- 
ness, saith  the  Lord  God."  (Ezek.  xiv.  13,  14.)  David,  doubtless, 
prayed  earnestly  that  he  might  escape  from  the  chastisement  of  his 
sin  when  he  numbered  the  people,  but  it  could  not  be  removed.  He 
l\ad  a  choice  of  three  evils,  but  one  of  the  three  was  inevitable.  When 
God  has  come  to  this  pass  with  a  people,  that  he  must  and  wiU  smite 
them,  prayer  is  their  only  resource,  and  even  that  mav  fail  to  avert  the 
threatened  stroke.  A  child  may  have  so  transgressed  that  his  father  may 
feel  bound  to  punish  him,  and  then  he  will  not  spare  the  rod  because  of 
his  crying.  1  pray  God  that  the  rain  may  cease,  but  if  it  should  be 
continued  it  will  not  be  because  the  Lord  cannot  help  us,  or  has  ceased 
to  answer  prayer.  Here  is  the  secret  of  it  all,  and  with  trembling  do  I 
quote  the  words :  **  Behold,  the  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened,  that  it 
cannot  save;  neither  his  ear  heavy,  that  it  cannot  hear:  but  voar 
iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and  your  God,  and  your  sins  have 
hid  his  face  frt)m  you,  that  he  will  not  hear.  For  your  hands  are  defiled 
with  blood:'    (Is.  lix.  1—8.) 


THE  PBBSSST  0BI8IS*  889 

Beinem1)ery  too,  that  not  only  may  God  withdraw  himself  in  an^r, 
but  it  may  be  hia  determination  to  punish  a  people  out  of  a  &r-seemg 
design  for  their  good.  Perhaps,  as  a  nation^  we  haye  had  too  much 
prosperity.  Ease  and  plenty  have  begotten  pride  and  luxury,  and  these 
may  haye  weakened  the  spirit  of  the  nation.  It  may  haye  become  abso« 
lutely  necessary  for  this  &youred  nation,  if  it  is  to  be  still  the  strong- 
bold  of  liberty  and  the  fortress  of  gospel  truth,  that  it  should  again 
endure  those  northern  blasts  of  adyersity  which  haye  aforetime  strength- 
ened  it  at  heart.  It  will  not  be  the  first  time  that  our  land  has  suffered 
for  her  good.  Bad  hairests  and  decaying  trade  are  not  new  things  to 
Englishmen*  There  linger  amon^  us  now  a  few  yenerable  men  and 
women  who  can  tell  us  of  the  straits  of  the  old  war  time,  of  how  there 
was  great  scantiness  of  bread,  and  heayiness  of  taxation,  and  frequent 
alarms  from  abroad  and  riots  at  home.  What  a  long  and  dreary  time  it 
was  when  the  sound  of  cannon  might  almost  be  heara  across  the  straits, 
and  watchfires  were  ready  on  eyery  diff  and  height !  Yet  good  came 
of  the  afl9iction,  and  since  that  gloomy  time  the  country  has  made  rapid 

frogress  in  many  respects,  and  cspecisJly  in  freedom,  ciyil  and  religious, 
t  may  be  so  again.  I  would  not  mBh  ill  to  my  country,  but  if  our 
fellow  men  will  not  remember  God  except  in  adyersity,  adyersiiy  itself 
might  be  desired  by  the  kindest  heart.  If  true  religion  is  to  be  cast 
into  the  dust  by  boastfrd  infidelity,  if  a  bastard  popery  is  to  be  allowed 
to  occupy  our  national  churches,  if  drunkenness  is  to  remain  shameless 
and  abnost  uniyersal,  if  the  language  of  the  common  people  is  to  become 
filthy  and  obscene,  if  the  excutation  of  one  fieiyoured  sect  aboye  its 
fellow  Christians — ^a  crying  deed  of  injustice — is  perpetually  to  endure, 
if  our  nation  is  to  shed  the  blood  of  weaker  nations,  and  send  its 
armies  into  lands  which  are  none  of  ours,  then  it  will  not  be  a  strange 
thing  if  the  Lord  resolyes  to  nunish,  and  it  will  be  hard  for  the  righteous 
man  to  find  an  argument  witn  which  to  plead  for  pity.  When  the  offence 
is  repented  of  the  punishment  will  be  withdrawn,  but  can  we  expect 
pardon  on  other  terms?  Can  we  eyen  ask  for  it?  The  yerdict  of  the 
sternly  just  would  rather  be,  "  Let  the  rod  fall "  than  "Let  it  be  with- 
drawn ;"  if  only  by  seyere  means  the  nation  can  be  made  to  put  away  its 
eyil  deeds.  In  our  text  God  declares  that  he  will  not  giye  audience  to 
his  erring  people,  but  will  retire  into  his  secret  place  until  they  acknow- 
ledge the  offence  and  seek  his  face.  It  may  be  so  with  our  nation  at 
this  time,  and  if  it  be  we  need  to  be  exhorted  to  something  more  than 
public  prayer ;  there  is  need  of  a  work  more  thorough  and  more  difficult 
than  the  public  use  of  a  deyotional  form. 

But,  saith  one,  "  We  hope  we  shall  haye  national  prayer."  I  hope  so, 
too,  but  will  tliere  be  a  national  confession  of  sin  ?  If  not — ^how  can  mere 
prayer  ayail?  WiU  there  be  a  ej^eral desire  to  do  that  which  is  just  and 
right  between  man  and  man  ?  Will  Uiat  be  a  declaration  that  England's 
policy  is  neyer  to  trample  on  the  weak  or  pick  a  quarrel  for  her  own 
aggrandizement  ?  Will  there  be  a  loathing  of  the  pnnciple  that  British 
miereaU  are  to  be  our  guiding  star  instead  of  justice  and  nght  ?  Personal 
interests  are  no  excuse  for  doing  wrone;  if  they  were  so  we  should  haye 
to  exonerate  the  worst  of  thieyes,  for  Uiey  will  not  inyade  a  house  until 
their  personal  interests  inyite  them.  Perhaps  the  midnight  robber  may 
jet  learn  to  plead  that  he  only  committed  a  burglary  for  fear  another 


S90'  METROPOLITAN  TABERl^ACLB  PULPIT. 

thief  should  take  the  spoil,  and  make  worse  use  of  it  than  he.  Does  the 
footpad  stop  a  passenger  on  the  road  for  any  other  than  his  own  interests  ? 
Wlien  our  oato  interests  are  our  policy,  nobility  is  dead  and  true  honour 
is  departed ;  but  I  fear  that  only  a  minority  are  of  this  mind.  Will  the 
nation  repent  of  any  one  of  its  sins  ?  Will  it  settle  itself  down  like  the 
people  of  Jerusalem  during  the  great  rain  of  Ezra's  time  and  do  that 
which  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God?  Eemember  what  they  said  in  that 
day  :  '^  The  people  are  many,  and  it  is  a  time  of  much  rain,  and  we  are 
not  able  to  stand  without,  neither  is  this  a  work  of  one  day  or  two :  for 
we  are  many  that  have  transgressed  in  this  thing:"  If  stem  reformation 
went  with  supplication,  I  am  persuaded  that  prayer  would  prevail ;  but 
while  gin  is  gloried  in  my  hopes  find  little  ground  to  rest  upon. 

But  will  there  be  general  prayer  ?  No,  there  will  not.  I  speak  sadly, 
but  I  speak  no  more  than  the  tnith.  There  are  numbers  among  us  who 
say  tliat  prayer  is  of  no  use  with  regard  to  the  winds  and  the  clouds,  for 
certain  laws  gorem  the  weather,  and  prayer  cannot  affect  those  laws. 
These  men,  therefore,  will  not  pray,  and  there  are  multitudes  of  others  of 
like  spirit  whose  atheism  is  practical  though  it  is  unavowed.  How,  then, 
can  prayer  be  general  when  such  vast  numbers  utterly  disregard  it? 
Turn  your  eyes  to  Nineveh.  When  Jonah  threatened  that  great  city, 
and  upon  its  repentance  the  judgment  was  withdrawn,  of  what  character 
was  its  humiliation  ?  From  the  king  on  the  throne  even  to  the  beasts  in 
the  field  all  were  clothed  with  sackcloth,  and  fasted,  and  cried  out  to  God, 
and  therefore  we  marvel  not  that  he  heard  them.  Will  there  be  any 
such  crying  to  God  among  us  ?  I  trow  not.  A  defiant  silence  will  seal 
millions  of  lips.  But  what  of  those  who  are  supposed  to  pray ;  are  all 
these  men  of  the  Elias  stamp,  whose  fervent  prayer  could  open  or  shut 
the  windows  of  heaven  ?  We  dare  not  put  much  confidence  in  the 
prayera  which  will  be  offered.  Will  they  be  offered  in  fiiith  by 
a  tenth  of  those  who  will  repeat  them.  I  wish  I  could  hqpe  so.  By 
many  the  public  prayer  will  be  regarded  as  absolutely  ridiculous,  and 
by  many  more  as  a  mere  matter  of  form,  which  it  is  proper  to  use,  but  in 
which  no  confidence  whatever  can  be  placed.  Do  not  therefore  say,  if 
the  rain  should  continue  by  the  month  together,  that  prayer  was  ordered 
by  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbuiy,  and  that  Qtod  did  not  hear  it,  and 
therefore  all  prayer  is  idle.  No,  but  see  what  kind  of  prayer  it  will  be, 
and  how  little  connected  it  vdW  be  with  confession,  and  how  little  it  will 
be  general,  and  how  little  it  vdU  be  sincere,  and  then  you  will  not  wonder 
if  no  coinfortable  answer  comes  of  it.  It  may  be  that  my  text  will  be 
the  sole  answer  of  the  Lord — *^  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  place,  till  they 
acknowledge  their  offence,  and  seek  my  face :  in  their  affliction  they  will 
seek  me  early." 

What  then  is  to  be  done  ?  This  much  is  to  be  done.  All  hope  for  a 
country  lies  in  the  true  believers  who  dwell  therein.  Bemember  Sodom, 
and  how  it  would  have  been  spared  had  there  been  ten  righteous  men 
found  therein,  and  know  that  ye  also  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  by  whom 
it  is  to  be  conserved.  Loathe  the  spirit  of  those  who  say  that,  because 
we  are  citizens  of  heaven  we  are  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  con- 
cerns of  men  below.  A  more  un-Christianlike  sentiment,  a  more  selfish 
sentiment,  never  degraded  spiritual  minds.  Wherever  the  Jews  dwelt  in 
^He  days  of  their  scattering  they  were  commanded  to  care  for  the  good  of 


THB  FBXSlirr  0BI8IEL  891 

the  people  among  whom  they  dwelt.  Here  are  the  words  of  the  Lord  by 
Jeremiah  :  '^  Seek  the  peace  of  the  city  whither  I  have  caused  yon  to  he 
carried  away  captiveSy  and  pray  nnto  the  Lord  for  it :  for  in  the  peace 
thereof  shall  ye  hare  peace."  Sorely  Christians  are  not  to  be  less  generooa 
than  Jews.  Happily  we  are  not  imder  a  despot ;  in  England  we  are  our 
own  govemorSy  and  the  man  who  in  this  lana  does  nothmg  to  secure  the 
good  government  of  the  country  is,  by  his  silence,  on  the  side  of  wrong* 
You  cannot  shirk  your  reqponsibility  anyhow  except  by  clearing  out  or 
the  land  altogether,  and  then  if  it  suffers  by  your  absence  you  wiu  still  be 
found  guilty.  You  are  part  and  parcel  of  Uie  nation,  for  you  share  in 
its  protection  and  priyifeges,  and  it  is  yours  as  Cluristian  m^n  to  feel 
that  you  are  bound  m  return  to  do  all  you  can  in  the  midst  of  it  to  nro^ 
mote  truth  and  righteousness.  What  then  ?  What  course  eliould  we- 
now  pursue?  Let  us  make  confession  of  sin  on  behalf  of  the  people  as 
Moses  and  Jeremiah  and  Daniel  did  aforetime.  You  may  not  consider 
that  to  be  sin  which  I  judge  to  be  so,  but,  n^  brotiier,  you  see  sin 
enough  all  around  you  of  one  sort  or  another.  Take  it  to  yourself,  and 
as  the  high  priest  went  in  to  the  holy  {dace  to  plead  for  the  people,  so  act 
you  as  a  priest  before  Qod,  in  your  quiet  personal  devotions.  Confess 
the  sin  of  this  nation  before  God.  If  it  will  not  repent,  repent  for  it.. 
Stand  as  a  sort  of  consecrated  sponsor  before  Ood,  and  let  the  sin 
lie  on  your  heart  tiU  you  fall  on  your  fece  before  the  Most  High. 
Bemember,  the  saints  are  intercessors  with  6od  for  the  people.  Ye 
are  Ood's  remembrancers,  and,  as  ye  are  called  to  make  mention  of 
his  name,  keep  not  silence  day  nor  night,  but  in  this  hour  of  trouble 
pour  out  your  hearts  before  him.  Qet  you  up  to  your  Carmeb 
and  cry  aloud,  you  that  know  how  to  cry  unto  Ood,  that  he  may 
send  aeliverance,  and  when  you  have  prayed  for  this  people  and 
asked  the  Lord  to  forgive  its  sin,  and  also  to  take  away  the  cluustising 
rod,  then  all  of  you  promote  by  your  daily  Uves,  your  precepts,  and  your 
actions, '' whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest,  what- 
soever things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are 
lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report."  Be  on  the  side  of  temper- 
ance and  sobriety:  be  on  the  side  of  peace  and  of  justice;  be  on  the  side 
of  everything  that  is  according  to  the  mind  of  Gkxi,  and  according  to  the- 
law  of  love.  Love  Qod  and  your  fellow  men,  and  seek  to  promote  all 
interests  which  look  that  way.  I  believe  that  a  country  can  never  have  a 
larger  blessing,  a  truer  safeguard  for  the  present,  or  a  firmer  security 
for  its  fature  greatness,  than  a  band  of  praying  men  and  women, 
who  make  mention  of  it  before  the  throne  of  G^  English  history 
from  the  first  day  till  now  is  as  full  of  instruction  as  the  history  of 
Israel  from  Egypt  even  to  Babylon.  Did  you  ever  read  Cowper's- 
wonderful  description  of  the  care  which  God  has  taken  of  this  little 
island,  how  he  has  favoured  and  protected  it  ?  When  all  the  nations: 
were  in  arqis  against  it  they  could  not  touch  its  shore,  for  God  was^ 
there :  and  on  the  other  hand  the  Lord  has  laid  us  low,  and  made  us  suffer, 
when  we. have  boasted  of  our  fleets  and  armies.  Our  nation  has  been  as- 
much  under  the  peculiar  and  especial  providence  of  €k>d  as  were  the 
descendants  of  Jacob  themselves,  and  therefore  God  deals  with  ns  as  he- 
dges not  deal  >\ith  other  nations.  The  smothering  of  black  men  with, 
mnokc  in  the  caves  to  which  they  had  fled,  the  burning  down  of  human 


392  METBOFOUTAK  TABXBVAOLK  PULPIT, 

habitations,  and  the  hunting  of  men  as  if  they  were  wild  beasts,  is  a 
greater  iniquity  with  us  than  it  would  have  been  in  savageSy  or  even  ia 
Papists  or  Mahomedans.  Our  religion  is  higher,  nobler,  purer  than  theirs; 
ana  we  ought  to  be  ashamed  to  act  as  uiey  do.  Bloodshed  by  some 
nations  God  winketh  at,  for  they  know  but  little  better,  but  a  country 
which  has  in  it  the  very  sun  of  the  gospel  shining  in  the  fiilness  of  its 
strength  should  set  to  the  world  an  example  which  it  can  follow,  and, 
if  it  does  not,  it  may  erpect  to  have  trouble  after  trouble  and  blow  after 
blow  from  the  hand  of  God. 

Thus  have  I  spoken  what  was  burdening  my  heart;  make  what  you 
will  of  it,  it  is  the  warning  of  an  honest  lover  of  his  country,  who  fears 
the  Lord  and  fears  none  Asides.  Judge  me  to  have  spoken  with  political 
bias  or  not,  and  censure  me  as  you  choose,  I  could  say  no  less,  or  I  would 
gladly  have  held  my  peace.  Before  God  I  am  clear  in  this  thing  of  any 
attempt  but  an  upright  one.  May  God  grant  that  my  feeble  protest 
may  touch  the  hearts  of  those  who  ought  to  feel  its  truth.  I  am  not 
very  sanguine  that  it  will  be  so,  for  we  have  fallen  upon  evil  times,  and 
the  heart  of  the  people  has  waxen  gross. 

II.  And  now,  secondly,  let  us  view  the  text  in  reference  to  our 
PERSONAL  TBIALS  AS  BELIEVERS.  Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  now 
commune  with  one  another  concerning  the  ways  of  God  with  our  own 
souls.  The  Lord  will  not  cast  off  his  people;  notwithstanding  their 
&ults  they  are  his  own  children,  and  they  shall  be  his  children  for  ever. 
But  when  his  children  sin,  Grod  is  sure  to  chasten  them  for  it.  *'  You  only 
have  I  known  of  aU  the  people,  therefore  will  I  punish  you  for  your  ini- 
quities." He  leaves  his  enemies  alone  for  awhile,  but  he  smites  his  sons. 
His  foes  shall  go  unpunished  till  the  end  shall  be ;  but  as  for  his  beloved, 
he  is  exceedingly  jealous  over  them,  and  he  will  make  them  smart  when 
they  sin.  Has  the  Lord  been  chastening  anv  of  us  of  late  ?  Has 
the  moth  been  in  our  estates,  or  has  the  lion  oeen  tearing  our  peace  ? 
Let  us  turn  at  his  rebuke;  let  us  say  unto  the  Lord,  ''Show  me 
wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me.  Lord,  if  thou  art  smiting  me,  I 
would  not  be  as  the  horse  or  as  the  mule  which  have  no  understanding, 
but  I  would  turn  unto  thee  at  once,  before  thou  smitest  me  again.'' 
It  is  good  to  repent  at  once,  and  seek  our  heavenly  Father*s  face 
betimes. 

For,  note  next,  when  chastisements  are  of  no,  avail  withdrawment 
follows.    The  Lord  has  promised  that  he  will  not  forsake  his  people, 
nor  will  he  utterly  do  so,  but  there  are  withdrawments  which  are  not 
included  in  that  promise.    God  may  so  hide  himself  ^om  his  servants 
that  they  may  have  no  conscious  fellowship  with  him,  no  enjoyment  of 
his  word,  no  power  in  prayer;  in  fact,  they  may  pray  and  he  may  shut 
out  their  prayer.    Their  life  may  be  sapless  and  spiritless ;  joy  and  peace 
may  flee.    They  may  possibly  try  at  such  times  to  make  up  for  their  loss  by 
enjoying  the  world.    They  may  run  after  carnal  pleasures  and  rain  amuse- 
ments, but  they  cannot  fill  their  minds  therewith ;  they  are  spoiled  for 
such  empty  vanities ;  grace  has  made  them  incapable  of  finding  soul  food 
in  the  com  and  wine  of  earth :  they  must  have  their  God  or  otie.    Let 
me  tell  you  most  solemnly  that  it  is  a  very  sad  thing  when  Gfod  has 
withdrawn  from  a  believing  spirit,  and  the  more  holy  a  man  has  been 
the  more  sadly  will  he  lament  that  he  is  now  under  a  cloud,  and  the  more 


THE  PBESBNT  CBSSIB.  Sd3 

earnesUy  will  he  cry,  '^  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him,  that  I 
jnight  come  even  to  his  seat." 

When  these  witiidrawments  of  God  are  painfoUy  felt,  then  we  should 
begin  most  eagerly  to  search  out  the  sin  which  has  caused  them ;  for  sin 
is  at  the  bottom  of  it  alL  If,  believer,  there  be  a  quarrel  between  thy 
Beloved  and  thyself,  is  there  not  a  cause?  Our  Lom  Jesus  is  no  fitfcd 
lover,  who  in  a  pet  will  leave  the  soul  which  is  espoused  to  him  merely 
to  indulge  a  whim.  Far  otherwise ;  he  never  trifles  with  us,  but  treats 
our  love  as  a  sacred  thing.  There  is  some  grave  cause  whenever  the 
Beloved  frowns.  Now  for  a  thorough  search,  a  sweeping  of  the  house, 
and  a  cleansing  out  of  all  things  that  ofiend.  Througnout  the  heart,  the 
understanding,  and  the  lips  let  a  search  warrant  be  issued,  and  if  any  sin 
be  detected — and  it  will  not  be  long  before  it  will  be — ^let  it  be  brought 
to  light  and  judged.  Set  it  in  the  hght  of  Ood's  countenance  and  there 
confess  it  and  lament  it.  Make  no  apologies,  and  excuses,  and  explana- 
tions, but  honestly  confess  the  wrong  and  leave  it*  Hast  thou  restrained 
prayer?  Confess  it.  Hast  thou  neglected  the  reading  of  the  Word? 
Confess  it.  Hast  thou  been  neglectful  of  thy  children  and  thy  family  as 
to.  training  them  in  the  nurture  of  the  Lord  ?  Confess  it.  Has  there 
been  laxity  in  thy  contact  with  the  World?  Hast  tixou  given  way  to 
flippancy  and  levity  ?  Hast  thou  been  proud  ?  Hast  thou  been  slothful  ? 
Hast  thou  indulged  too  much  in  the  pleasures  of  the  table?  Has  thy 
heart  set  itself  upon  thy  wealth  ?  Then  bring  the  idols  out  and  let  thy 
heart  see  the  wounds  which  they  have  given  thee,  and  what  it  is  that 
thou  hast  doted  on,  and  what  these  things  are  which  have  come  in  be- 
tween thee  and  thy  Ood.  Surely  thou  mlt  be  ashamed  of  them  when 
thou  dost  consider  that  their  love  is  the  price  for  which  thou  hast  parted 
with  thy  Saviour's  presence.  Is  this  a  goodly  price  that  thy  Lord  was 
prized  at  by  thee  ?  Judas's  pieces  of  silver  were  not  more  contemptible 
than  these  poor  paltiy  bribes.  Lament  the  treachery  of  thy  heart  and 
hear  him  ask  thee,  '^  Lovest  thou  me  ?  "  nor  hesitate  to  answer,  "  Lord, 
thou  knowest  all  things,  thou  biowest  that  I  love  thee." 

But,  beloved,  when  you  have  obtained  a  sense  of  the  sin  or  sins  which 
separate  you  from  Ood,  and  have  made  a  full  confession,  then  take  care 
that  you  seek  the  Lord  with  hopefulness  and  confidence,  for,  notwith- 
standing all  this,  you  are  his  child  still,  and  must  not  give  way  to  a  para- 
lyzing despair.  You  are  married  unto  Christ,  and  there  is  no  divorce  with 
him,  ''for  the  Lord  the  Ood  of  Israel  saith  he  hateth  putting  away."  He 
will  not  cast  off  for  ever  nor  put  awdy  his  erring  spouse.  Gome,  there- 
fore, unto  him  with  humble  confidence.  He  hath  torn  and  he  will  heal, 
he  hath  smitten  and  he  will  bind  us  up.  Seek  his  face,  for  his  face  is 
towards  you.  The  veiy  face  of  Ood  is  Jesus  Christ.  The  Son  of  Ood  is 
he  in  whom  we  see  the  Father.  Even  as  you  see  a  man  in  his  counte- 
nance, so  Ood  is  seen  in  Christ.  Seek  you  Ood  in  Christ  Jesus,  for 
thereby  eood  shall  come  unto  you.  Do  not  say, ''  It  is  of  no  use,  I  have 
backslidden,  and  revolted  again  and  again,  and  he  will  now  refuse  me 
finally."  No,  he  will  not  reject  you.  xou  are  not  out  of  reach  of  his 
love ;  he  will  turn  again  and  have  compassion  on  you,  for  he  delights  in 
mercy.  If  he  withdraws,  it  is  only  that  you  may  sigh  after  him  and  seek 
after  him.  A  nurse,  when  her  little  child  will  go  away  from  her  and  &U 
into  danger,  will  sometimes  hide  herself  away  from  it,  to  teach  it  better. 


SU  HETBOPOLITAS  TIBBBVAGLE  PULPIT. 

She  sees  the  child  stilly  thongh  the  little  one  cannot  see  her.  She  is  near  to 
help,  bat  the  child  cannot  find  her,  and  so  it  begins  to  cry  for  her,  and 
does  not  rest  till  she  is  found.  Th^  child  will  not  so  soon  wander  again. 
Even  so  may  the  Lord  hide  his  £ace  to  make  ns  cry  after  him,  bat  he  is 
very  near  ns  sl\  the  while,  and  he  will  yet  be  found  of  ns.  **  Behold," 
saith  he,  "  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock ;  if  any  man  open  to  me  I  will 
enter  in."  It  is  not  much,  is  it,  to  open  the  door  ?  That  is  all  he  asks. 
Open  and  let  him  in,  for  he  adds,  ''and  I  will  sup  with  him."  **  Ah, 
Lord,"  say  yon,  **  we  have  no  provision  fit  for  thee."  But  know  assnredl  j 
he  brings  his  supper  with  him,  and  we  sup  with  him  and  he  with  ns. 
He  only  wants  you  to  lend  the  house,  by  opening  your  heart,  for  he  has 
brought  the  yiauds,  yea,  he  is  himself  our  bread  nrom  heaven.  Now,  to 
whom  is  this  spoken  ?  To  sinners?  No,  no,  it  is  spoken  to  the  church 
of  Laodicea,  which  was  ''neither  cold  nor  hot"  Her  Lord  was  ready  to 
spue  her  out  of  his  mouth,  and  yet  in  mercy  he  cries,  "  Behold,  I  stand 
at  the  door  and  knock."  0  backslider,  Jesus  waits  to  be  gradons  to  you. 
He  longs  to  restore  you.  Only  acknowledge  your  transgression  and 
return  to  him.  Be  of  good  cheer  as  to  acceptance,  for  he  casts  out  none 
who  come  to  him.  End  these  backsUdings,  and  there  need  be  no  m^re 
misery.  God  help  you  to  rise  this  very  &j  into  a  closer  walk  with  him, 
and  may  he  keep  you  by  his  side  for  ever. 

To  be  out  of  fellowship  with  God  is  for  the  heart  to  be  in  a  state  of 

Sdritual  disease.  Things  must  be  wrong  within  when  we  are  wrong  with 
od.  When  we  do  not  walk  in  the  lignt,  as  God  is  in  the  light,  there 
is  some  evil  in  the  eye  of  the  souL  Dread  the  evil,  and  cry  for  healing. 
To  be  away  from  Gk)d  is  to  be  in  a  state  of  spiritual  weakness.  Samsou 
may  shake  himself  as  at  other  times,  but  he  can  do  no  deeds  of  strength 
when  the  Lord  has  departed  from  him.  God  is  our  strength,  and  G(^*s 
hiding  makes  us  weak  as  water.  If  the  Lord  should  leave  us  we  cannot 
plead  with  him  and  prevail,  nor  can  we  plead  with  men  and  win  them 
for  Christ  Our  strength  has  departed,  both  towards  Gk)d  and  towards 
man,  when  our  fellowship  with  God  is  suspended.  Our  heart  cannot  leap 
like  a  young  roe  upon  the  mountains,  but  our  spirit  limps  as  one  whose 
bones  are  broken.  We  cannot  even  gaze  through  the  gates  of  pearl  to 
Bce  the  glory  which  the  Spirit  reveals,  for  our  eye  is  dim,  so  that  we  can- 
not see  afar  off  when  Jesus  is  away.  If  you  are  in  this  condition  you 
ire  in  an  evil  case ;  cai*king  care  invades  yon,  anxieties  annoy  you,  yonr 
temper  gets  the  mastery,  Satan  accuses,  and  oonsdence  trembles ;  yonr 
spirit  is  like  that  of  a  carnal  man,  and  you  are  apt  to  speak  unadvisedly 
with  your  lips,  and  to  be  readily  moved  by  every  external  influence.  What 
is  worse,  when  a  man  is  out  of  iellowship  with  God  he  is  in  danger  of  pre- 
sumptuous sins.  David  on  the  terraces  of  his  palace  had  not  been  walking 
with  God,  or  else  the  sight  of  Bathsheba  below  had  not  caused  him  so 
grievous  a  fall.  Lose  conununion  with  Christ,  and  yon  are  on  the  verge 
of  a  follv  which  will  stain  your  chaiacter  and  terribly  mar  your  life. 
It  ia  only  when  we  are  near  to  God  that  we  are  safe ;  therefore  let 
a  sense  of  danger  drive  us  to  him  at  once.  I  speak  from  a  widespread 
observation  as  well  as  from  an  inward  experienoe ;  there  is  but  a  step 
between  distance  from  God  and  the  nearness  of  temptation  and  sin.  If 
God  thinks  much  of  you  he  will  have  you  near  him,  or  else  he  will  make 
jou  miserable.    He  will  not  permit  you  to  rejoice  except  in  himself.    If 


THE  PSBSBlirr  CRISIS.  '895 

your  loTe  is  not  worUi  his  haring  you  idaj  love  whom  yon  like,  but  when 
he  loTes  you  much  he  will  be  very  jealous  over  you,  and  if  he  finds  yon 
are  content  to  be  without  his  company,  he  will  make  you  suffer  tor  sudi 
wantonness  and  ingratitude.  That  by-path  meadow  business,  that  going 
down  the  green  lane  to  get  off  the  flints  of  the  right  road,  that  getting 
away  from  Christ  to  have  a  taste  of  the  world's  sweet  delusions,  that 
coming  down  irom  our  high  places  as  if  we  had  grown  weary  of  being 
happy,  and  were  discontent^  with  an  angelic  life — ^all  that  means  a  suc- 
cession of  afflictions  and  regrets  which  can  only  at  the  very  best  end  in  our 
getting  to  Christ  again  with  broken  bones.  Such  wanderings  are  painful, 
end  how  they  may.  David's  career  before  his  sin,  how  ^^erent  it  was 
from  his  life  afterwards.  You  can  always  tell  which  psalms  he  wrote 
before  his  trani^ression,  they  are  so  jubilant,  so  fall  of  holy  rejoicing ;  but 
afterwards  when  he  sings,  it  is  in  a  bass  voice ;  he  sweeps  his  harp,  but 
the  strings  are  disordered ;  he  loves  his  God,  but  it  is  the  solemn,  tearful 
love  of  repentance  rather  than  the  bright  sparkling  love  of  delight  in 
God.  Do  not  err,  my  beloved  brethren,  for  error  brings  sorrow.  "  Little 
children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols."  If  you  have  gone  aside  to  evil, 
then  seek  early  the  face  of  God,  and  he  will  be  found  of  you  in  Christ 
Jesus. 

III.  And  now  my  time  is  almost  spent,  indeed  I  have  but  a  few  minutes 
to  use  on  the  third  head,  and  I  would  therefore  speak  few  words,  but 
speak  them  very  earnestly  indeed.  We  shall  now  think  of  the  perbokai* 
TRIALS  OF  THB  siNKBR.  Oh,  you  that  are  unconverted,  if  God  means 
to  save  you,  he  will  before  long  begin  by  chastening  you  in  body  or  in 
mind.  You  will  have  trouble.  You  are  a  wandering  sheep,  and  Gk)d 
will  send  his  black  dog  after  you  to  fetch  you  to  the  fold.  If  one 
trouble  does  not  do  it,  you  will  nave  another,  and  another,  and  another. 
Perhaps  I  speak  to  some  who,  as  the  result  of  providential  chastenings, 
and  the  work  of  conscience  on  their  spirit  have  already  been  aroused ; 
let  them  take  heed  of  trifling  with  their  awakenings.  After  that  earnest 
sermon,  or  after  reading  that  stirring  book,  you  did  begin  to  pray,  but 
your  desires  and  feelings  have  now  subsided.  I  would  have  you  greatly 
grieve  over  this.  Let  me  warn  you  that  God  may  withdraw  himseli 
from  you  altogether.  Some  have  been  sitting  in  this  Tabernacle 
now  for  years  from  whom  I  fear  God  has  withdrawn  himself;  for  you 
used  to  feel  much  moved  by  the  gospel,  but  it  is  not  so  now.  xou 
would  not  come  when  you  were  called  and  admonished,  but'  you  revolted 
more  and  more,  and  now  mercy  is  growing  weary  of  you.  You  were 
smitten  again  and  a^n,  but  you  still  rebelled,  and  now  God  says,  ^*  Let 
him  alone."  This  is  a  more  terrible  calamity  than  you  suspect ;  unless 
it  be  averted  it  will  be  your  ruin. 

I  may  be  speaking  to  some  strangers  here  who  at  one  time  had  a  dis* 
turbed  conscience,  but  they  have  grown  very  callous  of  late.  You  are  in 
danger  of  eternal  wrath,  but  you  are  wonderfully  easy.  You  can  even 
make  jokes  about  religion,  cannot  you  ?  Poor  souls !  I  fear  the  Lord 
has  given  you  over  for  a  time  at  least ;  I  hope  not  for  ever.  Do  you  ask 
me  what  you  shall  do  ?  I  reply  that,  according  to  our  text,  it  is  high 
time  for  you  to  seek  the  Lord.  When  vou  were  smitten  before  you  tried 
self-righteousness,  church-going,  chapel-going,  sacraments,  and  so  forth. 
As  the  prophet  says,  you  went  to  king  Jareb,  but  he  could  not  heal  you 


-896  UETBOPOUTAH  TABBBHACLB  PULPIT. 

of  yovLT  wounds.  You  must  now  retam  to  yoor  God,  or  yoa  vnH  never 
be  right.  It  is  vain  to  look  to  priests,  or  aeraments,  or  religiousnesses : 
:aU  these  things  put  together  are  nothing;  you  must  have  personal  deal- 
ings with  your  Uod,  and  you  must  confSis  your  sin  to  him,  or  you  will  be 
•eternally  undone.  Oo  and  do  it  this  morning.  Tdl  him  all  that  yon 
know  about  your  sin,  and  ask  him  to  have  mercy  upon  you  for  Jesos' 
sake.  Seek  to  know  him  as  he  manifests  himself  in  Jesus.  Be  willing 
to  believe  whatever  he  pleases  to  reveal.  Be  anxious  to  be  reconciled  to 
hinu  Long  to  be  at  peace  with  the  great  God  who  made  the  heavens 
:and  the  earth.  Why  should  there  be  a  quarrel  between  your  Creator 
«nd  your  soul  ?  The  way  of  reconciliation  is  by  the  blood  of  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ.  You  must,  therefore,  trust  Jesus,  and  you  shall  find  the 
peace  of  Ood.  Oh  may  his  Sjiirit  help  you  to  do  this  now.  Seek  him, 
^ud  seek  him  intensely,  resolving  that  you  will  never  cease  to  s^ 
till  you  find  God  full  of  mercy  and  love  to  yon.  Come,  I  pray  you,  and- 
turn  unto  the  Lord  now,  and  may  the  Holy  Spirit  aid  you  in  so  doing. 
He  hath  torn  and  he  wiU  heal  you.  He  hath  smitten  and  he  will  bind 
jbu  up.  After  two  days  will  he  revive  you»  in  the  third  day  he  will  raise 
you  up,  and  you  shall  live  in  his  sight. 

Goa  himself  must  heal  you,  or  you  will  never  be  healed.  He  who  has 
broken  your  heart  must  give  you  comfort  or  you  will  never  have  any. 
Hasten  to  your  chamber  at  once,  and  then  upon  your  knees  cry  out  unto 
God  with  the  prayer  of  &ith.  Be  not  content  with  your  own  sense  of 
fiin.  Do  not  say,  '^I  am  getting  on,  for  I  have  felt  my  guilt."  No,  your 
«ense  of  sin  may  be  but  the  first  drop  of  a  shower  of  eternal  remorse. 
Get  away  to  God  in  Christ,  and  rest  not  till  yon  are  there.  Oh,  if  I  had 
the  power  to  put  this  into  fitting  and  forcible  words,  I  would  implore 
'every  man  and  woman  that  I  look  upon  not  to  live  without  God.  He 
made  you,  and  you  cannot  be  happy  without  him.  While  he  is  angry 
with  you,  you  cannot  be  at  peace.  He  bids  you  come  to  him.  The 
«miting8  of  his  providence  are  meant  to  separate  you  from  the  love  of 
-sin,  and  drive  you  to  your  God.  In  Jesus  Chnst  the  great  Father 
stretehes  out  his  arms  to  you  and  says,  *'  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason 
together :  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shaU  be  as  white  as 
finow ;  though  tney  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  Believe 
in  Jesus  and  live.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  call  ye 
upon,  him  while  he  is  near :  let  the  wicked  fbrsake  lus  way,  and  the  un- 
righteous man  his  thoughte,  and  let  him  return  unte  the  Lord,  and  be 
will  have  mercy  upon  him;  and  te  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly 
pardon."  God  bless  you,  my  beloved  Mends,  for  his  name's  sake. 
Amen. 


POBTION  OF  SCBIPTUBE  BEAD  BEFOBE  SeBMON — Hosca  V. 


Etmns  ebom  "Oub  Own  Hthk  Book."— COS,  C20,  C14. 


|9ld)[j)pte  ^nibmiMk  §a\pL 


OUE    MOTTO. 


%     ? 


Dbuvbbso  cast  Lobd's-dat  Mosimra,  Jitlt  20th,  1879,  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THX  HSTBOPOUTAK  TABSBNAOLE,  HEWIKGTON. 


*'  "Wifh  good  will  doing  Mrrioe,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men."— Eph«iiani  tL  7. 

Thbs  sentence  was  expressly  addressed^  in  the  first  place^  to  **  servants/' 
which  term  inclades^  and  first  of  all  intends,  those  who  unhappily  were 
shives.    There  were  many  slaves  in  the  Boman  Empire,  and  the  form  of 
bondage  which  then  existed  was  of  the  bitterest  kind.    I  can  imagine  a 
slave  becoming  a  Christian  and  so  finding  peace  as  to  his  former  guilt, 
and  obtaining  renewal  of  heart ;  and  then,  although  rejoicing  in  the 
Lord,  I  can  well  conceive  that  he  would  often  be  downcast  in  view  of  his 
sad  condition  as  a  bondsman.    I  see  him  sitting  down  and  moaning  to 
himself,  *'  I  am  a  bondsman  under  a  tyrant  master.    I  have  aheady  en« 
dured  many  cruelties,  and  may  expect  many  more.    I  would  be  free, 
but  there  is  no  hope  of  escape,  since  there  is  noplace  to  which  I  can  flee, 
for  Offisar's  arm  is  long,  and  would  reach  me  at  the  very  euds  of  the  earth. 
I  cannot  purchase  my  libertv,  nor  earn  it  by  long  years  of  flEdthfiil  ser- 
vitude; neither  .can  my  fellow-bondsmen  effect  our  deliverance  by 
rebellioD,  for  this  has  been  tried  and  has  ended  in  terrible  bloodshcKl.    1 
am  hopetessly  a  slave.    What  shall  I  do  ?    How  shall  I  sustain  my  fate  ? 
My  lim  is  well-nigh  intolerable :  would  to  Ood  it  were  at  an  end.*'    I 
can  imagine  the  poor  bondsman  goine  to  his  cramped  up  bed  under  the 
stair— for  in  any  hole  or  comer  the  Itoman  slave  might  find  such  little 
rest  as  was  allowed  him — and  there  he  would  almost  wish  to  deep  him- 
self into  another  world.   Being  a  Gluistian,  as  I  have  supposed,  he  pours 
out  his  heart  before  God  in  prayer,  and  in  answer  to  ms  ci^  the  Lord 
Jesus  sets  before  him  the  rich  consolation  which  he  has  provided  for  ail 
that  mourn,— consolation  strong  enough  to  enable  him  to  endure  to  the 
end,  and  glorify  the  name  of  Jesus  even  under  such  hard  conditions. 
"While  yet  troubled  in  mind  this  freeman  of  the  Lord,  who  is  yet  in  bonds 
to  man,  is  met  by  the  Saviour  himself.    He  appears  to  him — ^I  will  not 
say  in  such  form  as  could  be  perceived  by  the  eyes,  but  in  vision  clear 
enough  to  be  exceedingly  influential  over  his  spirit.    Jesus  stands  before 
him.    The  five  wounds  adorning  him  like  precious  rubies  are  infallible 
tokens;  the  fiuse  lit  up  with  ui  unearthly  splendour  is  still  marked  with 
^      N08.  1,484-5. 


898  •  MSTEOPOLITAH  71BBB5A0IiB  PULPIT. 

ihe  old  lines  of  sonow,  and  tfie  head  be&ra  fin  thom-croiMi  Um  iUiit 
ite  brow.  The  poor  slaye  casts  himself  at  his  Redeemer's  feet  with 
astonishment}  with  awe,  and  with  intense  delight;  and  then  I  think  I 
hear  those  dear  lips,  which  are  a9  lilies  dropping  sweet-smelling  myrrh, 
saying  to  his  poor  servant,  "  Fulfil  thy  service  Uravely.  Do  it  nnto  me. 
Forget  thy  tyrant  master  and  remember  only  me.  Bear  on^  work  on, 
suffer  on,  and  do  all  as  unto  me,  and  not  unto  men."  Then  I  think  I  see 
the  broken-hearted  captive  rising  up  refreshed  with  inward  strength,  and 
I  hear  him  say,  **  I  will  even  bear  the  yoke  until  my  Lord  shall  cidl  me 
away.  Unless  his  providence  shall  open  for  me  a  door  of  liberty  I  will 
patiently  abide  where  I  am  and  suffer  all  his  will ;  hopefully  and  joyfully 
serving  because  Tie  bids  me  do  it  ibr  his  sake."  A  vision  which  would  so 
greatly  comfort  the  poor  Soman  slave  in  his  extremity  may  well  stand 
before  each  one  of  us.  Let  us  each  hear  our  Saviour  say,  ''Live  unto  me, 
and  do  all  for  my  sake."  Our  service  is  so  much  more  pleasant  and  easy 
than  that  of  slaves,  let  us  perform  it  *'  with  good  will  doing  service,  as 
unto  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men."  Our  princely  motto  is  "  I  serve  : "  be 
this  sentence  emblazoned  on  our  banner,  and  used  as  the  battle-cry  of 
life's  campaign. 

Notice  well  that  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not  bid  us  leave  our  stations 
in  order  to  serve  the  Lotd.  He  does  not  bid  tm  fav&go  the  domestic 
relations  which  make  us  husbands  or  wives,  parents  or  children, 
masters  or  servants ;  he  does  not  suggest  to  us  to  put  on  ^  peculiar 
garb,  and  seek  the  seclusion  of  a  hennitege,  or  the  retirement  of  monastic 
or  conventual  life.  Nothing  of  the  kind  is  hinted  at,  but  he  bids  the 
servant  continue  in  his  or  her  service — **  with  good  will  doing  service." 
Our  great  Captain  would  not  have  you  h(^  to  win  the  victory  hy  leaving 
your  post.  He  would  have  yon  abide  in  your  trade,  calling,  or  ptofeflsioi^ 
and  all  the  while  liferve  the  Lord  in  it,  doing  the  will  of  God  firom  the 
heart  in  common  things.  This  is  the  practical  beauty  of  our  holj  &ith» 
that  when  it  casts  the  devil  out  of  a  man  it  sends  him  home  to  bless 
his  friends  by  tdling  them  how  great  things  the  Lord  has  done  Ax  him. 
Grace  does  not  trai^lant  the  tre^  but  bids  It  ov^iAadow  the  oU  house 
at  home  as  before,  ahd  brin^  forth  good  fimit  WheiB  it  is.  Grass  doek  not 
mskQ  us  unearthly,  though  it  makes  iis  tmWoridHy.  Troe  itligioa  diatifti* 
guishes  us  from  othbtif^  txba  as  otkr  Ldrd  Jesus  was  seftaiiite  firom 
sinne^^  but  it  does  n6t  ^htit  us  lip  oir  hMge  lis  rbuhd  abont  as  if  we  were 
too  good  or  tbo  t^iid^r  for  the  rough  rimiff^  bt  levorydaj  life.  It  does 
not  put  ^  ih  t)x»  Mt  hot  iM  Mnift  th«  Md  do\m,  %ut  it  t»ib  H^  in 
^mong  6itt  fdlb^-inbn  M  fiiSr  'j^bbd.  #ra<tt  nakss  ite  thb  0urnal»  sf 
Cod  while  ^iiill  we  at^  the  servfintil  of  ifaen  t  it  fenablee  ns  to  4o  th6  busi- 
ness of  heaven  while  we  are  attending  to  the  buUn^  of  earth :  it  fkax> 
tifies  the  common  duties  of  lifb  by  showing  ns  how  to  perform  them  in 
the  light  of  heaven.  The  love  of  Ghnst  modkes  the  lowliest  acts  snUime* 
As  the  sunlight  brightens  a  landscape  and  sheds  beauty  over  the  com- 
monest scene,  sb  does  the  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesos.  The  spirit  of 
ooDsecration  renders  the  offices  of  domestic  servitude  as  sabiitae  m  the 
worship  which  is  preisented  upon  the  Soa  of  glass  before  the  eternal 
throne,  by  spirits  to  whom  w^  courts  cf  heaven  ace  their  familiar 
home. 
'  I  ifuggest  mf  text  to   all  bdiev^ra  as  the  motto  of  their  fives. 


otm  xono.  S99 

Tniether  we  are  fl^rvantB  or  marten^  whethtr  we  are  poor  or  ricb,  lei 
tis  take  this  as  onr watchword,  "As  tQ  th$ Lard,  and  noi  to  men'*  Hence- 
forth may  this  be  the  engraving  of  onr  seal  aod  the  motto  of  our  coat  of 
arms ;  the  constant  i*ule  of  onr  life,  and  the  mm  of  onr  motive.  In 
advocating  this  gracious  aim  of  onr  beings  tet  ine  say  that  if  we  are 
enabled  to  adopt  this  motto  it  will,  first  of  all,  infiumiDe  our  wort  itself^ 
and,  secondly,  it  will  elevate  &ur  epirit  coneetning  thai  work.  Yet  let  mQ 
add,  thirdly,  that  if  the  Lord  shall  really  be  tlie  ail  in  all  of  our  lives,  t / 
is  nfler  all  only  what  hs  has  a  tighi  to  espsct,  and  what  we  are  under  a 
thousand  obligations  to  give  to  him. 

I.    Our  subject  opens  with  this  refleoiion,  that  if  henceforth  whether 
we  live  we  live  unto  the  Lord,  or  whether  we  die  we  die  unto  the  Lord, 

THIS  GOKSEGRATtOK    WlLti   OIIEATLT    tKFLUEHOB    OUH    SNTiaE  WORK. 

Do  you  say,  my  brother,  that  henoeforth  vour  whole  life  shall  be  a 
service  of  the  Liord  ?    Then  it  will  follow,  first,  that  yon  will  have  to 
live  Unih  a  single  eye  to  his  glciry.    Bee  how  in  verse  b  we  are  told, 
'*  Servants,  be  obedient  to  them  that  are  your  masters  according  to  the 
flesh,  with  fear  and  trembling,  in  biagleness  of  yonr  heart,  as  unto 
Christ."    If  we  do  indeed  live  ^'as  tc)  the  Lord,"  we  must  needs  live 
wholly  to  the  Lord.    The  Lotd  Jesus  is  a  most  engrossing  Master.    He 
has  said,  **  No  man  can  serve  two  masters,"  and  we  shall  find  it  so.    He 
will  have  everything  or  nothing.     If  indeed  he  be  onr  Lord  he  must  be 
sole  sovereign,  for  he  will  not  brocdc  a  rival.    It  comes  to  pass  then,  0 
Christian,  that  you  are  bound  to  Vm  ioic  Jeans  and  for  him  alone.    You 
mu^  have  no  co-ordinate  or  even  Bsooadaiy  <ibject  or  divided  aim :  if 
you  do  divide  your  heart  yonr  life  Will  be  a  failure.  As  no  dog  can  follow 
two  hares  at  one  time,  or  he  will  lose  both^  certainly  no  man  can  follow 
two  contrary  objects  and  hope  to  secnre  either  of  them.    No,  it  behoves 
a  servant  of  Christ  to  be  a  conoentrated  man :  his  affections  should  be 
bound  up  into  one  afi^ion,  and  that  afifoction  should  not  be  set  on 
things  on  the  earth,  but  on  things  above ;  his  heart  must  not  be  divided^ 
or  it  will  be  said  of  him  as  of  these  in  Hosea,  ''Their  heart  is  divided ; 
now  shaU  they  be  fimnd  wanting."    The  chamber  of  the  heart  is  far  too 
narrow  to  aeoommodalie  tli^  Kimr  of  kings  and  the  worlds  or  the  fleisl^ 
or  the  devil,  at  the  same  time.     We  have  no  wish,  deairey  ambition*  or 
exertion  to  spare  for  a  rival  lord,  tiie  servioe  of  Jesus  demands  and  de- 
serves all.    Such  JB  ^  onitieiioa  ef  this  object,  that  ail  a  man  hath 
or  can  have  of  reason  or  strength  must  be  spent  this  way  if  he  is  to  win. 
Nor  is  this  tbb  mndi  fer  our  great  Lord  to  expeet  from  th^se  for  whom 
he  has  done  so  muoli.    !ifo  whom  dioald  I  give  a  part  of  myself,  my 
Master  ?    Thou  hast  redeemed  me  wholly,  and  I  am  altogether  thine^ 
take  thon  full  nossiMioti  of  me!    Who  else  can  be  worthy  of  my  heart? 
Who  ebe  can  have  a  right  to  set  ibo'l  within  the  province  whereof  thou 
art  the  King?    Nay,  rde  done,  thon  blessed  and  only  Potentate!    As 
thon  ak)ne  hast  redeemed  me,  treading  the  winepress  of  wrath  alone  for 
me,  so  shalt  thou  be  sole  monarch  of  my  soul  I    Thou  art  all  my  salvation 
and  all  my  desire,  and  therefore  thou  shalt  have  all  my  homage  and  scr- 
rice.    With  such  a  Lord  to  be  served  the  current  of  our  life  must  run 
in  one  sole  channel^  that  he  may  have  it  all  and  none  may  run  to  waste. 
Next,  to  do  (tervice  to  the  Lord  we  musi  Uve  wiik  holy  ca^^ulness,  for 
What tatih tbi tiontoxt ?    Weareto  aerve  ''with  fear  and  trembling.*' 


400  lOBTROPOLITAir  TABKRNAOLB  PULPIT. 

In  the  Bervioe  of  God  we  should  use  great  care  to  aooom^ligh  our  veiy 

best,  and  we  shonld  fed  a  deep  aodety  to  pleaae  him  in  all  thingi. 

There  IB  a  trade  called  paper-Btainmg;  in  which  a  man  flings  oolonrsnpon 

the  paper  to  make  common  wall  decorations,  and  by  rapid  prooeoses  acres 

of  paper  can  be  speedily  finished.    Sappoee  that  the  paper-stainer  shoold 

laagh  at  an  eminent  artist  beoanse  he  had  coyered  sach  a  little  qpaoe, 

having  been  stippling  and  shading  a  little  tiny  piece  of  his  pictore  by 

the  honr  together^  sach  ridicnle  would  itself  be  ridiculous.    Now  tfao 

world's  way  of  rehgion  is  the  ]3aper-stainer's  way,  the  daubing  way ; 

there  is  plenty  of  it^  and  it  is  quictdy  done ;  but  God's  way,  the  narrow 

way,  is  a  careful  matter ;  there  is  but  litfle  of  it,  and  it  costs  thought, 

effort,  watchfulness,  and  care.    Yet  see  how  precious  is  the  work  of  art 

when  it  is  done,  and  how  long  it  lasts,  and  you  will  not  wonder  that  a 

man  spends  his  time  upon  it :  even  so  true  godliness  is  acceptable  with 

God,  and  it  endures  for  ever,  and  therefore  it  well  repays  the. earnest 

effort  of  Uie  man  of  Qoi.    The  miniature  painter  has  to  be  very  careful 

of  every  touch  and  tint^  for  a  very  little  may  spoil  his  work  ;  let  our 

life  be  miniature  painting ;  '^  with  fear  and  trembling  "  let  it  be  wrought 

out    We  are  serving  the  thrice  Holy  God,  who  will  be  had  in  reverence 

of  them  that  come  near  to  him,  let  us  mind  what  we  do.    Our  blessed 

Master  never  made  a  faulty  stroke  when  he  was  serving  his  Father ;  he 

never  lived  a  careless  hour,  nor  let  drop  an  idle  wora.    Oh,  it  was  a 

careful  life  he  lived :  even  the  night  watcmes  were  not  without  the  d&ep 

anxieties  which  poured  themselves  forth  in  prayer  unto  God ;  and  if  you 

and  I  think  that  the  first  thing  which  comes  to  hand  will  do  to  serve 

our  God  with,  we  make  a  great  mistake,  and  grossly  insult  his  name. 

We  must  have  a  very  low  idea  of  his  infinite  majesty  if  we  think  that  we 

can  honour  him  by  doing  his  service  half-heartedly,  or  in  a  slovenly 

style.    No,  if  you  will  indeed  live  '^  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  man, ' 

you  must  watch  each  motion  of  your  heart  and  Ufe,  or  you  will  fi^  in 

your  design. 

Living  as  to  the  Lord  means  living  with  a  concentrated  spirit,  and 
living  with  earnest  care  that  our  one  service  may  be  the  best  of  which 
we  are  capable  when  at  our  best  estate.  Alas,  how  poor  is  that  best 
when  we  reach  it !  Truly,  when  we  have  done  all  we  are  unprofitable 
servants,  but  that  all  is  seldom  reached. 

Further,  if  henceforth  our  desire  is  to  live  '^as  to  the  Lord,  and  not 
unto  men,"  then  what  we  do  must  be  done  with  the  heart.  **  In  sinrieness 
of  your  heart,"  says  the  context ;  and  again  in  the  sixth  verse,  '^  As  the 
servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  will  of  God  firom  the  heart."  Our  work 
for  Jesus  must  be  the  outgrowth  of  the  soil  of  the  heart.  Our  service 
must  not  be  performed  as  a  matter  of  routine :  there  must  be  vigour, 
power,  freshness,  reality,  eagerness^  and  warmth  about  it,  or  it  wUl  be 
good  for  nothing.  No  fish  ever  came  upon  God's  altar  because  it  oonld 
not  come  there  alive ;  the  Lord  wants  none  of  your  dead,  heartless  wor- 
ship. You  know  what  is  meant  by  putting  heart  into  all  that  we  do; 
explain  it  by  your  lives.  A  work  which  is  to  be  accepted  of  the  Lord 
must  be  heart-work  throughout;  not  a  few  Noughts  of  Christ  oooasicm* 
ally,  and  a  few  chill  words,  and  a  few  chance  gifts,  and  a  little  done  by 
way  of  by«play,  but  as  the  heart  beats  so  must  we  serve  God :  it  must 
be  our  very  life.    We  are  not  to  treat  our  religion  as  though  it  were  m 


OUB  MOTTO.  401 

sort  of  off-hand  farm  which  we  were  willing  to  keep  goins  bat  not  to 
make  much  of,  onr  chief  thoughts  being  engrossed  with  the  home  fiirm 
of  self  and  the  world,  wibh  its  gains  and  pleasures.  Our  Lord  will  be  aui 
CcMOT  aui  nuUus,  either  mler  or  nothing.  My  Master  is  a  jealous  hns- 
iMtnd:  he  will  not  tolerate  a  stray  thought  of  love  elsewhere,  and  he 
thinks  it  scorn  that  they  who  call  themselves  his  beloved  should  love 
others  better  than  himself.  Such  unchastity  of  heart  can  never  be  per- 
mitted, let  us  not  dream  of  it. 

We  may  not  claim  to  be  his  if  we  give  him  only  lip  service,  and  brain 
service,  and  hand  service ;  he  must  have  the  heart.  Oh,  our  beloved 
Lord,  thou  didst  not  spare  thy  heart  from  agony  for  us,  the  lance  set  it 
abroach  with  all  its  costly  double  iiood  for  our  unworthy  sakes ;  there- 
fore thou  canst  not  be  content  to  receive  in  return  lifeless  forms  and  cold 
pretences.  Thou  didst  live  indeed ;  there  was  no  sham  about  thv  life. 
In  all  thou  didst  thou  wast  intense.  The  seal  of  thy  Father's  house 
had  eaten  thee  up.  Thou  wast  dad  with  zeal  as  with  a  cloak  which 
covered  thee  from  head  to  foot.  Let  us  live  somewhat  after  this  riorious 
foshion,  for  thy  servant  only  truly  lives  when  he  lives  as  his  Master. 
**  He  that  is  perfect  shall  be  as  his  Master."  If  we  are  to  live  to  the 
Lord,  the  fountains  of  our  soul  must  flow  with  boiling  floods,  and 
our  life  must  be  like  a  great  Icelandic  gcjrser  casting  up  its  columns 
of  water,  which  seethe  and  boil  as  they  nse.  As  great  earthquakes 
shake  the  very  centre,  so  must  there  be  movements  of  life  within  us 
which  stir  our  soul  with  vehement  longings  for  Jesus,  and  with  intense 
yearnings  for  his  glory.  All  our  light  and  life  must  turn  to  love,  and 
that  love  must  be  all  on  flame  for  Jesus.  If  we  truly  live  unto  Christ 
it  must  be  so. 

What  else  saith  the  passage  before  us  ?  If  we  say, — ^henceforth 
I  will  do  the  will  of  Ood  as  to  the  Lord  and  not  unto  men,  then  we 
must  do  it  tinder  aubfBeiwn :  for  note  well  the  words,  "  doing  the  will  of 
God."  Some  people's  religion  is  only  another  way  of  doing  their  own 
wilL  They  pick  and  choose  what  precepts  thev  shall  keep  and  what 
they  shall  neglect,  what  doctrines  they  shall  hold  and  what  they  shall 
lemae :  their  spirit  is  not  bowed  into  sacred  servitude,  but  t»kes  licence 
to  act  according  to  its  own  pleasure.  The  freedom  of  a  Christian  lies 
in  what  I  will  venture  to  call  an  absolute  slaverv  to  Christ ;  and  we 
never  become  truly  free  till  every  thought  Ib  brought  into  subjection  to 
the  wiU  of  the  Most  High.  Now  if  henceforth  I  live  to  God,  1  have  no 
longer  any  ri^t  to  say,  **  I  will  do  this  or  that,"  but  I  must  inquire, 
"  My  Master,  what  wouldst  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  As  the  eyes  of  the 
maidens  are  to  their  mistress,  so  are  our  eyes  up  to  thee,  0  Lord.  B^ever, 
thy  Master  is  to  will  for  thee  henceforth.  Itisidle  to  say,  **  I  shallliveas 
to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men/'  when  all  the  wlule  we  intend  to  live  in 
our  own  fiMhion.  Which  is  to  be  master  now,  self  or  Christ  ?  On  eveiy 
point  this  question  must  be  settled :  for  if  on  any  point  we  assume  the  per- 
sonal mastery  the  rule  of  Jesus  is  wholly  refused.  To  go  or  to  stand  still, 
to  suffer  or  to  be  in  pleasure,  to  be  in  honour  or  to  be  in  disgrace,  is  no 
more  to  be  at  our  op^on,  or  if  we  have  a  momentary  choice  it  is  to  be 
obe^nlly  resigned  before  the  sovereignty  of  hiia  whom  we  have  now 
tdken  to  be  our  all  in  all.  There  is  no  being  a  Christian  if  Christ  does 
not  have  the  throne  in  the  heart  and  life.    It  is  but  the  modoBTj  of 


402  METBOFOLITAir  TABERNAGLB  PULPIT. 

Christianity  to  call  Jesus  Master  and  Lord  while  we  do  not  the  thingg 
which  he  commands. 

Again^  w»  must  do  all  this  under  a  sense  of  the  Divine  overs^hL 
Notice  in  verse  6  it  is  said  of  servants,  "  Not  with  ejeaervice,  as  men- 
pleaaers."  What  a  mean  and  beggarlv  thing  it  is  for  a  man  only  to  do 
his  work  well  when  he  is  watched.  Such  oversight  is  for  boys  at  school  and 
mere  hirelings.  You  never  think  of  watching  noble-spirited  men.  Here 
is  a  young  apprentice  set  to  copy  a  picture :  his  master  stands  over  him 
and  looks  over  each  line>  for  the  young  scapegrace  will  grow  carelesa  and 
spoil  his  work/ or  take  to  his  games  if  he  be  not  well  looked  after.  Did 
anybody  thus  dream  of  supervising  Raphael  and  Michael  Angelo  to  keep 
them  to  their  work  ?  No,  the  master  artist  requires  no  eye  to  urge  him 
on.  Popes  and  emperors  came  to  visit  the  great  painters  in  their 
studios,  but  did  they  paint  the  better  because  these  grandees  gazed  ripoa 
them  ?  Certainly  not ;  perhaps  they  did  all  the  worse  in  the  excitement 
or  the  worry  of  the  visit.  Tney  had  regard  to  something  better  than 
the  eye  of  pompous  personages.  So  the  true  Christian  wants  no  eye  of  man 
to  watch  hmi.  There  may  be  pastors  and  preachers  who  are  the  better 
for  being  looked  after  by  bishops  and  presbyters;  but  fancy  a  bishop 
overseeing  the  work  of  Martin  Luthery  and  trying  to  quicken  his  seal ; 
or  imagine  a  presbyter  looking  after  Calvin  to  keep  him  sound  in  the 
faith.  Ohy  no;  gracious  minds  outgrow  the  governance  and  stimolns 
which  comes  of  the  oversight  of  mortal  man.  Ood's  own  Spirit  dwells 
within  us,  and  we  serve  the  Lord  from  an  inward  principle,  which 
is  not  fed  from  without.  There  is  about  a  real  Christian  a  prevailing 
sense  that  €k)d  sees  him,  and  he  does  not  care  who  else  may  set  his 
eye  upon  him;  it  is  enough  for  him  that  God  is  there.  Ete  hath 
small  respect  to  the  eye  of  man,  he  neither  courts  nor  dreads  it. 
Let  the  good  deed  remain  in  the  dark,  for  Qod  sees  it  there,  and  that  is 
enough ;  or  let  it  be  blazoned  in  the  light  of  day  to  b€^  pecked  at  by  the 
censorious,  for  it  little  matters  who  censures  since  Gk)d  approves.  This 
is  to  be  a  true  servant  of  Christ :  to  escape  from  being  an  eye-servant  t^ 
men  bv  becoming  in  the  sublimest  sense  an  eye-serrant,  worldng  ever 
beneatn  the  eye  of  Ood.  If  we  did  but  realize  this,  how  well  we  should 
live  I  If  now  I  recollect,  as  I  try  to  do,  that  Gkd  hears  eaob  word  I 
speak  to  yon  from  this  pulpit ;  that  he  reads  my  soul  as  I  address  you  in 
ms  name,  how  ought  I  to  preach  ?  And  if  joxx  go  to  your  Sabbath* 
school  class  this  afternoon,  and  picture  Jesus  sitting  among  the  boys  and 
girls,  and  boaring  how  you  teach  them,  how  earnestly  you  wiU  teacsL 
At  home  when  yon  are  about  to  scold  a  servant ;  or  in  the  sbop» 
when  you  think  to  do  a  rather  sharp  thing,  if  you  think  your  Master 
stands  there  and  sees  it  all,  what  a  power  it  will  have  over  yoa  I  Our 
lives  should  all  be  spent  nuder  the  spell  of ''  Thou  God  seest  me,"  and  ws 
should  each  be  able  to  declare,  '<  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me." 

Qne  mpre  thought^  and  it  ig  this.  If  henceforth  we  tt«  to  serve  the 
liQld^  and  not  men,  then  we  must  look  to  the  Lord/or  our  reward,  and 
not  to  fnen.  *'  Knowing,"  saith  th«  eighth  verse, ''  that  whatsoever  good 
thing  any  man  dueth,  the  same  shall  he  receive  of  the  Lord,  wheth^  he 
bi»  fapnd  or  free."  Wage !  Is  thst  the  motive  of  a  Christian  ?  Tes^  in 
tlid  highMt  sense,  for  the  greatefl  ^  the  saints,  iudli  as  Mofies,hav^  ^'had 
respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward,"  and  it  were  like  despising  the 


017B  KOTTO.  4M 

reward  which  Qod  promises  to  hia  people  if  we  had  ho  respect  whatever 
unto  it.  Bespect  unto  the  reward  which  cometh  of  Ood  kills  the  selfish* 
ness  which  is  always  expecting  a  reward  from  men.  We  can  postpone  onr 
reward,  and  wc  can  be  content  instead  of  receiving  present  praise,  to  be 
misunderstood  and  misrepresented :  we  can  postpone  our  reward,  and  we 
can  endure  insteaa  thereof  to  be  disappointea  in  our  work,  and  to  labour 
on  without  success,  'or  when  the  reward  does  come  how  glorious  it  will 
be  I  An  hour  with  J  v  ^ns  will  make  up  for  a  lifetime  of  persecution  1  One 
Bnaile  ih)m  him  will  repay  us  a  thousand  times  over  for  all  disappointments 
and  discouragements. 

Thus  you  see,  brethren,  that  if  we  do  in  very  deed  make  this  our  rule  and 
maxim — ^'^  As  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men" — our  work  will  be  shaped 
and  fashioned  most  wonderfully.  May  God  grant  that  the  influence  of 
this  motive  may  manifestly  sway  our  whole  life  henceforth,  until  we 
close  it  for  this  world,  and  commence  it  anew  where  we  shall  not  need  td 
shift  our  course,  but  shall  continue  eternally  to  live  to  the  Lord  alone. 

II.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  guide  us  while  we  reflect,  secondly,  that 
should  this  text  become  the  inspiration  of  our  life  It  would  qbeatlt 
BLEVATB  OXTK  SPIRITS.  What  would  it  do  for  us  ?  First,  it  would  lift  us 
above  all  complaining  about  the  hardness  of  our  lot,  or  the  difficulty  of 
our  service.  **  Alas,"  says  one,  "I  ain  worn  out.  I  cannot  keep  on  at 
this  rate.  My  position  is  so  terribly  trying  that  I  cannot  hold  on  much 
longer:  it  strains  not  only  muscle  and  sinew,  but  nerve  and  heart. 
Nobody  could  bear  my  burden  long :  my  husband  is  crael,  my  friend  is 
ankind,  my  children  are  ungrateful."  Ah,  poor  heart,  there  are  many 
others  who  wear  the  weeping-willow  as  well  as  thyself.  But  be  of  good 
oourf^,  and  look  at  thy  case  in  another  light  if  the  burden  is  to  be 
borne  for  Jesus*  sake,  who  loved  thee  and  gave  himself  for  theci  bj 
whose  precious  blood  thou  art  redeemed  from  Sie  pains  of  heD,  canst  thoa 
not  bear  it?  Oanst  thou  not  bear  it  ?  **  That  is  quite  another  thing," 
saj  you :  '^  I  could  not  bear  it  for  a  sneering  master :  I  could  not  b^ 
it  ibr  a  passionate,  f^oward  mii^ess,  but  I  Could  do  anytliing  and  I 
oould  bear  anything  for  Jesus."    This  makes  all  the  differenoe-^ 

^  For  him  I  count  as  gain  each  lo8% 
Disgrace  for  him,  renown  ( 
Well  may  I  glory  in  his  cross, 
While  he  prepares  my  crown !  *• 

We  are  satisfied  to  bear  any  cross  so  long  as  it  is  his  cross.  What 
wonders  men  can  do  when  they  are  influenodd  by  enthusiastio  love  for  a 
leader !  Alexander's  troops  marched  thousands  of  miles  on  foot,  and 
they  would  hove  been  utterly  wearied  had  it  not  been  for  tiieir  seat 
for  iJexander.  He  led  thiem  fotth  conquermg  and  to  conquer. 
Alexander's  presence  was  the  life  of  their  valour^  the  glory  of  their 
strength.  If  there  was  a  very  long  day's  march  over  burning  sands, 
one  ming  they  knew, — ^that  Alexander  marched  with  them ;  if  they  were 
thirsty,  tiiey  knew  that  he  thirsted  too,  for  when  one  brought  a  onp  of 
water  to  the  king,  he  put  it  aside,  thirsty  as  he  was,  and  said,  **  Give 
it  to  thd  sick  soldier.*'  Onoe  it  so  happened  that  they  were  loaded  with 
the  spoil  which  they  had  taken,  Imd  each  maft  had  become  rich  wiUi 
good^  gartnente  and  wedges  of  gold ;  th^h  they  began  to  travel  v^ 


404  XBTBOFOLITAK  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

bIowIj  with  80  much  to  carry,  and  the  king  feared  that  he  ahonld  not 
overtake  his  foe.  Having  a  large  quantity  of  spoil  which  fell  to  lus 
own  share,  he  bnmed  it  all  before  the  eyes  of  his  soldiers  and  bade  them 
do  the  like  that  they  might  pursue  the  enemy  and  win  even  more 
^*  Alexander's  portion  lies  beyond,"  cried  he,  and  seeing  the  Idng's  own 

Soils  on  fire  nis  warriors  were  content  to  give  up  their  gains  luao  and 
are  with  their  king.  He  did  himself  what  he  commanded  othen 
to  do :  in  self-denial  and  hardship  he  was  a  full  partaker  with  his 
followers.  After  this  iashion  our  liord  and  Master  acts  towards  ns.  He 
saYB,  ^'  Benounce  pleasure  for  the  good  of  others.  Deny  yourseli^  and 
take  up  your  cross.    Suffer,  though  you  might  avoid  it ;  laoour,  thoogfa 

Siu  might  rest,  when  God*s  glory  demands  suffering  or  labour  of  yoa. 
ave  not  I  set  you  an  example  ?  "  "  Who,  though  he  was  rich,  yet  for 
our  stJLCs  he  became  poor,  that  we  through  his  poverty  might  be  ridi.'' 
He  stripped  himself  of  all  things  that  he  might  clothe  us  with  his  gkiry. 
0,  brothers  and  sisters,  when  we  heartily  serve  such  a  leader  as  this,  and 
are  fired  by  his  spirit,  then  murmuring,  and  complaining,  and  weari- 
ness, and  fainting  of  heart  are  altogether  fled :  a  oivine  passion  caxries 
US  beyond  ourselves. 

"  I  can  do  all  things,  or  can  bear 
All  saflfering  if  my  Lord  be  there.** 

Next,  this  l^  ihs  Christian  above  th$  tpirU  of  BimUng.    I  believe 
great  numbers  of  working  men — I  am  not  going  to  judge  them  for  it — 
always  consider  how  little  they  can  possibly  do  to  earn  their  wages,  and 
the  question  with  them  is  not, ''  How  much  can  we  give  for  the  wage  ?  " 
that  used  to  be ;  but,  "  How  little  can  we  give  ?    How  little  work  can 
we  do  in  the  day,  without  being  discharged  for  idleness?"    Iktaay 
men  say,  '^  We  must  not  do  all  the  work  to-day,  for  we  shall  need  some- 
thing to  do  to-morrow :  our  masters  will  not  give  us  more  than  thev 
can  help,  and  therefore  we  will  not  give  them  more  than  we  are  obliged 
to."    This  is  the  general  spirit  on  both  sides,  and  as  a  nation  we  are 
going  to  the  dogs  because  that  spirit  is  among  us;  and  we  shall  be 
more  and  more  beaten  by  foreign  competition  if  this  spirit  is  cultivated. 
Among  Christians  sudi  a  notion  cannot  be  tolerated  in  the  service  of 
our  Lord  Jesus.    It  never  does  for  a  minister  to  say,  "  If  I  preach  three 
times  a  week  it  is  quite  as  much  as  anybody  will  expect  of  me  ;  theiB- 
fore  I  shall  do  no  more."    It  will  never  be  right  for  yon  to  say,  **  I  am 
a  8abbathH9chool  teacher ;  if  I  get  into  the  class  to  the  minnte— flome 
of  yon  do  not  do  that — and  if  I  stop  just  as  long  as  the  dass  lasts,  I  need 
not  look  after  the  boys  and  girls  through  the  wc«k ;  I  cannot  be  bothered 
with  them :  I  will  do  just  as  much  as  I  am  bound  to  do,  but  no  more." 
In  a  certain  country  town  it  was  reported  that  the  erocer's  wife  cut  a 
plum  in  two,  for  fear  there  should  be  a  grain  more  Uian  wdght  in  the 
parcel,  and  the  folks  called  her  Mrs.  SpUt-plunu    Ah,  there  are  many 
opiit-plums  in  religion.    They  do  not  want  to  do  more  for  Jesua  than 
may  be  absolutely  necessary.    They  would  like  to  give  good  weight,  but 
they  woqld  be  sorry  to  be  ocmvicted  of  doing  too  much.    Ah,  whoi  we 
get  to  feel  we  are  doing  service  for  our  Lord  Jesns  Ohrist,  we  ndopt  a  &r 
more  liberal  scale.    Then  we  do  not  calculate  how  much  ointment  will 
suffice  for  his  feet^  but  we  giv^  him  all  that  onr  bogi  ooBtains.    Is  this 


Otm  KOTTO.  406 

your  talk,  **  Here,  bring  the  Bcales,  this  ointment  oo^  a  great  deal  of 
xnonejy  we  mi29t  be  economical.  Watch  every  drachmi  yea,  eyery  scruple 
and  gndn»  for  the  nard  is  costly"?  If  this  l)e  your  cool  manner  of  cal- 
culation yonr  offering  is  not  worth  a  fig.  Not  so  spake  that  daughter  of 
love  of  whom  we  r^  in  the  gospels,  for  she  brake  the  box  and  poured 
ont  all  the  contents  upon  her  Ix)ra.  **  To  what  purpose  is  this  waste  ?  " 
cried  Judas.  It  was  Judas  who  tliuB  spoke,  and  you  know  therefore  the 
^orth  of  the  observation.  Christ's  servants  delight  to  give  so  much  aa 
to  be  thought  wasteful,  for  they  feel  that  when  they  have  in  the  judgment 
of  others  done  extravagantly  for  Christ,  they  have  but  begun  to  show 
their  hearts'  love  for  his  dear  name.  Thus  the  elevating  power  of  the 
spirit  of  consecration  lifts  us  up  above  the  wretched  parsimony  of  mere 
fbrmality. 

Again,  Oiib  rausa  us  up  ahov$  all  boasHfig  of  our  wart.  "  Is  the  work 
good  enough  ?  "  said  one  to  his  servant.  The  man  replied,  '^Sir,  it  is 
good  enough  for  the  price  :  and  it  is  good  enough  for  the  man  who  is 
gjoing  to  have  it."  tfust  so,  and  when,  we  ''  serve  "  men  we  may  perhaps 
rightly  judge  in  that  &shion,  but  when  we  come  to  serve  Christ,  is  anv- 
tliing  good  enough  for  him  ?  Could  our  zeal  know  no  respite,  could 
our  prayers  know  no  pause,  could  our  efforts  know  no  relaxation,  could 
we  give  all  we  have  of  time,  wealth,  talent,  and  opportunity,  could  we 
die  a  martyr's  deatih  a  thousand  times,  would  not  he,  the  Best  Beloved 
of  our  souls,  deserve  far  more  ?  Ah,  that  he  would.  Therefore  is  self- 
<x)ngratulacion  banished  for  ever,  TVlien  you  have  done  all,  you  will  feel 
that  it  is  not  worthy  of  the  matchless  merit  of  Jesus,  and  you  will  be 
humbled  at  the  thought.  Thus,  while  doing  all  for  Jesus  stimulates 
zeal,  it  fosters  humility,  a  happy  blending  of  useful  effects. 

The  resolve  to  do  all  as  unto  the  Lord  will  cdevate  yon  above  that  era* 
vingfw  recognUion  which  is  a  disease  with  many.  It  is  a  sad  fault  in 
many  Christians  that  they  cannot  do  anything  unless  all  the  world  is  told 
of  it.  The  hen  in  the  faurm-yard  has  laid  an  egg,  and  feels  so  proud  of 
the  achievement  that  she  must  cackle  about  it :  everybodv  must  know  of 
that  one  poor  egg  till  all  the  country  round  resounds  with  the  news.  It 
is  so  with  some  professors :  their  work  must  be  published,  or  they  can  do 
no  more.  *'  Here  have  I,"  said  one,  "  been  teaching  in  the  school  for 
years,  and  nobody  ever  thanked  me  for  it ;  I  believe  that  some  of  us  who 
do  the  most  are  the  least  noticed,  and  what  a  shame  it  is."  But  if  you 
have  done  your  service  unto  the  Lord  you  should  not  talk  so,  or  we 
shall  suspect  you  of  having  other  aims.  The  servant  of  Jesus  will  say, 
**  I  do  not  want  human  notice.  I  did  it  for  the  Master ;  he  noticed  me, 
and  I  am  content.  I  tried  to  please  him,  and  I  did  please  him,  and 
therefore  I  ask  no  more,  for  I  have  gained  my  end.  I  seek  no  praise  of 
men,  for  I  fear  lest  the  breath  of  human  praise  should  tarnish  the  pure 
silver  of  my  service." 

This  would  Uft  you  above  the  diseouragement  which  sometimes  comes  of 
human  censure.  If  you  seek  the  praise  of  men  you  will  in  all  probability 
&il  in  the  present,  and  certainly  you  will  lose  it  in  the  future  sooner  or 
hter.  Many  men  are  more  ready  to  censure  than  to  commend;  and  to  hope 
tor  their  praise  is  to  seek  for  sugar  in  a  root  of  wormwood.  Man's  way  of 
judging  IB  unjust,  and  seems  fuhioned  on  purpose  to  blame  all  of  us  one 
way  or  another.    Here  is  a  brother  who  smgs  bass,  and  the  critics  say. 


406  XBTBOPOUTAV  TABKBVMU  PULPIT. 

^Oh  yei,  a  very  fine  ban  voioei  b«t  he  eoald  iu)t  ling  tieble.'*  Hete 
is  another  who  ezoek  in  treble,  and  they  say,  *'Ye^  yesi  but  ve 
prefer  a  tenor."  When  th^  find  a  tenor  they  blame  him  becaoBe  be 
cannot  take  the  baas.  Xo  one  can  be  candidly  pndaed,  bnt  all  most  be 
savagely  oensozed.  What  will  the  great  Master  say  about  it?  Will 
he  not  judge  thus— *'I  have  given  this  man  a  bass  ToioOi  and  he  sings 
bass,  and  that  is  what  I  meant  him  to  do :  I  gave  that  man  a  tenor 
Toioe,  and  he  sings  tenor,  and  that  is  what  I  meant  him  to  do :  I  gave 
that  man  a  treble  voice,  and  he  sings  treble,  and  so  takes  the  put  I 
meant  him  to  take.  All  the  parts  blended  together  make  up  sweet  music 
for  my  ears"?  Wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children,  but  folly  blames  them 
all  round.  How  tittle  we  ought  to  care  about  the  opinions  and  criticisms 
of  our  fellow-men  when  we  recollect  that  he  who  made  us  what  we  are, 
and  helps  us  by  his  grace  to  act  our  part,  will  not  judge  ns  after  the 
mode  in  which  men  carp  or  flatter,  but  will  accept  us  according  to  the 
sincerity  of  our  hearts.  If  we  feel,  *'  I  was  not  working  fer  you;  I  x^-as 
working  for  God,"  we  shall  not  be  much  wounded  by  our  neighbours' 
remarks.  The  nightingale  charms  the  ear  of  night.  A  fool  pansec  by, 
and  declares  that  he  hates  such  distracting  noises.  The  nightingale  sings 
on,  for  it  never  entered  the  tittle  minstrel's  head  or  besot  that  it  was 
Singing  for  critics :  it  sings  because  he  who  created  it  ^e  it  this  sweet 
feculty.  So  may  we  reply  to  those  who  condemn  us, — "  VTe  Uve  not  unto 
you,  0  men ;  we  live  unto  our  Lord."  Thus  do  we  escape  the  discourage- 
ments which  come  of  ungenerous  misapprehension  and  jealous  censure. 

This,  too,  ivill  $ktvaie  you  above  the  diaappomtmrnte  of  non-suceess,  ay, 
even  of  the  saddest  kind.  If  those  you  seek  to  bless  be  not  saved,  yet 
you  have  not  altogether  failed,  for  you  did  not  teach  or  preach  having  the 
winning  of  souls  as  the  absolate  ultimatum  of  your  work,  you  did  it  with 
the  view  of  pleasing  Jesus,  and  he  is  pleased  with  faithfulness  even  where 
it  is  not  accompanied  with  success.  Sincere  obedience  is  his  delight  even 
if  it  lead  to  no  apparent  result.  If  the  Lord  should  set  his  servant  to 
plough  the  sea  or  sow  the  sand  he  would  accept  his  service.  If  we  should 
have  to  witness  for  Christ's  name  to  stocks  and  stones,  and  our  hearers 
should  be  even  worse  than  blocks  of  marble,  and  should  turn  again  and 
rend  us,  we  may  still  be  filled  with  contentment,  for  we  shall  have  doue 
our  Lord's  will,  and  what  more  do  we  want  ?  To  plod  on  under  apparent 
&ilure  is  one  of  the  most  acceptable  of  all  works  of  faith,  and  he  who  can 
do  it  year  after  year  is  assuredly  well-pleasing  unto  God. 

This  lifts  us  above  disappouitmsnt  in  the  prospect  of  dealh.  We  shall 
have  to  go  away  from  our  work  soon,  so  men  tell  us,  and  we  are  apt  to 
ifret  about  it.  The  truth  is  we  shall  go  on  with  our  work  for  ever  if  our 
service  is  pleasing  to  the  Lord.  We  shall  please  him  up  yonder  even  better 
than  we  oo  here.  And  what  if  our  enterprise  here  diould  seem  to  end,  as 
&r  as  man  is  concerned,  we  have  done  it  unto  the  Lord,  and  our  record 
is  on  high,  and  therefore  it  is  not  lost.  Nothing  that  is  dune  for  Jesus 
will  be  destroyed:  the  flower  may  fade,  but  its  esseiioe  remains;  the  tree 
may  fell,  but  its  fruit  is  stored ;  the  cluster  may  be  crushed,  but  the  wine 
is  preserved ;  the  work  and  its  place  may  pass  away,  but  the  glory  which 
it  Drought  to  Jesus  shines  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever. 

Ay,  and  ihds  k/is  us  above  the  deadening  injimnce  of  age  and  the  infirmi- 
ties whiiob  oome  with  multiplied  years.    What  little  we  can  do  we  do  it 


aim  »«WTQ.  407 

all  the  mem  jthoioQghly  for  JTemi  ff  oar  f|Spai|aoQ  ripeof.  If  we  most 
oontraot  H»  B^em,  wi  qo^^qsq  9x^0.  intesmfj  the  tt^ottya.  If  we  are 
liriiig  unto  Ohrist,  wtloYO  hiqi  ^rep  w^^i^  907  n^fjlr);  grows  cold  to  other 
things.  When  the  eye  growfi  dio^  ei^rthwfiras,  ib  brij^htens  towards 
beaten ;  wken  the  ea^  oiui  hardly  )ieer  the  yoipe  Qf  singing  men  and 
mnging  wemen,  it  knowa  the  miisic  of  J^of '  name ;  and  when  the  hand 
I9an  do  little  Ib  hiunaa  bniilneaq,  it  begins  %ling  for  the  strings  of  its 
^destial  hazp  thai  it  may  majse  nelody  for  the  Well-beloved.  I  know 
of  nothing  which  ean  possibly  elevate  our  spiri^  1^  WQfl^ers  forOhrist 
like  the  sense  of  doing  all  unto  the  1^t4  V^^  ^^^  ^^  ^^9*  ^^7  ^^ 
Spirit  of  €h)d  help  us  to  ri^e  intq  thifi  ^rfect  consecration. 

I  have  not  time  to  say  more  than  ]ast  this  word.  A  due  sense  of 
aerring  the  Lord  would  ennoble  %U  our  service  beyond  conception. 
Think  -of  working  /or  km, — for  bim»  the  best  of  masters,  before  whom 
smgels  oount  it  g&ry  tq  bow.  Worl^  donp  for  him  i§  in  itself  the  best 
i?ork  that  can  te,  for  all  that  pleases  him  u^xxBt  be  pure  and  lovely,  honest 
and  of  ffood  report.  Work  for  the  eternal  iFather  and  work  for  Jesus 
are  works  which  are  good  and  only  good.  To  live  for  Jesus  is  to  be 
swayed  by  the  noblest  of  motives.  To  liv^  for  the  inoarnate  Qod  is  to 
blen^  the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  men  in  pne  passion.  To  live  for 
tiie  ever-liyi^  Christ  is  elevating  to  the  soul,  for  its  results  will  be  most 
enduring.  When  all  other  work  is  dissolved  thif  shall  abide.  Men  spake 
of  painting  for  eternity,  but  we  in  very  deed  serv^  for  etemi^. 

Soon  sh^  all  worlds  behold  the  nobility  of  the  service  of  tinrist,  for  it 
wrill  bring  with  it  the  most  blessed  of  all  rewards,  When  men  look  back 
on  what  they  have  done  for  their  fellows,  how  small  is  the  recompense 
of  a  patriotic  life  I  The  world  soon  forgets  its  bene&ctors.  Many  and 
many  a  man  has  been  borne  aloft  in  youth  amidst  the  applause  of  men, 
and  then  in  his  old  age  he  has  been  left  to  starve  i|ito  ms  grave.  He 
who  scattered  fi;old  at  first,  begs  pence  at  last :  the  world  called  him 
senerous  while  he  had  something  to  give,  and  when  he  had  bestowed  all 
it  blamed  his  imprudence.    He  who  lives  for  Jesus,  will  never  have 

Sxiund  of  complaint  concerning  his  Lord,  for  he  forsaketh  not  his  saints. 
ever  man  regretted  ought  he  did  for  Jesus  yet^  ^ve  that  he  may  r^ret 
that  he  has  not  done  ten  times  more.  The  Lord  will  not  leave  his 
old  servants.  **  0  Qod,  thou  hast  taught  me  from  my  youth :  and 
hitherto  haye  I  declared  thy  wondrous  works  ;  now  also  when  I  am  old 
and  greyrheaded,  0  Qod,  forsake  me  not/'  such  was  the  prayer  of 
David,  and  he  was  confident  of  being  heard.  Such  may  be  the  confidence 
of  every  servant  of  Christ.  He  may  go  down  to  his  grave  untroubled ; 
he  may  rise  and  enter  the  dread  solemnities  of  the  eternal  world  without 
a  fear,  for  service  for  Christ  creates  heroes  to  whom  fear  is  unknown. 

III.  I  dose  by  saying,  that  if  we  enter  into  the  very  spirit  of  this 
discourse,  or  even  go  beyond  it, — if  henceforth  we  live  for  Jesus  only,  so 
as  never  to  know  pleasure  apart  from  him,  nor  to  have  treasure  out  of 
him,  nor  honour  but  in  his  honour,  nor  success  save  in  the  progress  of 
his  kmgdom,  we  shall  even  then  have  done  no  mobe  than  he 
DESBBVES  at  oub  HANDa.  For,  first,  we  are  God's  creatures.  For 
whom  should  a  creature  live  but  for  his  Creator  ?  Secondly,  we  are  his 
new  ereaUires,  we  are  the  twice-born  of  heaven;  should  we  not  live 
for  him  by  whom  we  have  been  begotten  for  gloiy?    As  many  as 


^^vVim  ^nibmmk  ittp. 


THE  WITHERED  HAND. 


t^ 


Deliysbed  ok  Thubbday  Evening,  Mat  22nd,  1879,  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METBOPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLB,  NEWINGTON. 


"  And,  behold,  there  was  a  man  which  had  hif  hand  withered  .  •  •  .  Then 
aaith  he  to  the  man.  Stretch  forth  thine  hand.  And  he  stretched  it  forth ;  and  it 
was  restored  whole,  like  as  the  other."— Matthew  xii.  10,  18. 

Note  well  the  expressioiL  Jesns  ''went  into  their  synagogue  ;  and, 
behold,  there  was  a  man  which  had  his  hand  withered."  A  mark  is  set, 
as  it  were,  in  the  margin,  as  if  it  were  a  notable  fact  That  word  "  behold'* 
is  a  sort  of  note  of  exclamation  to  draw  attention  to  it.  ''Behold,  there 
was  a  man  which  had  his  hand  withered."  In  many  congregations, 
if  there  should  step  in  some  one  of  the  great  and  mighty  of  the  land, 
people  would  say,  "Behold,  there  was  a  duke,  an  earl, or  a  bishop  there." 
But  although  there  were  some  great  ones  occasionally  in  our  Saviour's 
oon?regation,  I  find  no  notes  of  admiration  about  their  presence,  no 
"beholds"  inserted  by  the  evangelists  as  if  to  call  attention  to  their 
appearance.  No  doubt  if  there  were  in  a  congregation  some  person  of 
known  intelligence  and  great  learning,  who  had  earned  to  himself  a  high 
degree,  there  are  persons  who  would  say,  "Do  you  know  that  Professor 
Science  or  Doctor  Classic  was  present  at  the  service  ?"  There  would  be 
a  "behold**  put  to  that  in  the  memories  of  many.  There  were  prsons 
well  learned,  according  to  the  learning  of  the  dajr,  who  came  to  listen  to 
Christ,  but  there  are  no  ^'beholds"*  put  about  their  having  been  present. 
Yet  in  the  synagogue  there  was  a  poor  man  whose  hand  had  been 
withered,  and  we  are  called  upon  to  note  the  fact. 

It  was  his  right  hand  which  was  withered,  the  worse  of  the  two 
for  him,  for  he  could  scarcely  follow  his  handicraft  or  earn  his  bread. 
His  best  hand  was  useless,  his  bread-winner  failed  him.  I  have  no 
doubt  he  was  a  very  humble,  obscure,  insignificant  individual,  pro- 
bably very  badly  oif  and  in  great  poverty,  because  he  could  not  work 
as  his  fellow  craftsmen  could,  but  not  a  man  of  any  rank,  or  learning, 
or  special  intelligence.  His  being  in  the  assembly  was  in  itself  nothing 
very  remarkable.  I  suppose  he  had  been  accustomed  to  go  to  the 
synagogue  as  others  of  his  townsmen  did ;  yet  the  Holy  Spirit  takes 
care  to  mark  that  he  was  present,  and  to  have  the  word  ''behold"  hung 


410  lOETROFOLlTAV  TABKBKAOUI  PULPIT. 

oonsideratioii  that  tbe  crippled  man  was  there. 

And  io-nighty  doar  frieiidi,  it  matters  very  little  to  the  preacher  or  to 
the  congregation  that  you  are  here,  if  yon  are  some  person  of  note  or 
oonseonenoe ;  for  we  9^ak9  no  note  of  dignitaries  here^  and  attadi  no 
speciat  consequence  to  any  one  in  this  place,  where  the  rich  and  the  poor 
meet  together.  But  if  you  happen  to  pe  here  as  a  need^  soul  wanting  a 
Saviour,  if  yon  happen  to  be  nere  with  a  spiritually  withered  hand  so 
that  you  cannot  do  the  things  that  you  woi^d>  and  you  are  wanting  to 
have  that  hand  restored  to  you^i  tl)eie  shall  baa  '^  be/wld"  put  to  that,  and 
especially  shall  it  be  doubly  emphatic  if  to-night  the  Master  shall  sar  to 
you,  ''Stretch  out  thy  withered  hand,"  and  if  t^e  dinne  power  sWl 
restore  that  hand  and  a  deed  of  grace  shall  be  accomplished.  What  onr 
Lord  wanted  on  that  partioular  Sibbath  morning  was  somebody  to  work 
upon,  somebody  whom  he  might  heal,  and  so  defy  the  traditional 
legality  of  the  Pharisees  who  said  that  it  was  wrong  to  heal  on  the 
Sabbath  da^.  Christ  did  not  want  their  health  that  morning :  he  looked 
out  for  their  sickness  that  he  might  illustrate  his  healing  power.  He  did 
not  want  any  greatness  in  anybody  there  ;  bat  he  did  want  some  poor 
needy  one  in  whom  he  could  display  his  power  to  heal.  And  that  is  just 
the  case  to-night.  If  you  are  rich  and  increased  in  goods  and  have  need 
of  nothing,  my  Master  does  not  want  you.  He  is  a  physician,  and  those 
who  practise  the  healing  art  look  out  for  sickness  as  their  sphere  of 
operation.  If  we  were  to  tell  a  wise  physician  of  a  town  where  nobody 
was  sick,  but  e?erybody  enjoyed  perfect  health,  he  would  not  settle 
there,  unless  he  wished  to  retire  from  practice.  My  Master  does  not 
come  into  the  assemblies  where  all  feel  themselves  quite  content  with 
themselves,  where  there  are  no  blind  eyes,  no  deaf  ears,  no  broken  hearts, 
no  withered  hands;  for  what  do  such  folks  need  with  a  Saviour?  He 
looks  around  and  his  eye  fixes  itself  upon  pain,  upon  necessity,  upon 
incapacity,  upon  sinfulness,  upon  everything  to  which  he  can  do  good ; 
for  what  he  wants  in  us  mortals  is  the  opportunity  to  do  us  good  and  not 
a  pretence  on  our  part  that  we  can  do  him  good. 

I  begin  with  this,  because  my  talk  to-night  will  be  very  simple, 
and  it  will  only  be  meant  for  those  of  you  who  want  my  Lord  and 
Master.  Those  of  you  who  do  not  need  him  can  go ;  but  you  that  want 
him,  it  may  be  you  shall  find  him  to-night;  and  there  shall  be  the 
record  kept  in  heaven,  not  of  those  who  were  here,  who  said,  "We  see," 
nor  of  those  who  said,  ^'Our  hand  is  strong  and  deft;  for  labour,"  but 
there  shall  be  a  register  of  blind  ones  who  shall  say,  ''Thou  Son  of 
David,  open  our  eyes,"  and  of  withered  one^  who  shall  to-night  stretch 
out  their  withered  hands  in  obedience  to  his  divine  command.  I  do  not 
know  that  our  crippled  friend  when  he  went  to  the  synagogue  that  morn- 
ing expected  to  get  his  withered  hand  healed.  Being,  perhaps,  a  devout 
man,  be  went  there  to  worship,  but  he  got  more  than  he  went  for.  And  it 
may  be  that  some  of  you  whom  God  means  to  bless  to-night  do  not  know 
what  you  have  come  nere  for.  You  came  because  you  somehow  love  th« 
ordinances  of  God's  house,  and  you  feel  happy  in  hearing  the  gospel 
preached.  Ton  have  never  yet  laid  hold  of  the  gospd  for  yourselves,  never 
enjoyed  its  privileges  and  blessings  as  your  own,  but  still  you  have  a 
luuikering  alter  t^e  best  things.     What  if  to-night   the   hour  has 


i 


THl  WIEKXBBD  HABD.  411 

oim^  tto  hffu  irbiflb  a^Yomigu  graee  has  marked  mtix  a  rad  letter 
m  Ihe  4)fJendar  of  loye,  in  whidi  your  withered  hand  ahell  be  made  atrong, 
and  yonr  sin  ahafl  be  forgiTen!  Wliat  bliss  if  790  ahall  go  yonr  wi^ 
lo  glorify  Ood  becanae  a  notable  mirade  of  grace  h^  beea  wroaghfe  in 
yon !  God  grant  it  may  be  ao  done  bj  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  I 
entreat  those  of  yoa  "vho  love  the  Master  to  prigr  him  to  work  wondeia 
at  this  time  npon  many,  and  his  shall  be  the  praise. 

I.  First,  we  will  say  a  little  about  the  pbb8w  to  whom  xu 
WKMAin)  IV  CUB  TBXT  IS  ADjiassssD.  **  Then  said  Jesus  to  the  man, 
atretch  forth  thme  hand." 

Tbia  oommand  was  addreased,  then,  to  a  man  who  wa$  hiipdusly  m- 
€e^bk  9f  obeying.  "  Stretch  iorth  thine  hand."  I  do  not  know  whether 
hia  arm  was  pw»iyBedy  or  only  his  hand.  Aa  a  general  rule  when  a 
thorough  paralTSiSy  not  a  partial  one,  takes  place  in  the  hand  it  seizes 
the  entire  member,  and  botn  hand  and  arm  are  paralyzed.  We  usually 
apeak  of  this  man  aa  if  the  entire  limb  had  b^  dried  up,  and  yet  1 
do  not  see  either  in  Matthew,  Mark,  or  Luke,  any  express  deolarati<»i 
that  the  whole  arm  was  withered.  It  seems  to  me  to  have  been  a  case  in 
which  the  hand  only  was  affected.  We  used  to  have,  not  far  from  here, 
I  remember,  at  Kennington  Gate,  a  lad  who  would  fr^equently  get  on  th^ 
step  of  the  omnibus  and  exhibit  bis  hands,  which  hung  down  as  if  hia 
wnats  were  broken,  and  he  would  cry, "  Poor  boy  I  poor  boy ! "  and  appeal 
to  our  oompassion.  I  &ncy  that  his  case  was  a  picture  of  the  one  before 
US,  iu  which,  not  the  arm  perhaps,  but  the  hand  had  become  dried  up. 
We  cannot  decide  positively  that  the  arm  was  still  unwithered,  but  we 
may  notice  thai^  our  Lord  did  not  say, "  Stretch  out  thy  arm,"  but "  thine 
hand,"  so  that  he  points  to  the  hand  as  the  place  where  the  paralysis 
lay.  If  he  had  said,  *'  Stretch  out  thy  arm,"  as  the  text  does  not  declare 
that  the  arm  was  dried  up,  we  should  have  said  that  Ohrist  hade  him  do 
exactly  what  he  was  capable  of  doing,  and  there  would  have  been  no 
miracle  in  it.  But  inasmuch  as  he  says,  ^'Stretch  forth  thine  hand," 
it  is  clear  that  the  mischief  was  in  the  hand,  if  not  in  the  arm ;  and  so 
it  was  putting  him  to  do  what  he  could  not  possibly  do,  for  the  man's 
hand  was  assuredly  withered.  It  was  not  a  sham  disease.  He  had  not 
saade  a  pretence  of  being  paralyzed,  but  he  was  really  incapable.  The 
hand  had  lost  the  moisture  of  li&.  The  spirits  whicdi  gave  it  strength 
had  been  dried  out  of  it,  and  there  it  was  a  withered,  wilted,  useless  thing, 
with  which  he  could  do  nothing ;  and  yet  it  was  to  such  a  man  that 
Jesus  said,  "  Stretch  forth  thine  hand." 

This  is  very  important  for  us  to  notice,  because  some  of  you  under 
a  burden  of  sin  think  that  Christ  does  not  save  real  sinners — that 
those  people  whom  he  does  save  are,  in  some  respects,  not  quite  so  bad 
as  you — that  there  is  not  such  an  intensity  of  sin  about  them  as  about 

Jour  case,  or  if  an  intensity  of  sin,  yet  not  such  an  utter  hopelessness  and 
elplessness  as  there  is  about  you.  You  ieel  quite  dried  up,  and  utterly 
without  strength.  Dear  hearer,  it  is  exactly  to  such  as  you  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  Ohrist  directs  the  C4)mmands  of  the  gospel.    We  are  bidden  to 

{reach  to  you,  saying,  **  Believe,"  or  at  other  times,  '*  Bepent,  and  be 
aptized,  every  one  of  you ; "  **  Believe  in  the  Loid  Jesus  Ohrist,  and 
ihovi  shalt  be  saved,"— oommandments  not  addressed,  as  some  say  they 
are,  to  sensible  sinners,  but  to  insensible  sinners,  to  stupid  sinners,  to 


412  UBTBOFOLITAH  TABSRKACLS  t^ULPIT. 

Binners  who  cannot,  flo  far  as  moral  ability  in  oonoernod,  obey  the  oom* 
mand  at  all  Snch  are  bidden  so  to  do  by  him,  w1m>  in  this  case 
bade  the  man  do  what  he,  natoraUy  in  and  of  himself,  was  quite  in- 
capable  of  doing ;  be(»nse  yon  see  if  he  conM  stretch  out  his  hand 
himself,  there  was  no  miracle  wanted,  for  the  man's  hand  was  not 
withered  at  alL  But  it  is  dear  that  he  could  not  moye  his  hand,  and 
yet  the  Saviour  addressed  him  as  if  he  could  do  it;  in  which  I  see  a 
symbol  of  the  gospel  way  of  speaking  to  the  sinner ;  for  the  gospel  cries 
to  him  in  all  his  misery  and  incapacity,  *'To  thee,  even  to  thee,  is  the 
word  of  this  salvation  sent."  ,  This  very  incapacity  and  inability  of  thine 
is  but  the  space  in  which  the  divine  power  may  be  diq>layed,  and  because 
thou  art  thus  incapable,  and  because  thou  art  thus  unwle,  therefore  to 
thee  does  the  gospel  come,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  seen 
to  dwell  in  the  gospel,  and  in  the  Saviour  himself,  and  not  at  all  in  the 
person  who  is  saved. 

The  command,  then,  which  brought  healing  with  it,  was  addiened  to 
one  who  was  utterly  incapable. 

But,  mark  you,  it  came  to  om  who  foas  per/edly  teUUnff,  for  this  man 
was  quite  prepared  to  do  whatever  Jesus  bade  him  do.  If  yon  had 
questioned  him  vou  would  have  found  no  desire  to  retain  that  withoed 
hand— -no  wish  tnat  his  fingers  should  remain  lifeless  and  useless.  If  von 
had  said  to  him,  '*  Poor  man,  would  you  like  to  have  your  hand  restoiea  ?'* 
tears  would  have  been  in  his  eyes,  and  he  would  have  replied,  *'  Ay,  that 
I  would,  that  I  might  earn  bread  for  my  dear  chiliben ;  uiat  I  might  not 
have  to  go  about  beting,  and  have  to  depend  upon  the  help  of  others,  or 
only  earn  a  hard  crust  with  this  left  hand  of  mine.  I  wish  above  all  things 
that  I  could  have  my  hand  restored ! "  But  the  worst  of  many  uncon- 
verted people  is  that  they  do  not  want  to  be  healed-nlo  not  want  to  be 
restorea.  As  soon  as  a  man  truly  longs  for  salvation,  then  has  salvation 
already  come  to  him ;  but  the  most  of  you  do  not  wish  to  be  saved. 
"  Oh,  say  you,  **  we  truly  wish  to  be  saved."  I  do  not  think  so,  for 
what  do  you  mean  by  being  saved  ?  Do  you  mean  being  saved  from 
going  down  to  hell  ?  Everybody,  of  course,  wishes  that.  Bid  you  ever 
meet  a  thief  that  would  not  like  to  be  saved  from  going  to  prison  or  being 
locked  up  bv  the  policeman  ?  But  when  we  talk  about  salvation,  we  mean 
being  saved  from  the  habit  of  wrong-doing ;  being  sayed  from  the  power 
of  evil,  the  love  of  sin,  the  practice  of  folly,  and  the  very  power  to  find 
pleasure  in  transgression.  Do  you  wish  to  be  saved  from  pleasurable 
and  gainful  sins  ?  Find  me  the  drunkard  who  sincerely  prays  to  be 
delivered  from  drunkenness.  Bring  me  an  unchaste  man  who  pines  to  be 
pure.  Find  me  one  who  is  an  habitual  liar  and  yet  longs  to  speak  the 
truth.  Bring  me  one  who  has  been  selfish  and  who  in  his  very  heart  hates 
himself  for  it,  and  longs  to  be  full  of  love  and  to  be  made  Ohristlike. 
Why,  half  die  battle  is  won  in  snch  cases.  The  initial  step  is  taken. 
The  parallel  holds  good  in  the  spiritual  world.  The  character  I  have  in 
my  mind's  eye  is  the  case  of  a  soul  desiring  to  be  what  it  cannot  be,  and 
to  do  what  it  cannot  do,  and  yet  desiring  it.  I  mean  the  man  who* 
cries  in  agony,  ''To  will  is  present  with  me,  but  how  to  perform  that 
which  is  good  I  find  not."  "  I  would,  but  cannot,  repent.  My  heart 
feels  like  a  stone.  I  would  love  Christ,  but,  alas,  I  feel  that  I  ana 
fettered  to  the  world.    I  would  be  holy,  but,  alas,  sin  Oomes  violently 


THE  WITHSBSD  HAKD«  413 

npon  m&9  and  carries  me  away."  It  is  to  auchpeople  that  Jeans  Christ's 
gospel  oomes  with  the  force  of  a  command.  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole^ 
my  friend  ?  Then  thou  mayest  be.  Doet  thoa  desire  to  be  saved  from 
an?  Hiou  mayest  be.  Dost  thou  wish  to  be  emancipated  from  the 
bondage  of  corruption  ?  Thou  mayest  be.  And  this  is  the  way  in  which 
thou  mayest  be  say^, — "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt 
be  saved" :  his  name  is  called  Jesus,  for  he  shall  save  his  people 
from  their  sins*  He  has  come  on  purpose  to  do  this  to  real  sinners,  and 
not  to  mere  pretenders,  for  it  is  dear  that  he  cannot  save  men  from  sins 
if  they  have  none.  He  cannot  ,heal  withered  hands  if  there  are  no 
withered  hands  to  be  healed.  He  comes  to  you  that  want  him,  to  you 
that  are  guilty,  to  you  whose  hands  are  withered.  Even  to  you  is  this 
glorious  word  of  the  good  news  proclaimed;  God  grant  you  grace  to 
Sear  it  believingly  and  to  feel  its  power ! 

U.  Secondly,  I  want  to  speak  a  little  upon  thb  person  who  oayb 
THB  ooxxAND.  It  wss  Jesu8  who  gave  it.  Be  said,  ^'  Stretch  forth 
thine  hand." 

Did  our  Lord  speak  this  in  ignorance,  supposing  that  the  man  could 
do  so?  By  no  means,  for  in  hmi  is  abundant  knowled^.  He  had  just 
rc^  the  hearts  of  the  Pharisees,  and  you  may  be  sure  that  he  who  could 
read  those  subtle  spirits  could  certainly  see  the  outward  condition  of 
this  patient.  He  knew  that  the  man's  hand  was  withered,  and  yet  he  said, 
**  Stretch  forth  thine  hand."  When  I  lead  in  Scripture  the  command, 
**  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  I  am  sure  that  Jesus  Christ  knows 
what  he  is  saying.  **  60  ve,"  said  he,  "  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature.  Yes,  to  every  creature.  Suppose  that  some 
of  his  disciples  had  been  very  orthodox,  and  had  come  back  and  said, 
''Lord,  was  there  not  a  mistake  about  the  persons?  Why  preach  to 
every  creature  ?  Are  not  some  of  them  dead  in  sin  ?  We  would  rather 
preach  to  character."  I  have  heard  some  of  Christ's  professed  servants 
say  that  to  bid  dead  sinners  live  is  of  no  more  use  than  to  shake  a  hand- 
kerchief over  the  graves  in  which  the  dead  are  buried  ;  and  my  reply 
to  them  has  been,  ''Ton  are  quite  right.  Do  not  do  it,  for  it  is  evident 
you  are  not  called  to  it.  60  home  and  go  to  bed.  The  Lord  never  sent 
you  to  do  anything  of  the  kind,  for  you  own  you  have  no  faith  in  it." 
lout  if  my  Master  sent  me  as  the  herald  of  resurrection,  and  bade  me 
shake  a  handkerchief  over  the  graves  of  the  dead,  I  would  do  it,  and  I 
should  expect  that  this  poor  handkerchief,  if  ?ie  commanded  it  to  be 
shaken,  would  raise  the  aead,  for  Jesus  Christ  knows  what  he  is  doing 
when  he  sends  his  servants.  If  he  does  not  send  us,  it  is  a  fool's  errand 
indeed  to  go  and  say,  ''Te  dead  men,  live";  but  his  commission  makes 
all  the  difference.  We  are  to  say  to  the  dead,  ''Awake,  and  Christ 
shall  give  yon  life."  What>  wake  nrst,  and  then  get  life  afterwards  ?  I 
shall  not  try  to  explain  it,  but  that  is  the  order  of  the  Scripture :  "  Awake, 
thou  that  aleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee 
life."  If  my  Master  puts  it  so,  I  am  quite  satisfied  to  quote  ms  words. 
I  cannot  expkiin  it,  but  I  delight  to  take  him  in  his  own  way,  and  blindly 
follow  his  evenr  step,  and  believe  his  every  word.  If  he  bids  me  say, 
"  Arise  from  the  dead,"  I  will  gladly  do  it  now.  lu  the  name  of  Jesus, 
TD  dead  ones,  live.  Break,  ye  hard  hearts.  Dissolve^  ye  hearts  of  steel. 
Believe,  ye  unbelievers.  Lay  hold  on  Christy  yc  ungodly  ones.  If  he  speak 


414  MSTBOPOLITAN  TABEBKACLB  PULPIT. 

by  his  minisfcers,  that  word  shall  be  with  power ;  if  he  speak  not  bf  iib»  it 
is  little  matter  how  we  speak.  Well  may  the  judicious  brother  say  tiiat 
there  would  be  no  use  in  his  bidding  the  dead  arise,  for  he  confesses  thtt 
his  Master  is  not  with  him.  Let  him,  therefore,  go  home  till  his  Master 
is  with  him.  If  his  Master  were  with  him,  then  would  he  speak  his 
Master's  word,  and  he  would  not  be  afraid  of  being  called  foolish.  It 
is  the  liord  Jesns  Christ  who  says  to  this  man  with  the  withered  hand^ 
"  Stretch  forth  thine  hand." 

To  me  it  is  a  sweet  thought  that  he  is  able  to  give  power  to  do 
what  he  gives  the  command  to  do.  Dear  soul,  when  yon  are  bidden  to 
believe,  and  you  stand  with  tears  in  your  eyes  and  say,  "  Sir,  I  cannot 
understand,  and  I  cannot  believe,"  dost  thou  not  know  that  he  who  bids 
thee  believe  can  give  thee  power  to  believe  ?  When  he  speaks  through 
his  servants,  or  through  his  word,  or  directly  by  his  Spirit  upon  your 
conscience,  he  who  h\&  thee  do  this  is  no  mere  man,  but  the  Son  of  Ood, 
and  thou  must  say  to  him, "  Good  Lord,  I  beseech  thee  give  me  now  ttie 
faith  which  thou  dost  ask  of  me.  Give  me  the  repentance  thou  dost 
command ; "  and  he  will  hear  thy  prayer,  and  faith  shall  spring  np 
within  thee. 

Did  you  never  notice,  dear  souls,  Christ's  way  of  doing  his  work  ? 
His  way  is  generally  this, — ^first,  to  give  the  command,  then  to  help  the 
heart  to  turn  the  command  into  a  prayer,  and  then  to  answer  that  prayer 
by  a  promise.  Take  these  specimens.  The  Lord  says,  **  Mrice  you  a 
new  heart."  That  is  clearly  a  command.  But  by-and-by  you  find  the 
psalmist  David,  in  the  fifty-first  psalm,  saying,  "  Create  in  me  a  clean 
heart,  0  Gbd."  And  then,  if  you  turn  to  Ezekiel,  you  get  the  promise, 
"A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you."  First,  he  commands  you;  next 
he  sets  you  praying  fbr  the  blessing ;  and  then  he  gives  it  to  you. 

Take  another ;  the  command  is,  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  why  will  ye  die,  O 
house  of  Israel  ?  "  Then  comes  the  prayer,  **  Turn  thou  me,  and  I  shall 
be  turned  "  ;  and  then  follows  the  blessed  turning  of  which  the  aposl^e 
Paul  speaks  when  he  says  that  God  has  sent  his  Son  to  blefis  us  by  torii- 
ing  every  one  of  us  from  his  iniquity. 

Take  another  case,  and  let  it  refer  to  pm'ging.  We  find  the  Lord 
commanding  us  to  "purge  out  the  old  leaven  " ;  and  straightway  there 
comes  the  prayer,  **  Furge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  cleah,"  and 
then  on  the  heels  of  it  comes  the  promise,  "  I  will  purely  purge  away  thy 
dross."  Or,  take  another  kind  of  precept,  of  a  sweeter  sort,  bel(>figing  to 
the  Christian.  You  are  continually  told  to  sing :  "  Sing  praises  to  Qod, 
sing  praises :  sin^  praises  unto  our  King,  sing  praises."  In  another 
place  we  meet  with  the  prayer,  "  Open  thou  my  lips,  and  my  month 
shall  shew  forth  thy  praise ;"  and  in  a  thil*d  Scripture  we  have  tlie  divine 
promise,  **This  people  have  I  formed  for  myself;  they  shall  shew  fbrth 
my  praise."  See^  then,  the  Master's  way  of  going  to  work — ^he  commands 
you  to  beKeve,  or  repent ;  he  then  sets  you  a-praying  that  you  may  be  en- 
abled to  do  it,  and  then  he  gives  you  grace  to  do  it,  so  that  the  blessmg  mar 
really  come  to  your  soul ;  for  everywhere  gospel  commands  are  uttered 
bv  Christ  himself  to  men's  hearts,  and  they,  receiving  them,  find  &e 
abili^  coming  with  the  comitiand. 

"  But  he  is  not  here,"  says  one,  "  he  is  not  here."  Verily  I  say  xmta 
yon  in  his  name,  he  is  here.    His  #ord  is,  *'  Lo,  I  am  with  you  iiway. 


THB  WITHEBSD  HAZn).  419 

eren  to  tbe  end  of  the  world " :  till  this  diroensation  shall  be  ended 
Christ  will  be  where  the  gospel  is  preached.  Where  his  message  is 
honestly  and  truthfiillj  delivered  with  the  Spirit  of  Qod,  there  Jesutf 
Christ  himself  is  Tirtually  present,  speaking  through  the  lips  of  his  ser- 
vants. Therefore,  dear  soul  with  the  withered  hand,  to-night  Jesus  himself 
says  to  thee,  '^  Stretch  forth  thine  hand."  He  is  present  to  heal,  and 
his  method  is  to  command.  He  now  commands.  0  gracious  Spirit,  be 
present  that  men  may  obey. 

III.  It  is  time  for  a  few  words  upon  another  point,  and  that  is  upon 
THE  COMJCAND  ITSELF.  The  command  it&elf  was,  "Stretch  forth  thine 
hand."  I  notice  about  that  command  that  it  goes  to  the  very  essence  of 
Uie  matter.  It  is  not,  "Rub  your  right  hand  with  your  left";  it  ii^ 
not, "  Show  your  hand  to  the  priest,  and  let  him  perform  a  ceremony 
npon  it";  it  is  not,  "Wash  your  hand";  but  it  is,  "Stretch  it  forth. 
That  was  the  very  thing  he  could  not  do,  and  thus  the  command  went 
to  the  very  root  of  the  mischief.  As  soon  as  the  hand  was  stretched 
ont  it  was  healed ;  and  the  command  went  directly  to  the  desired  mark. 

Now,  my  Lord  and  Master  does  not  say  to  anv  of  you  sinners  to-night, 
"  Go  home  and  pray,"    I  hope  you  will  pray,  but?  that  is  not  the  great 
gospel  command!    The  gospel  is,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved?'    Paul  stood  at  the  dead  of  night,  with  the 
troubling  jailer,  who  hardly  understood  his  own  question,  when  he  cried, 
''Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved?"  and  Paul  according  to  the  prac- 
tice of  some  should  have  said,  "We  must  have  a  little  prayer,"  or,  "You 
most  go  home  and  read  the  Bible,  and  I  must  farther  instruct  you  until 
joa  are  in  a  better  state."    He  did  nothing  of  the  sort,  but  there  and 
then  Paul  said,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."    There  is  no  gospel  preached  unless  you  come  to  this;  fo^ 
salvation  comes  by  faith,  and  b^  nothing  short  of  it.    That  is  jnst 
the  difficult  point,  you  tell  me.     les,  and  at  the  difficult  point  this  com- 
mand strikes  and  says,  "  Stretch  forth  thine  hdnd  ";  or  in  the  case  of  tM 
sinner,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."    For,  remember,  all  thai 
any  of  yon  ever  do  in  the  matter  of  eternal  life,  which  has  not  faith 
in  it,  can  be  nothing  after  all  but  the  effort  of  your  carnal  nature,  and 
that  is  death.    What  can  come  of  the  movements  of  death  but  a  still 
de^r  death  ?    Death  can  never  produce  life.    Prayer  without  fiiith  f 
What  sort  of  prayer  is  it  ?    It  is  the  prayer  of  a  man  who  does  not 
believe  God.    Shall  a  man  expect  to  receive  anything  of  the  Lord  if  he 
does  not  believe  that  God  is,  and  that  he  is  the  rewarder  of  them  that 
dikgentlv  seek  him  ?    "  Oh,  but  I  must  repent  before  I  believe,"  says 
one.    What  kind  of  repentance  is  that  which  does  not  trust  God— ^ 
does  not  believe  in  God  ?    An  unbelieving  repentance — ^is  it  not  a  selfish 
expression  of  regret  because  of  punishment  incurred?    Faith  must  be 
mixed  with  every  prayer  and  every  act  of  repentance,  or  they  cannot  be 
acceptable ;  and  hence  we  must  go  right  straight  to  this  point,  and  de- 
mand faith,  saying :  "  Believe  and  live ; "  "  Stretch  forth  tnine  hand." 

That  stretching  forth  of  the  hand  was  entirely  an  act  o/faith.    It  waft 
not  an  act  of  sense.    As  a  matter  of  sense  and  nature  the  man  wa4 

r^weriess  for  it.    He  oidy  did  it  because  his  faith  btonght  the  abilitv. 
say  it  was  a  pure  act  of  &ith,  that  stretching  ont  of  the  hand.    ^  I  do 
not  nnderstana  as  yet,^'  says  one,  ''how  a  man  can  do  what  he  cannot 


lie  KETBOPOLITAN  TABEBKACLE  PULPIT. 

do?"  Bat  you  will  understand  a  great  many  other  wonderful  things 
when  the  Lord  teaches  you ;  for  the  Christian  life  is  a  series  of  para- 
doxes ;  and  for  my  own  part  I  doubt  an  experience  unless  there  is  some- 
thing paiBdoxical  about  it.  At  any  rate  I  am  sure  that  it  is  so — ^that  I 
who  can  do  nothing  of  myself  can  do  everything  through  Christ  which 
strengtheneth  me.    The  man  who  is  seeking  Christ  can  do  nothing,  and 

fety  if  he  beheveth  on  Christ,  he  can  do  everything,  and  his  withered 
and  is  stretched  out. 

But,  in  addition  to  its  being  an  act  of  &ith,  it  seems  to  me  it  was  an 
act  of  decision.  There  sit  the  haughty,  frowning  Pharisees.  Yonr  imagi- 
nation can  easily  picture  those  fine-looking  gentlemen,  with  fringes  to 
their  garments,  and  phylacteries  across  their  foreheads.  There,  too,  are 
the  scribes  all  wrapped  up  in  their  formal  array — ^very  grave  and 
knowing  men.  Persons  were  almost  afraid  to  look  at  them,  they  were 
80  holy,  and  so  contemptuous.  See,  there  they  sit,  like  judges  of  assiase, 
to  try  the  Saviour.  Now,  Christ  does,  as  it  were,  single  out  this  poor  man 
Trith  a  withered  hand  to  be  his  witness ;  and  by  his  command  he  practically 
asks  him  which  he  will  do— will  he  obey  the  Pharisees  or  himself?  It  is 
wrong  to  heal  on  the  Sabbath  day,  say  the  Pharisees.  What  say  you 
with  the  withered  hand  over  yonder  ?  If  you  agree  with  the  Pharisees, 
of  course  you  will  decline  to  be  healed  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and  you  won't 
stretch  out  your  hand;  but  if  you  agree  with  Jesus,  ^ou  will  be  glad  to 
be  healed,  &tbbath  or  no  Sabbath.  Ah,  I  see,  you  will  stretch  out  your 
hand  and  break  away  from  the  tyrants  who  would  keep  you  withered. 
The  man  did  as  good  as  vote  for  Cfhrist  when  he  stretched  forth  his  hand. 
Many  a  soul  has  found  peace  when  at  last  he  has  held  up  his  hand 
and  said,  ''Sink  or  swim,  lost  or  saved ;  Christ  for  me,  Christ  for  me  ! 
If  I  perish  I  will  cling  to  his  cross-foot,  and  to  him  alone  will  I  look  ;  for 
I  am  on  his  side,  whether  he  will  have  compassion  upon  me  or  not." 
When  that  act  of  decision  is  performed,  then  comes  the  healing.  If  yoa 
hold  up  your  hand  for  Christ,  he  will  make  it  a  good  hand  though  now 
it  is  all  paralyzed  and  drooping,  like  a  dead  thing.  Unworthy  as  yoa 
are,  he  has  the  power,  as  you  hold  up  your  hand  for  him,  to  put  life  into 
it»  and  to  give  you  the  blessing  your  heart  desires. 

I  think  I  hear  somebody  say,  ''  Oh,  sir,  vou  would  not  be  praising 
me  too  umch  if  you  were  to  say  that  I  do  wish  to  be  saved,  and  saved  in 
Christ's  own  way ;  I  would  give  my  very  eyes  to  love  him."  Ah,  you 
need  not  lose  your  e^res :  give  him  your  trust ;  give  him  your  soul's  ^res. 
Look  to  him  and  live.  "  Oh,  that  I  could  be  saved,"  says  one ;  **  How 
I  long  for  it."  May  the  Holy  Ghost  lead  you  to  resolve  in  your  own 
soul  tnat  you  will  not  be  savea  by  anybody  but  by  Christ.  0  that  you 
would  determine — 

''  He  that  suffer  d  in  my  stead, 
Shall  my  Physician  be  ; 
I  will  not  be  comforted 
Till  Jesos  comforts  me.** 

When  that  is  done,  I  do  not  doubt  that,  through  &ith  in  the  physiciaiiy 
you  will  be  Quickened  by  divine  power,  and  you  will  find  healing  at  onoe. 
lY.  So  I  will  jost  lead  you  on,  in  the  fourth  place,  to  notice  this 
Kur's  OBEDIKNCB.  We  are  told  that  he  stretched  forth  his  hand.  Christ 
9aid^ ''  Stretch  forth  thin^  hand  " :  Mark  says, "  And  he  did  so."    That  is 


THE  WITHSBED  HAND.  417 

to  BKj,  he  Btrefcched  forth  his  hand.  Now,  observe  that  this  man  did  not 
do  wmothmg  elss  in  preference  to  what  Jeeue  commanded,  thoa^h 
many  awakened  sinners  are  foolish  enough  to  try  experiments.  Ohnst 
aaid,  ^  Stretch  forth  thine  hand";  and  he  did  so.  ti,  instead  of  that^ 
the  man  had  walked  across  the  synagoeae  and  brought  himself  up  to 
Christy  the  Master  would  have  said,  '' I  bade  thee  ao  no  such  thin^. 
I  bade  thee  stretch  forth  thy  hand."  Suppose  he  had  then  with  his 
left  hand  begun  to  grasp  the  roll  of  the  law  as  it  stood  in  the  synagogue, 
and  had  kissed  it  out  of  reverence,  would  that  have  been  of  anv  use  ? 
The  Master  would  only  have  said,  **  I  bade  thee  stretch  forth  thy  hand." 
Alas,  there  are  many,  many  souls  that  say,  **  We  aie  bidden  to  trust  in 
Jesus,  but  instead  of  that  we  will  attend  the  means  of  grace  reenlarly." 
Do  that  by  all  means,  but  not  as  a  substitute  for  faith,  or  it  will  become 
a  vain  confidence.  The  command  is,  **  Believe  and  live";  attend  to  that, 
whatever  else  you  do.  ''Well,  I  shall  take  to  reading  good  books; 
perhaps  I  shall  get  good  that  way."  Bead  the  good  bool^  by  all  means, 
but  that  is  not  the  gospel :  the  gospel  is, ''  Beueve  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  thou  shidt  be  saved."  Suppose  a  physician  has  a  patient 
tinder  his  care,  and  he  says  to  him, ''  You  are  to  take  a  bath  in  the 
morning ;  it  will  be  of  very  great  service  to  vour  disease."  But  the  man 
takes  a  cup  of  tea  in  the  morning  instead  of  the  bath,  and  he  says, 
**  That  will  do  as  well,  I  have  no  doubt."  What  does  his  physician  say 
when  he  enauirea — ^**Did  you  follow  my  rule?"  "No,  I  did  not." 
''  Then  you  ap  not  expect,  of  course,  that  there  will  be  any  good  result, 
for  you  have  disobeyed  me."  So  we,  practically,  say  to  Jesus  Christ, 
when  we  are  under  searching  of  soul,  ''Lord,  thou  badest  me  trust 
thee,  but  I  would  sooner  do  something  ebe.  Lord,  I  want  to  have 
horhble  convictions ;  I  want  to  be  shaken  over  hell's  mouth ;  I  want  to 
be  alarmed  and  distressed."  Yes,  you  want  anvthing  but  what  Christ 
prescribes  for  you,  which  is  that  you  should  simply  trust  him.  Whether 
you  feel  or  do  not  feel,  you  should  just  come  and  cast  yourself  on  him, 
that  ho  may  save  you,  ana  he  alone.  "But  you  do  not  mean  to  say  that 
you  speak  against  praying,  and  reading  good  books,  and  so  on  ?  "  Not 
one  single  word  do  I  speak  against  any  of  those  things,  any  more  than, 
if  I  were  the  physician  I  quoted,  I  should  speak  against  the  man's  drink- 
ing a  cup  of  tea.  Let  him  drink  his  tea ;  out  not  if  he  drinks  it  instead 
of  taking  the  bath  which  I  prescribe  for  him.  So  let  the  man  pray : 
the  more  the  better.  Let  the  man  search  the  Scriptures ;  but,  remember, 
that  if  these  things  are  put  in  the  place  of  simple  &ith  in  Christ,  the  soul 
will  be  mined.  Let  me  give  you  a  text :  did  you  ever  hear  it  quoted 
properly?  "Ye  search  uie  Scriptures,  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have 
eternal  life ;  but  ye  will  not  come  unto  me  that  ye  might  have  life." 
That  is  where  the  life  is — in  Christ ;  not  even  in  searching  Scripture, 
good  as  the  searching  of  Scripture  is.  If  we  put  even  golden  idols  into 
Sie  place  of  Christ,  such  idols  are  as  much  to  be  broken  as  if  the^  were 
idols  of  mud  or  idols  of  dung.  It  matters  not  how  good  an  action  is,  if  it 
is  not  what  Christ  command^  you  will  not  be  saved  by  it.  "  Stretch  forth 
thine  hand,"  says  he ;  that  was  the  way  hj  which  the  healing  was  to 
oome :  the  man  did  nothing  else,  and  he  received  a  gracious  reward. 

Notice,  that  ho  did  not  raiee  any  piestions.    Now  this  man  had  a  feir 
opportunity  of  raiimg  questions.  1  think  he  might  very  feirly  have 


418  XXTBOPOLITAH  TABEBKAOLB  PULPIT. 

stood  up  in  his  place  and  said,  ^This  is  inoonsistent,  good 
Thou  sajest  to  me,  'Stretch  forth  thine  hand/  Now,  thon  knowesfc 
that  if  I  can  stretch  forth  my  hand  there  ails  me  nothing,  and  therefore 
there  is  no  room  for  thy  miracle.  And  if  I  cannot  stretch  forth  my  hand, 
how  canst  thoa  tell  me  so  to  do  ?  "  Have  yon  not  heard  some  of  onr 
friends^  who  like  to  make  jests  of  holy  things,  and  to  scoff  at  oar  doc- 
trines of  grace,  declare  that  we  teach,  "  You  can  and  yon  can't ;  yon 
shall  and  yon  shan't*'  ?  Their  description  is  right  enough,  thongh  meant 
to  ridicule  us.  We  do  not  object  to  their  patting  it  thus  if  so  it  pleases 
them.  We  teach  paradoxes  and  contradictions  to  the  eye,  if  you  only 
consider  the  letter ;  but  if  you  get  down  into  the  innermost  spint,  it  is 
within  these  contradictions  that  the  eternal  trath  is  found.  We  know 
that  the  man  is  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins^feteeped  in  a  spiritad  and 
moral  torpor,  out  of  which  he  cannot  raise  himself ;  yet  do  we  by  the 
Master's  own  command  say,  '*  Awake,  thou  that  steepest,  and  arise  fiom 
the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  life ; "  or,  in  other  words,  we  Baj 
to  the  withered  hand,  "  Be  thou  stretched  out,"  and  it  is  done.  The 
blessed  result  justifies  that  very  teaching  which  in  itself  seems  to  worthy 
of  sarcastic  remark. 

Notice  farther  that  what  the  man  did  was,  that  h6  was  fold  id  sfrOeh 
out  his  hand,  and  he  did  stretch  out  his  hand.  If  you  had  asked  him^ 
"Did  you  stretch  out  your  hand  ?"  nerhaps  he  would  have  said,  "Of 
course  I  did.  Nobody  else  did."  "  Wait  a  minute,  my  good  man.  Did 
you  of  yourself  stretch  out  your  hand  ?  "  "  Oh,  no,  he  would  say, 
"  because  I  have  tried  many  times  before  and  I  could  not,  bat  tliis  time 
I  did  do  it."  "  Then  how  was  it  that  vou  were  able  to  do  it  ?  "  **  Jesns 
told  me  to  do  it,  and  I  was  willing,  ana  it  was  done."  I  do  not  expect 
that  he  could  have  explained'  the  rationale  of  it,  and  periiaps  we  cannot 
eitiier.  It  must,  indeed,  have  been  a  very  beautifal  sight  to  Bee  that  poor, 
withered,  limp,  wilted  hand,  first  hanging  down,  snd  then  stretched  oat 
before  all  the  people  in  the  middle  of  the  synagogue.  Do  you  not  see  (te 
blood  begin  to  flow,  the  nerves  gaining  power,  and  the  hMiA  opening 
like  a  revivii^g  flower  ?  Oh,  the  delight  of  his  isparkHng  etes  as  at  first  m 
could  only  fix  them  Upon  the  litue  fing^  and  the  thntnb  to  bee  if 
they  were  really  all  alive  I  Then  he  turned,  looked  at  that  btessed  One 
who  had  healed  him,  and  seemed  anxious  to  M  down  at  his  feet  and  give 
him  all  the  praise!  Even  so,  we  cannot  exblain  ctonversian  and  legen- 
eration  and  the  new  birth,  and  all  that ;  out  we  do  know  this,  that 
Jesus  Christ  says,  ^Believe,"  and  We  belieVe.  By  oUr  owtt  f>oWBr  ?  No. 
But  a&  we  will  tb  beliete  f  and  he  ^ves  tt5  that  will)  there  dottM  a  power 
to  do  according  to  his  good  pleasure. 

I  look  around  me,  wondenng  where  is  the  ttian  ^h  the  With^:^  hind 
to-night,  or  where  is  the  woman  with  the  withered  hand.  To  nutA  I 
would  say  in  my  Master's  name,  "Stretch  out  that  hand  of  thine."  It  is 
an  auspicious  moment.  A  great  thing  shall  be  done  unto  thee.  Belie?e 
thou  now.  Thou  hast  said  aforetime,  "I  never  can  believe."  Now  ti^usi 
Jesus.    Sink  or  'swim,  trust  him. 

^  Venture  on  him,  venture  wholly ; 
Let  no  other  trust  intrude, 

None  but  Jesus 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good.** 


A 


THS  WITHERED  HAKI).  410 

Onr  Lord  Jesns  never  casts  away  a  mnner  Who  tmsts  in  him.  Oh  I 
would  almost  put  it  like  this, — ^If  you  do  not  fbel  that  yon  can  come,  or 
ought  to  come^  to  Christ,  being  so  unworthy,  steal  in  ;  steal  into  hii 
house  of  mercy,  just  as  you  have  known  a  nungry  do^  steal  in  where 
ihere  has  been  something  to  eat.  The  butcher  very  likely  would  deal 
him  a  kick  if  he  saw  him  afber  a  bone ;  but  if  he  once  gets  it  he  may  al( 
well  make  off  with  it,  and  keep  it  to  himself.  There  is  this  blessed  thing 
about  my  Master — if  you  can  get  a  crumb  from  under  his  table  he  will 
not  take  it  from  you,  for  he  never  cast^  out  those  that  come.  However 
they  come,  he  neither  turns  them  away  nor  takes  back  the  blessing.  He 
never  says, "  Come  here,  you  sir,  you  have  no  right  to  hope  in  my  grace." 
Bemember  the  woman  in  the  press  that  dared  not  come  to  Christ  before 
his  face,  but  who  came  behind  him,  and  toachted  the  hem  of  his  garment. 
She  stole  the  cure  from  him,  as  it  were,  Will  he,  nil  he,  and  what  did  he 
Bay?  "Come  here,  my  woman,  comb  here,  what  have  you  been  at? 
TThat  right  had  you  to  touch  my  garment,  and  to  steal  a  dure  like  this  ? 
A  curse  shall  come  upon  thee."  Did  he  speak  thus  in  indignation? 
Not  at  all :  not  at  all !  He  bade  her  come,  and  she  told  him  all  the  truth, 
and  he  said,  "Daughter,  be  of  ^ood  cheer.  Thy  faith  hath  made  thee 
whole."  Get  at  him,  soul !  Behind  or  before,  push  for  a  touch  of  him ! 
Make  a  dash  at  him.  If  there  be  a  crowd  of  devils  between  you  and 
Christ,  plough  your  way  through  them  by  resolute  faith.  Though  you 
be  the  most  unworthy  wretch  that  ever  trusted  him,  trust  him  now,  that 
it  may  be  told  in  heaven  that  thet^  is  a  bigger  sinner  saved  to-day  than 
ever  Tvas  saved  before.  Such  a  salvation  wiU  makie  Christ  more  glorious 
than  he  ever  was ;  and  if  yours  is  a  worse  case  than  he  ever  touched  with 
his  healing  hand  to  this  d%y,  well  then,  when  he  has  touched  and  healed 
you,  as  he  wilL  there  will  be  morie  praise  to  Mm  in  heaven  than  he  ever 
had  before.  0  soul,  I  would  I  could  persuade  thee  to  draw  nigh  to  him, 
but  my  Master  can  do  it.    May  he  d^w  thee  by  his  great  grace ! 

V.    The  last  thing  to  consider  is  the  REstJLT  of  this  BTUETd&tKa 

OUT  OF  THE  liAN'd  HAKB  IN  OBBDIENCnB  TO  THE  COIDIAND.     H^  Wa& 

healed. 

I  have  already  iried  to  set  befoi^  you  the  &ct  that  the  healing  was 
manifest;  it  was  also  immediate.  The  man  had  hbt  to  stand  there  h,  long 
time,  but  his  hand  was  straightway  healed :  and  yet  the  cure  ^v&mriM, 
for  his  hand  was  whole  like  unto  the  other,  lust  as  useM  as  his  left 
hand  had  been,  with  all  the  extra  dexterity  which  naturally  belongs  to 
the  right.  It  was  perfectly  healed,  though  healed  in  a  moment.  You 
may  depend  uponi^  that  it  was  permanently  healed ;  for,  though  I  have 
heard  it  said  tnat  saved  souls  M  from  grace  and  perish,  I  never  believed 
it,  for  I  have  never  read  of  any  of  the  cases  whi^  our  Lord  cured  that 
they  became  bad  again.  I  never  heard  of  a  withered  hand  that  was 
healed  and  was  paralyzed  a  second  time.  Nor  will  it  ever  be.  My 
Master's  cures  last  for  ever.  I  remember  seeing  in  the  shop  windows 
0ome  years  ago,  that  there  was  to  be  had  within  a  "moDientary  cure  " 
for  the  toothache.  I  noticed  after  a  few  months  that  the  proprietor 
of  that  valuable  medicine,  whatever  it  was,  had  discovered  that  nobody 
wanted  a  momentart/  cure,  and  so  the  word  "momentary"  was  changed 
for  the  word  ^'instanlaneous"  which  was  a  great  improvement.  I  am 
afraid  that  some  people's  salvation  is  a  momentary  salvation.    They  get 


r 


480  HBTROPOLITUr  TABSBNACUB  PULPIT, 

A  lort  of  RnK»y  and  they  lose  it  again.  They  get  peace,  and  hy-and-by  it 
it  gone.  What  is  wanted  is  pennanenoe,  and  there  is  always  permanence 
in  the  work  of  Christ.  "  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repent- 
ance," and  his  heiding  is  never  revoked.  0  soul,  dost  thou  see,  then,  what 
is  to  be  had  at  this  moment  of  Jesus?  Healing  for  lift;  deliverance 
from  the  wiUiering  power  of  sin  through  life  and  through  eterniir. 
This  is  to  be  had  by  cheerful  obedience  to  the  matchless  command : 
"Stretch  forth  thine  hand,"  or,  in  other  words,  ''Trust,  trust,  trust." 
Only  Uiis  wec^  I  was  talking  with  one  who  said  he  could  not  trust 
Ohrist,  and  I  said,  ''But,  my  dear  friend,  we  cannot  have  that.  Could 
you  trust  fn$?"  Yes,  he  could  trust  me.  "Why  can  you  trust  me  and 
not  trust  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  I  will  put  it  the  other  way.  If  you  said  to 
me  I  cannot  trust  you,  what  would  that  imply  ?  "  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  it 
would  mean,  of  course,  that  you  were  a  very  bad  fellow,  if  I  could  not  trust 
on."  "Ah,"  I  said, " that  is  exactly  what  you  insinuate  when  you  say, 
cannot  trust  Jesus ;  for  he  that  believeth  not  hath  made  him  a  liar. 
Do  you  mean  to  say  that  Ood  is  a  liar  ?  "  The  person  to  whom  I  rooke 
drew  back  with  horror  from  that  consequence,  and  said  "  No,  sir,  I  am 
sure  that  God  is  true."  Very  well,  then,  you  can  certainly  trust  one  who 
is  true.  There  can  be  no  difficulty  in  that ;  to  trust  and  rest  upon 
one  whom  you  cannot  doubt  must  follow  as  a  matter  of  course  upon  your 
good  opinion  of  him.  Your  belief  that  he  is  true  is  a  sort  of  &ith. 
Throw  yourself  upon  him  now.  Just  as  I  lean  upon  this  rail  with  all 
my  weight,  lean  luce  that  upon  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  That 
is  faith.  If  God's  mercy  in  Christ  cannot  save  thee,  be  lost.  Make  it 
thy  sole  hope  and  confidence.  Hang  on  thy  God  in  Christ  Jesus  as  the 
vessel  hangs  upon  the  naiL  As  a  man  casts  his  whole  weight  upon  his 
bed,  so  throw  thyself  unreiervedly  upon  the  divine  love  wnich  was  seen 
in  Jesus,  and  is  seen  there  still.  If  thou  doest  this  thou  shalt  be  saved. 
And  I  do  not  mean  merely  that  you  shall  be  saved  from  hdl ;  for  the 
power  of  fiaith,  working  in  vou  by  God  the  Holy  Spirit,  shall  save  you 
m)m  loving  sin  any  more :  being  forgiven,  you  will  henceforth  love  him 
who  forgives  you,  and  you  will  receive  a  new  principle  of  action  which 
shall  be  strong  enough  to  break  the  bands  of  your  old  habits,  and  you 
shall  rise  into  a  pure  and  holy  life.  If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free,  you 
shall  be  free  indeed ;  and  free  you  shall  be  at  once  if  now  you  trust  hiin, 
Tbib  Lord  grant  his  blessing,  for  Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


POBTIOH  07  SOBIFTUBE  BfiAD  BEFOBE  SERKON— Matthew  xii.  1—29, 


HTiors  7B0M  "Cub  Own  Hymk  Book"-*391,  894|  540. 


^^ti[0j0lttmi  ^ixhrmdt 


THE  aOAME  AND  SPITTING. 


^1 


Dblitbbbd  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  July  27th,  1879,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


'*I  gare  my  taek  to  tlie  smiton,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  o£f 
I  hid  not  my  fiue  £(om  shame,  and  ipitttng." — ^iMiah  L  6. 

Of  whom  speakefch  the  prophet  this  ?    Of  himself  or  of  some  ofchet  ? 
We  cannot  doubt  bat  what  Isaiah  here  wrote  concerning  the  Lord 
Jesns  Christ.    Is  not  this  one  of  the  prophecies  to  which  onr  Lord 
himself  referred  in  the  incident  recordea  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of 
Luke's  gospel  at  the  thirty-first  verse?  "Then  he  took  unto  mm  the 
twelve,  and  daid  unto  them.  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  all 
things  that  are  written  by  the  prophets  concerning  the  Son  of  man  shall 
be  accomplished.     For  he  shall  be  delivered  unto  the  Gentiles,  and  shall 
be  mocked,  and  spitefully  entreated,  and  spitted  on:   and  they  shall 
flconrge  him,  and  put  him  to  death."    Such  a  remarkable  prophecy  of 
scourging  and  spitting  as  this  which  is  now  before  us  must  surely  refer 
to  the  Lord  Jesus ;  its  highest  fulfilment  is  assuredly  found  in  him  alone. 
Of  whom  else,  let  me  ask,  could  you  conceive  the  prophet  to  have  spoken 
if  you  read  the  whole  chapter  ?    Of  whom  else  could  he  say  in  the  same 
breath, "  I  clothe  the  heavens  with  blackness,  and  I  make  sackcloth  their 
covering.    I  gave  my  back  to  the  smitcrs,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that 
plucked  off  the  hair."  (Verses  3  and  6.)    What  a  descent  from  the  om- 
nipotence which  veils  the  heavens  with  clouds  to  the  gracious  condescen- 
sion which  does  not  veil  its  own  face,  but  permits  it  to  be  spat  upon !  No 
other  could  thufl  have  spoken  of  himself  but  he  who  is  both  God  and 
man.   Ha  must  be  divine :  how  else  could  he  say,  "  Behold,  at  my  rebuke 
I  dry  up  the  sea,  I  make  the  rivers  a  wilderness  "  ?  (Verse  2.)    And  yet 
he  must  at  the  same  time  be  a  ''Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with 
grief,"  for  there  is  a  strange  depth  of  pathos  in  the  words,  "  I  gave  my 
back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair  :  I 
hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting."     Whatever  others  may 
say,  we  believe  that  the  speaker  in  this  verse  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  tiie 
King  of  the  Jews,  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Son  of  man,  our  Redeemer. 
It  is  the  Judge  of  Israel  whom  they  have  smitten  with  a  rod  upon  the 
cheek  who  here  plaintively  declr^res  the  griefe  which  he  has  unoergone. 
No.  1,48G. 


422  METROPOLITAK  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

We  have  before  ns  the  langaage  of  prophecy,  bat  it  is  as  aoonrate  as 
though  it  had  been  written  at  the  moment  oi  the  event.  Isaiah  might 
have  been  one  of  the  Evangelists,  so  exactly  does  he  describe  what  our 
Savionr  endured. 

I  have  already  laid  before  yon  in  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures  some  of 
the  passages  of  the  New  Testament  wherein  the  soonrging  and  the  shame 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  are  described.  We  saw  him  first  at  the  tribunal  of 
his  own  countrymen  in  Matthew  xxvi.,  and  we  read,  **  Then  did  they  spit 
in  his  &ce,  and  buffeted  him  ;  and  others  smote  him  with  the  palms  of 
their  hands."  It  was  in  the  hail  of  the  high  priest,  among  his  own 
countrymen,  that  first  of  all  the  shamefiil  deeds  of  scorn  were  wrought 
upon  him.  **  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not.'' 
His  worst  foes  were  they  of  his  own  household;  they  deq)i8ed  and 
abhorred  him,  and  would  have  none  of  him.  His  own  Father's  husband- 
men said  among  themselves, — "This  is  the  heir ;  let  us  kill  him,  and  let 
us  seize  on  his  inheritance."  This  was  his  treatment  at  the  hand  of  the 
house  of  Israel. 

The  same  treatment,  or  the  like  thereto,  was  accorded  him  in  Herod's 
palace,  where  the  lingering  shade  of  a  Jewish  royalty  still  existed. 
There  what  I  might  venture  to  call  a  pattern  mixture  of  Jew  and 
Gentile  power  held  court,  but  our  Lord  &red  no  better  in  the  united 
company.  By  the  two  combined  the  Lord  was  treated  with  equal 
derision  (Luke  xxiii.  11).  "  Herod  with  his  men  of  war  set  him  at 
nought,  and  mocked  him,  and  arrayed  him  in  a  gorgeous  robe." 

Speedily  came  his  third  trial,  and  he  was  delivered  altogether  to  the 
Gentiles.  Then  Pilate^  the  governor,  gave  him  up  to  the  cruel  process 
of.  scourging.  Scourging  as  it  has  been  practised  in  the  English  army 
is  atrocious,  a  barbarism  which  ought  to  make  us  blush  for  the  past^ 
and  resolve  to  end  it  for  the  future.  How  is  it  that  such  a  horror  has 
been  tolerated  so  long  in  a  country  where  we  are  not  all  savages?  But 
the  lash  is  nothing  among  us  compared  with  what  it  was  among  the 
Bomans.  I  have  heard  that  it  was  made  of  the  sinews  of  oxen,  and  that 
in  it  were  twisted  the  hucklebones  of  sheep,  with  slivers  of  bone,  in 
order  that  every  stroke  might  more  effectually  tear  its  way  into  the  poor 
quivering  flesh,  which  was  mangled  by  its  awful  strokes.  Scourging  was 
such  a  punishment  that  it  was  generally  regarded  as  worse  than  death 
itself,  and  indeed,  many  perished  while  enduring  it,  or  soon  afterwards. 
Our  blessed  Bedeemer  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters,  and  the  ploughers 
made  deep  furrows  there.  0  spectacle  of  misery !  How  can  we  bear  to  look 
thereon  ?  Nor  was  that  all,  for  Pilate's  soldiers,  calling  all  the  band 
together,  as  if  there  were  not  enough  for  mockery  unless  all  were  mustered^ 
put  him  to  derision  by  a  mock  enthronement  and  a  mimic  coronation ; 
and  when  they  had  thus  done  thev  again  buffeted  and  smote  him,  and 
spat  in  his  &oe.  There  was  no  kina  of  cruelty  which  their  heartlessness 
could  just  then  invent  which  the^r  did  not  exercise  upon  his  bless(^ 
person :  their  brutal  sport  had  full  mdulgence,  for  their  mnocent  victim 
offered  neither  resistance  nor  remonstrance.  This  is  his  own  record  of 
his  patient  endurance, ''  I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks 
to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair :  I  hid  not  my  &ce  from  shame  and 
spitting." 

Behold  your  King!    I  bring  him  forth  to  you  this  morning  in  spirit 


THU  SUAHE  AND  SPITTING.  423 

wadxsTjf  '*  Behold  the  Man !''  Turn  hither  all  yonr  cjres  and  hearts  and 
look  npon  the  despised  and  rejected  of  men!  Gaze  reverently  and 
loTingly,  with  awe  for  his  sufferings  and  love  for  his  person.  The  sight 
demands  adoration.  I  would  remind  you  of  that  which  Moses  did  when 
he  saw  the  hush  that  burned  and  was  not  consumed — ^fit  emblem  of  our 
Lord  on  &e  with  griefe  and  yet  not  destroyed ;  I  bid  you  turn  aside  and 
see  this  great  sight,  but  first  attend  to  the  mandate — ''put  off  thy  shoes 
from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground." 
All  round  the  cross  the  soil  is  sacred.  Our  suffering  Lord  has  con- 
secrated every  place  whereon  he  stood,  and  therefore  our  hearts  must  be 
filled  with  reverence  while  we  linger  under  the  shadow  of  his  passion. 

May  the  Holy  Spirit  help  vou  to  see  Jesus  in  four  lights  at  this  time. 
In  each  \iew  he  is  worthy  of  devout  attention.  Let  us  view  him  first  as  the 
represmtative  of  Ood;  secondly,  as  the  mhsiitute  of  his  people ;  thirdly,  as 
the  servant  of  Jehovah;  and  fourthly,  as  tho  Comforter  of  his  redeem^. 

I.  First,  I  invite  you  to  gaze  upon  your  despised  and  rejected  Lord 
as  TH£  E£PRESENTATIV£  OF  GoD.  In  the  persou  of  Christ  Jesus,  God 
himself  came  into  the  world,  making  a  special  visitation  to  Jerusalem  and 
the  Jewish  people,  but  at  the  same  time  coming  very  near  to  all  mankind. 
The  Lord  c^ea  to  the  people  whom  he  had  &voured  so  long  and  whom 
he  was  intent  to  &vour  stul.  He  says,  in  the  second  verse,  "  I  came  " 
and  ^*  I  called."  God  did  in  very  deed  oome  down  into  the  midst  of 
mankind. 

Be  it  noted,  that  when  our  Lord  came  into  this  world  as  the  represent- 
ative of  God,  he  came  with  all  his  divine  power  about  him.  The  chapter 
before  us  says, ''  Is  my  hand  shortened  at  all,  that  it  cannot  redeem  ?  or 
have  I  no  power  to  deliver  ?  behold,  at  my  rebuke  I  dry  up  the  sea,  I 
make  the  rivers  a  wilderness."  The  Son  of  God,  when  he  was  here,  did 
not  perform  those  exact  miracles,  because  he  was  bent  upon  marvels  of 
beneficence  rather  than  of  judgment.  Ho  did  not  repeat  the  plagues  of 
£gypt,  for  he  did  not  come  to  smite,  but  to  save  ;  but  he  <ud  greater 
wonders  and  wrought  miracles  which  ought  far  more  powerfuiiv  to 
have  won  men's  confidence  in  him  because  they  were  full  of  goodness 
and  mercy.  He  fed  the  hungry,  he  healed  the  sick,  he  raised  the  dead, 
and  he  cast  out  devils.  He  did  equal  marvels  to  those  which  w  ere  wrought 
in  Egypt  when  the  arm  of  the  Lord  was  made  bare  in  the  eyes  of  all  the 
people.  It  is  true  he  did  not  change  water  into  blood,  but  he  turned 
water  into  wine.  It  is  true  he  did  not  make  their  fish  to  stink,  but  by  his 
word  he  caused  the  net  to  be  filled  even  to  bursting  with 'great  fishes. 
He  did  not  break  the  whole  staff  of  bread  as  he  did  in  Egypt,  but  he 
multiplied  loaves  and  fishes  so  that  thousands  of  men  and  women  and 
children  were  fed  from  his  bounteous  hand.  He  did  not  slay  their  first- 
born, but  he  restored  the  dead.  I  graat  you  that  the  glory  of  the 
Godhead  was  somewhat  hidden  in  tl^  peroon  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
bat  it  was  still  there,  even  as  the  glory  was  upon  the  &ce  of  Moses  (when 
he  covered  it  with  a  veil.  No  essential  attribute  of  God  was  absent  in 
Christ,  and  every  one  might  have  been  seen  in  him  if  the  people  had. not 
been  wilMly  bUnd.  He  did  the  works  of  his  Father,  and  those  works 
bare  witness  of  him  that  he  was  oome  in  his  Father's  name.  Yes,  God 
was  personally  in  the  world  when  Jesus  walked  the  blessed  £elds  of  the 
Holy  Laad^  m>w»  alas>  laid  under  the  ouxae  for  rejecting  him. 


4f^4  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

But  when  Ood  thus  came  among  men  he  was  unacknowledged.  What 
saith  the  prophet?  "  Wherefore  when  I  came  was  there  no  man?  when 
I  called  was  there  none  to  answer?*'  A  few^  taught  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  discerned  him  and  rejoiced ;  but  they  were  so  very  few  that  we 
may  say  of  the  whole  generation  that  they  knew  him  not.  Those  who 
haa  some  dim  idea  of  his  excellence  and  majesty  yet  rejected  him. 
Herod,  because  he  feared  that  he  was  a  king,  sought  to  slay  him.  The 
kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the  rulers  took  counsel  together, 
against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  anointed.  He  was  emphaticafly  and 
beyond  all  others  ^'  despised  and  rejected  of  men."  Though,  as  I  have 
said,  the  Godhead  in  him  was  but  scantily  veiled,  and  gleams  of  its  glory 
burst  forth  ever  and  anon,  yet  still  the  people  would  have  none  of  it, 
and  the  cry,  "  Away  with  lum,  away  with  him,  let  him  be  crucified," 
was  the  verdict  of  the  age  upon  which  he  descended.  He  called  and 
there  was  none  to  answer ;  he  spread  out  his  hands  all  the  day  long  unto 
a  rebellious  people  who  utterly  rejected  him. 

Tet  our  Lord  when  he  came  into  the  world  was  admirably  adapted  to 
be  the  representative  of  €k)d,  not  only  because  he  was  God  himself,  but 
because  as  man  his  whole  human  nature  was  consecrated  to  the  work, 
and  in  him  was  neither  flaw  nor  spot.  He  was  untouched  by  any  motive 
other  than  the  one  desire  of  manifesting  the  Father  and  blessing  the 
sons  of  men.  Oh,  beloved,  there  was  never  one  who  had  his  ear  so  near 
the  mouth  of  God  as  Jesus  had.  His  Father  had  no  need  to  speak  to 
him  in  dreams  and  visions  of  the  night,  for  when  all  his  faculties  were 
wide  awake  there  was  nothing  in  them  to  hinder  his  understanding  the 
mind  of  God ;  and  therefore  every  morning  when  his  Father  wakened 
him  he  spake  into  his  ear.  Jesus  sat  as  a  scholar  at  the  Father's  feet 
that  he  might  learn  first,  and  then  teach.  The  things  which  he  heard 
of  the  FaUier  he  made  known  unto  men.  He  savs  that  he  spake  not 
his  own  words  but  the  words  of  Him  that  sent  him,  and  he  did  not 
his  own  deeds,  but  ''  my  Father,"  saith  he, ''  that  dwelleth  in  me,  he 
doeth  the  work."  Now,  a  man  thus  entirely  agreeable  to  the  mind  and 
will  of  the  great  God  was  fitted  to  be  the  representative  of  God.  Both 
the  alliance  of  his  manhood  with  the  Godhead  and  its  perfect  character 
qualified  it  to  be  the  fittest  dwelling  of  God  among  men.  Yes,  dear 
mends,  our  Saviour  came  in  a  way  which  should  at  once  have  commanded 
the  reverent  homage  of  all  men.  Even  his  .great  Father  said,  "They 
will  reverence  my  «)n."  Enough  of  the  Godh^  was  manifested  to  im- 
press and  no  more,  lest  it  should  alarm.  With  a  soul  of  gentlest  mould 
and  a  body  like  our  own  he  was  altogether  adapted  to  be  the  representa- 
tive of  God.  His  errand,  too,  was  all  gentleness  and  love,  for  he  came 
to  speak  words  in  season  to  the  weary,  and  to  comfort  those  that  were 
cast  down  :  surely  such  an  errand  should  have  secured  him  a  welcome. 
His  course  and  conduct  were  most  conciliatory,  for  he  went  among  the 
people,  and  ate  with  publicans  and  sinners ;  so  gentle  was  he  that  he  took 
uttk  children  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  them ;  for  this,  if  for  nothing 
else,  they  ought  to  have  welcomed  him  right  heartily  and  rejoiced  at 
the  sight  of  him.  Our  text  tells  us  how  contrary  was  their  conduct 
toward  him  to  that  which  he  deserved  :  instead  of  being  welcomed  he 
was  scourged,  and  instead  of  being  honoured  he  was  scorned.  Cruelty 
smote  his  back  and  plucked  off  the  hair  from  his  fiioe,  while  derision 


THE  8HAMB  AND  BPITTINa.  425 

jeered  at  him  and  casfc  its  spittle  upon  him.  Shame  and  contempt  were 
ponred  upon  him,  though  he  was  God  himself.  That  spectacle  of  Christ 
spat  upon,  and  scourged,  represents  what  man  virtually  does  to  his  God, 
what  he  would  do  to  the  Most  High  if  he  could.    Hart  well  puts  it : — 

**  See  how  the  patient  Jesus  stands. 
Insulted  in  his  lowest  case  ! 
Sinners  have  bound  the  Almighty  hands, 
And  spit  in  their  Creator*s  face." 

When  our  parents  broke  the  command  of  their  Maker,  obeying  the  ad- 
vice of  the  devil  rather  than  the  word  of  God,  and  preferring  a  poor 
apple  to  the  divine  favour,  thev  did  as  it  were  spit  into  the  face  of  God ; 
ana  every  sin  committed  since  nas  been  a  repetition  of  the  same  contempt 
of  the  Eternal  One.  When  a  man  will  have  his  pleasure,  even  though 
it  displeases  God,  he  as  good  as  declares  that  he  den>iBes  God,  prefers 
himself,  and  defies  the  wrath  of  the  Most  High.  When  a  man  acts 
contrary  to  the  command  of  God  he  does  as  good  as  say  to  God,  *'  This 
is  better  for  me  to  do  than  what  thoii  bidst  me  do.  Either  thou  art 
mistaken,  in  thy  prohibitions,  or  else  thou  dost  wilfully  deny  me  the 
highest  pleasure,  and  I,  being  a  better  judge  of  my  own  interests  than 
thou  art,  snatch  at  the  pleasure  which  thou  dost  refuse  me.  I  judge  thee 
either  to  be  unwise  or  unkind."  Every  act  of  sin  does  despite  to  the 
sovereignty  of  God:  it  denies  him  to  be  supreme,  and  refuses  him 
obedience.  Every  act  of  sin  does  dishonour  to  the  love  and  wisdom  of 
God,  for  it  seems  to  say  that  it  would  have  been  greater  love  to  have  per- 
mitted us  to  do  evil  than  to  have  commanded  us  to  abstain  from  it  All 
sin  is  in  many  ways  an  insult  to  the  majesty  of  the  thrice  Holy  God,  and 
he  regards  it  as  such. 

D^  friends,  this  is  especially  the  sin  of  those  who  have  heard  the 
gospel  and  yet  reject  the  Saviour,  for  in  their  case  the  Lord  has  come  to 
them  in  the  most  gracious  form,  and  yet  they  have  refused  him.  The 
Lord  might  well  say,  "  I  have  come  to  you  to  save  you,  and  vou  will  not 
regard  me.  I  have  come  saying  to  you,  'Look  unto  me  and  oe  ye  saved, 
all  the  ends  of  the  earth,'  and  you  close  your  eyes  in  unbdief.  I  have 
come  saying,  'Let  us  reason  together :  though  your  sins  be  as  crimson,  they 
shall  be  as  wool,'  but  you  wOl  not  be  cleansed  from  yotir  iniquity.  I  have 
come  with  thepromise, '  All  manner  of  sin  and  iniquity  sh^l  be  forgiven 
unto  men.'  miat  is  your  reply?  "  In  the  case  of  many  the  answer  is, 
''  We  prefer  our  own  righteousness  to  the  righteousness  of  God."  If  that 
is  not  casting  spittle  into  the  face  of  God  I  knoftr  not  what  is,  for  our 
righteousnesses  are  well  described  as  "  filthy  rags,"  and  we  have  the  impu< 
dence  to  say  that  these  are  better  than  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Ohnst 
Jesus.  Or  if  we  do  not  say  this  when  we  reject  the  Saviour  we  teU  him  that 
we  do  not  want  him,  for  we  do  not  need  a  Saviour:  this  is  as  ^ood  as  to  say 
that  God  has  played  the  fool  with  the  life  and  death  of  his  own  Son. 
What  greater  derision  can  be  cast  upon  God  than  to  consider  the  blood 
of  atonement  to  be  a  superfluity  ?  He  who  chooses  sin  sooner  than 
repentance  prefers  to  suffer  the  wrath  of  God  rather  than  be  holy  and 
dwell  in  heaven  for  ever.  For  the  sake  of  a  few  paltry  pleasures  men 
forego  the  love  of  God,  and  are  ready  to  run  the  risk  of  an  eternity  of 
divine  wrath.    They  think  so  little  of  God  that  he  is  of  no  aooonnt  with 


426  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLB  PUIiPIT. 

them  at  aD.  All  this  is  in  reality  a  scorning  and  despising  of  the  Lord 
God,  and  is  well  set  forth  by  the  insults  which  were  poured  upon  the 
Jjord  Jesus. 

Woe's  me  that  it  should  ever  be  so.  My  God  !  my  God !  To  what  a 
sinful  race  do  I  belong.  Alas,  that  it  should  treat  thine  infinite  good- 
ness so  despitefully  !  That  thou  shouldst  be  i*ejected  at  all,  but  especially 
that  thou  shouldest  be  rejected  when  dressed  in  robes  of  love  and  arrayed 
in  gentleness  and  pity  is  horrible  to  think  upon.  Do  you  mean  it,  0 
men  ?  Can  you  really  mean  it  ?  Can  you  deride  the  Lord  Jesus  who 
died  for  men  ?  For  which  of  his  works  do  ye  stone  him,  when  he  lived 
only  to  do  good  ?  For  which  of  his  griefs  do  you  refuse  him,  when  he 
died  only  that  he  might  save  ?  "  He  saved  others,  liimself  he  cannot 
save,"  for  he  had  so  much  love  that  he  could  not  spare  himself.  I  can 
understand  your  resisting  the  thunder  of  Jehovah's  power,  for  I  know 
your  insanity ;  but  can  you  resist  the  tenderness  of  Jehovah's  love  ?  If 
you  do  I  must  charge  you  with  brutality,  but  therein  I  wrong  the 
brutes,  to  whom  such  crimes  are  impossible.  I  may  not  even  call  this 
cruel  scorning  diabolical,  for  it  is  a  sin  which  devils  never  did  commit, 
perhaps  would  not  have  committed  had  it  been  possible  to  them. 
They  have  never  trifled  with  a  Redeemer,  nor  rejected  the  blood  of 
atonement,  for  our  Lord  took  not  up  the  Mien  angels,  but  he  took  up 
the  seed  of  Abraliam.  Shall  the  favoured  race  spit  upon  its  friend  ? 
God  grant  we  may  be  brought  to  a  better  mind.  But  there  is  the 
picture  before  you.  God  himself  set  at  nought,  despised,  rejected,  put 
to  shame,  perpetually  dishonoured  in  the  person  of  his  dear  Son.  l^he 
sight  should  breed  repentance  in  us.  We  should  look  to  him  whom  we 
have  scourged,  and  mourn  for  him.  0  Holy  Spirit,  work  this  tender 
grace  in  all  our  hearts. 

II.  And  now,  secondly,  I  want  to  set  the  Lord  Jesus  before  you  in 
another  light,  or  rather  b^cch  him  to  shine  in  his  own  light  before  your 
eyes : — ^AS  the  substitute  i^r  his  people.  EecoUect  when  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  suffered  thus  it  was  not  on  his  own  account  hor  purely 
for  the  sake  of  his  Father,  but  he  "  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions, 
he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities :  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon 
him ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  There  has  risen  up  a  modern 
idea  which  I  cannot  too  much  reprobate,  that  Christ  made  no  atonement 
for  our  sin  except  upon  the  cross  :  whereas  in  this  passage  of  Isaiah  we 
are  taueht  as  plainly  as  possible  that  by  his  bruising  and  his  stripes,  as 
well  as  oy  his  death,  we  are  healed.  Never  divide  between  the  Ufe  and 
the  death  of  Christ.  How  could  he  have  died  if  he  had  not  lived  ? 
How  could  he  suffer  except  while  he  Uved  ?  Death  is  not  suffering,  but 
the  end  of  it.  Guard  also  against  the  evil  notion  that  you  have  nothing 
to  do  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  for  he  could  not  have  made  an 
atonement  by  his  blood  if  he  had  not  been  perfect  in  his  life.  He  could 
not  have  been  acceptable  if  he  had  not  first  been  proven  to  be  holy, 
harmless,  and  unddiled.  The  victim  must  be  spotless,  or  it  cannot  be 
presented  for  sacrifice.  Draw  no  nice  lines  and  raise  no  quibbhng  ques- 
tions, but  look  at  your  Lord  as  he  is  and  bow  before  him. 

Understand,  my  deai'  brothers  and  sisters,  that  Jesus  cook  upon  him- 
self our  sin,  and  being  found  bearing  that  sin  he  had  to  be  treated  as  sin 
should  be  treated.    Now,  of  all  the  things  that  ever  existed  sin  is  the 


THE    SHAME  AKD  SPITTING.  427 

most  shameful  thing  that  can  be.  It  deserves  to  be  scourged,  it  deserves 
to  be  spit  upon,  it  deserves  to  be  crucified  ;  and  because  our  Lord  had 
taken  upon  himself  our  sin,  therefore  must  he  be  put  to  shame,  there- 
fore must  he  be  scourged.  If  you  want  to  see  what  God  thinks  of  sin. 
Bee  his  only  Son  spat  upon  by  the  soldiers  when  he  was  made  sin  for 
ns.  In  God's-  sight  sin  is  a  shameful,  horrible,  loathsome,  abominable 
thing,  and  when  Jesus  takes  it  he  must  be  forsaken  and  given  up  to 
Bcorn.  This  sight  will  be  the  more  wonderful  to  yon  when  you  recollect 
who  it  was  that  was  spat  upon,  for  if  you  and  I,  being  sinners,  were 
scourged,  and  smitten,  and  despised,  there  would  be  no  wonder  in  it ; 
but  he  who  took  our  sin  waa  God,  before  whom  angels  bow  with  reverent 
awe,  and  yet,  seeing  the  sin  was  upon  him,  he  was  made  subject  to  the 
most  intense  degree  of  shame.  Seeing  that  Jesus  stood  in  our  stead,  it  is 
written  of  the  eternal  Father  that  "  He  spared  not  his  own  Son."  "  It 
pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  him :  he  hath  put  him  to  grief";  he  made 
his  soul  an  offering  for  sin.  Yes,  beloved,  sin  is  condemned  in  the  flesh 
and  made  to  appear  exceeding  shameful  when  you  recollect  that,  even 
though  it  was  only  laid  on  our  blessed  Lord  by  imputation,  yet  it  threw 
him  into  the  very  depths  of  shame  and  woe  ere  it  could  be  removed. 

Reflect,  also,  upon  the  voluntariness  of  all  this.  He  willingly  sub- 
mitted to  the  endurance  of  suffering  and  scorn.  It  is  said  in  the  text, 
*•  He  gam  his  back  to  the  smiters."  They  did  not  seize  and  compel 
him,  or,  if  they  did,  yet  they  could  not  have  done  it  without  his  consent. 
He  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters.  He  gave  his  cheek  to  those  that 
plucked  off  the  hair.  He  did  not  hide  his  lace  from  shame  and  spitting : 
he  did  not  seek  in  any  way  to  escape  from  insults.  It  waa  the  voluntari- 
ness of  his  grief  which  constituted  in  great  measure  the  merit  of  it. 
That  Christ  diould  stand  in  our  stead  by  force  were  a  little  thing,  even 
had  it  been  possible ;  but  that  he  should  stand  there  of  his  own  free 
will,  and  that  being  there  he  should  willingly  be  treated  with  derision, 
this  is  grace  indeed.  The  Son  of  God  was  willingly  made  a  curse  for 
us,  and  at  his  own  desire  was  made  subject  to  shame  on  our  acconnt. 
I  do  not  know  how  you  feel  in  listening  to  me^  but  while  I  am  speak- 
ing I  feel  as  if  language  ought  scarcely  to  touch  such  a  theme  as 
thia :  it  is  too  feeble  for  its  task.  I  want  you  to  get  beyond  my 
words  if  yon  can,  and  for  yourselves  meditate  upon  the  fact  that  he  who 
coTers  the  heavens  with  blackness,  yet  did  not  cover  his  own  face,  and  he 
who  binds  up  the  universe  with  the  girdle  which  holds  it  in  one,  yet  was 
bound  and  blindfolded  by  the  men  he  had  himself  made  ;  he  whose  face 
is  as  the  brightness  of  the  sun  that  shineth  in  its  strength  waa  once  spit 
upon.  Surely  we  shall  need  faith  in  heaven  to  believe  this  wondrous 
met.  Can  it  have  been  true,  that  the  glorious  Son  of  God  was  jeered  and 
jeeted  at  ?  I  have  often  heard  that  there  is  no  faith  wanted  in  heaven, 
but  I  rather  judge  that  we  shall  want  as  much  faith  to  believe  that  these 
things  were  ever  done  as  the  patriarchs  had  to  believe  that  they  would 
be  done.  How  shall  I  sit  down  and  gaze  upon  him  and  think  that  his  dear 
fiioe  waa  once  pro&ned  with  spittle  ?  When  all  heaven  shall  he  prostrate 
at  his  feet  in  awful  silence  of  adoration  will  it  seem  possible  that  once  he 
waa  mocked?  When  angels,  and  principalities,  and  powers  shall  all  be 
rooaed  to  rapture  of  harmonious  music  in  his  praise,  will  it  seem  possible 
that  once  the  most  abject  of  men  plucked  out  the  hair  ?    Will  it  not 


4^28  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PFLPIT. 

appear  incredible  that  those  sacred  hands,  which  are  ''  as  gold  rings  set 
with  the  beiyl/'  were  once  nailed  to  a  gibbet,  and  that  those  cheeks 
which  are  ''  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers,"  should  have  been  bat- 
tered and  bruised  ?  We  shall  be  quite  certain  of  the  fact,  and  jet  we 
shall  never  cease  to  wonder,  that  his  side  was  gashed,  and  his  face  was 
spit  upon  ?  The  sin  of  man  in  this  instance  will  always  amaze  us. 
How  could  you  commit  this  crime  ?  Oh,  ye  sons  of  men,  now  could  ye 
treat  such  an  one  with  cruel  scorn  ?  0  thou  brassen  thing  called  sin, 
thou  hast,  indeed,  as  the  prophet  saith,  "  a  whore*s  forehead  ;  thou  hast 
a  demon's  heart,  hell  bums  within  thee.  Why  couldst  thou  not  spit  upon 
earthly  splendours  ?  Why  must  heaven  be  thy  scorn  ?  Or  if  heaven, 
why  not  spit  on  angels !  Was  there  nd  place  for  thy  base  deed  but  ^e 
Well-beloved's  face?  Was  there  no  place  for  thy  spittle  but  his  face? 
JE[i8  face !  Woe  is  me !  His  &ce !  Should  such  loveliness  receive  such 
shame  as  this  ?  I  could  wish  that  man  had  never  been  created,  or  that, 
being  created,  he  had  been  swept  into  nothingness  rather  than  have  lived 
to  commit  such  horror. 

Yet  here  is  matter  for  our  faith  to  rest  upon.  Beloved,  trust  your- 
selves in  the  hands  of  your  great  Substitute.  Hid  he  bear  all  this  diame  ? 
then  there  must  be  more  than  enough  merit  and  efficacy  in  this,  which 
was  the  prelude  of  his  precious  deaSi — and  especially  in  his  death  itself 
— there  must  be  merit  sufficient  to  put  away  all  transgression,  iniquity, 
and  sin.  Our  shame  is  ended,  for  he  has  borne  it !  Our  punishment  is 
removed  :  he  has  endured  it  all.  Double  for  all  our  sins  has  our  Re- 
deemer paid.  Return  unto  thy  rest,  0  my  soul,  and  let  peace  take  full 
possession  of  thy  weeping  heart. 

III.  But  time  faib  us,  and  therefore  we  will  mention,  next,  the  third 
light  in  which  it  is  our  desire  to  see  the  Saviour.  Beloved,  we  desire  to 
see  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  servant  of  Oop.  He  took  upon 
himself  the  form  of  a  servant  when  he  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  man. 
Observe  how  he  performed  this  service  right  thoroughly,  and  remember 
we  are  to  look  upon  this  third  picture  as  our  copy,  which  is  to  be  the 
guide  of  our  life.  I  know  that  many  of  you  are  glad  to  call  yourselves 
the  servants  of  God ;  take  not  the  name  in  vain.  As  Jesus  was,  so  are 
you  also  in  this  world,  and  you  are  to  seek  to  be  like  him. 

First,  as  a  servant,  Christ  was  personally  prepared  for  service.  He 
was  thirty  years  and  more  here  below,  learning  obedience  in  his  Other's 
house,  and  the  after  years  were  spent  in  learning  obedience  by  the  things 
which  he  suffered.  What  a  servant  he  was,  for  he  never  went  about  his 
own  errands  nor  went  by  his  own  will,  but  he  waited  always  upon  his 
Father.  He  was  in  constant  communication  with  heaven,  both  by  day 
and  by  night.  He  says, ''  He  waken^th  momiug  by  morning,  he  wakeneth 
mine  ear  to  hear  as  the  learned.'*  The  blessed  Lord  or  ever  the  day 
broke  heard  that  gentle  voice  which  called  him,  and  at  its  whisper  he 
arose  before  the  sunrise,  and  there  the  dawning  found  him,  on  the  moun- 
tain side,  waiting  upon  God  in  wrestling  prayer,  taking  his  message  from 
the  Father  that  he  might  go  and  deliver  it  to  the  children  of  men.  He 
loved  man  much,  but  he  loved  his  Father  more,  and  he  never  came  to 
tell  out  the  love  of  God  without  having  as  man  received  it  fresh  fh>m 
the  divine  heart.  He  knew  that  his  Father  heard  him  always,  and  he 
lived  in  the  spirit  of  conscious  acceptance.    Have  you  ever  noticed 


THE  SHAMB  AND  SPirTING.  429 

that  sometimes  a  passage  will  begin,  ''At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and 
said,"  and  yet  there  is  no  notice  that  he  had  been  speaking  to  anybody 
before,  or  that  anybody  had  been  speaking  to  him  ?  What  he  said  was 
an  answer  to  a  voice  which  no  ear  heard  but  his  own,  for  he  was  always 
standing  with  opened  ear,  listening  to  the  eternal  voice,  Such  service 
^d  Jesus  render,  and  you  must  render  the  same.  Ton  cannot  do 
yonr  Lord's  will  except  you  live  near  to  him.  It  is  of  no  use  trying  to 
preach  with  power  unless  we  get  our  message  from  our  heavenly  Father's 
own  self.  I  am  sure  you  as  hearers  know  the  difference  between  a  dead 
word  which  comes  from  a  man's  own  brain  and  lip,  and  a  living  woixl 
which  the  preacher  delivers  fresh  as  the  manna  which  fell  from  heaven. 
The  word  should  come  from  the  minister  like  bread  hot  from  the  oven,  or 
better  still,  like  a  seed  with  life  in  it ;  not  as  a  parched  grain  with  the  germ 
dead  and  killed,  but  as  a  living  seed  which  roots  itself  in  your  souls, 
and  springs  up  to  a  harvest.  This  made  our  Lord  such  a  good  servant 
tliat  he  listened  to  his  Father's  voice  and  yielded  himself  to  the  Father's 
will  to  perfection. 

Our  text  assures  us  that  this  service  knew  no  reserve  in  its  conse* 
cration.  We  generally  draw  back  somewhere.  I  am  ashamed  to  say  it, 
but  I  mourn  that  I  have  done  so.  Many  of  us  could  give  to  Christ  all 
our  health  and  strength,  and  all  the  money  we  have,  very  heartily  and 
cheerfully ;  but  when  it  comes  to  a  point  of  reputation  we  feel  the  pinch. 
To  be  slandered,  to  have  some  filthy  thing  saia  of  you ;  this  is  too  much 
for  flesh  and  blood.  You  seem  to  say,  "I  cannot  be  made  a  fool  of,  I 
cannot  bear  to  be  regarded  as  a  mere  impostor ; "  but  a  true  servant  of 
Christ  must  make  himself  of  no  reputation  when  he  takes  upon  himself 
Uie  work  of  his  Lord.  Our  blessea  Master  was  willing  to  be  scoffed  at 
by  the  lewdest  and  the  lowest  of  men.  The  abjects  jeered  at  him ; 
the  reproach  of  them  that  reproached  God  fell  upon  him.  He  became 
the  song  of  the  drunkard,  and  when  the  rough  soldiery  detained  him  in 
the  ^nard-room  they  heaped  up  their  ridicule,  as  though  he  were  not 
worUiy  of  the  name  of  man. 

"  They  bow  their  knees  to  me,  and  cry,  *Hail,  King': 
Whatever  scoffs  or  scomfiilness  can  bring, 
I  am  the  floor,  the  sink,  where  they  it  fling : 

Was  ever  grief  like  minef 

**  The  soldiers  also  spit  upon  that  face 
Which  angels  did  desire  to  have  the  grace 
And  propheU  once  to  see,  hut  found  no  place  : 

Was  eter  grief  ake  minef  " 

Herod  and  Pilate  were  the  very  dix)ss  of  men,  and  yet  he  permitted  them  to 
judge  him.  Their  servants  were  vile  fellows,  and  yet  he  resigned  himself 
to  tncm.  If  he  had  breathed  upon  them  with  angry  breath,  he  might  have 
flashed  devouring  fire  upon  them,  and  burned  them  up  as  stubble ;  but 
his  omnipotent  patience  restrained  his  indignation,  and  he  remained  as 
a  sheep  before  her  shearers.  He  allowed  his  own  creatures  to  pluck  his 
hair  and  spit  in  his  face.  Such  patience  should  be  yours  as  servants  of 
God.  We  are  to  be  willing  to  be  made  nothing  of,  and  even  to  be  counted 
as  the  offscouring  of  all  things.  It  is  pitiful  for  the  Christian  to  refrise 
to  suffer,  and  to  become  a  fighting  man,  crying,  '*  We  must  stand  up 
for  our  rights."    Did  you  ever  see  Jesus  in  that  posture?    There  is  a 


k 


480  METUOrOLITAN  TABESNACLE  PULPIT. 

propciuity  in  us  tx)  saj,  '^I  will  have  it  out.*'  Yee,  but  yoa  cannot  pis- 
tare  JesuB  in  that  attitude.  I  defy  a  painter  to  depict  him  so :  it  is 
somebody  else,  and  not  Christ.  No  I  he  said,  **  I  gave  my  back  to  the 
smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  placked  off  the  hair :  I  hid  not  my 
&ce  from  shame  and  spitting." 

There  is  something  'more  here  than  perfect  consecration  in  the  vo/exe 
form  of  it,  for  its  heart  and  essence  are  manifest  in  an  obedient  deh'ght  in 
the  will  of  the  Father.  The  words  seem  to  me  to  express  alacrity.  It  is  not 
said  that  he  reluctantly  permitted  his  enemies  to  pluck  his  hair,  or  smite  his 
back,  bnt  it  is  written, ''  I  §iave  my  back  to  the  smiter,  and  my  dieeks  to 
them  that  plucked  off  the  hair."  He  could  not  delight  in  it ;  how  conld 
he  delight  in  suffering  and  shame  ?  These  things  were  even  more  repag 
nant  to  his  sensitive  nature  than  they  can  be  to  us ;  and  yet,  '^  For  the 
joy  tliat  was  set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame." 
He  was  ready  for  this  dreadful  treatment,  for  he  said, ''  I  have  a  b^ 
tism  to  be  baptized  with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  until  it  be  accomp- 
lished ! "  He  was  ready  for  the  cup  of  gall,  and  willing  to  drink  it  to  its 
dregs,  though  it  was  bitterness  itself  to  him.  He  gave  his  back  to  the 
smitere. 

All  tliis  while — ^now  follow  me  in  this  next  point — ^there  was  no  flinch- 
ing in  him.  They  spat  in  his  &ce,  but  what  says  he  in  the  seventh  vetse. 
"  I  have  set  my  face  like  a  flint."  If  they  are  about  to  defile  his  face  he  is 
i*esolved  to  bear  it ;  he  girds  up  his  loins,  and  makes  himself  more  deter- 
mined. Oh,  the  bravery  of  our  Master's  silence !  Cruelty  and  shame 
could  not  make  him  speak.  Have  not  your  lips  sometimes  longed  to 
speak  out  a  denial  and  a  defence  ?  Have  yon  not  felt  it  wise  to  be  quiet, 
but  then  the  charge  has  been  so  excessively  cruel,  and  it  has  stung  yon  bo 
terribly  that  you  hungered  to  resent  it.  Base  fidsehoods  aroused  your 
indignation,  and  you  felt  you  must  speak  and  probably  you  did  speak, 
though  yon  tried  to  keep  your  lip  as  with  a  bridle  while  the  wicked 
were  before  you.  But  our  own  beloved  Lord  in  the  omnipotence  of 
his  patience  and  love  would  not  utter  a  word,  bnt  like  a  lamb  at  the 
slaughter  he  opened  not  his  mouth.  He  witnessed  a  good  confession 
by  his  matchless  silence.  Oh,  how  mighty — ^liow  gloriously  mighty 
was  his  patience !  We  must  copy  it  if  we  are  to  be  his  disciples.  We, 
too,  must  set  onr  &ces  like  flints,  to  move  or  to  sit  still,  according  to  the 
Father's  will,  to  be  silent  or  to  speak,  as  most  shall  honour  him.  "  I 
have  set  my  face  like  a  flint,"  saith  he,  even  thongh  in  another  place  he 
cries,  "  My  heart  is  like  wax,  it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  my  bowels." 

And  do  you  notice  all  the  while  the  confidence  and  quiet  of -his  spirit? 
He  almost  seems  to  say,  *'  You  may  spit  upon  me,  but  you  cannot  find 
fault  with  me.  You  may  pluck  my  hair,  but  you  cannot  impugn  my  in- 
tegrity ;  you  may  lash  my  shoulders,  but  yon  cannot  impute  a  &ult  to 
me.  Your  false  witnesses  dare  not  look  me  in  the  &ce :  let  me  know 
who  is  mine  adversary,  let  him  come  near  to  me.  Behold,  Adonai 
Jehovah  will  keep  me,  who  is  he  that  shall  condemn  me  !  Lo,  they  all 
shall  wax  old  as  a  garment,  the  moth  shall  eat  them  up."  Be  calm  then, 
0  true  servant  of  God !  In  patience  possess  your  soul.  Serve  God 
steadily  and  steadfastly  though  all  men  should  belie  you.  Go  to  the 
bottom  of  the  service,  dive  even  to  the  very  depth,  and  be  content  eve^ 
to  lie  in  Christ's  grave,  for  you  shall  share  in  Christ's  rcsuireotion.    D6 


A 


THE  SHAME  AHfD  gPITTINa.  481 

not  dream  that  the  path  to  heaven  is  up  the  hill  of  honour,  it  winds 
down  into  the  valley  of  humiliation.  Imagine  not  that  you  can  grow 
great  eternally  by  bieing  great  here.  You  must  become  less,  and  less,  and 
kss,  even  though  you  should  be  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  for  this 
is  the  path  to  everlasting  glorf. 

I  have  not  time  to  expound  the  last  two  verses  of  the  chapter,  but  they 
read  you  a  noble  lesson.  "  He  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters ; "  if,  then, 
any  of  you  walk  in  darkness  ana  have  no  light,  this  is  no  new  thing  for 
a  servant  of  God.  The  chief  of  all  servants  persevered,  though  men  des- 
pised him.  Follow  him,  then.  Stav  yourselves  upon  €k>d  as  he  did,  and 
K)ok  for  a  bright  ending  of  your  trials.  He  came  out  into  the  light  ulti- 
mately, and  there  he  sits  in  inconceivable  splendour  at  his  Father's  right 
hand,  and  so  shall  all  the  faithful  come  out  of  the  cloud  and  shine  forth 
as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.  Only  bear  on  with  resolute 
patience,  and  glory  shall  be  your  reward,  even  as  it  is  his. 

lY.  Lastly,  I  am  to  set  him  forth  in  his  fourth  character,  as  thb 
COXFORTEK  OF  HIS  PEOPLE ;  but  I  must  ask  you  to  do  this,  while 
I  just,  as  it  were,  make  a  charcoal  sketch  of  the  picture  I  would  have 
painted. 

Semember,  first,  our  blessed  Lord  is  well  qualified  to  speak  a  word  in 
season  to  him  that  is  weary,  because  he  himself  is  lowly,  and  meek,  and 
so  accessible  to  us.  When  men  are  in  low  spirits  they  feel  as  if  they 
oould  not  take  comfort  from  persons  who  are  harsh  and  proud.  The 
comforter  must  come  as  a  sufferer ;  he  must  come  in  a  lowly,  broken 

3[>irit|  if  he  would  cheer  the  aJQUcted.  Tou  must  not  put  on  your  best 
ress  to  go  and  visit  the  daughter  of  poverty,  or  go  with  your  jewels 
about  you  to  show  how  much  better  off  you  are  than  she.  Sit  down  by 
the  side  of  the  downcast  man  and  let  him  know  that  you  are  meek 
and  lowly  of  heart.  Your  Master  ''gave  his  back  to  the  smiters,  and 
his  cheek  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair,"  and  therefore  he  is  the 
Oomforter  yon  want. 

Bemark  not  only  his  lowliness,  but  his  sympathy.  Are  you  full  of 
aches  and  pains  this  momins;  ?  Jesus  knows  all  about  them,  for  he 
''gave  his  back  to  the  smiters.  Do  you  suffer  from  what  is  worse  than 
pain,  from  scandal  and  slander?  "  He  hid  not  his  face  from  shame  and 
spitting."  Have  you  been  ridiculed  of  late  ?  Have  the  graceless  made 
ron  of  your  godliness  ?  Jesus  can  sympathise  with  you,  for  you  know 
what  unholy  mirth  they  made  out  of  him.  In  every  pang  that  rends 
your  heart  your  Lord  has  borne  his  share.  Go  and  tell  him.  Many 
will  not  unaerstand  you.  You  are  a  speckled  bird,  differing  from  all  the 
rest,  and  they  will  aU  peck  at  you ;  but  Jesus  Christ  knows  tins,  fi)r  he 
was  a  speckled  bird  too.  He  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate 
from  sinners,"  but  not  separate  from  such  as  you.  Get  you  to  him  and 
he  will  smpathise  with  you. 

In  addition  to  his  gentle  spirit  and  his  power  to  sympathise,  there  is 
this  to  help  to  comfort  us — ^namely,  his  example,  for  he  can  argue  thus 
with  yon,  "  I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters.  Cannot  you  do  the  like  ? 
Shall  the  disciple  be  above  his  master  ?  "  If  I  can  but  get  on  the  door- 
step of  heaven  and  sit  down  in  the  meanest  place  there  I  shall  feel  I 
have  an  infinitely  better  position  than  I  deserve,  and  shall  I  think  of  my 
dear,  blessed  Lord  and  Master  giving  his  face  to  be  spit  upon,  and  then 


432  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

giA'c  myself  airs,  and  say,  '*  I  cannot  bear  this  scorn,  I  cannot  bear  this 
pain'M  What,  does  the  King  pass  over  the  brook  Kedron,  and  must 
there  be  no  brook  Kedron  for  yon  ?  Does  the  Master  bear  the  cross, 
and  must  your  shoulders  never  be  galled  ?  Did  they  call  the  Master  of 
the  house  "  Beelzebub,"  and  must  they  call  you  "Rererend  Sir"?  Did 
they  laugh  at  him,  and  scoff  at  him,  and  must  you  be  honoured  ?  Are 
you  to  1^  "gentleman"  and  "lady"  whe^e  Christ  was"  that  fellow"? 
For  his  birth  they  loaned  him  a  stable,  and  for  bis  burial  he  borrowed  a 
grave.  0  friends,  let  pride  disappear,  and  let  us  count  it  our  highest 
honour  to  bo  pei'mittea  to  stoop  as  low  as  ever  we  can. 

And,  then,  his  example  further  comforts  us  by  the  fact  that  he  wa.< 
calm  amid  it  all.  Oh,  the  deep  rest  of  the  Saviour's  heart!  They 
set  him  up  upon  that  mock  throne,  but  he  did  not  answer  with  an  angry 
word;  they  put  a  reed  into  his  hand,  but  he  did  not  change  it  to  an 
iron  rod,  and  break  them  like  potters'  vessels,  as  he  might  have  done. 
There  was  no  wincing  and  no  pleading  for  mercy.  Sighs  of  pain  were 
forced  from  him,  and  he  said,  "  I  thirst,"  for  he  was  not  a  stoic ;  hot 
there  was  no  fear  of  man,  or  timorous  shrinking  of  heart. 

The  King  of  Martyrs  well  desen-es  to  wear  the  martyr's  crown,  for 
right  royally  did  he  endure :  there  was  never  a  patience  like  to  his. 
That  is  your  copy,  brother,  that  is  your  copy,  sister — ^you  must  write 
very  carefully  to  write  as  well  as  that.  You  had  need  your  Master  held 
your  hand  ;  in  fact,  whenever  children  in  Christ's  school  do  write  ac- 
cording to  his  copy,  it  is  always  because  he  holds  their  hand  by  his 
Spirit. 

Last  of  all,  our  Savioiu'*s  triumph  is  meant  to  be  a  stimulus  and  en- 
couragement to  us.  He  stands  before  us  this  morning  as  the  Comforter 
of  his  people.  Consider  Him  that  endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners 
against  himself  lest  ye  be  weary  and  faint  in  your  minds ;  for  though  he 
was  once  abased  and  despised,  yet  now  he  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  and  reigns  over  all  tilings ;  and  the  day  is  coming  when  every  knee 
shall  bow  before  him,  and  every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord, 
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  They  that  spat  upon  him  will  rue  tin 
day.  Come  hither,  ye  that  derided  liim !  He  has  raised  yon  from  the 
dead,  come  hither  and  spit  upon  him  now  I  Ye  tliat  sbourgcd  him,  bring 
your  rods,  see  what  ye  cau  do  in  this  day  of  his  glory  !  Sec,  they  fly 
before  him,  they  invoke  the  hills  to  shelter  them,  they  ask  the  rocks  to 
open  and  conceal  them.  Yet  it  is  nothing  but  his  lace,  that  sel&amc 
face  they  spat  upon,  which  is  making  earth  and  heaven  to  flee  away.  Yea, 
all  things  flee  before  tlic  majestv  of  his  frown  who  once  gave  his  back  to 
the  smiters,  and  his  cliteks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair.  Be  hke 
him,  then,  ye  who  bear  his  name ;  trust  him,  and  live  lor  him,  and  jou 
shall  reign  with  him  in  glory  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


PouTiojSiS  OF  SouiPTUKB  Read  bp:fore  Sebmon — Isaiali  1. ;  liii.  1 — 7 ; 
Matfclicw  xxvi.  62—68;  Luke  x.\iii.  8 — 11 ;  Matthew  xxvii.  27 — SO. 


HxADfS  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 327,  937,  2G8. 


Jlll^0$0litmt  ^^ttmk  ittp. 


THE  PROPHET  LIKE  TJNTO  MOSE& 


i  I 


Delivered  on  Lobd's-Dat  Morning,  August  8rd,  1879,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABBBNAGLS,  NEWINGTON. 


**  The  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  up  onto  thee  a  Prophet  from  the  midflt  of  thee,  of 
thy  brethren,  Uke  unto  me ;  nnto  him  ye  shall  hearken ;  according  to  all  that  thou 
desiredst  of  the  Lord  thy  Qod  in  Horeb  in  the  day  of  the  assembly,  saying,  Let  me 
nol  hear  again  the  Toioe  of  the  Lord  my  God,  neither  let  me  see  this  great  fire  any 
more,  that  I  die  not.  And  the  Lord  said  nnto  me,  They  have  well  spoken  that 
which  they  haTO  spoken.  I  will  raise  them  up  a  Prophet  from  among  their  brethren, 
like  unto  thee^  ana  will  put  my  words  in  his  mouth ;  and  he  shall  speak  nnto  them 
all  that  I  shall  command  him.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whosoeyer  will  not 
hearken  nnto  my  wwds  which  he  shall  speak  in  my  name^  I  will  require  it  of  him." 
— ^Deuteronomy  xriii.  15 — 19. 

Man,  the  creature,  may  well  desire  intercourse  with  his  Creator.  When 
we  are  right-minded  we  cannot  bear  to  be  like  fatherless  children,  bom 
into  the  world  by  a  parent  of  whom  we  know  nothing  whatever.  We 
long  to  hear  onr  father's  voice.  Of  old  time,  or  ever  sin  had  entered 
into  the  world,  the  Lord  Ood  was  on  the  most  intimate  terms  with  his 
creature  man.  He  communed  with  Adam  in  the  garden ;  in  the  cool  of 
the  day  he  made  the  evening  to  be  seven-fold  re^shing  by  the  shadow 
of  his  own  presence.  There  was  no  cloud  between  unfalfen  man  and 
the  ever-blessed  One:  they  could  commune  together,  for  no  sin  had 
set  up  a  middle  wall  of  ^rtition.  Alas,  man  being  in  honour  oon- 
tinnea  not,  but  broke  the  law  of  his  Ood,  and  not  only  forfeited  his 
own  inheritance,  but  entailed  upon  his  descendants  a  character  with 
which  the  holy  Ood  can  hold  no  converse.  By  nature  we  love  that 
which  is  evil,  and  within  us  there  is  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  de* 
parting  from  the  living  Ood,  and  consequently  intercourse  between 
Ood  and  man  has  had  to  be  upon  auite  another  footing  from  that  which 
commenced  and  ended  in  the  glades  of  Eden.  It  was  condescension 
at  the  first  which  made  the  Lord  speak  with  man  the  creature ;  it  is 
mercy,  unutterable  mercy,  now  if  Ood  deigns  to  speak  with  man  the 
sinner. 

Through  his  divine  grace  the  Lord  did  not  leave  our  fiEU^hers  altogether 
)^ithout  a  word  from  himself  even  after  the  Fall,  for  between  fche  cbvs  of 
Adam  and  Hoses  there  were  occasional  voices  heard  as  of  Ood  speaking 
No.  1,487. 


481  METROPOLITAN  T^SRITACLE  PUI4PIT. 

with  man.  "Enoch  walked  with  God,'*  which  implies  that  (3od  walked 
with  him  and  had  communion  with  him,  and  we  m^  rest  aasored  it  was 
no  Bilent  walk  which  Enoch  had  with  the  Most  High.  The  Lord  also 
spake  to  Noah,  oneo  and  again,  and  made  a  covenant  with  him  :  and  then 
he,  at  still  greater  length  and  with  greater  frequency,  spake  with  Abraham, 
whom  he  graciously  called  his  Mend.  Voices  also  came  to  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  and  Joseph,  and  celestial  beings  flitted  to  and  fro  between  earth 
and  heaven.  Then  there  was  a  long  pause  and  a  dreary  silence.  No 
prophet  spoke  in  Jehovah's  name,  no  voice  of  God  in  priestly  oracle  was 
heard,  but  all  was  silent  while  Israel  dwelt  in  Egypt,  ana  sojourned  in  the 
land  of  Ham.  So  completely  hushed  was  the  spiritual  voice  among  men 
that  it  seemed  as  if  God  had  utterly  forsaken  his  people  and  left  the 
world  without  a  witness  to  his  name  (  yet  these  was  a  prophecy  of  his 
return,  and  the  Lord  had  great  designs,  which  only  waited  till  the  full 
time  was  come.  He  purposed  to  try  man  in  a  very  special  manner,  to 
see  whether  he  could  bear  the  presence  of  the  Lord  or  no.  He 
resolved  to  take  a  family,  multiply  it  into  a  nation,  and  set  it  apart 
for  himself,  and  to  that  nation  he  would  make  a  revelation  of  himself 
of  the  most  extraordinary  character.  So  he  took  the  people  who  had 
slaved  amongst  the  brick  kilns  of  Egypt,  and  made  them  his  elect,  the 
nation  of  hia  choice,  ordained  to  be  a. nation  of  priests,  a^peoiplenear  unto 
him,  if  they  bad  but  grace  to  bear  the  honour.  Though  they  had  lain  among 
the  pots,  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm  he.  delivered  them, 
and  with  gracious  love  he  favoured  them,  so  that  they  became  for  beaujty 
and  excellence  as  the  wings  of  a  dove  thaib  aie  covered  with  silver  aad 
her  feathers  with  yellow  gold.  He  divided  the  Bed  Sea  and  made  thera 
a  way  of  escape,  and  afterwards  set  that  sea  as  a  barrier  between  them 
and  theiT  fonner  masters.  He  took  them  into  the  wildemesSy  and  there 
fed  them  with  manna  which  dropped  from  heaven,  and  with  water  out  of 
the  rock  did  he  sustain  them.  After  a  while  he  began  ta^ak  to  them, 
as  he  had  never  spoken  to  any  nation  before.  He  spJie  with  them  from 
the  top  of  Sinai,  so  that  they  heard  his  voice  oui  of  the  midst  of  the 
Are,  and  in  aatonishment  they  cried,  '*  We  have  seen  this*  day  that  God 
doth  talk  with  msA,  and  he  iiveth."  But  the  experiment  failed.  Man 
waSf  not  in  a  condition  to  hear  the  direct  voice  of  God.  On  the  very 
first  day  the  peojde  were  in  such  terror  aad  alarm  thai;:  they  cried  oat, 
"  This  great  fire  will  consume  us :  if  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our 
God  any  more  we  shall  die."  As  they  stood  stili  at  a. distance  to  hear 
the  words  of  God's  perfect  law  they  were  fiUed  with  great  fear,  and  so 
terrihle  was  the  si^t  that  even  Moses  said,  "  I  exceedingly  fear  and 
quake.''  The  people  could  not  endure  that  which  wasrcasamanded,  aad 
entreated:  that  the  word  should  not  be  spoken  to  them  any  more. 
They  felt  the  n^  of  some  one  to  interpose — a  ds^man^  an  interpreter, 
oneofa.thousand  was  needed  to  come  between  them,  and  God.  Even 
thoso'  amox^  them  that,  weoe  the  most  spiritual,  and  ooddrstood  and 
loved  God  better,  than  the  reet,  yet  confessed  tb«it  they  oould  not 
endure  the  thunder  of  his  dreadful  voice,  and  their  elders  and  the 
headAof  their  tribes  came  unto  Moaes  and'saidi/'Ggi  tbon  near,  and 
hets  all  that  the  Iiord  our  God  shaUl  sa(jr. :  aad  speak,  thoQ.,unta  us  all 
,  —  that  the  Lovd  one  God  shall,  speak  unto  thee  ;  and  we  will,  hear  it,  aad 

o  it. 


THB  PR''  1>HET  LIKE  UNTO  U08E8.  485 

The  Lord  knew  that  man  would  always  be  nnable  to  hear  his  Maker's 
Toice,  and  he  therefore  determined  not  only  to  spc»k  by  Moses,  bat,  ever 
and  anon,  to  speak  by  his  servants  the  prophets^  raising  up  here  one 
and  there  anotner;  and  then  he  determined)  as  the  oonsummation  of 
his  condescending  mercy,  that  at  the  last  he  would  put  all  the  word  he 
had  to  say  to  man  into  one  heart,  and  that  word  should  be  spoken  by 
one  mouth  to  men,  furnishing  a  fidl,  complete,  and  unchangeaUe  reyela- 
tion  of  himself  to  the  human  race.  This  he  resolved  to  give  by  one  of 
whom  Moses  had  learned  something  when  the  Lord  said  to  him  in  the 
words  of  our  text,  **  I  will  raise  them  up  a  Prophet  fix)m  among  their 
brethren,  like  unto  thee,  and  will  put  my  words  in  his  mouth ;  and  he 
shall  speak  unto  them  dl  that  I  shall  command  him."  We  know  as- 
suredly that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  that  prophet  like  unto  Moses  by 
whom  in  these  last  days  he  has  spoken  unto  us.  See  Peter's  testimony 
in  the  third  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles^  and  Stephen's  in  the 
seventh  chapter  of  the  same  book.  **  This  man  was  counted  worthy  ot 
more  glory  than  Moses,  inasmuch  as  he  who  hath  builded  the  house 
hath  more  honour  than  the  house,"  yet  did  he  bear  a  gracious  likeness 
to  Moses,  and  therein  his  apostles  found  a  sure  argument  of  his  being 
indeed  the  Messiah,  sent  of  God« 

The  subject  of  this  morning's  discourse  is  the  Lord's  speaking  to  us 
b^  Jesus  Christ,  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  and  our  earnest 
aim  is  that  all  of  us  may  reverently  hear  the  voice  of  God  by  this 
greatest  of  all  prophets.  Men  and  brethren,  this  is  the  word  of  God 
onto  you  this  morning,  that  veiv  word  which  he  spake  on  the  holy 
Mount,  when  the  Lord  was  transfigured  and  there  appeared  with  him 
Moses  and  Elias  spealdng  to  him,  and  out  of  the  excellent  glor^  there 
came  the  word,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear  ye  him."  This  is  my 
message  at  this  hour — '*  Hear  ye  him."  He  saith  to  you  all  this  day, 
"  Incline  your  ear  and  come  unto  me :  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live. 
Hearken  oiiigently  unto  me,  and  eat  ye  that  which  is  ^ood,  and  let  your 
soul  delieht  itself  in  fatness."  ''See  that  ye  refuse  not  mm  Uiat  speaketh. 
For  if  they  escaped  not  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  earth,  much 
more  shall  not  we  escape,  if  we  turn  away  from  mm  that  speaketh  from 
heaven." 

Our  meditation  wiU  run  in  this  line :  first,  we  wiU  tUnk  for  a 
moment  upon  ihs  necessity  for  a  Mediator;  secondly,  upon  the  person 
of  the  Prophet-Mediator  whom  God  hath  chosen;  and,  thirdly,  upon 
the  authority  with  which  this  Mediator  is  invested,  by  which  authori^ 
he  calleth  upon  us  this  day  to  hearken  to  God's  voice  which  is  heard  in 
him. 

I.  We  begin  by  considering  how  urgently  there  existed  thb  neceb- 
siTT  for  a  Mediator.  I  need  but  very  short  time  to  set 'this  forth. 
There  was  a  neceesity  for  a  Mediator  in  the  case  of  the  Israelites,  first, 
because  of  the  unutterable  glory  of  Ood,  and  their  own  inability  to  endure 
that  glory,  either  with  their  eye,  their  ear,  or  their  mind.  We  cannot 
suppose  that  the  revelation  of  God  upon  Sinai  was  the  displav  of  all  his 
greatness :  nay,  we  know  that  it  could  not  be  such,  for  it  would  have  been 
impossible  for  man  to  have  lived  at  all  in  the  presence  of  the  infinite 
glory.  Habakkuk,  speaking  of  this  manifestation,  says,  "  God  came 
m>m  Teman,  and  the  Holy  One  from  mount  Paran.    His  glory  covered 


4d6  H£TBOPOUTAV  TABEBKAOl4^.,PXfl4PIT. 

(he  heaTenB,  and  the  earUb  waa  full  of  his  p^iifle.  Aad  hiabrig)>toess 
W83  as  the  light;  he  had  honii.ooiuag  out  oi  hiahand'';  but  he  adds, 
"  there  waa  the  hiding  of  hia  po«^."  Peq)iie  its  exoeeding  gk»7»  the 
manifeatatioa  upoa  tiie  moaat  of  Qod  at  HorQb!  waa  a  anbduad  mafiir 
festatioB,  aad  yet,  thoDghr  it  ¥WA  tfaos  toned. down  to  humaa  weak- 
ness, it  could  not  he  homeL  Tha  unveilings  of  Jehovah'a  fact  no 
mortal  eye  coold  bciir.  The  voice*  with  w&dx  God  spake  at  Sioai 
is  by  Mcfiea  (XMapared  to  the  Toice  of  a  tnunpet  waxing  exceeding 
loud  and  long;  and  a]fio  to  the  roll  of  thunder ;  and  we  ^  know  the 
awe-inspiring  aaund  of  thimder  whea  it  is  heard  near  at  hand,  its  voUeya 
rolling  oyerhead.  How  the  ovaah  of  peal  on  peal  makes  (^  braFsat 
hiQttrt,  if  not  to  qnail,  yet  still  to  bow  in  reverent  awe  before  God !  Xet 
this  is  not  the  full  voioe  of  God :  it  is  but  his  whisper.  Jehovah  hath 
hushed  liis  Toice  in  the  thunder,  for  were  that  voioe  heaoxi  in  Ha 
fulness  it  would  shake  not  only  earth*,  but  also  heaven.  If  he  were  for 
once  to  unveil  his  fiuie  the  lightning's  flame  would  pale  to  darkness  ia 
comparison.  The  vdoe  of  the  Lord  Qod  is  inconceivably  majestic,  and 
it  is  not  possible  that  we^  poor  cseatures,  wonna  of  the  dust,  insects  of  a 
day,  should  ever  be  able  to  hear  it  and  live.  We  could  not  bear  the 
full  revelation  of  God  apart  firom  mediatorial  interpoaition.  Peilii^ 
when  he  has  made  na  to  be  pujsa  efgm%,  or  when  our  bodies  shall  have 
been  '^  raised  in  power,"  made  UUie  unto  the  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  we 
may  then  be  able  to  behold  the  gloiiona  JehovsJi,  but  as  yet  we  moal 
accept  the  kindly  wanning  of  the  Lootd  in  answer  to  the  request  of 
Moses,  "  thou  canst  not  see  my  fitoe^  for  there  shall  no  man  see  me  and 
live*"  The  strings  of  lifb  are  too.  weak  for  the  strain  of  the  unveiled 
presence ;  it  is  not  possible  for  such,  a  gossamer,  spider-like  thread  as  our 
existence  to  survive  the  breath  of  Deity,  if  he  should  actually  and  in  v^y 
deed  draw  nigli  to  as.  It  appeared  oteariv  at  Sinai,  that  even  when  tl^ 
Lord  did  acoomoaodate  himself,  as  mnoh  as  waa  consistent  with  his 
honour,  to  the  infirmity  of  human  nature,  man  was  so  alarmed  and  afraid 
at  his  presence  that  he  could  m)t  bear  it,  and  it  was  absolutely  necessary 
that  instead  of  speaking  with  his  own  voice,  even  though  he  whispered 
wJiathe  had  to  say>  he  should  speak  to  another  apart,  and  afterwards  that 
other  should  come  down  from  the  mount  and  repeat  the  Lord's  woida 
to  the  people. 

This  su&cient  reason  is  supported  by  another  most  weighty  fact, 
namely,  that  God  cannot  commufie  with  men  because  of  iludr  auu  God 
was  pleased  to  regard  his  people  krael  at  the  foot  of  Sinai  as  pure. 
*^  Moses  went  down  from:  the  mount  unto  the  people,  and  sanctified  the 
people ;  and  they  washed  their  clothes."  They  had  abstained  for  awhile 
nom  defiling  actionsi  and  as  they,  stoodi  outside  the  bounds  they  were 
ceremonially  clean;  but  it  was  only  a  ceremonial  purity.  Before  long 
they  were  really  uncleaa  before  the  Lord,  and  in  heart  defiled  and 
polluted.  The  Lord  said  of  th^u,  ^*  0  that  there  were  suck  a  heart  ia 
them^thatthey  wouldfoai^me,  and  keep  allmyconunandcocnts  always^  that 
it  might  be  well  with  them,  and  with  their  childr^i  for  ever!"  He  knew 
that  their  heart  was  not  right  e^en  whisn  they  spoke  obediently.  Not 
many  days  after  the  people  had  txambled  at  Sinai  they  made  a  goidea 
cal4  and  set  it  up  ana  bowed  before  it,  and  provoked  the  Lord  to  jealousy 
so  that  he  sent  plagues  among  them.    It,  is  quite  clear  that  afi;er  suck  a 


THE  FBOPHBT  IJKB  UNTO  MOfiEfi.  487 

rebellion,  after  a  deliberate  breach  of  his  oov^iant,  and  dating  violation 
of  his  oommands,  it  would  have  been  quite  impossible  for  GckI  to  speak 
to  them,  or  for  them  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God,  in  a  direct  manner. 
They  would  have  fled  before  him  because  of  his  holiness,  which  shamed 
their  unholiness ;  and  because  of  their  sin,  which  provoked  his  indigna- 
tion, because  of  the  wandering,  and  instability,  and  treachery  of  their 
hearts,  the  Lord  could  not  have  endured  them  in  his  presence.  The 
holy  angels  for  ever  adore  with  that  threefold  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy 
Lord  God  of  Sabaoth  ";  and  he  could  not  permit  men  of  unclean  lips  to 
profane  his  throne  with  their  unholy  utterances.  Oh  no,  my  brethren, 
with  such  a  sense  of  sin  as  some  of  us  have,  and  as  all  of  us  ought  to 
have,  we  should  have  to  eover  our  fietoeB,  and  oower  down  in  terror,  if 
Jehovah  himmlf  were  to  appear.  He  oannot  look  upon  iniquity,  neither. 
can  evil  dwell  with  him,  for  he  is  a  consuming  fire.  While  wc  are  com- 
passed with  infirmity  we  cannot  behold  him,  for  our  eyes  are  dimmed 
with  the  smoke  of  onr  iniquities.  If  we  wo«ld  see  even  the  skirts  of  hir. 
garments  we  must  first  be  pore  in  heart,  and  he  must  pat  us  in  the  clefl 
of  the  rock,  and  cover  vs  with  his  hand.  If  we  were  to  behold  his  etern 
justice,  his  awful  holiness,  and  his  boundless  power,  apart  ^m  our  ever- 
blessed  Mediator,  we  should  dissolve  at  the  8ight,and  utterly  melt  away, 
for  we  have  sinned. 

This  doable  reason  of  the  weakness  of  our  nature,  and  the  sinfulnessof 
our  charaoter,  is  a  forcible  one,  for  I  olose  this  part  of  the  diseoui^se  by 
observing  that  the  argument  was  so  forcible  th^i  the  Lord  himself  allowed 
it.  He  said,  ''They  have  well  spoken,  that  which  they  have  spoken." 
It  li^'as  no  morbid  apprehension  which  made  them  afraid,  it  was  no  fooKsh 
dread  which  made  them  start,  for  wisdom's  own  self  in  the  person  of 
Moses,  said,  *'  I  do  esoeedingly  fear  and  quake."  The  calmest  and 
meekest  of  men  had  real  cause  for  Mr. 

God*s  face  is  not  to  be  seen.  An  occasional  glimpse  may  come  to 
spirits  raised  above  their  own  naitural  level,  -eo  that  they  ean  for  awhile 
behold  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hoslis ;  but  even  to  them  it  is  a  terrible 
strain  upon  all  their  powers,  the  wine  Is  too  strong  for  the  'bottles. 
What  said  John,  when  he  «aw,'not  to  much  absolute  Deitv,  bat  the 
divine  side  of  the  Mediator  ?  *'  When  I  saw  him  I  fell  at  his  feet  as 
dead."  Daniel,  'the  man  greatly  belorved,  confesses  that  there  remained 
no  strsngth  in  him  and  his  oomelinaas  was  turned  into  corruption  when 
he  heard  the  voioe  of  Ood ;  4md'0ob  asid,  *'  I  have  heard  of  thec^by  the 
hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee ;  therefore  I  abhor  my- 
self in  dust  and  ashes."  No,  God  kaoweth  it  is  not  silly  fright  nor  un- 
believing fear ;  it  is  a  most  seemly  awe  and  a  most  natural  dread  which 
takes'hoid  of  finite:and  falHble  oreatimis  in  theprwenoe  of  the  Infinite 
and  Perfect  One.  These  irail  tabemades,  like  the  tents  of  Ooshan,  are 
in  aflSiction  when  the  Lord  marches  by  in  the  greatness  of  his  power. 
We  need  a  Mediator.  The  Lord  knows  right  well  that  our  sinfulness 
provokes  him,  and  that  there  is  in  w,  in  the  best  here  present,  that 
which  would  make  him  to  break  out  agaiuBt  us  to  destroy  us  if  we  were 
to  come  to  him  without  a  covering  and  «  propitiation. 

We  must  approach  the  Loid  through  a  Mediator :  it  is  absolutely 
necessary.  -Goa  himself  witnesses  it  is,  and  therefore  in  his  mercy  he 
ordains  a  Mediator,  that  by  him  we  timj  be  able  to  approach  his  thiotie 


488  JIETBOPOLITAV  TABBRKAOLE  PULPIT. 

of  grace.    May  the  Holy  Spirit  make  this  troth  very  plain  to  the  oon- 
flciouanefis  of  all  of  ns,  and  cause  ns  to  sing  with  the  poet : 

**  Till  God  in  human  flesh  I  see, 
My  thoughts  no  comfort  find ; 
The  holj,  just,  and  sacred  Three 
'  Are  terrors  to  my  mind. 

''  But  if  ImmanueTs  ii^e  appear, 
My  hope,  my  joy  begins  ; 
His  name  forbids  my  sTavish  fear, 
His  grace  removes  my  sins.** 

II.    This  brings  us  to  consider  thb  person  of  the  appointed  Mediator, 
and  in  my  text  we  obtain  a  liberal  measure  of  information  upon  this 
point.    JEtead  these  blessed  wordsy  ^*  The  Lord  thy  €k>d  will  raise  up  unto 
thee  a  Prophet  from  the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy  orethren*"    Dwell  with 
sweetness  upon  this  fiact,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  was  raised  up  from  the 
midst  of  uSy  from  among  our  brethren.    In  him  is  fulfilled  that  glorious 
prophecy,  *'  1  have  exalted  One  chosen  out  of  the  people."    He  is  one 
of  ourselves,  a  brother  bom  for  adversity.    He  was  bom  at  Bethlehem, 
not  in  fiction,  but  in  &ct :  where  the  homed  oxen  fed  he  in  a  manger 
lay,  as  any  other  babe  might  do,  wrapped  in  swaddling  bands,  and  de- 
pendent on  a  woman's  loving  care  as  any  other  babe  might  be.     He 
vfBB  like  ourselves  in  his  growth  from  in&ncy  to  manhood,  increasing  in 
stature  as  we  do  from  our  childhood  to  our  riper  age.    Thou&^h  the  holy 
x^hild  Jesus  he  was  yet  a  child,  and  therefore  he  was  subject  to  his  parents. 
And  when  he  came  forth  as  a  man,  his  was  no  phantom  manhood,  but 
'trae  flesh  and  blood ;  he  was  tempted  and  he  was  betrayed  :  he  hungered 
.and  he  thirsted;  he  was  weary  and  he  was  sore  amazed;  he  took  our 
sicknesses,  and  he  carried  our  sorrows ;  he  was  niAde  in  all  points  like 
unto  his  brethren.    He  did  not  set  himself  apart  as  though  he  were  of  an 
exclusive  caste  or  of  a  superior  rank,  but  he  dwelt  among  us ;  the  brother 
of  the  race,  eating  with  publicans  and  sinners,  mingling  ever  with  the 
common  people.    He  was  not  one  who  boasted  his  descent,  or  gloried  in  the 
so-called  blue  blood,  or  placed  himself  among  the  ParpJ^fhgerUU,  who  most 
not  see  the  light  except  in  marble  halls.  He  was  bom  in  a  common  house  of 
entertainment  where  all  might  come  to  him,  and  he  died  with  his  arms  ex- 
.tended  as  a  pledge  that  he  continued  to  receive  all  who  came  to  him.    He 
nevef  spoke  of  men  as  the  common  multitude,  the  vulgar  herd,  but  he  made 
.himself  at  home  among  them.    He  was  dressed  like  a  peasant,  in  the 
ordinary  smock  of  the  country,  a  garment  without  seam,  woven  from  the 
top  throughout ;  and  he  mixed  with  the  multitude,  went  to  their  mar- 
riage feasts,  attended  their  funerals,  and  was  so  much  among  them,  a 
man  among  men,  that  slander  called  him  a  gluttonous  man  and  a  wine- 
bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners.    In  all  respects  our  Lord 
was  raised  up  from  the  midst  of  ns,  one  of  our  own  kith  and  kin. 
**  For  this  cause  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.'*    He  was  our 
brother  in  living,  our  brother  in  death,  and  our  brother  in  resurrection ; 
for  after  his  resurrection  he  said,  " 60,  tell  my  brethren;  "  and  he  also 
said,  ''My  Father,  and  your  Father ;  my  Gk)d,  and  your  Grod."    Though 
now  exalted  in  the  highest  heavens  he  pleads  for  us  and  acts  as  a  High 
Priest  who  can  be  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities.    God  has 


THE  PfiOPHET  UKB  imTO  MOSES.  439 

gracionsly  raised  up  snch  a  Mediator,  and  now  he  speaks  to  ns  through 
him.  0  sons  of  men,  will  ye  not  hearken  when  such  an  one  as  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  the  Son  of  man,  is  ordained  to  speak  of  the  eternal 
God  ?  Ye  mifi^ht  be  unable  to  hear  if  he  should  speak  again  in  thun- 
der, but  now  he  speaketh  by  those  dear  lips  of  love,  now  he  speaketh 
by  that  gracious  tongue  which  has  wrought  such  miracles  of  grace 
by  its  words,  now  he  speaketh  out  of  that  great  heart  of  his,  which 
never  beats  except  with  loTe  to  the  sons  of  men — ^will  ye  not  hear 
him  ?  Surely  we  ought  to  give  the  most  earnest  heed  and  obey  his 
eYen"  word. 

Moses  was  truly  one  of  the  people,  for  he  loved  them  intensely,  and 
all  his  sympathies  were  with  them.  They  provoked  him  terribly,  but 
still  he  loved  them.  We  can  never  admire  that  man  of  Qod  too  much 
when  we  think  of  his  disinterested  love  to  that  guilty  nation.  See  him 
on  the  mountain  there  as  Israel's  advocate.  The  Lord  said,  "  Let  me 
alone  that  I  may  destroy  them,  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation." 
That  proposal  opened  up  before  Moses'  eye  a  glittering  destiny.  It  was 
within  his  grasp  that  he  himself  should  become  the  founder  of  a  race, 
in  whom  the  promises  made  to  Abraham  should  be  fulfilled.  Would 
not  the  most  of  men  have  greedily  snatched  at  it?  But  Moses  will  not 
have  it.  He  loves  Israel  too  well  to  see  the  people  die  if  he  can  save 
them.  He  has  not  an  atom  of  selfish  ambition  about  him ;  but  with 
cries  and  tears  he  exclaims,  ^'  Wherefore  should  the  Egyptians  speak  and 
say.  For  mischief  did  he  bring  them  out,  to  slay  them  in  the  mountains, 
and  to  consume  them  from  the  &ce  of  the  earth  ?  Turn  fix}m  thy  fierce 
wrath,  and  repent  of  this  evil  against  thy  people."  He  prevailed  with 
God  by  his  pleading,  for  he  identified  himself  with  Israel.  Moses  did, 
as  it  were,  ^her  up  all  their  grie&  and  sorrows  into  himself,  even  as 
did  our  liora.  True  Israelite  was  he,  for  he  refused  to  be  called  the 
son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  people  of  Ood. 
This  is  just  what  our  blessed  Lord  has  done.  He  will  not  have  honour 
apart  from  his  people,  nor  even  life,  unless  they  live  also.  He  saved 
others,  himself  he  could  not  save.  He  would  not  be  in  heaven,  and 
leave  his  saints  behind.  He  loved  the  people  and  so  proved  himself  to 
be  one  chosen  out  of  their  midst,  a  brother  among  brethren. 

Mark  well  that,  while  thus  our  Lord  is  our  brother,  the  great  Ood  has 
in  bis  person  sent  us  one  who  is  lifiied  up  above  us  all  in  the  Jmowledge 
of  his  mind.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  (v.  18.),  "  I  will  put  my  words  in  his 
month."  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  comes  to  us  inspired  by  G[od.  Not  alone 
Cometh  he,  nor  of  his  own  mind ;  but  saith  he,  **  The  Father  is  with  me :  I 
do  always  the  things  which  please  him :  the  Father  that  dwelleth  in  me, 
he  doeth  the  works."  Both  in  word  and  work  he  acted  for  his  Father, 
and  under  his  Father's  inspiration.  Men  and  brethren,  I  beseech  you 
not  to  reject  the  message  which  Jesus  brings,  seeing  it  is  not  his  own, 
but  the  sure  message  of  God.  Trifle  not  with  a  single  word  which 
Jesus  speaks,  for  it  is  the  word  of  the  Eternal  One :  despise  not  one 
siugle  deed  which  he  did,  or  precept  which  he  commanded,  or  blessing 
which  he  brought,  for  upon  all  these  there  is  the  stamp  of  deity.  God 
chose  one  who  is  our  brother  that  he  might  come  near  to  us ;  but  he  put 
his  own  royal  imprimatur  upon  him,  wat  we  might  not  have  .an  am- 
bassador of  second  rank,  but  one  who  counts  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal 


440  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PUT^PIT. 

with  God,  who  nevertli^ess  for  onr  €ake  has  taken  npon  himself  the 
form  of  a  servant  that  he  might  apeak  home  to  onr  hearts.  For  all  liNBe 
reasons,  I  beseech  you  despise  not  him  that  speakelh,  seeing  he  mealoAh 
from  heaven. 

The  main  point,  however,  upon  which  I  vramt  to  dwell  is,  tiiat  Jans 
is  like  to  Moses.  There  had  been  no  better  mediator  found  than  Mases 
up  to  Moaes'  day ;  the  Lord  Gk)d,  therefore,  determined  to  woi^  wpm 
that  model  with  the  great  prophet  of  his  raoe,  and  he  has  done  so  in 
sending  forth  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  would  be  a  very  intereating  task  ftr 
the  young  people  to  work  out  all  the  points  in  which  Mosesis  a  peraoiiil 
type  of  the  Lonl  Jesus.  The  points  of  rescmblanee  are  very  nraay,  nntihere 
is  hardly  a  single  incident  in  the  life  of  the  great  Lawgiverwhidiiis-not 
symbolical  of  the  promised  Saviour.  Yon  may  begin  from  ilhe  banning 
at  the  waters  of  the  Nile,  and  go  to  the  dose  upon  the  brow  of  Pim^ 
and  you  will  see  Christ  in  Moses  as  a  man  sees  his  foce  in  a  giaas.  I  mi 
only  mention  in  what  respects,  as  a  Mediator,  Jesus  is  hice  to  Moses,  md 
fiurely  one  is  found  in  the  fiict  that  Moses  beyond  all  that  went  befae 
him  was  petuHarli/  ihe^ depository  of  ih6  mind  of  Ood.  'Oncse  and  Mnn 
we  find  him  closeted  with  God  for  forty  days  at  a  time.  He  went  nf^t 
9LWAJ  from  men  to  the  lone  niountain^top,  and  there  he  was  fotty  Ays 
and  forty  nights,  and  did  neither  eat  nor  drink,  but  lived  in  high 
munion  with  his  Ood.  In  those  iimes  of  sednsion  he  received  itfae 
of  the  tabernacle,  the  laws  of  the  priesthood,  of  the  sacrifioss  of  the  iiolj 
days,  and  of  the  civil  estate  of  Israel,  and  periiaps  the  early  Feeoniswfaiefa 
compose  the  book  of  Genesis.  To  whom  else  had  God  ev^Toaoktn  fbr 
that  length  of  time,  as  a  man  speaket^  with  his  friend  ?  He  wistiie 
peculiar  favourite  of  God.  From  the  first  day  of  his  call,  when  he  was 
keeping  his  father's  flock  at  the  back  of  the  desert,  right  to  the  <Uky  wksD 
God  kissed  away  his  soul  on  the  top  of  Nebo,  he  was  a  iman  -gratif 
beloved,  to  whom  God  manifested  himself  as  to  no  otlier.  Vsar  w 
Lord's  own  words  to  Aaron  and  Miriam.  '^  And  he  said,  Hear  noiir  ny 
words  :  If  there  be  a  prophet  among  you,  I  the  Lord  will  make  BVfsrif 
known  unto  him  in  a  vision,  and  will  speak  unto  him  in  a  dream.  My 
servant  Moses  is  not  so,  who  is  faithful  in  all  mine  house.  Wdth  him 
will  I  speak  mouth  to  mouth,  e¥en  apparently,  and  not  in  davkispsediss: 
and  the  sindlitudeof  the  Loord  shall  he  behold  :  wherefore  thennore  ye 
not  afraid  to  speak  against  'niy«ervBnt  Moses  ?  "  In  this  our  sLordJtesss 
is  like  to  Moses,  only  he  far  surpasses  -him,  for  the  intercomiae'brtwaai 
Christ  and  ihe  Father  was  yery  much  more  intimate,  seeing  that  Jssbb 
is  himself  essential  deity,  and  ^  in  him  dwelleth  all  Hie  fulness  of  tiie'Qod- 
head  bodily."  Gold  moontains  and  ihe'midm'ght  air  continually  iwiteassid 
to  his  conmiunion  with  tiie  Father.  Nor  these  alone,  for  he  abode  ^solii 
the  Father.  His  language  was  alwavs  spoken  out  as  G^d  was  9fmidmg 
within  him ;  he  lived  in  God,  and  with  God.  **  1  know,"  said  he,  **tlmt 
thou  hearest  me  always."  Instead  of  having  to  point  out  wh&a.  CMit 
was  in  oonunnnion  «with  ihe  Father,  we  have  rather,  with  astonishmmtylo 
point  out  the  solitary  moment  ^when  he  was  left  of  the  Father,  e^en  Alt 
dread  hour  when  he  cried,  ''My  God,!mv  God,  why  hast  4hon 
me  ?"  Only  for  that  once  tiie  Fa&er  had  left  him,  and  even  ikmi  it 
ine:n)lical;^,  and  he  asked  the  reason  for  it ;  iiiough  he  knewihi 
be  then  suffering  as  the  Sabstitnte  for  man,  yet  did  has  desertioAtbf  ^flbd 


THE  PBOPHST  LIKK  UNTO  H08B&.  441 

oome  upon  him  aa  anoveltj  which  utterlj  overwhelmed  him^  so  that  he 
asked  in  agony  why  he  was  forsaken. 

MoseSy  to  take  another  point,  ia  the  first  of  the  prophets  unth  whom 
Ood  ke^  t^  eontinuaus  revdalion.  To  other  men  he  spake  in  dreams 
and  vinons,  bat  to  Moses  by  plain  and  perpetual  testimony.  His  ^irit 
rested  on  him,  and  he  took  of  it  to  give  thereof  to  Joshua,  and  to  the 
seventy  eldezl^  even  as  Jesus  gave  of  his  Spirit  to  the  apostles.  Some- 
times God  spdcfi  to  Noah,  or  to  Abraham  and  others;  but  it  was  upon 
occasions  oidy ;  and  even  then,  as  in  the  case  of  Abraham  and  Jacob,  tney 
must  Ml  asleep  to  see  and  hear  hun  best :  but  with  Moses  the  Lord  abode 
perpetually ;  whensoever  he  willed  he  consulted  the  Most  High,  and  at 
once  God  spake  with  him,,  and  directed  his  way.  So  was  it  with  Christ 
Jesus.  He  needed  not  to  behdd  a  vision :  the  spirit  of  propbec v  did  not 
oocaaionally  come  upon  him,  and  bear  him  out  of  himself,  for  the  Spirit 
was  given  him  without  measure,  and  he  knew  the  very  mind  and  heart 
of  G^od  perpetually.  He  waa  always  a  prophet ;  not  sometimes  a  prophet, 
like  him  of  old,  of  whom  we  read,  *'  The  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him 
in  the  can^  of  Dan";  or  like  others  of  whom  it  is  written, ''  the  word  of 
the  Lord  came  to  them."  At  all  times  the  Spirit  rested  upon  him :  he 
spake  in  the  abiding  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost^  even  more  sp  than 
md  Moses. 

Moses  is  described  aa  a  prophet  mighty  in  word  and  deed,  and  it  is 
singnlar  that  there  never  was  another  prophet  mighty  in  word  and  deed 
till  Jesos  came*  Moses  not  only  spoke  with  maichless  power,  but 
wrought  miracles.  You  shall  find  no  oUier  pro[diet  who  did  both.  Other 
prophets  who  spake  well  wrought  no  miracles,  or  onlv  here  and  there ; 
whilst  those  who  wrought  miracles,  such  aa  Elijah  and  Eliaha,  have  left 
us  but  few  worda  that  they  spake :  indeed,  their  prophecies  were  W 
lightning  flashes,  and  not  as  the  bright  shining  of  a  son.  When 
you  come  to  our  Lord  Jesus  you  find  lip  and  heart  working  together, 
with  equal  p»&ctness  of  witness.  You  cannot  tell  in  which  he  is  the 
more  marvellous,  in  his  speech  or  in  his  act.  ''  Never  man  spake  like 
this  man,"  but  certainly  never  man  wrought  such  marvels  of  mercy  as 
Jesus  did.  He  far  exceeds  Moses  and  all  the  prophets  put  together  in 
the  variety  and  the  multitude  and  the  wonderful  character  of  the  miracles 
which  he  did.  If  men  bow  before  prophets  who  can  cast  down  their  rods, 
and  they  become  serpents,  if  they  yiela  homage  to  prophets  who  call  fire 
from  heaven,  how  much  more  should  they  accept  him  whose  words  are 
matchless  music,  and  whose  miracles  of  love  were  felt  even  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  ttus  visible  world;  for  the  angels  of  God  flew  &om  heaven 
to  minister  to  him,  the  devils  of  the  pit  fled  before  lus  voice,  and  the 
cavema  of  death  heard  his  call  and  yielded  up  their  prey.  Who  would 
not  accept  this  prophet  like  unto  Moses,  to  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  bare 
witnesa  by  mighty  signs  and  wonders? 

Moses,  again,  was  the  founder  of  a  greai  syeism  of  reUgioue  law,  and 
this  waa  not  the  case  with  any  other  but  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  founded 
the  whole  system  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood  and  the  law  that  went  with 
it.  Moses  was  a  law-giver :  he  gave  the  ten  commandments  in  the 
name  of  God,  and  all  the  other  statutes  of  the  Jewish  polity  were 
ordained  through  him.  Now,  till  you  come  to  Christ  you  mid  no  such 
law-giver ;  but  Jesus  institutes  the  new  covenant  as  Moses  introduced 


442  METROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PUIiPIT. 

the  old,  the  sermon  on  the  mount  was  an  ntCerance  from  a  happier  Sinait 
and  whereas  Moses  gives  this  and  that  command,  Jesos  gives  the  like  in 
sweeter  form  and  in  diviner  fiashion,  and  embodies  it  in  his  own  sacsed 
person.  He  is  the  great  l^islator  of  oar  dispensation,  the  King  in  Om 
midst  of  Jeshnnm,  giving  forth  his  command  whioh  runneth  verjr 
swijftly,  and  thev  that  fear  the  Lord  are  obedient  thereunto.  . 

Time  will  fail  us,  or  we  would  mention  to  jou  that  Moses  taasfiUihfid 
before  God  as  a  servant  over  all  his  house,  and  so  was  Jesus  as  a  Son  over 
his  own  house.  He  was  never  unfiuthfnl  to  his  charge  in  any  respect^ 
but  in  all  things  ruled  and  served  to  perfection  as  the  anointed  ofib» 
Father.  He  is  the  faithful  and  true  Witness,  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of 
the  earth.  Moses,  too,  was  zealous  for  Ood  and  for  his  honour.  Re- 
member how  the  zeal  of  Ood's  house  did  eat  him  up.  When  he  saw 
grievous  sin  among  the  people,  he  said,  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  AiidT* 
and  there  came  to  him  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  he  said, ''  60  in  and  ont^ 
and  slaj  ye  every  one  his  men  that  were  joined  to  Baal-peor."  Herein 
he  was  the  stem  type  of  Jesus,  who  took  the  scourge  of  small  oords,  and 
drove  out  the  buyers  and  sellers,  and  said,  ''Take  these  things  hence: 
it  is  written,  My  Father's  house  shall  be  a  house  of  prayer,  but  ve  have 
made  it  a  den  of  thieves  ";  for  the  zeal  of  Gk)d's  house  had  eaten  him  up. 

Moses,  by  divine  grace,  was  very  meek^  and  perhaps  this  is  the  chief 
parallel  between  him  and  Jesus.  I  have  said, ''  bv  aivine  grace,"  for  I 
suppose  by  nature  he  was  strongly  passionate.  There  are  many  indica- 
tions that  Moses  was  not  meek,  but  very  far  from  it  until  the  Spirit  of 
God  rested  upon  him.  He  slew  the  Egyptian  hastily,  and  in  after 
years  he  went  out  from  the  presence  of  rharaoh  ''in  great  anger.** 
Once  and  again  you  find  him  very  wroth :  he  took  the  tables  of  stone 
and  dashed  them  in  pieces  in  his  indignation,  for  "  Moses'  anger  waxed 
hot";  and  that  unhappy  action  whicn  occasioned  his  being  shut  out 
of  Canaan  was  caused  oy  his  "  being  provoked  in  spirit  so  that  he  spake 
unadvisedly  with  his  lips,"  and  said,  "  Hear  now,  ye  rebels ;  must  I 
fetch  vou  water  out  of  this  rock?"  Divine  grace  had  so  cooled  and 
(^dmed  him  that  in  general  he  was  the  gentlest  of  men,  and  when  ha» 
brother  and  sister  tlmist  themselves  ,into  his  place  and  questioned  his 
authority,  it  is  written,  "Now  the  man  Moses  was  very  meek,  i^ve 
all  the  men  which  were  upon  the  face  of  the  earth."  In  his  own  qnand 
he  has  never  anything  to  say :  it  is  only  for  the  people  and  for  God 
that  his  anger  waxeth  hot.  Even  about  his  last  act  of  hastiness  he  sam 
"  God  was  angry  with  me  for  vour  sake,"  not  for  his  own  sake.  He 
was  so  meek  and  gentle  that  for  forty  years  he  bore  with  the  most 
rebellious  and  provoking  nation  that  ever  existed.  But  what  shall  I  say 
of  my  Master?  Let  him  speak  for  himself.  "Oome  unto  me,  all  ye 
that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest :  take  my 
yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart: 
and  ye  diall  find  rest  unto  your  souls."  Our  children  call  him  "  G^tiUe 
Jesus,  meek  and  mild."  The  man  Jesus  is  very  meek  above  all  men 
that  are  upon  the  £ace  of  the  earth.    He  has  his  indignation — 

'*  Like  glowiDg  oven  is  his  wrath, 
As  flimie  by  furious  blast  upblown,*' 

for  he  can  be  angry,  and  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  is  the  most  awful 


THE  PBOFHET  LIKB  UNTO  HOSEH.  443 

Trratli  beneath  the  bhh  ;  bnt  still  to  us,  in  this  gospel  daj,  he  is  all  love 
and  tenderness ;  and  when  he  bids  ns  come  to  him,  can  we  refuse  to 
hear  ?  So  meek  is  the  Mediator  that  he  is  loTeit8elf»  izMamate  love ;  so 
loving,  that  when  he  died  his  only  crime  was  that  he  wiw  "found  goilty  of 
excess  of  love  ";  can  we  be  so  omei  as'  to  reject  him  ?  0  brotheis  and 
sisters,  do  not  refuse  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  this  Tender  One  by  whom 
God  speaketh  to  you. 

Our  Lord  was  like  to  Moses  in  meekness,  and  then  to  sum  up  all, — 
Moses  was  the  Mediator  far  Ood  unik  the- people,  and  so  is  our  blessed 
Lord.  Moses  came  in  God's  name  to  set  Israel  free  £rom  Pharaoh's  bond- 
age, and  he  did  it :  Jesus  came  to  set  us  free  from  a  worse  bondage  still, 
and  he  has  achieved  our  freedom:  Moses  led  the  pe<mle  through  the 
Hed  Sea,  and  Jesus  has  led  us  where  aU  the  hosts  of  hell  were  over- 
thrown, and  sin  was  drowned  in  his  own  moei  precious  btood.  Moses  led 
the  tribes  through  the  wildemess,  and  Jesm  leads  us  through  the  weary 
ways  of  this-  lii6  to  the  rest  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God. ' 
Moses  spake  to  the  people  for  God,  and  Jesus*  hath  done  the  same.  Moses 
spake  to  God  for  the  people,  and  Jesus  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us.  Moses  proposed  himself  as  a  saedfice  when  he  said,  "  If  not^  blot 
my  name  out  of  the  book  of  life  '*;  but  Jesus  was.  an  aetuid  saerifice,  and 
was  taken  away  from  the  land  of  the  living  for' our  sakes,  being  made  a 
curse  for  us%  Moses,  in  a  certain  sense,  died  for  the  people,*  for  he  could 
not  estor  into  the  landy  but  must  needs  close  his  eyes  on  Nebo.  Those 
are  touching  words,  "The  Lord  was  angry  with  me  for  your  sakes": 
words  which  in  a  diviner  sense  may  be  fitly- qppiied  to  Jesus,  for  God  was 
angry  with  him  for  our  sakes.  Bfgfat  through  to  the  very  end  our 
blessed  Lord  Jesus*  Christ,  our  Saviour,  is  a  prophet  like  unto  Moses, 
raised  up  from  the  midst  of  his  brethren.  0  my  hearersj  hear  ye  him. 
Tiim  not  your  ear  away  from  this  Prophet  of  prof^ets^  but  hear*  and  live. 

III.  I  close  with  that  point,  and  if  my  words  are  very  few  let  them  be 
weighty.  Let  us  think  of  the  AuriMmiTT  of  our  great  Mediator,  and 
let  this  be  Uie  practical  lesson — Hear  ye  him.  Men  and  brethren,  if  our 
hearts  were  rignt,  the  moment  it  was  annoumed  that  God  would  speak  to 
us  thtough  Jesus  Ohrist  there  would  be  a  rush  to  hear  him.  If  sin  had 
not  maddened  men  they  would  listen  eagerly  to  every  word  of  God 
through  such  a  Mediator  as  Jesus  is ;  they  would  write  eadi  golden  sen- 
teuce  OB  their  tablets,  they  would  beard  his  word  in  their  memories, 
they  would  wear  it  between  theireyes/  they  woirfd  yield  their  hearts  to  it. 
Ala%  it  is  not  so ;  and  the  saddest  thing  of  all  is  that  some  talk  of  Jesus 
fc^*  gain^  and  others  hear>  of  him  as*  if  his  story  were  a  mere  tale  or  an 
old  Jewish  ballad  of  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  Yet,  remember,  God 
speaks  by  Jesug  stilly  SoA  ev^ry  word  of  his  that  is  left  on  record  is  as 
solemnly  alive  to-day  as*  when  it  fint  leaped  from  his  blessed  lips.  I 
beseech  you  remember  Christ  cometh  not  as  an  amateur,  but  he  hath 
authority  with  him :  this'arabussador  to  men  wears  the  authority  of  the 
King  of  kings.  If  ye  despise  him  ye  despise  him  that  sent  him  :  if  ye 
turn  away  from  himi  that  spNBaketh  from  heaven  ve  turn  away  from  the 
eternal  God,  and  ye  do  despite  to  his  love.    Oh,  do  not  so. 

Note  how  my  text  puts  it.  It  saith  here,  "Whosoever  shall  not 
hearken  unto  my  words  which  he  shall  speak  in  my  name,  /  will  require  it 
of  him''    My  heart  trembles  while  I  repeat  to  you  the  words,  "  I  will 


444  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

require  it  of  him."  To-day  God  gracioasly  requires  it  of  some  of  joa, 
and  asks  why  you  have  not  listened  to  Christ's  voice.  Why  is  ttdn  ? 
Ton  have  not  accepted  his  salvation.  Why  is  this  ?  You  Imow  all 
about  JesnSy  and  you  say  it  is  true,  but  you  have  never  believed  in  him : 
why  is  this?     God  requires  it  of  you.     Many  years  has  he  waited 

§atiently^  and  he  has  sent  his  servant  again  ana  again  to  invite  you. 
^he  men  of  Nineveh  sought  mercy  in  their  day,  and  yet  you  have  not 
repented.  God  requires  it  of  you.  Why  is  this  ?  Give  your  Mska 
a  reason  for  your  rejection  of  his  mercy  if  you  can  :  fashion  some  sort  of 
excuse,  0  ye  rebellious  one.  Do  you  despise  your  God  ?  Do  yon  dare 
his  wrath  ?    Do  you  defy  his  anger  ?    Aie  you  so  mad  as  this  ? 

The  day  will  oome  when  he  will  require  it  of  you  in  a  much  more  violent 
sense  than  he  does  to-day ;  when  you  shall  have  passed  beyond  the  region 
of  mercy  he  will  say,  ''I  called  you  and  you  refused,  why  is  this  ?  I 
did  not  speak  to  you  in  thunder.  I  spoke  to  you  witJi  the  gentle  voice 
of  the  Only  Begotten  who  bled  and  diea  for  men :  why  did  you  not  hear 
him  ?  Every  Sabbath  day  my  servant  tried  to  repeat  the  language  of 
his  Master  to  you  :  why  did  you  refuse  it  ?  You  are  cast  into  hell,  but 
why  did  not  you  accept  the  pardon  which  would  have  delivered  yon  from 
it  ?  "  You  were  too  busy.  Too  busy  to  remember  your  God  ?  What 
could  you  have  been  busy  about  that  was  worth  a  thought  as  compared 
with  him  ?  You  were  too  fond  of  pleasure.  And  do  you  dare  insult 
your  God  by  saying  that  trifling  amusements  which  were  not  worth  the 
mentioning  could  stand  in  comparison  with  his  love  and  his  good  pleasore  ? 
Oh,  how  you  deserve  his  wrath.  I  prav  you  consider  what  this  meaneth, 
**  I  iwill  .require  it  of  him."  You  who  still  harden  your  hearts,  and 
refuse  my  Master,  go  away  with  this  ringing  in  your  ears, "  I  will  require 
it  of  him !  I  will  require  it  of  him."  ''  When  he  lieth  dying  alone  in  that 
sick  chamber  I  wiU  require  it  of  him :  when  he  hath  token  the  last 
plunge,  and  left  this  world,  and  finds  himself  in  eternity,  I  will  require  it 
of  him :  and  when  the  thunder  wakes  the  dead,  and  the  great  Prophet 
like  unto  Moses  shall  sit  on  the  great  white  throne  to  judge  the  guide 
and  the  dead,  I  will  require  it  of  him,  I  will  require  it  of  him." 

My  Master  will  require  of  me  how  I  have  preached  to  you,  and  I  sincerdy 
wish  it  were  in  my  power  to  put  these  tmngs  in  better  form,  and  plead 
with  you  more  earnestly ;  but,  after  all,  what  can  I  do  ?  If  yon  have 
no  care  for  ^our  own  souls,  how  can  I  help  it  ?  If  you  will  rush  upon 
eternal  woe,  if  you  will  despise  the  altogether  lovely  One  through  whom 
God  speaks  to  you,  if  you  will  live  day  after  day  carelessly  and  wantonly, 
throwmg  away  your  souls,  oh,  then  mine  eyes  shall  weep  in  secret  plaoes 
for  you ;  but  what  more  can  I  do  but  leave  you  to  God  ?  At  the  last  I 
shall  be  compelled  to  say  ''Amen  "  to  the  vermct  which  condemns  you  for 
ever.  God  grant  that  such  a  reluctant  task  may  not  ML  to  my  lot  m 
reference  to  any  one  of  you,  but  may  you  now  hear  and  obey  the  Loid 
Jesus,  and  find  eternal  salvation  at  once,  for  his  dear  name's  sake.   Amem 


Portions  of  Sobifturb  bead  befobe  Sebmon — Deuteronomy  v.; 

xviii.  15—22. 


Hticns  fbom  "Oub  Own  Htun  Book"— 240,  229,  2U 


^^j)|0litmr  iFab«ntad(  futpt 


MOBE  AND  MOBE,  OR  LESS  AND  LESS. 


%  $tmtft{ 


Dblivbbbd  on  Lord's-day  Moening,  August  10th,  1879,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  MBTBOPOLITAK  TABERNACLB,  NEWINQTOK. 


^<For  whoaoeTer  hath»  to  Mm  shall  be  Kiv^Qf  And  lie  shall  haye<more  abimdiiDce : 
but  irhosoeyer  hath  noti  firom  him  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  he  hath." — 
Matthew  ziiL  12. 

Two  great  general  principles  are  Gonspicaous  in  the  gospel.  The  first  is 
that  God  giveth  of  nis  grace  to  the  empty — '*  He  hath  filled  the  hungry 
with  good  things,  and  the  rich  he  hath  sent  empty  away."  The  second 
principle  is  that  where  God  has  given  a  measure  of  grace  it  is  his  wont 
to  give  more — "  He  giveth  more  grace."  There  is  no  stint  with  the 
Lord  of  love,  and  no  limit  to  the  abundance  of  the  grace  which  those 
who  come  to  him  may  receive.  He  giveth  grace  to  those  who  have 
none^  and  more  grace  to  those  whom  he  has  ahready  favoured.  These 
two  principles  do  not  contradict  each  other,  but  help  to  make  each  other 
complete.  In  their  proper  order  they  exhibit  both  sides  of  one  truth, 
and  give  us  instruction  as  to  the  Lord's  dealings  with  two  diifercnt  stages 
of  spiritual  condition*  Sach  principle  has  its  own  ran^.  Are  you  as  yet 
munrved  ?  Then  the  principle  which  yon  have  to  do  with  is  this,  that  God 
win  fill  the  empty  and  feed  the  hungry.  You  have  to  go  to  him  with 
noUiing  of  your  own  except  your  needs,  and  ask  for  everything  at  his 
hands. '  Your  wisdom  is  to  hasten  to  the  Saviour  just  as  you  are,  tarry- 
ing not  to  gather  a  price  which  you  may  carrv  in  your  hand,  but  coming 
empty  handed  to  tne  generous  Lord.  In  all  your  sinfiilness  you  must 
look  to  him  Ibr  pardon ;  in  all  your  nakedness  ^ou  must  fly  to  him  for 
clothing;  in  all  your  weakness  yon  nmst  cry  to  mm  for  strength ;  yea,  in 
all  your  death  you  are  to  look  to  him  for  life,  even  as  he  hath  said, 
"  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give 
thee  light."  Take  care  th^t  you  are  quite  dear  upon  this  point,  for  un* 
less  your  eye  be  single  here  your  whole  soul  ^itl  be  full  of  darkness. 
Oraoe  is  for  the  undeserving,  the  guilty,  the  needy ;  otherwise  it  would 
be  BO  more  graoe.  The  gospel  is  not  the  law,  and  therefore  it  does 
not  demand  a  holy  character  as  a  condition  of  receiving  its  blessings, 
hot  it  oomes  to  Binners  aa  they  are,  casts  on  them  an  eye  of  pity,  forgives 
their  sins,  and  makes  them  new  creatures  and  holy  creatures.  In 
deaUng  with  the  sinner  God  acts  on  the  principle  of  undeserved  love 
No.  1,488. 


446  HETBOFOLITAN  TABERNACI.E  PUIiPIT. 

and  unmerited  favour.  Trembling  sinner^  you  have  to  go  to  him  wit}> 
your  empty  bucket  that  he  may  fill  it  out  of  the  deep  well  of  his  OTer- 
flowing  love. 

When  a  man  has  received  grace^  or  when  he  professes  to  have  done  ho, 
he  comes  under  the  second  principle.  He  must  take  care  that  he  has  in- 
deed and  of  a  truth  received  that  which  God  in  the  gospel  presents  to  him : 
for  if  he  does  not  at  the  very  beginning  receive  really  and  truly  the  true 
grace  of  Qod  he  will  begin  with  falsehood  and  end  in  shame.  He  must 
see  to  it  that  he  has  the  beginnings  of  grace,  or  he  cannot  have  their  in- 
crease. If  there  be  a  mistake  as  to  the  actual  receipt  of  Christ  into  the 
heart  there  may  be  an  appearance  of  having  Christ,  and  this  appearance 
may  last  for  a  while,  but  as  there  is  really  nothing  commenced  there  will 
be  no  addition  thereto.  ^Miile  I  am  like  the  unsown  soil  I  am  simply  to 
receive  the  seed  when  it  is  scattered ;  but  after  the  scattering  of  the  seed, 
if  I  think  I  have  received  it,  I  must  see  to  it  that  I  am  not  deceived,  I 
must  watch  that  the  word  really  does  lodge  in  the  furrows  of  my  soul,  for 
unless  that  be  the  case,  bevond  all  question,  so  far  from  obtaining  growib 
in  grace,  I  shall  by-and-by  lose  what  I  think  I  have,  and  I  shall  be 
openly  proved  to  be  barren  and  unfruitful.  If  I  have  received  the  light 
of  heaven  into  my  soul,  however  small  its  beginnings,  the  Lord  will  ^d 
a  gracious  increase,  and  as  I  follow  on  to  &ow  him  I  shall  be  as  the 
shining  light  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  If 
I  am  a  mere  pretender  I  shall  &de  away,  but  if  I  am  a  sincere  believer  I 
shall  become  brighter  and  brighter.  This  last  principle  I  shall  endeavonr 
to  use  at  this  time  for  our  warning  and  instruction.  May  the  Holy  Ghost 
greatly  bless  it  to  our  hearts,  so  that  those  who  profess  to  be  the  people 
of  God  may  make  sure  that  their  profession  is  founded  on  the  truth ;  and 
may  those  who  are  mere  hearers  of  the  gospel  be  disturbed  in  their  oon* 
sciences  and  aroused  from  the  sleep  of  death. 

I.  First,  we  shall  study  this  principle  as  it  is  illustrated  m  ths 
PARABLE  OF  THE  BOWER.  You  wiU  uot  fail  to  observe  that  this  saying 
of  our  Lord  occurs  in  three  evangelists  in  connection  with  the  parable  of 
the  sower.  Besides  our  text,  you  will  find  it  in  Mark  iv.  24,  and 
there  it  is  at  the  close  of  the  parable  of  the  sower;  you  will  meet  with 
it  again  in  Luke  viii.  18,  still  in  connection  with  the  same  parable.  The 
principle  must  be  very  important,  or  else  our  Lord  would  not  have  taken 
care  to  have  it  recorded  by  three  evangelists ;  and  he  must  have  iiftended 
that  we  should  read  it  in  the  light  of  the  parable,  or  he  would  not  have 
connected  it  therewith. 

That  parable  was  spoken  in  reference  to  the  hearing  of  the  word,  and  it 
is  concerning  the  word  of  God,  and  its  blessings,  that  he  says, "  Whosoever 
hath,  to  him  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more  abundance :  bat 
whosoever  hath  not,  fix>m  him  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  he  hath.'* 
To  know  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  it  is  always  wise  to  view  a  passage  in  its 
connection ;  this  we  do  with  the  writings  of  men  if  we  wish  to  under- 
stand Uiem,  and  reason  itself  teaches  us  to  do  likewise  with  the  word  of 
God.  Let  us  consider  our  text  in  its  original  connection.  Eadi  evan* 
gelist  has  riven  a  shade  of  difference  to  his  record. 

In  Matthew,  whence  we  take  our  text,  the  words  stand  in  cQnneation 
with  the  hearing  of  the  word, — ^not  any  mode  of  hearing,  but  hearing 
itself    Bead  the  ninth  verse  :  ^' Who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. ' 


AND  MOU,  OB  1MB  AMD  LBS8.  447 

Thafe  WKfmnmitbo'  bear  noby  for  "  their  ears  axe  dull  of  hearing  *';  and 
there  ave-  oMiefa  of  whom  it  ie  written,  "  Blessed  are  jonr  ears,  for  they 
heaor."  Bdiyved^  we  most  take  care  tbit  we  tmly  hear  what  we  hear,  for 
if  we  do  not>  we  shidl  soon  loee  all  power  tO'hear;  bntif  wehearthetmth 
attentiTely  and  heavtily  we  shall  be  privileged  to  hear  it  yet  more  folly, 
and  to  make  larger  profit  by  listening  to  it,  even  as  our  Lord  saith : 
'*  He  answered  and  said  nnto  them.  It  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  bat  to  them  it  is  not  given. 
For  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more 
abundance." 

Our  Saviour's  first  picture  in  the  parable  of  the  sower  is  that  of  the 
seed  Ming  upon,  the  wwyside  or  the  hard  road.  There  was  much  traffic 
through  the  neUd,  a  foo^th  which  was  trodden  hard  by  many  feet  ran 
fiom.one  end  to  the  other,  and  a  handfiil  of  seed  fell  upon  it.  So  the 
gospel  falls  upcm  men  who  are  occupied  with  obstinacies,  prejudices, 
purauits,  ambitions^  cares,  and  these  make  so  much  traffic  through  their 
minds  that  they  are  hardened  towards  the  gospel,  and  it  never  reaches 
the  inner  man,  but  lies  upon  the  hard  surfiice,  a  rejected  thing. 
When  they  hear  it  thev  do  liear  it,  and  that  is  all :  as  the  saying  is,  **  it 
goes  in  at  one  ear  and  out  at  the  other.''  The  truth  never  enters  the 
man.  They  would  not  like  to  absent  themselves  from  religious  services 
altogether,  and  yet  they  do  much  the  same  thing,  for  only  their  bodies 
are  there,  their  hearts  are  &r  away,  engaged  with  very  different  themes. 
They  bring  to  the  nreacher  ears  which  are  sealed  up,  and  eyes  which  are 
curtained  against  tne  light.  They  see,  but  do  not  perceive ;  they  hear, 
but  do  not  understand.  What  is  the  sure  result  of  this  mimic  hearing  ? 
The  Saviour  in  the  parable  represents  the  birds  of  the  air  as  taking 
away  the  seed  which  fell  upon  the  roadside  and  devouring  it,  and  he 
tells  us  by  way  of  explanation  that  Satan  comes  and  takes  away  the 
word,  lest  in  any  after  time  it  should  obtain  an  entrance  into  the  heart. 
Thus  is  tiie  text  fulfilled :  "  Whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken 
away  even  that  he  hath."  How  many  of  our  hearers  are  of  this  kind  I 
They  lose  what  they  have  because  in  very  truth  they  never  had  it. 
Their  att^dance  at  worship  is  coming  and  going,  coming  and  going, 
and  nothing  more.  Like  a  dog  in  and  out  of  the  fair,  they  have  no 
business  to  do  when  they  go  to  the  house  of  God.  They  are  no  more 
the  better  by  their  going  and  coming  than  the  door  which  swingeth  on 
its  hinges,  and  tumeth  in  and  tumeth  out,  and  then  rests  in  its  place. 
Such  persons,  like  the  wayside,  do  not  receive  anything ;  and,  receiving 
notlung,  they  continue  to  receive  notliing ;  nay,  they  even  go  from  baa 
to  worse,  for,  though  they  received  nothing  at  first,  they  at  least  seemed 
to  do  so,  and  in  due  course  even  that  seeming  disappears.  They  be- 
come less  likely  to  profit  by  the  gospel,  and  more  and  more  hardened 
against  it,  while  those  who  really  do  near  and  drink  in  the  truth  become 
capable  of  hearing  and  understanding  more,  more  mysteries  are  opened 
up  to  them,  deeper  truths  are  revealed,  and  they  perceive  a  greater 
sweetness  and  a  mviner  power  in  the  word  of  God.  Those  who  do  not 
receive  the  word  lose  what  little  notional  knowledge  of  the  word  they 
once  possessed.  Though  it  may  be  the  same  preacher  and  the  same 
preaching  of  the  sel&amo  doctrines,  yet  the  results  are  very  different : 
to  those  who  have  a  part  and  a  lot  in  the  matter  the  paths  of  the 


448  XETROPOLITIH  TABERHAOLB  PULPIT. 

Jjoid  drop  fatnesa  ;  while  to  careleBs,  unbelieyin^  heaien  the  minirtrT 
bcoomes  every  daj  more  dall^  till  they  cit  ont,  **  miat  a  wearinen  it  is. 
SataD  is  doing  his  work  thoroughly,  ana  is  taking  away  from  the  haurd 
heart  ail  desire  towards  the  word  and  all  interest  in  it. 

In  Mark  iv.  25  our  text  is  used  in  reference  to  tiie  doctrine  which  is 
to  be  heard.  The  Savionr  in  the  twenty-fourth  Terse  says,  '^Take  heed  what 
ye  hear."  I  would  press  that  important  exhortation  ujpon  you  all  as  most 
needful  at  this  time.  Nowadays  people  do  not  care  what  they  hear.  If  a 
man  can  speak  fluently^  if  he  can  be  rhetorical  and  sensational,  if  he  can 
tell  many  pretty  stories,  if  he  can  use  claptrap  and  bombast  he  will  have 
many  auditors.  Time  was  with  our  Others  when  if  a  man  went  half  an 
inch  astray  as  to  orthodoxy  they  would  have  none  of  him  ;  and  thongh 
we  would  not  have  you  so  censorious,  for  we  are  not  to  make  a  man  an 
offender  for  a  word,  yet  we  would  have  you  jealous  for  the  truth.  If 
we  or  an  angel  from  heaven  preach  any  other  gospel  than  that  which 
ye  have  received,  I  charge  ye  listen  not  to  it  Be  the  good  sheep  of 
the  good  Shepherd,  of  whom  it  is  written, '*  a  stranger  will  they  not 
follow,  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers."  The  false 
shepherds  try  to  charm  you  with  their  excellency  of  speech,  but  be  ye 
deaf  to  their  charms.  False  doctrine  is  a  poisoned  dish  however  daintily 
it  may  be  served.  The  false  teachers  would,  if  it  were  possible,  deceive 
the  very  elect ;  but  ye  know  what  the  Savionr  said,  "  All  that  ever  came 
before  me  were  thieves  and  robbers,  but  the  sheep  did  not  hear  them." 
''  Take  heed  what  ye  hear."  A  man  cannot  b^  false  doctrine  long 
without  being  injured  by  it.  He  may  at  the  first  say,  "  I  like  the  man, 
I  admire  his  cleverness,  although  I  dissent  very  much  from  what  he 
says."  This  is  treacherous  ground  to  stand  upon,  for  impercq)tibly  evil 
comes  of  it ;  **  their  word  doth  eat  as  doth  a  canker."  ^ou  cannot 
expose  the  soil  of  your  heart  to  a  continual  sowing  of  tares  but  what 
some  tare  or  other  will  take  root,  and  by-and-by,  instead  of  having  the 
good  wheat  growing  in  your  soul,  thei*e  will  spring  up  the  tares  whose  end 
is  to  be  burned,  and  you  will  have  lost  the  harvest  which  should  have 
been  produced  in  your  spirit.  The  wise  man  saith,  "  Cease,  my  son,  to 
hear  the  instruction  that  causeth  to  err  from  the  words  of  knowledge.'^ 
"  Beware  of  &lse  prophets,  which  come  to  you  in  sheep's  clothine,  but 
inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves."  "  Be  not  carried  about  with  divers 
and  strange  doctrines,  for  it  is  good  that  the  heart  be  established  with 
grace."    Therefore  take  heed  what  ye  hear. 

There  are  many  who,  when  they  hear  the  gospel,  are,  according  to  our 
Lord's  second  picture,  mere  superficial  hearers.  They  take  some  heed  to 
their  hearing,  but  not  to  what  they  have  heard ;  for  if  they  regard^  the 
value  and  dignity  of  the  word  they  would  take  it  more  thoroughly  to  heart, 
and  it  would  permanently  affect  their  lives.  These  are  they  who  receive 
the  word  in  stony  places.  When  the  gospel  comes  to  them  they  catch  at 
it  without  much  consideration;  they  are  hot  and  eager  for  it,  and 
rejoice  because  it  has  come  in  their  way,  ''Anon  with  joy  they  receive 
it."  They  sing  and  shout  at  once,  "  Happy  day !  Happy  day  I  This  is 
the  gospel  for  me.  I  have  found  peace  and  heaven,  and  will  never  be 
anxious  again."  These  people  have  not  counted  the  cost,  or  weighed  the 
ti'uth,  or  entered  into  its  inner  meaning  and  spiritual  certainty.  There 
has  been  no  repentance  of  sin,  no  sense  of  guilt,  no  humbling  before  God, 


HOBB  AND  MOBB,  OB  LB88  AKD  LBSS.  449 

no  brokenness  of  spirit,  no  inner  conflict,  and  no  work  of  the  Holy 
OhoBt  in  the  soul,  it  has  all  been  a  sort  of  happy-go-lucky  business,  in 
which  they  canght  at  what  came  in  their  way  and  promised  them  fair. 
They  will  soon  fling  away  that  which  they  hare  so  inconsiderately 
embraced :  when  the  sun  is  up  the  plant  which  has  no  root  will  wither; 
when  persecution  arises  the  unregenerated  convert  vrill  be  offended.  Our 
Saviour  warns  us  against  this  in  the  language  of  the  text.  If  you  truly 
receive  what  you  hear  you  shall  have  more ;  for  unto  every  one  that 
hath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  abundance ;  but  if,  like  the  stony 
ground,  you  never  really  have  the  seed,  but  simply  allow  it  to  sprout  in  the 
flurface-soil  which  conceals  the  rock  of  your  unrenewed  nature,  then  under 
trial  you  will  lose  what  you  have :  the  sprouting  of  the  grain  so  prematurely 
will  only  end  in  an  equally  rapid  withering,  and  all  will  be  gone.  Oh,  my 
dear  hearers,  be  sincere  and  solid  in  all  things.  Believe  what  you  do 
believe,  and  take  care  that  what  you  believe  is  worth  believing,  and  is 
the  very  truth  of  the  living  Qod,  Let  it  sink  deep  into  your  soul  and 
take  root  there.  I  pray  you  do  not  espouse  religion  as  a  man  puts  on 
his  coat  to  take  it  off  again :  let  it  be  woven  into  the  woof  and  warp  of 
your  being ;  let  it  be  part  and  parcel  of  yourselves,  running  like  a 
thread  through  all  your  thoughts,  desires,  and  aims,  so  that  if  aught 
else  of  yourselves  should  be  torn  away,  yet  it  would  be  impossible 
to  tear  away  from  you  the  blessed  gospel,  liccause  it  is  in  and  of  you,  a 
component  part  of  your  truest  selves.  If  you  thus  receive  the  gospel  and 
give  it  root-hold  you  shall  know  more  ana  more  of  its  blessings  ;  but  if 
yon  do  not  thas  receive  it,  but  leave  it  to  a  rootless  sprouting  of  mere 
surface  religion,  it  shall  be  taken  away  from  you  when  trouble  and 
persecution  arise. 

In  Luke  viii.  18  this  grand  i)rinciple  is  used  in  reference  to  taking 
heed  how  we  hear.  Our  Lord  said, — "  Take  heed  therefore  how  ye  hear : 
for  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given ;  and  whosoever  hath  not,  fh>m 
him  shall  be  taken  even  that  which  he  seemeth  to  have."  Manv  are 
attentive  to  the  gospel,  and  they  have  some  discernment,  and  will  not 
listen  to  what  is  unsound,  so  that  they  do  regard  what  thev  hear,  and 
yet  they  have  small  consideration  for  haw  they  hear  it,  ana  that  espe- 
cially on  one  poinL  The  suitable  way  to  hear  the  gospel  is  to  give  it 
full  and  entire  possession  of  the  heart.  The  gospel  is  exclusive.  It  will 
not  be  one  of  two  masters.  I  would  have  you,  my  brethren,  be  among 
**  the  exclusive  brethren*'  in  a  very  excellent  and  admirable  sense  of  the 
term.  Our  Saviour  gives  us  a  picture  of  the  non-exclusives,  who  are 
set  forth  as  the  seed  sown  among  thorns.  The  soil  received  the  good 
seed  after  a  fashion,  and  then  it  received  the  nettles  and  the  thorns ;  and 
these  nettles  and  thorns  and  wheat  all  began  to  grow  together--a  happy 
fiunily  some  would  say,  but  a  devil's  garden  is  nearer  the  truth.  In  these 
days  such  a  garden  is  projected  on  a  large  scale  by  some  of  our  public 
writers  and  speakers.  The  church  and  the  world  are  to  become  one,  and 
flaints  and  sinners  are  to  blend  together  in  one  universal  round  of  play- 

g>ing.  We  are  actually  urged  by  persons  who  suppose  themselves  to  be 
hrisUans  to  renew  the  old  league  whid^  was  esteblished  in  the  davs  of 
Noah,  and  brought  on  the  Flocd,  when  the  sons  of  God  and  the  daughters 
of  men  joined  in  alliance,  because  the  sons  of  God  thought  that  they  should 
greatly  improve  the  world  by  uniting  with  it.    At  this  time  we  are  told 


450  MBTROPOLITAK  TABBRNACLB  PULPIT. 

that  it  18  wrong  on  our  part  to  forsake  the  debaeing  amrusemenia  of  the  on- 
godly,  for  if  we  would  join  in  them  we  might  improve  their  tone  and  quality. 
If  heaven  would  go  down  to  hell,  hell  would  be  greatly  improved.  See 
how  benevolent  Satan  has  turned,  and  how  anxious  to  be  reformed. 

Hear  ye  the  voioe  of  God  which  runs  in  another  manner :  **  Come  ye 
out  from  among  them,  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing/* 
^'  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him/'  Beware  of 
religious  play*going  and  pious  theatricals,  for  they  are  a  snare  into  which 
only  t^e  vain  and  foolish  will  fall.  Let  thorns  be  thorns,  and  let  not 
wheat  attempt  to  grow  among  them.  See  you  that  plot  of  ground,  how 
charming  is  its  aspect,  wheat  springing  up  with  its  green  blades  among 
the  thorns  and  thistles !  Is  it  not  a  delightful  oompiomise  ?  What  was 
the  end  of  this  conglomeration  ?  Wh^,  the  wheat  died ;  it  was  choked, 
and  could  not  grow  in  such  uncongenial  society.  Enow  you  this,  that  if 
ve  receive  Christ  ye  must  cast  out  the  love  of  the  world.  Christ  will 
be  aut  Cetaar  aut  nullus — either  king  or  nobody.  He  will  have  the  whde 
of  our  heart  or  none  of  it.  We  must  altogether  give  ourselves  up  to  his  in- 
fluence and  to  his  sway ;  for  if  we  set  up  another  kmg  and  say  to  him, ''  Thou 
shalt  reign  and  Christ  shall  reign,  too,"  Christ  vfSl  not  have  it ;  he  will 
up  and  away,  for  his  jealousy  will  not  endure  a  rival,  and  his  sovereignty 
will  not  brook  a  consort.  Take  care,  then,  how  ye  hear  the  go^^ ; 
hear  it,  knowing  it  to  be  the  only  word  which  can  save  your  aouls. 
Receive  it  into  your  being,  to  become  everything  to  you ;  for  if  you  do 
not  there  shall  be  taken  away  tiom  you  that  gospel  which  you  think  you 
have,  since  you  have  not  afforded  it  the  reception  which  it  demands  and 
deserves.  If  vou  sav  to  sin,  and  self,  and  all  else,  "  Begone !  my  heart 
is  for  Christ  alone,  this  good  seed  must  not  be  cumbered  with  such  weeds 
as  you  are ; ''  then  the  truth  is  in  you,  and  shall  be  more  and  more  fully 
apparent  within  you,  bringing  forth  fruit  abondanUy  after  its  kind. 

In  connection  with  this  parable,  then,  the  sum  and  substanoe  of  our 
text  is  this  :  tiie  word  must  dwell  in  us  triUy,  and  then  it  will  dmll  in  us 
richly  ;  but  if  it  enter  not  in  very  deed  into  the  heart  we  shall  loee  it 
altogether  before  long.  The  Jewish  people  heard  Christ  preach  the 
gospel,  and  because  never  man  spake  as  he  did  they  listened  to  him,  but 
they  did  never  receive  his  word,  for  they  understood  not  his  meaning; 
they  only  caught  at  the  symbols  under  wUch  he  couched  the  sacred 
mysteries,  but  the  mysteries  themselves  they  knew  not ;  conaequently 
after  a  little  while  they  grew  angry  with  the  divine  messeDgar  of  tibe 
covenant ;  they  perseouted  him,  and  hounded  faiin  to  dcAth.  While  he 
gave  them  loaves  and  fishes  and  there  was  something  to  be  got  by 
hearing  they  hung  upon  his  lips  in  crowds,  but  when  he  offered  them  no 
longer  any  other  fooa  than  tiie  bread  of  heaven,  then  they  straightvray 
lifted  up  the  heel  against  him  and  would  have  none  of  him.  In  oonae- 
quence  of  this  the  preaching  of  the  word  ceased  among  them.  The 
apostles  turned  unto  the  Gentiles,  who  gladly  received  the  truth,  and 
the  Jewish  nation  was  left  in  blindness,  in  which,  alas,  it  abideth  unto 
this  day.  The  like  is  constantly  hi^denuig  among  us  now.  Men  hear 
the  gospel,  bat  tbey  do  not  receive  it  into  their  hearts,  and  therefore 
after  awhile  they  grow  weary  of  it :  they  are  tired  of  being  perpetually 
reminded  of  a  dai^r  in  which  they  do  not  believe,  imd  of  being  invited 
to  a  feast  which  they  despise,  and  therefore  they  turn  upon   their 


UORE  AND  VOBE,  OB  LE8B  AVD  LEfiS.  451 

heel  and  go.  If  from  force  of  habit  they  remain,  the  gospel  seems 
to  hare  lost  all  power  over  them,  and  they  have  no  appreciation  of  its 
ministry.  What  they  once  had  is  taken  from  them,  because  they  never 
tmly  had  it ;  they  are  blinded  by  the  li^t  which  they  refused  to  see, 
choked  by  the  morsels  which  ought  to  have  been  their  food,  and  oast  down 
to  hell  by  the  stone  on  which  they  should  hare  mounted  to  hearen.  He 
who  reoeiTes  gets  more ;  he  who  does  not  receiye  loses  what  he  seemed 
to  have.  There  is  no  standing  still :  there  is  a  necessary  moTement  one 
way  or  another.  In  this  business  a  man  daily  grows  richer  or  poorer. 
This  is  no  stagnant  sea,  the  current  bears  all  vessels  onward  either  to  the 
fair  havens  or  to  the  black  sea  of  eternal  ruin.  Here  stands  the  inevitable 
decree :  he  who  has  shall  have ;  he  who  is  a  mere  pretender,  and  has  not, 
shall  lose  even  his  power  to  seem  to  have. 

II.  Let  this  suffice ;  and  now,  dear  friends,  let  us  try  and  bring  out 
the  same  principle  in  bkferekce  to  theexperibkcb  of  all  gracioub 
SOULS.  Our  experience  verifies  the  truth  of  the  text^  *' Whosoever  hath, 
to  him  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more  abundance.'' 

In  the  world  among  men  it  is  commonly  observed  that  it  never  rains 
bnt  it  pours.  Where  you  see  a  sheep  there  is  generally  a  flock.  Money 
makes  money.  Poverty  remains  poor.  Want  of  capital  brings  bank- 
ruptcy. A  company  starts  on  imaginary  or  borrowed  capital :  it  makes 
a  niss  and  a  noise,  bnt  it  never  prospers.  By-and-by  it  breaks  up,  and 
all  is  lost,  and  yet  it  never  had  anything  of  its  own  to  lose  :  thus  it  veri- 
fies to  the  letter  the  truth — whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken 
away  even  that  he  hath.  Ordinarily,  prosperity  is  a  hen  which  likes  to 
lay  where  there  is  a  nest  egg,  and  when  one  swallow  of  success  comes 
others  will  follow  it  .  Certainly  we  have  ibund  it  so  in  the  things  of 
grace  ;  where  grace  has  been  given  more  giace  comes ;  spiritual  capital 
well  worked  multiplies  the  stock,  and  spiritual  wealth  is  realised  where 
there  is  a  solid  basis  to  begin  upon.    Let  us  give  instances. 

When  a  man  believes  the  gospel  in  its  most  elementary  form  that  man 
will  soon  be  taught  the  hisher  truths.  When  we  begin  with  some 
people  by  telling  them  the  pudn  way  of  salvation  they  raise  doubts  and 

a  nibbles.  **  But "  is  their  fftvourite  word.  They  eiy,  *'  I  cannot  see 
bis  and  I  cannot  understand  that."  We  never  thought  they  would  see 
it  or  understand  it^  for  they  generally  want  to  understand  the  most 
difficult  parts  of  the  gospel  first,  like  a  man  who  must  needs  stand  on 
the  top  of  Mont  Blanc  before  he  has  readied  the  valley  at  its  base. 
Imagine  the  follv  of  such  a  conversation  as  this :  ''  Here  are  your  letters, 
my  child ;  this  letter  is  A."  "  Sir,  I  cannot  learn  ABC,  for  as  yet  I 
cannot  read  a  single  line  of  Homer's  Iliad."  **  Gome  then,  my  child, 
and  leun  the  multiplication  table.**  *'  Alas,  sir,  I  cannot  do  it,  fur  I  am 
not  yet  acquainted  with  the  Differential  Calculus."  Surely  the  child 
mooks  us  and  is  unwilling  to  learn.  The  elements  can  be  mastered, 
although  the  higher  gradot  of  study  have  not  been  reached.  Half  the 
difficulties  of  unbetievers  are  the  result  of  unreadiness  to  be  taught. 
When  a  man  saith,  **  I  underatand  very  little,  but  I  know  that  I  am  a 
sinner,  and  I  perceive  that  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save*  sinners, 
therefore  I  will  trust  him  to  save  me,"  that  man  has  something,  and  he 
shall  have  more.  When  a  seeker  oonfesses, ''  I  am  very  foolish  and  slow 
of  comprehension,  but  I  perceive  that  I  need  a  new  heart,  and  that  the 


452  metrofolhav  tabernaolb  pulpit. 

Spirit  of  Ood  alone  can  renew  me,  and  therefore  I  seek  to  him  for  his 
grace/' — then  it  is  clear  that  he  hath  some  belief,  and  to  him  shall  be 
given  so  that  he  shall  have  more  abundance.  If  jon  are  stmggling  with 
unbelief,  be  willing  to  beUeye  what  yon  can  believe :  have  a  will  towards 
believing.  Dear  friend,  if  yon  cannot  yet  follow  the  Lord  into  the 
depths,  he  will  save  yon  if  yon  follow  him  into  the  shallows  as  far  as  you 
can.  If  you  are  staggered  by  any  one  truth,  do  not  therefore  reject  your 
Lord,  but  be  willing  to  accept  that  which  does  not  stagger  you.  Touch 
the  hem  of  his  garment  if  you  cannot  reach  his  divine  person,  and  yon 
shall  soon  find  that  yourfftith  in  the  elementary  truths  of  the  gospel  will, 
by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  lead  you  to  an  understanding  of  the 
deeper  mysteries.    Use  your  starlight  and  you  shall  have  sunlight  soon. 

As  it  is  with  faith  so  is  it  with  the  possession  of  any  real,  genuine  grace. 
Take  repentance  for  instance :  a  man  may  say,  "  My  heart  is  hard,  and  I 
cannot  repent  as  I  would."  No,  my  dear  friend,  but  do  you  really  hate 
evil,  and  do  you  labour  to  avoid  the  &ult8  into  which  you  formerly  fell? 
Do  you  mourn  and  regret  mistakes,  and  errors,  and  transgressions  of 
which  you  are  convinced?  Well,  then,  this  repentance  of  youra  will 
deepen :  you  will  come  to  be  very  sensitive  one  of  these  days,  and  yon 
will  chasten  yourself  even  for  a  sinfol  thought.  Though  now  you  cannot 
reach  the  sensitiveness  which  you  long  for,  yet,  if  your  repentance  be  real, 
though  it  be  weak  at  first,  to  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  your 
repentance  shall  gi^)w.  If  there  be  in  your  heart  an  evident  love  of 
sin  it  is  idle  for  you  to  hope  that  your  repentance  will  increase,  for  you 
have  none.  Your  green  bay  tree  is  not  the  weeping  willow,  and  win 
never  grow  into  one,  however  much  it  may  spread ;  but  the  least  twig 
of  the  willow,  if  planted  by  the  watercourses,  will  be  sure  to  flourish. 

Take  fidth  again.  If  thou  dost  really  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and 
look  to  him  for  salvation,  that  faith,  though  it  be  very  weak,  will  become 
strong.  If  it  be  there  at  all  it  will  wax  great  in  the  soul :  but  if  you  say, 
"  I  think  I  believe,"  and  yet  you  really  do  not  believe,  you  will  never 
grow  in  faith ;  in  fact,  the  faith  you  think  you  have  will  in  the  day  of 
trouble  altogether  vanish,  and  you  will  find  yourself  in  despair.  If  tnon 
wilt  really  trust  my  Lord  and  Master,  though  thy  &ith  be  but  as  a  grain 
of  mustard  seed,  yet,  if  it  be  real,  thou  shalt  have  more  and  more  tiU  thy 
faith  can  move  mountains  and  pluck  up  trees.  It  is  God*s  plan  to  add 
more  to  the  first  little  deposit  of  &itn,  even  as  a  master  builder  adds 
stone  to  stone  till  the  structure  is  complete. 

It  is  so  with  love  to  God.  Who  among  us  loves  God  as  he  would 
wish  to  love  him  I    We  sigh  out — 

"  Yes,  I  love  thee  and  adore, — 
Oh,  for  grace  to  love  thee  more.** 

But,  beloved,  the  point  you  have  to  watch  is  not  so  much  the  possession 
of  the  flaming  love  of  a  Samuel  fiutherford  or  a  Madame  Guyon,  as  the 
making  sure  of  even  the  lowest  degree  of  genuine  love  to  Jesus.  See  that 
it  be  true  even  if  it  be  feeble.  A  spark  of  fire  is  true  fire,  and  is  q«ite 
enough  to  begin  with.  It  turns  everything  with  which  it  comes  in  con- 
tact into  its  own  nature,  and  it  spreads  by  the  force  of  its  own  intensity. 
The  like  is  true  of  love.  If  you  have  real  fire  it  will  bum,  but  if  you 
have  only  a  painted  fire,  it  will  not  increase.    A  painted  love  to  Christ, 


MORE  AND  HOBE,  OB  LESS  AVD  LESS.  458 

by  Tvhich  I  mean  the  mere  imitation  of  love  to  him,  will  not  increase, 
bnt  will  eventaally  disappear  altogether.  See  that  yon  trolj  love  Jesus. 
I  implore  and  beseech  you  to  mind  this.  Do  not  feign  love,  but  feel  love. 
Give  him  your  whole  heart,  for  lip  love  is  mockery.  How  canst  thou 
say,  I  love  thee,  when  thy  heart  is  not  with  me  ? 

It  is  the  same  with  zeal  for  God's  glory  :  we  are  none  of  us  as  zealous 
as  we  ought  to  be  for  Christ,  but  the  way  to  get  to  be  flamingly  zealous 
for  his  name  is  to  be  truly  zealous  at  the  first.  If  you  desire  his  glory, 
though  fiunt  be  that  desire,  it  will  become  more  and  more  intense. 
If  you  feel  that  you  must  live  to  praise  him,  if  you  desire  to  be  made 
willing,  even  to  die  to  praise  him,  you  will  ere  long  feel  seraphic  zeal. 
True  grace  must  grow,  tnere  is  no  fear  about  its  increase.  If  the  bulb 
of  the  lily  is  really  alive  the  fair  flower  will  crown  its  stem  ere  lon^,  bnt 
if  it  is  a  dead  bulb,  to  start  with,  you  may  place  it  in  the  best  soil,  and 
water  it  every  moment,  but  nothing  will  come  of  it.  A  seed  may  be  so 
small  that  you  can  scarcelv  see  it,  and  yet  if  it  be  a  living  seed  none  can 
tell  how  much  it  will  develop ;  but  if  it  be  one  of  those  dead  seeds  which 
are  ^  too  plentifully  mixed  up  with  the  seedsman's  parcels,  you  may  do 
what  you  will  with  it,  bnt  its  only  change  will  be  decay.  You  see,  then, 
that  where  there  is  true  grace  we  should  not  despise  the  da^  of  small 
things,  but  look  for  more  grace  and  a  grander  display  of  the  divine  power. 

The  way  in  which  the  promise  of  the  text  is  carried  out  by  our 
gracious  God  is  worthy  of  observation.  "Whosoever  hath,  to  him 
shall  be  given."  If  this  is  connected  with  the  parable  of  the  sower  it 
becomes  clear  that  God  gives  more  by  a  process  of  growth  ;  and  then 
turning  the  truth  the  other  way  we  see  that  all  growth  in  ^race  is  still 
the  gift  of  God,  and  we  should  not  forget  that  it  is  so.  If  you  have 
any  faith,  if  you  are  to  grow  strong,  me  same  grace  that  gave  you 
your  first  confidence  in  Christ  must  give  you  more.  It  is  quite  true  that 
there  is  a  growing  power  about  the  inner  life,  but  its  growing  power  is 
dependent  upon  the  immediate  working  of  God  upon  it.  If  he  were  to 
cease  to  communicate  more  grace  the  new  life  must  cease  to  grow.  Well 
saith  the  apostle,  "  He  giveth  more  grace."  You  grow,  but  that  growth 
is  God's  gift,  and  you  must  look  to  him  for  it. 

Why  did  not  the  Lord  give  us  the  largest  measure  of  grace  to  begin  with 
— why  promise  more  abundance  as  an  after  result  ?  I  think  it  is  because 
we  vuue  grace  all  the  more  when  it  comes  to  us  by  little  and  little. 
Again,  it  is  to  our  good  to  be  exercised  to  get  more  grace.  A  poor 
woman  is  allowed  to  go  and  glean  in  a  field :  your  generosity  might  say, 
"  Come,  my  good  woman,  I  wiU  give  yon  the  com,  and  you  shall  not  have 
the  trouble  of  gleaning ; "  but  this  might  not  be  so  good  a  thing  for  her 
as  to  allow  her  to  gather  the  wheat  by  her  own  efforts.  It  is  often  much 
better  to  enable  the  poor  to  help  themselves  than  to  help  them  without 
their  own  exertions.  God  is  wise  towards  us  ;  he  means  to  give  us  the 
com,  but  he  decides  that  we  shall  glean  it,  and  so  exercise  ourselves  unto 
godliness.  We  are  to  become  rich  in  grace,  but  it  is  to  be  by  heavenly 
trading.  Growth  is  gift,  remember  that.  God'a  grace  is  received,  not  as  a 
dead  external  thing,  but  as  a  living  outgrowth,  and  for  outgrowth  there 
must  be  inner  life. 

You,  then,  who  hope  that  you  have  a  little  genuine  grace  in  your 
souLsf,  may  well  take  courage.    Let  the  truth  contained  in  the  text  cheer 


454  KSTBOJPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PULFIt. 

you — tuttoyon  shall  more  be  given,  and  you  shall  hare  more  abundance. 
Do  not  think  becaiiBe  you  have  but  little  faith  you  are  always  to  be 
doubting  and  tremblins.  Yon  shall  grow  oat  of  it,  my  brother,  as  your 
£Eui^  becomes  establi^ed.  Do  not  suppose  that  because  your  hands 
have  been  weak  and  your  knees  have  been  trembling,  they  are  always 
to  be  so.  We  are  not  always  to  be  infants  in  arms,  we  are  daily 
nearing  fulness  of  stature.  You  are  very  glad  to  have  little  ones  at 
home.  They  may  be  dear  tinv  babes,  but  you  are  not  at  all  dis- 
satisfied with  their  being  so  little,  seeing  it  is  right  that  they  shonld 
be.  A  babe  of  six  months*  old  is  not  expected  to  be  very  talL 
Yoa  ace  pleased  to  have  a  son  though  he  be  little,  you  even  admire 
his  littleness.  But,  suppose  your  cmld  should  live  twenty  years,  and 
should  still  remain  a  babe  in  stature,  you  would  be  sorely  distressed,  and 
say,  "  Surely  my  child  is  a  dwar£  What  a  sad  thing  that  my  boy  should 
be  so  deformed.^'  You  young  beginners  need  not  mind  bemg  Httle,  we 
expect  you  to  be  so :  but  it  does  not  do  for  yon  older  folk  who  have  been 
Ohristians  these  twenty  years  to  be  babes  still,  for,  if  so,  we  shall  b^n 
to  be  afraid  that  yon  are  not  a  child  of  the  Lord^s  own  family,  mr 
divine  life  grows.  A  dead  post  which,  we  saw  in  the  ground  twenty  years 
ago  is  the  same  post  still,  no  bigger,  no  smaller^  and  only  altered  by 
becoming  rotten  underground;  but  the  tree  which  you  saw  twenty  years 
ago,  what  a  di£ference  there  is  in  it.  It  was  then  a  sapling  which  yon  oonld 
bend,  bat  now  it  has  become  as  an  iron  pillar,  and  there  is  no  moving  it. 
So  ought  it  to  be  mth  us,  and  we  must  aspire  to  have  it  so.  May  God 
the  Holy  Spirit  work  it  in  us,  for  Jesus'  sake. 

The  main  point,  however,  to  come  to  is  this — ^have  we  really  obtained 
the  first  living  principle?  Have  we  the  heavenly  seed  really  in  our 
souls  ?  I  cannot  preach  to  you  at  this  time  as  I  should  like,  becaoae  it  is 
not  so  much  a  subject  for  discourse  as  for  personal  use.  0  for  a  disoem* 
ing  eye  to  look  tlnrough  a  wiudow  right  into  the  heart  of  each  one  of 
you.  The  most  of  you  profess  to  be  the  people  of  God,  but  are  yon  really 
so  ?  I  have  no  reason  to  suspect  yon,  nave  yon  any  reason  to  suspect 
yourselves  ?  You  were  converted,  you  say,  but  was  it  conversion  or  not  ? 
You  say,  '^  I  do  believe  in  Jesus,*'  but  is  it  that  real  faith  wbdch  hangs 
alone  upon  him?  You  know  a  person  may  be  a  long  time  a  profegsor 
and  not  find  out  that  he  has  deceived  himself  even  for  scores  of  years; 
and  I  am  afraid  that  there  are  some  who  will  never  open  their  eyes  to 
their  wilfal  self-deceit  till  they  find  themselves  in  hell,  when  that  discoveiy 
win  come  too  late.  Oh  do  not  let  us  go  on  increasing  the  number  of  the 
church  without  duly  searching  ourselves  to  see  whether  we  truly  belong 
to  the  number  of -the  faithful.  A  prince  may  get  his  casket  full  of  shining 
stones,  but  what  if  they  should  dl  turn  out  to  be  paste  gems  ?  A  col- 
lector of  coins  might  accumulate  a  multitude  of  them ;  there  are  dealers 
who  will  gratify  his  taste  and  supply  him  with  an  endless  number  of 
counterfeits,  but  if  a  master  of  the  science  should  look  over  his  treasures 
and  condemn  them  as  mere  shams,  what  a  disappointment  would  be&U 
him !  Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  each  one  put  himself  into  the  test 
house ;  let  us  ask  the  Lord  to  search  us  lest  we  be  found  destitute  of 
grace.  To  him  that  hath  that  shall  be  given,  and  if  we  have  not  true 
grace  it  sliall  not  be  given  to  us,  but  we  shall  even  lose  what  we  have. 

III.    I  must  now  mournfully  conclude  with  the  otheh  8u>s  of 


1. 


VOnE  AND  KOKE,  OB  LESS  AND  LESS.  455 

THE  TBUTH  AS  EXEMPLIFIED  IN  THE  EXPERIENCE  OF  THE  INSINCERE. 

Insincere  men  and  women  find  that  what  they  had  is  taken  away  from 
them.    I  will  illuBtrate  this  point  very  rapidly.    It  is  in  this  way. 

Many  who  hear  the  gospel  have  been  brought  up  to  do  so  from  their 
childhood ;  but  if  they  do  not  heartily  receiye  the  gospel  they  in  many 
instances  give  up  attendance  upon  the  outward  means  of  grace  when 
they  get  away  from  the  restraints  of  religious  society.  They  find  it  dull 
work  to  sit  so  long  and  listen  to  drowsy  prayers  and  dull  preachings. 
They  find  it  uncomfortable  to  get  into  crowded  congregations,  cold  to  be 
in  small  ones,  and  unhealthy  to  sit  in  the  close  atmosphere  of  a  meeting- 
house. They  see  many  faults  in  the  service,  and  grumble  quite  cleverly. 
At  first  they  stop  away  one  part  of  the  day.  Once  is  quite  enough  for 
them,  they  say ;  they  cannot  stand  twice.  Then,  by-and-by,  every  excuse 
is  made  for  stopping  at  home.  Sometimes  it  is  wet,  at  another  time 
they  feel  a  little  out  of  sorts ;  these  things  would  not  keep  them  firom 
business,  but  a  very  little  suffices  to  excuse  a  man's  staying  at  home  on 
Sunday.  At  length  they  do  not  go  at  alL  Thus  there  is  taken  away 
from  them  what  they  really  did  not  have :  they  did  not  really  hear,  and 
now  they  do  not  nominally  hear.  There  are  thousands  of  people  in 
London  at  home  to-day,  hardly  dressed  even  at  this  hour,  from  whom  is 
taken  away  all  wish  to  hear  the  gospel. 

Here  is  another  form  of  the  same  thing.  The  man  keeps  on  hearing, 
but  not  having  received  the  gospel  he  loses  all  power  to  appieciate  it. 
''  I  do  not  know  what  has  come  over  our  minister,*'  he  says,  ''  I  used 
at  one  time  to  feel  something  when  he  was  preachine,  but  it  is  not 
so  now.  He  is  getting  old,  and  has  about  spun  himself  out."  Other 
people  do  not  think  so,  however,  for  they  have  been  converted  and  blessed 
unckr  his  ministry.  What  hsa  happened  ?  Why,  this  man  has  lost 
what  he  seemed  to  have,  namely,  tne  power  to  appreciate  the  gospel. 
He  recollects  the  day  when  he  used  to  stand  in  the  aisles  all  the  time, 
longing  to  catch  every  syllable,  and  then  would  go  home  and  get  on  his 
kneesy  and  after  a  fashion  pray  for  mercy.  Nothing  affects  nim  now. 
Tremble,  my  hearers,  if  that  is  your  case,  for  you  are  going  &st  to  per- 
dition, with  nothing  to  stop  you.  You  are  dying  at  the  root  and  will 
continue  to  lose  all  sensation  until  death  ends  in  corruption. 

In  certain  persons  this  takes  yet  another  form.  They  did  receive  the 
grace  of  God  in  a  way  and  there  was  an  effect  produced  upon  them,  but 
It  all  disiq>peared.  I  have  seen  an  unconverted  man  admirably 
i^ormed  for  a  time  by  hearing  the  Word.  The  drunkard's  cup  has 
been  given  up,  and  foul  language  has  ceased ;  there  has  been  a  great 
moral  improvement  for  which  we  have  all  been  very  glad ;  but,  alas,  it 
has  not  lasted.  Unless  gospel  work  is  inward  heart- work,  if  it  merely 
lies  in  external  reformation,  the  man  often  goes  back  to  be  worse  than 
he  was  before.  The  evil  spirit  which  had  left  him  returns,  and  takes 
with  it  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  itself,  and  they  enter  in 
and  dwell  there,  and  the  last  end  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first.  If 
the  gospel  does  not  save  you,  it  may  in  the  end  even  make  you  worse :  if 
it  is  not  a  savour  of  life  unto  life  it  wiU  become  a  savour  of  death  unto 
death. 

One  more  version  of  this  same  truth  and  I  have  done.  Some  appear 
to  receive  the  Word  even  further  than  those  in  whom  it  produces  au 


456  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

external  reformation,  for  they  make  a  confession  of  faith  in  Christ :  they 
pi-ay,  and  perhaps  they  preach:  their  voices  are  heard  in  Christian 
assemblies,  and  they  appear  to  live  the  lives  of  Christians.  I  have  seen 
them  even  become  eminent  for  supposed  sanctity,  but  if  they  have  not 
received  the  Word  really  and  tmly  what  a  miserable  life  theirs  most  be ! 
They  do  not  get  the  secret  comfort  of  true  religion,  and  yet  they  have  to 
keep  up  an  appearance  of  it.  Surely,  the  poorest  people  in  the  world 
are  those  who  have  to  keep  up  appearances  and  have  not  the  means  to 
do  it  with :  they  are  always  getting  in  debt,  and  yet  have  to  look  every- 
body in  the  face.  I  always  pity  a  penniless  nobleman,  the  Earl  of 
Nowhere,  Lord  Lackland.  Many  professors  are  in  a  like  plight,  they  have 
a  name  to  live  and  are  dead.  They  do  not  really  believe  what  they  pro- 
fess to  beUeve.  They  have  a  shrewd  suspicion  that  all  is  not  right  within, 
and  hence  they  ^et  no  comfort  from  all  their  religious  talking  and  doing ; 
it  is  a  task,  a  dreary,  cheerless  task.  They  have  no  proof  in  their  own 
hearts  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel ;  for  they  lack  the  internal  evidence, 
which  is  the  best  of  all.  Their  religion  has  never  changed  them,  nor 
stirred  the  deeps  ot  their  being,  and  at  last  it  becomes  impossible  to 
keep  up  tfhe  imposture.  Just  as  with  a  man  who  continues  to  live  beyond 
his  means,  there  comes  a  time  when  he  must  be  bankrupt,  so  there 
comes  a  time  with  the  spiritual  deceiver  when  he  cannot  keep  it  up 
any  longer.  Look  at  Judas ;  he  sold  his  soul  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver 
and  a  rope, — that  was  his  way  out  of  his  profession .  Others  have  become 
grosser  sceptics  and  viler  haters  of  Christ  than  others, — ^their  hypocrisy 
has  curdled  into  blasphemy.  Others  have  settled  dowa  in  utter  in- 
difference, callousness^  and  carelessness,  and  have  slept  themselves  into 
hell.  Where  the  cheat  is  kept  up  till  the  end,  what  a  waking  awaits 
the  deceiver  I  When  he  will  have  to  go  from  the  hearing  of  the 
gospel  to  the  bowlings  of  the  lost,  from  his  pew  in  the  house  of  God 
to  his  place  in  Tophet :  when  he  will  have  to  be  dragged  awav  from 
ti^e  cup  of  the  Lord  to  drink  in  very  deed  the  cup  of  devils ;  wnen  be 
will  be  shut  out  from  the  association  of  the  saints  to  dwell  for  ever  with 
the  condemned;  wh^i  that  God  whom  he  professed  to  worship  diall 
reject  him,  and  Jesus  himself  shall  say^  ^^  1  never  knew  you ;  depart 
from  me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity."  God  save  us  from  such  a  doom,  for 
his  name's  soke.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  £bad  before  Sermon — ^Matthew  xin.  1 — ^23. 


Hymns  from  ''Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 906,  51. 

The  Doxology  was  also  sung  in  gratitnde  for  gracious  answers  to  prayer,  die 

Lord  having  sent  a  sufficient  sum  to  pay  for  the  land 

far  the  Girls*  Orphanage. 


THE  PLAGUE  OF  THE  HEAET. 


%     I 


Dblivebed  ok  Lobd*&-Day  EvENivey  August  10th,  1879,  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  HXTBQFOLITAN  TABSBNAOLB,  NEWU^GTOK, 

{"  When  the  regular  congregation  unanimously  left  their  seats  to  he  occupied  htf 
strangers,  who  crowded  the  building  to  its  utmost  capacity  J. 


"  "What  pnyefr  uid  mpplieation  loeyer  be  made  by  any  man,  or  by  all  thy  people 
Israel,  which  shall  know  eyery  man  the  plague  of  hia  own  heart,  and  epread  forUi 
his  hands  toward  this  house  :  then  hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  dwelling  place,  and  for- 
giTOi  and  do,  and  give  to  every  man  according  to  his  ways,  whose  heart  thou  knowest ; 
(for  thou,  even  thou  only,  knowest  the  hearts  of  all  the  children  of  men;)  that  they 
may  fear  thee  aU  the  days  that  they  live  in  the  land  which  thon  gayest  unto  our 
fathers."— 1  Sings  yiii  38—40, 

You  all  know  that  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  tiie  one  place  of  sacrifice 
throughout  all  the  holy  land^  for  thns  had  the  Lord  spoken^  '^  Whatsoever 
man  there  he  of  the  house  of  Israel,  or  of  the  strangers  which  sojourn 
among  you,  that  ofPereth  a  burnt  offering  or  sacrifioe,  and  bringeth  it  not 
nnto  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  to  offer  it  unto  the 
Lord  ;  even  that  man  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people."  According 
to  God's  law  there  was  one  altar,  and  it  was  countea  a  nigh  crime  when 
the  tribes  which  dwelt  beyond  Jordan  built  another,  and  their  brethren 
besought  them,  saying, ''  Itebel  not  against  the  Lord  in  building  you  an 
altar  beside  the  altar  of  the  Lord  our  G^."  (Josh,  xzii,  19.)  As  Uiere  was 
only  one  high  priest,  so  there  was  only  one  altar ;  and  sacnfice  might  not 
be  offered  anywhere  else  but  on  that  altar  at  Jerusalem.  Hence  when  a 
man  wished  to  present  his  offerings  to  God  he  went  up  to  the  one  temple 
which  Solomon  dedicated  by  the  prayer  in  which  our  text  occurs.  The 
people  did  afterwards  build  altars  on  high  hills  and  in  green  groves,  but 
these  places,  and  the  sacrifices  offered  there,  were  contrary  to  the  mind  of 
Qod.  There  was  buc  one  altar  and  one  sacrifice,  and  that  was  at  the 
temple.  Hence  when  the  godly  Israelite  prayed  he  looked  towards  the 
one  place  of  sacrifice,  not  in  superstition,  but  in  believing  remembrance 
of  tae  one  sacrifice,  and  the  one  altar,  and  the  one  glorious  token  of  the 
divine  presence  which  shone  over  the  mercy-seat  within  the  veil.  He 
knew  that  God  oould  only  accept  him  through  the  one  sacrifice,  and 
therefore  he  looked  that  way. 

The  people  especially  looked  toward  the  temple  in  prayer  in  times  ot 
national  calami^.    In  droughty  or  when  the  crops  were  consumed  by 
locusts  or  by  caterpillars,  or  when  blast  and  mildew  destroyed  the  hope 
No.  1,489. 


458  HETBOPOLITAN  TABEBNACLB  PULPIT. 

of  harvest,  or  in  time  of  war,  or  pestilence,  their  supplications  were  pre- 
sented unto  the  one  Jehovah,  all  eyes  looking  towards  his  one  sacred 
shrine  where  the  one  sacrifice  smoked  upon  the  altar.  Bnt,  although 
there  were  those  special  opportanities,  and  God  heard  his  people's  cry,  as 
a  nation,  it  is  very  pleasant  to  observe  that  he  regarded  the  griefs  of  in- 
dividuals. Every  man,  says  the  text,  that  knew  the  plague  of  his  own 
heart  was  to  spread  forth  his  hands  towards  that  one  place  of  sacrifice 
and  pray,  and  God  would  forgive  him  and  deliver  him.  That  is  my 
subject  to-night.  The  Lord  will  hear  whatsoever  prayer  and  supplication 
is  made  by  any  man  in  reference  to  his  own  personal  affliction,  if  his 
heart  is  turned  towards  God's  own  temple. 

But  what  is  that  temple  ?  and  where  is  it  ?  There  are  now  no  material 
temples  beneath  the  whole  heaven,  unless  the  bodies  of  believers  m^  be 
so  called,  and  no  one  thinks  of  looting  to  them.  No,  *^  The  Most  High 
dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  No  one  place  is  more  saci^ 
than  another. 

"Where'er  we  seek  him  he  is  found. 
And  every  place  is  hallowed  ground.** 

There  remains  one  temple,  however,  and  that  is  the  body  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  He  is  temple,  altar,  and  sacrifice ;  and  if  you  would  look 
the  right  way  in  prayer,  and  if  you  desire  your  prayers  to  speed,  you  must 
look  to  him  by  the  eye  of  faith.  See,  there  he  sits  at  the  right  hand  of 
God.  Having  finished  the  one  sacrifice,  and  made  atonement  for  sin  for 
ever,  there  he  sits — spriest,  altar,  offering,  temple ;  and  every  true  sup- 
plicant must  enter  into  Uie  holiest  by  his  blood, ''  bv  a  new  and  living 
way,  which  he  hath  consecrated  for  us,  through  tne  veiL,  that  is  to 
say,  his  flesh."  Whoever  beneath  the  wide  heavens  is  conscious  of  the 
plague  of  his  own  heart,  or  has  anything  that  places  him  or  aught  that 
troubles  him,  may  turn  his  eyes  towards  Christ,  the  true  temple,  with  a 
certainty  that  God  will  hear  his  prayer  and  answer  his  request,  and  send 
to  him  deliverance.  '^  We  have  an  altar,"  and  that  altar  is  our  Lord's 
own  blessed  person ;  we  have  but  one,  and  we  tremble  for  those  who  set 
up  another,  but  to  that  one  we  look  with  confident  hope,  being  assured 
that  the  sacrifice  once  offered  there  has  made  our  peace  with  Grod,  and 
procured  acceptance  for  our  supplications. 

"  We  rear  no  altar — thou  hast  died ; 
We  deck  no  priestly  shrine  ; 
What  need  have  we  of  creature-aid  ? 
The  power  to  save  is  thine.'* 

But  now  I  must  come  nearer  to  the  point  in  hand.  The  test  speaks  of 
**  every  man  which  shall  know  the  plague  of  his  own  heart."  I  am  going 
to  talk  to  yon  about  that  knowledge,  and  the  plague  with  which  it  deals. 

These  are  home  affairs  that  we  shall  speak  of  to-night;  not  matters 
beyond  our  line,  and  unpractical,  but  our  own  personal  concerns, — "  Every 
man  the  plague  of  his  own  heart."  A  great  many  men  think  they 
know  the  plague  of  other  people's  hearts,  and  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
talk  in  the  world  about  this  family,  and  that  person,  and  the  other. 
I  pray  you  let  the  scandals  of  the  hour  alone,  and  think  of  your  own 
evils.  This  night  let  each  man  consider  his  own  home  afikirs,  and  not 
other  people's  busmess.    He  would  be  a  bad  farmer  who  ploughed  other 


THE  Phkaxn  OF  THS  HSABT.  459 

people's  lands;  and  lefb  his  own  nntilled  He  would  be  a  poor  gardener 
who  used  his  hoe  on  other  men's  weeds,  and  not  on  his  own.  To-night 
I  pray  yon  let  each  man  think  of  home  affairs.  Yes,  and  let  him  think 
of  heart  affairs ;  for,  whatever  may  be  wrong  about  us,  the  worst  place  to 
have  anything  wrong  is  the  heart.  Out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life.  We 
can  endure  the  burdens  of  life,  but  "  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear  ?" 
A  plague  in  the  body  is  not  half  so  bad  as  a  plague  in  the  heart — ^a 
plague  in  the  soul :  of  all  plagues  the  plague  of  the  heart  is  the  sorest. 
It  is  not  the  plague  of  another  man's  heart  which  I  have  to  think  of 
to-night,  but  the  plague  of  my  own  heart,  for  the  text  speaks  of  knowing, 
"  Every  man  the  plague  of  his  own  heart." 

It  is  a  dreadful  mischief  that  there  should  be  a  plague  in  the  heart, 
for  a  plague  is  a  dreadful  thing.  A  plague  means,  first,  something  which 
brings  pain;  and  there  is  manv  a  seci'et  heart-ache  in  this  world  where 
we  least  suspect  it.  If  you  could  take  the  roofs  off  the  houses  of  London 
strange  sights  would  be  seen,  but  if  once  you  could  proceed  to  put  a 
window  into  every  heart,  some  of  those  whose  fisices  Iook  gladdest  would 
appear  to  us  to  be  among  the  most  miserable  of  men.  The  plague  of  the 
heart  means  pain,  care,  worry,  grief,  and  trouble  of  mind :  but  it  means 
more  than  that,  for  the  plague  is  a  disease.  Now,  a  diseased  heart  is 
something  terrible.  Often  we  see  it  reported  that  a  man  died  sud- 
denly of  disease  of  the  hearty  which  I  suppose  frequently  means  that 
the  doctors  do  not  know  what  he  died  of;  but  certainly  anything 
that  ails  the  heart  is  a  disease  in  a  most  important  organ.  The 
hand  may  be  cured,  or  we  may  even  lose  it  and  live ;  but  when  the 
heart  is  affected  the  whole  ^tem  gets  out  of  gear,  and  life  itself  verges 
dangerously  upon  the  edge  of  death.  As  it  is  witib  the  heart  of  the  body 
so  is  it  with  the  soul's  heart :  its  depravity,  or,  in  other  words,  its  moral 
disease,  puts  all  the  faculties  out  of  order  and  ruins  our  whole  nature. 
Nothing  can  be  right  with  the  immortal  nature  till  the  heart  is  cured  of 
the  plague  which  came  upon  it  through  the  Fall.  The  worst  point  about 
the  plague  of  the  heart  is  the  fact  that  if  it  be  not  removed  it  will  ulti- 
mately brififf  death  upon  the  souL  Plague  at  the  heart  is  mortal,  and  I 
am  much  surprised  if  I  have  not  in  this  great  congregation  some  who 
have  a  present  pain,  a  present  disease  of  the  heart,  and  who  will,  unless 
Ood  of  his  grace  lead  them  to  adopt  the  cure  we  shall  set  before  them 
to-night,  perish  through  this  deadly  plague.  0  that  while  I  am  speaking 
to  you  the  Holy  Spirit  may  lead  many  a  sin-sick  soul  to  breathe  out 
seme  such  desire  as  that  expressed  by  John  Newton  when  he  wrote, — 

"  Physician  of  my  sin-sick  sonl, 

To  thee  I  bnng  my  case  ; 
My  ra^ng  malady  control. 
And  heal  me  by  thy  grace. 

Pity  the  anguish  I  endure, 

See  how  I  mourn  and  pine ; 
For  never  can  I  hope  a  cure 

From  any  hand  hut  thine. 

Lord,  I  am  sick,  regard  my  cry, 

And  set  my  spirit  free  : 
Say,  canst  thou  let  a  sinner  die, 

Who  longs  to  live  to  theeP  '* 


AGO  HETROFOLITAir  TABERKACLE  PtTLPIT. 

To  come  to  close  quarters.  Our  first  point  will  be  farms  of  this  plague^ 
the  next  will  be  mode  of  ireatmmity  and  the  third  will  be  help  to  he 
expected, 

I.  First,  let  us  mention  various  forms  of  this  plagur  of  the  hrart. 
They  are  y&cj  many,  perhaps  almost  as  many  as  the  hearts  themselves. 
Some  have  this  plague  of  the  heart  in  the  form  of  a  terrible  memory. 
With  blood-red  line  remorse  has  scored  their  memories  in  an  inefboeable 
manner.  We  need  not  go  into  particulars — a  secret  something  known 
scarcely  to  anyone  but  themselves  hides  away  in  the  tenderest  part  of 
their  nature  and  eats  out  their  vitals.  They  sinned — sinned  terribly, 
and  the  sin  haunts  them.  They  could  be  happy  if  they  could  foi^t, 
but  that  one  sin  is  ever  before  them  as  though  a  blood  spot  were 
painted  on  their  very  eyeballs.  They  are  remind^  of  it  by  the  simplest 
events,  for  it  seems  as  though  Ood  had  put  an  accusing  tongue  into  the 
stones  they  tread  upon  and  the  walls  which  surround  them.  Even  their 
beds  refuse  them  repose ;  they  wake  in  the  darkness  and  sit  in  speechless 
horror,  or  if  they  fall  asleep  the  visions  of  the  night  scare  them.  Few 
know  of  their  fault,  and  yet  they  imagine  that  they  are  universally 
suspected.  Nobody  has  cried  shame  upon  them,  but  they  cry  shame 
upon  themselves.  It  may  not  be  one  sin  alone,  but  perhaps  all  their 
sins  in  one  pack  bay  at  them  and  pursue  them  like  bloodhounds 
eager  to  devour.  They  can  hear  the  voice  of  their  sins  above  all  notes 
of  music  or  shouts  of  laughter.  When  they  would  be  quiet  and  at  rest 
they  cannot  be,  for  they  are  tossed  to  and  fro  like  ocean  in  a  storm. 
They  have  the  plague  of  remembered  sin  upon  them  and  see  no  remedy 
for  it :  to-night  it  is  my  gladsome  message  that  there  is  a  cure  ior  this 
form  of  heart-plague^  an  effectual  cure.  Transgression  can  be  blotted 
out,  even  the  greatest  trespass  can  be  altogether  forgiven.  Sin  can  be 
put  away  so  that  it  shall  not  be  mentioned  against  you  any  more  lor  ever. 
Blessed  be  God  for  this.  If  this  be  the  plague  of  your  heart,  have  confi- 
dence and  embrace  the  cure  to-night. 

With  others  it  takes  another  shape.  Their  heart-plague  has  assumed 
the  form  of  dissatisfaction  and  unrest.  They  cannot  be  quiet.  They  are 
like  the  troubled  sea,  which  cannot  rest  They  were  a  little  pleased  at  one 
time  when  they  had  a  new  scheme  on  hand  to  divert  their  thoughts  and 
amuse  their  minds.  The  scheme  has  prospered,  but  that  prosperity 
has  brought  them  no  contentment ;  they  must  now  be  at  something 
else,  and  while  the  new  plan  is  in  full  swing  they  will  a  little  forget^ 
but  when  that  also  is  accomplished  they  will  sit  down  and  cry, ''  What 
next  ?  I  am  sick  of  all  things,  and  most  of  all  of  myself.  Life  is  worry 
and  disappointment.  I  cannot  be  quiet.  I  crave  a  something,  I  know 
not  what.  There  are  hundreds  and  thousands  of  men  who  have  all 
that  heart  can  wish,  and  yet  are  miserable.  On  the  other  hand  I  conld 
point  you  to  many  hundreds  who  have  but  little  in  this  world  and  ^et  are 
almost  as  happy  as  the  angels,  in  full  contentment  rejoicing  in  their  GRkL 
The  plague  in  the  heart  rages  fiercely  in  those  who  lack  for  nothing 
except  the  power  to  enjoy  what  they  have.  They  have  succeeded  in 
their  learning,  and  gained  their  degree,  but  increased  learning  has  onl^  en* 
larged  the  sphere  of  their  disquietude.  They  have  succeeded  in  business 
and  have  retired,  but  retirement  is  a  weariness  to  them.  They  have 
prospered  in  everything,  and  this  has  become  their  adversity.    Like  the 


THE  PLAGUE  OF  THE  HEART.  461 

vnae  man  of  old,  they  cry,  "  Vanity  of  vanities  I  All  is  vanity."  They 
monm  over  all  earthly  good,  saying,  *'  There  is  nothing  in  it.  It  is  an 
empty  thing.  Woe  is  me !  Where  is  rest  for  my  soul  ?  "  Again  it  is 
my  glad  errand  to-night  to  tell  yon  where  perfect  rest  and  sweet  con- 
tentment can  be  found ;  where  your  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease  and  possess 
the  earth,  and  inherit  worlds  to  come,  and  your  peace  shall  be  like  a 
rirer,  and  your  righteousness  like  the  waves  of  the  sea.  The  Lord  God, 
the  Holy  Spirit,  help  you  to  avail  yourselves  of  the  blessed  peace  stored 
up  in  the  one  great  sacrifice  which  every  unresting  heart  may  have,  if  it 
will  come  to  him. 

This  plague  takes  another  shape,  and  I  mention  several,  that  I  may 
come  home  to  many  hearts,  and  depict  many  experiences ;  in  many  it  is  a 
wretched  tendency  to  same  one  sin,  which,  nevertheless,  the  man  in  his 
better  moments  does  not  wish  to  commit.  Some  are  horribly  plagued  by 
their  passions.  They  stand  out  against  them  occasionally,  and  come  to  a 
pause,  and  resolve,  "  It  shall  not  be.  In  the  name  of  everything  that  is 
good,  it  shall  not  be."  They  hate  and  despise  themselves  for  it,  and  yet 
they  yield  to  overwhelming  lust,  and  are  hurried  forward  by  their  passions 
like  sear  leaves  in  the  tempest,  or  spray  dashed  aloft  by  the  storm. 

Many  individuals  are  plagued  with  the  temptation  to  strong  drink. 
They  vow  that  they  will  abstain,  but  the  serpent  stings  and  they  thirst 
for  the  fire-water,  and  will  have  it,  though  it  degrades  their  manhood 
below  the  level  of  the  swine.  With  others  wantonness  and  chambering 
have  gained  the  mastery,  and  the  plague  is  foul  indeed.  With  another 
class  it  is  ungovernable  anger,  quickness  of  wrath,  or  that  slow-burning, 
smouldering  fire  called  malice,  which  is  nearest  akin  to  the  fire  of  hell. 
Better  burn  with  a  life-long  fever  than  be  the  prey  of  these  fierce  heats. 
Some  know  the  evil  which  twines  about  them  like  a  python,  and  they 
wish  to  resist  it,  and  yet  they  are  so  fascinated  by  the  sin  that  they  can- 
not tear  away  the  serpent  s  folds.  Many  are  as  though  they  were 
taken  in  a  net,  or  garmented  about  with  lusts,  till  they  are  comparable  to 
Hercules  of  old  when  he  put  on  the  tunic  which  burned  into  his  flesh 
and  clung  to  his  body,  so  that  when  he  laboured  to  tear  it  off  as  best  he 
could,  he  tore  away  his  flesh  therewith.  Many  are  enshrouded  in  a 
horrible  robe  of  habit  which  has  become  a  part  of  their  being,  the 
very  skin  of  their  souls.  They  cannot  get  rid  of  that  awful  fire-tunic— 
a  tendency  to  sin.  To  them  also  I  have  the  joy  to  proclaim,  in  the 
name  of  God,  the  all-merciful,  that  from  this  they  can  be  redeemed : 
they  can  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  and  brought 
into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 

In  others,  this  plague  of  the  heart  is  a  wretched  indecision — a  perpetual 
Tadllation.  They  are  resolved  at  times,  but  their  resolve  ends  in  nothing. 
Oh,  there  are  numbers  of  men  who  know  it  thomselves— that  they  never 
can  succeed  in  life  because  they  are'' everything  by  turns,  andnothing  long," 
and  especially  in  matters  of  religion  they  wax  and  wane  like  the  moon.  To- 
day they  repent :  to-morrow  they  return  to  their  sin.  To-day  they  are  in 
earnest ;  to-morrow  they  are  careless.  To-day  they  are  almost  persuaded  to 
be  Christians;  to-mprrow  they  are  quite  persuaded  to  find  pleasure  in  sin. 
False  as  the  waves  and  fickle  as  the  winds,  they  are  never  long  enough  in 
one  stay  to  take  root  anywhere.  Unstable  as  water,  they  shall  not  excel. 
Who  can  heal  them  of  this  moral  palsy  ?    Can  nothing  decide  them  in 


f^ 


4G2  HETBOPOLITAK  TABESZTACLE  PULPIT. 

the  right  direction?  Yes,  there  is  One  who  can  decide  them.  There  is 
One  who  can  throw  the  weight  of  his  sweet  loTe  into  the  qniyering 
balance,  and  make  it  tnm  in  the  right  direction.  0  hesitating  mortal, 
if  you  have  grace  to  look  to-night  towards  the  one  Sacrifice,  the  Holy 
Spirit  will  root  yon  and  ground  you  in  love,  Jesus  will  make  a  stead- 
fast man  of  you,  and  you  shall  yet  say,  "  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed,  my 
heart  is  fixed :  I  will  sing  and  give  praise." 

I  have  known  this  plague  of  the  heart  in  some  to  take  the  form  of  a 
mournful  hardness,  so  that  they  cry,  "  I  would,  but  cannot,  repent.  I 
would  feel,  but  I  cannot  feel.  I  seem  to  be  given  up,  seared  as  with  a 
hot  iron,  and  insensible."  This  is  a  fearful  plague,  perhaps  worse  than  all 
I  have  previously  mentioned  because  more  fatal.  Is  there,  then,  no  hope  ? 
Yes,  there  is  one  who  can  make  the  dead  to  live,  who  can  take  away  tJie 
heart  of  stone  and  give  a  heart  of  flesh,  and  it  is  his  name  we  preach  to- 
night, the  name  of  Jesus,  who  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins. 

There  are  others  whom  I  meet  pretty  constantly  who  have  afaminess 
oflieart,  a  despondency  of  spirit,  and  this  is  their  plague.  They  cannot 
believe  that  there  is  mercy  for  them.  They  cannot  hope  that  they  could 
live  a  new  life.  At  times  they  feel  a  desire  to  turn  unto  the  Lord,  but 
they  think  it  is  impossible ;  and  that  grim  impossibility  drives  them  back 
from  Christ,  and  forward  to  yet  grosser  sin.  Many  a  man  has  said, 
**  Because  there  is  no  hope,  therefore  will  I  sin  to  the  very  length  of  my 
tether.  I  cannot  be  saved,  and  so  I  may  as  well  have  the  pleasures  of 
sin  to  the  full."  I  pray  thee,  dear  hearer,  let  not  despair  thus  saddle 
thee  and  ride  thee,  for  there  is  no  cause  for  it.  There  is  salvation  where 
Jesus  comes,  and  he  comes  here  to-night.  No  man  need  say  he  is  denied 
a  hope  since  Christ  came  into  the  word  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which 
is  lost.  Oh,  my  hearer,  hope  as  long  as  you  live.  To  the  very  confines 
of  death's  dominions,  and  to  the  borders  of  hell-shade  let  this  word  of 
mercy  fly,  "  There  is  hope :  there  is  hope."  For  the  most  hopeless  there 
is  still  hope.  *^  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous 
man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have 
mercy  upon  him ;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon." 

One  other  form  of  heart-plague  is  a  constant  dread  of  fhe  future. 
Multitudes  of  persons  are  always  under  apprehension,  and  especially  under 
apprehension  of  death.  You  must  not  mention  death  in  some  places, 
the  very  word  is  horrible.  Some  would  like,  I  dare  say,  that  the  etiquette 
of  the  age  should  respect  their  coward  fears  and  be  as  daintily  absurd  as 
that  of  the  French  monarch  who  would  not  allow  death  to  be  mentioned 
in  his  presence,  and  when  his  secretary  read  the  words,  "  the  death  of  the 
king  of  Spain,"  he  sharply  asked,  "What  is  that?  what  is  that?  "in 
anger  that  such  a  thing  should  be  mentioned  in  his  sacred  presence. 
The  secretary  was  obliged  to  say  that  it  was  a  circumstance  which 
occasionally  happened  to  kings  in  Spain.  Scores  of  people  would  like  us 
to  be  just  as  delicate  as  that  upon  the  subject  of  their  end.  But,  0  sirs, 
ye  must  die.  TJie  youngest  among  us  who  is  in  best  health  wUl  die — 
may  die  soon ;  but  where  the  snows  of  winter  lie  upon  your  heads,  and 
where  already  the  tenement  begins  to  crumble  through  old  age,  death 
must  come.  Are  you  not  prepared,  my  friend  ?  Are  you  not  prepared  ? 
Then  I  do  not  wonder  that  you  tremble  at  the  very  thought  of  being 
summoned  before  vour  Maker'«  bar.    But  be  not  as  the  ostrich  which 


THE  FLAGnE  OF  THE  HEABT.  468 

hides  its  sflly  head  from  the  hunter,  and  then  dreams  of  being  secure. 
Learn  to  look  death  in  the  faoe,  for  it  will  soon  stare  yon  ont  of 
oonntenance.  Do  yon  call  yourself  a  Christian,  and  are  yon  afraid 
to  die  ?  Oh  I  if  God  had  made  yon  such  a  man  as  yon  ought  to  be 
you  would  not  dread  to  die,  for  death  is  a  mere  undressing  to  the  true 
believer,  an  undressing  which  leads  to  his  being  arrayed  in  glory. 
Death  to  the  saint  is  the  gate  of  endless  joy,  and  shall  he  dread  to  enter 
there  ?  To  such  as  are  in  Christ  who  have  looked  to  the  one  temple,  to 
the  one  sacrifice,  to  the  one  priest,  to  the  one  altar,  the  fear  of  death  is 
gone.  Within  tiiem  God  has  wrought  such  a  work,  and  for  them  Christ 
has  prepared  such  a  heaven,  that  without  apprehension  they  may  look 
through  the  gates  of  pearl,  and  often  dap  tneir  hands  for  very  joy,  as 
they  sing — 

''  See  that  glory,  how  resplendent ! 

Brighter  ax  than  fimey  paints  ; 
There  in  majesty  transcendent, 

Jesns  reigns,  the  King  of  saints. 
Spread  my  wings,  my  seal,  and  fly 
Straight  to  yonder  world  of  joy.** 

So  elevated  is  the  joyous  experience  of  the  tme  believer,  that  death  to 
him  would  be  unmingled  gam,  and  he  knows  it  to  be  so,  and  therefore 
at  times  he  is  even  in  haste  to  be  gone. 

Have  I,  in  any  of  these  descriptions,  picked  you  out,  my  dear 
friend,  to-night  ?  Have  you  a  heart-plague  like  to  any  of  these  ?  Or  is 
it  some  other  form  of  the  great  spiritusd  pestilence  ?  I  cannot  tarry  to 
describe  it,  for  now  I  want  to  roeak  upon  the  mode  of  treatment.  May 
the  Holy  Ghost  help  you  to  feet  the  plague,  and  accept  the  remedy  upon 
the  spot. 

II.  Yon  desire  to  get  rid  of  this  heart-plague— effectually  rid  of  it ; 
let  us  then  consider  the  modb  of  treatment  which  will  work  a  cure. 
I  hope  you  are  not  so  foolish  as  to  say,  '*  I  shall  not  think  about  the 
matter,  for  it  would  only  plague  me  more."  That  is  a  very  bad  habit, 
and  only  such  as  a  frivolous  or  a  wicked  person  would  foUow.  A  man 
is  in  trade,  and  he  says  to  his  clerk,  ^^  Don't  bring  me  the  books,  I 
do  not  want  to  know  anything  about  my  accounts.  Don't  let  me  see 
day-book  or  ledger ;  I  had  rather  not  oe  troubled  with  them."  The 
confidential  clerk  replies,  ''Sir,  I  think  you  ought  to  see  your  account 
at  the  bank."  '^ No,"  answers  the  silly  one  ''I  should  not  like  to  be 
perplexed  with  figures,  and  balances,  and  losses,  and  deficits.  I  should 
not  enjoy  my  dinner  if  I  attended  to  these  matters ;  let  us  drive  dull 
care  away  and  enjoy  life  while  we  may.  Don't  worry  me,  but  keep  those 
in*etohed  books  away."  I  do  not  think  it  ne^  a  prophet  to  foretell  that 
this  tradesman  will  soon  be  in  his  creditors'  hands,  with  very  small  assets. 
By  such  avoidance  of  knowing  his  position  he  will  be  mined  as  sure  as 
doomsday.  And  whenever  a  man  dares  not  look  into  the  state  of  his  own 
soul  and  dreads  a  half-an-hour  alone,  he  may  conclude  that  there  is  some* 
thing  rotten  in  the  state  of  Denmark — something  fer,  far  gone  with  regard 
to  his  soul's  estate.  He  need  not  question  that,  I  think.  But  let  us  not 
be  so  unwise,  for  the  first  mode  of  treatment  we  prescribe  to-night,  in 
order  to  the  remedy,  is  that  every  man  should  know  the  plague  of  his 


464  METBOPOLITAN  TABSRNAOLB  PULPIT. 

own  heart ;  that  is  to  say,  he  shonld  endeavour  to  get  a  true  and  accurate 
hnowUdge  of  his  spirit'iial  condiium  ae  in  the  sight  of  Ood. 

What  is  this  sia  that  troubles  yon  ?  Honestly  look  at  it.  What  is^ 
this  fear  that  haunts  you  ?  Do  you  know  what  it  is?  I  would  advise 
you  to  write  it  down  and  see  it  in  black  and  white.  What  is  this  ten- 
dency to  sin  that  enslaves  you  ?  What  is  this  wretched  indecision.  Get 
a  di^nosis  of  the  disease  and  be  sure  it  is  a  correct  one.  Look  your  own 
case  through  and  through.  It  very  much  helps  towards  salvation  when  a 
.'  man  knows  something  of  his  need  of  it,  and  he  will  be  very  much  helped 
to  a  sense  of  his  need  if  he  will  impartially  examine  his  own  state.  Might 
I  ask  such  a  thing,  I  fear  it  would  not  be  granted,  but  I  am  sure  good 
would  come  of  it  if  I  could  get  it — that  every  person  to-night  on  his  going 
home  would  sit  down  in  his  chamber,  look  into  the  state  of  his  heart  befoi^ 
God,  and  then  write  on  a  piece  of  paper  one  of  two  words — "saved  "  or 
"lost"?  My  friend,  do  not  write  that  word  " saved "  unless  you  can 
honestly  and  sincerely  say,  "  I  have  looked  to  the  Saviour,  and  he  has 
saved  me."  But  suppose  you  are  forced  in  honesty  to  your  own  con- 
science to  write  down  the  word  "  lost "  as  your  tnie  description,  it  will 
be  both  manly  and  useful  to  do  so.  I  have  known  this  to  be  done  in 
cases  in  which,  before  the  morning  light,  that  piece  of  paper  has  been 
burned  and  another  word  has  been  written  in  its  stead,  even  the  bright 
consoling  word  "saved."  Only  foolish  people  object  to  enquiry  as  to 
their  state :  be  not  one  of  them.  Write  down  the  condition  of  your  soul. 
Take  stock,  and  make  sure.  Write  down  "  impenitent,"  if  you  are  so : 
put  it  before  you  in  black  and  white.  Write  "  unbelieving,"  if  you  are 
BO.  It  cannot  hurt  you  to  know  the  truth,  and  it  may  be  of  lasting  benefit 
to  you.    We  prescribe  that  to  be^n  with. 

Then,  next,  as  Solomon  bade  those  who  knew  the  plague  of  their  own 
heart  turn  their  eyes  to  the  great  sacrifice  at  the  temple,  so  the  next 
thing  to  do  is  to  turn  your  eye  to  God.  You  cannot  help  yourself,  and 
nobody  on  earth  can  help  you.  Your  case,  apart  from  divine  grace,  is 
desperate.  This  heart-plague  will  not  die  out  of  its  own  accord,  nor  will 
any  change  of  your  outward  condition  eradicate  it.  Turn,  then,  to  the 
great  Physician  and  cry  to  him  thus,  "  Lord  God,  thou  didst  make  mc, 
thou  canst  mend  me.  Thou  didst  make  me,  thou  canst  make  me  over 
again.  I  am  lost.  Greater,  Redeemer,  Sanctifier,  thou  canst  save  me." 
Look  heavenward  and  Christward.  Look  to  the  bleeding  Lamb,  to  the 
risen  Redeemer.  To  look  within  will  breed  despair,  but  to  look  to  Christ 
on  the  cross,  nay,  to  Christ,  now  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  will  beget 
lively  hope.  Jesus  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unt>> 
God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them  " — 1<> 
look  to  him  is  the  main  part  of  the  cure.  Bring  God  into  the  business; 
bring  Christ  into  your  trouble,  for  here  lies  your  help.  Look  that  way, 
I  pray  you.    Look  and  live. 

And  when  you  have  looked  that  way,  the  next  thing  to  do  is  to  eipriad 
the  trouble  before  Ood.  Some  do  not  know  how  to  pray.  When  you 
cannot  pray  l>egin  your  attempt  in  this  manner :  "  Lord,  I  cannot  praj ; 
I  cannot  pray;  oh,  teach  me  to  pray."  But  you  say  you  do  not  fed: 
then  I  would  urge  you  to  confess,  "  Lord,  I  do  not  feel.  My  heart  is 
hard.  Lord,  cause  me  to  feel."  Oh,  but  you  say  you  are  so  disquieted,  and  so 
nnrestful.    Go,  and  tell  him, "  Lord,  I  am  so  disquieted :  I  cannot  rest. 


THE  PLAGUB  OF  THE  HEABT.  465 

Help  me ;  help  me."  Tell  it  all  to  Jesus  without  reserve.  I  am  persuaded 
that  if  you  will  confess  the  plague  to  God,  you  will  soon  find  help  from 
that  act  of  confession.  The  Lord  Jesus  will  speedily  relieve  your 
conscience  in  a  very  special  and  effectual  manner.  Tell  it  unto  no  man ; 
tell  it  unto  God  alone.  Judas  confessed  unto  the  priests,  and  you 
know  what  he  did  next.  Confess  to  God,  and  you  shall  not  go  forth  to 
hang  yourself,  hut  you  will  go  forth  to  find  that  he  is  able  to  help  you, 
for  **  n  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  &ithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins, 
and  to  save  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  Pour  out  your  heart  before 
him,  and  it  will  ease  you  mightily. 

After  confession  is  made,  with  your  eye  to  the  sacrifice,  pray  with  your 
€ye  still  upon  the  Lord  Jesus,  Pleading  the  blood  of  Jesus,  be  im- 
portunate for  pardon.  No  man  has  truly  sought  God  in  prayer,  looking 
to  Jesus  Christ,  and  has  been  I'efiised,  and  there  never  shaU  be  such  a 
man.  I  remember  how  I  was  struck  with  what  my  mother  said  to  me 
when  she  was  pleading  with  me  to  lay  hold  on  Christ,  and  I  was  despair- 
ing. She  said,  "There  was  never  yet  a  man  so  wicked  as  to  say  that 
he  had  sincerely  sought  the  Lord  and  asked  mercy  at  his  hands  through 
Christ,  and  yet  had  been  denied."  Now,  I  thought  that  I  had  done  so, 
and  I  felt  sure  that  the  Lord  had  refused  me,  and  I  half  resolved  in  my 
mind  that  I  would  say  as  much ;  but  I  have  never  said  it,  for  this  reason, 
that  I  sought  him  again  and  found  him,  to  the  joy  of  my  spirit.  So  shall 
it  be  with  you,  poor,  weary  seeker.  You  shall  find  him  soon  if  you  seek 
him  with  your  whole  heart.  Eternity  shall  not  reveal  a  single  instance 
in  which  Christ  Jesus  cast  away  a  sinner  that  came  to  him.  All  hell 
shall  be  searched  through,  and  they  shall  ask  them,  "  Is  there  one  here 
that  can  say  that  Christ  rejected  him  when  he  came  to  him  ? "  and 
though  glad  enough  to  blaspheme,  there  shall  not  be  found  among  the 
damned  a  single  tongue  that  shall  dare  to  utter  such  a  baseless  slander 
against  the  Priend  of  sinners.  My  hearer,  if  you  repentingly  believe  and 
yet  are  rejected,  you  will  be  the  first.  Come,  then,  ay,  come  to-night, 
and  tell  out  the  plague  of  your  heart  with  your  eye  to  Christ,  and 
then  plead  with  God,  "  Lord,  save  me."  I  would  put  words  into  your 
mouth,  if  I  could.  Say,  "  Lord,  save  me.  I  am  lost,  save  me.  There 
is  a  plague  in  my  heart,  heal  it.  I  confess  my  ereat  sin.  Lord,  blot  it 
out.  1  acknowledge  my  present  depravity  and  tendency  to  sin.  Lord,  tear 
up  my  sin  by  the  roots.  Thou  knowest  my  disquietude,  and  my  hardness 
of  heart.  Lord  give  me  peace.  There  is  something  in  me,  I  scarce  know 
what  it  is,  that  I  must  get  rid  of;  Lord,  rid  me  of  it,  for  Jesus' 
sake.  Oh,  for  his  Son's  sake,  for  his  blood's  sake,  for  his  death's 
sake,  for  his  resurrection's  sake,  I  beseech  thee,  hear  me."  Earnest, 
childlike  pleading  shall  certainly  have  its  answer.  Only  do  thou  believe 
that  the  Lord  can  do  this,  and  he  will  do  it.  Faith  is  the  starting 
point  of  salvation,  yea,  it  brings  you  to  salvation  itself.  Jesus  Christ 
said,  **  Believest  thou  that  I  am  able  to  do  this?  "  and  the  poor  man 
answered,  "Lord,  I  believe."  Follow  his  example.  My  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  God  as  well  as  man.  He  is  the  Son  of  the  Highest,  and  he  came 
into  this  world,  and  took  the  form  of  man,  and  in  that  form  he  suffered, 
the  Just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God ;  why,  then,  should  we  doubt 
him  ?  The  merit  of  his  precious  blood  is  exceeding  great  beyond  compare, 
and  he  would  have  us  believe  in  its  eternal  efiicacv ;  whv  should  we  not  ? 


466  METROPOLITAN  TABESNACLB  PULPIT. 

Do  yon  say  you  cannot  believe  ?  Bead  oyer  the  story  of  the  fonr  evan- 
gelists, and  then  sit  still  awhile  and  think  it  all  over.  He  who  soffered 
so  is  Gk)d.  The  incarnate  God  died  this  shamefnl  death  to  save  the  goilty. 
Surely  as  you  look  yon  will  believe.  The  Holy  Spirit  will  create  feith  in 
you  by  .his  own  inspired  testimony.  Ton  will  say,  '*  I  know  not  how  it  is, 
but  &ith  comes  stealing  over  me.  I  do  believe  the  dying  Savionr*8 
love,  and  I  cast  my  soul  upon  him."  That  is  Ae  way  of  salvation — ^jnst 
to  rest  in  Christ.  As  the  pitcher  hangs  on  the  nail,  so  must  we  hang 
on  Christ.  As  the  babe  lies  in  its  mother's  arms  without  fear,  so 
must  we  lie  in  the  arms  of  Jesus.  We  must  be  nothing,  and  Christ 
everything.  When  we  do  this  we  shall  get  rest ;  rest  from  all  the  plague 
of  the  heart. 

III.  I  close,  lest  I  weary  yon,  by  mentioning,  in  the  third  place, 
HELPS  WHICH  WE  MAT  EXPECT  TO  BECEIVB  if  we  foUow  the  treatment 
which  I  have  tried  to  describe. 

The  first  help  we  shall  get  according  to  our  text  is, ''  Then  hear  thou 
in  heaven,  thy  dwelling  place,  and  forgive,**  In  answer  to  your  con- 
fession and  your  prayer  and  your  looking  to  the  great  altar  and  the  great 
sacrifice  there  shall  come  a  free  pardon  from  the  court  of  heaven. 
What  a  splendid  word  that  is,  "  forgive,"  when  you  know  God's  sense 
of  it  It  is  to  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea  all  memory  of  sin,  to  blot 
it  out  as  a  paid  debt,  to  drive  it  away  as  a  cloud,  to  cover  it  so  that  it  is 
out  of  sight  for  ever,  to  cast  it  behind  his  back,  yea,  even  to  cause  it  to 
cease  to  be  as  though  it  had  never  been.  I  know  one  who  differed  from 
his  friend,  and  spoke,  under  a  misunderstanding,  more  sharply  than  the 
case  required.  His  friend  was  quite  able  to  fight  his  own  battles,  and 
say  sharp  things  too.  The  case  was  cleared  up,  and  misapprehension 
removed,  and  he  who  had  been  first  ofiended  said  in  all  heartiness,  ^'  Let 
us  take  the  sponge  and  clean  the  slate  and  begin  anew,  as  if  the  past 
had  never  been."  The  other  was  a  good  man  and  true,  but  he  paused  so 
much  in  his  reply  that  the  first  brother  does  not  feel  that  he  has  healed 
the  wound,  and  felt  tempted  to  say, ''  Say  straight  out  that  you  do  not 
mean  to  forgive,  and  then  I  shall  know  where  you  are."  A  limping  re- 
conciliation is  half  a  feud.  But  when  God  foi^ves  he  means  it,  and  the 
offence  is  gone  for  ever.  He  cleans  off  the  record.  It  is  ail  gone,  every 
trace  of  it.  I  think  I  see  that  slate  with  your  sins  written  thereon  to- 
night, a  long  and  heavy  score,  but  if  you  ^o  to  the  Lord  as  I  have 
described^  he  will  wipe  it  all  out  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west  he 
will  remove  your  transgressions  from  you.  Do  you  remember  the  story 
of  Martin  Luther  when  Satan  came  to  him,  as  he  thought,  with  a  long 
black  roll  of  his  sins,  which  truly  might  make  a  swaddling-band  for  the 
round  world?  To  the  arch-enemy  Luther  said,  **  Yes,  I  must  own  to 
them  all.  Have  you  any  more  ?  "  So  the  foul  fiend  went  his  way  and 
brought  another  longer  roll,  and  Martin  Luther  said  **  Yes,  yes,  I  must 
own  to  them  all.  Have  you  any  more  ?  "  The  accuser  of  the  brethren, 
beiug  expert  at  the  business,  soon  supplied  him  with  a  further  length  of 
charges,  till  there  seemed  to  be  no  end  to  it  Martin  waited  till  no 
more  were  forthcoming,  and  then  he  cried,  "Have  you  any  more?" 
"  Were  not  these  enough?"  Ay,  that  they  were.  "But,"  said  Martin 
Luther,  "  write  at  the  bottom  of  the  whole  account,  ^The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  cleanseth  us  from  dl  sin.' "    Brethren,  this  was  a  receipt  in  full. 


THE  PLAGUE  OV  THE  HEART.  467 

stamped  in  snob  a  manner  that  even  Satan  oonld  not  question  the  cor- 
rectness of  it.  However  many  or  however  few,  all  onr  sins  are  gone 
when  the  atoning  blood  comes  in.  I  have  an  ugly  thing  in  my  study ;  it 
is  a  piece  of  iron,  with  a  sharp  point  to  it  at  the  top,  and  the  bottom  is 
formed  of  a  rounded  piece  of  wood.  It  is  not  an  ornamental  object, 
especiaily  as  it  holds  impaled  upon  it  a  fine  selection  of  biUs,  which  are 
inclined  to  go  yellow  and  dusty.  Bills  are  horrible  things,  but  though  I 
have  a  file  of  them  they  never  horrify  me  in  the  least,  for  though  they 
are  very  many,  and  some  of  them  are  for  large  amounts,  yet  there  is  not 
one  of  them  but  what  has  Her  Majesty's  head  in  the  corner,  with 
the  name  of  the  creditor  to  whom  I  have  paid  it.  I  have  no  fear  of 
these  records  either  day  or  night ;  in  fact,  it  is  a  comfort  to  keep  them 
now  that  they  are  discharged.  When  I  look  at  the  old  file  I  think  of  my 
old  sins,  pierced  through  by  my  Lord,  and  kept  in  my  penitent  memory 
as  a  witness  to  the  value  of  his  blood  which  nas  set  me  free  from  sin's 
tremendous  debt.  Here  is  the  receipt  for  them  all — '^  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  firom  all  sin."  Some  of  you,  I  dare  say, 
can  look  to-night  at  many  a  file  of  your  transgresaons.  Are  the  bills 
all  receipted  ?  Are  your  sins  all  blotted  out  ?  Then  you  can  bless 
the  name  of  the  Lord  that  the  plague  of  your  heart  is  gone.  You 
are  not  afraid  to  live  or  afraid  to  die ;  for  perfect  pardon,  irreversible 
pardon,  pardon  which  makes  a  sweep  of  all  trausgression  and  sinks  it 
as  in  a  bottomless  sea,  from  which  it  never  can  be  washed  up  for  ever — 
pardon,  perfect  pardon  is  yours  in  Christ  Jesus.  How  sweetly  this 
now  rings  out.  Is  there  any  musio  of  silver  bell  that  can  equal  it  ? 
Pardon !    Pardon ! 

*^  Earth  has  a  joj  nnknown  in  heaven— 
The  new-born  peace  of  sins  forgiven  I 
Tears  of  such  pure  and  deep  delight, 
Ye  angels !  never  dimmed  jonr  sight*' 

The  fi:eenes8,  fiilness,  perpetuity,  and  completeness  of  pardon  is  its  greatest 
joy.  Our  Lord  does  nothing  by  halves,  but  plunges  the  whole  of  our 
guilt  into  the  sea  of  his  own  blood,  where  it  is  drowned  for  ever,  and, 
being  justified  by  faith,  henceforth  we  have  peace  with  God  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  That  is  the  first  help  we  will  mention,  and  who 
shdl  say  that  it  is  not  a  grand  one  ? 

Did  you  notice  in  my  text  a  little  word  which  follows  pardon,  "and 
do.*'  Now,  when  the  Lord  forgives  a  man's  sins  he  then  begins  to  do  for 
him  many  wonderful  things.  For  instance,  that  hardness  of  the  heart 
he  melts  down ;  that  uneasiness  he  quiets ;  that  tendency  to  sin  he 
destroys  by  imparting  a  new  tendency — a  tendency  to  holiness.  The  Lord 
can  make  the  old  sinner  to  become  a  babe  in  grace,  so  that  he  shall  be 
just  as  if  he  were  bom  again — nay,  he  sfiall  be  bom  again.  An  old 
man  who  had  lived  a  vicious  life  sat  down  in  his  cottage  a  sad  remnant 
of  humanity,  a  wom-out  waster  of  hfe,  and  when  his  little  grandchild  came 
with  curly  locks,  and  clambered  up  his  knee,  he  patted  his  cheeks,  and 
murmured  to  himself,  '*  0  Ood,  if  I  could  be  a  little  child  again  and 
begin  anew  !  "  That  wish  of  many  shall  be  fulfilled  to  all  who  look  to 
Jesus.  *^  Except  ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall 
in  no  wise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."    ''Ye  must  be  bom 


4C8  laSTBOPOUTAH  TABBBNAGLB  PUI<PIT. 

a^in."  The  mercy  ib  that  ye  may  be  bom  aeaiiL  New  life  shall  enter 
old  hearts,  or  old  hearts  shaU  be  made  new  ana  filled  with  the  life  eternal 
which  for  ever  has  the  dew  of  its  yonth.  Turning  yonr  eye  to  the  great 
sacrifice,  altar,  temple,  priest,  even  Jesos  Christy  and  crying  to  him  the 
prayer  of  faith,  his  Spirit  will  come  upon  ^on,  and  working  mirades  apcn 
yon,  will  make  yon  a  new  creature  in  Ohnst  Jemuk  Old  things  shall  pass 
away,  and  all  things  shall  become  new. 

After  that  the  Lord  will  continne  to  do  great  thincs  for  yon.  He 
will  keep  yon  to  the  end ;  he  will  lead  yon  firom  strength  to  strength  and 
from  joy  to  joy.  He  will  make  you  nsefiil,  and  that  is  what  you  ne^er 
dreamed  you  could  be :  the  thorny  waste  shall  bear  fruit  a  hundied&ld. 
He  will  take  you  firom  among  sinners,  and  put  you  among  saints;  and 

Jutting  you  among  the  saints  he  will  make  yonr  very  experience  of  sin  to 
e  instrumental  for  good.  As  none  make  better  gamekeepers  than  old 
poachers  when  they  are  reclaimed,  so  noiie  seem  better  able  to  bring  others 
to  Christ  than  those  who  know  what  sin  and  salvation  mean  by  actual 
experience.  Such  persons  talk  of  what  they  have  felt  in  their  own  case, 
and  when  they  are  saved  they  speak  of  a  salvation  which  is  manifest  to 
everybody,  for  they  are  such  changed  men  and  changed  women  that 
no  one  can  deny  the  power  of  grace  upon  them*  How  eagerly  do  I  hope 
that  my  Lord  Jesus  will  quarter  on  the  enemy  to-night.  0  Lord,  come 
in  and  capture  some  out  of  this  crowd.  Say  to  many  who  throi^  this 
building,  "  To-night  I  must  abide  in  thy  house."  O  my  brother,  live  no 
longer  an  indifferent  life,  but  b^in  to  care  for  your  soul's  eternal  interests. 
No  longer  oppose  your  Saviour.  Become  one  of  his  disciples.  He  has 
many  such  as  you  are,  and  he  does  not  despise  them  because  they  once 
rioted  in  sin ;  on  the  contrary,  he  binds  them  to  himself  by  the  great- 
ness of  their  former  guilt.  They  love  him  much  because  they  have  had 
much  forgiven,  and  they  serve  him  all  the  more  earnestly  because  of  what 
he  has  done  for  them.  The  Lord  grant  that  the  like  may  happen  in  your 
case,  for  Jesus  Ghrist*s  sake,  and  he  shall  have  all  the  glory.  Ajnen 
and  Amen. 


Portion  of  Soriptubb  bead  befoius  Sebmoh — Psalm  cxvi. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 581,  688,  566. 


Jiut  Pvhlishedy  Royal  32mo.,  doth  Gilt. 

No.  6  OF  SPUSGEON'S  SHILLINa  SERIES. 


**  A  mora  amnaixig  and  interesting  book  has  not  come  from  the  pcew  £or  a  long 
while." — I^eetnan, 


PASflHoaa  &  AiJLDASTBB,  4,  Paternoster  Buildings ;  and  all  Booksellers. 


,y 


dktfof d  Sill  Skpti^t  dl^kpel. 


In  January,  1878,  a  small  Lecture  Hall,  near  Catford  Hill, 
which  had  been  taken  on  lease  by  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon, 
was  opened  as  a  Baptist  Chapel,  and  Mr.  T.  Greenwood, 
Junr. — then  a  Student  in  the  Pastors'  College — ^was  requested 
to  conduct  the  services  there.  In  the  following  June  a 
Church  was  formed,  which  now  numbers  59  Members. 

The  Hall  has  been  throughout  far  too  small,  hence, 
to  meet  the  necessities  of  the  congregation  and  of  this  fast 
increasing  neighbourhood,  a  suitable  building  is  in  course  of 
erection,  to  hold  365  persons,  capable  of  easy  extension  to 
accommodate  300  more,  and  by  galleries  to  provide  a  total 
number  of  over  1,000  sittings. 

The  land  is  freehold,  on  the  high  road,  at  a  short 
distance  from  Catford  Bridge  Railway  Station,  and  is  of 
ample  dimensions  for  the  Chapel  and  large  Schoolrooms. 

The  total  cost  is  estimated  at  ;^3,5oo.  A  Friend 
has  promised  to  add  a  tenth  to  all  sums  received,  within  a 
limited  time^  towards  this  outlay.  Contributions  are  earnestly 
solicited  to  be  sent  to  the 

Treasurer^-K^v.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Newington,  S.K 

Secretary—].  G.  PRIESTLEY,  Esq., 

44,  St.  Germans  Road,  Forest  Hill,  S.E.,  or 

'       Pastor— K^y.  T.  GREENWOOD, 

Lachaire,  Stanstead  Road,  Forest  Hill,  S.K 


{Jt^  w--t-^ 


io^Je:^    Jk^ 


<?      "I     ■!  -«   .<i 


/£-x^    /^      ty^^^^-^e^      ,fi^^-*^.C:6.  y4-^.c^  «.  <f.Jiifc^_, 

.^      *^      .^     "  ft      '  ^-t^CLC.j&je.0C.       ^^  .^Ai^dZZ^ 


^eti[0pKtmi  iUab^mad^  §ti\pi 


CONTENTION  ENDED  AND  GRACE  EEIGNING. 


%  ^'^mtt{ 


Dkliyered  on  Lord's-day  Moening,  August  17th,  1879,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METBOFOLITAK  TABEBNACLE,  NEWIKOTON. 


9 

"  For  I  wHl  not  contend  ibr  OTor,  neither  wiH  I  be  ftlwftys  wroth ;  for  the  spiriti 
•honld  fail  before  me,  and  the  eoole  which  I  have  made.  For  the  iniqui^  of  hie 
coyeteonsnets  was  I  wroth,  and  emote  him :  I  hid  me,  and  was  wroth,  and  he  went 
on  ftowardly  In  the  way  of  his  heart  I  have  seen  hii  ways^  and  will  heal  him:  I 
will  lead  him  also,  and  restore  comforti  nnto  him  and  to  his  monmen." — finish 
IviL  le— 18. 

The  high  and  holy  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity  is  here  speaking  with 
himself  oonceming  Israel.  The  Lord  is  holding  high  soulo^ny.  He 
is  not  so  mnch  ad£:eil3sing  the  sons  of  men,  bidding  them  do  this  or  that, 
as  speaking  to  himself  of  what  he  intends  to  do  amone  them.  He  aUows 
his  prophet  to  stand  where  he  can  hear  the  sacred  soUloqny  of  the  great 
Supreme ;  and  he  does  hear  it,  and  then  under  the  dictate  of  the  divine 
Spirit  he  records  it  in  the  inspired  book,  where  it  remains  to  this  day 
for  onr  instmction.  Hear,  then,  these  words  of  the  liying  God,  and  let 
yonr  hearts  be  satisfied  conoemine  the  secret  purposes  of  Jehovah. 
Although  the  Lord  may  say  many  things  to  himself  which  we  do  not 
hear,  and  which  it  were  not  well  that  we  should  hear,  yet  he  never 
unsays  in  secret  what  he  has  spoken  in  public ;  and  specially  we  may 
i^t  Bflsured  that  he  never  speaks  in  the  dark  places  of  the  carta 
concerning  the  house  of  JacoD,  ''Seek  ye  my  face  in  vain?"  No 
decree  of  God  is  contrary  to  the  gospel ;  we  may  always  be  sure  of 
that.  Whenever  he  unveils  before  us  his  private  thoughts  we  never 
find  them  to,  be  less  gracious  than  his  published  words;  the  same  love 
which  spoke  itself  through  prophets  and  seers  dwells  in  the  silent  heart 
of  God,  and  abides  for  ever  at  the  full  even  when  it  finds  no  voice  In 
the  verses  before  us  we  find  words  of  exceeding  great  mercy  and  special 
tenderness,  and  we  see  moving  before  our  adoring  eye  the  eternal  wisdom, 
the  infinite  patience,  and  the  immutable  love  of  the  great  Father.  May 
it  please  the  Lord,  in  very  truth,  to  restore  comforts  unto  his  mourners 
by  the  subject  which  shall  now  engage  our  attention,  for  under  the 
blessing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  it  is  in  every  way  calculated  to  cheer  the 
contrite  heart. 

I.    The  first  truth  to  which  I  call  your  attention  is  that  God  con* 
tends  with  men,  and  that  the  nivnns  contention  is  well  dbssbved 
Na  1,490. 


470  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

oa  their  part.  Hfe  says,  **  I  will  not  contend  for  ever,*'  ia  which  it  is 
implied  tliat  he  does  contend  sometimes.  TVhere  he  has  purposes  of 
eternal  grace,  the  Lord,  at  the  opening  of  his  s&ving  work,  eoioes  into 
contention  with  men.  Smiting  comes  before  saving.  He  bends  his 
bow,  and  points  his  arrow  against  the  heart's  sui  before  he  pours 
out  his  balsam  for  the  heart's  wound.  He  usually  gives  the  spirit 
of  bondage  before  he  sends  the  spirit  of  sonship:  he  thunders  by 
the  law  before  he  waters  the  soul  wtth  the  soft  shower  of  the  gospel 
Nor  need  we  wonder  at  this,  ftr  there  is  so  much  in  man  that  is 
altogether  opposed  to  the  divine  nature,  and  alien  to  the  object  and 
design  of  God,  that  there  must  be  a  conflict  till  the  opposing  principle  is 
overcome  and  removed.  The  strong  man  armed  will  not  go  out  except 
by  force,  neither  will  the  Lord  ent^  the  soul  except  as  a  conqueror. 

First  I  would  speak  of  this  to  the  seeking  sinner.  It  may  be  that 
there  are  in  this  house  anxious  persons  who  were  once  careless  and  at 
ease,  but  now  there  is  a  striving  within  them,  and  a  conflict  which  rages 
terribly.  The  Lord  has  a  contsaveEsy  with  them.  However  unhappy 
it  makes  them  I  am  right  glad  that  the  inward  strife  is  felt  by  them. 
Anything  is  better  than  the  horrible  calm  of  the  dead  sea  of  spiritual 
inmfieiience.  My  fciend,  your  deadly  peace  is  brokan,  your  fatal  sleep  is 
ended,  the  magie  spell  (k  Satan  haa  lost  all  its  power,  you  are  arooied, 
and  Badness  roles  the  hoar.  Tour  wisesfc  fnends  are  glad  of  t^ia,  they 
welcome  your  return  to  feeling  even  as  we  rejoice  to  discover  signs  of  life 
in  one  who  hafi  been  snatched  &om  a  watery  grave.  There  is  now  scnne 
hope  of  you.  The  Spirit  of  6od  has  come  to  yon  as  a  spirit  of  bondage, 
ana  this  makes  yoa  fear,  but  fear  ia  often  the  outrider  of  &ith.  The 
Loird'a  diesigTt  in  coateoding  with  you  is  U  cotwitwa  you  cf  yimir  svl 
Yoa  will  never  see  sin  to  be  eaceedingly  sinful  unless  the  Holy  Spirit 
tlurows  his  own  light  upon  it  You  love  sin  too  rnxmh  to  deal  with  it 
in^rtiaUy  :  yon  ace  so  tainted  by  it  in  yonar  nature  that  yoiuroonscieiioe 
by  QD*  metuDS  cenaoresyoit  so  much  as  yoiur  iniqnity  deserves.  Thou^ 
some  say  that  ocmseiience  is  the  vicegerent  of  God  there  is  nothing  in 
the  Scriptures  to  prove  that  statement,,  neither  is  it  true.  Conscience  is 
oa  imp^eet  guide  and  monitor,  and  like  all  the  other  Acuities  it  is 
weakened  a&d  vitiated  by  the  Fall,  so  that  it  iaa  very  pEej[udiced  judge 
ol  right  »id  wrong,  and  too  often  it  puts  bitter  for  sweet  and  sweet  £r 
Intter.  CkMiscience  is  often  Uinded  by  self-lovci  and  at  all  times  apt  to 
^nmber.  Until  the  Holy  Ghost  qoickens  yoar  oonfiGienoa  yioxi  will  never 
daseoper  to  the-  full  the  eaormity  of  sin.  Yoam»y  know  it  to  be  evil  asa 
matter  of  dogma,  hut  you  wiU  not  feel  it  to  be  evil  aa  a  matter  of  expe- 
rience, noB  will  see  1m)w  gveatly,  how  continually,  how  wickedly,  yon 
hue  oi&oded  i^aiost  the  law.  of  God  unless  the  Lord  opens  yonr  eyes. 
This  he  iAtends  to  doy  and  he  will  not  cease  to  strive  with  you  till  his 
purpose  is  perfbrmed.  My  dear  &iend»  the  Lord  will  probably  keep 
up  the  oofntroversy  ia  your  soul  until  your  beauty  cansumes  away, 
am.  instead  of  admirii^^  youcself  you  come  to  loathe  yourself.  Though 
joxM  wash  yourself  with  snow-water,,  and  make  yourself  never  so 
ole^n,  yet  will  he*  plunge  yon  in  the  ditch.  tiU  yonr  own  clothes  shall 
abhor  yon.  You  shall  see  your  righteousness  to  be  filthv  rags,  audi  yonr 
peraon  to  be  tmder  the  curse,  and  then  part  of  the  Lord's  design  will  be 
aooompltthed. 


CONTENTION  ENDED  AND  GRACE  BEIGNING.  471 

The  next  reason  for  the  Jjord's  contending  with  yon  will  begin  to 
operate  when  the  first  purpose  has  been  aocomplished.    Ton  will,  in 
yonr  self-abasement,  be  driTen  to  look  to  the  grace  of  God.    It  is 
hard  to  part  a  man  from  his  sin,  it  is  still  harder  to  divorce  him 
irom  his  self-righteousness :  and  this  is  a  part  of  the  Lord's  conten* 
tion  with  awakened  sonls ;  he  determines  to  rid  them  of  all  self-con- 
fidence because  it  is  false  confidence,  and  they  on  their  part  appear 
to  be  resolved  to  hold  to  self  as  long  as  there  is  a  rag  or  a  thread 
left.    That  our  salvation  is  entirely  of  the  grace  of  God  is  a  lesson  which 
we  are  slow  to  learn,  and  yet  we  must  learn  it  or  perish.    Dear  anxious 
one,  if  ever  you  are  saved  it  must  be  by  an  act  of  undeserved  favour  on 
God's  part.    I  do  not  care  who  you  are,  you  are  guilty,  and  if  you  escape 
execution  a  free  pardon  will  have  to  be  given  to  you  by  the  Great  King 
for  reasons  found  in  himself  alone,  for  there  is  nothing  in  you  whicb 
can  constitute  a  claim  for  mercy.    You  may  never  have  feUen  into* 
adulteiy  or  murder,  nor  even  have  committed  theft  or  false  witness,  but 
the  same  grace  is  needed  to  save  yon  as  to  save  an  adulteress  or  a  mur^ 
derer.    You  have  no  merit  to  plead,  nor  any  claim  upon  God :  such 
claim  as  you  had  as  a  creature  you  have  forfeited,  and  you  have  done 
nothing  to  create  any  other.    You  have  committed  treason  against  G^, 
and  you  are  condemned  already  by  his  unquestionable  justice.    If  you 
shall  ever  be  saved  it  must  be  by  a  high  act  of  the  Lord  of  mercy,  passed 
in  his  infinite  sovereignty,  not  because  of  anything  in  you  to  deserve  it, 
but  because  he  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy,  and  he  will 
have  compassion  on  whom  he  will  have  compassion.    So  stands  the 
matter,  and  this  controversy  between  you  and  yonr  God  is  meant  to  bring 
this  fact  before  you,  and  push  the  question  to  an  issue  with   you. 
When  the  Lord  contends  with  a  man's  soul  and  the  law  of  the  Lord 
enters  his  spirit,  it  hides  pnde  from  him  and  lays  his  glory  in  the 
dust ;  in  fact  the  truly  awakened  man  cannot  find  a  place  low  enough  to 
lie  in,  nor  words  black  enough  in  which  to  describe  himself;  he  is  driven 
to  a  deep  spiritual  despair  of  self,  and  to  a  horror  of  soul  at  his  presump- 
tion in  having  dared  to  offend  against  the  God  of  heaven,  and  a  deeper 
horror  still  that  he  should  have  transgressed  against  the  Christ  of  love, 
and  should  have  rejected  him  year  after  year.    May  God  bring  vou  down 
to  this  prostrate  condition  if  he  has  not  done  so.    If  the  Lord,  has  now 
begun  to  trouble  you  he  will  not  have  done  with  you  till  he  has  laid  yon 
even  with  the  ground.    This  will  not  only  make  you  know  that  you 
must  be  saved  by  grace  alone,  but  it  will  cause  you  to  value  grace  itself 
US  more  to  be  desired  than  the  much  fine  gold.    A  soul  with  whom  God 
hath  entered  into  the  lists  prizes  every  word  of  promise,  every  single 
look  of  grace,  for  he  sees  himself  to  be  in  an  evil  plight  unless  grace  shall 
supervene.    The  tears  of  Jesus  over  sinners  are  very  precious  to  hearts 
with  whom  God  is  contending,  and  still  much  more  precious  is  the  blood, 
the  heart's  blood  of  Jesus,  with  which  he  takes  away  sin.    They  can 
speak  lightly  of  grace  who  have  never  had  a  heavy  heart  on  account  of 
their  transgression ;  but  give  a  man  to  feel  the  burden  of  sin,  and  the 
faintest  hope  of  grace  will  be  worth  all  the  king's  jewels  to  him.    0  sirs, 
sin  is  a  burden  such  as  an  angel's  shoulders  could  not  bear,  it  crushes 
a  man  not  only  into  the  dust  but  into  the  grave,  nay,  even  there  he  can- 
not find  rest.    If  nothing  else  were  prepared  for  the  impenitent  in  the 


472  XBTROPOLITAir  TABBBHAOLB  PULPIT. 

next  world  except  a  sight  and  sense  of  their  own  sin  it  would  of  itself 
create  a  hell  mthin  the  haman  bosom.  Stake  and  rack  are  nothing 
compared  with  the  torments  of  remorse.  It  is  Qod  s  design  to  make  as 
fi^l  something  of  this,  that  we  maj  bless  his  name  if  he  doth  but  look 
upon  ns  or  think  upon  ua  in  a  waj  of  grace,  and  that  we  maj  praise 
and  magnify  him  with  all  our  hearts  for  ever  and  ever  when  he  freely 
pardons  us  for  his  name's  sake,  and  accepts  us  in  Christ  Jesus.  Do 
you  wonder  that  Qod  hath  a  contention  with  seeking  souls  when  sudi 
needful  and  beneficent  designs  are  answered  thereby  ? 

MoreoTer,  no  one  can  be  surprised  that  the  Lord  lets  forth  a  measure 
of  his  wrath  upon  seeking  sinners  when  we  see  how  they  behave,  even 
while  they  are  seeking.  We  have  known  them  red  hot  one  day  and  icy 
cold  another,  and  albeit  that  they  long  for  mercy,  you  will  see  them 
at  certain  seasons  acting  as  if  they  despised  it.  At  times  they  tremble 
at  (rod's  word,  and  anon  they  are  hardened  against  it.  I  may  be  speak- 
ing to  some  of  you  who  know  that  during  the  time  of  your  conviction 
of  sin  you  have  tried  to  stifle  your  feelings,  and  you  have  sought  to  Idll 
the  messenger  within  who  has  so  efiBectuaUy  aruiusod  you.  Many  of  you 
have  run  after  carnal  amusements,  and  evil  pleasures^  in  order  to  drown 
conscience  and  escape  from  rebuke;  and  others  of  you  have  run  to 
this,  that,  and  the  other  pretended  way  of  salvation,  instead  of  ranning 
to  Christ  alone  for  his  free  grace.  All  this  provokes  the  Most  High,  and 
therefore  it  cannot  be  wonderful  that  the  Lord  should  have  a  contention 
with  yon. 

But  now  I  turn  to  the  people  of  God.  Sometimes,  my  brethren,  our 
Lord  hath  a  contention  with  us,  and  then  he  covereth  the  daughter 
of  Zion  with  a  cloud  in  the  dav  of  his  anger,  and  he  bums  against 
Jacob  like  a  flaming  fire  which  devoureth  round  about.  Thia  is 
not  at  all  wonderful  when  we  consider  how  unworthily  we  often  live 
towards  his  sacred  name ;  indeed,  ^'  it  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we 
are  not  consumed."  Hia  contention  with  us  will  show  itself  occasionally 
in  adverse  providences.  He  will  aim  a  deadly  shaft  at  the  beloved 
objects  of  our  heart ;  perhaps  not  once  alone  doth  the  arrow  fly,  but  he 
seems  to  empty  out  his  quiver,  and  finds  no  other  targets  but  the  breasts 
of  those  who  are  our  other  selves.  With  one  believer  the  Lord  contends 
by  a  sickness  in  his  own  person ;  with  another  by  the  pining  away  of  a 
beloved  wife  or  child.  The  contention  which  the  Lord  hath  with  his 
elect  frequently  displays  itself  in  troubles  connected  with  their  temporal 
circumstances :  nothing  prospers  with  them ;  they  make  a  navy  to  go  to 
Tarshish  for  gold,  and  it  is  broken  by  the  storm :  a  worm  eats  up  all 
their  increase :  the  caterpillar  devours  the  garden,  and  the  locust,  or  the 
bUght,  or  the  drought,  or  the  exceeding  moisture  destroys  the  produce  of 
the  field.  When  <>od  hath  a  controversy  with  his  own  people  he  smites 
again  and  again  in  this  fiwhion,  nor  does  he  stop  at  braises  and  bleeding 
wounds.  Our  heavenly  Father  never  spares  the  rod;  no  sin  of  Eli  can 
be  alleged  against  him. 

Even  more  severe  are  his  blows  when  it  comes  to  be  a  controversy 
carried  on  l^  bis  Spirit  within  the  mind.  AVhen  the  light  of  God*s 
countenance  is  withdrawn ;  when  conscience  is  allowed  to  point  oat  incon- 
sistencies, and  hypocrisies,  and  wanderings  of  heart ;  when  the  pronuses 
cease  to  be  wells  of  comfort ;  when  the  means  of  grace  appear  to  be  dry 


COirrBNTION  KNDED  AND  GRACE  HTCIONING.  473 

and  barren ;  when  private  prayer  beoomes  rather  a  task  than  a  pleasure, 
and  commnnion  with  God  seems  to  be  little  more  than  looking  up  to 
an  angrj  Father  who  only  frowns, — ^this  is  mnch  worse  than  any  proni- 
dential  chastisement.  When  God  smites  a  man  in  the  heart  the  blow  is 
a  stauir^ring  one.  The  affliction  of  the  sonl  is  the  sonl  of  affliction.  God 
will  touch  his  people  in  their  bone  and  their  flesh,  and  in  their  very 
hearts.  Ah,  my  brethren,  if  you  remember  your  laxity  in  life,  yoar  dul- 
ness  in  prayer,  your  forgetfulness  of  God's  word,  your  hardness  of  feeairt 
at  thnes  towai^is  poor  sinners,  your  indifference  to  \he  Lord's  cause,  the 
want  of  life,  the  want  of  love,  the  want  of  power,  the  want  of  hotiness, 
the  want  of  the  mind  of  Christ  within,  the  want  of  delight  in  the  divine 
will, — ^you  will  perceive  that  there  is  quite  enongh  in  us  to  lead 
the  Lord  to  have  a  controversy  with  us.  Hath  he  not  said  that  he 
will  walk  contrary  to  us  if  we  walk  contrary  to  him  ?  Is  it  not  his 
Rpecial  word  to  us,  "  You  only  hek\e  I  known  of  all  the  people  of  the 
earth;  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  your  iniquity"?  Chastiseineiit 
must  come  to  the  beloved  child  of  a  wise  father :  the  servant  may  eacujp^ 
the  bastard  may  know  no  touch  of  the  rod ;  but  the  true-bom  and  welK 
beloved  child  of  God  must  smart  if  he  sins,  not  because  his  Father  dis- 
likes him,  but  because  he  loves  him.  The  dearer  we  are  to  the  heart  «f 
God  the  more  jealous  he  is,  and  the  more  does  he  resent  any  wamdering 
of  our  heart  from  him.  His  love  is  strong  as  death,  blessed  be  his  name, 
but  as  a  natural  consequence  his  jealousy  is  cruel  as  the  grave :  be  will 
not  endure  unchastity  of  heart  in  the  beloved  object  of  his  eternal 
choice.  I  have,  however,  said  enough  upon  this  topic,  if  we  are  no«w 
ready  to  confess  that  the  divine  cont-ention  with  us  is  well  deserved. 
II.    We  now  advance  to  the  next  truth,  namely,  that  this  diviite 

CONTENTION  WILL  COME  TO  AN  END  WITH  THE  COKTRITB.     We  knOW 

that  it  will  be  so,  for  the  words  are  very  express  :  "  For  1  will  net  con- 
tend for  ever,  neither  will  I  be  always  wroth."  Oh,  catch  at  this,  ye 
humble  and  contrite  ones  with  whom  God  has  been  contending.  Here 
is  a  word  of  gracious,  absolute,  unconditional  promise  for  yon.  May 
the  Holy  Ghost  enable  you  to  draw  consolation  fix)m  it. 

The  question  arises  :  when  may  we  expect  that  this  promise  will  be 
fulfilled  ?  Kindly  notice  the  verse  which  precedes  the  text,  for  that 
assures  us  that  God  hath  no  controversy  with  the  humble  and  the 
contrite.  This  is  self-evident,  for  he  declares  that  with  such  he  will 
dwell,  and  the  God  of  grace  will  not  dwell  in  a  house  that  is  fall  of  con- 
tention. He  contends  where  he  does  not  abide,  but  where  he  abides 
there  is  peace.  When  a  man  is  humble  and  contrite,  th^i  God's  conten- 
tion with  him  has  come  to  an  end.  Omnipotence  will  not  lift  its  hand 
to  overthrow  one  who  yields  himself  up.  Greatness  doth  not  strike  a 
fallen  foe  who  craves  forgiveness.  Majesty  will  not  wreak  vengeance 
upon  suppliant  misery.  Grouch  in  the  dust,  and  Jehovah's  wrath,  which 
like  his  thunderbolt  smites  Ictfty  things,  will  pass  you  by.  Surrender  un- 
conditionally, be  thou  saint  or  sinner :  throw  down  the  weapons  ot 
rebellion,  doif  the  plumes  of  pride,  and  sue  out  a  pardon  on  thy 
bended  knee.  Cry  out,  "  Loid,  I  am  undone,  for  I  have  ill  done ; 
I  am  cast  away,  for  I  have  cast  thv  fear  Away  ;  I  must  die,  for  I  have 
slain  myself  But  God  be  merdfdi  to  me  a  sinner."  Majesty  is  ever 
pitiful  to  misery. 


474  METROPOLITAN  TABEKNACLE  PULPIT. 

Nor  is  it  majesty  alone  that  thoa  majest  look  to  with  hope,  but  niercj 
also  is  thy  friend.  Mercy  is  very  speedy  where  confession  is  complete. 
"  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithfal  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins." 
Be  humbled,  for  to  such  Grod  giveth  grace ;  the  river  of  his  goodness 
flows  along  the  low  valleys.  Talk  no  more  of  thy  good  works :  boast  no 
longer  of  thy  Ohristian  experience,  thy  bright  profession,  thy  precise 
religiousness,  but  fall  at  Jesus'  feet  and  lie  down.  Tears  for  thine  eyes 
are  more  becoming  than  rings  for  thine  ears  ;  sackcloth  suits  thy  case 
rather  than  fine  attire.  Be  humble  because  you  are  a  nobody,  be  contrite 
because  you  are  a  sinner. 

It  is  wonderful  how  the  pity  of  God  has  in  some  cases  been  excited, 
even  by  a  temporary  repentance.  When  wicked  Ahab  rent  his  clothes 
and  put  sackcloth  upon  himself,  the  Lord  took  note  of  it  and  said, 
'^Seest  thou  how  Ahab  humbled  himself  before  me?  Because  he 
humbled  himself  before  me  I  will  not  bring  the  evil  in  his  days.*' 
When  the  Ninevites  repented,  though  probably  there  was  very  little 
spiritual  about  their  humbliDg,  yet  it  was  sincere  as  far  as  it  went,  and 
the  Lord  turned  Irom  his  fierce  anger  and  there  was  a  reprieve  for  the 
wicked  city.  This  plainly  shows  that  the  Lord  is  speedily  moved  by  true 
humiliation,  and  if  any  soul  will  but  lie  before  him  iu  self-abasemeut  and 
lowliness,  he  will  no  longer  contend,  but  will  put  away  his  anger. 
Besides,  his  truth  is  compromised  in  this  matter  for  he  has  given  a 
promise  of  grace  which  rons  thus,  *'  Humble  yourselves  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord,  and  he  shall  lift  you  up"  (James  iv.  10).  He  cannot  spurn 
those  who  submit  themselves  before  him,  for  it  is  written, ''  Though  the 
Lord  be  high,  yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly."  He  is  fall  of 
grace,  and  that  grace  is  for  the  poor  and  needy.  Condescension  to  the 
lowly  is  his  glory,  as  the  blessed  Virgin  sang  of  old,  and  as  many 
fi9kinting  ones  may  sing  at  this  moment  if  they  will :  *'  He  hath  put 
down  the  mighty  from  their  seats,  and  exalted  them  of  low  degree : 
he  hath  filled  the  hungry  with  good  things ;  and  the  rich  he  hath  sent 
empty  away."  The  Lord  delights  in  mercy,  and  his  mercy  delights  to 
come  to  those  who  are  most  abased  in  their  own  esteem,  and  judge  them- 
selves to  be  least  worthy  of  it.  We  are  quite  sure  that  the  divine  conten> 
tion  will  come  to  an  end  with  the  humble  and  contrite,  because,  as 
we  have  said,  the  promise  is  ''  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  place  with 
him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit."  Do  not  say,  dear 
cast  down  one,  "  God  will  never  look  at  me ;  I  have  no  hope,  no  sti-eng^th, 
no  merit"  This  thy  self-abasement  prepares  thee  for  him.  Bv  this 
is  thy  house  swept  and  emptied  for  God  to  dwell  in.  He  hath  two 
houses ;  one  is  above  in  glory,  and  that  high  house  above  is  none  too 
high  for  him ;  his  other  dwelling  is  below  in  all  his  condesccusion,  and 
the  lowliest  heart  is  none  too  lowlv  for  him.  He  comes  not  to  whole- 
hearted men  who  bear  their  heaos  aloft  and  scarcely  own  their  need 
of  his  favour ;  he  comes  not  to  those  whp  trust  in  themselves,  and  think 
but  little  of  his  grace,  but — 

^  He  bids  hiB  awful  chariot  roll 
Far  downward  from  the  skies, 
To  visit  every  humble  soul 
That  low  before  him  lies.** 


COKTKNTION  ENDED  AND  GRACK  UEIGNING.  475 

Liowlj  roo&  attract  the  Deity.    He  comes  to  those  who  are  broken  in 
heart,  and  when  he  comes  the  contention  is  over. 

And  what  else  doth  the  Lord  promise  to  do?  He  says  he  will  dwell 
with  the  hnmble,  and  he  adds  that  he  will  revive  them.  Thou  art  ihintiug 
nowy  poor  soul,  thou  art  very  feeble,  thou  art  as  one  that  is  slain :  the 
Lord  will  come  and  revive  thee,  that  is,  give  thee  new  life ;  he  will 
^ve  thee  life  enough  to  hope  in  his  mercy,  life  enough  to  believe  in 
Jesus  Christ  his  dear  Son,  life  enough  to  see  thy  transgression  covered 
for  ever,  never  to  be  laid  to  thy  charge.  He  will  not  contend  for  ever,  for 
on  the  contrary  he  will  revive  the  spirit  of  the  humble.  Perhaps  he 
means  by  adding  a  second  **  revive  "  to  make  us  a  promise  of  comfort, 
**  to  revive  the  neart  of  the  contrite  ones."  Weeping  one,  he  will  wipe 
away  those  tears.  Despairing  sinner  or  desponding  saint,  if  thou  Milt 
lie  low  at  his  feet  he  will  stoop  to  thee  and  cheer  thine  heart.  So  anxious 
is  he  to  cheer  his  mourners  that  the  third  person  of  the  blessed  Trinity 
haa  undertaken  this  special  work  ;  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Comforter,  loves 
to  come  where  there  is  comforting  work  to  do.  Look  up  now  from  your 
beds,  ye  soul-sick  ones,  for  the  great  Physician  comes  to  heal  you.  He 
ends  the  inner  conflict  of  your  nature  by  becoming  himself  your 
peace.  Look  up  now,  ye  that  sit  in  darkness,  in  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  bound  with  affliction  and  iron,  for  the  time  of  your 
deliverance  has  come.  I  know  your  plight,  for  I  have  been  in  it  myself, 
and  while  I  am  speaking  to  you  I  am  remembering  the  time  when  my 
chains  clanked  as  I  walked,  and  when  as  I  lav  down  to  sleep  they  entered 
into  my  soul,  so  that  the  visions  of  the  night  alarmed  me.  Job's  cry 
was  mine,  "  I  was  at  ease,  but  he  hath  broken  me  asunder :  he  hath  also 
taken  me  by  my  neck,  and  shaken  me  to  pieces,  and  set  me  up  for  his 
mark."  Thus  was  it  with  me  once,  but  it  was  not  so  for  ever,  for  in 
tender  pity  my  Lord  laid  down  the  sword,  and  spake  comfortable  words 
to  me.  Just  when  I  had  come  to  the  worst,  and  I  thought  no  hope 
would  ever  visit  me,  I  was  made  to  realise  the  blessed  truth  of  the  text, 
*'  I  will  not  contend  for  ever,  neither  will  I  be  always  wroth,"  and  ot 
that  other  promise,  "  With  this  man  will  I  dwell,  even  with  him  that  is 
poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit  and  that  trembleth  at  mv  word."  En* 
conraged  by  my  own  experience  of  great  love  I  feel  bound  to  com- 
fort others.  Penitent  hearts,  he  will  revive  you,  he  will  give  you  comfort 
again ;  your  mourning  he  will  turn  to  dancing,  and  your  sackdotii  into 
beautiful  array.  Do  not,  I  pray  you,  sorrow  as  those  that  are  without 
hope.  This  is  not  the  den  of  despair,  so  long  as  this  life  lasts  it  is  the 
hill  of  hope :  neither  are  you  a  person  who  has  any  cause  to  despair, 
since  those  whom  the  Lord  chastens  he  certainly  has  not  cast  away. 
Men  do  not  prune  the  vine  which  they  mean  to  root  up  and  cast  into 
the  fire.  Tms  chastening  is  not  unto  death.  There  is  a  measure  to 
your  stripes  which  cannot  be  passed,  and  there  will  be  a  speedy  and 
happy  end  to  the  scourging.  The  Lord's  anger  endureth  but  for  a 
ni^b^  and  that  night  will  end  in  a  hopeful  dawn.  When  your  proud 
spirit  is  conquered,  the  Lord's  controversy  with  you  is  closed. 

III.  I  would  now  ask  your  loving  attention  to  this  choice  fact,  that 
God  himself  fihdb  reasons  fob  ENDora  the  ooittektiok.  We 
could  not  have  found  any,  for  in  ourselves  there  is  much  cause  for  the 
Lord's  anger  but  none  for  his  grace.    A  convinced  sinner  can  give  no 


47C  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PTTLPIT. 

reason  why  he  should  be  saved.  It  is  a  part  of  his  convmcement  that 
his  mouth  is  closed  as  to  self-justification :  he  can  make  neither  apology 
nor  appeal :  he  feels  that  he  will  have  to  say  *'  Amen  '*  to  his  oirn  dam- 
nation if  God  shall  drive  him  away  from  the  mercy  seat.  Bat  the  Ijotd 
himself  finds  reasons  for  his  grace.  Two  of  these  he  mentions  in  onr 
text. 

The  first  is  found  in  human  weafcnBss,  andifis  inabUUy  to  hear  the  difnHS 
cmitentian.  "  I  will  not  contend  for  ever,  neither  will  I  be  always  wroth : 
for  the  spirits  should  fail  before  me,  and  the  souls  winch  I  have  made." 
The  Lora's  chastisement  is  meant  to  be  corrective,  not  destructive  :  kis 
intent  is  curing,  not  killing ;  and  therefore  he  will  not  make  his  medi- 
cine too  potent,  or  his  surgery  too  severe.  He  presses  fais  heavy  hand 
on  the  sinner  until  he  cries  out  with  David,  ^'  Day  and  night  thy  hand 
was  heavy  upon  me :  m^  moisture  is  turned  into  the  drought  of  summer." 
He  felt  as  destitute  of  hfe-moisture  as  if  God  had  wroug  him  out  as  men 
do  a  wet  sheet,  and  made  him  dry  as  cloth  whidi  has  hung  vp  in  the  hot 
sun.  All  his  life  and  spirits  were  gone  out  of  him,  and  he  felt  that  his 
bones  were  dried  and  fit  only  for  the  chamel  house.  When  things  hare 
come  so  far  the  merciful  Lord  saith,  "  But  I  do  not  desine  to  kill  Mm ;  I 
do  not  purpose  his  destruction,  for  I  hate  nothing  that  my  hands  have 
made.  Nay,  I  love  with  all  my  heart  this  poor,  troubled  soul  whom  it  is 
in  my  mind  to  bless.''  "*'  The  Lord  doth  not  ailict  ^lingly,  nor  gnevt 
ttie  children  of  men."  He  aims  at  whippirng  self  out  of  ns,  but  it  is  not 
his  will  to  crush  the  humble  under  his  foet.  In  measure  will  he  debate 
with  us,  for  he  aims  at  our  conviction  and  oonveision,  and  not  at  oor 
oondcmnatiou.  If  he  were  to  go  forth  to  fight  i^foinst  ns  it  wonld  be  as 
when  fire  enters  into  battle  with  briars  and  thorns :  he  would  go  through 
us  and  bum  us  together.  Our  wealoiess  shall  plead  for  us,  even  as  it  is 
said  in  the  seventy- eighth  Psalm,  at  tlic  thirty -eighth  verse :  ^  Bnt  he, 
being  full  of  compassion,  forgave  tiieir  iniquity,  and  destroyed  them  not: 
yea,  many  a  time  turned  he  his  anger  away,  and  did  not  stir  up  all  kis 
wrath.  For  he  remembered  they  were  but  fiesh ;  a  wind  that  pasBeth 
away,  and  cometh  not  again."  upon  certain  strong  minds  Goa  lays  a 
heavy  load  of  oonviction^  as,  for  instamce,  upon  John  Bnnyan,  whose 
five  years  of  inward  contention  you  will  find  mi^ped  out  in  his  **  Grace 
Abounding  ";  but  these  cases  are  not  the  rule,  and  in  such  instances  the 
Lord  means  to  make  a  peoulisrly  useful  and  experienced  man.  In  the 
formation  of  a  competent  leader,  and  a  spiritual  champion,  the  Lord 
ezerdses  the  man  to  make  him  expert  in  dealing  with  othovs^  but  he 
doth  not  do  ti»s  with  poor,  weak  radnds,  which  are  rendered  still  weaker 
by  the  assaults  of  Satan  and  their  inward  fears.  **  He  gattMreth  tibe 
lambs  in  his  bosom,  and  doth  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young."  **  I 
will  not  contend  for  ever,"  saith  he,  **  for  the  spirits  should  &il  beibre  me, 
and  the  souls  which  I  have  made."  Some  men  under  a  sense  of  sin  have 
been  driven  to  lay  violent  hands  upon  themselves ;  others  have  been 
soarcely  aUc  to  eat  or  drink,  and  many  have  been  severely  injured  in 
their  health  bv  the  inwaid  carrosion  caused  by  strong  conviction.  A 
sense  of  sin  fills  some  souls  witii  fall  and  wonnwood  to  soch  a  degree 
that  they  are  drunks  with  it,  and  are  as  men  at  their  wits'  end :  but 
God  stayeth  his  rough  wind,  and  holds  in  the  rage  of  his  tempest.  In 
dae  time  he  saith  to  Moses,  "  Stand  back,  and  let  your  law-work  cease; 


002¥T£NTI0K  SNBBD  AlO)  ORAGE  RSIQJUKO.  477 

you  have  beenr&ithfdl  as  mj  servainfc,  uow  retire  and  let  my  Son  oome  in, 

for  he  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  and  those  who  tremble  at  my  word 

shall  now  find  rest  unto  their  souls  by  his  knowledge."  Yes^  this  is  God's 

reaaon  for  being  gen  tie.  with  his  people :  ''  For  my  name's  sake  will  I 

defer  mine  anger,  and  for  my  praise  will  I  refrain  for  thee,  that  I  cat 

thee  not  ofL*'    Sometimes  when  he  sends  them  correction  after  correction, 

chastisement  after  chastisement,  they  can  scarce  bear  up  under  it ;  but  it 

is  never  his  intention  to  destroy  his  own  children,  and  therefore  he  stayeth 

fads  hand,  and  saith  that  he  will  not  slways  chide,  nor  keep  his  anger  for 

ever ;  for,  **  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth 

them  that  fear  him;    for  he  knoweth  our  frame;   he  rememoereth 

that  we  are  dust."     If  any  of  you  are  enduring  such  a  variety  of 

troubles  that  you  are  staggered,  and  feel  that  you  can  hold  up  no  longer, 

then  you  must  appeal  to  the  pity  of  the  Lord.    If  your  heart  is  like  a 

lily  when  the  stalk  is  bruised,  drooping  on  its  stem,  and  your  soul  is 

pining  like  a  consumptive  child,  and  your  heart  is  melted  like  wax  in  the 

midst  of  your  bowels,  let  your  weakness  appeal  to  Grod ;  yea,  it  is  appeal- 

in^  even  now.    He  says,  "  I  know  their  sorrows.    I  have  surely  seen  the 

affliction  of  my  people,  and  I  have  heard  their  cry.    I  have  visited  their 

transgression  with  the  rod,  and  they  are  brought  very  low,  but  they  can 

bear  no  more,  therefore  shall  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner  oome  before 

me."    The  Lord  marks  man  *'  fragile,"  as  we  do  boxes  of  glass  which 

must  not  be  roughly  handled  lest  they  be  broken ;  in  this  frailty  he 

finds  a  reason  for  tenderness ;  let  his  name  be  adored  for  it. 

His  second  reason  is,  to  my  mind,  even  more  extraordinary.  It  is 
given  in  the  next  verse  :  "  For  the  iniquity  of  his  oovetousness  was  I 
wroth,  and  smote  him:  I  hid  me,  and  was  wroth,  and  he  went  on 
frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart."  This  argument  is  founded  on  the 
inoperativeness  of  the  divine  contention  upon  the  Jteart  which  is  to  he  icon. 
The  Lord  says, ''  I  was  angry  with  him,  and  smote  him."  Did  he  re- 
pent? No.  ^'I  hid  my  &ce  from  him."  Did  he  humble  himself? 
No,  "  he  went  on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart."  What  is  the 
reason  of  this  wicked  petrifying  of  the  heart  ?  Here  is  the  key  to  the 
cause:— 

''  Law  and  terrors  do  but  harden 

All  the  while  they  work  alone, 
Nothing  but  a  blood -bought  pardon 

Can  dissolve  a  heart  of  stone.** 

Affliction  often  drives  the  child  of  Gk)d  into  impatience,  acd  of  itself  it 
has  a  hardening  and  not  a  softening  influence,  while  even  the  convic- 
tions wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God  afe  often  perverted  into  causes 
of  unbeUel^  and  Satan  comes  in  and  drives  the  soul  to  unworthy 
thoughts  of  God.  Such  is  our  evil  heart  that  it  even  curdles  self-loathing 
and  hatred  of  sin  into  a  reluctance  to  go  to  God,  and  into  a  persuasion  of 
the  impossibility  of  mercy.  I  have  known  humihation  and  self-despair, 
which  are  so  much  to  be  desired^  lead  to  unb^ef,  which  is  the  saddest 
of  all  crimes.  '^  Therefore,"  saith  the  Lord,  ''I  will  not  contend  anv 
longer ;  for  my  anger  seems  to  excite  rebellion  rather  than  to  subdue  it. 
See  a  wise  father  when  he  haa  a  proud  and  obstinate  boy  who  has 
become  estranged ;  he  puts  him  under  strict  rule  and  discipline,  and 
he  chides  and  chastens  him ;  but  if  the  child  evidently  grows  more 


478  XEraopoLiTAN  tabbbnagle  pulpit. 

Btnbboniy  if  he  is  manifestly  of  such  a  spirit  that  the  more  yon  drire 
him  the  more  he  will  not  be  driven,  his  father  says  within  himself, 
"  I  will  try  other  methods  with  him,  and  see  what  gentleness  will  do." 
Sach  is  the  mind  of  Ood,  who  says :  "  For  the  iniquity  of  his  covetous- 
ness  was  I  wroth,  and  smote  him :  I  hid  me,  and  was  wroth,  and  he 
went  on  irowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and 
will  heal  him :  I  wiU  lead  him  also,  and  restore  comforts  unto  him  and 
to  his  mourners."  If  wrath  will  not  humble  us  the  Lord  may  yet  in 
his  grace  try  what  love  can  do.  He  will  love  us  to  a  better  mind^  tH] 
our  heart  sings  : — 

"  And  dost  then  ttill  invite  mj  love, 

And  court  me  to  be  blest? 
Wilt  thou  my  friend  and  patron  prove, 

My  refuge  and  my  rest  f 

*^  Convinced,  ashamed,  amszed,  I  now 
Obey  thy  gracious  call ;  • 

To  love*s  command  I  freely  bow. 
And  offer  thee  my  all.** 

lY.  This  brings  us  to  the  fourth  and  last  point,  which  is  this  :  God 
himself  having  found  a  reason  why  he  should  cease  from  contention, 
nay,  two  reasons,  the  one  in  our  weakness  and  the  second  in  the 
failure  of  his  own  chastisement  by  reason  of  the  flesh,  he   himself 

INTENTS  AND  PROPOSES  ANOTHER  METHOD  FOR  ENDING  HIS  CONTEN- 
TIONS and  making  us  right  with  himself.    Here  it  is,  and.  we  note  in  the 
first  place  that  it  is  an  astonishing  method  :  '*  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and 
will  heal  him."    Hear  this,  0  ye  heavens,  and  be  astonished,  0  earth ! 
God's  mercy  is  not  blind  mercy,  he  is  merciful  in  spite  of  his  clear  vision 
of  our  sins.    "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  yet  1  will  heal  him."     If 
God  had  not  seen  man's  sin  his  passing  it  by  would  be  easy  to  under- 
stand.   What  the  eye  does  not  see  the  heart  does  not  rue.    But  it  is 
wonderful  that  it  should  be  written,  ''I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will 
heal  him."    The  Lord  seems  to  say,  "  I  see  him  become  more  froward 
the  more  I  smite  him ;  I  see  him  provoking  me  over  and  over  i^n  though 
I  chide  with  him ;  I  see  not  onlv  his  ways,  but  I  see  through  his  ways 
the  rebellious  heart  which  dwells  within.    I  see  that  he  is  worthless, 
undeserving,  ill-deserving  and  hell-deserving ;   I  see  that  his  mind  is 
set  on  mischief,  that  he  is  altogether  estranged  fix)m  me,  even  fix)m 
his  birth,  and  that  his  whole  nature  is  tainted  with  rebellion."    Yet  the 
Lord  adds  that  astonishing  word  of  grace,  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and 
will  heal  him."    0  soul,  God  sees  what  you  are,  he  knows  your  secret 
wickedness,  and  you  have  not  half  such  an  idea  of  your  own  sin  and  per- 
verseness  as  he  has,  and  yet  over  the  head  of  it  all  leaps  the  eternal, 
boundless  mercy,  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him." 

Note  that  it  is  an  effectual  method.  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will 
heal  him,"-^not  "  I  will  smite  him  again,"  but ''  I  will  treat  his  sin  as  if 
it  were  a  disease."  That  is  a  very  wise  thing  to  do  with  persons  who 
grievously  offend  you.  When  a  man's  action  is  very  provoking  I  like  to 
hear  people  say,  *'  Surely  he  must  be  a  little  wrong  in  the  head.  Poor 
man,  ne  must  be  out  of  order  or  he  would  not  act  so."  Put  the  best 
construction  you  can  upon  an  offence  and  treat  it  as  if  it  arose  out  of 
disease.    It  is  true  that  sin  is  much  more  tkan  a  disease,  and  God 


COXT£NTION  £ND£D  AM)  GAAOE  RSIQUTIXG.  479 

XKiij^t  treafe  us  altogether  and  only  from  its  criminal  side,  but  still  it  is 
a  disease,,  and  therefore  he  resokes  to  treat  it  as  such.  Oar  great  Lord 
in  effect  cries,  "Oh,  this  wicked  creatnre  of  mine  will  not  own  its 
Creator,  this  sinful  child  of  mine  will  persist  in  rebelling  against  my 
love.  Surely  something  ails  him.  I  will  not  chasten  him  again,  but  I 
will  treat  him  as  a  sick  man  and  I  will  heal  him.  I  will  change  his 
nafcure,  I  will  take  away  the  heart  of  stone  out  of  his  flesh,  I  will  give 
hinoL  a  heaxt  of  flesh.  I  will  take  those  dry  eyes  and  fill  them  with  tears. 
I  will  take  that  dumb  tongue  and  inspire  it  with  pmyer ;  I  will  take 
that  careless  heart  and  melt  it  with  holy  penitence.  I  have  seen  his 
ways,  and  will  heal  him."    It  is  an  astonishing  w^ ;  it  is  an  efiectual  way. 

Notice  further  that  it  is  a  tender  way, — "  1  will  lead  him  also." 
Observe  that  word.  The  sinner  will  have  his  own  way,  and  the  Lord 
has  been  driving  him  into  another,  but  he  will  not  go ;  now  the  Lord 
will  come  to  him  in  gentleness  and  lead  him.  He  will  say,  "  Come  now, 
let  ns  reason  together."  He  will  appeal  to  him,  and  say,  "  Do  not  con- 
tend with  me  any  longer.  I  can  strike  hard,  and  I  could,  if  I  would^ 
strike  you  into  hell :  but  do  not  fight  with  me,  let  us  make  peace.  '  As 
I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that 
dieth,  but  that  he  should  turn  unto  me  and  live.' "  Come  unto  the 
Lord,  thou  poor  broken-hearted  one ;  he  has  only  striven  with  thee  to 
wean  thee  from  thy  sin  and  make  it  possible  to  him  to  save  thee.  Stand 
not  up  in  thy  puny  insignificance  to  contend  against  thy  God ;  do  not 
brazen  it  out  with  him  :  the  mere  bosses  of  his  buckler  will  break  thee ; 
as  for  his  sword,  if  he  uses  it  upon  thee  thou  art  utterly  slain.  Come, 
for  he  will  put  your  sin  away,  he  will  cease  from  his  fierce  anger  and 
reveal  his  love.  He  proclaims  pardon.  Free  grace  and  dying  love  are 
the  charming  bells  wnich  ring  thee  into  the  banquet  of  grace.  The 
Lord  leads  the  contrite  soul  step  by  step  ;  there  is  no  driving,  but  like 
as  a  shepherd  goeth  before  his  sheep  so  the  Lord  Jesus  goeth  before 
broken,  humble,  and  contrite  spirits,  and  they  know  his  voice  and  follow 
him. 

Observe,  also,  how  cormlete  is  this  method.  As  if  all  that  went  before 
were  not  enough  it  is  added,  "  I  will  restore  comforts  unto  him  and  to 
his  mourners."  How  tender  this  is.  He  will  take  away  the  sorrow  as 
well  as  the  sin,  the  killing  grief  as  well  aache  killing  disease.  He  will 
give  us  the  true  balm  of  Gilead,  and  will  pour  such  wine  and  oil  into  our 
gaping  wounds,  that  all  shall  be  healed,  and  the  bones  which  he  had 
broken  shall  rejoice. 

I  do  not  know  whether  I  have  succeeded  in  striking  you  all  with  an 
impression  of  my  Master's  great  love,,  but  it  is  very  much,  upon  my  soul 
at  this  time.  It  amazes  me  that  though  he  has  been  contending  with 
ns,  after  all  it  is  no  contention  of  hu  heart,  but  only  of  his  hand ! 
When  we  have  resisted  and  kept  up  ^e  contention,  he  says,  **  I  have 
smitten  you  and  you  revolt  more  and  more :  why  should  you  be  smitten 
any  more  ?  Your  whole  head  is  sick  and  your  whole  heart  faint  with 
my  smiting  you.  I  will  chasten  you  no  more,  but  change  my  method. 
I  have  brought  you  down  almost  to  deatti's  door  by  affliction,  and  yet  you 
kick  and  struggle  stiU,  as  if  the  last  breath  in  you  should  be  spent  in 
fighting  against  me ;  but  I  will  conquer  yon :  if  it  cannot  be  accom- 
plished by  £Bar  it  shall  be  achieved  by  love.    If  you  will  not  yield  to  my 


480  METBOPOLITAN  TABEBKACLB  PULPIT. 

thunder  70a  shall  yield  to  my  snnshine ;  if  yon  will  not  bow  before  mj 
throne  you  shall  fall  before  my  cross.  I  will  die  for  you,  and  so  I  will 
win  you.  I  will  let  my  own  heart  be  brolten  for  you,  that  at  last  yoa 
shall  look  at  me  and  your  heart  shall  be  broken.  I  will  love  you :  I 
will  love  you  into  life ;  I  will  love  you  up  from  the  veiy  gates  of  hell ; 
I  will  love  you  till  you  love  me."  0  irresistible  love  I  who  can  stand  ont 
against  thee  ?  0  Lord,  this  morning  thy  people,  if  they  have  rebelled, 
come  weeping  back  to  thee  to  ask  thee  again  to  give  the  kiss  of  recon- 
ciliation. We  yield,  we  yield,  submitting  ourselves  witiiout  reserve  t^* 
God.  Many  a  poor  sinner  who  has  given  up  the  hope  of  being  saved 
under  the  crashing  blows  of  conviction  and  chastisement,  shoSd  now 
cry,  **  I  can  hold  ont  no  longer. 

<  Lord,  what  hard  heart  can  still  withstand. 
And  still  rebellious  prove  f 
Refuse  to  bow  to  thy  command. 
Or  to  accept  thy  love. 

'  Overcome  by  glorious  grace,  1  now 
My  former  war  give  o'er  ; 
To  thy  command  I  gladly  bow, 
And  would  contend  no  more.*  ** 

Oh,  come,  ye  wanderers,  and  rest  in  Jesus.  Come,  ye  most  lost,  most 
ruined,  most  hopeless,  and  find  heaven  begun  in  Christ.  Oh,  you  that 
sit  on  the  veree  of  perdition,  who  have  made  a  covenant  with  death  and 
a  league  with  nell,  whose  death  warrant  seems  to  be  siened,  and  put  into 
your  hands,  so  that  you  read  it  by  the  flames  of  hell  whose  fury  you 
anticipate,  come  to  Jesus  and  that  handwriting  of  death  shall  be  blotted 
out.  The  impending  judgment  seems  even  now  to  scorch  your  souls  ; 
come  and  find  deliverance  from  it,  for  Ood  himself  invites  you.  Tarry 
no  longer.    May  Jesus  sweetly  lead  you  to  himself.    Amen. 


PoBTiONS  OF  ScBiPTURE  Rbad  BEFORE  Sbrmok — Isaiah  IviL 

15—21 ;  Iviii. 


Htmns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 194,  691,  586. 


Spurgeon'8  Birthday  Book  and  Autographic  Register. 

Compiled  from  the  Works  of  G.  H.  SPURGEON. 

**  Onr  young  friendi  delight  in  poflMMing  birthday  albnmi,  and  here  is  one  wliich 
is  fit  for  a  qneen.    We  wiU  say  nothing  of  the  contents,  bat  the  binding  ia  aiinply 

SrgeoQS.  Whether  in  doth  at  2t.  6d.,  or  in  a  more  luzorioiu  form  at  68.,  this  u  a 
inty  birthday  present,  and  is  eqnal  to  any  that  hare  gone  before  it ;  we  think  we 
might  Tentore  to  say  that  it  is  seoond  to  none.  Facsimiles  of  the  antographs  of  the 
Plastor  and  his  wifo  are  given  in  their  proper  plaoes."— TA^  Smard  and  the  TrotteL 


Fassmou  &  Alaqastbb,  4,  Faternoeter  Bttildings ;  and  all  Booksellera. 


^^xrpte  Wisbtxnmk 


BEMEMBSB    LOT'S    WIFE. 


^1 


DeUTEBXD  ox  L0S]>'B<DaT  MOBNIOrG,  AUftUST   24th,  1870,  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THB  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NWINOTON, 


*<  Bflnembar  Lot's  wife^'*— Lake  xvii.  3S» 

It  was  the  purpose  of  God  always  to  maintain  a  testimouy  fbr  tmth  and 
righteousness  in  the  midst  of  tills  nngodly  world.  For  this  end  of  old 
he  set  apart  fbr  himself  a  chosen  &mily  with  whom  he  had  fellowship. 
Abraham  was  the  man  whom  God  chose,  that  in  him  and  in  his 
l^on^ehold  the  witness  might  be  preserved.  This  chosen  family  was 
called  out  and  separated  from  its  ancestors,  and  led  apart  to  dweQ  as  way- 
faring men  in  the,  land  of  Canaan.  They  were  not  to  go  into  the  cities 
and  mingle  with- other  races,  but  to  dwell  in*  tents  as  a  separate  tribe, 
lest  their  character  should  become  polluted  and  their  testimony  should 
be  silenced*  It  was  the  Lord's  intent  that  the  people  should  dwell  alone 
and  not  be  numbered  among  the  nations.  Abraham,  being  called,  obeyed* 
and  went  forth,  not  knowing  whither  he  went.  His  separated  life  gave 
great  exercise  to  his  &ith,  and  so  strengthened  it  that  it  became  a  calm, 
UBstaggering  assurance ;  and  this  enabled  him  to  enjoy  a  quiet,  sublime^ 
and  happy  career,  dependent  only  upon  God,  and  altogether  above  as  well 
as  apart  from  man.  With  him  was  his  nephew  Lot,  who  also  left  Haran 
at  tne  divine  call,  and  shared  with  the  patriarch  his  wanderings  inf 
Canaan  and  in  Egypt.  He  was  not  a  man  of  so  noble  a  soul,  but  was 
greatly  influenced  by  the  stronger  mind  of  his  nncle  Abraham.  He  was 
ai&cere,  no  doubt,  and  is  justly  called  righteous  Lot,  but  he  was  fitter  to 
be  a  follower  than  a  leader.  He  also  sojourned  in.  tents,  and  led  the; 
separated  life,  until  it  became  necessary  for  him  to  become  an  inde- 
pendent chieftain,  because  the  flocks  and  herds  of  tiie  two  families 
nad  so  greatly  multiplied  that  they  could  not  well  be  kept  together. 
Then  came-  out  the  weak  side*  of  Lot's  character.  He  md  not  give 
Abraham  the  choice  in  selecting  a  sheep  walk,  but  like  all  weak  natures 
he  selfishly  consulted  his  own  advantage,  and  determined  to  go  in  the 
direction  of  the  cities  of  the  plain  of  Jordan,  where  well  watered  pas- 
tures abounded.  This  led  to  his  dwelling  near  the  cities  of  the  plain, 
where  crime  had  reached  its  utmost  point  of  horrible  degradation.  We 
read  that  ''he  pitched  his  tent  toward  Sodom";  he  found  it  convenient 
No.  1,491. 


482  XETROPOLITAH  TABEKNACLB  PULPIT. 

to  be  near  a  settled  people,  and  to  enter  into  friendly  relations  with  them, 
though  he  most  have  known  what  the  men  of  Sodom  were,  for  the  crj 
of  them  had  gone  forth  &r  and  wide.    Thus  he  began  to  leave  the  sepa- 
rated path.    After  a  while  he  went  further,  for  one  step  leads  to  another. 
He  was  a  lover  of  ease,  and  therefore  he  gave  up  the  tent  life,  with  its 
many  inconvenienoes,  and  went  to  live  with  the  townsmen  of  Sodom  : 
a  thine  to  be  wondered  at  as  well  as  deplored.    He  did  not  oease  to  be 
a  good  man,  but  he  did  oease  to  be  a  faithful  witness  for  his  Crod ;  and 
Abraham  seems  to  have  given  him  up  altogether  from  that  day,  for  we 
find  that  noble  patriarch  enquiring  of  the  Lord  concerning  his  heir» 
saying,  "  Lord  God,  what  wilt  thou  give  me,  seeing  I  go  childless,  and 
the  steward  of  my  house  is  this  Eliezer  of  Damascus?"    And  the  Lord 
said,  '*  This  shall  not  be  thine  heir."    Now,  this  enquiry  would  have 
been  needless  had  Lot  been  still  reckoned  to  belong  to  the  chosen  seed, 
for  naturally  Lot  was  the  heir  of  Abraham,  but  he  forfeited  that  posi- 
tion and  gave  up  his  portion  in  the  inheritance  of  the  elect  house  by 
quitting  the  separated  hfe.    Lot,  although  he  dwelt  in  Sodom  was  not 
happy  diere,  neither  did  he  become  so  corrupt  as  to  take  pleasure  in 
the  wickedness  of  the  people.    Peter  says  that  Ood  delivo^  just  Lot 
vexed  with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the  wicked.    He  tried  to  bear  his 
protest  in  the  place,  and  signally  failed,  as  all  must  do  who  imitate  him. 
His  witness  for  purity  would  have  been  far  more  powerful  if  he  had  kept 
apart  bom  them,  for  this  is  the  protest  which  God  demands  of  us  when 
he  says,  "  Come  ye  out  from  among  them,  be  ye  separate." 

In  the  midst  of  the  world  which  lieth  in  the  wicked  one  Lot  lived  on, 
not  without  greatly  degenerating  in  spirit,  until  the  kings  came  and 
carried  him  away  captive.  Then  by  the  intervention  of  Abraham  he 
was  delivered  fix)m  the  captivity  which  threatened  him,  and  brought 
back  again.  This  was  a  solemn  warning,  and  you  would  have  thought 
that  Lot  would  have  said,  '*  I  will  go  back  to  Abraham's  way  of  living, 
I  will  affain  become  a  sojourner  with  God.  Sodom's  walls  without  God 
are  fax  less  safe  than  a  frail  tent  when  God  is  a  wall  of  fire  around  it." 
His  vexation  with  the  conversation  of  the  lewd  townsmen  ought  to  have 
made  him  long  for  the  sweet  air  of  the  wild  country ;  but  not  so,  he 
again  settles  down  in  Sodom,  and  forgets  the  holy  congregation  whidi 
clustered  around  the  tent  of  Abraham.  Being  still  a  man  of  God,  he 
could  not  be  allowed  to  die  in  such  society :  it  was  not  to  be  endured 
that  'Must  Lot"  should  lay  his  bones  in  the  graveyard  of  filthy  Sodom. 
If  God  would  save  a  man  he  must  fetch  him  out  from  the  world ;  he 
cannot  remain  part  and  parcel  of  an  ungodly  world  and  yet  be  God's 
elect  one,  for  tms  is  the  Lord's  own  woi^  to  the  enemy  at  the  gates  of 
Eden — "  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  between  thy 
seed  and  her  s^d."  Did  he  not  also  say  to  Pharaoh, ''  I  will  put  a 
division  between  my  people  and  thy  people"?  The  Lord  will  sooner 
burn  all  Sodom  down  than  Lot  shall  continue  to  be  associated  with  its 
crimes,  and  dragged  down  by  its  evil  spirit.  And  so  it  came  to  pass 
that  Lot  was  forced  out ;  he  was  placed  in  such  a  strait  that  he  must 
either  run  for  his  life  or  perish  in  the  general  burning.  Happy  had  it 
been  for  him  if  he  had  hved  all  the  while  in  the  holy  seclusion  of  Abra- 
ham ;  he  would  not  then  have  lost  the  inheritance  for  his  seed,  nor  have 
passed  away  under  a  dark,  defiling  doud,  nor  have  missed  his  place 


ft^jnUB  XiOT'S  WIfK.  483 

amotig  the  hevoes  af  Mti^,  of  whcmi  Paid  writ^  in  the  fitmonB  chapter  of 
t^e  I^brewB :  "  These  all  died  in  £uth,  not  haying  receiyed  the  promiseSy 
but  haviDg  Been  them  a&r  off,  and  weie  penmaded  of  them»  and  em- 
braoed  them,  and  oonfeasad  that  they  were  Btrangeis  and  pilgrims  on  the 
eaith." 

Hese  I  muet  panae,  or  you  will  think  that  lir  have  misread  my  text, 
and  that  I  am  preaching  from  the  words^-'' Bemember  Lot";  and, 
indeed,  I  might  profitably  do  so,  for  there  is  much  of  warning  in  the 
history  ol  Lot  himself.  If  Christian  men  are  so  unwise  as  to  conform 
themaelvea  to  the  world,  even  if  they-  keep  up  the  Christian  character  in 
a  measmre,  they  will  gain  nothing  by  worldly  association  bat  being  vexed 
with,  the  conversation  of  the  ungodly,  and  they  will  be  great  losers  in 
their  own  souls :  their  character  will  be  tarmahed,  their  whole  tone  of 
feeling  will  be  iowiered,  and  they  themselves  will  be  wretchedly  weak 
and  imhappyi  Contbrmity  to  the  world  is  sure  to  end  badly  sooner  or 
later:  to  the  man  himself  it  is  injurious,  and  to  his  family  ruinous. 

But  the  text  saith,  '^Bemember  Lot's  im/e"  and  therefore  I  must  let 
the  husband  go,  and  call  yoar  attention  to  ner  who,  in  this  case,  is  '*  his 
worse  ha]£"  When  the  time  for  s^>aration  arrived  Lot's  wife  could  not 
tear  herself  »way  from  the  world.  She  had  always  been  in  it,  and  had 
loved  it,  and  delisted  in  it;  and,  though  BSfociated  with  a  gracious 
man,  when  the  time  came  for  decision  she  betrayed  her  true  character. 
Flight  without  so  much  as  looking  back  was  demanded  of  her,  but  this 
was  too  much ;  she  did  look  back,  smd  thus  proved  that  she  had  suffi- 
cient presumption  in  her  heart  to  defy  Qod's  command,  and  risk  her  all, 
to  give  a  lingering  love-glance  at  the  condemned  and  guilty  world.  By 
that  glance  she  p^nshed.  That  is  the  subject  of  our  discourse.  The 
love  of  the  world  is  death*  Those  who  ding,  to  sin  must  perish,  be  they 
who  they  may.  ' 

Do  not  omit  to  notice  the  connection  of  the  text,  for  therein  our  Lord 
bids  UB  hold  the  world  with  a  loose  hand,  and  be  ever  ready  to  leave  it 
alL  When  we  are  called  to  it  we  are  to  be  ready  to  go  forth  without  a 
particle  ia  our  hands.  ^  In  that  day,  he  which  shall  b^  upon  the  house- 
top, and  his  stuff  in  the  honse^  let  him  not  come  down  to  take  it  away : 
and  he  that  is  in  the  fields  let  him  likewise  not  return  back."  Life  itselt 
they  were  not  to  hold  dear,  but  to  be  ready  to  lay  it  down  for  his  sake; 
for  he  said,  '^Whosoever  shall  seek  to  save  his  life  shell  lose  it;  and 
whosoever  ^mll  lose  his  li&  shall  preserve  it."  To  be  divided  from  the 
world,  its  possessions,  ita  maxims,  its  motives,  ia  the  mark  of  a  disciple 
«f  Christ,  and,  in  order  to  keep  up  the  feeling  of  sepauateness  among  his 
ftUdwers^  our  Lord  bade  them  *'  Bemember  Lot's  wife."  She  is  to  be  a 
cantion  to  us  all,  f(»^  Ood  will  deal  with  us  aa  with  her  if  we  sin  as  she 
did.  "  The  thing  which  has  been  is  the  thing  which  shall  be :"  if  our 
hearts  are  glued  to  the  world-  we  shall  perish  with  the  world ;  if  our  de- 
nres  and  delights  look  that  way^  and  if  we  find  our  comfort  in  it,  we 
ahall  have  to  see  onr  all  consamed,  and  shall  be  ourselves  consumed  with 
it  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger.  Sepasation  is  the  only  way  of  escape : 
we  must  flee  ftom  the  world  or  perish  with  it;  "  Depart  ye,  depart  ye, 
go  ve  out  fiom  thence,  touch  no  undkan  thing;  go  ye  out  of  the  midst 
of  her;  be  ye  dean,  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord." 

I.    **  Bemember  Lot's  wife":  and  one  first  oall  shall  be— bemembsb 


484  ICBTBOFOLITAH  TABBBHAOLE  PULPIT. 

THAT  SHE  WAS  Lot'b  WIFE.    She  was  the  wife  of  a  man  who,  with  att 
his  &nlt8,  was  a  righteous  man.    She  was  umiBd  to  km  in  th$  ehsesi 
possible  hondSf  and  yet  she  perished.    She  had  dwelt  in  tents  with  holj 
4^braham,  and  seemed  to  be  a  sharer  in  all  the  privileges  of  the  separated 
people,  and  yet  she  perished.    She  was  dear  to  one  who  had  been  dear  to 
the  fiEither  of  the  faithfal,  and  yet  for  all  that  she  perished  in  her  sin. 
This  note  of  warning  we  would  strike  very  loudly,  for,  commonplaoe  as 
the  truth  is,  it  needs  often  to  be  repeat^  that  ties  oi  blood  are  no 
guarantees  of  grace.    You  may  be  the  wife  of  the  saintUest  man  of  Gk>d 
and  yet  be  a  daughter  of  BeliaJ ;  or  you  may  be,  the  husband  of  one  of 
the  King's  daughters  and  yet  be  yourself  a  castaway.    You  may  be  the 
child  of  a  prophet  and  yet  the  curse  of  the  prophet's  Ood  may  light 
upon  you ;  or  you  may  be  the  fiftther  of  a  most  gracious  &mily  and  yet 
still  be  an  alien  to  the  conmionwealth  of  Israel.    No  earthly  relationship 
can  possibly  help  us  if  we  are  personally  destitute  of  the  spiritual  life. 
Our  first  birth  does  not  avail  us  in  the  langdom  of  God,  for  that  which 
is  bom  of  the  flesh  at  its  very  best  is  fledi,  and  is  prone  to  sin,  and 
will  certainly  perish.    We  must  be  bom  again,  for  o^y  the  new  birth, 
which  is  of  the  Spirit  and  from  above,  will  bring  us  into  covenant  bonds. 
0  ye  children  of  godly  parents,  I  beseech  you  look  to  yourselves  Uiat  ye 
be  not  driven  down  to  nell  from  your  mother's  side.    0  ye  relatives  of 
those  who  are  the  &vourites  of  heaven,  I  beseech  you  look  to  yourselves 
that  ye  die  not  within  sight  of  heaven,  in  spite  of  all  your  advantages. 
In  this  matter  remember  Lot's  wife. 

Being  Lot's  wife,  remember  that  she  had  since  her  marriage  shared 
with  Lot  in  his  journeys  and  adventures  and  trials.  We  cannot  tell 
exactly  when  she  became  Lot's  wife,  but  we  incline  to  the  belief  that  it 
was  after  he  had  left  Haran,  for  when  Abraham  left  Haran  we  read  that 
he  took  "  Sarai  his  wife,  and  Lot  his  brother's  son,"  but  we  do  not  read 
of  Lot's  wife.  The  name  of  Abraham's  wife  is  given,  but  of  Lot's  wife 
there  is  no  mention  whatever.  Again,  we  read,  **  Abram  went  up  out  of 
Egypt,  he,  and  his  wife,  and  all  that  he  had,  and  Lot  with  him,  into  the 
south."  "  And  Lot  also,  which  went  with  Abram,  had  flocks,  and  heids, 
and  tents,"  but  nothing  is  said  about  his  having  a  wife.  She  must  have 
been  a  person  of  very  small  consideration,  for  even  when  it  is  certain 
that  Lot  was  married,  when  he  was  taken  captive  and  afterwards  rescued 
by  Abraham,  all  we  &id  is  this :  ''And  Abraham  brought  back  all  the 
goods,  and  also  brought  again  his  brother  Lot^  and  his '  goods,  and  the 
women  also,  and  the  people."  We  suppose  that  Lot's  w^e  is  induded 
under  the  word ''  the  women."  Now  the  Holy  Spirit  never  puts  a  slight 
upon  good  women :  in  connection  with  their  husbands  they  are  glene- 
rally  mentioned  with  honour,  and  in  this  book  of  Genesis  it  is  speciallv 
so.  Sarah  and  Rebekah  and  Rachel  have  each  an  honourable  memorial, 
and  as  no  mention  is  made  of  Lot's  wife  we  may  infer  that  she  was  not 
worthy  to  be  mentioned.  She  oould  hardly  have  been  an  inhabitant  of 
Sodom,  as  the  Jewish  traditions  assert,  unless  she  was  a  widow,  as  they 
say,  and  the  daughters  mentioned  were  hers  by  a  previous  marriage,  for 
at  the  destruction  of  Sodom  Lot  had  marriageable  daughters,  and  it 
would  not  seem  that  Lot  had  then  been  separated  from  Abraham  for  many 
years.  Trae,  the  women  of  Sodom  mav  nave  been  given  in  marria^  at 
-^n  earlier  age  than  was  usual  with  the  Abrahamic  stock,  and,  if  so,  Liot  s 


BSMBHBEB  LOT'S  WIFB.  485 

wife  may  haye  been  a  native  of  Sodom,  for  it  is  piossible  that  he  dwelt 
theie  for  twenty  years.  More  probably,  however,  either  in  Canaan  or  in 
Egypt,  Lot  married  a  Canaanite  or  an  Egyptian  woman,  a  person  utterly  nn- 
worthy  to  be  taken  into  the  holy  household,  and  therefore  the  marriage  is 
not  recorded.  It  was  the  custom  of  that  elect  and  separated  family,  as  you 
know,  to  send  back  to  Padan-aram,  to  fetch  from  tnence  some  daughter 
of  the  same  house,  that  the  pure  stock  might  be  preserved,  and  that  there 
might  be  no  connection  with  the  heathen.  It  was  Abraham's  desire  for 
Is^,  and  he  charged  his  steward  to  carry  it  out,  saying,  *^  And  I  will 
make  thee  swear  by  the  Lord,  the  God  of  heaven,  and  the  God  of  the 
whole  earth,  that  thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  unto  my  son  of  the  daughters 
of  the  Oanaanites,  among  whom  I  dwell :  but  thou  shalt  go  unto  my 
country,  and  to  my  kindred,  and  take  a  wife  unto  my  son  Isaac."  This  also 
was  Isaac's  desire  for  Jacob,  for  we  read,  "  And  ^saac  called  Jacob,  and 
blessed  him,  and  charged  him,  and  said  unto  him.  Thou  shalt  not  take  a 
wife  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan.  Arise,  go  to  Padan-aram,  to  the  house 
of  Bethuel  thy  mother*s  father ;  and  take  thee  a  wife  from  thence  of  the 
daughters  of  Laban  thy  mother's  brother."  It  seems  to  me  that  Lot  had 
married  a  heathen  woman,  and  so  her  name  is  omitted.  Whether  it  be  so 
or  no,  it  is  certain  that  she  had  shared  with  Lot  in  the  capture  of  the  city 
of  Sodom ;  she  had  seen  the  ruthless  sword  slay  the  inhabitants,  and  she 
herself  with  her  husband  had  been  among  the  captives,  and  she  had  been 
delivered  by  the  good  sword  of  Abraham.  So  that  she  had  been  a  par- 
taker of  her  husband's  trials  and  deliverances  and  yet  she  was  lost.  It 
will  be  a  sad,  sad  thing  if  there  should  come  an  eternal  severance  between 
those  united  by  marriage  bonds :  that  we  should  live  together,  and  work 
together,  and  suffer  together,  and  should  be  delivered  by  the  providence 
of  God  many  a  time  together,  and  should  see  our  children  grow  up 
together,  and  yet  should  be  torn  asunder  at  the  last  never  to  meet 

X'n :  Uiis  is  a  prospect  which  we  dare  not  think  upon.  Tremblej^ou 
se  love  is  not  in  Christ,  for  your  union  will  have  an  end.  What 
saith  the  Saviour?  ''I  tell  you,  in  that  night  there  shall  be  two  in 
one  bed ;  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  shaU  be  left.  Two  women 
shall  be  grinding  together ;  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left. 
Two  men  shall  be  in  the  field ;  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the  other  left." 
It  matters  not  how  close  the  association,  the  unbeliever  must  be  divided 
from  the  living  child  of  QtfA,  If  you  cling  to  the  world  and  cast  your 
eye  back  upon  it  you  must  perish  in  your  sin,  notwithstanding  that  you 
have  eaten  and  drunk  with  the  people  of  God,  and  have  been  as  near 
to  them  in  relationship  as  wife  to  husband,  or  child  to  parent.  This 
makes  the  remembrance  of  Lot's  wife  a  very  solemn  thing  to  those  who 
are  allied  by  ties  of  kindred  to  the  people  of  God. 

Lot's  wife  had  also  shared  her  husband's  privileges.  Her  husband 
had  not  forgotten  his  association  with  Abraham,  and  he  could  not  have 
fiEuled  to  communicate  his  knowledge  to  her.  The  one  God  was  wor- 
shipped, and  Lot's  wife  was  present.  She  knew  of  the  gracious  covenant 
which  God  had  made  with  his  separated  people,  and  she  knew  that  her 
husband  was  one  of  the  family.  She  had  cast  in  her  lot  with  the  chosen 
people  of  God  apparently,  though  her  heart  was  not  in  it,  and  she  there- 
zbre  joined  their  sacred  song  and  their  holy  prayer.  She  saw  the  daily 
provision  which  God  made  for  his  people,  and  the  joy  which  Abraham 


486  HETROFOUTIK  TABEBKACI^  PULPIT. 

had  in  Bbiding  under  the  shadow  of  the  Ahnighty.  Bven  in  Sodom  her 
husband  kept  np  such  separateness  as  he  conld  in  snch  an  evil  plaee,  and 
die  saw  the  goodness  of  the  man  with  all  hn  nnstakes.  When  Soidom 
mnst  be  destroyed  the  angels  came  to  their  house,  and  she  herself  helped 
to  entertain  them.  She  Teoeived  the  merchal  wvrmng  to  escape  as  weD 
as  her  hnsband,  and  she  was  tirged  as  much  as  he  k)  lee  &om  the  wrath 
so  near  at  hand.  Thiw  is  it  with  many  df  yon  who  are  enjoying  aD 
sorts  of  Ohri«tian  privfle^Bs  and  are  yet  imisaTed.  Yon  come  to  the 
Lord's  tabic,  and  eat  and  drink  of  tiie  mcmorialB  of  his  body  and  blood, 
and  yet  yon  remain  trasaved.  Yon  seem  to  be  part  and  parcel  of  tiie 
church  of  God,  and  if  there  is  any  privilege  or  advantage  a  share  of  it 
is  set  before  you,  if  there  is  any  fellowship  yon  are  not  eKclnded,  it 
there  is  any  joy  it  is  not  denied  yev.  You  wiH  have  to  u^  at  last, 
*'  Loid,  Lord,  we  have  eaten  and  drank  in  IJby  presence,  and  tiion  hast 
tangfat  in  our  rtreets,"  «Qd,  oh,  how  wretched  it  will  be  to  hear  him  say, 
•'  I  never  knew  you;  depart  from  me,  ye  woikers  of  initjnrty."  It  mnst 
be  ISO  if  yom*  souls  are  dinging  to  sin,  and  you  are  castmg  a  wistfol  eye 
to  the  ungodly  world.  It  must  be  so,  and  if  you  w«nt  a  proof  **  rememfcJer 
Lot's  wife." 

Lot^BmfbhnAsfumdinhm'ku8band*serrvr8.  It  wafi  a  great  mistake  on 
his  part  to  abandon  the  outwardly  separated  life,  but  she  had  kept  to  him 
in  it,  and  perhs^  was  the  cause  of  his  so  doing.  I  suppose  he  thou^t  he 
could  live  above  the  world  spiritually,  and  yet  mingle  with  its  votaries, 
even  as  «ome  now  do  wko  enter  into  worfdfy  company  and  yet  hope  to 
walk  with  €bd  in  sprrit.  He  said  to  himself,  *'  It  is  very  uncomfartaUe 
to  wander  alone  in  this  deserted  wilderness,  and  to  dwell  in  these  tem- 
porary teats,  I  wish  I  had  a  more  abiding  dwelling,  and  could  mingie  on 
peaceable  terms  with  those  around  me.*'  He  oeased  to  look  for  the  city 
whidi  hath  foundations  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God,  and  he  wanted 
to  tdse  up  citizensUp  here,  i  should  not  wonder  if  Lot's  wife  influenced 
him  in  tnat  way.  He  was  a  man  of  weak  mind,  and  while,  hh  midc 
had  him  under  nis  wing  he  was  right  enough,  except  that  even  then  he 
had  what  a  writer  calls  ''a  lean-to  religion";  he  did  not  stand  alone, 
but  leaned  upon  Abraham.  When  he  wcas  mairried  ft  is  probable  t^ 
his  wife  assumed  the  ruling  place,  and  guided  the  way  of  nis  life.  She 
began  to  think  that  it  was  a  pity  that  the  fiimily  should  live  in  «noh 
separation,  so  nnfeshionable,  iso  tigid,  and  peculiar,  and  all  tSiat.  She 
tossed  her  head,  and  cried,  "  Keally,  people  mudt  mix  with  society,  and 
not  keep  up  old-feshioned,  strait-laoed  ways.  You  mngfot  as  well  be  dead 
as  be  shut  out  from  life."  When  her  husband  had  an  opportunity  of 
getting  out  o/f  that  rigid  style  by  leaving  his  unde  she  said  she  would 
like  to  go  down  Sodom  way,  because  it  would  be  nice  for  the  girls,  and 
give  them  a  taste  of  something  liberal  and  reifined.  The  old  style  was  all 
very  well  for  such  an  vndquated  couple  «8  Abradiam  und  Sarah,  but  Lot 
and  haself  belonged  to  a  younger  generation,  and  were  bound  to  get  into 
a  little  society,  and  find  eligible  matches  for  their  young  people.  It  iroold 
be  well  for  them  to  dress  better  than  they  oouM  fearn  to  do  if  they 
always  kept*roanring  about  like  gipsies.  Ym  see,  Abraham's  people  did 
notstudythe  feshions  at  all,  and  were  a vinty  vulgar sort'<tfBhepheras,  who 
.  had  no  ideas  of  refinement  and  politeness,  and  it  was  a  pity  that  people 
in  Lot's  station  in  life  should  always  associate  with  mere  sheep-sfaeaiers, 


REMKHBER  LOT'S  WIFE.  487 

and  drov«VB^  and  the  like.  If  they  got  to  Sodom  iiiere  wonld  1)6 
nice  parties,  and  dances,  and  all  sorts  of  things.  Of  course  the  pe<q>le 
were  a  little  loose,  and  rather  fest ;  they  went  to  plays  where  modesty 
was  shocked,  and  gathered  in  admiration  around  performers  whose  lives 
ivere  openly  wanton ;  bnt  then  you  see  one  mnst  be  fashionable,  and 
wink  at  a  good  deal :  we  cannot  expect  all  people  to  be  saints,  and  no 
donbt  they  have  theor  good  points.  By  some  each  talk  Mistress  Lot 
gained  her  hnsbond  over  to  her  way  of  linking.  They  did  not  mean 
actually  to  go  into  the  worst  society  of  Sodom,  but  they  intended  to 
make  a  carefol  selection,  and  go  o^y  a  IMe  way.  Surely  they  could  be 
tmsted  to  know  where  to  stop.  So  they  pitched  the  tent  towards  Sodom, 
where  it  was  within  an  easy  wa&  of  the  town,  a  Kttle  separated,  bat  not 
far.  If  anything  did  happen  that  was  very  bad  tiiey  oonld  move  «wtiy, 
and  no  harm  would  be  done,  bat  nntil  they  saw  the  harm  of  it  they  Wk&i 
the  neighbonrhood  and  the  wi^^  of  the  townsfolk.  It  was  no  donbt 
wise,  they  said,  to  gotud  see  Sodom  and  know  the  people,  for  it  wonld  be 
ridiculoas  to  condemn  what  they  had  not  seen ;  they  would  therefore  lay 
it,  and  give  the  yonng  people  some  idea  of  what  the  world  was  Ifte. 
Yety  sweet  the  cit^  life  became*  The  fne  and  easy  wafs  of  Sodom  eame 
to  be  enjoyable.  Not  the  jgross  part  of  Sodom  life,  IJiat  Lot  could  not 
bear,  and  it  made  Mistress  iA>t  unoomfoi*table  at  times,  bat  the  MbeiBl 
spirit,  the  fine  free  bearing  of  the  people,  their  eaiety  aoid  arttstiic  onlttore, 
-were  quite  to  her  mind;  and  so  she  was  r^ht  ^ad  when  her  husband  put 
away  the  old  tent,  had  a  sale  of  the  sheep,  and  lived  as  a  retired  grader 
in  the  west  end  of  the  city. 

I  think  I  am  not  mistaken  in  the  eonjeotoie  that  Hmtrees  Lot's  in- 
fluence bronght  her  huBband  ti^ere,  and  when  there  introduced  Urn 
to  the  best  families,  and  foniid  scdtors  for  tike  daughters,  who  had  been 
folly  imbued  witii  tiiie  liberal  ideas  of  the  place.  At  any  Tate,  whatever 
were  his  faults  ahe  was  a  sartoker  in  them :  «he  was  with  him  in  the 
choosing  the  plam  of  Joroon,  with  him  in  ithe  pitching  of  the  tent 
towards  Sodom,  wi&  him  in  aetnoUy  settHi^  in  Sodom,  and  I  could 
almost  hope  widi  hiib  in  bearing  as  good  a  pniest  «n  they  could  agaifnst 
the  vilest  of  Sodonite  sflH,  bat  oertaiiUy  with  Inm  in  giving  up  the 
strictness  andsevertey  of  the  separated  life.  Yet  at  last  she  was  sepcD*a{ted 
from  him  for  ever;  &r  hisorrom,  notwithstanding  their  grievous  misehiaf 
to  him,  did  not  utterly  destroy 'Ate  life  of  God  in  his  soiu ;  as  for  her,  she 
never  1^  any  spiritaal  life,  and  bow,  when  ahe  is  called  to  leave  Sodom, 
she  shows  her  love  to  it  by  a  distinct  disofaedienee  of  Ood,  and  bu  open 
turning  to  the  doomed  eity,  and  so  she  periBheB.  Oh,  you  that  are 
Christian  people  because  your  friends  are  Ohnstian  people,  yoa  that 
associate  with  us  beoauae  it  happens  to  be  the  way  in  which  you  were 
brought  op,  the  time  wiU  come  when  the  secfot  attadiment  of  your 
hearts  towoids  a  giddy  world  will  show  itudf  meet  dearly,  and  in  a 
&tal  moment  you  will  give  a  iavQ  look  towards  sin  which  will  piove 
you  noG  to  belong  to  the  people  of  Ood.  ^en  wiU  it  hB|q)en  to  yoa 
according  to  the  word  of  the  apostle,  ''It  had  been  better  for  timnLiiot 
to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness,  than,  afior  they  fattve  known  it, 
to  turn  from  the  holy  oommandment  ^liveised  unto  thraou" 

II.    And  now,  secondly,  **  Remember  Lot's  wife,"  and  recollect  that 

SHE  WENT  SOME  WAT  TOWARDS    BEING  SAVSI).       MistreSS   Lot  SO  &r 


488  UETBOFOLITAN  TABERNAOLE  PULPIT. 

believed  the  message  thafc  came  to  her  aboat  the  destrnction  of  the  city 
that  she  was  aroaseicl.    She  rose  early  as  her  husband  did,  and  she  pre- 
pared to  leave  the  house.    She  ran  down  the  streets,  she  passed  the  citj 
gate,  she  reached  the  open  plain  along  with  her  husband.    She  was  willing 
for  awhile  to  run  with  him,  following  his  example ;  she  did  so  for  a 
considerable  distance,  till  she  began  to  think  over  what  she  was  doing, 
and  to  consider  what  she  was  leaving,  and  then  she  slackened  her  pace 
and  lingered  behind.     Semember,  then,  that  she  did  go  part  of  the 
way  towards  satiety,  and  yet  she  perished :  and  so  many  may  go  part 
of  the  way  towards  Christ,  and  they  may  go  a  little  way  out  of  the 
world,  but  if  their  hearts  still  linger  with  the  ungodly  they  will  perish, 
notwithstanding  all.    There  is  one  very  solemn  thought,  and  that  is,  that 
the  angels'  hand  had  pressed  her  wrist.    When  they  said,  "  Up,  get  you 
gone,"  and  Lot  lingered, — ^the  men  laid  hold  upon  his  hand,  and  the 
hand  of  his  wife.    So  it  is  expressly  said.    An  angel's  hand  had  pressed 
her  wrist  to  draw  her  forth  to  safety,  and  she  had  gone  a  little  way  nnder 
that  sacred  constraint ;  and  yet  she  perished.    Some  of  you  may  have 
had  spiritual  touches  upon  the  conscience  and  heart,  which  you  will 
never  be  able  quite  to  foi^t,  and  the  responsibility  of  this  will  cling  to 
you,  though  you  have  drawn  back  from  godliness  and  your  heart  crieth 
after  vanity,  and  lusteth  after  its  idols. 

This  woman  was  actually  out  of  Sodom,  and  she  was  almost  in 
Zoar,  the  refuge  city,  and  yet  she  perished.  How  near  she  was  to  the 
little  city  of  escape  I  cannot  tell,  but  she  was  certainly  almost  there,  and 
yet  she  perishea.  Almost  saved,  but  not  quite.  Let  me  repeat  those 
words,  for  they  describe  some  of  you  who  are  present  at  this  nour,  and 
they  may  be  your  epitaph  if  you  do  not  mina  what  you  are  about : — 
''  AiiHOST  SAVED,  BUT  NOT  QUITE."  Escaped  from  the  vilest  form  of  sin* 
but  not  truly  in  Ohrist ;  the  mind  not  weaned  from  its  idols,  iniquity  not 
given  up  in  the  soul,  though  perhaps  given  up  in  outward  deed.  0  you 
who  are  almost  saved,  but  not  quite,  "  Remember  Lot's  wife." 

III.  This  brings  me  to  a  third  point  of  remembrance,  which  is  this : 
remember  that  though  she  went  some  way  towards  escape  she  did 
ACTUALLY  PEBISH  TUBOUGH  SOT.  The  first  sin  that  she  committed  was 
that  she  lingered  behind,  Moses  teUs  us  "  Lot's  wife  looked  back  from 
behind  hiuL"  That  is,  the  good  old  man  was  making  such  haste  as  he 
could;  but  she,  though  she  had  run  with  him  side  by  side,  lingered  in 
the  rear — I  should  not  wonder  but  what  the  same  angel  had  one  of  them 
by  the  right  hand  and  the  other  by  the  left,  while  the  other  angel  brought 
the  two  daughters  on  beldnd,  but  Lot's  wife  after  all  slackened  her  pace  and 
M  behind.  That  is  the  first  sin  with  most  people  who  profess  religion, 
but  are  not  true  to  God :  they  begin  to  backslide  by  creeping  along  very 
slowly,  they  are  not  half  so  earnest  as  they  used  to  be,  they  lag  behind. 
One  service  a  day  is  sufficient,  a  very  little  reading  of  the  Bible  con- 
tents them ;  they  do  not  quite  give  up  the  appearance  of  prayer,  but  still 
there  is  very  little  of  it;  they  do  not  see  the  good  of  being  in  such  a 
fiirv  over  religion ;  they  do  not  see  why  they  should  exercise  any  sacred 
violence  to  take  the  kingdom  by  force.  They  linger.  It  is  because  after 
all  the  world  is  master  of  their  hearts ;  they  would  if  they  dare  be  a? 
worldly  and  as  ungodly  as  others,  and  they  prove  their  true  character  bj 
slackening  their  pace. 


BEHBMBBR  LOT'S  WIFE.  489 

Having  sladcened  her  pace,  the  next  thing  she  did  was  she  disbeUeved 
what  had  been  told  her.    Yon  mnst  remember  that  their  flight  out  of 
Sodom  w<M  to  be  an  act  of  fiuth ;  for  the  angel  said,  '^  Look  not  behind 
thee."    That  Sodom  was  to  be  destroyed  did  not  appear  at  all  likdy,  for 
it  was  a  bright  morning.    They  were  to  fly  with  as  much  haste  as  if  they 
could  see  the  fire-shower  filling,  bnt  they  were  not  to  see  it ;  their  flight  was 
to  be  nreed  forward  by  faith  in  the  angels'  words.    Faith  may  be  as  well 
exhibited  by  not  looking  as  by  looking.     Faith  is  a  look  at  Christ,  bnt 
faith  is  a  not  looking  at  the  things  which  are  behind.    Lot's  wife  saw  the 
sun  rising,  so  we  are  told :  '^  the  son  had  risen  upon  the  earth  when  Lot 
entered  into  Zoar."    She  saw  the  briffht  dawning  and  everything  lit  up 
with  it,  and  it  came  across  her  mind — "  It  cannot  be  true,  the  city  is 
not  being  destroyed.    What  a  lovely  morning!     Why  are  we  thus 
running  away  from  house,  and  goods,  and  friends,  and  everything  else 
on  such  a  bright,  clear  morning  as  this  ?"    She  did  not  truly  bdieve, 
there  was  no  real  fiuth  in  her  heart,  and  therefore  she  disobeyed  the  law 
of  her  safety  and  tamed  her  fiace  towards  Sodom.    Yet,  mark  yon,  she 
had  received  the  angels  in  her  honse,  she  had  seen  them  blind  the  wicked 
mob  around  her  door,  she  had  heard  their  majestic  words  of  persua- 
sion, and  felt  their  kind  compulsion :  she  had  plenty  of  evidence  that 
God  was  speaking,  but  she  doubted  the  truth  of  his  word,  and  here  was 
the  very  essence  of  her  sin.    What  if  some  of  you  that  have  mingled 
with  the  godly,  and  have  been  numbered  with  them,  and  have  par- 
ticipated in  their  worship,  should,  nevertheless,  come  short  because  of 
unbelief!    It  is  by  no  means  improbable,  for  out  of  all  that  came  out 
of  Egypt  there  were  only  two  that  entered  into  Canaan.    Thev  could 
not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief;  their  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness. 
May  it  never  come  to  pass  with  any  of  us  that  we  shall  leave  our  car- 
cases outside  of  the  eternal  hope  because  we,  too,  do  not  believe  in 
him  who  is  invisible,  but  must  needs  walk  according  to  the  sight  of  the 
eyes. 

Having  got  so  &r  as  lingering  and  doubting,  her  next  movement  was 
a  direct  act  of  rebellion, — she  turned  her  head :  she  was  bidden  not  to 
look,  bnt  she  dared  io  look.  Bebellion  is  as  much  seen  in  the  breach  oi 
what  appears  to  be  a  little  command  as  in  the  violation  of  a  great  pre- 
cept. Our  fall  at  the  first  came  from  the  plucking  of  forbidden  fruit, 
and  this  woman's  death  came  by  a  look !  Take  care  of  little  things. 
There  is  life  in  a  look,  and  here  is  a  case  in  which  there  was  death  in  a 
look.  She  looked,  but  why  did  she  look  ?  I  suppose  it  was  this :  her 
heart  was  that  way.  She  loved  Sodom;  and  the  separated  life  die 
abhorred.  She  had  led  her  husband  and  her  children  away  from  the 
peculiar  people  of  God,  for  she  felt  that  she  would  rather  mix  with  the 
reprobate  multitude  than  with  the  chosen  few.  She  was  not  of  the  spirit 
that  could  walk  with  God  alone,  she  clung  to  society  and  to  sin.  Though 
she  was  running  for  her  life  she  thought  of  her  household  stuff,  and  of 
the  ease  of  Sodom,  and  she  looked  hack  with  a  lingering  eye  because 
she  wanted  to  be  there ;  and  it  came  to  this,  that  as  her  eye  went  back 
her  whole  body  would  have  gone  back  if  time  had  been  allowed.  She 
already  lingered,  she  would  soon  have  turned.  That  one  glance  betrayed 
which  way  her  soul  was  going :  a  little  thing  in  professors  may  show 
what  they  are,  and  we  may  re^ly  betray  the  inward  turning  of  the  soul 


4d0  MSTBOEOLITAir  TABEBJSAOUL  PULPIT. 

bj  an  act  as  simple  as  tha^  of  torning  the  nedk  60  look  tomrds  Sodom. 
This  was  her  sin. 

Now,  dear  Mendsy  let  ns  remember  Lot's  wife  each  one  of  ns  by 
learning  a  personal  lesson^  Here  is  a  hard  thing ;  we  must  go  without 
tiie  camp,  or  ntteiij  ML  Can  70a  maintain  the  lifia  of  God  mud  wmlk 
with  Ghnst,  and  be  sqmiate  from  the  world?  Many  of  yoa  oaanot; 
yon  may  pretend,  to  do  so»  but  yon  cannot,  it  is  beyond  yon.  I  fear  that 
the  number  of  tme  Ghrktians  in  the  world  is  Tery  mudi  lea^  than  we 
suppose.  We  are  enonmbered  with  a  host  of  peo{de  who  call  tfasnHshu 
Gluistians,  but  are  as  mnch  of  the  world  as  other  people,  whoae  iidieiit- 
ance  is  in  the  w(»ld,  whose  pleasure  is  in  the  world,  whose  speedi  is 
worldly,  and  who  are  altogether  of  the  world;  and  because  thej.  aieof 
the  worid  the  world  loves  its  own;  and  therefore  th^ce  is^  litUa  or  no 
strife  between  them  and  the  world.  Ala%  I  fear  the  church  is  not  true 
to  itself,  and  therefore  the  world  begins  to  love  it.  It  says,  "  You  ha?e 
come  to  live  with  us,  and  do  as  we  do,  and  you  do  not  bear  your 
awkward  protests*  as  you  used  to  do,  and  so  we  need  not  to  bom  yoa 
aa  we  did  your  jGEuth^rs.  You  are  hail  fellow,  we^  met!  with  ui^  and 
therefore  we  will  treat  you  kindly."  Only  let  ua  live  as  Christ  lived,  and 
we  shall  find  the  dogs  of  this  world  howling  at.  us  as  thoy  used  to  da 
at  our  forefathers^  M^  heatersi  can  you  Uve  the  separated  life  ?  If  you 
caoy  God  help  you  and  bless  you  in  it,  but  if  you  cannot,  leooUect 
though  you  do  not  so  go  into  Sodom  as  to  indulge  in  its  grosser  8m% 
yet  the  very  looking  at  it,  the  wishing  for  it,,  the  desiring  to  be  diere 
shows  where  your  heart  is^  and  your  heart's  tendency  is  your  tme 
character.  You  will  be  judged  according  to  the  going  of  your  heart.  If 
your  heart  goes  toward  the  mountain  to  escape,  and  if  you  hasten  to  be 
away  with  Christ  to  be  his  separated  follower,  you  shall  be  saved :  but  if 
your  heart  still  goes  after*  evil  and  sin,  his  servants  ye  are  whom  ye 
obey,  and  &om  yonr  evil  master  you  shall  get  your  black  reward. 

IV.  Here  comes  our  remembrance  of  Lot*s  wife  in  the  fourth,  and 
most  solemn  place,  and  that  is — remember  that  hb&  doom  wa&  tsr- 
RIBLB.  '^Bemember  Lot's  wife."  Remember  that  she  perished  with 
the  same  doom  as  that  which  happened  to  the  inhabituits  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  btU  thai  doom  be/ell  h&r  at  the  gates  of  Zoar,  Oh,  if  I  mnat 
be  damned,  let  it  be  with  the  mass  of  the  ungodly,  having  ^ways  been 
one  of  them ;  but  to  get  up  to  the  very  gates  of  heaven,  and  to  penah 
there,  wiU  be  a  most  awfol  thing !  To  have  lived  with  Grod's  people,  to 
have. been  numbered  with  them,  to  have  been  joined  to  them  by  ties  of 
blood,  and  then  after  all  to  peridii,  will  be  horrible  indeed !  To  ham 
h£«rd  the  goq)el,  to  have  felib  the  gospel,  too,  in  a  measure,  to  have 
amended  one's  116  because  of  it,  to  have  escaped  from  the  filthiest  ceo^ 
ruption  of  the  world,  and  tP  have  become  moral,  and  amiable,  and  excel- 
lent, and  yet  still  not  to  have  been  weaned  from  the  world,  not  to  have 
been  clean  divorced  firom  sin,  and  so  to  perish, — the  thou^t  is  intoto- 
able.  That  same  brine  and  brimstone  which  fell  upon  the  inhabitants  of 
the  four  cities  o\'ertoQk  Lot's  wife.  She  was  on  the  margin  of  tha 
shower,  and  as  it  fell  she  was  salted  with  fire,  she  was  turned  into  a 
pillar  of  salt  where  she  stbod.  Dreadful  doom !  On  the  verge  of  mssKSf 
to  be  slain  by  justice ;  on  the  brink  of  salvation  to  be  the  yictiin  <n 
eternal  wrath ! 


REMEMBER  LOT'S  WIFE.  491 

This  came  upon  her  of  a  sudden,  too.  What  a  picture !  She  stops 
as  she  is  flyiug,  she  turns  her  head !  She  scarcely  looks  I  The  gaZiC  is 
not  long  enough  to  single  out  her  own  house — and^  lo,  she  is  turned  into 
a  pillar !  The  fire-salt  has  Men  on  her !  She  \nll  never  move  again  I 
She  had  not  time  to  start  or  turn,  and,  with  her  neck  just  as  it  was, 
she  stands  as  a  statue  of  salt,  a  warning  to  all  who  should  pass  that 
way.  I  do  not  suppose  Lot's  wife  to  be  standing  there  now,  as  some 
travellers  have  imagined:  the  pillar  was  not  even  there  in  Christ's 
day,  for  if  it  had  been,  as  Bengel  very  properly  remarks,  our  Lord 
would  have  siaid,  ''See  Lot's  wife";  but  as  she  was  not  there  he 
said,  **  Remember"  her.  Her  doom  came  on  a  sudden,  without  a  further 
warning  or  a  moment's  time  to  consider.  What  if  sudden  death  should 
strike  some  of  you  down  at  this  moment  ?  You  professors  who  still  love 
the  world,  what  if  you  now  fell  dead  ?  You  professed  Christians  who 
sneak  in  among  the  ungodly  to  have  a  suck  at  their  pleasures,  suppose 
you  should  be  struck  down  in  the  theatre  one  of  these  days !  You  that 
pretend  to  be  Christians  and  frequent  the  dancing  saloon,  suppose  you 
diould  Ml  dead  there !  It  would  not  be  a  new  thing  under  the  sun,  for 
God  deals  severely  with  those  who  profess  to  come  under  his  covenant ; 
he  has  jealous  laws  for  those  who  join  his  church  and  vet  have  not 
the  grace  of  God  in  their  hearts.  These  men  die  not  the  death  of  com- 
mon men,  but  are  often  overtaken  by  strange  punishments,  that  the 
world  may  see  that  the  Lord  hath  set  a  wall  of  fire  around  his  church, 
which  none  may  break  through  on  peril  of  their  lives.  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  entered  the  church,  but  they  could  not  live  there ;  a  glance  of 
Peter*s  eye  and  they  fell  dead  before  him.  Such  judgments  still  purge 
the  ranks  of  the  professing  church,  as  all  that  observe  must  know,  for  the 
Lord  will  be  sanctified  of  them  that  come  near  to  him.  "  For  this  cause," 
saith  the  apostle,  "  Some  are  sickly  among  you,  and  many  deep,"  be- 
cause the  discipline  of  God  goes  on  in  the  midst  of  lus  visible  church. 
He  lets  the  world  alone  till  the  fire-shower  comes,  but  to  those  that  pro- 
fess to  be  his  people  he  is  always  a  jealous  God.  I  speak  strong  things ; 
strong  things  are  wanted  in  these  compromising  days.  May  the  Holy 
Ghost  impress  these  weighty  facts  on  all  your  heuias. 

The  worst  point,  perhaps,  about  the  perishing  of  Lot's  wife  lay  in 
this,  that  she  perished  in  the  very  act  of  sin,  and  had  no  space  for  re- 
pentance given  her.  In  the  instant  she  turned  her  head  she  was  a 
pillar  of  salt.  It  is  a  dreadfiil  thing  to  die  in  the  very  act  of  sin, 
to  be  caught  away  by  the  justice  of  God  while  the  transgression 
is  being  perpetrated,  let  such  a  thing  may  happen,  and  let  those  who 
profess  to  be  Christians  and  yet  parley  with  sin  "remember  Lot's  wife,'* 
and  how  swift  God  is  to  deal  out  his  judgment  against  professors  who 
betray  his  holy  name  and  cause. 

I  cannot  help  going  back  to  the  text  I  started  with,  which  was  one 
of  my  own  makmg,  and  that  is,  "  Remember  Lot."  Though  Lot  him- 
self was  a  righteous  man  and  escaped  from  the  doom  of  the  wicked  city, 
vet  I  cannot  help  tracing  the  death  of  Lot's  wife  in  some  degree  to  her 
husband.  When  a  man  walks  with  God  and  imitates  God  he  gets  to  be  a 
great  character — that  is  Abraham.  When  a  man  walks  with  a  holy  man 
and  imitates  him  he  may  rise  to  be  a  good  character,  but  he  will  be  a 
weak  one — that  is  Lot    But  when  one  walks  with  Lot,  the  weak 


i92  METROPOLITAN  TABSfiVACIiE  PULPIT. 

character,  and  only  copies  him,  the  result  will  be  a  failure — that  is 
Lot's  wi&.    It  is  like  the  boy's  copy  book.    If  he  will  copy  the  top  Hue 
the  boy  makes  an  Abraham  line ;  bat  if  the  next  time  he  does  not  look 
at  the  top  line,  bat  imitates  the  second — that  makes  a  Lot  line,  very 
&i  short  of  the  JSist.    If  he  next  copies  I7o«  3,  the  Lot  line,  the  result 
will  be  a  poor  affior — that  is  Lots  wife.    Beloved,  we  are  to  lire 
having  the  perfect  Father  for  our  example,  looking  and  following  in  his 
stops,  and  if  we  do  so  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  we  shall  reach  a  grand, 
nd^ie,  Abrahamic  character.    Bat  suppose  you  get  to  imitate  some  good 
man,,  and  he  is  your  standard,  you  wtu  make  a  secondrrate  Christian,  it 
wHl  be  a  weak  a^air,  like  Lot.    And  then  if  your  wife  and  children  get 
copying  you^  oh,  the  mischief  that  must  come  of  it !    Lot  ought  to  have 
been  more  firm,  miare  steadfast,  more  thorough.    He  had  no  business  to 
have  gone  to  Sodom.    If  he  had  said  to  his  wife,  *^  No,  my  wife,  we 
belong  to  a  chosen  people.    God  called  us  out  of  Haran,  and  away  from 
tiie  gods  of  our  fatners,  that  we  might  live  a  separated  life,  and  here  I 
am  going  to  stop^  and  yon  must  stop  with  me,"  she  would  have  had  to 
obey,  or  even  if  she  had  not  dona  so.  Lot  was  not  to  do  evil  to  please  his 
wife.    She  could  not  have  learned  the  ways  of  Sodom — she  might  ha^e 
given  her  heart  still  to  the  world,  but  she  could  not  have  been  so  clearly 
mixed  up  with  it,  and  her  daughters  could  not  have  been  so  ill-moralled 
as  they  were  if  he  had  resolved  to  live  apart  from  the  town's  people. 
I  believe  that  fathers  and  husbands  ought  to  take  the  lead  in  the  manage- 
ment of  their  fsimilies,  and  parents  are  bound  to  arrange  their  house- 
holds after  a  godly  fashion.    Do  not  sav,  "  Oh,  we  cannot  manage  onr 
£3kmilies."    You  must  do  it.    £U  fiulea  in  this,  and,  instead  of  being 
firm,  he  timidly  said,  '*  Do  not  so,  my  sons.**    Poor  dear  old  Eli,  he 
did  not  like  to  get  into  trouble  with  his  sons  by  finding  &ult  with 
them.    But  what  did  his  softness  cost  him  ?    The  Lord  smote  his  &nil j 
because  he  had  not  ordered  his  household  aright.   If  Christian  men  leave 
their  &milies  to  go  anyhow  they  choose,  they  will  soon  find  the  Lord  has  a 
Qontrovers;^  with  them ;  and  if  the  children  and  if  the  wife  diould  after 
all  perish,  it  will  be  a  horrible  thought  for  the  head  of  the  household, 
even  if  he  be  a  saved  man,  that  it  was  his  ill  example  which  caused  their 
ruin.    It  was  partly  Lot's  own  doing  that  his  wife  oecame  what  she  was. 
If  Lot  had  never  gone  to  Sodom  his  wife  would  not  have  perished  near  iL 
Look  to  yourselves  lest  ye  lead  others  astray.    Keep  near  to  God  and 

Jou  will  l)e  blessed  and  become  a  blessing  to  others.  Abraham  did  not 
ave  this  trouble  with  San^,  nor  Isaac  with  Bebekah,  for  they  walked 
with  God,  and  their  influence  was  felt  in  their  tents.  Live  near 
to  God,  and  let  your  own  life  be 'according  to  the  command  which 
God  gave  the  patriarch — "Walk  with  me  and  be  thou  perfect,"  and  you 
shall  see  that  he  will  bless  your  household,  and  yoar  children  after 
you ;  but  if  you  do  not  thus  walk  before  the  Lord  you  will  have  to 
"remember  Lot's  wife."  May  God  add  his  blessing  on  these  words, 
for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


POETIOKS  OP  SCRIPTTIRB  EeAD  BEFORE  SkEMON— Gcuesis  xix.  12—26, 

and  Luke  xvii.  20 — ^28. 


Hymns  feom  "Ouk  Own  Hymn  Book"— 179,  849,  653. 


Pl^titij|0litmi  Sl^ab^matk  ftilpit 


THE  FIRST  NOTE  OP  MY  SONG. 


%  I 


tnm\ 

Delivered  on  Lobd's-day  Moening,  August  31st,  1879,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"Who  forgiyeth  all  thine  iDiquiUes."— Psalm  ciil.  8. 

1  AM  a  firm  believer,  not  only  in  the  inspiration  of  the  psalms  themselves, 
but  also  in  the  correctness  of  their  order.  I  believe  that  Paul  was  right 
when  he  called  a  certain  psalm  "  the  second  psalm,"  and  that  those  are 
wrong  who  so  disarrange  the  book  as  to  make  it  the  sixteenth.  Any- 
thing to  certain  radicals  in  theology  is  better  than  the  established  order ; 
they  change  for  change  sake.  Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  arrange 
the  psalms  chronologically,  and  critics  have  shifted  them  about  at  their 
pleasure,  according  to  this  theory  or  that.  Their  wisdom  is  utter  folly ; 
the  psalms  as  they  stand  have  an  order  most  appropriate  and  instructive. 
If  time  permitted  I  could  illustrate  this  in  many  ways,  but  for  this 
present  it  is  more  in  the  line  of  my  discourse  to  obsene  that  we  could 
not  have  understood  so  well  the  hundred  and  third  psalm  if  we  had  not 
first  read  the  thirty-second.  You  remember  how  the  thirty-second  begins : 
"  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered. 
Blessed  is  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  iniquity."  The 
pardoned  man  is  blessed,  and  then  he  blesses  God.  First  the  full,  deep, 
effective  blessing  comes  to  him  freely  from  the  Lord,  and  then  he  re- 
flects the  blessing,  and  exclaims  in  joyful  gratitude, ''  Bless  the  Lord, 
O  my  soul."  First,  we  are  blessed  with  the  pardon  of  sin,  and  then  we 
bless  God  for  the  pardon  of  sin.  The  divine  blessing  enters  our  hearts 
loaded  with  good  things ;  we  gladly  receive  the  heavenly  messenger,  and 
then  it  begins  to  sing  like  a  minstrel  at  a  feast,  nor  does  it  long  sing 
alone,  for  all  that  is  within  the  house  of  our  manhood  arouses  itself  to 
join  in  the  strain,  and  never  is  better  music  made  this  side  the  heavenly 
places  than  when  all  that  is  in  ns  is  stirred  up  God's  holy  name  to 
magnify  and  bless.  Our  text  is  one  stanza  of  the  never-ending  "  song 
of  loves." 

In  the  verse  before  ns  the  most  wonderful  point  to  my  mind  is  the 

atti'ibute  of  God  which  David  selects  for  special  praise : — "  All  that  is 

witliin  me  bless  his  holt/  name."    You  might  have  expected  to  read 

(*  gracious  name,"  or  *'  ^lerciful  naiqe,"  but  you  find  it  written  "  holy 

•     Nos.  1,492-3. 


/' 


40i  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

nomo":  indeed,  this  is  the  emphatio  point  of  the  wonder  of  forgiven 
sin,  that  a  holy  God  should  pass  it  by.  If  €k)d  could  wink  at  iniqaitj, 
if  there  were  something  in  his  nature  which  rendered  sin  tolerable  to 
him,  it  would  be  a  slight  thing  that  he  should  allow  it  to  go  un- 
punished ;  but  because  he  is  a  holy  Ood,  righteous,  just,  and  pure,  who 
cannot  look  upon  iniquity,  whose  fury  burns  against  evil,  therefore  it 
becomes  wonderful  even  to  amazement  that  he  should  forgive  our  ini- 
quities. To  accomplish  this  wonder  the  miracle  of  the  cross  was  wrought 
by  unspeakable  love.  0  man,  thou  hast  but  to  gain  a  true  idea  of  that 
holiness  which  is  like  a  consuming  fire,  that  holiness  which  even  angels 
cannot  gaze  upon,  but  of  which  they  sing  "  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God 
of  hosts," — thou  hast  but  to  gain  a  glimpse  of  that  unutterable  perfec- 
tion, and  thou  wilt  abhor  thyself  in  dust  and  ashes,  and  then  thoa  wilt 
marvel  to  think  that  the  thrice  holy  should  have  spared  thy  guilty  soul. 
How  abhorrent  is  thy  depravity  in  his  sight,  and  yet  he  does  not  smite 
thee !  What  art  thou  but  a  mass  of  pollution  ?  and  yet  the  Infinitely 
Pure  has  considered  thee  in  love !  What  art  thou  but  a  sink  of  im- 
purity ?  and  yet  the  All-perfect  One  has  looked  upon  thee  in  compassion. 
Dost  thou  believe  in  him  and  accept  of  his  dear  Son  ?  Then  grace  has 
looked  upon  thee.  Before  the  glance  of  love  omnipotent  thy  sin  shall 
disappear,  and  thine  iniquity  shall  for  ever  vanish.  0  blessed  deed  of 
boundless  mercy !  If  indeed  the  royal  pardon  has  been  sent  to  us  &um 
the  court  of  heaven  we  may  right  heartily  say,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my 
soul,  and  all  that  is  within  me  bless  his  holy  name,  who  forgiveth  all 
thine  iniquities." 

In  these  latter  days,  amongst  the  other  wonderful  things  which  have 
been  developed,  we  have  been  enriched  by  a  school  of  thinkers  who  kick 
against  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith,  and  rebel  against  the  idea 
of  the  atoncnmnt  and  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  The  meagre  gospel  which 
they  proclaim  to  us  poor  fallen  wretches  is  this — If  you  do  wrong,  there 
is  no  help  for  it,  you  will  have  to  reap  the  consequences.  If  you  do 
right  you  will  of  course  bring  your  hearts  into  a  healthier  condition,  and 
you  will  be  happy  in  proportion,  but  if  you  do  wrong  there  is  no  hope 
for  you,  there  certainly  will  come  upon  you  the  result  of  evil,  and  you 
will  suffer  till  you  work  yourself  right.  •*  Do  not  flatter  yourself,"  say 
they,  "  with  any  idea  of  grace  and  mercy  interposing :  there  either  is  no 
God,  or  if  there  be  one  he  will  take  no  notice  of  your  prayers,  but  will 
lot  you  develop  in  your  own  way.  The  fictions  of  substitution,  and 
imputation,  and  pardon  are  mere  delusions,  or  pious  subterfuges,  un- 
worthy of  rational  men."  These  "men  of  culture"  and  "modem 
thought"  are  intent  upon  robbing  us  of  the  essenee  of  the  gospel,  and 
under  cover  of  enforcing  a  truth  which  nobody  denies  they  unaermine 
the  special  doctrine  for  which  revelation  was  given.  It  is  true  that  upon 
man's  character  his  true  condition  depends,  but  this  by  no  means  dis- 
proves the  interpositions  of  supreme  love.  Woe  to  us  if  their  philosophy 
should  be  tnie,  and  woe  to  them  also ;  yea,  woe  to  the  whole  worla  if 
their  denial  of  our  best  hope  should  be  accepted  for  truth.  As  for  us, 
this  gracious  forgiveness  which  they  deny  touches  the  chief  spring  of 
our  soul,  and  stirs  us  with  a  hope  of  better  things;  this  very  grace  which 
they  deprecate  as  though  it  were  immoral,  and  could  not  work  men 
Awards  holiness,  is  the  cause  in  our  soul  of  hatred  to  sin,  and  the  source 


THE  FIRST  KTOTE  OF  MY  SONG.  495 

of  our  liearfcs'  noblest  aspirations  after  lioliness.  Moved  by  gratitude,  we 
long  to  honour  onr  pardoning  God,  who,  thongh  he  be  glorious  in  holi- 
ness, is  also  glorious  in  grace  when  he  blots  out  sin.  We  would  foin 
prove  by  our  lives  that  we  have  not  in  vain  received  this  gift  of  mercy, 
oy  letting  all  men  see  that  we  are  now  dead  to  sin,  and  cannot  live  any 
loncjer  therein.  Evangelism  does  not  flatter  mere  morality  by  making 
it  the  rival  of  Christ,  but  it  is  the  highest  promoter  of  all  that  is  honest, 
temperate,  and  of  good  report,  as  our  daily  conversation  shall  prove. 

The  grand  truth  of  forgiven  sin  is  our  subject  at  this  time.  I  hope  I 
cannot  say  anything  which  will  be  new  to  you  upon  this  point,  for  if  I 
could  it  would  look  as  if  you  did  not  already  understand  this  early 
privilege  of  true  believers.  Many  of  you  understand  it  and  enjoy  it, 
and  therefore  I  can  only  bring  to  your  remembrance  old  fects ;  but 
these,  like  well-stored  ana  ripe  fruit,  will  be  exceedingly  sweet.  I  spread 
the  table,  not  with  foreign  delicacies  and  novel  dainties,  but  with  the 
every-day  fare  of  the  great  Father's  house.  Our  sermon  will  be  simple,' 
but  I  trust  it  will  be  most  consoling ;  it  will  not  display  the  ability  of 
the  speaker,  but  it  will  reveal  the  grace  of  his  Master,  and  this  is  his 
heart's  desire. 

"  I  believe  in  the  forgiveness  of  sin,"  is  one  of  the  most  blessed  sen- 
tences of  the  creed.  Dear  friends,  we  do  most  joyfully  believe  in  it,  and, 
what  is  more,  we  enjoy  the  truth  personally  as  a  matter  of  fact  in  our 
own  case.  May  we  reel  the  joy  of  it  at  this  good  hour.  0  Holy  Spirit, 
bear  witness  with  the  water  and  the  blood. 

I.  In  speaking  of  the  pardon  of  sin,  I  shall  remark,  first,  that  it  is 
A  PRIMARY  BLESSiKG.  Obscrvc,  it  is  put  first  in  the  catalogue  given  by 
the  Psalmist.  It  is  not  written,  "  Who  healeth  all  thy  diseases,  who  for- 
giveth  all  thine  iniquities."  No,  but  the  hst  commences  thus,  "Who 
forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities."  Forgiveness  leads  the  van,  and  stands  in 
the  forefront  of  the  host  of  mercies.  When  the  angels  of  God  meet  us, 
the  first  messenger  of  love  that  comforts  our  heart  brings  in  his  hand 
pardon  for  our  transgressions.  As  the  olive  leaf  in  the  dove's  mouth 
proved  to  Noah  that  all  the  waters  were  assuaged,  so  does  a  sense  of 
forgiven  sin  assure  us  that  our  great  griefs  are  ended,  and  our  liberty 
and  joy  has  come.    Pardon  shines  first  of  the  stars  of  mercy. 

A  main  reason  for  this  is  the  fact  that  we  never  enjoij  a  mercy  as  a 
mei'cyfrom  God  till  we  receive  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  A  man  lives  while 
his  sin  is  unforgiven ;  he  cats,  he  drinks,  he  sleeps,  he  wakes,  and  talks 
about  enjoying  life,  but  none  of  these  things  are  received  by  him  as  gifts 
from  God.  If  he  thinks  upon  God  at  all,  the  divine  name  is  a  terror  to 
him  :  he  does  not  cat  his  bread  as  though  it  were  given  by  a  Father's 
hand,  nor  does  he  put  on  his  garments  as  though  he  were  clothed  by 
divine  love.  That  cannot  be  while  he  abides  under  divine  anger.  The 
unpardoned  sinner  is  barely  able  to  see  God  as  his  Benefactor;  as  hia 
Father  he  knows  him  not.  God  does  bestow  mercies  upon  unpardoned 
men  and  women,  but  they  cannot  receive  them  as  such  until  first  of  all 
they  come  to  know  that  their  transgression  is  forgiven. 

Brethren,  Ihere  are  many  mercies  which  are  not  given  at  all,  and  can- 
not he  given  until  first  of  all  the  pardon  of  sin  has  been  bestowed,  it  would 
be  out  of  place  and  inconsistent  to  give  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  to 
unpardoned  sinners.    For  instance,  why  should  God  heal  the  diseases  of 


49C  METEOI'OLITAN  TABEONACLB  PULPIT. 

a  man  under  condemnation  for  sin  ?  Ifc  is  but  a  scant  mercy  which  would 
seek  the  health  of  a  man  condemned  to  die :  by  all  means  relieve  his  pain, 
but  his  disease  you  may  let  alone.  We  cannot  expect  God  to  crown  a 
man  with  lovingkindness  and  tender  mercies  while  still  he  is  dead  in 
sin,  and  lives  in  daily  dread  of  a  second  death — a  death  etemaL  A  coro> 
nation  for  a  condemned  criminal  would  be  a  superfluity  of  inconsistency. 
To  crown  a  hardened  convict  who  lies  in  the  cell  of  Newgate  awaiting 
his  execution  would  be'a  wretched  mockery.  How  could  it  be  that  God 
should  wreathe  a  chaplet  of  &vour8  for  a  man  who  has  refused  his  mercy 
and  wilfully  abides  under  his  wrath  on  account  of  unconfessed  and  un- 
pardoned sin?  How  could  our  spiritual  youth  be  renewed  like  the 
eagle's,  or  our  mouth  be  satisfied  with  good  things,  while  as  yet  we  are 
doomed  to  die  and  are  withering  away  in  our  wickedness?  What  are 
good  things  to  a  tortured  conscience,  and  what  is  renewed  youth  to  a 
soul  racked  by  remorse  ?  No :  pardoned  sin  must  clear  the  road  for  the 
march  of  grace,  this  jungle  oi  iniquity  must  be  removed  to  make  a 
highwJEty  for  our  God.  The  application  of  the  blood  of  sprinkling  must 
be  felt,  the  cleansing  power  of  the  atonement  must  be  known,  or  the  rest 
of  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  will  never  reach' us. 

And  well  may  the  Lord  place  this  mercy  first,  because  taken  U  com^s 
it  ensures  all  the  rest.  The  forgiveness  of  sin  is  the  day-dawn  which  is 
always  followed  by  the  cleai*er  light.  God  doth  not  pardon  us  and  then 
leave  us  to  perish  of  our  spiritual  diseases,  but  when  once  he  grants 
a  plenary  absolution  then  his  Spirit  exercises  his  healing  art  and  re- 
covers us  of  the  leprosy  of  sin.  When  the  Lord  forgives  all  our  iniquities 
it  is  not  long  before  we  perceive  that  our  life  is  redeemed  from  de- 
struction, crowned  with  lovingkinduess,  and  satisfied  with  good  things 
to  the  renewal  of  its  youth.  Pardon  never  comes  alone,  troops  of 
blessings  attend  it.  The  voice  of  the  turtle,  which  speaks  peace  b^i^ause 
of  pardoned  sin,  also  tells  that  the  rain  is  over  and  gone,  and  that  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit  will  soon  appear.  He  who  gave  his  Son's  blood  to 
wash  us  will  withhold  no  good  thing  from  us.  He  who  hath  said  to  ns, 
**  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,"  has  given  us  a  grant  of  all  needful  good  in 
that  one  sentence  of  his  love.  Like  the  comet's  nucleus,  which  bears  a 
streaming  train  of  light  behind  it,  so  doth  forgiveness  draw  along  with 
it  a  far-reaching  glory  of  boundless  favour.  Well  may  this  blessing  be 
set  fii-st,  since  it  carries  all  the  rest  in  its  loins. 

**  When  dreadful  guilt  is  done  away 

No  other  fears  we  know  ; 
That  hand,  which  scatters  pardons  down, 

Shall  crowns  of  life  bestow.*' 

There  is  this,  also,  to  be  thought  of,  that  the  pardon  of  sin  comes 
flrat,  that  it  may  be  seen  to  he  an  act  of  pure  grace.  If  any  other  bless- 
ing had  preceded  it,  our  legal  spirits  would  have  dreamed  of  merit  and 
fitness :  if  any  attainment  had  been  reached  by  us  before  the  forgiveness 
of  sins  was  given,  we  might  have  been  tempted  to  glory  in  self;  but  now 
we  perceive  that  God  forgives  our  sins  before  he  heals  our  moral  diseases, 
and  therefore  there  is  no  room  for  pride  to  set  her  foot  upon.  While  the 
man  is  still  white  with  the  leprosy  of  sin,  the  Lord  visits  him  in  pity  to 
show  that  he  looks  for  nothing  in  man  as  the  motive  power  of  his  love. 


THE  FIBST  NOTE  OF  HY  BONG.  497 

While  yet  the  sinner  has  his  jadgment  perverted,  his  afPections  pol- 
lilted^  and  his  desires  depraved,  even  while  he  is  full  of  the  plague  of 
his  own  heart,  God  saith  to  him,  "  I  have  forgiven  thee."  This,  there- 
fore, is  pure  grace,  and  is  set  in  the  ibreground  that  its  sovereignty  and 
freeness  may  be  written  before  our  eyes  as  with  a  sunbeam.  God  pardons 
men  as  sinners  just  as  he  finds  them,  notwithstanding  that  they  have 
nothing  to  recommend  them  to  him.  Their  disease  is  so  foul,  indeed, 
that  they  might  have  been  spumed  for  their  loathsomeness,  if  it  were 
not  for  his  boundless  love ;  but  seeing  them  plunged  in  evil  and  dead  in 
siu,  he  magnifies  his  mercy  by  quickening  them  to  new  life  and  forgiving 
them  all  their  trespasses. 

Brethren,  on  this  first  head  I  want  to  be  very  practical,  and  say  to 
you — ^let  us  seek  this  forgiveness  of  sin  as  a  primary  blessing  if  we  have 
not  yet  obtained  it.  If  the  Holy  Spirit  puts  it  first,  let  us  seek  it  first. 
Be  wise,  0  you  who  feel  your  guilt,  and  do  not  go  about  first  of  all  to 
make  a  reformation  in  yourselves,  and  then  to  come  to  God  for  mercy ; 
but  come  first  to  him,  and  then  see  afler  other  things.  When  you  come 
to  him  do  not  ask  him  first  to  heal  your  soul's  disease,  but  first  to 
forgive  your  iniquities.  Follow  God's  order,  and  you  cannot  go  amiss : 
there  is  infinite  wisdom  in  all  the  Lord's  arrangements.  Do  not,  I  pray 
you,  try  to  make  that  first  which  God  makes  second,  nor  that  second 
which  God  makes  first.  You  are  guilty,  ask  for  pardon  at  the  outset. 
Tlirough  Jesus  Christ  a  free  pardon  is  proclaimed,  pardon  for  sins  of 
deepest  dye,  pardon  bought  and  sealed  with  his  atoning  blood.  Come 
and  receive  it  just  as  you  are.  Though  there  is  nothing  in  you  to  com- 
mend you  to  the  divine  regard,  you  are  now  in  just  such  a  state  as  best 
prepares  you  for  his  sovereign  grace.  Are  you  startled  at  this  statement  ? 
It  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  truth.  You  are  empty,  therefore 
there  is  room  in  you  for  the  fulness  of  divine  mercv :  you  are  polluted, 
therefore  there  is  opportunity  to  show  the  power  of  the  blood  in  cleansing 
you :  you  are  guilty,  and  there  is  space  for  undeserved  mercy.  Plead 
your  guiltiness  and  say,  '*  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great." 
Do  not  urge  any  extenuation,  but  as  guilty  say,  "  Forgive  me."  In  your 
confessed  guiltiness  there  is  space  for  the  great  King  to  do  as  he  wills, 
and  put  away  your  sin  by  a  sovereign  act  of  mercy.  Let  your  first  desire 
be  pardoned  sin.  Do  not  wait  till  first  you  understand  all  mysteries : 
but  get  your  sins  forgiven.  Do  not  first  labour  to  attain  a  perfect  life, 
get  your  sins  forgiven.  Do  not  first  make  a  profession,  and  join  a 
church,  and  put  on  outward  religiousness.  Get  your  sins  forgiven.  There 
David's  psalm  begins,  and  there  yours  must  begin  if  God  in  love  accepts 
it, — "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  all  that  is  within  me  bless  his  holy 
name;  who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities."  That  is  our  first  heaa. 
Pardon  is  a  primary  blessing ;  seek  it  as  such. 

II.  Forgiveness  is  a  present  blessing.  This  is  very  apparent  in 
the  text,  wliich  is  in  the  present  tense : — "  Who  forgiveth  all  thine 
iniquities."  Not,  "  who  will,  perhaps,  forgive  you  on  your  death  bed ; " 
not  **  who  did  forgive  you  years  ago,  and  now  condemns  you,"  but "  who 
forgiveth  " — is  now  forgiving  daily,  hourly,  momentarily, — is  continually 
forgiving  your  iniquity. 

I  want  to  bring  this  fact  of  a  present  blessing  before  your  minds 
briefly^  but  very  clearly.    This  privilege  the  believer  has  actually  obtained 


498  METROPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PTTLriT. 

— all  Ills  sins  are  forgiven  at  this  moment  of  time.  Blessed  be  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  we  are  even  now  washed  from  sin.  We  shall  grow  in  grace,  bat 
we  shall  never  be  more  completely  pardoned  than  when  we  first  believed : 
we  shall  one  day  stand  before  the  glorious  presence  of  God  in  his  own 
sacred  courts,  and  see  the  Well-beloved  and  wear  his  likeness,  but  we 
shall  not  even  then  be  more  perfectly  forgiven  than  we  are  at  this  present 
moment.  Sin  depresses  our  spirit,  the  consciousness  of  it  often  makes 
us  weep  in  secret,  and  yet  none  of  it  is  imputed  to  us,  every  grain  of  it  is 
as  far  removed  from  us  as  the  east  is  fi^m  tlie  west.  Rejoice,  believer, 
that  the  Spirit  bears  this  witness — "  God  for  Christ*s  sake  hath  forgiven 
YOU."  As  many  as  have  looked  to  Christ  npon  the  cross  are  now 
justified  by  faith,  and  have  peace  with  God.  They  are  at  this  moment 
cleansed  from  all  sin  through  the  application  of  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ.    This  is  a  matter  of  present  fact,  and  not  of  mere  hope. 

According  to  the  text  this  present  mercy  is  perpetually  bestowed — ^be 
still  forgiveth  our  iniquity ;  there  is  pcipetuity  in  it.  At  this  very  moment 
I  may  be  mourning  my  sin,  but  Goa  is  forgiving  it.  Alas,  I  may  be 
sinning,  for  even  in  the  holiest  deeds  we  do  there  is  still  sin,  but  even 
then  God  is  still  forgiving.  If  indeed  you  are  a  believer  in  Jesus  Christ 
the  Lord  is  at  all  times  forgiving  you :  as  constant  as  your  sin  so  con- 
stant is  his  forgiveness.  Never  fall  into  the  notion  of  some  that  the 
one  forgiveness  which  wc  received  at  the  firat  has  rendered  it  unnecessary 
for  us  to  seek  new  forgiveness,  and  unnecessary  for  us  to  offer  new  confes- 
sion. It  is  not  so.  The  Lord  is  always  forgiving,  and  it  is  for  us  still 
to  be  seeking  that  blessing.  We  ask  each  day  for  daily  bread,  though  the 
promise  has  made  it  sure,  and  so  must  wc  daily  seek  mercy,  though  it  is 
already  promised.  Our  Lord  said,  "  After  this  manner  also  pray  ye,"  and 
a  part  or  that  prayer  is,  "Forgive  us  our  trespasses  as  we  forgive  them 
that  trespass  against  us."  I  know  that  certain  brethren  say  that  the 
Lord's  prayer  is  not  for  believers ;  but  their  dictum  in  such  a  case  is  not 
worth  tne  breath  they  waste  in  delivering  it.  I  am  quite  satisfied,  for 
one,  to  pray  as  my  Lord  taught  me,  and  if  thev  prefer  to  pray  as  their 
whims  teach  them  it  is  at  their  own  risk.  Besides,  I  read  that  we  are  to 
confess  our  sins  one  to  another ;  and  sins  to  another  are  certainly  sins 
towards  God.  If,  then,  we  are  to  confess  to  our  fellow-men  the  wrongs 
which  we  have  done  to  them,  it  will  take  a  great  deal  of  reasoning  to 
convince  me  that  we  are  not  to  confess  the  wrongs  which  we  do  towards 
our  heavenly  Father.  There  should  be  daily  confession ;  for  even  "  if  we 
walk  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the  light,"  and  that  is  a  very  high  condi- 
tion, and  if  we  have  fellowship  with  God  clearly  and  distinctly,  yet  even 
then  we  shall  need  to  have  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleansing  ns  frY>m 
all  sin.  We  still  sin  even  when  walking  in  the  light,  and  still  need  that 
Jesus  should  cleanse  us  by  his  blood.  Herein  is  our  consolation,  that 
Jesus  is  always  cleansing  us — "  he  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities."  Yon 
are  often  sinning,  but  he  is  always  forgiving  yon ;  you  are  oft«n  wander- 
ing, oft;en  erring,  oft^en  grieving  him,  but  "  he  forgiveth  all  thine  iniqui- 
ties." I  do  not  feel  like  preaching  when  I  touch  this  text.  I  heartily 
wish  I  could  sit  down  ana  have  a  happy  cry  over  this  blessed  truth  that 
my  God  is  at  this  moment  forgiving  me.  Oh,  poor  heart,  thou  hast 
much  to  chide  thyself  for,  but  thy  Lord  forgiveth  thee  I  Thou  art  a 
^-fr^ul,  foolish,  unstable,  selfish,  wayward  thing,  but  he  forgives  thee! 


THE  fnWT  MOTS  OF  XT  SOHO.  499 

Whatever  thy  faults,  known  and  unknown,  he  is  forgiving  thee  now. 
Even  whilst  thon  art  lamenting  thj  many  transgressions  he  is  casting 
them  behind  his  back  and  hurling  them  into  the  depths  of  the  sea. 
"While  I  speak  to  you  with  my  voice  my  own  heart  is  singing  inwardly, 
**  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities." 

Beloved  brethren,  this  mercy  of  pardon  is  knowingly  received.  We 
know  that  we  are  forgiven.  "  Presumption,"  saith  one.  Simple  truth, 
say  I.  Do  you  think  David  would  say,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  who 
may  or  may  not  have  forgiven  me."  Ah,  no ;  he  speaks  of  favours 
which  he  had  consciously  received.  Nobody  ever  sings  over  uncertain 
blessings.  I  say  again,  nobody  ever  sings  over  an  uncertain  pardon  ;  a 
doubt  as  to  our  forgiveness  is  fotal  to  all  joy,  for  it  lets  in  the  dread  fear 
of  divine  wrath.  Absolute  certainty  must  be  realized  ere  a  heart  can 
make  a  sonnet  concerning  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  When  by  faith  we 
accept  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  our  all  in  all  we  are  as  clear  about  God's 
having  forgiven  us  our  sin  as  we  are  about  our  having  committed  it. 
Upon  our  believing  we  have  as  good  evidence  of  being  cleansed  as  we 
had  of  having  been  foul :  our  sense  of  guilt  arises  from  our  knowledge  of 
the  law,  and  that  is  clear ;  but  our  sense  of  forgiveness  comes  from  our 
knowledge  of  the  gospel,  and  that  is  equally  clear.  I  am  not  sure  that  I 
was  condemned  if  there  be  a  question  about  the  law ;  but  there  is  no 
question,  and  as  a  sinner  I  am  condemned :  in  the  same  way  I  am  not 
assuredly  absolved  if  there  is  a  question  about  the  gospel ;  but  as  there  is 
110  question  about  the  gospel  I  am  assuredly  absolved,  because  I  believe 
in  Jesus.  Resting  in  Christ,  and  trusting  alone  in  him,  you  and  I 
may  have  a  present  conscious  sense  of  pardon,  we  may  know  our  forgive- 
ness, and  be  beyond  doubt  concerning  it.  God  bring  us  to  that  happy 
condition. 

Then,  brethren,  this  present  hlea&ing  i%  immediaiely  efficient,  for  it  secixceB 
us  a  present  right  to  all  that  is  involved  in  being  pardoned.  If  a  man  is 
forgiven  his  offences  he  has  peace  towards  God,  he  has  boldness  to  enjoy 
access  to  God,  and  reason  to  expect  that  his  petitions  will  be  answeredf. 
The  stone  which  was  lying  at  the  door  blocking  his  acceptance  is  now 
rolled  way ;  he  is  a  justified  man,  and  he  is  accepted  in  the  Beloved. 
God  treats  him  as  just,  and  rewards  him  as  such.  The  man  is  free  from 
guilt,  for  God  has  absolved  him ;  he  is  worthy  in  the  sight  of  the  great 
Judge  of  all  the  earth.  "  Being  justified  bv  faith  "  we  have — .  Ah,  my 
brethren,  we  have  not  only  what  the  apostle  tells  us,  but  we  have  untold 
blessings ;  we  have  time  and  eternity,  life  and  death,  earth  and  heaven, 
Christ  and  God.  These  are  our  own  now;  we  have  a  present  portion 
in  all  the  covenant  promises  and  provisions. 

The  practical  point  is  this :  if  this  forgiveness  of  sin  be  a  present 
blessing,  seek  it  for  to-day ;  seek  it  at  once.  Do  not  be  satisfied  unkss  you 
are  forgiven  now ;  do  not  be  satisfied  unless  you  are  forgiven  everv  day, 
and  all*  the  day ;  do  not  put  off  your  soul  with  a  bare  hope,  but  labour 
for  certainty ;  do  not  foolishly  postpone  it  in  the  inere  chance  that  at  the 
last  pinch,  when  you  come  to  die,  you  may  be  forgiven,  but  cry  for  it 
now.  Why,  man  alive,  if  I  knew  I  could  gain  pardon  when  I  came  to 
die  I  should  not  like  to  spend  the  interval  Avithout  it.  It  is  such  a 
privilege  to  be  forgiven  that  I  want  it  at  once,  and  cannot  endure 
delay.    Oh,  the  sense  of  pardoned  sin !    What  sweetness !    What  rest ! 


500  UETROPOLITAK  TABEBNACLK  PULTIT. 

I  know  its  rapture  in  my  own  heart ;  it  is  my  support  and  my  delight ; 
making  my  heart  to  be  ul  music  and  dancing.  We  at  this  present  hour 
joy  in  God  through  our  liord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  we  have  received 
the  atonement.  I  charge  you,  do  not  postpone  this  matter :  why  should 
you  put  off  a  joy  ?  0  repenting  sinner,  believe  that  you  can  have  for- 
giveness through  Christ  Jesus,  and  you  shall  have  it.  Going  to  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  with  a  humble  confession  of  your  sin,  you  shall 
to-day  enjoy  the  Father's  kiss  of  reconciliation,  and  your  conscience  shall 
be  thoroughly  purged  from  the  least  taint  of  sin.  May  the  Holy  Ghosc 
work  this  present  sense  of  forgiveness  in  you  all. 

III.  Thirdly,  this  is  a  personal  blessing.  I  cannot  resist  the 
tendency  in  reading  to  lay  the  stress  upon  the  word  "  /Aww."  "  Who 
forgiveth  all  thifie  iniquities."  Our  Lord  is  a  blessed  Grod  to  forgive  any- 
body, but  that  he  should  forgive  me  is  the  greatest  feat  of  his  mercy. 
A  good  brother  wrote  me  the  other  day,  "  Mercy  had  reached  its  ^nith 
when  it  saved  m$.'*  He  thought  so  of  himself,  and  we  may  each  one 
think  the  same  of  his  own  case. 

^  Tis  grace,  *tis  glorious  mce  indeed, 
Grace  without  parallel  : 
Great !  but  how  great  I  doth  far  exceed 
The  power  of  speech  to  tell." 

You  can  all  rejoice  that  (Jod  forgives  iniquity,  but  your  rejoicing  will 
never  reach  so  high  as  when  you  know  that  he  forgives  all  your  iniquity. 
Honey  is  not  sweet  except  to  him  that  tastes  it. 

"  But  may  we  know  this  personally  ?"  saith  one.  I  answer,  '*  Yes." 
Some  of  us  know  that  God  has  forgiven  us,  because  we  have  the  chartut^ 
tchirh  he  describes  B&heing  forgiven.  He  forgives  those  who  confess  their 
sin : — *'  If  we  confess  our  sin,  he  is  faithfol  and  just  to  forgive  us  oar 
sin,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  We  have  made  con- 
fession before  his  face,  and  we  believe  his  word,  and  are  therefore  sure 
that  he  has  cleansed  us.  He  has  promised  mercy  to  those  who  forsake 
their  sins.  Having  forsaken  our  sins,  we  look  to  be  forgiven  for  Christ's 
sake.  Forgiveness  is  also  freely  promised  to  those  who  look  to  Jesus  for 
it.  We  are  looking  to  him,  and  we  arc  forgiven.  Are  you  not  believers  ? 
Then  there  is  no  hope  for  you,  but  if  you  are  trusting  alone  in  Jesus 
Christ  your  iniquity  is  blotted  out.  "  He  that  believeth  is  justified  from 
all  things  from  which  he  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  Moses."  In 
repentance,  in  confession  of  sin,  in  forsaking  sin,  and  in  feith  in  our  Lord 
Jesus,  we  have  the  marks  of  pardoned  sinners^  and  these  marks  are 
apparent  in  our  souls. 

Moreover,  brethren,  if  you  have  any  doubt  about  whether  the  Lord 
forgives  you  now,  it  will  be  well  for  you  to  make  sure  that  you  acc^i 
his  way  of  salvation.  It  is  by  faith  in  his  dear  Son.  Do  you  want 
any  other  way?  He  forgives  because  Jesus  stood  in  the  sinner's  place, 
and  he  puts  the  sinner  into  Christ's  place.  Are  you  satisfied  with  that 
great  plan  of  salvation  by  substitution,  by  atonement,  by  sacrifice  ?  Oh, 
I  hear  you  say, ''  Satisfied  with  it !  I  am  delighted  with  it :  it  is  all  my 
salvation,  and  all  my  desire."  Then,  if  you  have  accepted  what  God 
sets  before  yon,  it  is  not  possible  that  he  should  refuse  you  the  blessing 
which  he  has  promised.    What  saith  the  Scripture?    "Through  his 


TUK   FIBST  KOTK  OF  MY  tiONG.  501 

name  whosoeTer  believeth  in  him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins."  As 
dure  as  you  have  received  Christ  your  sin  is  removed  from  yon.  It 
cannot  he  that  a  man  hath  Christ  and  hath  his  sin,  too ;  for  his  iniquity 
must  be  covered  to  whom  Christ  is  all  in  all.  Yes,  \vc  have  this  pardon 
personally  and  presently,  for  we  believe  in  Jesus.  Dost  thou  not  believe 
in  the  divine  wo  d  and  tesHmony  concmiiUig  fJle  pardon  of  sinf  Hast 
thou  not  heard  the  Lord  God  declare  that  his  Son  hath  for  ever  put 
away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself?  What  better  evidence  dost  thou 
want  than  the  infallible  word?  Dost  thou  look  for  feeUngs,  signs, 
tokens,  or  other  things  to  corroborate  the  witness  of  thy  God  ?  Is  he 
an  unreliable  witness?  Is  not  his  word  enough,  alone,  and  by  itself? 
It  is  so  to  those  that  have  believed,  and  it  ought  to  be  so  to  all  men. 
For  my  own  part,  I  had  rather  venture  my  soul  upon  one  word  of  God 
in  the  sacred  Scriptures  than  upon  all  the  whispers  of  angels  that  men 
have  ever  heard,  all  the  visions  that  men  have  ever  seen,  and  all  the 
ccstacies  of  delight  that  saints  have  ever  felt.  All  the  world,  all  the 
church,  and  all  heaven  put  together  cannot  make  up  the  weight  of  one 
sentence  of  God's  word. 

One  truth  I  woald  like  to  mention,  it  is  this :  we  know  that  we  are  at 
this  moment  forgiven,  because  tve  at  this  moment  give  to  the  Lord 
Jestie  Christ  that  look  which  brings  forgiveness.  I  will  put  aside  all 
the  past,  I  will  put  aside  all  our  experience,  all  the  change  of  heart 
which  we  hope  we  have  undergone,  and  I  will  pat  the  matter  altogether 
apart  from  the  past.  If  I  never  did  look  to  thee,  Immanuel,  crucified 
for  me,  I  look  to  thee  now !  If  I  have  never  rested  in  thee  before  I  will 
rest  in  thee  now. 

*<  A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm, 
On  thy  kind  arms  1  fall ; 
Be  thou  my  strength  and  righteousness, 
My  Jesus,  and  my  all." 

Oh,  then,  we  are  forgiven.  We  must  be  forgiven.  Never  soul  did  give 
that  look  without  finding  forgiveness  of  sin  as  surely  as  the  Israelite  found 
healing  when  he  looked  to  the  brazen  serpent.  So,  beloved,  if  that  be 
the  case,  I  want  you  to  view  this  blessing  as  a  personal  possession,  and 
seek  it  as  such.  I  would  to  God  that  all  of  you  that  hear  me  would  seek 
personal  forgiveness  at  this  moment.  Do  not  think  of  the  preacher,  or 
the  heavy  style  in  which  he  sets  forth  this  truth,  but  think  of  yourself 
and  your  personal  need  of  cleansing.  Think  nothing  just  now  of 
those  that  sit  at  your  side,  but  seek  for  mercy  at  the  hand  of  God, 
each  man,  each  woman,  each  child,  for  himself,  or  hei'self.  Pardon 
is  to  be  had :  rest  not  till  you  have  it.  It  will  not  avail  you  if  all 
the  rest  of  the  congregation  should  be  pardoned  if  sin  should  remain 
upon  yoiL  Breathe,  then,  the  personal  prayer  to  a  personal  Sa\iour : 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  Trust  in  Christ  for  yourself,  and  you 
shall  sing  to-day,  "  Who  forgiveth  all  mine  iniquities."  Blessed  be  his 
name. 

lY.  I  have  now  a  fourth  point  to  call  your  attention  to,  and  that  is, 
this  is  A  PERFECT  BLESSING.  '' Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities." 
For,  recollect,  the  forgiveness  spoken  of  in  the  text  is  a  divine  one.  It 
is  God  that  forgiveth  all  our  iniquities.    A  man's  forgiveness  when  we 


502  HETUOPOLITAH  TABEENACS^B  PULPIT. 

have  wronged  him  is  to  be  sought,  and  irhen  we  get  it  we  shall  find  ia 
many  instances  that  it  is  a  poor,  iialMiearted  affair.  Men  often  saj  they 
forgive,  "  but " — now,  that  very  hesitation  in  their  speech  shows  it  is 
not  a  full  and  free  forgiveness ;  but  when  God  does  anrthing  he  does  it 
thoroughly.  Now,  listen,  just  this  minute.  When  God  ehaiges  sin  npon 
a  man  he  does  it  after  a  very  high  standard,  for  every  idle  word  that  man 
shall  speak  he  shall  be  brought  into  judgment :  when  God  condemns  man 
he  does  it  after  an  equally  elevated  standard,  and  when  God  pnnishea 
man  he  does  it  after  a  solemn  and  awful  manner.  The  new  gouB  lately 
oome  up  have  a  little  hell  because  they  are  little  gods,  but  my  God, 
the  God  of  the  whole  earth,  has  a  great  hell  and  a  fearful  doom,  for 
what  he  doth  is  done  by  rule  of  strict  justice.  Believe  me,  he  pardons 
to  the  same  scale :  all  his  acts  are  of  a  sublime  character.  The  standard 
of  punishment  is  the  standard  of  forgiveness.  You  know  how  he  judges, 
how  he  condemns,  how  he  punishes ;  after  thett  same  thorough.  God- 
like manner  he  doth  forgive.  He  makes  a  clean  sweep  of  sin,  according 
to  that  blessed  word,  "  The  day  cometh,  saith  the  Lord,  when  the  ain  of 
Jacob  shall  be  sought  for  and  it  shall  not  be  found :  yea,  it  shall  not  be, 
saibh  the  Lord.''  *'I  will  subdue  all  their  iniquities,  and  oast  their 
transgressions  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  "  I  have  blotted  out  thine 
iniquities  as  a  thick  cloud,  and  as  a  doud  thy  sins":  they  shall  not  be 
mentioned  against  thee  any  more  for  ever."  Oh,  it  is  a  perfect  blessing, 
for  it  is  a  divine  pardon,  and  you  see  its  completeness  expressed  in  that 
word  "  all."  "  Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities."  He  does  not  remove 
the  great  ones,  and  leave  the  Uttle  ones  to  rankle ;  not  the  little  ones, 
and  leave  one  great  black  one  to  devour  us,  but  "all"  of  them  he  coTera 
and  annihilates  with  the  effectual  atonement  made  by  his  dear  Son. 

And  then  notice  the  word  which  in  our  text  expresses  sin — "  iniquities." 
Pull  it  to  pieces :  it  is  in-equities — the  matters  in  which  we  are  not 
according  to  equity.  Sometimes  we  fall  short,  sometimes  we  go  beyond, 
sometimes  we  do  not  act  in  equity  towards  our  friends,  our  relatives,  or 
strangers ;  constantly  we  do  not  act  in  strict  equity  towards  God.  Now, 
he  saith,  all  our  in-equities — everything  in  which  we  fall  short  of  the 
perfect  rule  of  equity,  or  go  beyond  that  rule— all  these  he  forgiveth. 
What  a  blessed,  comprehensive  word  this  is.  I  was  reading  the  other 
day  in  a  very  delightful  little  book,  entitled, "  Never  say  '  die/  "  which  is 
admirably  calculated  to  comfort  a  seeking  soul,  these  few  words,  which 
struck  me  forcibly.*  The  writer  says,  "  All  our  righteousnesses  are  as 
filthy  rags.  If  you  will  bring  your  good  living  and  your  precious 
righteousness  to  Christ  you  must  make  sin  of  the  whole  hi — ^there  is 
nothing  else  you  can  do  isNith  it — and  ask  to  have  it  all  forgiven :  the 
man  who  unll  be  saved  by  his  own  righteousness  says  hopelessly,  ^  Die,'  to 
his  own  soul.  Tou  must  cast  all  this  splendid  rubbish  of  yours  oil  the  heap 
along  with  the  oaths  and  the  lies,  the  drinkings  and  Sabbath  breakings, 
and  the  foul  living,  and  let  the  ever-flowing  stream  that  keeps  eddying 
round  wash  it  all  away."  As  I  read  it  I  thought, — That  is  what 
I  will  do  with  mine  :  I  will  put  my  sermons,  my  prayers,  my  almsgivings 
—everything  else — on  the  same  heap  as  my  sins,  and  let  them  go  together. 

•  "  Nerer  eay  *  die.'    A  Talk  with  Old  Friends."    By  8.  G.  Prout    Niabet  &  Co. 
In  paper  cOTers,  lixpence. 


THS  FIRST  NOTE  OF  HY  BOKO.  508 

Lord,  be  pleased  to  forgive  all  mine  in-equities,  my  good  works  and  my 
bad  worlm.  I  might  have  tried  to  sort  them  a  little,  but  one  is  so 
much  like  the  other  that  I  fling  them  all  overboard,  and  swim  to  gloiy  on 
the  cross.  We  have  no  hope  but  in  our  Lord  Jesus :  we  need  pardoning 
mercy  for  all  we  have  ever  done,  for  sin  has  been  mixed  with  it  all. 
I  advise  you,  my  hearer,  to  put  the  whole  life  you  have  lived  into  one 
lump,  and  say, "  Lord,  forgive  me  the  whole  of  it :  I  cannot  acknowledge 
every  sin,  for  I  do  not  know  them  all ;  sin  is  such  a  subtle  thing  that  it 
has  penetrated  into  my  most.holy  thoughts  and  desires,  but,  Lord, 
cleanse  me  &om  all  sin  through  the  atoning  blood." 

"Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities."  What  a  blessed  thing  is  this. 
For  when  God  once  forgives  he  forgives  for  ever ;  he  never  plays  fast 
and  loose,  and  he  never  brings  to  mind  again  that  of  which  he  hath  said, 
'*  I  will  remember  it  no  more."  0  my  brother,  if  thou  art  pardoned 
once  thou  art  forgiven  once  for  all,  irreversible  acquittals  God  oestows ; 
"  for  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance."  Immuta- 
bility is  stamped  upon  the  patent  of  our  pardon.  Until  God  can  change 
or  lie,  he  never  will  bring  to  mind  again  the  sin  of  that  man  whom  he 
liath  pardoned,    "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee :  go  in  peace." 

Now,  I  want  you,  practically,  to  use  this  head  by  seeking  to  obtain 
this  pardon  as  a  complete  thing.  Hosts  of  professing  Christians  never 
reach  to  this.  Many  of  you  do  not  believe  that  you  are  or  can  be  par- 
doned completely.  But  such  pardon  is  possible.  Do  not  rest  till  you 
have  it:  you  will  never  know  true  peace  of  mind  until  it  is  yours.  The 
Bomanist  cannot  believe  that  God  pardons  him  altogether,  and  he  never 
knows  that  he  is  safe.  It  is  a  very  poor  thing  you  gain  by  being  a 
Eomanist.  If  you  get  the  best  you  can,  you  go  to  purgatory  when 
you  die.  It  is  great  cry  and  very  little  wool.  But  in  the  faith  of  Jesus 
Christ  you  get  present  pardon.  However  great  our  cry  is  it  is  never 
equal  to  the  wool,  for  what  a  great  blessing  it  is  to  receive  imme- 
diate, absolute,  eternal  salvation  on  the  spot,  so  that  if  you  live  as  long 
as  Methuselah  the  transgressions  of  all  those  years  are  covered,  and  if  you 
die  at  once  all  your  offences  are  put  away  through  the  precious  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Seek  for  this  heavenly  boon.  Do  not  rest  till  you  are 
as  sure  of  perfect  forgiveness  as  of  your  own  existence ;  and  when  you 
have  this  glorious  gift  of  grace  say,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  who 
forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities." 

V,  In  the  fifth  place,  this  is  a  priceless  blessing.  It  is  a  blessing 
which  could  not  be  purchased  by  a  life  of  holiness.  If  we  have  onco 
committed  sin,  and  should  henceforth  be  absolutely  spotless,  yet  our  pre- 
vious sin  Avould  absolutely  condemn  us. 

"  Could  my  zeal  no  respite  know. 
Could  my  tears  for  ever  flow, 
All  for  sm  could  not  atone. 
Thou  must  save,  and  thou  alone.*' 

Put  on  a  hair  shirt  and  an  iron  girdle,  fast  day  and  night,  cover  yourself 
with  the  bruises  of  your  scourging,  starve  as  a  mendicant,  or  s^ut  your- 
6clf  up  in  a  hermitage ;  but  the  sin  of  the  past  will  remain  the  same. 
Weep  tears  of  blood,  but  their  crimson  will  not  wash  out  the  crimson  of 
your  sin.    That  spot,  that  blood-red  spot  upon  the  soul  defies  removal. 


504  JCEtROPOLITAlt  TABERNACLfe  PULPIT. 

Wash  it  with  yonr  hearths  blood,  and  it  would  be  still  there.  Thoogh 
you  should  incanninate  every  wave  that  breaks  upon  the  either  shore, 
and  fill  the  Atlantic  with  a  crimson  flood,  though  you  should  gather  all 
the  seas  that  ever  flowed  together,  and  wash  and  wash  with  nitre  and 
much  soap  till  you  had  polluted  all  the  ocean  with  your  filth— it  would 
still  remain.  In  vain  you  cry,  **  Out,  damning  spot,"  the  spot  abides 
and  will  abide,  unless  Almighty  love  shall  take  it  out  for  ever.  Only  Grod 
himself  can  forgive,  and  by  him  no  price  can  be  accepted  in  the  form  of 
future  obedience,  for  all  that  yon  can  promise  is  already  due,  and  the 
promise  itself  will  be  broken. 

What  is  more,  this  forgiveness  could  not  be  purchased  by  an  eternity 
of  suflTering  in  hell.  There  they  lie  in  anguish,  which  God  grant  we  may 
never  know ;  but  they  are  as  far  off  from  the  expiation  of  their  sin  as 
when  they  first  came  there.  When  the  world  grows  grey,  and  sun  and 
moon  die  out,  and  time  hath  spun  its  utmost  thread,  the  last  will  be  as 
for  off  from  the  expiation  of  their  sin  as  ever.  There  is  no  getting  rid 
of  sin  by  suffering.  Still  must  the  lost  suffer,  for  still  their  sin  remains. 
"These  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment,"  as  surely  ais  the 
righteous  go  away  into  life  eternal. 

But  though  it  could  not  be  purchased  by  a  life  of  holiness  nor  by  an 
eternity  of  woe,  forgiveness  has  been  procured.  This  pardon  which  is 
freely  preached  to-day  to  all  who  believe  in  Jesus  hath  been  purchased, 
and  there  is  he  that  procured  it,  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the 
Father,  a  man  like  unto  ourselves,  but  yet  equal  with  the  ever-blessed 
One.  If  you  ask  me  how  he  procured  forgiveness,  I  answer  that  he  shows 
his  hands,  the  scars  are  there:  he  shows  his  feet,  he  shows  his  sido^  the 
scars  of  his  wounds  are  there :  he  shows  his  heart  that  was  broken  for 
our  guilt ;  he  shows  his  blessed  peraon,  which  underwent  the  baptism  of 
divine  wrath  that  he  might  deliver  us  from  being  plunged  into  those 
tremendous  deeps.  0  Son  of  God,  thou  hast  redeemed  us,  but  what  a 
price  hast  thou  paid  in  the  bloody  sweat  of  thy  face  and  the  sorrowful 
breaking  of  thy  heart ;  and  now  to-day  we  accept  freely,  gladly,  what 
thou  hast  so  dearly  earned. 

WHiat  else  do  we  say  ?  Why,  that  if  wc  are  parrloncd  through  such  an 
atonement  then  are  we  Christ's  for  ever.  We  ought  to  show  deep  grati- 
tude, and  the  least  we  can  do  is  to  confess,  "  Wc  are  not  our  own,  wc 
are  bought  with  a  price."  0  Lord,  hast  thou  redeemed  us  from  our 
iniquities?  Then  would  we  show  forth  thy  praise  by  lioliness  all  the 
days  of  our  lives.  God  bless  you,  brothers  and  sisters;  God  give  you 
to  go  out  singing  with  all  your  heart,  "  He  hath  put  away  my  trans- 
gressions, and  covered  mine  iniquities."  The  Lord  grant  it  may  be  so, 
lor  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scriptuub  Read  before  Sermon — Psalm  ciii. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 108,  666,  545. 


JWrii[0pIitan  Sfakmade 


THE  GLORY  OP  GOD  IN  THE  FACE  OP  JESUS  CHRIST. 


t 


Delivebbd  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  Sbptember  7th,  1679,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINQTON. 


"For  God,  who  oommanded  the  light  to  shine  oat  of  dflrknets,  hath  shined  in  our 
hearts,  to  giro  the  light  ftf  the  Imowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ.  "t>2  Corinthians  iv.  6. 

The  apostle  is  explaining  the  reason  for  his  preaching  Christ  with  so 
much  earnestness:  he  had  received  divine  light,  and  he  felt  bonnd 
to  spread  it.  One  great  motive  power  of  a  true  ministry  is  trusteeship. 
The  Lord  has  pnt  ns  in  trust  \vith  the  gospel ;  he  has  filled  us  with 
a  treasure  with  which  we  are  to  enrich  the  world.  The  text  explains 
in  full  what  it  is  with  which  the  Lord  has  entrasted  us :  he  has  be- 
stowed upon  us  "  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in 
the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,"  and  it  is  ours  to  reflect  the  light,  to  impart 
the  knowledge,  to  manifest  the  glory,  to  point  to  the  Saviour's  face,  and 
to  proclaim  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Having  such  a  work 
before  us,  we  faint  not,  but  press  onward  with  our  whole  heart. 

I.  With  no  other  preface  than  this  we  shall  ask  your  attention  this 
morning,  first,  to  the  suBjEcr  of  that  knowledge  in  which  Paul 
delighted  so  much.  What  was  this  knowledge  which  to  his  mind  was 
the  chief  of  all,  and  the  most  worthy  to  be  spread  ?  It  was  the  know- 
ledge  of  God.  Truly  a  most  needful  and  proper  knowledge  for  all  God's 
creatures.  For  a  man  not  to  know  his  Maker  and  Ruler  is  deplorable 
ignorance  indeed.  The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  God.  Paul  not 
only  knew  that  there  is  a  God,  for  he  had  known  that  before  his  con- 
veraion :  none  can  more  surely  believe  in  the  Godhead  than  did  Paul  as 
a  Jew.  Nor  does  he  merely  intend  that  he  had  learned  somewhat  of 
the  character  of  God,  for  that  also  he  had  known  irom  the  Old  Testa- 
ment Scriptures  before  he  was  met  with  on  the  way  to  Damascus ;  but 
now  he  had  come  to  know  God  in  a  closer,  clearer,  and  surer  way,  for 
he  had  seen  him  incarnate  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  apostle  had  also  received  the  knowledge  of  **  the  glory  of  Ood" 
Never  had  the  God  of  Abraham  appeared  so  glorious  as  now.  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  had  won  the  adoring  wonder  of  the  apostle's  instructed  mind. 
He  had  known  Jehovah's  glory  as  the  One  and  only  God,  he  had  seen 
that  glory  in  creation  declared  by  the  heavens  and  displayed  upon  the 


506  MBTROPOLITAN  TABEHNACLB  PULPIT. 

earth,  he  had  beheld  that  glory  in  the  law  which  blazed  from  Sinai  and 
shed  its  insuflferable  light  upon  the  face  of  Moses ;  but  now,  beyond  all 
else,  he  had  come  to  perceive  i?ie  glory  of  God  in  theface^  or  person^  of 
Jisus  Christ,  and  this  had  won  his  souL  This  apecial  knowledge 
had  been  communicated  to  him  at  his  conversion  when  Jesus  spake 
to  him  out  of  heaven.  In  this  knowledge  he  had  made  great  advances 
by  experience  and  by  new  revelations  ;  but  he  had  not  yet  learned 
it  to  the  full,  for  he  was  still  seeking  to  know  it  perfectly  by  the 
teaching  of  the  divine  Spirit,  and  we  find  him  saying,  ''That  I  may 
know  him,  and  the  power  of  his  resurrection,  and  the  fellowship  of  his 
sufferings,  being  made  conformable  unto  his  death." 

Paul  knew  not  merely  God,  but  God  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  not  merely 
"  the  glory  of  God,"  but  "  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ/* 
The  knowledge  dealt  with  God,  but  it  was  Christward  knowledge.     He 

Eined  not  for  a  Christless  Theism,  but  for  God  in  Christ.  This, 
eloved,  is  the  one  thing  which  you  and  I  should  aim  to  know.  There 
are  parts  of  the  divine  glory  which  will  never  be  seen  by  us  in  this  life, 
speculate  as  we  may.  Mysticism  would  fain  pry  into  the  unknowable  ; 
you  and  I  may  leave  dreamers  and  their  dreams,  and  follow  the  clear 
light  which  shines  from  the  face  of  Jesus.  What  of  God  it  is  needful  and 
beneficial  for  us  to  know  he  has  revealed  in  Christ,  and  whatsoever  is 
not  there,  we  may  rest  assured  it  is  unfit  and  unnecessary  for  as  to 
know.  Truly  the  revelation  is  by  no  means  scant,  for  there  is  vastly 
more  revealed  in  the  person  of  Christ  than  we  shall  be  likely  to  learn  in 
this  mortal  life,  and  even  eternity  will  not  be  too  long  for  the  discovery 
of  all  the  glory  of  God  which  shines  forth  in  the  person  of  the  word 
made  flesh.  Those  who  would  supplement  Christianity  had  better  first 
add  to  the  brilliance  of  the  sun  or  the  fulness  of  the  sea.  As  for  us,  wc 
are  more  than  satisfied  with  the  revelation  of  God  in  the  person  of  our 
Lord  Jesus,  and  we  are  perauaded  of  the  truth  of  his  words  "  he  that 
hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father." 

Hope  not,  my  brethren,  that  the  preacher  can  grapple  with  such  a 
subject.  I  am  overcome  by  it.  In  my  meditations  1  have  felt  lost  in  its 
lengths  and  breadths.  My  joy  is  great  in  my  theme,  and  ^ct  I  am 
conscious  of  a  pressure  upon  brain  and  heart,  for  I  am  as  a  little  child 
wandering  among  the  mountains,  or  as  a  lone  spirit  which  has  lost 
its  way  among  the  stars.  I  stumble  among  sublimities,  I  sink  amid 
glories.  I  can  only  point  with  my  finger  to  that  which  I  see,  but 
cannot  describe.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  himself  take  of  the  things  of 
Christ  and  show  them  unto  you. 

We  will  for  a  minute  or  two  consider  this  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ  historically.  In  every  incident  of  the  life  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  the  Lord's  anointed,  there  is  much  of  God  to  be  seen.  What 
volumes  upon  volumes  might  be  written  to  show  God  as  revealed  in 
every  act  of  Christ  from  his  birth  to  his  death  !  I  see  him  as  a  babe  at 
Bethlehem  lying  in  a  manger,  and  thei*e  I  perceive  a  choice  glory  in  the 
mind  of  God,  for  he  evidently  despises  the  pomp  and  glory  of  the 
world,  which  little  minds  esteem  so  highly.  He  might  have  been  bom 
in  marble  halls,  and  wrapped  in  imperial  purple,  but  he  scorns 
these  things,  and  in  the  manger  among  the  oxen  we  see  a  glory 
which  is  independent  of  the  trifles  of  luxury  and  parade.    Tlie  glorr 


THE  GLOEY  OP  GOD  m  THE  PACE  OP  JESUS  CHRIST.  507 

of  God  in  the  person  of  Jesus  asks  no  aid  &om  the  splendour  of  courts 
and  palaces,  xet  even  as  a  babe  he  reigns  and  rules.  Mark  how 
tbe  shepherds  hasten  to  salute  the  new-born  King,  while  the  magi  from 
the  far-off  East  bring  gold,  frankincense,  and  myrrh,  and  bow  at  his 
feet.  When  the  Lord  condescends  to  show  himself  in  little  things  he 
is  still  right  royal,  and  commands  the  homage  of  mankind.  He  is  as 
majestic  in  the  minute  as  in  the  magnificent,  as  royal  in  the  babe  at  Beth- 
lehem as  in  after  days  in  the  man  who  rode  through  Jerusalem  with 
hosannas.  See  the  holy  child  Jesus  in  the  temple  when  he  is  but  twelve 
years  old,  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  doctors,  astonishing  them  with 
his  questions !  Wliat  wisdom  there  was  in  that  child  I  Do  you  not 
see  therein  an  exhibition  of  the  truth  that  *'the  foolishness  of  God  is 
wiser  than  men"?  Even  when  God  reserves  his  wisdom,  and  gives 
forth  utterances  fitted  for  a  child,  he  baffles  the  wisdom  of  age  and 
thought.  Watch  that  youth  in  the  carpenter's  shop.  Sec  him  planing 
and  sawing,  cutting  and  squaring,  working  according  to  his  parent's 
command,  till  he  is  thirty  years  of  age.  What  learn  we  here  when  we 
see  the  incarnate  God  tai-rying  at  the  workman's  bench  ?  Sec  we  not 
how  God  can  wait  ?  Is  not  this  a  masterly  display  of  the  leisure  of  the 
Eternal  ?  The  Infinite  is  never  driven  out  of  his  restful  pace  of  con- 
scious strength.  Had  it  been  you  and  I,  we  should  have  hastened  to 
begin  our  life-work  long  before ;  we  could  not  have  refrained  from 
preaching  and  teaching  for  so  long  a  period ;  but  God  can  wait,  and  in 
Christ  wc  see  how  prudence  tempered  zeal,  and  made  him  share  in  that 
eternal  leisure  whicli  arises  out  of  confidence  that  his  end  is  sure.  The 
Godhead  was  concealed  at  Bethlehem  and  Nazareth  from  the  eyes 
of  carnal  men;  but  it  is  revealed  to  those  who  have  spiritual  sight 
wherewith  to  behold  the  Lord.  Even  in  those  early  days  of  our  Lord, 
while  yet  he  was  preparing  for  his  great  mission,  we  behold  the  glory 
of  God  in  his  youthful  face,  and  we  adore. 

As  for  his  public  ministry,  how  clearly  the  Godhead  is  there !  Behold 
him,  brethren,  while  he  feeds  five  thousand  with  a  few  loaves  and  fishes, 
and  you  cannot  fail  to  perceive  therein  the  glory  of  God  in  the  commis- 
sariat of  the  universe ;  for  the  Lord  God  openeth  his  hand  and  supplieth 
the  lack  of  every  living  thing.  See  him  cast  out  devils,  and  learn  the 
divine  power  over  evil.  Hear  him  raise  the  dead,  and  reverence  the 
divine  prerogative  to  kill  and  to  make  alive.  See  him  cure  the  sick, 
and  think  you  hear  Jehovah  say,  "  I  wound,  I  heal."  Hear  how  he 
speaks,  and  infallibly  reveals  the  truth,  and  you  will  perceive  the  God  of 
knowledge  to  whom  the  wise  hearted  owe  their  instruction.  Set  over 
against  each  other  these  two  sentences, — ''Behold,  God  exalteth  by  his 
power ;  who  teacheth  like  him  ?"  and  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  man." 
It  is  ever  the  Lord's  way  to  make  his  truth  known  to  those  of  humble 
and  truthful  hearts,  and  so  did  Jesus  te^ch  the  sincere  and  lowly  among 
men.  Observe  how  Jesus  dwelt  among  men,  wearing  the  common 
smock-frock  of  the  peasant,  entering  their  cottages,  and  sharing  their 
poverty.  Mark  how  he  even  washed  his  disciples'  feet  Herein  we  see 
the  condescension  of  God,  who  must  stoop  to  view  the  skies,  and  bow  to 
see  what  angels  do,  and  yet  does  not  disdain  to  visit  the  sons  of  men. 
In  wondrous  grace  he  thinks  of  us,  and  has  pity  upon  our  low  estate. 
See,  too,  the  Christ  of  God,  my  brethren,  bearing  every  day  with  the 


608  Metkopolitak  tabernacle  pulpit, 

taunts  of  the  ungodly,  enduring  "  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against 
himself,"  and  you  hare  a  fair  picture  of  the  infinite  patience  and  the 
marvellous  longsuffering  of  God,  and  this  is  no  small  part  of  his  s^lorj. 

Note  well  how  Jesus  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  yea, 
loved  them  to  the  end,  and  with  what  tenderness  and  gentleness  he 
bore  with  them,  as  a  nurse  with  her  child,  for  here  you  see  the  tender- 
ness and  gentleness  of  God,  and  the  love  of  the  great  Father  towards 
his  erring  children.  You  read  of  Jesus  receiving  sinners  and  eating 
with  them,  and  what  is  this  but  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious, 
passing  by  transgression,  iniquity,  and  sin?  You  see  Jesus  living 
as  a  physician  among  those  diseased  by  sin,  with  the  one  aim  of 
healing  their  sicknesses ;  and  here  you  see  the  pardoning  mercy  of  our 
God,  his  delight  in  salvation,  and  the  joy  which  he  has  in  mercy. 
Beloved,  I  cannot  go  through  the  whole  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  were  im- 
possible, for  time  would  fail  us ;  but  if  yon  will  yourselves  select  any 
single  incident  in  which  Jesus  appears,  whether  in  the  chamber  of  sick- 
ness or  at  the  grave,  whether  m  weakness  or  in  power,  you  shall  in 
each  case  behold  the  glory  of  God.  Throughout  his  ministry,  which 
was  mainly  a  period  of  humiliation,  there  gleams  forth  in  the  character, 
acts,  and  person  of  Jesus  the  glory  of  the  everlasting  Father.  His  acts 
compel  us  not  only  to  admire  but  to  adore ;  he  is  not  merely  a  man 
whom  God  favours,  he  is  God  himself. 

What  shall  I  say  of  his  death  ?  Oh  never  did  the  love  of  God  reveal 
itself  so  clearly  as  when  he  laid  down  his  life  for  his  sheep,  nor  did  the 
justice  of  God  ever  flame  forth  so  conspicuously  as  when  he  would  suffer 
in  himself  the  curse  for  sin  rather  than  sin  should  go  unpunished,  and 
the  law  should  be  dishonoured.  Every  attribute  of  God  was  focussed  at 
the  cross,  and  he  that  hath  eyes  to  look  through  his  tears,  and  see  the 
wounds  of  Jesus,  shall  behold  more  of  God  there  than  a  whole  eternity 
of  providence  or  an  infinity  of  creation  shall  ever  be  able  to  reveal  to 
him.  Well  might  the  trembling  centurion,  as  he  watched  the  cross?, 
exclaim,  ''Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God." 

Shall  I  need  to  remind  you,  too,  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  person  of 
Christ  Jesus  in  his  resurrection,  when  he  spoiled  principalities  and  powers, 
led  death  captive,  and  rifled  the  tomb.  That  is  indeed  a  godlike  speech, 
"I  am  he  that  liveth  and  was  dead,  and  behold  I  am  alive  for  evermore, 
and  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death."  His  power,  his  immortiility, 
his  eternal  majesty,  all  shone  forth  as  he  left  the  shades  of  death. 

I  will  not  linger  over  his  ascension  when  he  returned  to  his  own  again. 
Then  his  Godhead  was  conspicuous,  for  he  again  put  ou  the  glory  which 
he  had  with  the  Father  or  ever  the  world  was.  Then  amid  the  accla- 
mations  of  angels  and  redeemed  spirits  the  glory  of  the  conquering  Lord 
was  seen.  By  his  descent  he  had  destroyed  the  i^owers  of  darkne-ss,  and 
then  he  ascended  that  he  might  fill  all  things  as  only  God  can  do. 

I  would  only  hint  at  his  session  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  for  there 
you  know  how — 

"  Adorkig  saints  around  him  stand, 
And  thrones  and  powers  before  him  fall ; 
The  God  shines  gracious  through  the  Man, 
And  sheds  sweet  glories  ou  them  all." 

In  heaven  they  never  conceive  of  Jesus  apart  from  the  divine  glory  which 


THE  GLORY  OF  GOD  IN  THE  PACE  OP  JESUS  CHRIST.  509 

pcrpcfnally  snrronnds  him.  No  one  in  heaven  donbts  his  deity,  for  all 
i':iU  prostrate  before  him,  or  anon,  all  seize  their  harps  and  wake  their 
strings  to  the  praise  of  God  and  the  Lamb. 

The  glory  of  God  will  most  abundantly  be  seen  in  the  second  advent  t)f 
onr  Lord.  Whatever  of  splendour  we  may  expect  at  the  advent,  whatever 
of  glory  shall  surround  that  reign  of  a  thousand  years,  or  the  end  when  he 
shall  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Fath(er,in  every  transaction 
which  prophecy  leads  us  to  expect,  God  in  Christ  Jesus  will  be  con- 
spicuous, and  angelic  eyes  shall  look  on  with  adoring  admiration  as  they 
Bee  the  eternal  Father  glorious  in  the  person  of  his  Son.  These  are 
great  themes ;  we  do  but  indicate  them,  and  leave  them  to  your  quiet 
thought.  It  is  enough  to  point  to  a  table  if  men  have  appetites  for 
food. 

But  now  I  will  ask  you  to  think  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ,  in  the  same  line  of  thought,  only  putting  it  in  another 
fashion.  Treat  it  hy  way  of  observation.  When  you  look  upon  the 
material  universe  you  can  see,  if  your  eyes  are  opened,  somewhat  of  the 
glory  of  God.  The  reverent  mind  perceives  enough  to  constrain  the 
heart  to  worship,  and  yet  after  awhile  it  pines  for  more.  I  have  often 
heard  the  earth  spoken  of  as  the  mirror  of  God's  imnge,  but  when  I  was 
travelling  among  the  Alps,  and  saw  many  of  the  grandest  phenomena  of 
creation,  such  as  glacier,  avalanche,  and  tempest,  I  was  so  impressed  with 
the  narrowness  of  visible  things  in  compai'ison  with  God  that  I  wrote 
such  lines  as  these : 

The  mirror  of  the  creatures  lacketh  space 

To  bear  the  image  of  the  Infinite. 

*Tia  true  the  Lord  hath  fairly  writ  his  name, 

And  Bet  his  seal  upon  creation's  brow, 

But  as  the  skilful  potter  much  excels 

The  vessel  which  he  fashions  on  the  wheel, 

Ken  80,  but  in  proportion  greater  far, 

Jehovah's  self  transcends  his  noblest  works. 

Earth's  ponderous  wheels  would  break,  her  axles  snap, 

If  freighted  with  the  load  of  Deity. 

Space  IS  too  narrow  for  th*  Etemars  rest, 

And  time  too  short  a  footstool  for  his  throne. 

If  your  mind  has  ever  entered  into  communion  with  God,  you  will 
liecome  conscious  of  the  dwarfing  of  all  visible  things  in  his  presence. 
Even  when  your  thought  sweeps  round  the  stars,  and  circumnavigates 
space,  you  feel  that  heaven,  even  the  heaven  of  heavens,  cannot  contain 
him.  Everything  conceivable  falls  short  of  the  inconceivable  glory  of 
God.  When  you  come,  however,  to  gaze  upon  the  face  of  Christ  Jesus, 
how  different  is  the  feeling  I  Now  you  have  a  mirror  eaual  to  the 
reflection  of  the  eternal  face,  for  "  In  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodily."  His  name  is  "Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the  mighty 
God."  He  is  the  image  of  God ;  '*  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  and  the 
express  image  of  his  person."  If  your  conception  of  Christ  be  truthful 
it  will  coincide  with  the  true  idea  of  God,  and  you  will  exclaim,  **  This 
is  the  true  God  and  eternal  life."  Like  Thomas,  you  will  salute  the 
wounded  Saviour  with  the  cry,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God."  Truly,  **  God 
was  manifest  in  the  flesh  " — not  a  part  of  \\\m^  but  God  in  perfection. 


610  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLE  PULPIT. 

In  the  Tiaible  creation  we  see  Ood's  works,  but  in  Christ  Jesus  wo  haro 
God  himself,  Emmanuel,  "  God  with  us."  The  glorj  of  God  in  the  face 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  most  sweeblj  conspicuous,  because  you  arc  cooscioaa 
that  not  only  are  God*8  attributes  there,  but  God  himself  is  there. 

In  the  person  of  Jesus  we  see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  veiling  of  his 
splendour.    The  Lord  is  not  eager  to  display  himself:  "Verily  thou 
art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself,  said  the  prophet  of  old."     The  world 
seems  to  be  created  rather  to  hide  God  than  to  manifest  him :  at  lexuit, 
it  is  certain  that  even  in  the  grandest  displays  of  his  power  we  may 
say  with  Job,  "  There  was  the  hiding  of  his  power."    Though  his  lijrht 
is  brightness  itself,  yet  it  is  only  the  robe  which  conceals  him.     "  Who 
coverest  thyself  with  light  as  with  a  garment."    If  thus  God's  glory  is 
seen  in  the  field  of  creation  as  a  light  veiled  and  shaded  to  suit  the 
human  eye,  we  certainly  see  the  like  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  where 
everything  is  mild  and  gentle — full  of  grace  as  well  as  truth.     How 
softly  breaks  the  divine  glory  through  the  human  life  of  Jesus :  a  babe 
in  grace  may  gaze  upon  this  brightness  without  fear.    When  Moses'  face 
shone  the  people  could  not  look  thereon ;  but  when  Jesus  came  from 
his  transfiguration  the  people  ran  to  him  and  saluted  him.     Everythinpr 
is  attractive  in  God  in  Christ  Jesus.     In  him  we  see  God  to  the  full,  bnt 
the  Deity  so  mildly  beams  through  the  medium  of  human  flesh  that 
mortal  man  may  draw  near,  and  look,  and  live.    This  glory  in  the  face 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  assuredly  the  glory  of  God,  even  though  veiled ;  for 
thus  in  every  other  instance  doth  God  in  me«i8ure  shine  forth.    In 
providence  and  in  nature  such  a  thing  as  an  unveiled  God  is  not  to  l)e 
seen,  and  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  is  after  the  same   divine 
manner. 

In  our  Lord  Jesus  we  see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  wondrous  hiendwg 
of  the  atfribiiks.  Behold  his  mercy,  for  he  dies  for  sinners ;  but  see 
his  justice,  for  he  sits  as  judge  of  quick  and  dead.  Obsen'e  his  immu- 
tability, for  he  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever ;  and  see  his 
power,  for  his  voice  shakes  not  only  earth  but  also  heaven.  See  how 
infinite  is  his  love,  for  he  espouses  his  chosen ;  but  how  terrible  his 
wrath,  for  he  consumes  his  adversaries.  All  the  attributes  of  Deity 
are  in  him:  power  that  can  lull  the  tempest,  and  tenderness  that 
can  embrace  little  children.  The  character  of  Christ  is  a  wonderful 
combination  of  all  perfections  making  up  one  perfection;  and  so  we 
see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  this  is  God's  glory, 
that  in  him  nothing  is  excessive  and  nothing  is  deficient.  He  is  all 
that  is  good  and  great :  in  him  is  lights  and  no  darkness  at  all.  Say, 
is  it  not  so  seen  in  Jesus  our  Lord  ? 

When  I  think  of  God  I  am  led  to  see  his  glory  in  the  outgoing  of  his  gieal 
Mart;  for  he  is  altogether  unselfish  and  unsparingly  communicative. 
We  may  conceive  a  period  when  the  Eternal  dwelt  alone  and  had  not 
begun  to  create.  He  must  have  been  inconceivably  blessed ;  but  he 
was  not  content  to  be  enwrapped  within  himself,  and  to  enjoy  perfect 
bliss  alone.  He  began  to  create,  and  probably  formed  innumerable 
beings  long  before  this  world  came  into  existence ;  and  he  did  this  that 
he  might  multiply  beings  capable  of  happiness.  He  delighted  to  indulge 
'  is  heart  by  deeds  of  beneficence,  manifesting  the  inherent  goodness  of 

nature.    In  whatever  God  is  doing  he  is  consulting  the  happiness  of 


THE  GLORY  OF  GOD  IN  THE  FACE  OF  JBBUS  CHUIBT.     511 

bis  oreatoTes;  being  in  himtelf  independent  of  all^  he  loves  to  bless 
others.  He  is  living — we  speak  with  awe  in  his  presence— lie  is  living, 
even  he,  not  nnto  himself,  but  living  in  the  lives  of  othera,  rejoicing  in 
the  joy  of  his  creatures.  This  is  his  glory,  atod  is  it  not  to  be  seen  most 
evidently  in  Christ  Jesas,  who  "saved  others,  himself  he  could  not  save  "? 
Do  joQ  not  see  the  great  unselfish  glory  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  When 
did  he  ever  live  unto  himself?  What  single  act  of  his  had  a  selfish  par- 
pose  ?  What  word  ever  sought  his  own  honour  ?  In  what  deed  did  he 
consult  his  own  aggrandisement?  Neither  in  life  nor  in  death  did 
Christ  live  within  himself:  he  lived  for  his  people,  and  died  for  them. 
See  the  glory  of  God  in  this ! 

There  are  two  things  I  have  noticed  in  the  gloiy  of  God  whenever 
my  soul  has  been  saturated  with  it,  and  these  I  have  seen  in  Jesus.  I 
Imve  stood  upon  a  lofty  hill  and  looked  abroad  upon  the  landscape,  and 
seen  hill,  and  dale,  and  wood,  and  field,  and  I  have  felt  as  if  God  had 
gone  forth  and  spread  his  presence  over  all.  I  have  felt  the  outflow  of 
Deity,  There  was  not  a  pleasant  tree,  nor  a  silvery  stream,  nor  a  corn- 
field ripening  for  the  harvest,  nor  mount  shaggy  with  pines,  nor  heath 
purple  with  heather,  but  seemed  aglow  with  God.  Even  as  the  sun 
pours  himself  over  all  things,  so  does  God ;  and  in  the  hum  of  an 
insect  as  well  as  in  the  crash  of  a  thunderbolt  we  hear  a  voice  saying, 
*'  God  is  here."  God  has  gone  forth  out  of  himself  into  the  creation, 
and  filled  all  things.  Is  not  this  the  feeling  of  the  heart  in  thopresence 
of  Christ?  When  we  come  near  him  he  is  the  all-pervading  spirit. 
In  any  of  the  scenes  in  wliich  Jesus  appears  he  is  omnipresent.  Who 
but  ifc  is  at  Bethlehem,  or  at  Nffzareth,  or  at  Jerusalem?  Who  but 
he  is  in  the  world?  Is  not  he  to  us  the  everybody,  the  one  only 
person  of  his  age  ?  I  cannot  think  of  Caesar  or  Rome,  or  all  the  myriads 
that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  earth  as  being  anything  more  than  small 
figures  in  the  background  of  the  picture  when  Jesus  is  before  me.  He 
is  to  my  mind  most  clearly  the  fulness,  filling  all  in  all ;  all  the  accessories 
of  any  scene  in  which  he  appears  are  submerged  in  the  flood  of  glory 
which  flows  from  his  all-subduing  presence.  Verily  the  outgoing  glory 
of  God  was  in  Christ. 

But  you  must  have  had  another  thought  when  you  have  felt  the  glory 
of  God  in  nature :  you  must  have  felt  the  indrawing  of  all  thing  $  towards 
Ood,  You  have  felt  created  things  rising  unto  God  as  steps  to  his 
throne.  As  you  have  gazed  with  rapture  on  the  landscape  every  tree 
and  hill  has  seemed  to  drift  towards  God,  to  tend  towards  him,  to 
return,  in  fact,  to  him  from  whom  it  came.  Is  it  not  just  so  in  the  life 
of  Christ  ?  He  seems  to  be  drawing  all  things  to  himself,  gathering 
together  all  things  in  one  in  his  own  personality.  Some  of  these  things 
will  not  move,  but  yet  his  attraction  has  fallen  on  them,  while  others 
fly  with  alacrity  to  him,  according  to  his  word,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will 
draw  all  men  unto  me.''  Thus  those  observations  of  the  glory  of  God, 
which  have  been  suggested  to  us  by  nature,  are  also  abundantly  verified 
in  Christ,  and  we  are  sure  that  the  glory  is  the  same. 

I  cannot  express  my  own  thoughts  to  you  so  clearly  and  vividly  as  I 
would,  but  this  I  know,  if  you  ever  get  a  vision  of  the  glory  of  God  in 
nataie,  and  if  you  then  turn  your  thoughts  toward  the  Lord's  Christ, 
joa  wUl  see  that  the  same  God  is  in  him  as  in  the  visible  universe^  and 


512  UETBOPOLITAH  TABEOSACLE  FULPIT. 

that  the  same  glorj  shines  ia  him,  only  more  clearly.  Thera  iB  one  God, 
and  that  one  God  is  gloriously  manifested  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  No  man 
]irvth  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only  Begotten  Sou,  which  ia  in  (be 
bosom  or  the  Father,  tie  hath  declared  him." 

Ijet  us  now  treat  this  thought  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  penon 
of  Christ  by  way  of  exptrience.  Have  yon  ever  heard  Christ's  doc- 
trins  in  yonr  soul?  If  so,  you  have  felt  it  to  be  divine,  for  yoar 
heart  has  pcreeired  its  moral  and  spiritual  glory,  and  joa  have 
concluded  that  God  is  in  it  of  a  truth.  Has  your  heart  heard  the 
voice  of  Christ  speaking  peace  and  pardon  through  the  blood?  If  ep. 
Tou  have  known  him  to  be  Lord  of  all.  Did  you  ever  see  the  falueBa  of 
Ilia  atonement  ?  Then  yon  have  felt  that  God  himself  was  there  re- 
conciling the  world  nnto  himself.  Yon  have  understood  the  nrtion  of 
the  two  titles,  "  God,  our  Saviour,"  Beloved,  yon  have  often  felt  your 
Ijord's  prcBBDce,  and  you  have  been  admitted  into  intimate  conusunian 
with  him.  Then  I  know  that  a  profound  awe  has  crept  over  you  which 
has  mode  you  fall  at  his  feet,  and  in  the  lowliest  reverence  of  your 
spirit  you  have  owned  him  to  be  Lord  and  God.  But  when  be 
liaa  bent  over  yon  in  love  and  said,  "Fear  not";  when  he  has 
opened  his  heart  to  jou  and  siiowa  you  how  dear  you  are  to  bim, 
then  the  rapture  you  hnve  felt  has  been  so  divine  that  you  have,  beyond 
all  qnestion,  known  him  to  be  Qod.  There  are  times  when  the  ele- 
vating influence  of  the  prcacnu)  of  Christ  has  pat  hia  Godhead  beyond 
the  possibility  of  question,  when  wo  have  felt  that  all  the  tmtli  we  ever 
heard  before  had  no  effect  upon  ns  compared  with  the  trntb  that  is  in 
him  ;  that  all  the  spirits  in  the  worid  were  iuefTectual  to  stir  as  till  bis 
Spirit  came  into  contact  with  our  spirit.  lathis  manner  hia  omnipotent, 
all-anbdaing,  elevating  love  has  proved  him  to  be  noue  other  than  "  very 
God  of  very  God." 

Thus  have  we  spoken  of  the  enpremely  precious  object  of  Christian 
knowledge. 

II.  ^condly,  let  us  spend  a  few  words  jn  noticing  the  matueb  of 
TRia  KKOWLEDQE.  How,  and  in  what  respects,  do  we  know  the  glory 
of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesua  Christ  ? 

Briefly,  first.  We  know  it  by  faith.  Upon  the  testioionv  of  the  in- 
fiillible  word  we  believe  and  arc  sure  that  God  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Tiie 
Lord  hath  spoken  and  said,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  boar  ye  him." 
We  accept  as  a  settled  fact  the  Godhead  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  our  sonl 
never  permits  a  question  upon  it.  "  We  know  that  the  Sou  of  God 
is  come,  and  hath  given  ua  an  understanding,  that  we  may  know  hiio 
that  is  true,  and  we  are  in  him  that  is  true,  even  in  his  Sou  Jesua 
Christ.    This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life." 

ng  our  Lord's  divinity  by  &ith,  we  next  have  used  our  perce[>- 
Ity,  and  by  consideration  and  medilaliea  toe  perceive  that  bis 
shes  abundant  evidence  that  he  was  God,  for  God's  glory  shines 
fc.  The  more  carefully  we  pay  attention  to  the  dctaib  given 
four  cvangcliats,  the  more  is  our  understaudiug  persuaded  that 
man  stands  before  ua.  If,  my  brelhi'eu,  your  spiritual  nature 
his  task,  to  try  aud  describe  how  God  wontd  act  if  he  ffure 
it  God  would  be  if  he  became  incarnate  and  dwelt  among  men 
urc  you  would  not  hare  been  able  to  imagine  th9  life  of  Christ  i 


THE  GLORY  OF  QOD  IN  THE  FACE  OF  JESUS  CHRIST.     513 

but  if  some  one  had  brought  to  jon  the  description  given  by  the  evan- 
gelists you  would  have  said,  ''My  task  is  done :  this  is  indeed  a  noble 
conception  of  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  1  do  not  say  that  the  wise 
men  of  this  world  would  suppose  God  to  have  thus  behaved,  for  their 
suppositions  are  sure  to  be  the  reverse  of  the  simple,  unaffected,  open* 
hearted  conduct  of  Jesus:  but  this  I  say,  that  the  pure  in  heart  will  at 
once  see  tiiat  the  acts  of  Christ  are  like  the  doings  of  God.  He  ^hath 
done  exactly  what  a  pure  intelligence  might  suppose  God  would  have 
done.  The  more  we  nave  studied  the  more  we  nave  seen  the  glory  of 
God  in  Christ. 

And  now  we  have  come  rather  further  than  this,  for  we  feel  an 
inward  consciotisnesa  that  the  Deity  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  not  merely 
that  we  have  believed  it,  and  that  we  somewhat  perceive  it  by  observa- 
tion, but  we  have  come  into  contact  with  Christ,  and  have  known  there- 
fore that  he  is  God.  We  love  him,  and  we  also  love  God,  and  we 
perceive  that  these  two  are  one;  and  the  more  we  love  truth  and 
holiness,  and  love,  which  are  great  traits  in  the  character  of  God,  the 
more  we  see  of  these  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  by  the  heart  that  we  know 
God  and  Christ,  and  as  our  affections  are  purified  we  become  sensible 
of  God's  presence  in  Christ.  Ofttimes  when  our  soul  is  in  rapt  fellow- 
ship with  Jesus  we  laugh  to  scorn  the  very  thought  that  our  Beloved 
can  be  less  than  divine. 

Moreover,  there  is  one  other  thing  that  hath  happened  to  us 
while  we  have  been  looking  at  our  Lord.  Blessed  be  his  name,  we 
begin  to  grow  like  him.  Our  beholding  him  has  purified  the  eye 
which  has  gazed  on  his  purity:  his  brightness  has  helped  our  eyesight, 
so  that  we  see  much  already,  and  shall  yet  see  more.  The  light  of  the 
sun  blinds  us,  but  the  light  of  Jesus  Christ  strengthens  the  eye.  We 
expect  that  as  we  gi'ow  in  grace  we  shall  behold  more  and  more  of  God's 
glory ;  but  we  shall  sec  it  best  in  the  Well-beloved,  even  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord.  What  a  sight  of  God  we  shall  enjoy  in  heaven !  We  are 
tending  that  way,  and,  as  we  get  nearer  and  nearer,  our  sight  and  vision 
of  the  glory  of  God  in  Christ  is  every  day  increased.  We  know  it,  then; 
we  know  it :  we  believe  it,  we  are  conscious  of  it,  we  are  affected  by  it, 
we  are  transformed  by  it;  and  thus  at  this  day  we  have  ''the  light  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ." 

III.  Thirdly,  let  us  gratefully  review  the  means  of  this 
KNOWLEDGE.  How  have  we  come  at  it  ?  That  brings  us  to  read  the 
text  again: — ''For  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of 
darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  Why  did  not  every- 
body see  the  glory  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  when  he  was  here  ?  It  was 
conspicuous  enough.  Answer :  it  mattereth  not  how  brightly  the  sun 
shineth  among  blind  men.  Now,  the  human  heart  is  blind,  it  refuses  to 
see  God  in  creation  except  after  a  dim  fashion,  but  it  utterly  refuses  to 
discern  God  in  Christ,  and  therefore  he  is  the  despised  and  rejected  of 
men.  Moreover,  there  is  a  god  of  this  world,  the  nrince  of  darkness,  and 
since  he  hates  the  light  he  deepens  and  confirms  the  natural  darkness  of 
the  human  mind,  lest  the  light  should  reach  the  heart.  He  blinds  men's 
minds  with  error  and  falsehood  and  foul  imaginations,  blocking  up  the 
wiodows  of  the  soul  either  with  unclean  desires^  or  with  dense  ignorance, 


514  KETROPOLITAIT  TASBKVACLE   PULPIT. 

or  with  pride.    The  reason  why  wc  did  not  at  one  time  perceiTe  the 

§lorj  of  God  in  Christ  was  because  we  ivere  blind  by  natnre,  and  were 
arkened  by  the  evil  one.  Aa  only  the  pure  in  heart  can  see  God,  we, 
being  impure  in  heart,  could  not  see  God  in  Christ.  What,  then,  hath 
happened  to  us  ?  To  eternal  grace  he  endless  praise,  God  himself  hath 
ahined  into  our  hearts  :  that  same  God  who  said  "  Light  be,"  and  light 
was,  hatii  shinct!  into  onr  hearts.  You  know  creation's  story,  how  all 
things  lay  in  black  darkness,  God  might  have  gone  on  to  make  a  world 
in  darkness  if  he  had  pleased,  but  if  he  had  done  so  it  would  have  been 
to  us  as  tliough  it  had  never  been,  for  wc  conid  not  have  perceived  it; 
therefore  he  early  said,  "Let  there  be  light."  Now,  God's  gloir  in  the 
face  of  Jesns  Christ  might  have  been  all  there,  and  we  should  ne^"er 
have  discerned  it,  and  aa  far  as  we  are  concerned  it  would  have  been  aa 
though  it  had  never  been,  if  the  Lord  had  not  entered  into  ns  amid 
the  thick  darkness  and  said,  "  Let  there  be  light."  Then  burst  in  the 
everlasting  morning,  the  light  shined  in  the  darkness,  and  the  darkness 
fled  before  it.  Do  yon  recollect  the  incoming  of  that  illamination  ?  If 
you  do,  then  I  know  the  first  sight  you  saw  by  the  new  light  was  the 
glory  of  God  in  Jesua  Christ :  in  fact,  that  light  had  come  on  purpose 
that  you  might  see  it;  and  at  this  present  moment  that  is  the  main 
delight  of  yonr  poni,  the  choice  subject  of  your  thoughts.  In  the  light 
of  God  you  have  seen  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God,  as  it  is  written, 
"In  thy  light  we  shall  see  light," 

One  thing  I  want  to  say  to  comfort  all  who  believe.  BeloTed, 
do  yon  see  the  glory  of  God  in  Christ  Jesns  ?  Then  let  that  sight  be 
on  evidence  to  you  of  your  salvation.  When  our  Irf>rd  asked  his  dis- 
ciples, "  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of  man  am  ? "  Simon  Peter 
answered,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  Now, 
note  the  reply  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  that  confession :  "  Klessed  art  thon, 
Simon  Bar-jona;  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  yon,  bnt 
my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  If  thou  canst  delight  in  God  in 
Christ  Jesus,  then  remember,  "  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ 
but  by  tJie  Holy  Oliost,"  and  thou  hast  said  it,  and  this  morning  thou 
art  saying  it,  and  therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  has  come  upon  thee, 
"Whosoever  believeth  thnt  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  horn  of  God."  Thon 
believest  this,  and  therefore  thou  art  horn  of  the  Father.  "  Whosoexer 
denieth  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father ;  but  he  that  acknow- 
ledgeth  the  Son  hath  the  Father  also."  Thou  lovest  God,  and  thou  art 
his  :  the  Spirit  of  God  hath  opened  thine  eyes  and  thou  .art  saved. 

While  I  have  been  preaching  this  morning  a  number  of  my  hearers 
have  been  saying,  "  We  care  nothing  aboat  Jesus  Christ.  His  name 
is  a  most  respectable  one  in  onr  religion ;  we  call  ourselves  Christians, 
but  as  to  seeing  the  glory  of  God  in  him  when  he  was  a  babe,  and  when 
he  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  we  know  nothing  of  it.  No  doubt 
heisexaltednowinheaven,  and  we  worship  him,  though  we  hardly  know 
why.  But  we  see  no  special  glory  in  him,"  Others  of  you  have  been 
saying,  "  Yes,  God  was  in  Christ  Jesus  reconciling  the  world  nnto  him- 
self, and  he  has  reconciled  me  to  himself,  I  never  loved  God  till  I  saw 
him  in  Christ.  I  coald  never  have  any  familiarity  with  God  till  I  saw 
hia  familiarity  with  me  in  the  pcraon  of  his  Son.  I  never  nnder-^ 
stood  bow  I  could  be  God's  son  till  I  understood  how  God's  Sm  ^ 


THE  GLORY  OF  GOD  IS  THE  FACE  OF  JESUS  CHEIST.  515 

berw.me  a  man.  I  never  saw  how  I  could  be  a  partaker  of  the  dirine 
nature  till  I  saw  how  his  Son  became  a  partaker  of  the  human  nature, 
and  took  me  up  unto  himself  that  he  might  take  me  up  unto  his 
Father."  Oh,  beloved,  do  you  delight  in  Jesus  Christ?  Is  he  all  your 
Balvation  and  all  your  desire  ?    Do  you  adore  him,  do  you  consecrate 

?oTirself  to  his  honour,  do  you  wish  to  live  for  him,  and  to  die  for  him  ? 
^hen  be  sure  that  you  belong  to  him,  for  it  is  the  mark  of  the  children 
of  God  that  they  love  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 

IV.  So  I  finish  by  mentioning,  in  the  fourth  place,  the  responsi- 
bilities OF  THIS  KNOWLEDGE.  There  have  been  considerable  debates 
among  the  interpretera  as  to  the  pi'ecise  bearing  of  this  text,  and  some 
of  them  think  it  means  that  Paul  is  giving  a  reason  why  he  preached 
the  gospel.  This  makes  the  verse  run  thus : — "  For  God,  who  com- 
manded the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  that 
we  might  give  out  again  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God 
in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  God  gave  light  to  the  apostles  that 
they  might  show  forth  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ  to  the  nations.  I  do  not  know  whether  this  is  the  exact 
run  of  the  text,  but  I  know  it  is  true  anyhow.  Never  is  a  gleam  of 
light  given  to  any  man  to  hide  away,  and  to  spiritual  men  the  great 
object  of  their  lives,  after  they  have  received  light,  is  to  reflect  that 
light  in  all  its  purity.  You  must  not  hoard  up  the  light  within  yourself; 
it  will  not  be  light  to  you  if  you  do.  Only  think  of  a  person 
when  his  room  is  full  of  sunlight  saying  to  his  servant,  '^  Quick,  now  ! 
Close  the  shutters,  and  let  us  keep  this  precious  light  to  ourselves.'' 
Your  room  will  be  in  the  dark,  my  friend.  So,  when  a  child  of  God 
gets  the  light  from  Christ's  face  he  must  not  say  "  I  shall  keep  this  to 
myself,"  for  that  very  desire  would  shut  it  out.  No,  let  the  light  shine 
through  you ;  let  it  shine  everywhere.  You  have  the  light  that  you 
may  i*efiect  it.  An  object  which  absorbs  light  is  dark,  and  we  call  ic 
black ;  but  hang  up  a  reflector  in  its  place  when  the  sun  is  shining, 
and  it  will  not  apjjear  black,  it  will  be  so  bright  that  you  will  hardly 
bear  to  look  at  it.  An  object  is  itself  bright  in  proportion  as  it  sends 
back  the  light  which  it  receives.  So  you  shall  find,  as  a  Citristian,  that, 
if  you  absorb  light  into  yourself,  you  will  be  black,  but  if  you  scatter 
it  abroad  you  yourself  shall  be  brilliant :  you  shall  be  changed  into  the 
very  image  of  the  light  whicli  you  have  received,  you  shall  become  a 
second  sun.  I  noticed  last  Sabbath  evening,  when  I  came  into  this 
pulpit,  that,  at  the  angle  of  the  building  before  me,  on  the  left  hand 
the  sun  seemed  to  be  setting,  and  I  saw  the  brightness  of  his  round 
face,  and  yet  I  knew  it  to  be  the  wrong  quarter  of  the  heavens  for 
the  sun  to  be  setting  there.  Perhaps  you  will  observe  that  there  is  a 
peculiar  window  on  the  other  side  of  the  street,  and  it  was  reflecting 
the  sun  so  well  that  I  thought  it  was  the  sun  himself,  and  I  could 
hardly  bear  the  light.  It  was  not  the  sun,  it  was  only  a  window,  and 
yet  the  radiance  was  dazzling ;  and  so  a  man  of  God,  when  he  receives 
the  light  of  Christ,  can  become  so  perfect  a  reflector  that  to  common 
eyes,  at  any  rate,  he  is  brightness  itself.  He  has  become  transformed 
from  glory  to  glory  as  by  the  image  of  the  Lord. 

Brothers  and  sisters,  if  you  have  learned  the  truth,  manifest  it,  and 
make  it  plain  to  others.     Proclaim  the  gospel,  not  your  own  thoughts ; 


61 G  METROPOIilTAN  TABBRNACLK  PULPIT. 

for  it  is  Christ  that  you  arc  to  make  manifest.  Teach,  not  yoar  own 
judgments,  and  conclusions,  and  opinions,  but  the  glory  of  God  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ.  Let  Jesus  manifest  himself  in  his  own  light ;  do 
not  cast  a  light  on  him,  or  attempt  to  show  the  sun  with  a  candle.  Do 
not  aim  at  converting  men  to  your  views,  but  let  the  light  shine  for  itself 
and  work  its  own  way.  Do  not  colour  it  by  being  like  a  painted  win- 
dow to  it,  but  let  the  clear  white  light  shine  through  you  that  others 
may  behold  your  Lord. 

Scatter  your  light  in  all  unselfishness.    Wish  to  shine,  not  that  others 
may  say  "  How  bright  he  is,"  but  that  they  getting  the  light  may 
rejoice  in  the  source  from  which  it  came  to  you  and  to  them.     Be  willing 
to  make  every  sacrifice  to  spread  this  light  which  you  have  received. 
Consecrate  your  entire  being  to  the  making  known  among  the  sons  of 
men  the  glory  of  Christ.    Oh,  I  would  we  had  swift  messengers  to  ran 
the  world  over  to  tell  the  story  that  Ood  has  come  down  among  us.    1 
wish  we  had  fluent  tongues  to   tell  in   every  language   the   story 
that,  coming  down  among  us,  God  was  arrayed  in  flesh  like  to  oar 
own ;   and  that   he  took  our   sins  and    carried  our  sorrows.      Oh, 
that  we  had  trumpet  tongues,  to   make  the  message  peal  through 
heaven  and  earth  that  God  has  come  among  men,  and  cries,  ^'  Come 
unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  yon 
rest."    Oh  for  a  thunder  voice,  to  spesJ^  it,  or  a  lightning  pen  to 
write  it  athwart  the  heavens,  that  God  hath  reconciled  the  world  unto 
himself  by  the  death  of.  his  6on,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto 
them ;  and  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  everlasting 
life.     I  cannot  command  thunder  or  lightning,  but  here  are  your  tongues, 
fy  and  tell  it  this  afternoon :  here  is  my  tongue,  and  I  have  tried  to  tell 
it,  and  msiy  it  be  silent  in  the  dust  of  death  ere  it  ceases  to  declare  that 
one  blessed  message,  that  God  in  Christ  Jesus  receives  the  sons  of  men 
in  boundless  love.     Tell  it,  brother,  with  broken  accents,  if  thou  canst 
not  speak  it  more  powerfully.    Whisper  it,  sister,  gently  whisper,  if  to 
none  other  yet  to  thy  little  children,  and  make  the  name  of ''  Emmanuel 
God  with  us,''  to  be  sweet  in  thine  infant's  ears.     Thbu  art  growing  in 
strength  and  talent,  young  man,  come,  consecrate  thyself  to  this.    And 
thou,  grey-beard,  ere  thou  dost  lie  down  on  thy  last  bed  to  breathe  oat 
thy  spirit,  tell  the  love  of  Jesus  to  thy  sons  that  they  may  tell  it  to  their 
sons,  and  hand  it  down  to  coming  generations,  that  mankind  may  never 
forget  that  the  *'  word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us,  and  we 
beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  fiill  of 
grace  and  truth."    God  bless  you.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Sceiptubk  bead  before  Sermon — 2  Cor.  iii.,  iv.  1^7. 


Htmns  from  *'  OuB  Own  Htmn  Book  "—249,  384,  425. 


jlllett[0piiliimi  i^abttitade  intpt 


THE    ONE    FOUNDATIOK. 


%  ^mm\ 


Deliybred  ok  Lord's-day  Morning,  September  14th,  1879,  bt 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


'*  F<yr  other  foniidation  can  no  man  Uy  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jqbus  OhriBt.'*— 
1  Corinthiana  iii.  11. 

TTpbttilding  is  very  important,  but  the  first  qnestion  must  alvrays 
concern  the  foundation.  However  quickly,  however  cleverly  a  man 
may  build,  if  the  foundation  be  unsound  he  is  a  foolish  builder;  and 
however  dowly,  however  laborioudy  a  man  may  proceed,  his  building 
will  not  put  him  to  shame  if  he  has  set  his  walls  erect  upon  a  firm  basis. 
This  is  emphatically  true  in  spiritual  things,  for  there  the  foundation  is< 
of  the  utmost  importance.  The  hearer  of  the  word,  who  is  not  a  doer 
also,  comes  to  a  fatal  end,  because,  as  the  Saviour  says,  he  has  built  upon 
the  sand,  and  therefore  his  &bric  in  the  day  of  storm  and  flood  is  swept 
away,  while  he  who  hears  the  word  and  does  it  is  secure  because  he  digs 
deep  and  lays  his  foundation  upon  a  rock,  and  therefore  his  building 
survives  the  rains  of  trial  from  above,  the  floods  of  persecution  from 
without,  and  the  mysterious  winds  of  Satanic  temptation  which  howl 
from  every  quarter.  The  best  masonry  must  crack  and  fall  if  the 
groundwork  is  unstable :  the  higher  the  pinnacle  the  speedier  its  M  if 
the  base  is  insecure. 

As  to  what  the  foundation  is  in  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  there  is^ 
no  question.  This  verse  declares  it  to  be  decided  beyond  controversy* 
A  man  may  build  the  supeistmcture  in  some  measure  according  to  hia 
own  taste  and  judgment,  out  it  must  be  based  upon  the  one  foundation ; 
there  may  be  room  for  varieties  of  style  in  the  upper  building,  but  there 
can  be  no  variety  in  the  groundwork.  That  is  fixed  for  ever  by  the  un- 
changing Gk)d,  who  says,  **  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  foundation  stone." 
It  must  be  acknowledged  that  all  Christian  minds  and  Uves  do  not  take 
exactly  the  same  form  and  fashion :  there  are  among  the  best  of 
Christian  builders  certain  grades  of  excellency, — one  man  builds  with 
gold,  another  with  silver,  and  a  third  with  precious  stones ;  but  as  to 
Uie  foundation,  all  are  on  a  level,  Christ  is  all  and  in  all.  Whether  the 
gracious  life  be  rich  as  a  golden  palace,  or  pure  as  a  temple  of  silver, 
or  substantial  as  a  tower  of  marble,  whether  it  be  public  or  obscure, 
wide  or  narrow,  it  must  in  every  case  be  built  upon  tne  same  basement 
of  eternal  rock :  "  for  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is 
No.  1,494. 


518  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

laid/'  Yoa  may  say  ''  we  \rill  ^i«tt  io  dfler "  about  motters  ^kt 
concern  the  superstructure,  but  we  must  agree  to  agree  as  toXhe  founda- 
tion ;  for  if  we  are  not  at  one  with  the  plain  Btalemeat  of  the  tad  we 
are  in  the  wrong. 

The  apostle  is  dogmatic  to  the  very  last  degree  :  **  Other  foandadon 
can  no  man  lay."  *'  But/'  saith  onoy  *'  various  teachers  did  lay  other 
foundations."  The  apostle  will  not  admit  that  they  were  fonndiations : 
they  were  not  worthy  of  the  name,  file  in4x>sture  was  too  shallow  to 
succeed.  No  builder  if  he  looked  upon  a  heap  of  sand  poured  into  an 
excavation  would  admit  that  it  was  a  foundation.  If  he  saw  a  mass  of 
decayed  vegetation  aad  garden  robbish  heeiped  together  no  architect 
would  for  one  moment  allow  it  to  be  spoken  of  as  a  "foundation."  Paid 
declareth  that  there  is  bmt  one  fkmdationy  and  that  ttiere  is  none  beside 
it,  or  beyond  it ;  and  that  the  one  only,  unalterable,  immovable,  ever- 
lasting foundation  is  Jesus  OkrisL  It  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  there 
are  other  foundations  somewhat  differing  and  only  a  little  inferior  to  the 
Lord  Jesus :  there  is  no  other,  and  no  other  can  be  laid.  It  is  not  a 
question  of  comparison,  but  of  monopoly.  All  other  groundworks  and 
principles,  whatever  may  be  said  in  their  praise,  are  mere  falsehoods  if 
they  are  set  forth  as  fonndatioBBy  for  the  Lord  Jesus  has  alccliisive  pooaes- 
sion  of  that  title,  and  in  himalflBie  all  that  s  fundamental  m  somiaed  op; 
"  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other  :  for  there  is  none  other  name 
under  heaven  giren  among  men,  whereby  we  mnst  be^ved/' 

And  truly,  when  yon  think  Hhat  God  frosi  all  «etevnii7  has  made  his 
only-begotten  iSon  to  be  the  foondation  and  ooiBor  stone,  it  will  be  seen 
that  this  roek  goes  deep  into  the  very  natuje  of  ihn^  aj,  deep  as 
infinity  itself;  and,  therefore,  these  camet  be  two  of  the  kind,  for  of 
whom  else  is  it  written  that  vmily  he  was  fore-ordsinei  befoie  the 
foundation  of  the  world  f  Of  whom  else  is  tt  said, ''  I  was  set  up  from 
everlasdng,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was"?  When  you 
think  that  this  foundation  is  nothing  less  than  divine,  for  Christ  is 
very  God  of  very  Ood,  it  is  as  itnpossil^  that  thene  should  be  two  founda- 
tions as  that  there  should  be  two  Gods.  You  must  imagine  two  redemp- 
tions before  you  can  cosoeive  of  two  giroundwoikB  for  our  confidence. 
Who  will  dream  of  two  atonements,  two  Saviours,  two  Ghiists  ?  Yet 
must  such  a  thing  be  ere  there  oan  be  two  fonndnftions.  None  but  Jesus, 
the  divine  Saviour,  ooirld  sustain  the  weight  of  a  single  soul  with  all  its 
sins,  much  less  of  all  the  souls  whaeh  are  baik  np  into  ^bt  temple  of 
God.  Jesus  alone  can  sustain  onr  eternal  interests,  deliver  us  from 
eternal  wrath,  or  lift  ns  into  ebennl  bliss*  "There  is  one  God,  and  one 
mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  man  Ghriat  Jesns."  His  own 
words  in  prophecy  are  very  positive— "I,  even  1,  aim  the  Lord,  and 
beside  me  there  is  ne  Savioor";  end  e<|naliy  CKpress  is  his  personal 
declaration — "  I  am  the  way,  the  troth,  and  the  life :  no  man  cometh 
onto  the  Father,  but  by  me/* 

I  will  sketch  out  my  diseourse  with  these  four  lines,  which  I  may  not 
always  be  able  to  keep  fimm  intersecting  each  other,  but  they  shall  each 
be  marked  deeply  and  broadly,  so  that  none  can  help  seeing  them.  First, 
no  church  biU  what  is  biHU  an  Christ;  secondly,  no  go^l  but  what 
M  built  on  Gkrist;  thirdly,  no  hops  of  salvation  but  lohat  is  buiii  oh 
Christ;  and  fourthly,  no  Christian  but  what  is  built  on  Christ. 


THB  ONE  FOUNBATIOV.  519 

L  Fint»  there  is  no  chubch  btjt  what  ib  built  ok  Chbibt.  I 
mean,  of  oonrse,  no  trae,  no  real  chnrch.  There  are  many  churches  in 
the  world,  so  called,  bnt  this  may  be  laid  down  as  a  first  principle  that 
there  is  but  one  church,  and  that  this  one  church  is  built  upon  Christ 
alone.  Whatever  community,  congregation,  hierarchy,  sect,  or  corpo- 
ration may  call  itself  a  church,  or  even  the  church,  if  it  is  not  built 
upon  Christ  it  is  not  a  church  at  all.  No  matter  how  great  in 
numbers,  nor  how  ancient,  nor  how  wealthy,  nor  how  learned,  nor 
how  pretentious,  bigoted,  dominant,  or  ezdusiye  it  may  be,  it  is  not 
Christ's  church  if  it  is  not  built  upon  Christ. 

To  begin  with,  a  foundation  is  the  first  portion  of  abuilding ;  and  so  is 
the  Lord  Jesus  first  and  foremost  with  his  church,  for  his  people  were 
chosen  in  him.  Gk)d  has  always  had  in  his  purpose  and  decnee  a  chosen 
p^ple,  but  he  has  had  no  such  people  apart  fix>m  Christ.  The  apostle 
saith :  **  Blessed  be  the  Qod  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in 
Christ :  according  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world."  We  were  chosen  in  Christ  Jesus ;  he  is  ''the  first  bom 
among  many  brethren,"  and  the  Lord  has  ''predestinated  us  to  be 
conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son."  The  first  setting  apart  of  the 
chnrch  and  making  it  to  be  the  peculiar  inheritance  of  God  was  in  con- 
nection with  Christ. 

"  *  Christ,  be  my  first  elect,*  he  said, 
Then  chose  our  souls  in  Christ  cor  head.*' 

We  were  never  otherwise  chosen,  nor  otherwise  beloved,  nor  otherwise 
appointed  to  eternal  life  than  as  regarded  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  one  with 
hiim.  No  single  soul  can  be  said  to  be  elect  otherwise  than  as  it  is 
considered  in  connection  with  Christ ;  much  less  then  is  there  a  church 
of  Ood  apart  from  the  eternal  purpose  concerning  Christ  Jesus,  the 
covenant  head,  and  federal  representative  of  his  people.  The  foundation 
must  be  laid  first,  and  so  was  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  first  appointed. 
"Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God^  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a 
foundation  a  stone,  a  tried  stone,  a  precious  comer  stone,  a  sure  founda- 
tion." Jesus  is  called  by  the  Fatner  "Mine  elect  in  whom  my  soul 
delighteth,"  and  there  are  none  elect  except  such  as  are  in  him  in  the 
eternal  purpose  of  grace. 

But  next,  a  foundation  is  the  support  of  all,  and  there  is  no  church 
but  that  which  derives  all  its  support  from  Christ  Jesua  If  there  be 
any  company  of  people  calling  themselves  a  church  who  depend  for  sal- 
vation and  etemal  life  upon  anything  beside,  or  beyond  the  merit  of 
Christ's  atoning  blood,  they  are  not  a  church.  That  all  things  are  of 
God,  and  that  he  hath  reconciled  us  unto  himself  by  Christ  Jesus,  is  a 
truth  never  to  be  doubted.  The  atoning  Saviour  is  the  oomer-stone  of 
the  church.  He  is  the  one  rock  of  our  salvation,  the  one  pillar  of  our 
strength.  As  living  stones  we  are  built  up  into  a  spiritual  house,  but 
we  one  and  all  rest  and  depend  upon  him,  and  upon  no  other.  To  us 
the  word  of  the  Lord  has  come  with  x)ower, — "Therefore  let  all  the 
house  of  Israel  know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus, 
whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and  Christ."  The  great  atoninff 
sacrifice  of  Cln'ist  must  be  the  sole  reliance  of  the  whole  oiurch  as  weO 


520  METBOPOLITAK  TABERKACLS  PtTLFIT. 

as  of  eadi  individa&l,  and  this  mni^  be  96t  forth  with  great  demiessaDd 
distinctness  aa  its  first  and  greatest  doctrine — Balvfttion  bj  Christ  JesoB : 
''  In  whom  we  have  redemption  throtigh  his  bloody  the  forgireneas  of 
sins,  acoordfng  to  the  riches  of  his  graoe.''  The  atonement  taken  awaj, 
no  church  remains.  Call  the  commnnity  a  religions  clabif  you  like»  bnt 
it  is  DO  church  when  once  the  atonement  made  by  the  Lord  Jesns,  ihioagfa 
his  death  in  the  room  and  stead  of  his  people,  is  denied  or  ignored. 

Nor  do  we  jndge  a  commnmly  to  be  worthy  of  the  name  of  a  church 
which  plaoes  its  dependence  for  its  present  power  and  fatnre  progress 
anywhere  but  in  the  almigM^  Saviour.  Jesus  saith, ''  Becanse  I  lire 
ye  shall  live  also,"  and  t^  ^sbnioh  must  draw  its  daily  life  from  the 
immortality  of  her  glorious  Head.  He  that  loved  ns  and  died  for  as 
and  rose  f^in  is  pledged  to  keep  his  own,  and  on  that  pledge  let  them 
repose  their  fsAih.  Becanse  aH  power  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and 
in  earth,  therefore  go  we  forth  to  teach  the  nations.  He  has  said,  ^*  Lo, 
I  am  with  yon  alway,  eren  nnto  the  end  of  the  world,"  therefore  have 
we  strength  to  go  forth  for  die  c:>nquest  of  the  world.  But  if  we  depend 
upon  an  arm  of  flesh,  upon  the  secular  power,  upon  carnal  wisdom,  upon 
education,  or  eloquence,  or  prestige,  or  upon  our  own  zeal  and  Gurdonr, 
and  not  upon  Ciirist,  we  are  leaving  the  rock  for  the  sand.  We  cannot 
thus  build  up  Christ's  ohnrch,  nor  ought  we  to  attempt  it.  The  strong^ 
of  a  living  church  is  the  living  Christ.  We  must  be  very  careful  on  Siis 
point,  that  when  we  are  zealous  in  building  we  build  only  upon  Christ 
and  by  Christ,  for  edifices  otherwise  erected  will  fall  in  heaps.  We  must 
as  a  church  not  only  rely  upon  the  Christ  that  died,  but  upon  the  Christ 
who  is  gone  into  the  glory  acnd^sits  at  the  right  hand  of  Ged,  ruling  and 
reigning  on  our  behalf,  who  also  shall  shortly  come  to  gather  together 
the  scattered,  and  to  reign  amongst  his  own.  The  true  church,  like  a 
vine,  derives  the  life^aap  of  its  branches  from  Jesus  the  stem,  and  from 
no  other  source.  She  can  f»f  oihet  glorious  Redeemer, ''  My  soul,  wait 
thou  only  upon  the  Lord,  fbr  ny  expectation  is  from  him."  Other  com- 
munities may  lean  on  princes,  but  she  comes  up  from  the  wilderness  leaning 
on  her  Beloved ;  other  ooi^ragations  may  look  to  human  greatness  for 
support^  but  her  eyes  are  towards  the  hills  whence  cometh  her  help;  her 
help  comets  from  the  Lord  wMch  made  heaven  and  earth. 

Furthmmore,  a  foundaii^n  iias  the  skcgring  af  the  huildtng^  and  the 
true  church  shapes  and  forms  itself  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  as  its  ground- 
plan  and  outline.  The  shape  «of  a  building  must,  to  a  very  large  extent, 
be  determined  by  its  foundation.  If  you  have  ever  traced  the  founda- 
tions of  an  ancient  abbey  or  oaade^  as  they  have  appeared  on  a  level  with 
the  soil,  you  have  proceeded  to  infer  the  form  of  the  building  from  tb^ 
run  of  the  ground  line.  Here  was  a  sharp  angle,  there  was  a  circular 
tower ;  there  was  a  buttress,  and  there  was  a  recess.  The  building  most 
have  followed  the  ground  Mna,  and  bo  must  every  true  church  be  built 
upon  Christ,  in  tiie  sense  of  feflowing  his  word  and  ordinances  to  the  best 
or  its  knowledge  and  understanding.  The  law  of  Christ  is  the  law  of  the 
church.  All  the  decrees  of  popes  and  councils,  all  the  resolutions  of 
assemblies,  synods,  presbyteries,  and  associations^  and  all  the  ordinances 
of  men  as  individuals,  howev^  great  they  be,  when  they  are  all  put 
together,  if  ihey  at  all  diffiar  from  the  law  of  Christ,  are  mere  wind  and 
waste  paper,  nay,  worse^  they  aie  ireasonable  insults  to  the  majesty  of 


THE  ONE  FOUNDATION.  521 

King  Jesus.  Those  who  build  apart  from  the  authonly  of  Christ  build 
off  of  the  foundation,  and  their  fabric  will  Ml,  There  is  no  law  and  no 
authority  in  a  ta*ue  churck  but  that  of  Christ  himself;  we  who  are  his 
ministers  sue  his  servants  and  the  serv»Qts  of  the  church,  and  not  lords 
or  law-makers.  To  his  law  a  &ithful  churck  brings  all  things  as  to  the  sure 
test.  As  churches  we  are  not  legislators,  but  subjects ;  it  is  not  for  us  to 
frame  constitutions,  invent  offices,  and  decree  rites  and  ceremonies,  but  we 
are  to  take  everything  out  of  the  mouth  of  Christ,  and  to  do  what  he  bids 
us,  as  he  bids  ua,  and  when  he  bids  us.  Pavliaments  and  kings  have  no 
authority  whatever  in  the  church,  but  Christ  alone  rules  therein.  If  any 
portion  of  a  church  be  not  based  upon  Christ  it  is  a  mere  deforming  addi- 
tion to  the  plan  of  the  great  Arclutect,  and  mars  the  temple  which  God 
has  built,  and  not  man.  What  a  blessed  thing  it  is  to  feel  that  you  belong 
to  a  church  which  has  a  rock  under  it,  because  it  is  constitnted  by  Christ's 
authority.  We  fed  safe  in  following  an  ordinance  whkk  is  of  his  com- 
manding, but  we  should  tremble  ^  we  had  only  custom  and  human 
authority  for  it.  How  secure  we  feel  in  believing  a  doctrine  which  is  of 
our  Lord's  teaching,  for  we  can  say,  "  tins  is  not  mere  o|»nion,  this  is 
not  the  judgment  of  a  wise  man,  this  is  not  the  deeree  of  councils,  but 
this  is  the  Master's  own  declaration."  Not  one  of  his  words  shall  ever 
fall  to  the  ground.  There  is  in  his  authoritv  no  change,  for  ever  is  his 
word  settled  in  heaven,  and  he  is  in  himself  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever.  Steadfast  is  that  church  whidi  carefully  follows  his  guiding 
line,  but  that  which  departeth  from  hia  fixed  rule  and  authority  hath  left 
the  foundation,  and  therein  ceased  to  be  a  ehurch. 

A  foundation  ia  mdi^ensable  to  a  buildiag,  and  so  Christ  is  indispen- 
sable to  a  true  church.  In  a  house  you  could  do  without  certain  of  the 
windows,  you  might  close  a  door,  and  you  might  remove  parts  of  the 
roof,  and  still  it  might  be  a  house,  but  you  cannot  have  a  house  at  all  if 
you  take  away  the  ^undation ;  and  so  you  cannot  have  a  church  of  Christ 
if  Jesus  Christ  be  not  there  as  the  foundation  and  comer  stone.  When 
sermons  are  preached  without  so  much  as  the  mention  of  Christ's  name, 
it  takes  more  than  charity,  it  requires  yon  to  tell  a  lie  to  say  ^'  That  was  a 
Christian  sermon  ";  and  if  any  people  find  their  joy  in  a  teaching  which 
casts  the  Lord  Jesus  into  the  badcgrouncl^  they  are  not  bis  church,  or  else 
such  teaching  would  be  an  abomination  to  Uiem.  Yet  have  I  heard  it 
said  that  from  some  ministries  you  may  go-aw&y  like  Ma^  Magdalene  from 
the  sepulchre,  exclaiming,  ^'  They  haive  taken  aimy  my  Lord,  and  I  know 
not  where  they  have  laid  him."  One  told  me  the  other  day  that  he  had 
heard  a  discourse  from  a  Christian  pulpit  whidi  would  have  been  ap- 
plauded by  Jews  and  Mahometans,  for  tiiere  was  not  a  trace  of  Chiist  in 
it.  Another  declared  that  in  another  pk^e  he  heard  priests,  and  clergy, 
and  sacraments  so  much  puffed  up  that  aa  for  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  it 
seemed  to  be  a  very  small  matter.  Brethren,  this  is  not  so  in  the  church 
of  Christ.  There  the  Lord  Jesus  is  Ahte  and  Omega— first  and  last, 
beginning  and  end.  True  Christians  make  much  of  Christ ;  indeed,  they 
m^e  all  of  him :  and  as  for  priests  and  preachers  they  say,  '*  Who  then  is 
Paul,  and  who  is  Apollos,  but  ministers  dv  whom  ye  believed,  even  as  the 
Lord  gave  to  every  man"?  0  brethren,  let  us  see  to  this.  If  anything 
be  put  into  Christ's  place  we  make  it  an  antichrist,  and  we  are  not 
Christians,  but  anti-Christians.    The  true  church  saitb,  *'  Give  us  what 


622  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

learning  and  eloquence  you  will,  bat  we  cannot  be  content  except  Christ 
be  glonfied ;  preach  us  what  you  may,  we  will  never  be  satisfied  unless 
he  who  is  the  express  image  of  the  Father  shall  be  set  forth  in  our  midst." 
Then,  I  say,  she  speaketh  like  the  true  bride  of  Christ,  but  if  she  can  be 
content  to  see  her  Lord  dishonoured  she  is  no  chaste  spouse  of  Christ. 

Let  us  put  this,  our  first  point,  in  a  few  sentences.  It  is  not  the  unicm 
of  men  with  men  that  makes  a  church  if  Jesus  Christ  be  not  the  centre 
and  the  bond  of  the  union.  The  best  of  men  may  come  into  bonds 
of  amity,  and  they  may  form  a  league,  or  a  federation,  for  good  and 
useful  purposes,  but  they  are  not  a  church  unless  Jesus  Christ  be  the 
basis  upon  which  they  rest.  He  must  be  the  ground  and  foundation 
of  the  hope  of  each  and  of  all. 

Neither  can  a  church  be  created  by  a  mere  union  to  a  minister. 
It  is  most  good  and  pleasant  to  see  brethren  dwelling  together  in  unity; 
it  is  most  advantageous  that  between  the  pastor  and  his  flock  there 
should  be  perfect  love,  but  the  relationship  must  not  be  exaggerated 
beyond  due  bounds.  Brethren,  there  must  be  no  glorying  in  men,  mx 
blmd  foUovdng  of  them.  A  body  formed  of  individuals  whose  religion 
lies  in  drinking  in  the  theories  and  opinions  of  a  religious  teacher  fidls 
short  of  being  a  churcl^  of  Ood.  The  church  is  not  built  on  Paul,  nor 
upon  ApoUos,  nor  upon  Cephas,  but  upon  the  sole  authority  of  Jesus 
Christ.  We  are  not  to  oe  believers  in  Luther,  Calvin,  Wesley,  or 
Whitefield,  but  in  Christ.  Of  such  behevers  a  true  church  must  be  com- 
posed. Neither  is  a  church  made  by  the  following  of  any  particular 
form  or  rite.  We  have  one  Lord,  one  taith,  one  baptism;  and  we 
are  bound  to  be  loyal  to  Christ  in  his  ordinances  as  in  all  else,  but  it  is 
not  the  practice  of  an  ordinance  which  constitutes  a  church.  It  is  well 
to  be  united  and  bound  together  in  loyalty  to  the  faith  once  deli- 
vered to  the  saints,  but,  unless  there  is  vital,  personal  union  with  the 
person  of  Christ  on  the  part  of  the  members  of  the  church,  their  associa- 
tion may  constitute  a  kague  for  the  defence  of  orthodoxy,  or  a  con- 
federation for  the  maintenance  of  a  form  of  religious  thonght,  but  it  is 
not  a  church.  No,  most  blessed  Lord,  thou  must  be  there,  or  nothing  is 
there !  Pastors,  elders,  deacons,  teachers,  evangelists,  these  are  courses  of 
precious  stones  in  the  heavenly  temple,  but  without  thee  they  are  no 
church,  for  the  foundation  is  wanting.  All  thy  saints  come  to  thee 
and  rest  on  thee,  O  Christ;  and  in  thee  all  the  building,  fitlv  framed 
together,  groweth  unto  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord.  Thou,  0  Christ, 
art  the  seed-corn  out  of  whidi  the  church  grows,  the  stem  from  which 
it  branches,  Uie  head  in  which  it  lives,  the  shepherd  by  whom  it  is 
fed,  the  captain  by  whom  it  is  marshalled,  the  husband  to  whom  it  is 
marri^  :  thou  art,  indeed,  the  all  in  all  of  the  church  which  thou  hast 
redeemed  with  thine  own  blood. 

"  God  hath  a  sure  foundation  given, 
Fixed  as  the  firm  decrees  otheaven  : 
The  changeless  everlasting  rock, 
That  braves  the  storm,  and  bides  the  shock. 
There  build:  the  gates  of  hell  in  vain 
Against  that  rock  their  war  maintain. 
Christ  is  the  rock,  the  comer  stone, 
God  rears  his  beauteous  house  thereon.'* 


THE  OKE  FOUNDATIOK.  523 

Tlins  fer,  then,  we  have  declared  that  there  is  no  church  except  that 
Tvhich  is  built  on  Jesus  Christ.  This  truth  we  assert  in  the  ince  of  all 
men,  let  them  make  what  they  will  of  it. 

II.  Secondly,  we  assert  that  there  is  KO  gospel  but  what  is  built 
ON  Jesus  Ghbist.  There  are  many  pretended  gospels  in  the  world. 
Paul  said  once  **  another  gospel,"  and  then  he  corrected  himself,  and 
said,  ''which  is  not  another,'  for  strictly  speaking  there  is  only  one 
gospel,  and  there  cannot  be  two.  The  good  news,  God's  good  news  to 
men,  is  one.  There  never  were  two  gospels,  for  there  never  were  two 
Saviours  or  two  redemptions,  and  there  never  will  be ;  but  a  Saviour 
and  a  redeniption  are  necessary  to  a  gospel,  and  therefore  there  can  be 
only  one.  The  foundation  of  the  gospel  is  one,  namely  Jesus  Christ, 
and  there  is  no  other  possible  foundation.  For,  first,  there  is  hut  atie 
Mediator,  by  wham  Ood  speaks  wwds  of  grace.  "  There  is  one  God,  and 
one  mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus."  If  then, 
beloved,  any  man  shall  come  to  you  and  say,  "  God  hath  spoken  to  me, 
and  bidden  me  say  to  you  somewhat  other  and  above  what  Jesus  hath 
said,"  receive  him  not  If  any  man  say  unto  you,  "  I  have  a  revelation 
from  heaven,  and  God  bids  me  speak,"  if  he  speak  not  according  to 
the  words  of  Christ  Jesus  he  is  a  false  prophet,  and  cometh  not  &om 
Ood  at  all.  Yea,  moreover,  if  bishop,  or  council,  or  church  speak  other- 
wise than  Christ  has  spoken,  the  truth  is  not  in  any  of  them.  All  that 
ever  spake  from  God,  both  before  Christ  and  after  Christ,  have  spoken 
after  uieir  manner  and  measure  in  the  same  fashion  as  Christ  Jesus  the 
Lord,  for  the  voice  of  God  is  not  two,  but  one,  and  the  word  of  God  is 
not  two  or  three,  but  one ;  and  now  at  this  day  ye  may  rest  quite  certain 
that,  if  God  hath  anything  to  say  unto  us,  he  hath  in  these  last  days 
spoken  to  us  by  his  Son,  and  his  own  hand  has  closed  and  sealed  the 
revelation  of  God.  Woe  unto  us  if  we  hear  him  not,  and  woe  unto  us  if 
we  listen  to  other  voices.  Indeed,  if  we  be  the  sheep  of  Christ  we  shall 
not  regard  new  voices,  for  our  Lord  hath  said  it,  ''A  stranger  will  they 
not  foUow,  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers,"  The  true  gospel 
comes  through  Christ  as  the  Mediator,  and  through  him  alone,  ana  that 
which  comes  otherwise  is  not  the  gospel. 

The  true  gospel  has  Chrisfs  divine  person  as  its  glory,  and  there  can 
be  no  gospel  without  this.  Christ  is  God,  and  in  him  dwelleth  all  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  In  the  person  of  Christ  the  divinity 
has  come  down  to  us  to  heal  our  diseases  and  remove  our  grieft.  Now, 
if  you  hear  of  a  gospel  which  begins  by  saying  that  Christ  is  not 
the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father,  or  that  he  is  not  the  Son  of  God,  close 
your  ears  to  it,  for  it  is  not  the  gospel  of  God.  Unless  Jesus  be  extolled 
as  certainly  God  over  all,  ble^ed  for  ever,  the  preaching  is  not  the 
gospel. 

Jesus  Christ  is  the  essence  of  the  gospel:  he  himself  is  the  good  news, as 
well  as  the  medium  of  it.  The  good  news  is  that  God  hath  sent  his  only- 
begotten  Son  into  the  world  that  we  might  live  through  him.  Eternal 
redemption  has  been  obtained  for  ns  by  the  life,  death,  and  lesurrection 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  this  is  the  gospel.  There  is  pardon  through  his 
blood,  justification  through  his  righteousness,  and  sanctification  through 
his  Spirit.  Complete  sdvation  is  freely  provided  for  believers  in  him, 
and  the  grace  of  God  through  him  is  abundantly  displayed  to  the  very 


624  KETBOPOLITAN  TABBBMACUB  PULPIT. 

chief  of  siimera.  God  hath  made  him  to  be  onto  as  wisdom,  and  rigbt«on?- 
ness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption  ;  in  fact,  all  the  bIe8siD«;s  tk 
are  needed  to  lift  man  up  into  the  &¥Our  of  Grod,  and  keep  him  tbei^j 
for  ever,  are  stored  up  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  in  whom  God  s  Iotc  h± 
displayed  itself  to  the  fullest  dec^^ee.  Jesus  is  the  aom  and  snbsKiiik):. 
crown  and  glory  of  the  gospel.  If,  then,  you  hear  a  gospel  in  \?hjch  lik 
freewill  of  man  is  spoken  of  as  the  main  agent,  in  which  the  works  <•: 
man,  or  the  iorms  and  ceremonies  practised  by  priests,  are  set  up  a.s  Wl;' 
fundamental  things,  reject  such  teaching,  for  it  is  not  tlie  good  Qe%: 
from  heayen.  The  one  good  news  is  tins, — **  God  was  in  Christ,  rw'C.- 
ciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  tbenL' 
Let  others  preach  what  they  please ;  as  for  qb»  *'  we  pieach  Christ  crcc- 
fied."  Jesus  himself  preached  the  very  gospel  of  the  go^l  vhea  bi 
cried,  **  Gome  ufUo  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden^  ami  I  vii^ 
give  you  rest." 

Now  then,  brethren,  for  I  speak  to  many  of  you  who  teadi  the  gosjd^ 
beseech  you  to  recollect  my  simple  text  of  tonday,  and  henceforth  teacb 
nothing  apart  from  Christ.  The  teaching  of  doctrines  is  not  the  teachiu: 
of  the  gowel  if  those  doctrines  be  held  in  a  dry,  didactic  style  apart  ^•a 
Christ.  Suppose  I  preach  the  doctrine  of  election — that  is  one  tkiug: 
but  unless  I  preach  that  we  are  chosen  in  Christ  I  have  left  qui  liit 
foundation,  and  my  teaching  crumbles  to  the  ground :  as  a  bowiag  «^ 
shall  it  be,  and  as  a  tottering  fence.  Suppose  I  preach  final  peiseverapoe. 
it  is  well;  but  I  have  not  preached  the  goiqpel  unless  I  show  that  it^ 
because  Jesus  lives  we  shall  live  ateO;  J^  that  the  preservation  of  t»^ 
saints  depends  on  their  union  with  him.  Suif)|2^  I  fto^  teaching  jn^j 
cation,  it  is  not  the  true  justification  unless  it  {sthfiL^ighteousnessof  w 
in  Christ  Jesus  which  I  hold  forth.  Herein  I^fc^nend  to  you  tk 
example  of  the  earlier  preachers  of  the  church.  F^o5^^8u<J^  ^^  '^'^ 
writings  as  remain  we  gather  that  they  dwelt  much  upAi^  the  '^ "" 
events  of  the  Bedeemer's  life.  They  are  not  always  so  clear 
wish  upon  the  great  doctrines  as  Paul  gives  them  to  us,  hut 
point  in  which  they  excel.  You  may  not  heaor  enough  from  thei 
justification  by  faith,  but  you  hear  a  great  deal  conoeming  the  pi 
blood  of  Christ :  they  do  not  always  speak  so  clearly  apou  rcgenei 
as  we  could  desure,  but  they  speak  much  of  the  rwurrection  of  Clin 
and  of  the  newness  of  life  which  his  saints  ei\ioy  in.  virtue  thereof.  Pardo 
to  them  is  a  washing  in  the  blood  of  Christ :  conversion  is  being  called  h^ 
Christ :  resurrection  is  a  risen  Christ,  Everything  is  brought  out  as  i 
matter  of  &ct  arising  from  the  actual  life  and  death  of  the  Saviour,  andi 
I  am  free  to  coofiBss  that  I  greatly  admire  tUs  way  of  preaciung  the 
gospel.  How  does  Paul  put  it  ?  What  was  the  gospel  to  him  ?  He^^ 
him:  "Moreover,  brethren,  I  declare  unto  you  the  gospel  whicij  i 
preached  unto  you,  which  also  ye  have  reoeived,  and  wherein  ye  stauci ; 


to  the  scriptures;  and  that  he  was  buried,  aad  that  he  rose  a^^^^^' 
third  day  aocordios  to  the  scriptures ;  and  that  he  was  seen  of  ^^'ff' 
then  of  the  twelve.^    Thus,  you  see,  Paul's  body  of  divinity  ^'«s  ^^  ^^ 
and  death  of  that  only  embodied  divinity,  the  Lord  Jesus.    M/  ^^"^^^^"^ 


THX  ONE  FOUNDATION.  '    525 

always  set  forth  the  goflpd  in  close  connection  with  your  Lord^  fetching 
it,  as  it  were>  out  of  him.  The  juice  of  the  grape  is  pleasant,  but  if 
you  Tvould  know  what  it  is  in  all  its  purity  keep  the  grapes  near  you,  and 
press  them  in  the  vineyard  where  they  grow.  So  the  gospel  is  the 
wine  of  Christ,  but  it  is  sweetest  when  it  flows  fresh  from  the  cluster. 
Preach  Jesus  Christ  himself  when  you  preach  his  doctrine,  or  else 
yoti  may  make  the  doctrine  to  be  like  the  stone  at  the  door  of  his 
sepnlchre,  whereas  it  ought  to  be  like  a  throne  of  ivory  on  which,  like 
another  Solomcm,  your  Ixyrd  sits  resplendent. 

Some  preach  eiroerience,  and  they  do  well ;  but  they  should  be  exceed- 
ingly carefol  to  keep  Jesus  very  prominent.  We  have  a  school  of 
brethren  who  preach  little  else  than  experience,  and  I  do  not  condemn 
them ;  but  what  is  the  experience  of  a  poor  felloW'-sinner  to  me?  How 
does  it  help  me  to  hear  that  he  groans  as  I  do,  or  sings  as  I  do  ?  It 
may  be  of  some  small  service  to  me,  but  there  are  more  excellent  things. 
I  Tvont  to  know  how  Jestis  felt,  and  what  Christ  can  do  for  my  brother 
and  for  me.  Experience  is  admirable  wh^i  Jesus  Christ  is  set  forth  in  it ; 
but  if  you  take  up  an  experimental  vein  of  things,  whether  of  human 
oorruption,  or  of  human  p^ection,  and  Jesus  Christ  is  put  in  the  back- 
ground, you  are  marring  the  gospel.  Jesus  is  the  one  foundation,  and 
there  is  no  gospel  apart  from  him. 

So,  too,  with  practice.  By  aU  means  let  us  have  practical  preaching, 
and  plenty  of  it>  and  let  it  oome  down  sternly  and  fiftithfuJiy  on  the 
vices  of  the  times ;  but  merely  to  preach  against  this  and  that  vice,  and 
extol  this  and  that  virtue,  is  a  mission  fit  enough  for  Socrates  or  Plato, 
but  does  not  well  beseem  a  minister  of  Jesus  Christ.  Set  Jesus  forth,  my 
practical  brother.  His  example  shames  vice  and  encourages  virtue.  Set 
him  up  as  the  mirror  of  all  perfection,  and  in  him  men  will  see  what  they 
ought  to  be,  and  learn  how  to  come  at  it.  JesuB  Christy  theu,  is  the 
only  gospel.  We  leave  that  point,  being  abondandy  sure  that  you  are 
persuad^  of  it. 

III.  Thirdly.  Therb  is  no  hope  of  salvation  but  that  which 
IS  BUILT  UPON  Chbist.  TWs  is  another  point  upon  which  I  need  not 
speak  much.  I  will  only  spend  a  few  minutes  in  talking  upon  certain 
other  hopes.  No  doubt  some  think  it  must  be  wril  with  them  because 
they  were  brought  up  frdm  their  childhood  most  respectably,  their 
;  parents  were  exoelleuft  Christian  people,  and  they  believe  that  they 
.  themselves,  having  never  done  anything  very  wrong,  are  no  doubt  safe. 
Ah,  my  dear  hearers,  if  this  is  your  oiJy  hope,  you  are  lost,  for  you 
are  dead  in  sin.  That  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh, — ^the  best  of  flesh 
that  ever  was — is  flesh,  and  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God.  Ton  must  be  bom  again,  you  must  hs.ve  a  ftir  better  hope 
than  any  which  can  spring  out  of  your  birth  and  your  relations.  "  Aj, 
but,"  saith  another,  "I  had  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  church  per- 
formed upon  me."  Yes,  and  it  makes  no  diference  to  me  what 
church  it  was.  If  yon  are  building  even  upon  rites  which  God  has 
given,  they  will  not  suffice  you ;  they  cannot  bear  the  weight  of  your 
loul.  Baptism,  the  Lord's  Supper,  or  fifty  thousand  sacraments,  if  men 
were  to  make  so  many,  would  not  help  you  one  solitary  inch.  The  only 
foundation  for  your  soul's  hope  nmst  be  Christ,  and  none  of  these  oat- 
ward  things.    **  Ah/'  scfth  a&other, ''  but  I  have  diligenily  performed  a 


526  HETSOPOLITAN  TABSRHACLX  PULPIT. 

great  many  good  works."    I  would  to  Ood  joa  had  ten  times  as  msny 

good  works ;  bat  if  yon  have  committed  one  single  sin  no  works  can 

save  yon.    All  the  good  works  of  the  best  men  that  ever  lived  would 

make  bat  a  rotten  foundation  for  them  if  they  were  to  place  reliaiKe 

thereon.     Abound  in  good  works,  but  do  not  trast  them.      Homaa 

merit  is  a  foundation  of  sand.      ''But  I  have  had  special  spiritoal 

feelings/'  says  one ;  "  I  have  been  broken  down,  I  have  been  lifted  np.*^ 

Yes,  you  may  have  been  crushed  down  to  hell's  door,  and  lifted  up  to 

heaven's  gate,  but  there  is  nothing  in  feelings  and  excitements  which 

can  be  a  ground  of  hope.    "  Why/'  says  one,  "  it  has  troubled  me  that  I 

have  not  had  these  feelings."    Do  not  let  it  trouble  you,  but  go  to  Jesos 

Christ  and  rest  in  him ;  feelings  or  no  feelings.    High  frames  and  low 

frames  are  delusions  all,  if  they  be  trusted  in.    We  can  no  more  be 

saved  by  our  feelings  than  by  our  works.    "Oh,  but,"  saith  another,  ''I 

have  confidence  that  I  am  saved,  for  I  have  had  a  wonderful  dream,  and, 

moreover,  I  heard  a  voice,  and  saw  a  vision."    Rubbish  all !     Dreams, 

visions,  voices!    Throw  them  all  away.    There  is  not  the  slightest 

reliance  to  be  placed  upon  them.    ''What,  not  if  I  saw  Christ  ?"    No, 

certainly  not,  for  vast  multitudes  saw  him  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  and 

died  and  perished  after  all.    "  But  surely  a  dream  will  save  me."    It 

will  give  you  a  dreamy  hope,  and  when  you  awake  in  the  next  world 

your  dream  will  be  gone.    The  one  thing  to  rest  upon  is  the  more  sore 

word  of  testimony : — Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners, 

and  whosoever    believeth  in  him  is  not  condemned.      I  believe  in 

him,  and,  therefore,  I  am  not  condemned.    Why  do  I  believe  my  sin  to 

be  forgiven  ?    Because  Jesus  died  to  put  away  the  sins  of  believers,  and 

there  is  no  condemnation  to  those  who  are  in  him.    Why  do  I  believe 

myself  to  be  justified?    Because  he  that  believeth  is  justified ;  the  word 

of  God  says  so.    How  do  I  know  that  I  am  saved  ?    Because  Jesns 

Christ  has  declared  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  is  not  condemned. 

To  believe  in  him  is  to  trust  in  him,  to  make  him  my  foundation.    I  do 

trust  in  him,  he  is  my  foundation,  and  I  am  saved,  or  else  his  word  is 

not  true.  I  know  that  his  word  is  true,  and  therefore  I  am  at  rest.    It  is 

written,  "  He  that  beUeveth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life."    I  believe  in 

him,  therefore  I  have  everlasting  life.    I  have  his  promise  that  I  shall 

never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  me  out  of  his  hand ;  therefore  I 

shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  separate  me  from  his  love. 

You  see,  then,  there  is  no  hope  of  salvation  but  what  is  fixed  upon 
Christ  alone ;  and  I  do  invite  and  entreat  you,  if  any  of  yon  have  any 
hope  which  goes  beyond  Christ  or  beside  Christ,  get  rid  of  it,  throw  it 
on  a  dunghill,  and  loathe  it  as  an  insult  to  God.  Do  as  the  man  did 
with  the  bad  bank  note.  When  he  found  it  was  a  forgery  he  buried  it,  and 
ran  away  as  fest  as  he  could,  for  fear  anybody  should  think  the  note  had 
ever  been  in  his  possession.    So,  if  you  are  trusting  in  anything  that  is  not 


THB  OKK  FOUKDATION.  527 

of  Christ;  hvLTj  your  faith,  and  ran  away  ftK>m  ifc,  for  it  is  a  false  confi- 
dence, and  will  work  ill  to  your  soul.  Let  your  faith  cry,  "  None  but 
Ohrifit":  all^savtng  fiiith  delights  in  that  cry.  For  eternal  salvation, 
''  other  Ibnndatien  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid." 

lY.  Oor  last  point  is  this, — there  is  iffo  Ohbibtiak  Birr  ths  mak 
BiHLT  oor  Jbsub  Ohribv.  Here  is  «  Ohristian,  and  of  one  thing  in 
him  I  ain  sure :  I  cannot  tell  whe^er  he  holds  Arminian  views  or 
Calvinistic  vkms,  bat  if  he  is  a  Christian  he  has  no  fonsdation  but 
Ghriflt.  Here  is  a  person  who  reverences  the  Pope,  here  is  another  who 
gloriee  in  the  name  of  Protestant,  here  is  a  thitd  who  is  a  Baptist : 
wlvich  is  the  Ofanstian  oat  ef  these?  I  answer,  he  is  the  Christian 
th»t  is  boilt  on  Christ,  whoever  he  may  be ;  but  if  he  can  do  without 
Ohnst  he  is  not  worthy  the  name  of  Christian.  What  do  we  mean  ? 
Why  thiB.  I  mean  first,  erveiy  man  to  be  a  Christian  mast  mi  hie 
mfhoh  M&ul  mfon  Ckrist  ae  to  ebeunal  salvation.  There  mast  be  no  stut- 
tering or  etanunenng  over  that;  there  moBt  be  no  mixing  op  the  merits 
of  Jesas  with  peiests  or  eeiemonies :  no,  it  most  be  a  dear,  straight 
line,— ^Ohnst  for  me,  Christ  everything  fer  me,  my  sole  and  only  hope. 
Any  deriotion  here  is  iMal.  On  the  cross  is  written,  i^MS  umka,  and  it 
remains  the  one  only  hope  ef  a  burdened  sool. 

NeKt,  if  you  are  to  be  a  ChristiBn,  Christ  mtui  I»  your  wodd;  by  the 
aid  of  his  Eoly  Spirit,  yon  nmst  try  to  do  what  he  would  have  done  in 
your  position  and  under  yonr  eirenmstanoes.  Yon  are  net  to  say,  "I 
cannot  follow  Cfanst  in  this" :  yon  are  never  to  renovnce  his  leadereAiip. 
If  you  do  you  mustf^  up  bttiong  a  Christian^  because  yon  are  bound  to 
take  up  his  cross  and  follow  him.  He  claims  to  be  your  King  when 
he  becomes  your  Saviour.  A  true  Christian  is  a  man  who  builds  upon 
Christ  as  hn  model  as  walls  are  bnilt  on  a  foundation.  A  true  Christian 
is  one  whose  growing  iq>  is  in  Christ,  for,  strange  to  say,  the  temple 
of  God  grows.  Nor  need  we  wonder,  for  it  is  a  living  temple.  I  have 
seen  magnificent  pieces  of  architecture,  masterpieces,  and  it  has  struck 
me  when  I  looked  at  them  that  they  must  have  grown.  An  ordinary, 
clumsy  fait  #f  work  displays  the  mason  and  the  carpenter,  but  perfect 
architectm-e  looks  as  if  it  grew ;  and  ChrisTs  church  does  grow,  for 
Christ's  people  grow.  Btt  aH  our  up-growing  mn0t<ee«e  out  of  Christ. 
When  a  man  says,  **  Years  ago  I  used  to  worship  with  these  Christian 
people,  and  I  felt  very  happy  trith  them,  bat  I  have  now  more 
educatioa  and  have  got  beyond  them,"  he  is  guided  by  his  pride  and 
not  by  grace.  Ko  true  Christian  talks  so.  The  higher  he  grows  the 
more  he  grows  into  Christ ;  the  wiser  he  is  the  mmie  he  shows  the  wisdom 
of  Christ.  If  he  has  begun  aright  he  may  advance  as  &r  as  he  can,  but 
he  never  can  advance  beyond  dirist ;  he  will  get  to  be  less  and  Christ 
will  be  more  and  more  to  him,  for  he  is  not  a  Christian  who  does  not  still 
stick  to  this, — that  the  foundation  goes  as  far  as  he  means  to  go,  and  he 


528  METROFOIilTAN  TABEBKAGLK  PULPIT. 

bailds  never  beyond  that,  but  bnilds  npward  upon  that,  and  upon  thnb 
alone. 

And  he,  again,  is  the  trae  Christian  who  lives  jor  Chnst,  to  whom 
Christ's  glory  is  the  great  object  of  his  being.  He  is  a  Christian  nrho 
reckons  that  time  wasted  which  is  not  nsed  for  Jesos,  that  sabstance 
wasted  which  is  not  used  in  obedience  to  Jesns :  who  considers  that  he 
does  not  live  except  as  Christ  lives  in  him. 

Brothers  and  sisters,  I  pray  that  yon  may  all  be  Christians  of  this  sort^ 
only  do  let  it  be  with  yon  evermore  Jesns  Christ.  I  do  not  like  to 
preach  a  sermon  withont  feeling  the  presence  of  my  Master.  I  have 
done  so,  but  never  to  my  own  comfort.  I  cannot  bear  to  come  away 
from  the  Monday  evening  prayer-meeting  withont  feeling  that  the  Lord 
has  been  there,  and  he  generally  is.  The  true  heart  does  not  like  to 
engage  in  any  kind  of  enterprise  without  first  consulting  him,  and  doing 
it  in  his  sight.  We  are  a  very  busy  church,  and  I  want  yon,  as  a  busy 
church  doing  a  great  deal,  always  to  keep  the  Master  near  yon.  The 
most  holy  work  gets  to  be  mere  routine,  to  be  done  mechanically,  unless 
we  enjoy  his  dear  love,  and  sweet  presence,  and  blessed  smile  in  the  doin^ 
of  his  wiU.  Sit  at  Jesus'  feet  with  Mary  as  well  as  work  for  him  like 
Martha.  May  he  be  the  foundation  of  everything,  not  only  of  the 
church,  but  of  our  hope,  of  our  character,  of  every  littie  thing  we  do. 
When  yon  are  laying  the  first  stone  of  a  new  enterprise,  lay  it  upon 
Christ  with  feir  colours.  Set  it  in  the  vermilion  of  his  precious  blood ; 
perfume  it  with  the  oil  of  gratitude,  and  lay  it  upon  him  alone ;  so  shall 
you  build  for  eternity,  and  glorify  his  precious  name. 


POBTION  OF  SOEIPTUSX  BKAD   BEFOBB   SXBMON— 1  OorinthiailB  iil. 


Hymns  fbom  *'  Cub  Own  Hymn  Book  " — 42  (Vers.  I.),  878,  549. 


Spurgeon'8  Birthday  Book  and  Autographic  Register. 

CompQed  firom  the  Works  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

'*  Oar  young  frionds  delight  in  pomoiwing  birthday  albnmi,  and  h«re  if  one  which 
18  fit  for  a  queen.  We  wffl  say  nothing  of  the  contents,  but  the  binding  is  simi^y 
gorgeous,  whether  in  doth  at  2s.  6d.,  or  in  a  more  luxuriona  form  at  5b^  this  is  a 
dainty  birtbday  present,  and  is  equal  to  any  that  haye  ffone  before  it ;  W9  think  we 
might  venture  to  say  that  it  is  second  to  none.  Eacsimfles  of  the  autographs  of  the 
Pastor  and  his  wife  are  given  in  their  proper  plaoee."— TA^  Sword  and  the  IVomeL 

Passmobb  &  Alabastbb,  4,  PaternoBter  Buildings ;  and  all  BookseUen. 


^£ft[0p0litett  ilJafoniml^  fttlpit. 


THE    KIXG-PRIEST. 


Delivbbbd  on  Loed's-day  Morning,  September  218t,  1879,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  TUE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  He  Bliall  sit  and  rale  upon  hiB  throne ;  and  he  shall  be  a  prieet  npon  his  throne : 
and  the  oonneel  of  peace  Bhall  be  between  them  both.'*— Zeohariah  ti.  13. 

Let  us  first  look  at  the  historical  setting  of  this  passage.  .  It  would  seem 
that  three  Jews  of  the  captivity  had  come  from  Babylon  with  a  contri-» 
bation  towards  the  building  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  under  Zerubbabel 
and  Joshua.  Their  names  are  given  in  the  tenth  verse  of  the  chapter 
before  us.  Now,  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  had  become  exceedingly  exclu- 
sive, and  in  some  measure  rightly  so.  They  would  not  accept  help 
for  the  building  of  the  temple  from  the  Samaritans  because  they  were  a 
mixed  race,  but  they  said  to  them  ^' Ye  have  nothing  to  do  with  us 
to  build  a  house  unto  our  6od,  but  we  ourselves  toother  will  build  unto 
the  Lord  Qtod  of  Israel."  Possibly  they  had  begun  to  feel  some 
coolness  with  reference  to  the  captivity  at  Babylon  that  inasmuch  as 
they  did  not  come  back  to  their  own  land  their  aescent  must  be  proved 
before  they  acknowledged  them.  If  they  would  not  quit  the  ease  and 
comfort  of  the  towns  in  which  they  were  settled,  and  come  up  to 
Jerusalem  to  work  with  their  brethren  could  they  be  sure  that  they 
were  really  Israelites.  At  any  rate  there  would  need  to  be  some  enquiry 
into  their  pedigree  that  they  might  not  be  receiving  help  from  Samaritan 
pretenders.  There  was,  however,  no  difficulty  about  the  acceptance  of 
the  offerings  in  this  case,  for  the  prophet  Zechariah  was  bidden  to  hasten 
down  that  same  day  and  meet  the  three  worthy  Jews  from  Babylon. 
He  was  to  accept  for  the  Lord  the  tribute  which  thev  had  brought, 
and  make  of  it  crowns  of  silver  and  gold.  He  was  then  to  go  witli 
these  brethren  and  Josiah,  the  son  of  Zephaniah,  their  host,  down  to  the 
temple,  call  for  the  high  priest,  Joshua,  or  Jesus,  the  son  of  Josedcch, 
and  place  these  coronets  of  silver  and  gold  upon  his  head.  This  was 
to  be  done,  not  as  an  honour  to  the  individual,  but  as  a  prophetic  token 
that  there  would  in  due  time  arise  one  who  would  be  a  priest  crowned 
with  many  crowns.  This  illustrious  personage,  who  is  called  ^Hhe 
Branch,"  was  to  spring  out  of  the  decayed  house  of  David,  like  a  shoot 
from  a  tree  which  has  been  cut  down  even  to  the  stump :  according  to 
the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  "  and  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the 
No.  1,495. 


530  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

stem  of  Jesse,  and  a  Branch  shall  ]^w  out  of  his  roots."  (Is.  xi.  1). 
He  was  to  be  both  a  priest  and  a  king,  even  as  David  had  prophesied  in 
the  hundred  and  tenth  Psalm — "  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  ana  will  not 
repent,  thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek."  Now 
M!elchizedek  combined  the  king  and  the  priest  in  one  person,  as  also 
doth  our  Lord  Jesus  of  whom  Zechariah  spoke.  This  royal  priest  was 
to  build  the  real  temple  of  Grod,  which  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  oonld 
never  be,  for  the  Most  High  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands. 
It  was  also  intimated  by  the  proiAet  that  as  at  that  particular  time  men 
had  come  from  aiar,  and  had  brought  oJQTerings  to  the  temple,  so  iu 
the  days  of  this  great  priest-king  many  should  come  from  the  uttermost 
ends  of  the  earth,  and  should  themselves  be  built  into  the  temple  of  the 
Lord  God.  This  is  the  historical  setting  of  our  text :  now  we  have 
to  learn  its  spiritual  lesson.    May  the  Holy  Spirit  be  our  instructor. 

Last  Sabbath  morning  we  spoke  of  the  foundation  of  the  temple  of 
Ood.    We  saw  how 

<*  The  churcVs  one  foundation 
Is  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord.** 

We  may  not  forget  that  he  who  is  the  foundation  is  also  the  builder 
of  the  spiritual  house :  ^'  He  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord ;  and 
he  shall  near  the  glory."  There  is  but  one  who  is  the  true  architect 
and  master-builder  of  the  church  of  Qod,  even  Jesus  Christ.  His  hands 
have  laid  the  foondatioii  of  the  house,  his  hands  shall  also  finish  it.  So 
great  is  the  fulness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  that  no  figures  can  exhaost  his 
character ;  he  is  not  only  foundation  and  builder,  but  he  is  the  "  head  stone 
of  the  comer";  the  pinnacle  as  well  as  the  basement,  the  Omisgsk  as  well 
as  the  Alpha,  the  finisher  as  well  as  the  beginner.  He  b^ns,  he  carries 
on,  and  he  completes  the  divine  structure  of  the  church,  and  when  all 
this  is  done,  it  is  he  that  establishes  the  structure,  provisions  and 
frimishes  it,  keeps  and  preserves  it,  and,  best  of  all,  it  is  he  that  is  the 
glory  in  the  midst,  dwelling  in  the  church,  as  a  monarch  in  his  own 
halls,  and  making  it  to  be  a  palace  as  well  as  a  temple.  It  is  the  Lord 
Jesus  who  walks  among  the  golden  candlesticks  of  the  church,  who  loads 
her  table  with  bread  and  wine,  and  sends  forth  his  rod  of  power  from 
her  midst.  As  a  King  as  well  as  a  Priest  he  dwells  in  his.palaoe-tempk. 
As  the  Shekinah  was  the  glory  of  the  tabernacle  of  God  among  men  in 
days  of  old,  so  is  the  presence  of  Jesus  the  glory  of  the  church  at  this 
hour.  '*  Lo,  I  am  ever  with  you ;  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world  "  is  our 
pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire,  our  glory  and  our  defence. 

Our  text  tells  us  that  the  promised  builder  of  the  spiritual  temple  will 
inhabit  and  build  it  in  his  double  character  as  priest  and  king.  The 
church  is  built  up  by  none  other  than  by  this  Melohisedek,  and  it  is 
built  by  him  in  virtue  of  both  his  o£S^ces  as  king  and  priest.  As  king  he 
pnts  forth  power,  and  as  priest  he  displays  holiness ;  as  a  king  he  nprears 
the  walls,  and  as  a  priest  he  sanctifies  them  unto  the  Lord.  At  this 
moment  it  will  be  well  for  our  &ith  to  open  her  eyes  and  look  up  into 
heaven  itself  and  see  our  great  Priest-Kiuff  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
Ood  exalted,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  womng  by  his  Spirit  among  men 
for  the  jperfecting  of  his  church  below.  Our  Solomon  is  both  reigning 
and  building.    Of  his  throne  we  may  well  say  "  there  was  not  the  like 


THB.  KIKO-PBIESr.  531 

in  any  Idngdoin,"  and  of  bis  temple  we  may  also  add  that  it  ig  '^ex- 
ceeding magnificaly  of  fame  and  glory  througbont  all  oonntries." 

I  sbaO  try  tbiR  morning  to  set  our  Lord  Jesos  before  you,  as  far  as  I 
can,  in  tbat  double  glory  which  is  peculiar  to  himself:  in  the  majesty 
of  his  royalty  and  the  holiness  of  his  priesthood.  Such  lights  meet  not 
in  any  other  star.  To  no  one  else  belongetb  the  royal  priesthood,  saye 
only  that  he  reflects  bis  own  brightness  upon  his  brethren,  whom  he  hath 
made  to  be  priests  and  kings. 

The  subject  will  run  thus  :  first  let  us  consider  ths  glorious  combination 
of  offices  in  the  person  of  Christ;  secondly,  let  us  notice  the  happy  result 
of  «^-^''the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both";  and  then, 
thirdly,  let  us  suggest  ilie  action  on  our  part  which  is  harmonious  thereto; 
— make  crowns  and  set  them  upon  the  head  of  Jesus. 

I.  First,  then,  I  want  you  to  consider  at  this  time  the  glorious 
COMBIKATIOK  which  is  found  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Note,  first  that  he  is  King^  and  of  him  as  king  it  is  written, ''  he  shall 
sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne."  One  has  the  idea  of  ease  suggested  by  the 
expression.  Few  kings  haye  been  able  to  sit  and  rule,  but  they  haye  been 
forced  to  rise  and  rush  hither  and  thither  to  defend  their  soyereignty. 
No  other  seat  in  the  world  is  so  uneasy  as  a  throne.  We  haye  seen 
monarchs  eleyated  by  their  soldiery,  or  borne  aloft  by  the  fickle  throng; 
bayonets  or  ballot  boxes  haye  been  the  frail  supports  of  their  thrones. 
The  later  centuries  haye  been  a  sorry  time  for  kings.  As  once  men 
feared  to  be  thought  prophets,  so  might  men  in  reyolutionary  times 
haye  cried  out  each  one,  '^  1  am  not  a  king  nor  the  son  of  a  king."  But 
our  Lord  Jesus  sits  upon  a  throne  which  knows  no  trouble ;  once  for  all 
has  he  bled  and  died,  but  now  he  has  gone  into  Us  glory  neyer  to  be  dis* 
turbed  again.  The  Lord  who  hath  set  him  on  the  throne  by  an  unal- 
terable decree  hath  his  enemies  in  derision,  and  Jesus  waits  in  perfect 
rest  until  hia  foes  shall  be  made  his  footstool.  Publicly  recognised  as 
King  of  kings  by  the  diyine  enthronement  which  his  Father  has  given 
him,  he  is  not  a  king  warring  for  a  disputed  crown,  nor  battling  to 
driye  inyaders  from  his  realm,  but  he  sits  and  rules  upon  his  throne. 

Sitting  is  the  posture  of  abiding  as  well  as  resting.  Jesus  reigns  on, 
and  will  reign  on  so  long  as  the  moon  endureth.  ^'Thy  throne,  0  God, 
is  for  eyer  and  eyer."  Eyen  we,  who  are  yet  young,  haye  seen  dynasties 
come  and  go,  and  we  haye  seen  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  moyed  and 
tossed  to  and  fro  as  the  wayes  of  the  sea,  yet  the  throne  of  Jesus  has  not 
been  shaken,  for  it  is  written,  '^  The  LotcL  sitteth  upon  the  flood ;  yea, 
the  Lord  sitteth  King  for  eyer."  '*  The  Lord  is  great  in  Zion,  and  he  is 
high  aboye  all  the  people."  ''  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  eyer  and  oyer." 
Hallelujah. 

As  a  King,  he  is  described  as  sitting  upon  his  own  throne.  Ho  has 
not  usurped  the  throne  of  another,  but  his  right  to  soyereigntyr  is  india- 

g table.  He  has  well  deserved  to  be  King  of  men  since  he  is  their 
ideemer.  His  Father  hath  given  him  a  crown  as  the  reward  of  the 
travail  of  his  soul,  even  as  he  promised  *'  Therefore  will  I  divide  him  a 
portion  with  the  great,  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong, 
oecanse  he  hath  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death."  Mo  sits  upon  a  throne 
which  he  has  won  by  conquest,  for  he  has  yanquished  the  powers  of 
datkness,  and  led  captivity  captiye.    His  right  to  his  throne  can  never 


582  METBOPOLTTAH  TABKBVAOLB  PULPIT. 

be  disputed^  for  it  is  accorded  to  him  by  the  enthnaiaAtic  soilirageB  of  all 
his  people.    Do  we  not  sing 

**  Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem, 
And  crown  him  Lord  of  all  "f 

There  is  no  monarch  so  secure  as  he.  He  is  really  and  truly  King  by 
right  divine.  He  is  King  by  descent,  for  he  is  Son  and  heir  of  the 
Highest.  He  is  King  by  his  own  intrinsic  excellence,  for  there  is  none 
to  be  compared  to  him.  And  he  is  King  by  his  own  native  might  and 
majesby,  for  he  himself  holds  the  throne  against  all  comers,  and  shall 
hold  it  till  all  enemies  shall  be  under  his  feet.  Thos  is  he  spoken  of  as 
King. 

A  hint  or  two  is  given  as  to  his  position  as  prisst,  name)y»  that  he  is 
first  priest  before  he  is  King,  for  so  was  the  tjnpe  in  the  text.  Jesos 
the  son  of  Josedech  was  already  high  priest,  and  then  he  was  crowned 
with  the  gold  and  silver  crowns.  Now,  the  kingdom  of  which  we  ^eak 
to-day  it  not  that  of  Christ's  essential  royalty  as  by  nature  divine,  and 
therefore  Lord  of  all,  bat  that  which  his  Father  liiath  ^iven  him,  be- 
canse,  **  Being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  and 
became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore 
Ood  also  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above 
every  name :  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  things 
in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth ;  and  that 
every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of 
God  the  Father."  Jesus  reigns  because  he  died.  For  the  suffering  of 
death  he  is  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  The  saints  in  heaven  sing, 
''  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof,  for 
thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood." 

We  note,  too,  with  regard  to  our  Lord's  priesthood  that  he  is  said  to 
sit,  for  if  he  site  as  king  it  is  implied  that  he  sits  as  priest :  indeed,  it  is 
expressly  said, ''  He  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne."  Now,  of  no 
other  priest  is  it  said  that  he  sitteth,  for  the  apostle  saith,  "  Every  priest 
Btandeth  daily  ministering  and  ofiering  oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices, 
which  can  never  take  away  sins."  There  was  no  seat  provided  within 
the  holy  place  for  Aaron,  or  for  any  of  the  priests ;  they  were  servanU 
of  God,  and  they  stood  daily  ministering.  '^But  this  man,  after  he  had 
offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God; 
from  henceforth  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool.  For 
by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified.*' 
Jesus  sitteth  still  for  evermore  in  quiet  expectancy,  for  all  his  work  is 
done :  no  merit  to  be  wrought  out  to  complete  his  righteousness,  no 
sufferings  to  be  endured  to  perfect  his  atonement.  "  It  is  finished,"  he 
said  as  he  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  it  is  finished ;  and  in  token  thereof 
Jehovah  saith  unto  him, ''  Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand  until  I  make  thine 
enemies  thy  footstool."  So  &r,  then,  we  have  a  glimpse  of  thie  King 
sitting  on  his  throne,  and  of  the  priest,  crowned,  and  resting  from  his 
labours. 

Thus  far  we  have  seen  each  office,  now  we  are  to  see  the  two  com* 
bined  in  the  Lord  Jesus :  and  to  make  the  combination  clear  we  shall 
notice,  first,  that  as  a  priest  he  is  royal ;  and  then,  secondly,  that  as  a 
king  he  is  priestly.    Consider,  now,  that  as  a  priest  our  Lord  is  royaL 


THB  KIXO-PRIEBT.  588 

He  was  a  priest  wlien  he  honoured  the  law  bj  his  own  death  :  he  was  a 
priest  when  he  took  npon  himself  onr  sin,  and  bore  it,  offering  his  own 
aonl  as  the  victim  npon  the  altar  of  his  body :  he  was  to  the  full  a  priest 
when  he  presented  his  one  sacrifice  for  sin,  but  never  let  it  be  forgotten  that 
even  then,  in  his  nature,  he  was  a  king.  The  sword  of  vengeance  awoke 
against  the  man  who  was  Jehovah's  fellow  even  when  he  bled.  The 
laws  which  he  vindicated  had  been  ordained  by  himself;  and  it  adds  a 
special  glory  to  his  priestly  work  of  atonement  that  it  was  wrought  by 
the  royd  Lawgiver  himself.  The  subject  broke  the  laws,  but  it  was  the 
King  who  bore  the  penalty.  He  that  is  under  law  offendeth,  but  he  that 
made  the  law  came  under  the  law  that  he  might  make  amends  to  the  in- 
jured honour  of  his  own  justice.  This  was  a  notable  deed  of  love  and  of 
justice  combined.  Let  ns  confide  the  more  surely  upon  the  sacrifice  of 
our  great  High  Priest,  because  of  the  dignity  of  his  nature,  and  the 
supremacy  of  his  rank,  even  when  he  made  himself  of  no  reputation  and 
took  npon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant. 

Onr  Lord  stooped  to  the  lowest  service  for  our  sakes  when  he  was 
acting  a  priest  among  us  in  these  lower  realms.  He  presented  himself 
as  an  offering  for  sin,  and  men  scourged  him,  and  spat  upon  him ;  and 
hung  him  up  like  a  felon,  and  in  all  this  shame  and  suffering  we  look  to 
him  as  onr  Saviour.  Thus  he  made  expiation  for  sin.  But  though  we 
are  to  look  to  him  in  that  capacity  for  the  pardon  of  sin,  as  men  sought 
cleansing  of  a  priest,  we  must  never  forget  that  now  he  expects  homage 
from  us,  and  we  must  come  to  him  for  government  as  men  pay  obedience 
to  a  king.  Think  of  him  as  the  crucified  One  as  much  as  you  will,  for 
as  such  he  is  your  atoning  sacrifice,  but  remember  that  this  same  Jesus 
which  was  crucified  God  hath  proclaimed  to  be  both  Lord  and  King. 
Trnst  in  the  man  of  the  thorn-crown  must  foster  and  nourish  reverence 
.  for  the  Lord  who  weareth  many  crowns.  We  must  not  only  trust  but 
worship.  We  must  never  dissever  from  that  shame  and  spitting  the  fact 
that  the  four  living  creatures  and  the  elders  prostrate  themselves  before 
the  Lamb,  and  sing  unto  his  praise,  *'  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book, 
and  to  open  the  seals  thereof:  for  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us 
to  God  by  thy  blood." 

"  Salvntioii  to  (JckI,  who  sits  on  the  throne, 
Let  till  cry  aloud,  and  honour  the  Son  ; 
The  praises  of  Jesus  the  antrels  proclaim, 
Fall  down  on  their  faces  and  worship  the  Lamb.** 

O  yon  that  come  to  him  to-day  laden  with  guilt  and  full  of  fears,  to 
wash  yourselves  in  the  fountain  which  he  filled  from  his  own  veins,  you 
must  also  come  to  obey  him,  and  to  walk  in  his  statutes.  You  may  not 
come  to  him  merely  that  you  may  get  your  sins  forgiven,  you  must  come 
to  be  cleansed  fh>m  the  power  of  evil,  and  to  yield  yourselves  unto  God. 
Jesus  was  given  that  he  might  be  a  leader  and  a  commander  to  the 
people,  as  well  as  their  deliverer  and  Saviour.  A  true  disciple  looks  to 
nis  Master  for  mling  as  well  as  for  teaching,  and  he  expects  to  render 
obedience  as  well  as  to  receive  instruction.  There  may  be  no  separation 
between  these  two  points :— our  priest  to  save  must  ever  be  regarded  as 
onr  king  to  rule.  He  puts  away  sin,  but  he  expects  to  reign  over  the 
forgiven  spirit ;  ho  washes  onr  feet,  but  he  looks  that  we  also  practise 


584  METROPOLITAK  TABERKACLK   PULPIT. 

Ws  precepts  and  example  of  love,  for  he  says—"  Ye  also  ought  to  vb4 

one  another's  feet."  ^v   t  j 

At  this  moment  in  heaven,  if  yonr  eyes  of  feith  can  see  the  Lort 
Jesus,  you  perceive  that  he  is  pleading  for  his  people  as  a  pnesL  It  is 
a  priest's  duty  to  offer  intercession  for  those  over  whom  he  is  ^ 
pointed;  and  this  Jesus  does  continually.  Hath  he  not  «ud,  "l!or 
Zion's  sake  will  I  not  hold  my  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  wiUnoi 
rest"?  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them  that  «>™«>* 
God  hy  him.  But  do  not  forget  that  our  Lord  does  not  make  in- 
tercession otherwise  than  royally.  There  is  no  prostration  now  amids 
the  olives  of  the  gloomy  garden,  no  bloody  sweat,  no  strong  crymg 
and  tears.  He  saith  not,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt,"  but  he  ni^ 
his  suit  in  another  fashion.  The  interceding  priest  has  laid  aside  J» 
hlood-stamed  garments  and  put  on  his  robes  of  holiness  for  gloiy  and  w 
beauty.  Jewelled  breastplate ;  ephod  of  gold  and  bine,  and  P'in>*«J(°? 
scarlet ;  mitre  and  fine  linen  and  gold ;  and  girdle  of  needlework  the  higo 
Priest  wore  on  favoured  days ;  all  typical  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Je5u> 
now  that  he  has  gone  within  the  veil.  With  authority  he  plewb  tntj 
Ood  from  the  throne  of  his  power.  He  asks  and  he  has ;  he  sp^^«? 
it  is  done  ;  for  the  intercessor  of  the  saints  before  the  throne  of  ^^ 
now  the  King  immortal,  eternal,  invisible,  the  only  wise  God,  our  fc>avH)^. 
Oh,  what  prevalence  there  is  in  his  plcjt^^d  when  we  give  him  our  catia 
to  plead,  how  confident  we  may  feel  that  tiheblessing  will  come  torn 


As  a  priest  our  Redeemer  not  only  plead^?vith  God,  ^^*^,  ^^J^^^ 
the  people.    It  was  the  work  of  the  high  priest  to^Jferpnounce  the  DajW"^ 
tion  over  the  house  of  Israel.    Jesus  does  that,  but  ms^Aoes  it  rop;y| 
mean  he  does  it  with  the  power  of  a  king  as  well  as  witlfc^he  ^^'^^ 
of  a  priest.     He  does  not  merely  wish  us  good,  but  he  w^rks  ^.^ 
There  is  omnipotent  sovereignty  at  the  back  of  the  priestly  "SSJiJS^ 
He  that  speaks  and  declares  his  people  to  be  justified,  ^^^^'^flr^gLn 
served,  and  blessed  is  he  who  can  make  good  his  words.  The  ^^^^  ^5 
of  Jesus  the  Priest  is  the  benediction  of  Jesus  the  King.    Ij*^ 
rejoice  and  be  glad  in  this.  ,       Vj  ^ 

And  now,  beloved,  it  is  as  a  priest  that  Jesus  sends  out  his  Soswp.^ 
the  ends  of  the  earth.    In  that  gospel  he  invites  men  to  come  *?  rj^, 
that  he  may  purge  them  from  their  uncleanness.    To-day  he  ^P^^Vr 
us,  his  ministers,  and  bids  men  come  to  the  great  Priest  that  he  np»i 
heal  them  of  their  leprosy,  and  deliver  them  from  all  manner  ^^  ^'  ^ 
ment ;  but,  mark  you,  it  is  an  invitation  from  a  King  as  well  as  from   , 
priest,  and  he  that  rejects  it  shall  be  counted  guilty  of  disloyalty  an 
high  treason.    "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."    ft  ^  ^^^A 
sons  of  men,  that  Jesus  offers  you  salvation,  and  leaves  it  to  7^^.^^  p. 
you  will  have  it  or  not ;  but  if  you  reject  it  your  rejection  Triii  oe/. 
goired  at  your  hands.     Beware,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and  pen 
The  invitation  to  the  wedding  of  the  great  King  is  made  freely,  ot  ^ 
voluntary  bounty,  but  if  any  who  are  bidden  shall  refuse  to  oon*® 
King  will  be  wroth,  and  send  forth  his  armies  against  those  who  wi^ 

Eroclaim  their  enmity.    Jesus  is  not  only  priest,  asking  you  to  cj^  .      | 
im  and  receive  of  his  forgiving  love,  but  he  is  a  King  as  J^  ^  1 
will  break  with  a  rod  of  iron  all  that  dare  to  trample  on  his  WooO) 
slight  his  priestly  grace.  mv 


THE  KINO-PBIEST.  535 

Thus  I  have  pat  forward  the  combination  in  one  form,  and  testified 
that  Jesns  as  a  priest  is  right  kingly  in  all  that  he  doth.  Let  us  now 
tnrn  the  other  side  of  the  truth  towards  the  light,  and  see  that  as  a 
King  he  always  retains  his  priestly  character,  and  in  the  deeds  of  his 
sovereignty  he  acts  not  otherwise  than  as  the  high-priest  of  his  people. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  King  over  all  at  this  very  moment.  He 
reigns  over  the  whole  world,  and,  notwithstanding  all  this  hurly-burly  of 
affairs,  this  perpetual  clamour  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wars,  his  lang- 
dom  ruleth  over  all.  Our  Lord  is  master  of  the  game,  and  he  shall 
surely  win  at  the  end.  ^^The  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulders.'^ 
But,  blessed  be  his  name,  our  Lord's  kingly  majesty  is  ever  softened  and 
sweetened  by  his  priestly  tenderness,  else  he  would  have  crushed  thia 
world  out  of  existence  long  ago.  If  rule  had  been  all,  and  mercy  had 
not  claimed  her  share,  justice  would  have  swept  away  this  rebellious  race. 
If  Jesus  were  not  priest  as  well  as  King  he  would  say  to  his  angels, ''  Go 
and  smite  that  nation  which  refuses  my  gospel.  Destroy  antichrist  that 
lifts  his  triple  crown  against  my  solo  sovereignty.  60  and  scourge  that 
favoured  nation  which,  having  the  gospel  of  peace,  yet  chooses  war,  and 
with  high  looks  and  lofty  words  provokes  bloodshed."  He  does  not 
destroy,  because  his  office  is  to  forgive  and  save.  A  priest  must 
show  longsufTering,  gentleness,  and  compassion,  for  to  that  end  is  he 
taken  from  among  men  and  ordained  for  men  in  the  things  of  God. 
Such  is  our  Lord :  "  He  is  not  slack  concerning  his  promise,  but  he 
is  longsufTering  to  usward,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but 
that  all  should  come  to  repentance."  This  longsuffering  of  the  King 
leadeth  to  repentance:  its  intent  is  man's  salvation.  We,  who  are 
short  of  patience,  cry  eagerly  to  him, "  Come,  0  King.  Come,  0  King  "; 
but  he  answers,  "  I  tany  yet  a  while  in  mercy  that  still  more  may  be 
lathered  to  my  name,  and  may  wash  themselves  in  my  atoning  blood." 
Think  of  this,  my  brethren.  Do  not  lower  Christ's  sovereignty,  but  at 
the  same  time  learn  to  see  it  shining  with  gentler  beams  through  the 
medium  of  his  priestly  character. 

And,  now,  to-day,  among  his  servants  Jesus  alone  is  King,  and  as  a 
king  he  commands  us.  He  lays  certain  laws  upon  his  servants,  and  he 
bids  us  teach  all  men  to  observe  liis  statutes ;  but,  oh,  it  is  so  sweet  to 
think  that  our  King  in  Zion  is  also  a  faithful  and  merciful  high  priest, 
'!  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  ready  to  help  us,  and  prompt 
to  forgive  us.  My  brother,  though  Jesus  commands  thee,  yet  he  pities 
thy  weakness,  and  helps  thee  to  obey.  He  has  given  thee  a  law,  but  he 
knows  thy  feebleness,  and  so  he  gives  thee  grace  to  keep  it ;  ay,  and  when 
thou  dost  not  keep  it  he  hath  pity  upon  the  ignorant,  and  upon  them 
that  are  out  of  the  way,  and  thy  sins  of  ignorance  and  of  trans- 
gression he  continues  still  to  put  away.  When  his  servants  were  about 
him  here  on  earth,  he  not  only  gave  his  commands  to  them,  but  he 
prayed  for  them  that  they  might  be  kept  from  disobeying  in  the  hour 
of  trial,  and  he  restored  them  when  they  had  fallen.  He  not  only  ruled 
his  little  band  of  followers,  but  he  kept  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
He  was  their  king,  and  their  priest  too.  Eead  the  commands  of  Jesus 
with  becoming  reverence,  for  he  is  your  king ;  but  let  them  not  distress 
you,  for  he  knows  your  weakness  and  will  help  you  to  do  what  of  your- 
self you  are  incapable  of  doing.    He  is  a  king,  but  the  priestly  garment 


5SC  ICETBOPOLITAK  TABBKSACLE  PULPIT. 

k  always  over  the  Idnf^hr  yentare :  whatever  the  omaments  of  his  im- 
perial eplendonr,  he  is  still  clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  the  foot  The 
priesthood  covers  ^l,  and  removes  all  cause  of  dread  from  every  believing 
mind. 

The  same  is  trne  of  onr  great  King  when  he  goes  out  to  war.  He  is 
the  Lord  mighty  in  battle  ;  in  righteousneas  he  doth  judge  and  make 
war.  The  psalmist  crieth,  "  Oini  thy  sword  npon  thy  thigh,  0  most 
mighty,  with  thy  glory  and  thy  majesty.  And  in  thy  majesty  ride  pros* 
perously  becanse  of  trath  and  meekness  and  righteoosness ;  and  thy  right 
hand  shall  teach  thee  terrible  things.  Thine  arrows  are  sharp  in  the 
heart  of  the  Idng's  enemies  ;  whereby  the  people  &11  under  thee."  Bat 
the  wars  of  Christ  are  not  lUce  the  wars  of  earthly  monarohs.  His  sword 
is  not  in  his  hand,  but  it  goeth  out  of  his  mouth,  and  with  this  he  smites 
and  rules  the  nations.  He  is  clothed  in  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood,  but  it 
is  his  own  blood.  Every  battle  of  the  warrior  is  with  oonfused  noise, 
and  garments  rolled  in  blood ;  but  this  is  a  warfare  of  another  fashion* 
for  he  wrestles  not  with  men,  but  with  their  sins ;  not  with  princes  and 
armies,  but  with  fiilsehood  and  iniquity.  His  victories  are  not  those  of 
mighty  men  who  return  from  the  fray,  amidst  the  groans  of  widows  and 
the  cries  of  orphans ;  but  his  bloodless  triumphs  make  glad  the  poor  and 
the  oppressed,  and  only  crush  down  principalities  and  powers  and 
spiritual  wickednesses  in  high  places,  bringing  good  to  all  who  seek  his 
fece.    He  is  a  king,  but  evermore  the  patron  and  true  priest  of  men. 

Among  ourselves  at  this  day,  beloved,  we  who  know  him  delight  to 
own  him  as  our  king.  0  Lord  Jesus,  thou  greater  Joseph,  the  shepherd 
and  stone  of  Israel ;  all  our  sheaves  pay  ol^ience  unto  thy  sheaf,  and 
all  thy  Mher*s  children  bow  down  before  thee.  Thou  more  glorions 
Jndah,  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise,  unto  thee  shall  the 
gathering  of  the  people  be.  The  chief  among  ten  thousand  and  the 
altogether  lovely  art  tnou.  Yes,  beloved,  this  glorious  one  is  our  brother, 
and  delights  to  be  regarded  as  a  priest  taken  from  among  men,  being  one 
of  ourselves,  able  to  sympathize  with  our  infirmities.  Our  Ijonl  is  higher 
than  the  highest,  and  yet  he  stoops  as  low  as  the  lowest.  He  is  kingly 
even  to  deity,  and  yet  so  truly  a  priest  that  in  aU  our  afflictions  he  is 
afflicted.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.  Euler  of  our  race,  he 
is  yet  partaker  of  our  flesh  and  blood,  and  he  is  acquainted  with  all  its 
sorrows.    True  king,  and  yet  true  priest. 

Thus  I  would  have  you  blend  the  idea  in  both  ways,  and  see  Jesus  as 
a  royal  priest  and  a  priestly  king. 

"  Jesus,  tlie  King  of  clory,  reigns 
On  Sion*8  heayemy  hill ; 
Looks  like  a  lamb  that  has  been  slain, 
And  wears  his  priesthood  still.** 

Snch  is  your  liord.  May  your  view  of  him  be  clear,  your  ibith  in 
him  be  firm,  your  love  to  him  be  fervent,  your  joy  in  him  be  over* 
flowing,  and  your  obedience  to  him  be  constant.  Trust  the  Priest  and 
serve  the  King,  and  ever  pay  your  vows  unto  him  who  is  *'a  priest 
apon  his  throne." 

II.  Secondly,  and  very  briefly,  we  shall  now  meditate  upon  ths 
oiPPY  BEsuLT  of  all  this.     The  text  says,  "  The  counsel  of  peace 


THB  KIHGkPBIBST.  587 

shall  be  between  tbem  both."  I  oonfen  myself  anable  dogmatioally  to 
interpret  this  passage^  for  there  are  no  less  than  three  possible  mean- 
ings. I  mast  give  yon  them  all,  and  leave  yon  to  judge  for  yourselves. 
The  most  natural  reading,  to  my  mind,  is  this — that  when  we  shall  see 
in  the  person  of  Ohrist  the  king  and  the  priest  oombined,  the  counsel  of 
})eaoe  snail  be  between  them  boi£.  These  offioes,  the  king  and  the  priest, 
being  combined  in  one,  shall  make  a  deep  and  lasting  peace  for  us,  a 
peace  arranged  by  the  deep  thought  and  counsel  of  Qoa,  and  therefore 
foU  of  wisdom,  truth,  and  certainty.  YHien  we  see  the  Lawgiver  him-, 
self  making  atonement  for  our  transgressions  we  have  peace  indeed : 
when  ruler  and  Saviour  meet  in  one  person  the  rest  is  sure  and  profound. 
Beloved,  if  this  be  not  the  meaning  of  the  passage,  it  is  at  least  a  pre- 
cious truth.  If  we  want  peace  we  can  only  obtain  it  by  knowing  Ohrist 
as  priest  and  king — the  counsel  of  peace  must  lie  between  these  two. 
Oh,  do  you  know  Ohrist,  my  dear  hearers,  as  your  priest  ?  Have  yoa 
seen  him  offering  sacrifice  for  your  sin  ?'  Does  he  stond  instead  of  you 
before  God?  Do  yon  present  your  prayers  and  your  praises  to  God 
through  him  ?  Well,  then,  you  have  begun  to  know  what  peace  is,  for 
peace  comes  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  the  priest — ^peaoe  by  his  righteous- 
ness, peace  by  h&  sacrifice.  But  if,  knowing  tnis,  you  are  still  in 
trouble  of  heart,  remember  that  yon  need  to  know  him  also  as  your 
king.  When  he  subdues  your  iniquities,  when  the  power  of  sin  is  taken 
away  as  well  as  the  guilt  of  it,  tnen  you  shall  know  the  perfection  of. 
peace.  ^'  Take  my  yoke  upon  vou,"  saith  he,  **  and  learn  of  me,  and  ye 
shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  It  is  not  in  a  mere  belief  in  Ohrist  as 
your  Saviour  that  you  will  ever  get  perfect  peace,  it  is  by  yielding  up 
yourself  unto  him  that  he  may  rule  and  reign  over  you  completely. 
This  man  shall  be  the  peace  when  he  is  Lord  as  well  as  priest.  As  long 
as  your  will  rebels  against  your  Bedeemer's  rule  you  cannot  have 
unbroken  rest.  It  is  idle  for  yon  to  talk  about  trusting  in  the  blood 
of  Jesus  unless  you  submit  to  his  sceptre.  The  cross  itself  cannot  save 
you  if  you  divorce  it  fix>m  the  crown.  Tour  Saviour  must  be  a  priest 
upon  his  throne  to  you ;  his  blood  must  be  on  your  conscience,  and  his 

Soke  must  be  upon  your  neck.  There  is  no  counsel  of  peace  until  it  is 
etween  both  these :  the  kingly  priest,  the  priestly  king,  alone  can  make 
and  maintain  the  peace  of  GckL  within  you.  That  is  a  great  and  deep 
truth :  may  we  learn  it  welL 

But  it  is  thought  by  some  wise  men  that  the  text  means  the  counsel 
of  peace  shall  be  between  Jehovah  the  Father,  and  the  Son.  I  am  not 
sure  that  such  a  meaning  would  suggest  itself  to  every  reader,  and  as  the 
most  obvious  meaning  is  generally  to  be  preferred,  I  will  not  contend 
for  this  second  meaning.  However,  as  an  interpretation  it  is  certainly 
not  too  far-fetched,  and,  even  if  it  cannot  be  sustained,  it  is  certainly  a 
very  great  truth.  It  is  between  God,  the  Eternal  Father,  and  Jesus 
Ohrist,  our  Melchizedek,  or  king-priest,  that  the  counsel  of  peace  has 
been  established  on  our  behalf.  You  never  know  God  so  as  to  have 
peace  with  him  till  you  know  God  in  human  flesh.  Only  the  incarnate . 
God  can  end  the  trouble  of  ^our  spirit.  A^,  and  it  must  be  that 
incarnate  God,  bleeding,  suffenn^,  dymg,  making  expiation  for  sin,  and 
then  rising  to  the  Uirone  and  ruling  over  all,  that  must  be  seen  before 
you  can  perceive  how  the  infinitely  glorious  Jehovah  can  be  at  peace  with 


58&  METROPOLITAN  TABEBKAOLB  PULPIT. 

YOU.  God  in  covenant  ib  Ood  afe  peace  with  man*  There  was  a  ooonad 
between  the  Trinity  at  the  making  of  man,  **  Let  ns  make  man";  and 
80  also  there  was  a  connsel  between  the  divine  Persona  at  the  redemp- 
tion of  man, — the  connflel  of  peace  is  between  them  both.  It  is  a  joj 
for  ns  to  know  that  between  Jesns  onr  priest-king  and  the  everlasting 
God  peace  has  been  established  for  ns,  peace  which  never  can  be  broken. 
Oar  first  covenant-head  broke  the  treaty,  and  left  ns  at  war  with  Grod, 
bat  the  second  Adam  has  fiilfiUed  and  established  the  covenant  of  grace, 
and  believing  in  his  name  we  have  peace  ^ith  God. 

But  there  is  a  third  meaning,  and  althongh  I  am  not  sore  of  it  as  the 
sense  here,  it  is  assuredly  a  blessed  truth,  and  appears  to  me  to  be  con- 
gruous with  the  connection.  Let  me  go  back  to  the  historical  drcnm- 
stances.  Here  were  these  three  men  that  had  come  from  Babylon.  The 
prophet  is  to  take  them  to  the  house  of  a  Jew  resident  in  Jerusalem. 
There  might  be  some  little  differences  between  these  men  and  the 
Jerusalem  Jews.  These  Babylonian  Jews  had  not  come  np  to  dwdl 
in  Jerusalem :  but  Josiah  the  son  of  Zephaniah  was  a  resident  there,  and 
he  might  have  demnrred,  and  have  said,  "  We  cannot  take  yonr  present 
to  the  temple  because  yon  do  not  bring  yourselves  and  come  to  abide 
with  your  own  people."  No,  but  thev  were  to  go  up,  together,  bearing 
the  gold  and  silver  crowns,  and  put  them  upon  the  head  of  the  pricsL 
They  were  to  go  up  in  unity  and  love,  and  they  were  to  famish  in  their 
own  persons  types  of  other  far-off  ones  who  should  come  to  the  great 
crowned  priest  whose  coming  the  prophet  had  foretold.  Thus  said  the 
prophet,  *'  They  that  are  far  off  shall  come  and  build  in  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  and  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto  you.'' 
Now,  certainly,  it  is  in  Jesus-  Christ  the  Priest  and  King  that  the 
Jews  who  were  nigh,  and  the  Gentiles  who  were  afar  off,  are  brought 
together,  and  made  one.  In  him  the  middle  wbII  of  partition  is  broken 
down,  and  the  counsel  of  peace  is  between  us  both.  The- day  shall 
come  when  our  glorious  Lord  shall  be  more  clearly  manifested  than  now 
in  the  glory  of  his  second  advent,  and  when  the  Jews  shall  behold  him  as 
the  priestly  king,  and  bow  before  him ;  then  shall  the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles  also  be  gathered  in,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  reign  over 
the  whole  earth.  May  that  day  speedily  dawn  1  We  have  reason  to 
expect  it ;  therefore,  let  us  pray  for  it  and  strive  for  its  on-bringing. 
Jesus  the  Priest  and  King  is  the  uniter  of  the  divided  nations.  Jew  and 
Gentile  are,  after  all,  of  one  blood,  and  one  God  is  the  Father  of  all ;  why 
should  they  not  become  one  ?  *'  One  touch  of  natuie  makes  the  whole 
world  kin";  but  one  touch  of  Jesus  Christ  shall  do  it  infinitely  better, 
shall  do  it  once  for  all. 

in.  I  close  with  the  third  point,  which  was  this,  thb  action  which 
IS  HABHONious  WITH  THESE  TRUTHS.  The  oonuecticn  of  our  text 
suggests  to  us  to  do  exactly  what  the  prophet  Zechariah  advised  the 
Babylonian  Jews  and  Josiah  to  do.  I  will  retid  you  what  he  said  : — 
**  Take  silver  and  gold  and  make  crowns  and  set  them  upon  the  head  of 
Joshua"  or  Jesus.    This  is  what  is  to  be  done. 

First,  " take"  '' Take  silver  and  gold."  That  is,  bring  the  choicest 
things  you  have.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  a  priest,  should  you  not  bring  your 
offerings  to  him !  If  Jesus  Christ  be  a  king,  should  you  not  bring 
tribute  to  yonr  king!      If  yon  have  gold  and  silver,  bring   them. 


THE  KINQ-PBIEST.  539 

for  to  bim  shall  be  ^ven  of  the  gold  of  Ophir.  If  yon  have  talent,  which 
is  mach  more  yaluable  than  gold  and  silver,  bring  ability,  tact,  genius ; 
bring  all  the  acquisitions  of  learning,  all  the  acquirements  of  experience, 
and  all  your  natural  gifts,  and  consecrate  them  all  to  him.  Whether 
you  have  these  or  not,  bring  your  heart,  which  is  more  precious  by  far, 
the  very  essence  of  your  being  ;  make  this  a  <srown  for  Jesus.  Gome, 
bring  your  soul,  your  life^  your  all.  Has  he  redeemed  you  ?  Then  be 
his  for  ever.  Is  he  your  king  ?  Do  not  mock  him  with  a  half-hearted 
service  ;  be  loyal  to  such  a  sovereign,  and  serve  him  with  spirit,  sonl,  and 
body.  Take  silver  and  gold  and  bring  them  unto  him.  Bring  your 
whole  being  to  him. 

What  next  ? — "  Take  "  ;  then  "  nuike  ":  '* make  crowns."  Come, my 
brethren,  I  invite  you  to  this  occupation.  You  say,  "  We  are  neither 
goldsoiiths  nor  silversmiths."  Nevertheless,  make  crowns.  Try  your 
hands  this  morning,  and  make  crowns  for  Jesus  with  such  materisd  as  ye 
have.  Fashion  the  crown  of  memory.  Think  of  what  he  has  done  for  you 
from  the  first  day  until  now.  Interweave  and  intertwist  the  recollections 
of  the  past :  hammer  out  the  gold  of  gratitude,  set  in  it  the  gems  of 
loTC,  and  make  a  coronet  for  his  dear  head.  Make  crowns  by  holy  con- 
templation and  thought.  Think  how  great  your  Lord  is,  and  how  great 
he  deserves  to  be — ^how  blessed,  how  ever-blessed.  Then  make  crowns 
of  purposes  of  what  you  hope  to  be  and  do.  Plot  and  plan  within  your 
spirit  something  you  have  not  yet  done,  which  yon  $kre  able  to  do 
before  you  go  home  to  heaven.  Look  out  some  child  you  may  teach,  some 
sinner  you  may  woo  and  win,  some  treasure  you  may  spend  for  Jesus, 
some  precious  promise  you  may  whisper  in  the  ear  of  the  distressed, 
some  holy  enterprise  you  may  suggest  to  earnest  youth.    Make  crowns ! 

It  seems  to  me  so  sweet  that  it  should  be  said, "  Set  them  upon  the 
head  of  Jesus."  Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  crown  him  ourselves.  We 
hope  to  do  so  in  heaven :  let  us  do  it  here»  Our  love  shall  be  the  gold, 
our  praise  shall  find  the  gems,  our  thanksgivings  and  our  humble  labours 
shall  furnish  the  silver,  and  then  we  will  set  the  golden  chaplets  about  his 
brow,  which  once  was  rent  with  thorns  for  us.  Coronets  for  Jesus !  Coro- 
nets for  Jesus !  Crowns  for  our  priestly  King !  Let  us  make  and  bring  them. 

I  return  to  that  blessed  precept,  <'  Set  them  upon  the  head  of  Jesus." 
Whenever  we  have  made  a  crown  let  us  take  care  to  put  it  on  his  head 
ourselves.  Have  you  never,  when  you  have  been  doing  something  for  him, 
or  giving  something  to  his  cause,  wished  that  you  could  present  it  to  him 
personally.  Well,  you  may  do  so  in  spirit,  and  that  is  as  much  a  matter 
of  fact  as  if  you  did  it  bodily.  With  your  shoe  from  off  your  foot,  let 
your  spirit  draw  near  to  Jesus,  and  in  thought  offer  to  his  own  self  the 
deed  which  you  have  wrought.  Speak  to  him,  and  tell  him  that  this  is 
done  for  him  alone.  I  do  not  know  a  greater  pleasure  upon  earth  than 
to  think  of  something  jovl  can  do  for  Jesus,  and  then  to  do  it  for  him, 
and  to  tell  him  so, — '^  Jesus,  I  did  it  all  for  thee.  I  thought  not  of  my 
farethren*s  praise,  nor  do  I  think  of  it  now,  but  I  did  this  deed  unto  thee 
alone.  Here  is  the  best  crown  I  can  make,  and  I  put  it  on  thy  head." 
The  love  of  Jesus  will  suggest  and  produce  many  a  deed  which  else  had 
never  been  done.  If  you  have  a  beautiful  alabaster  box  it  is  not  pleqipant  to 
break  it,  and  if  you  have  choice  ointment  it  is  not  according  to  nature  to 
pour  it  out  upon  another.    No,  but  when  you  are  before  his  feet,  the  feet 


biO  METROPOLITAN  TABEUNACLE  PULPIT. 

4)f  Jesus  your  Lord,  then  is  it  a  delight  to  break  the  alabaster  box  and 
to  pour  out  its  fragrant  contents /(?r  M».  The  utmost  waste  is  economy 
when  it  is  done  for  him,  and  to  sacrifice  strength,  soul,  health,  life,  is  to 
save  it  all,  when  it  is  spent  for  him.  Where  should  it  go  ?  Where  should 
my  all  go  ?  For  what  should  my  bodily  frame  be  consumed  ?  Where 
should  my  soul  be  poured  out  but  for  his  honour  ?  Do  you  not  feel  it  so  ? 
Tou  will  if  you  distinctly  recognise  that  he  is  king  and  priest.  You  will 
bring  crowns  and  put  them  on  his  head  if  you  know  who  and  what  he  is» 
And  what  is  said  last  ?  It  is  said  that  this  should  be  a  memorial  to 
those  three  men  and  to  the  brother  who  had  entertained  them»  I  suppose 
these  crowns  of  silver  and  gold  were  hung  up  in  the  temple,  and  when 
anybody  said,  "  What  are  tl^se  crowns  yonder  ?  "  it  would  be  answered, 
**  Those  are  coronets  which  were  made  by  order  of  the  prophet  Zechariah, 
by  Heldai  and  Tobijah  and  Jedaiah,  who  came  from  Babylon,  and  thej 
are  in  memorial  of  those  men,  and  in  memorial  of  the  hospitality  of  Josiah 
the  son  of  Zephaiiiah,  who  entertained  them  at  his  house  when  they  came. 
They  are  hung  up  in  the  temple  in  honour  of  the  coming  priestly  king,  and 
in  memorial  of  those  four  men  who  presented  an  offering  to  the  Lord.'' 
It  soems  very  wonderful  that  God  should  allow  in  his  house  memorials  of 
his  servants,  but  he  does  so ;  and  our  great  priestly  King  allows  memorials 
•of  his  people  in  his  temple  now.  We  shall  never  tbrget,  shall  we,  while 
the  world  standeth  the  sacrifice  of  Paul,  and  how  he  made  crowns  and  set 
4>hem  on  the  head  of  Jesus  ?  Never  while  the  earth  lasts  shall  we  forget 
the  sacrifioe  of  John,  and  Peter,  and  James.  Nay,  the  church  will  not 
forget  the  sacrifices  of  Luther,  and  Calvin,  and  Zwingle,  and  WycUffe,  and 
the  holy  lives  and  ardent  ministries  of  Whitefield  and  Wesley  shall  not  be 
forgotten  in  the  church,  because  they  made  crowns  and  set  tbem  on  the 
he^  of  Jesus.  "Oh,"  say  you,  "but  we  must  not  remember  mm.'' 
"Nay,"  say  I,  "but  we  may  remember  men,  and  women,  too,. for  our 
Lord  has  set  us  the  example.  *  Wheresoever  this  gospel  is  preached 
there  shall  this  which  this  woman  hath  done  be  mentioned  for  a  memo- 
Tial  of  her.'"  My  Master  thinks  much  of  his  people,  and  in  the 
plenitude  of  his  great  goodness  the  little  things  which  they  do  for 
him  are  had  in  remembrance.  Did  he  not  say  of  Comehus,  "Thy 
prayers  and  thine  alms  have  come  up  as  a  memorial  of  thee."  This  is 
sweet  to  think  upon.  While  our  King-priest  shall  have  the  crowns,  and 
wear  them,  yet  we,  if  we  bring  love-tokens  and  honourable  spoils  to  him, 
shall  be  remembered,  too,  in  that  day  when  he  shall  awam  the  praise 
to  his  people,  saying,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servants."  The 
Lord  whom  we  serve  will  immortalize  our  service  by  uniting  it  with  his 
service.  We  shall  rest  frx)m  our  labours,  but  our  works  shall  follow 
us.  The  righteous  shall  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance,  they  shall 
shine  forth  as  the  sun  when  their  Lord's  glory  shall  be  revealed.  Their 
priest  shall  make  them  priests,  their  king  shall  make  them  kings,  and 
they  shall  for  ever  be  filled  with  the  vision  of  the  priest  upon  his 
4ihrone.    So  may  it  be  with  us.    Amen. 

PoBTiONS  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Psalm  ex.; 
Zechariah  vi.  9 — 15;  Ephesians  ii.  11 — 22. 


Hyhks  from  "Our  Own  Utmn  Book"— 154,  419,  895. 


AMONG     LION^. 


%  I 


Dbliveeed  on  Thursday  Evbnino,  September  the  4th,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

« 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINOTON. 


"  My  Bonl  IB  among  lions."— Psalm  Iyu.  4. 

Some  of  you  cannob  say  this,  and  yea  ought  to  be  very  thankful  that 
you  are  not  obliged  to  do  so.  Happy  are  you  young  people  who  have  godly 
parents,  and  who  dwell  in  Christian  families.  You  ought  to  grow  like  the 
flowers  in  a  conservatory,  where  killing  frosts  and  biting  blasts  are  un- 
known. You  live  under  very  favourable  circumstances.  Your  soul,  I. 
might  almost  say,  is  among  angels ;  for  you  dwell  where  God  is  worshipped, 
where  family  prayer  is  not  forgotten,  where  you  can  have  a  kindly, 
guidance  in  the  hour  of  difSculty  and  comfort  in  the  time  of  trial.  You' 
dwell  where  angels  come  and  go,  and  God  himself  deigns  to  dwell.  Happy 
young  people  to  be  thus  circumstanced  I  How  grateful  and  how  holy 
you  ought  to  be !  I  want  all  who  dwell  where  everything  helps  them 
to  recollect  the  many  gracious  ones  who  dwell  where  everything  hinders 
them.  You  who  live  near  the  Beautiful  Gate  of  the  temple  must  not 
forget  the  many  who  are  sighing  in  the  tents  of  Kedar.  If  your  soul 
is  not  among  lions,  praise  God  for  it;  and  then  let  your' sympathies  go 
out  towards  those  who  mournfully  complain — 

"  My  soul  with  him  that  hateth  peace 
Hath  long  a  dweller  been ; 
I  am  for  peace  ;  but  when  I  speak, 
For  battle  they  are  keen.'* 

It  is  a  Christian  duty  to  *^  remember  them  that  are  m  bonds  as  bound  with 
them  ";  and  whenever  our  own  favoured  circumstances  lead  us  to  forget 
those  who  are  persecuted  and  tried,  our  very  mercies  are  working  mis- 
chief to  us.  ''  We  are  all  members  one  of  another."  If  one  member 
suffers,  dl  the  rest  should  suffer  with  him ;  and  therefore,  we  will  turn 
our  thougl^ts  towards  our  persecuted  brethren  to-night,  tlmt  our  united 
supplications  may  sustain  them  under  their  difficulties,  and,  if  the  Lord 
be  so  pleased,  may  even  deliver  them. 

When  may  a  Christian  man  truly  say,  "  My  soul  is  among  lions "? 
Such  is  the  case  when,  either  from  our  being  members  of  ungodly 
No.  1,496. 


542  HETBOPOUTAM  TABEBSACLE  PULPIT. 

fofflilies,  or  f^om  hRrinif  t&  gain  ear  livelihood  SBKingBt  mnnvcited 
and  graceless  people,  \re  tire  subjected  U>  reproach  and  rebuke,  and  to 
jest  and  jeer  for  Jeans  Christ's  sake.  Then  we  can  say,  "  My  sonl 
18  among  lions."  Many  in  this  congregation  known  to  me  are  the  only 
ones  in  their  family  whom  God  has  called.  I  bless  hia  name  that 
he  is  often  taking  one  of  a  hoosehold,  and  a  lone  one  of  a  family,  and 
bringing  such  to  Jesns.  Some  quite  nn-Cfaristian  person  who  thinks 
not  of  God  drops  in  here  out  of  curiosity,  and  God  meets  with  him 
and  he  becomes  the  first  of  his  kith  and  kin  to  say  "  I  am  the  Lord's." 
Frequently  when  converts  come  to  cast  in  their  lot  with  vs  they  will 
say,  "  I  do  not  know  one  in  all  my  family  who  makes  any  profession  of 
godliness :  they  are  all  of  them  opposed  to  me."  In  sncn  a  case  the 
Bonl  is  among  lions,  and  it  is  veiy  hard  and  trying  to  be  in  such  a 
position.  Well  may  we  pity  a  godly  wife  boniu  to  on  ungodly 
husband.  Alas!  full  often  a  drunkard,  wlioso  opposition  amounts  to 
brutality.  A  tender,  losing  spirit,  that  oogfat  to  nave  been  cherished 
like  a  tender  flower,  is  bruised  and  trodden  under  foot,  and  made 
to  suffer  till  the  heart  cries  out  in  grief,  "  My  soul  is  among 
lions."  We  little  know  what  life-long  martyrdoms  many  pious  women 
endure.  Children  also  have  to  bear  the  same  when  they  are  singled 
out  by  divine  grace  from  depraved  and  wicked  ^uuilies.  Only  the  otiier 
day  there  came  under  my  notice  one  who  loves  the  Lord.  I  thonght 
that  if  she  had  been  a  daughter  of  mine  I  should  have  rejoiced 
beyond  all  things  in  her  sweet  and  gentle  piety,  but  the  paj-enC  said, 
"  You  must  leave  our  house  if  you  attend  such-and-snch  a  place  of 
worship.  We  do  not  believe  in  these  things,  and  we  cannot  Imve  yon 
about  us  if  you  do."  I  saw  the  grief  which  that  stata  of  things 
was  causing,  and  though  I  could  not  alter  it  I  mourned  over  it.  Woe 
nnto  those  who  tyrannize  over  my  Lord's  little  ones. 

Nobody  knows  what  godly  working  men  haye  to  put  up  with  from 

those  among  whom  they  labour.     There  arc  some  shops  where  there  is 

religious  liberty ;  but  frequently  the  working  men  of  this  city  are  great 

tyrants  in  matters  of  religion.    I  tell  them  that  to  their  faces.     If  a 

man  will  drink  with  them,  and  swear  with  them,  they  will  make  him 

their  companion ;  but  when  a  man  comes  out  to  fear  God  they  make  it 

very  hard  for  him.  And  pray,  sir,  has  not  a  man  as  mnch  right  to  pray 

as  you  have  to  sweai?    And  haa  he  not  as  mach  right  to  believe  in  God 

as  yoQ  have  to  disbelieve  F    It  is  a  wonderfully  free  country,  this !     A 

wonderfully  free  country !    Ahnost  as  free  as  Ajnerica  in  the  olden  time 

whnn  ovo^rj  mou  was  free  to  lick  his  own  nigger;  for  now  the  working 

ms  freedom  to  laugh  and  swear  at  every  other  working  man 

>Bea  to  be  sober  and  religious.    There  arc  large  factories  all  over 

where  a  C^riatian  man  has  to  run  the  gauntlet  from  morning  to 

sneers  which  never  ought  to  come  upon  the  face  of  honest  men 

never  would  come  if  Britons  were  as  fond  of  freedom  as  they 

0  be.     They  declare  that  they  never  will  be  slaves ;  but  Uieif  are 

ilai'es  to  their  own  ungodliness  and  drunkenness — the  great  mass 

;  and  only  where  divine  grace  comes  in  and  snaps  the  chain  do 

jme  free  at,  all.    If  one  serious  man  sets  his  face  steadfastly  to 

d  the  baser  sort  seem  as  if  they  must  get  him  under  their  feeU 

t  him  with  every  indignity  that  malice  can  devise.  It  maybe  all 


AMONG  LIONS.  543 

in  sport,  bat  the  yictim  does  not  think  so.  Do  not  tell  me  that  persecu- 
tion  ceased  when  the  last  martyr  bamed.  There  are  martyrs  who  have 
to  burn  bj  the  slow  fire  of  cruel  mockings  day  after  day ;  and  I  bless 
God  that  the  old  grit  is  still  among  ns,  and  that  the  old  spirit  still  sur- 
Tives,  so  that  men  defy  sneers  and  slander  and  hold  on  their  way. 
I  conld  tell  stories,  which  wonld  both  shock  yon  and  delieht  you,  of 
what  is  said  and  done  by  the  common  order  of  Engli^  working 
men  against  those  who  profess  religion,  and  how  courageously  the 
righteous  and  the  true  bear  it  all,  and,  in  the  long  run,  conquer  too, 
and  oftentimes  win  their  mates  to  confess  the  sel&ame  faith.  They  call 
us  all  cants  and  hypocrites,  and  the  like,  but  they  know  better,  and  if 
they  had  a  grain  of  manliness  they  would  cease  from  such  lying.  A  true 
Briton  gives  that  liberty  to  others  which  he  claims  for  himself,  and  if  he 
does  not  choose  to  be  religious  himself  he  stands  up  like  a  man  to 
defend  the  rights  of  others  to  be  so  if  they  choose.  Now,  then,  ye 
British  workmen,  when  shall  we  see  you  doing  this? 

The  text  speaks  of  a  soul  among  lions.  Why  did  the  psalmist  call 
them  lions?  **  Dogs"  is  about  as  good  a  name  as  they  deserve.  Why 
call  them  lions?  Because  at  times  the  Christian  man  is  exposed  to 
enemies  who  are  very  strong — perhaps  strong  in  the  jaw — very  strong 
in  biting,  rending,  and  tearing.  Sometimes  the  Christian  man  is 
exposed  to  those  who  loudly  roar  out  their  infidelities  and  their  blas- 
phemies against  Christ,  and  it  is  an  awful  thing  to  be  among  such 
lions  as  those.  The  lion  is  not  only  strong  but  cruel ;  and  it  is  real 
cruelty  which  subjects  well-meaning  men  to  reproach  and  misrepre- 
sentation. The  enemies  of  Christ  and  his  people  are  often  as  cruel  as 
lions,  and  would  slay  us  if  the  law  permitted  them.  The  lion  is  a 
creature  of  great  craftiness,  creeping  along  stealthily,  and  then  making 
a  sadden  spring ;  and  so  will  the  ungodly  creep  up  to  the  Christian, 
and,  if  possible,  spring  upon  him  when  they  can  catch  him  in  an 
unguarded  moment.  If  they  fancy  they  spy  a  fault  in  him  they  come 
down  upon  him  with  all  their  weight !  The  ungodly  watch  the  righteous, 
and  if  they  can  catch  them  in  their  speech,  or  if  they  can  ms!ke  them 
angry,  and  cause  them  to  speak  an  unguarded  word,  how  eagerly  they 
pounce  upon  him.  They  magnify  his  fault,  put  it  under  a  microscope 
of  ten  thousand  power,  and  make  a  great  thing  of  it.  *'  Report  it  I 
Report  it ! "  they  say,  "  So  would  we  have  it !"  Anything  against  a 
true-bom  child  of  God  is  a  sweet  nut  for  them.  Such  as  are  daily 
watched,  daily  carped  at,  daily  abused,  daily  hindered  in  everything  that 
is  good  and  gracious,  go  with  their  tears  before  the  God  they  serve  and 
cry  to  him,  "  My  soul  is  among  lions." 

Now,  it  is  to  such  that  I  am  going  to  speak  to-night,  a  little  at  first  by 
way  ofcomforty  and  then  a  little  ly  way  of  advice. 

I.  First,  BY  WAY  OP  COMPOET.  You  are  among  lions,  my  dear  young 
friend,  then  you  will  have  fellowship  with  your  Lord  and  unih  his 
church.  Every  Lord's-day,  and  every  time  we  meet,  this  benediction  is 
pronounced  upon  you,  that  you  may  enjoy  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Fellowship  with  the  Holy  Ghost  brings  you  into  fellowship 
with  Jesus,  and  this  involves  your  being  conformed  to  his  sufferings. 
Now,  your  Lord  was  among  lions.  The  men  of  his  day  had  not  a 
good  word  to  say  for  hiuL     They  called  the  Master  of  the  house 


544  UETBOPOLITAK  TABERKAOLE  PULPIT. 

Beelzebub,  they  will  never  call  you  a  worse  name  than  that.  Thev 
said  that  he  was  a  drunken  man  and  a  wine-bibber;  possibly  they 
may  say  much  the  same  as  that  of  you,  and  it  will  be  equally 
false.  You  need  not  be  ashamed  to  be  pelted  with  the  same  dirt 
that  was  thrown  at  your  Master;  and  if  it  should  ever  come  to 
this,  that  you  should  be  stripped  of  everything,  and  false  witnesses 
should  rise  up  against  yon,  and  you  should  even  be  condemned  as  a 
felon,  and  taken  out  to  execution,  still  your  lot  will  not  be  worse  than  his. 
Bemember  that  you  are  the  followers  of  a  Crucified  Lord,  and  cannot 
expect  to  be  the  world's  darlings.  If  you  are  Christians,  the  inspired 
description  of  the  Christian  life  is  the  taking  up  of  the  cross.  Do  yoa 
expect  to  be  dandled  on  the  knees  of  that  same  ungodly  world  wmch 
hung  your  Master  upon  the  gibbet  ?  No  ;  you  know  that  he  who  is  the 
friend  of  this  world  is  the  enemy  of  Gk)d.  This  truth  is  unchangeable. 
It  is  just  as  certain  to-day  as  it  was  in  years  gone  by,  that  *^  the  eril 
hateth  the  righteous,  and  gnasheth  upon  him  with  his  teeth."  Yoa 
may  pick  up  a  &shionable  religion,  and  get  through  the  world  with 
it  veiT  comfortably;  but  if  you  have  the  true  faith  you  will  hare 
to  fight  for  it.  If  you  are  or  the  world,  the  world  will  love  its  own; 
but  if  you  are  not  of  the  world,  because  the  Lord  has  chosen  yoa  out 
of  the  world,  the  world  will  hate  you.  When  a  villager  goes  up  the 
little  street  the  dogs  do  not  bark  at  him,  for  they  know  him  well; 
but  when  a  stranger  rides  along  they  set  up  a  howl.  By  this  shall  you 
know  whether  you  are  a  citizen  of  the  world  or  a  pilgrim  towards  the 
better  land. 

Nor  was  your  Master  alone.  Recollect  the  long  line  of  prophets  that 
went  before  Christ.  Which  of  them  was  it  that  was  received  with 
honour?  Did  they  not  stone  one  and  slay  another  with  the  sword,  cat 
one  in  pieces  with  a  saw,  put  others  to  death  with  stones  ?  Ye  know 
that  the  march  of  the  faithful  may  be  tracked  by  their  blood.  And 
after  our  Lolrd  had  gone  to  heaven,  how  did  the  world  treat  the  chmch? 
In  the  streets  of  Rome,  and  all  large  cities,  the  fierce  cry  was  often 
heard,  "  Christians  to  the  lions !  Christians  to  the  lions !  Christians 
to  the  lions r'  At  dead  of  night  men  cry  *' Fire!''  when  a  hoose  is 
blazing ;  or  a  mob  will  cry  "  Bread !"  when  they  are  starving;  but  t/tB 
cry  of  old  Rome  that  was  dearest  to  the  Roman  heart,  and  most  ex- 
pressive of  their  horrible  enmity  to  goodness,  was  *'  Christians  to  the 
lions!"  Of  all  the  gallant  shows  the  Roman  Empire  ever  saw,  that 
which  excited  the  populace  beyond  all  things  else  was  to  see  a  family— 
a  man  and  his  wife,  perhaps,  and  a  grown-up  daughter  and  son,  and 
three  or  four  children — all  marched  into  the  arena,  and  the  big  door 
thrown  up,  that  out  might  rush  the  lion  and  spring  upon  them,  and 
tear  them  to  pieces.  What  harm  had  they  done  ?  They  had  forgiven 
their  enemies.  That  was  one  of  their  great  sins.  They  would  not 
worship  the  gods  of  wood  and  stone.  They  would  not  blaspheme  the 
name  of  Jesus  whom  they  loved,  for  he  had  taught  them  to  love  one 
another,  and  to  love  all  mankind.  For  such  things  as  this  men  raised 
the  cry,  *'  Christians  to  the  lions !  Christians  to  the  lions !"  All  along 
this  has  been  the  cry  of  the  world  against  all  who  have  faithfdlly  fol- 
lowed in  the  steps  of  Jesus  Christ.  Just  now  the  merciful  hand  of 
providence  prevents  open  persecution,  but  only  let  that  hand  be  taken 


AHOKG  UOKB.  545 

away,  and  the  old  spirit  will  rage  a^in.  The  seed  of  the  serpent  hates 
the  seed  of  the  woman  still ;  and  if  the  old  dragon  were  not  chained  he 
isrould  devour  the  man-child,  as  he  has  often  tried  to  do.  Do  not  de- 
ceive yourselves,  in  one  form  or  other  the  old  howl  of  "  Christians  to 
the  lions !"  would  soon  be  heard  in  London  if  almighty  power  did  not 
sit  upon  the  throne  and  restrain  the  wrath  of  man. 

You  who  have  to  suffer  a  measure  of  persecution  for  Christ's  sake 
ought  to  be  very  glad  of  it,  for  you  are  counted  worthy  not  only  to  be 
Christians,  but  to  suffer  for  Christ*s  sake.  Do  not,  I  pray  you,  be 
unworthy  of  your  high  calling,  but  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of 
Jesus  Christ.  In  these  afflictions  you  are  having  fellowship  with  your 
head  and  with  his  mystical  body,  therefore  be  not  ashamed. 

Here  is  another  thought.  If.  you  are  among  lions  you  should  thereby 
he  driven  nearer  to  your  God.  When  you  had  a  great  many  friends  you 
could  rejoice  in  them ;  but  now  that  these  turn  against  you,  and  the 
truth  has  come  home  to  you — "  A  mart's  foes  shall  be  they  of  his  own 
household," — ^what  ought  you  to  do  ?  Why,  get  closer  to  God  than  ever 
you  were  before.  Jesus  Christ  so  loved  his  church  that  he  said  as  he 
looked  at  his  poor  disciples,  •'  These  are  my  mother,  and  sister,  and 
brother."  You  should  do  what  your  Master  did — make  his  church  your 
father  and  mother  and  sister  and  brother ;  nay,  better  still,  make  Christ 
all  these  to  you  and  more.  Take  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  everything  that 
all  the  dearest  of  mortals  could  be  and  far  more.  Sing  that  charming 
"verse,  which  is  a  great  favourite  of  mine,  for  it  was  very  precious  to  me 
in  days  gone  by — 

*'  If  on  my  &ce,  for  thy  dear  name, 
Shame  and  reproaches  be, 
All  hail  reproaco,  and  welcome  shame, 
If  thou  remember  me." 

Be  sure  that  you  live  near  to  God.  All  Christians  ought  to  do  so,  but 
yon  especially  should  be  driven  by  every  false  accusation,  by  every 
caustic  remark,  by  every  cutting  sentence,  nearer  to  yonr  Father's  bosom. 
The  more  they  rebuke  you  the  more  constantly  should  you  abide  under 
the  covert  of  his  sacred  wings,  and  find  your  joy  in  the  Lord. 

And,  getting  close  to  Christ,  let  me  say  to  you  now  by  way  of  advice, 
and  by  way  of  comfort  too,  endeavour  to  he  very  calm  and  happy.  Do 
not  mind  it.  Take  as  little  notice  of  the  scoff  as  ever  you  can. ,  It  is 
a  grand  thing  to  have  one  deaf  ear.  Mind  that  you  keep  yourself  very 
deaf  to  slander  and  reproach,  as  the  psalmist  did  when  he  said,  "I  was 
as  a  man  that  heareth  not,  and  in  whose  mouth  are  no  reproofs."  One 
blind  eye  towards  the  folly  of  enemies  is  often  of  more  use  to  a  man 
than  two  that  are  always  looking  about  with  suspicion.  Do  not  see 
everything,  do  not  hear  everything.  When  there  is  a  hard  word  spoken, 
do  not  notice  it ;  or  if  you  must  hear  it,  forget  it  as  quickly  as  ever  you 
can.  Love  others  all  the  more  the  less  they  love  yon:  repay  their 
enmity  with  love.  Heap  coals  of  fire  upon  them  by  making  no  return  to 
a  hard  speech  except  by  another  deed  of  kindness.  Very  seldom  defend 
yourself:  it  is  a  waste  of  breath,  and  casting  pearls  before  swine. 
Bear  and  bear  again.  Recollect  that  our  Lord  has  sent  us  forth  as 
sheep  among  wolves,  and  sheep  cannot  defend  themselves.    The  wolf 


fi4S  MRTROPOLITAS  TABBBHACLB  PULPIT. 

can  eat  all  the  aheep  np  if  it  likes ;  bat,  do  yon  not  see,  there  are 
more  theap  in  the  world  now  than  there  are  wolveB,  ten  thonsaiid  to 
one?  Though  the  wolves  have  had  all  the  eating,  and  though  there 
never  yet  was  a  sheep  that  devonred  a  wolf,  yet  still  the  sheep  are 
here  and  the  wolves  have  gone.  The  aheep  have  won  that  victory: 
and  BO  will  Christ's  little  flock.  The  anvil  is  stmck  by  the  hammer, 
and  the  anvil  never  strikes  in  retom,  and  yet  the  anvil  wears  the 
hammer  oat.  Patience  baffles  fbry  and  vanqnishea  malice.  The 
non-resistance  principle  involves  a  resistance  which  is  irresistible.  The 
steady  patience  that  cannot  be  provoked,  bnt  which,  like  Jeans,  when 
reviled  reviles  not  again,  is  certain  of  conquest.  This  is  what  yon 
persecuted  ones  need  to  learn — to  get  more  near  yonr  God  the  more 
you  are  among  the  lions,  and  so  to  be  the  more  calm  and  patient  the 
more  men  rage  against  you. 

A  third  piece  of  comfort  is  this.    Please  to  recollect  that,  although 
yonr  soni  ts  among  hons,  Ihe  liona  are  chawted.    When  Daniel  was 
thrown  into  the  lions'  den  the  lions  were  hungry  and  would  soon  have 
devoured  him ;  bnt  yon  know  why  it  was  that  they  could  not  tench  him. 
Ah,  the  angel  came.   Jnst  as  the  fierce  lions  were  about  to  seize  on  Daniel, 
down  he  came  swift  &om  heaven,  and  stood  in  front  of  them.   "  Hush !" 
eaid  he,  and  they  lay  as  still  as  a  stone.    So  says  the  text :  "  My  God 
hath  sent  his  angel  and  shnt  the  lions'  months."    They  had  fine  teeth, 
bnt  their  mouths  were  shut.      If  the  Lord  can  easily  shnt  a  lion's 
month,  he  can  quit«  as  easily  shut  the  mouth  of  an  ungodly  man.     He 
can  take  off  all  trouble  from  you,  if  he  wills  it,  in  an  instant,  and  he  can 
give  you  a  smooth  path  to  heaven  when  it  pleases  him ;  only  remember 
that  if  everything  on  the  road  to  heaven  were  smooth,  heaven  wonld  not 
be  so  sweet  at  the  end,  and  we  should  not  have  an  opportnitity  of  dis- 
playing those  Christian  graces  which  arc  brought  out  and  educated 
by  the  oppoeition  of  the  world.    God  will  not  quench  the  fire  of  per- 
eecution,  for  it  consumes  onr  dross,  bnt  he  will  moderate  ite  power  so 
that  not  a  grain  of  pure  metal  shall  be  lost.    The  lions  are  chained, 
dear  friend  -,  they  con  go  no  farther  than  Qod  permits.    In  this  coontiy 
the  most  they  can  do,  as  a  rale,  is  to  howl,  they  cannot  bite ;  and  howl- 
: —  j„«g  QQt  break  bones ;  why,  then,  be  a&aid  ?    The  man  who  is  afraid 
%  laughed  at  is  not  half  a  man,  but  almost  deserves  the  scorn  he 
.     Never  mind  what  is  said.    Talking  will  not  hurt  you.     Harden 
irit  against  it,  and  bear  it  gallantly.     Go  and  tell  your  Lord  of 
ir  heaji;  fails  you  ;  and  then  go  forward,  calm  as  your  Master  was, 
nothing,  for  God  will  bear  you  throogh.     The  lious  can  roar,  but 
inot  rend — fear  thero  not. 

Iier  fact  for  your  comfort  is  this ;  wlien  your  soul  is  among  lienu, 
another  lion  there  as  well  as  the  lions  that  you  can  see.  Have 
er  heard  of  him  ?  He  is  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  How 
he  lies!  How  patiently  he  waite  by  the  side  of  his  servants ! 
it,  the  jeer,  the  noise  continue,  and  he  lies  still.  If  he  only 
-if  be  thought  it  wise,  if  it  were  not  for  his  superlative  patience 
ta  only  to  rouse  himself  for  one  moment,  and  all  our  enemies 
e  destroyed.  Our  great  Lord  and  King  could  have  had  twenty 
of  angels  when  he  was  in  the  garden  for  the  lifting  of  his 
)ut  he  contiuutd  a  lone,  a  aufiuring  man.    If  he  willed  it  at  this 


AUOKG  LIOKS.  547 

day  he  could  sweep  the  ungodly  away  as  chaff  before  the  wind :  his 
longsnffering  is  for  their  salvation,  if  haply  they  may  tnm  and  repent. 
If  your  faith  be  as  it  should  be,  it  will  be  a  great  joy  to  yon  to  know 
that  he  is  always  with  you,  that  he  is  always  near  you.  If  he  is  eyer  absent 
from  others  of  his  servants,  he  is  never  away  ^m  his  persecuted  servants. 
Ask  the  Covenanters  amongst  the  mosses  and  the  hills,  and  they  will  tell 
you  that  they  never  had  such  Sabbaths  in  Scotland  as  when  they  met 
among  the  crags,  and  set  their  scouts  to  warn  them  against  Claverhouse's 
dragoons.    When  Cargill  or  Cameron  thundered  out  the  word,  with  what 

Sower  was  it  attended.  How  sweetly  was  the  blessed  Bridegroom  with 
is  persecuted  church  among  the  hills.  There  is  never  such  a  time  for 
seeing  the  Son  of  God  as  when  the  world  heats  the  furnace  seven  times 
hotter.  There  is  the  flaming  furnace,  go  and  stand  at  the  mouth  of  it 
and  look  in.  They  threw  three  men  bound  into  it  in  their  hosen  and  in 
their  hats,  and  the  fiame  was  so  strong  that  it  killed  the  soldiers  who 
threw  them  in.  But  look!  Can  you  not  see?  Nebuchadnezzar 
himself  comes  to  look.  See  how  greatly  he  is  astonished !  He  calls 
to  those  around  him,  and  he  demands,  ''Did  not  we  cast  three 
men  bound  into  the  famace  ?  Look  ye,  there  are  four.  A  strange, 
mysterious  form  is  that  fourth.  They  are  walking  the  coals  as 
if  they  walked  in  a  garden  of  flowers.  They  seem  full  of  delight, 
they  are  walking  cahnly  as  men  converse  in  their  gardens  in  the  cool  of 
the  day ;  and  that  fourth — that  mysterious  fourth — ^is  like  the  Son  of 
Ood ! "  Ah,  Nebuchadnezzar,  thou  hast  seen  a  sight  that  has  often  been 
seen  elsewhere.  When  God's  people  are  in  the  furnace,  God's  Son  is  in 
the  furnace  also.  He  will  not  leave  those  who  will  not  leave  him.  If 
we  can  cling  to  him,  rest  assured  that  he  will  cling  to  us,  even  to  the 
end.  Fear  not  the  lions,  then.  Our  Samson  would  turn  upon  them, 
and  rend  them  in  a  moment  if  their  hour  were  come. 

'' Jesu's  tremendous  name 

Puts  all  our  foes  to  flight ; 
Jesus,  the  meek,  the  angry  Lamb, 

A  Lion  is  in  fight. 

By  all  heirs  host  withstood. 
We  all  hell*s  host  overthrow  ; 
And  conouering  them,  through  Jesu*8  blood 
We  still  to  conquer  go." 

Again,  I  want  to  comfort  you  with  this  word :  you  whose  souls  are 
among  lions  should  recollect  that  you  will  come  out  of  the  liens'  dm  uti' 
harmed.  Daniel  was  cast  into  the  den.  Darius  could  not  sleep  that 
night,  and  when  he  went  in  the  morning  he  did  not  eimect  to  find  a 
bone  of  Daniel  left,  and  so  he  began  crying  out  to  him.  How  surprised 
he  must  have  been  when  Daniel  replied,  that  his  God  had  preserved  him. 
How  thankful  he  was  to  fetch  him  out  of  the  den.  Ton,  too,  dear  child 
of  God,  will  come  out  of  the  den  all  right.  There  will  be  a  resurrection 
of  God's  people's  bodies  at  last,  and  there  will  be  a  resurrection  for  their 
reputations  also.  The  slanderer  may  belie  the  character  of  a  true  man, 
but  no  true  man's  character  will  ever  be  buried  lon^  enough  to  rot. 
Your  righteousness  shall  come  forth  as  light,  and  your  judgment  as  the 
noonday.    You  need  not  be  afraid  but  that,  as  Daniel  rose  from  the 


948  UETBOFOLITAS  TABTOWACLE  PULPIT. 

den  to  dignity,  «>  will  ereiy  man  who  snffen  for  Chnrt  reoeire  honoor 
and  glory  and  immortality  "  in  that  day." 

Recollect  that  if  yon  are  among  the  lions  now,  fhe  day  is  kurryuig  on 
with  ^eed  tehen  you  ehall  bt  among  the  angeU,  Oar  Lord  and  U«ster, 
after  bdng  in  the  wilderaees  with  the  wild  beaate,  fonnd  that  "angels 
came  and  ministered  to  him."  Bnoh  a  visitation  awaita  all  the  futi^oL 
What  a  change  those  martyrs  enjoyed  who  took  a  ^ary  breakfast  on 
earth,  hut  sn^^»d  with  Christ  that  rery  day  after  liding  to  ^ry  la  a 
eiiariot  of  fire.  If  yon  have  now  to  sntTer  all  that  oan  poaaibly  be 
wreaked  of  vengeance  open  yon  for  Ghiiat'a  sake,  yon  will  tkiok  nothing 
of  it  when  yon  have  been  five  minntes  in  heaves.  Indeed,  it  will  be  a 
anbject  of  congratDlaticxi  that  ever  yon  were  permitted  in  your  homble 
measure  to  be  (.ounted  worthy  to  suffer  for  Ghriat's  sake.  Therefore,  be 
je  comforted,  yon  young  people,  and  march  on  with  herdc  step. 

I  see  a  soldier  or  two  here  to-night,  and  I  am  right  glad  that  we 
Hatc  generally  a  block  of  red  coats  in  the  congregation.  I  koow 
that  often  in  the  barrack-room  it  is  hard  for  a  Ohristifui  man  to  bear 
witness  for  Jeens  Christ.  Many  and  ntany  a  soldier  has  fooud  his  paih 
as  a  Christian  to  be  extremely  difficult ;  he  has  had  to  sail  very  cace- 
fnlly,  like  a  ship  among  torpedoes,  and  only  divine  giaoe  has  kept  iiim 
safe.  8ome  of  yqn  who  reside  in  large  esbablishment^  where  you  sleep 
in  rooms  with  a  great  many  others,  find  it  diffioult  even  to  kneel  down 
to  pray.  Hind  that  yon  do  it,  though.  Do  it  at  first  right  bravely, 
and  keep  it  up.  Never  be  ashamed  of  your  ooloars.  ^gin  as  70s 
mean  to  go  on ;  and  go  on  as  yon  begin.  If  you  begin  parleying  yon 
will  soon  lose  all  their  respect,  and  make  it  worse  for  yourself;  bat  is 
the  name  of  Jesns  Christ  let  me  beseech  yon  to  be  firm  and  steadfast 
€ven  unto  death.  Be  comforted,  for  then  has  no  new  thine  happened 
to  yon.  It  is  no  novelty  for  the  followers  of  Jesus  to  be  ridiculed  and 
deBpised.  He  came  to  send  fire  on  the  earth,  and  it  has  been  kindled 
well  nigh  two  thousand  years.  The  fiery  path  is  the  old  road  of  the 
chnrch  militant ;  therefore  tread  it,  and  be  glad  that  yon  are  permitted 
to  follow  the  heroes  of  heaven  in  their  sacred  way. 
Now,  a  few  words  by  way  of  advice, 

>urse  this  does  not  deal  with  all  of  yon  who  are  now  present — I 
at  many  of  yon  dwell  among  the  godly.  Still  there  are  some 
□nl  is  among  lions,  and  to  them  I  give  this  oonnsel. 
,  if  yon  dwell  among  lions  do  not  irrilate  fhem.  If  I  haj^ned 
Qong  lions  I  wonld  not  tease  them :  I  would  take  good  oare  that 
were  cmel  and  fierce  I  did  not  make  them  sa.  I  have  known 
ho  I  hope  were  Ohriatiana,  who  have  acted  ver^  unwisely,  and 
3  made  matters  bad  for  themselves  There  is  anch  a  thing 
iiing  rehgion  down  people's  throats,  or  trying  to  do  so ;  and 
L  put  on  a  very  long  face,  and  try  to  scold  people  into  religion. 
11  not  do.  Never  yet  was  anybody  bullied  to  Christ,  and  th^e 
ill  be.  Some  are  very  stem,  and  make  no  allowances  for  other 
these  may  be  good,  but  they  are  not  wise.  What  is  a  rule  to 
1  to  me  may  not )»  arule  to  everybody  else.  We  said  the  other 
that  we  should  not  think  of  eating  what  we  give  to  swine ;  but 
not,  therefore,  say,  "These  swine  must  not  nave  their  n^isb." 
;  it  is  good  enough  for  them.    Let  them  have  it.    And  as  to 


AXOHO  LI01ir&  549 

worldlj  people  and  their  annuements^  let  them  have  them,  poor  things. 
They  have  nothing  else,  let  them  have  their  mirth.  I  womd  not  touch 
tiieir  joys,  nor  would  you,  for  they  would  be  no  pleasure  to  you ;  but 
do  not,  as  a  new-bom  man,  go  and  set  yourself  up  aa  the  standard 
of  what  the  ordinary  sinner,  dead  in  sin,  is  to  be.  He  cannot  come  up  to 
our  standard.  Do  not  be  perpetually  finding  fault :  that  is  pulling  the 
lions'  whiskers,  and  the  creatures  are  very  likely  to  growl  at  you.  If 
your  soul  is  among  lions,  be  gentle,  be  kind,  be  prudent,  be  tender. 
Sometimes  be  silent :  a  good  word  is  on  your  tongue,  but  there  are 
times  when  you  must  not  say  it :  for  the  life  of  you,  you  must  not  say 
it,  for  it  would  rouse  the  lions  and  make  more  sin  than  need  be.  Some- 
times a  troth  needs  defending ;  but,  my  inexperienced  and  untaught 
brother,  do  not  try  to  defend  it,  for  you  have  not  the  strength.  The 
champion  of  infidelity  will  challenge  one  who  is  weak  and  uninstructed, 
and  he  overthrows  him,  and  he  who  came  forth  valorously  is  beaten 
in  argument.  He  was  not  up  to  the  mark  in  knowledge,  and  so  he 
was  vanquished :  and  then,  wnat  do  the  adversaries  say  ?  Why,  they 
boast  that  the  truth  is  disproved  and  that  Christ  is  beaten.  Nothing 
of  the  kind.  The  British  empire  was  not  defeated  when  a  regiment  of 
our  soldiers  were  slain  at  Isandula ;  and  the  truth  and  cause  of  Christ 
is  not  defeated  when  some  weak  champion  full  of  zeal  rushes  to  the  front 
when  he  ought  to  have  kept  in  the  rear.  I  do  not  say  much  on  this 
point,  because  we  have  not  much  rash  zeal  nowadays,  and  it  would  be  a 
pity  to  check  what  honest  zeal  there  is ;  but  still  there  is  such  a  text  as 
**Be  ye  wise  as  serpents  and  harmless  as  doves."  Put  your  finger  on 
your  lips  when  you  are  irritated.  You  cannot  speak  to  the  purpose 
when  you  are  perturbed,  and  are  likely  to  be  angry.  Be  quiet  and  bide 
your  time.  Many  a  man  would  do  more  good  for  the  cause  of  God 
if  he  would  not  irritate  ungodly  people.  Let  them  alone :  seek  their 
salvation  lovingly  and  tenderly ;  but  when  your  efforts  to  do  them  good 
only  provoke  them  to  sin,  try  another  way.  Do  not  go  on  with  that 
which  angers  them ;  invent  another  method.  I  do  believe  that  some 
Christians  make  half  the  opposition  which  they  get  £rom  the  world  by 
their  own  ill  tempers  and  stupidity.  They  ch^lenge  conflict :  their 
actions  seem  to  say,  ^' Who  will  fight  me?"  and  then,  of  course,  some- 
body takes  up  the  cudgels.  Do  not  act  foolishly ;  but  if  yoor  soul  is 
among  lions,  and  (hey  are  inclined  to  be  quiet^  do  not  needlessly  excite 
them. 

Secondly,  if  your  soul  is  among  lions,  do  not  roar  yourself^  for  that 
is  very  easy  to  be  done.  We  have  known  some,  who  we  hope  wera 
Christians,  who  have  met  railing  with  railing,  hard  words  with  hard 
words,  bitter  speeches  with  bitter  speeches.  The  ungodly  are  lions, 
and  you  are  not ;  do  not  try  to  meet  wem  in  their  own  line.  You  will 
never  roar  as  well  as  they  do.  If  you  are  a  Christian  man,  you  have 
not  the  knack  of  roaring.  Leave  them  to  do  it.  Your  way  of  meeting 
them  is  not  by  losing  your  temper  and  abusing  your  antagonists, 
and  so  becoming  a  lipn  yourself;  but  you  must  conquer  them,  with 
gentleness,  patience,  kinmiess,  love.  I  pray  you,  dear  brothers  and 
sisters  who  have  to  bear  a  good  deal  for  Christ's  sake,  do  not  get  som*ed 
in  spirit.  There  is  a  tendency  in  a  martyr  age  to  become  obstinate 
and  pugnacious.    You  must  not  be  so.    Love,  love,  love ;  and  the  more 


550  UETROrOLITAN  TASEairi,OLE  PIILPET. 

yon  are  provoked,  love  the  more.  Overcome  evil  with  good.  I  think  it 
necessary  to  mention  these  cautions,  becSnse  I  know  many  require 
them. 

Again,  your  aonl  is  among  lions :  then,  do  nof  be  cowardly.  Have 
yon  never  heard  that  a  lion  is  afraid  of  a  man  if  he  looks  him  steadily 
in  the  face  ?  I  am  not  snre  abont  that  piece  of  natnral  history ;  bat  I 
am  qnite  certain  that  it  is  true  with  regard  to  the  nngodly  world.  If  a 
man  will  bear  himself  calmly — if  he  will  he  unmoved,  determined,  reao- 
late,  steadfast — he  will  overcome  the  adversary,     "  When  a  man's  wnys 

f lease  the  Lord  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him." 
f  yon  give  way  a  little,  yon  will  have  to  give  way  a  great  deaL  If 
yon  give  the  world  an  inch,  yon  will  have  to  give  it  an  ell,  aa  Bore 
as  yon  are  alive.  If  you  will  not  yield  an  inch,  nay,  nor  yet  a  barley- 
corn, but  stand  steadf^,  Qod  will  help  you.  Conrage  is  what  is  wanted. 
The  world,  after  a  while,  says  of  any  man,  "  It  is  of  no  nse  ianghing 
at  him ;  he  does  not  mind  it.  It  is  of  no  nse  calling  him  hard  names ; 
he  only  smiles  at  yon.  It  is  useless  to  be  his  enemy,  for  he  will  not 
be  yours.  He  will  only  be  your  friend."  Then  the  world  whispers, "  Well, 
after  all,  he  ia  not  so  bad  a  fellow  as  we  thought  he  was ;  we  mnst  let 
him  have  his  own  way."  There  is  a  big  hnman  heart  somewhere  down 
in  men  if  yon  can  but  get  at  it,  and  after  a  while,  when  trnth  and 
righteousness  have  suffered,  and  been  denounced,  men  turn  ronnd 
and  are  almost  ready  to  carry  on  their  shoulders  with  hosannas  the  self- 
same person  whom  a  little  while  before  they  longed  to  crucify.  Do  not 
be  a  coward  I    Do  not  be  a  coward ! 

"  Stand  up  I  stand  up  for  Jesus  I 
The  figbt  will  not  be  long  ; 
Tbis  da;  the  noise  of  battle, 
The  next  the  victor's  Eong," 

Even  if  the  fight  were  long,  for  such  a  Master  as  Jesus  it  were  worth 
~i,ii„  i-  — 'nre  ten  thousand  years  of  scorn,  and  moreover  the  reward 
'ill  repay  na  a  thousandfold. 

inl  is  among  lions,  then  do  not  go  out  among  them  alone. 
n  shall  I  take  with  me  ?"  says  one,  "  there  is  not  a  Christian 
"  Take  your  Lord  with  yon.  Be  sure  that  yon  do  that. 
ir  Mend,  I  know  what  they  said  yesterday,  and  how  tbcy 
a-,  and  you  were  tart  and  short  with  them,  because  yon 
n  in  prayer  in  the  morning  as  you  ought  to  have  been. 
.  had  been  more  calm  and  gentic  as  the  result  of  prayer  yon 
ave  minded  it  one-half  so  much.  Take  your  Master  with 
enever  you  have  to  speak  think  that  he  ia  standing  at  yoor 
'  to  say  what  you  would  like  him  to  hear ;  and  then,  when 
ide  your  defence  you  will  be  able  to  say,  "  Good  Master,  I 
;  not  dishonoured  thee,  for  I  have  spoken  thy  words,"  Oh, 
Christ  if  you  live  among  lions.  Those  of  yon  who  endure 
Dake  the  best  Christiana.  Many  that  have  been  dis- 
)r  Christ  in  after  life  have  had  to  rough  it  a  little  at  first, 
for  a  man  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth."  If  I  could 
ien-rol!er  and  roll  the  grass  for  you  all  the  way  from  here 
0  yon  think  that  I  would  do  it  ?     Certainly  not.    A  rough 


Ajiosra  LIONS.  551 

place  or  two  is  good  for  you,  it  tries  and  strengthens  pilgrim  feet. 
A  child  will  never  become  a  man  if  be  is  carried  about  all  his  life  like  a 
baby.  You  must  run  alone.  You  must  learu  the  arts  of  holy  warfare^ 
or  eke  you  will  not  be  lit  to  be  a  soldier  of  the  cross,  a  follower  of  tho 
Liamb.  May  hia  good  Spirit  help  you  to  keep  in  fellowship  with  Christ, 
that  he  may  gaud  and  protect  you  &om  every  temptation  and  per- 
Becation. 

Further,  let  me  say  to  you  that  if  your  soul  is  among  lions,  and  you 
feel  very  weak  about  it,  you  are  permitted  to  pray  the  Lord  to  move  you 
in  his  providmcB  to  quieter  quarters.  A  Christian  man  is  not  bound 
to  endure  persecakioit  if  he  can  help  it :  '^  When  they  persecute  you  in 
one  city  flee  to  another."  You  are  quite  warranted  in  seeking  another 
sitnation.  There  mav  be  reasons  why  you  should  remain  under  the  triaJ, 
and  if  so,  take  care  that  you  do  not  overlook  them.  Prudence  may  make 
yon  avoid  perseeution^  but  cowardice  must  not  mingle  with  the  pru- 
dence. That  prayer  which  says,  '*  Lead  us  not  into  temptation,"  gives 
us»  as  it  were,  a  pemit  to  remove  &om  places  where  we  are  much 
tempted ;  and  sometimes  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  to  seek  some 
other  sphere  of  labour,  if  he  possibly  can,  where  he  will  not  be  so  much 


One  thought  moce:  the  braiver  thing  is  to  ash  for  grace  to  stop 
with  the  lions  and  tame  them*    ''  My  soul  is  among  lions."    Well,  if 
the  Lord  makes  you  a  lion  tamer,  that  is  the  very  place  where  you 
oo^t  to  be.    In  some  of  our  districts  in  London  as  soon  as  ever  a  man 
is  converted  he  feels  that  he  cannot  live  there  any  longer,  and  this 
makes  the  district  hopeless.    My  dear  friend,  Mr.  Orsman,  working  in 
GMdcn  Lane,  as  it  used  to  be^  told  me  that  his  was  an  endless  task,. 
because  as  soon  as  ever  the  pe<^le  were  converted  they  say,  *'  Would 
you  have  me  live  here  any  long^,  in  such  a  horrible  place  as  this  ?^' 
They  naturally  feel  that  as  they  have  grown  sober,  and  decent,  and 
respectable,  thiey  should  move  into  a  different  locality,  and  they  do  so : 
but  the  result  is  that  the  old  spot  does  not  improve.    Sometimes  the 
Christian  man  should  say,  *^  No :  God  has  made  me  strong  in  grace ; 
and  I  will  stop  here,  and  fight  it  out.    These  are  lions,  but  I  will  tame 
them.    I  believe  that  God  has  put  me  here  on  purpose  to  bring  my 
fellow-workmen  to  the  Saviour,  and  by  his  grace  I  will  do  it."    Now, 
if  I  were  a  lamp  I  daresay  that,  if  I  had  my  choice  of  where  I  should 
bum,  I  should  choose  to  blaze  away  in  a  respectable  street.    I  should 
like  to  scatter  my  light  in  &ont  of  the  Tabernacle ;  but  surely  if  I 
were  a  really  sensible  lamp  I  should  say  to  myself — "  If  there  are  only 
a  few  lamps,  and  all  the  streets  have  to  be  lit,  there  is  more  necessity 
to  light  up  a  back  slum  or  a  blind  alley  than  to  adorn  a  main  street, 
therefore  let  me  shine  in  the  dismal  courts.    In  a  lonely,  dark  place 
where  murder  may  be  done,  there  let  me  act  as  guardian  of  the 
night  and  detective  of  the  villain."    A  wise  lamp  would  say, ''  I  came 
into  the  world  to  give  light,  and  I  should  like  to  give  light  where  light 
is  most  wanted.    Hang  me  up  in  Mint  Street,  or  in  St.  Giles's,  or  away 
there  by  the  b^k  of  !l^nt  Street,  where  I  may  be  most  useful." 

A.nd  now.  Christian  people,  is  there  not  sense  about  this  advice  ?  Is 
there  not  reason  in  it  ?  Would  not  your  Master  have  you  go  where  you 
are  most  wanted,  and  should  you  not,  therefore^  if  your  soul  is  amongst 


652  METaopOLrrAw  tabekkacle  pdi.pit, 

lions,  eaj,  "Thank  God  it  is  so.  These  people  are  not  going  to 
conqaer  me,  bnt  I  am  going  to  conqner  them"?  What  a  beaatirttl 
roectacle  was  that  which  was  exhibited  by  the  Moravian  Brethren  in 
their  gnind  times  !  They  conM  not  land  on  one  of  the  West  Indies  to 
preach  the  gospel  to  the  negroes,  for  the  planters  wonld  not  hare 
anybody  there  bat  slaves ;  and  two  brethren  sold  themselves  for  slaves, 
and  lived  and  died  in  bondage,  that  they  might  teach  the  poor  negroes. 
It  is  said  that  there  was  a  place  in  Africa  where  persons  were  shut  np 
whose  limbs  were  rotting  away  through  leprosy  and  other  diseases. 
Two  of  these  brethren  climbed  np  the  wall  and  saw  these  poor  creatures 
— some  with  no  legs,  and  others  with  no  anus.  They  asked  to  be  allowed 
to  go  in  to  win  their  souls  for  Christ,  and  the  answer  was,  "  If  yon 
enter  you  can  never  come  out  again,  because  yon  would  bring  contagion. 
Yon  go  in  there  to  die,  to  rot  away  as  the  lepers  do."  These  brave 
men  went  in  and  died  that  they  might  bring  the  lepers  to  Christ.  I 
hope  that  we  have  some  drops  of  tnat  grand  Christian  blood  still  in 
our  veins  ;  and  if  we  have,  we  shall  feel  that  we  could  go  to  the  gates 
of  hell  to  win  a  sinner.  Yon  are  not  like  your  Master  nnless 
yon  wonld  die  to  save  men  from  hell.  You  will  bear  jests  and  jeera, 
and  connt  them  nothing  if  yon  can  bnt  win  souls.  So  stop  where  you 
are,  my  stronger  brothers  and  sisters ;  if  yonr  souls  are  among  lions, 
tarry  and  tame  the  lions.  It  will  be  a  grand  thing  for  yon  to  come  one 
day  to  the  church-meeting  with  two  or  three  of  your  tteighbonra  wfaom 
yon  have  been  the  means  of  converting  to  ChrlsL  I  like  to  see  a  duq 
march,  if  he  can  do  it,  with  a  tame  Son  on  each  side.  When  a  man 
has  bv  Qod's  grace  brought  some  of  those  that  were  drunkards  and 

0  the  feet  of  Jesus,  oh,  it  is  a  grtuid  triumph.  It  has  been 
iS  for  many  years  to  be  a  lion  tamer,  and  I  delight  in  it.  If 
ly  lion  of  the  sort  here,  I  wish  the  Uaster  would  tame  him, 

him  lie  down  and  crouch  at  his  feet.  There  is  the  plaoe 
ir  sinners,  at  the  feet  of  Christ.  But  do  not  be  afi^id  of 
ar  friends,  for  how  can  you  tame  them  if  yon  tremble  at 

1  forth  to  win  them  in  the  strength  of  the  Uring  God,  and 
yet  see  the  lion  lie  down  with  t£e  lamb,  and  a  little  child 
them.    Amen  and  amen. 


yS  OR  SCBIPTURE   REJlD  BE70EE  SeBUOK— Psslm  Irii, 


Qis  ntOM  "OuE  OWK  Htmh  Book"— 124,  854,  131. 


^et)[j)|oGlmi  iiafrernadt  fttlpt 


SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS,— A    SMOULDERING    HEAP   OP 

RUBBISH. 


I 


Delivered  on  Lohd's-day  Morning,  September  28tii,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


'*  Which  say,  Stand  by  thyself,  oome  not  near  to  me ;  for  I  am  holier  than  thou. 
These  are  a  emoke  in  my  nose,  a  flie  that  bnmeth  aU  the  day." — Isaiah  Izr.  5. 


The  apostle  Paul  shall  be  our  interpreter  here.  You  remember  how  in 
the  tenth  chapter  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Bomans  he  quotes  from  this 
chapter  and  says,  "  Esaias  is  very  bold,  and  saith,  I  was  found  of  them 
that  sought  me  not ;  I  was  made  manifest  unto  them  that  asked  not  after 
me.  But  to  Israel  he  saith,  all  day  long  I  have  stretched  forth  mv  hands 
unto  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people."  Isaiah  was  very  bold  to 
speak  the  gospel  so  plainly,  when  a  legal  spirit  prevailed,  and  very  bold 
to  defy  the  enmity  of  his  own  nation  by  declarmg  that  they  would  be 
rejected  for  their  sins,  while  the  far-off  heathen  would  be  brought  in 
by  sovereign  grace.  He  was  bold  to  denounce  hypocrites  to  their  faces, 
and  to  smite  a  proud  nation  with  the  threatenines  of  the  Lord.  Perhaps 
it  was  fo|^  this  boldness  that  he  suffered  a  cruel  death  by  the  hands  of 
Manasseh.  The  application  of  the  passage  to  Israel  is  just  thus.  Year 
after  year  Ood  dealt  with  great  patience  towards  his  chosen  people, 
but  they  seemed  to  be  desperately  set  upon  idolatry  is  one  form  or 
another.  Sometimes  they  worshipped  Jehovah,  but  then  they  did 
it  under  figure  and  symbol,  whereas  he  has  expressly  forbidden  that 
even  his  ovm  worship  should  be  thus  celebrated.  He  who  said  in 
the  first  commandment,  '^  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me,"  said 
also  in  the  second,  "  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image, 
or  any  likeness  of  anything  that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  that  is  in 
the  earth  beneath,  or  that  is  in  the  water  under  tiie  earth:  thou 
ahalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  serve  them."  At  other  timea 
they  altogether  rejected  Jehovah,  and  worshipped  Baal  and  Ashtaroth, 
and  whole  troops  of  the  gods  of  the  heathen,  and  thus  they  provoked 
the  Lord  exceedingly.  They  also  practised  necromancy,  or  pretended 
communion  with  the  dead,  and  witchcraft  and  sorcery,  and  all  manner  of 
abominable  rites,  like  the  depraved  nations  around  them.  When  this 
open  rebellion  was  given  up,  as  it  was  after  the  captivity — for  the  Jews 
No.  1,497. 


554  MKTBOPOLITAK  TABBRNACLE  PULPIT. 

have  never  Irara  guilty  of  kloladrT  aiioe  that  day — Uiey  &11  into  snotber 
form  of  the  eame  evil,  namely,  self-righteonBness :  bo  Aat  when  oar 
Lord  came  he  found  self-righteousncBS  to  be  the  crying  rin  of  Israel,  the 
PhariBecB  carrying  it  to  such  a  pitch  as  to  render  it  utterly  ridiculoos. 
They  reckoned  that  the  touch  of  a.  common  person  polluted  their  sacrwi- 
ness,  HO  that  they  needed  to  waah  after  walking  down  a  street.  ^Vhen 
they  traversed  the  ways  they  took  the  edge  of  the  pavement,  so  that  thej 
might  not  brush  against  the  garments  of  the  passers-by,  and  even  in 
the  temple  in  prayer  they  stood  by  themselves  lest  they  should  be 
defiled.  Their  whole  spirit  ia  expressed  in  the  words  of  the  text — 
"  Stand  by  thyself,  come  not  near  to  me;  for  I  am  holier  than  thou.'" 
This  God  declares  to  be  as  obnoxious  to  him  as  smoke  in  a  man's  noee. 
He  could  not  bear  it.  He  was  no  more  able  to  tclcrate  their  self- 
righteousness  than  to  endure  their  idolatry.  It  is  this  last  form  of  tiie 
evil  of  the  Israelitish  heart  which  I  am  going  to  Bpeak  about  this 
morning,  because  it  is  a  phase  of  evil  which  is  now  common  atDong 
us.  Self-righteouHaesa  is  rampant  in  onr  own  day.  There  be  many 
who  come  up  to  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house  and  mingle  amongst 
the  followero  of  Christ  who  still  say,  "  Stand  by,  for  I  am  holier  than 
thou." 

Our  sermon  ia  meu^.  to  be  a  cannonade  against  seir-righteousness, 
that  righteonsness  which  a  man  makes  out  of  his  own  doings,  hJs  own 
feelings,  his  own  alms,  prayers,  or  sacraments, — all  such  righteousness  is 
to  be  utterly  despised. 

I.    The  first  point  is  this :  the  bts  of  SELF-RiaHTEOUSKBSS  obows 

UP  AMOHQ  BELIQIOUH  PEOPLE.    It  is  not  always  the  sin  of  the  ontside 

world,  for  many  outsiders  do  not  pretend  to  any  righteonsness  at  all,  and 

I  fancy  they  think  all  the  better  of  themselves  for  that.    This  is  an 

idle  plea  which  it  needs  not  many  words  to  expose.   "  I  make  no  pro- 

:ayB  one.      This  is  about  as  honanrahlc  a  confession  aa  if  a 

Id  boast  when  canght  at  picking  pockets,  "I  do  not  make  any 

)  be  honest,"  or  a  Uar  when  detected  should  turn  round  and 

rerprofcssed  to  speak  the  truth."     Would  you  have  men  glory 

"essmg  to  be  honest  or  true  ?    Yet,  surely,  they  do  no  worse 

rho  boaste  that  he  does  not  profess  to  fear  Ood.    Such  a  man 

3  a  considerable  pitch  of  iniquity  before  he  can  brazen  his  face 

s  glory  in  that  which  is  his  shame. 

those  who  profess  to  be  religious,  self-righteonsness  very  &e- 
mes  in,  because  they  have  not  trnly  received  the  reltgiun  of 
st ;  if  they  were  true  beHevers  they  would  be  humble  and  con- 
ilf-righteonsness  and  faith  in  Christ  are  diametrically  opposed, 
saved  by  grace  finds  no  room  for  glorying  in  himself.  What 
poatle  ?  "  Where  is  boasting,  then  ?  It  is  excluded."  The 
is  shut  out,  it  has  the  door  shut  in  its  iiice.  A  sinner  washed 
jlood  and  clothed  in  Jesus'  righteousness,  glories  only  in  the 
!  baa  done  once  for  all  with  that  particular  turm  of  sin  wliich 
self;  it  is  detestable  in  his  aight.  His  cry  ia  "God  forbid 
ild  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jeaua  Christ." 
ho  mingle  with  Christians,  and  arc  religious  in  a  certain  sense 
ey  practise  the  forms  of  religion,  are  wont  to  put  the  fitrm  into 
if  the  spirit.    With  thera  in  baptism  the  nashing  in  water  is  I 


BELF-BIGHTEOUBKESB.  555 

everything,  bafc  the  burial  with  Christ  which  it  sets  forth  is  qoite 
unknown ;  with  them  the  partaking  of  the  bread  and  the  wine  are 
everything  at  the  Lord's  table,  bat  the  ^iritnal  feeding  upon  the  body 
and  blood  of  Ohrist  is  not  understood.  With  them,  the  place  of  worship 
is  everything,  but  the  spirit  of  worship  is  lacking.  The  broken  heart, 
the  contrite  spirit,  the  soul  that  trembleth  at  (}od  s  word,  the  heart  that 
joys  in  the  I^rd,  they  are  strangers  to  all  this,  though  they  can  sit  as 
God's  people  sit,  though  they  can  hear  as  Grod's  people  hear,  and  look  as 
if  they  were  all  that  saints  should  be. 

These  persons,  too,  even  when  they  do  not  join  the  Christian  church, 
but  only  worship  or  seem  to  worship  with  Christians,  are  very  apt  to 
think  that  they  must  be  better  than  other  people  beoause  they  do  so> 
They  are  not  openly  Sabbath  breakers.  Is  there  not  something  in  this  ? 
Tes,  there  is  something  in  it,  certainly,  and  we  will  not  say  a  word 
against  it ;  but  there  is  not  everything  in  it,  and  certainly  not  enough  in 
it  to  make  a  perfect  righteousness  of  it.  The  bed  is  shorter  than  that  a 
man  may  stretch  himself  on  it,  and  the  covering  is  too  narrow  for  a  man 
to  wrap  himself  in  it.  '*  Oh,  but  I  have  occupied  a  seat  in  an  orthodox 
chapel  for  many  years."  Yes,  that  may  be,  and  if  yon  have  not  received 
the  gospel,  those  sermons  which  you  have  heard  will  rise  up  against  you 
in  judgment,  to  your  condenmation.    It  is  true  yon  dose  your  eyes  in 

Srayer,  but  if  you  never  pray  do  yon  not  mock  wd  with  a  pretence  of 
oing  it,  and  may  it  not  turn  out  that  your  religiousness  is  only  an  im- 
pudent provoking  of  God  to  his  face  ?  Avoid  the  tendency  to  say,  "  We 
are  certainly  much  better  than  the  outside  world,  and  if  God  is  hard  with 
ns  he  will  lie  hard  with  a  great  many."  Avoid  this,  I  say,  for  it  is  the 
danger  of  outwardly  religious  people,  who  are  not  savingly  converted,  to 
dream  that  they  are  somewhat  advantaged  bv  a  mere  att^dance  on  the 
means  of  grace.  Should  an  Egyptian  ruo  his  shoulders  against  an 
Israehte,  would  it  turn  him  into  an  Israelite?  Will  living  near  a  rich 
man  make  you  rich  ?  Because  the  Lord  Jesus  eats  and  drinks  in  your 
streets,  are  you,  therefore,  safe,  even  though  you  have  never  believed  on 
him  ?  Be  not  deceived  by  such  a  notion.  Do  vou  foreet  that  cry  of 
our  Lord,  ^'Woe  unto  thee,  Chorasdn.  Woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaida"?  Did 
he  not  proclaim  woe  to  the  very  places  where  his  voice  was  oftenest 
heard,  and  where  his  miracles  were  oftenest  worked?  Beware,  I  pray 
you  outwardly  religious  people,  lest  you  &11  into  the  sin  of  self-righteous- 
ness, and  fancy  that  you  are  holy  wnen  you  are  not. 

II.  This  is  a  sin  weigh  floubibhes  whbbb  oihsb  sins  abound. 
We  read  of  these  people  that  they  did  evil  before  the  eves  of  God,  and 
chose  that  wherein  he  delighted  not.  They  blasphemed  God,  and  pol- 
luted themselves  with  unhallowed  rites,  communing  with  demons  and 
the  powers  of  darkness,  and  pretending  to  speak  with  departed  spirits; 
and  yet  for  all  that  they  said — ''  Stand  by  thyself,  I  am  holier  than 
thou."  Self-righteousness  is  never  more  ridiculous  than  in  persons 
whose  conduct  would  not  hear  scrutiny  for  a  moment.  See  the  Pharisee 
with  his  phylactery,  and  his  broad-hemmed  garment  standing  there  in 
conscious  perfection!  See  him  and  feel  disgust,  for  the  wretched 
hypocrite  has  been  secretly  devouring  a  widow's  house,  and  his  heart 
is  full  of  ravening  and  wickedness.  In  his  greediness  and  lust  he 
makes  clean  the  outside  of  his  cup  and  platter,  but  within  he  is  full  of 


556  HETROPOUTAN  TABSBITAOLB  PULPIT. 

extortion  and  exoeas.  Hear  how  the  devil  derides  him.  **  Ah,  ah»"  he 
langhfl  with  satanic  glee,  ''the  oataide  nifty  he  aa  you  wilL  What  oaie 
I  while  the  inaide  is  foal!"  It  is  dreadfiil  that  any  man  ahonld  be  aelf- 
righteons,  bnt  it  is  monstrous  that  men  of  openly  eyil  life  should  dare  to 
set  up  such  a  pretence.  Such  persons  know,  if  they  will  but  think,  that 
they  are  trying  to  palm  off  a  baoeboed  lie ;  yet  it  is  commim  enough  in 
spiritual  things  for  those  who  axe  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable  to 
declare  that  they  are  rich  and  increased  in  goods.  How  are  they  aUe  to 
keep  up  this  imposture  upon  their  own  conscienoes?  Is  it  not  a  part  of 
their  spiritual  madness?  The  yery  blindness  which  makes  th^n  cfaooee 
sin  prevents  their  seeing  how  sinful  it  is,  and  enables  them  to  fimcy  that 
all  is  well.  As  men  wlu>  wear  spectacles  of  ootoured  glass  find  all  things 
tinted  witii  their  own  hoe,  so  does  a  self-righteous  heart  impart  a  tint  to 
actions,  till  the  worse  s^pears  the  better,  and  sin  glitters  like  righteous- 
ness. 

Moreover,  self-righteous  men,  like  foxes,  have  manv  tricks  and 
schemes.  They  condemn  in  other  people  what  they  consider  to  be  very 
excusable  in  themselves.  They  wocud  cry  out  against  othecs  for  a  toith 
part  of  the  sin  which  they  allow  in  themselves :  certain  constitutional 
tendencies,  and  necessities  of  circnmstanoes,  and  various  sarroondings, 
all  serve  as  ample  apologies.  Besides  this,  if  it  be  admitted  that  they 
are  wrong  upon  some  points,  yet  in  other  directions  they  are  beyond 
rebuke.  If  they  drink,  they  do  not  swear ;  and  if  they  swear,  tb^y  do 
not  steal :  they  make  a  great  deal  out  of  n^atives :  if  they  steal,  they 
are  not  greedy  and  miseny,  but  spend  their  gains  fireely.  If  they  prac- 
tise fornication,  yet  they  do  not  commit  adultery ;  if  they  talk  filthily, 
yet  they  boast  they  do  not  lie.  They  would  be  counted  good  becaoae 
they  are  not  universally  bad.  They  do  not  break  every  hedge,  and 
therefore  they  plead  that  they  ate  not  trespassera.  As  if  a  debtor  for  a 
hundred  pounds  should  claim  to  be  excused  because  he  does  not  owe  two 
hundred :  or,  as  if  a  highwayman  should  say,  **  I  did  not  stop  all  the 
travellers  on  the  road ;  I  only  robbed  one  or  two,  and  therefore  I  onght 
not  to  be  punished."  If  a  man  should  wilfully  break  the  windows  of 
your  shop,  I  warrant  yon  you  would  not  take  it  as  an  excuse  if  he 
pleaded,  ''I  did  not  br^  them  all;  I  only  smashed  one  sheet  of  plate 
glass."  Pleas  which  would  not  be  mentioned  in  a  human  court  are 
thought  good  enough  to  offer  to  God.    0  the  folly  of  our  race ! 

Besides,  these  people  will  make  a  righteousness  this  way — they  {dead 
that  if  they  do  wrong  yet  there  are  some  pmnts  in  which  they  are 
splendid  fellows.  ''You  should  see  how  grandly  I  acted  on  such  an 
occasion.  You  will  think  me  almost  a  saint,  and  quite  a  hero,  if  you 
wiU  but  fix  your  eye  on  that  one  particular  virtue.  Drink,  sir?  ^o ; 
I  never  touch  a  drop."  I  am  glad  you  do  not;  bnt  still,  if  yon  live 
in  lying,  or  in  pride,  your  abstinence  is  a  short  piece  of  stuff  to  make  a 
garment  out  of.  The  mere  fact  that  you  are  not  a  drunkard  is  so  far 
good,  bnt  it  goes  a  veiy  little  way  towards  the  perfect  righteousness  which 
God's  law  demands. 

Some  one  thing  in  which  the  unconverted  man  may  excel  is  put  in  to 
make  up  for  his  deficiencies  in  a  hundred  other  ways.  By  hook  or  by 
crook  a  man  will  make  out  that  he  is  not  so  bad  as  he  seems  to  be ;  the 
inventiveness  of  self-esteem  is  prodigious.    Those  who  come  with  the 


SBLFHEtlGHTEOUSKESS.  557 

language  of  repentance  but  Tvithout  the  spirit  of  it,  are  sometimes  the 
most  self-righteous  of  all,  for  they  say  "  I  am  all  right  because  I  am 
not  self-righteous."  They  make  a  self-righteousness  out  of  the  supposed 
absence  of  self-righteousness.  "  Thank  God,"  say  they,  "  we  are  not  as 
other  men  are,  nor  even  as  these  self-righteous  people."  Hypocrites 
all  the  way  through.  Have  you  never  heard  of  the  monk  who  said 
he  was  a  very  great  sinner,  that  he  had  broken  all  the  ten  command- 
ments, that  he  was  as  bad  as  Judas  and  deserved  to  be  hanged  as 
vrell  as  he,  and  when  his  confessor  began  to  go  over  the  commandments 
he  said  about  each  one  of  them, ''  Holy  father,  I  have  not  broken  that ;  I 
have  kept  that."  He  was  a  sinner  in  the  gross  but  not  in  detail,  a 
sinner  by  name  bnt  not  in  reality ;  so  he  said,  and  hosts  of  people  virtu^y 
say  the  same.  Hear  them :  "  Yes,  sir,  of  course  I  am  a  sinner.  We  are 
all  sinners."  But  if  you  bring  one  fault  home  to  them,  straightway 
they  bristle  up.  Who  are  you  that  you  should  speak  evil  of  them?  They 
have  done  nothing  amiss,  they  are  most  excellent  people,  and  you  will  go 
a  long  way  to  find  anybody  better  than  they  are,  and  so  on.  Oh,  this 
horrible  self-righteousness ;  it  is  not  merely  to  be  found  in  the  man  who 
attends  his  church  regularly  and  reads  his  prayers  daily ;  it  is  found  in 
the  man  who  will  not  go  to  his  church  nor  say  his  prayers.  The  harlot 
has  her  self-righteousness ;  the  thief,  the  drunkard,  the  profane  still  have 
their  self- justifications.  Yea,  and  it  may  be  seen  even  in  Atheists  who 
have  cast  ofP  all  &ar  of  God,  and  then  stand  in  an  elevation  of  self- 
esteem  which  hardly  any  other  man  can  match.  Hear  him :  "  I  have 
proved  my  freedom  of  thought  and  nobility  of  mind ;  I  am  the  model 
man.  As  for  these  Christians,  they  are  cants  and  hypocrites;  and 
believers  in  Christ  are  either  fools  or  knaves.  No  man  has  any  honest 
and  rational  convictions  but  myself.  I  can  improve  upon  the  Bible  and 
criticise  the  life  of  Christ.  Stand  by  thyself.  I  am  holier  than  thou." 
This  weed  of  self-righteousness  will  grow  on  any  dunghill.  No  heap  of 
rubbish  is  too  rotten  for  the  accursed  toadstool  of  proud  self  to  grow 
upon. 

III.  As  self-righteousness  grows  among  sins  to  onr  surprise,  so  it  is 
IK  ITSSLF  A  GRKAT  SIN.  One  is  abnost  starred  to  find  self-esteem  placed 
after  such  a  list  of  sins  as  this  chapter  records.  To  the  Jew  the  eating 
of  swine's  flesh  and  broth  of  abominable  things  was  a  great  pollution, 
but  self-righteousness  is  classed  with  it ;  it  is  even  placed  with  necromancy 
and  witchcraft.  Drunkenness  and  swearing  are  sin  in  rags,  but  seU- 
righteousness  is  sin  in  a  respectable  black  coat.  It  is  an  aristocratic  sin, 
and  does  not  like  to  be  put  down  with  the  common  ruck ;  and  if  we  call 
it  sin,  yet  many  will  plead  that  it  is  only  so  in  a  very  refined  sense. 
But  God  does  not  think  so,  he  classes  it  with  the  very  worst,  and  he 
does  so  because  it  is  one  of  the  worst.  For  a  man  to  be  self-righteous  is 
in  itself  a  sin  of  sins.  For,  first,  it  is  blaq)hemy.  Perhaps  you  do 
not  see  that.  Follow  me,  then.  God  is  holy.  Here  comes  this  base 
imposter  and  boasts,  "And  I  am  holy  too.*'  Is  not  that  a  ludicrous 
and  contemptible  form  of  blasphemy?  It  is  profanity  in  its  very 
essence.  The  cherubim  are  crying  "  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  of  hosts : 
heaven  and  earth  are  full  of  the  majesty  of  thy  glory,"  and  amid  it  all 
there  is  heard  this  squeaking  pretender,  whining, ''  And  I  am  holy  too." 
0  wretched  egotist,  &ou  dost  at  once  lie  and  blaspheme  I    The  heavens 


558  METROPOLITAK  TABKBNACLB  PULPIT. 

are  not  pure  in  his  sight :  he  charged  his  angeb  with  folly,  and  dost 
ihon,  that  art  bom  of  woman,  and  defiled  from  head  to  foot,  dare  to  talk 
about  righteousness ?  Righteousness,  indeed!  when  thou  art  a  maas  of 
sin. 

More,  this  self-righteousness  is  idolatry,  for  the  man  who  counts  him- 
self to  be  righteous  by  his  own  works  worships  himselfl  Practically,  the 
object  of  his  adoration  is  his  own  dear,  delectable,  excellent  self;  all  hk 
confidence  is  in  himself,  his  boasting  is  in  himself;  and,  though  he  may 
sing  psalms  to  Qod  with  his  voice,  yet  his  heart  is  really  singing  hymns 
to  himself,  and  he  is  saying  unto  himself, ''  Thou  hast  done  well,  my 
soul ;  there  is  something  great  and  bright  in  thee ;  thou  deservest  much 
of  thy  Creator ;  thou  shalt  surely  enter  heaven  on  thine  own  terms.  At 
thy  worst  thou  hast  never  been  so  bad  as  thy  fellow-men ;  at  thy  best 
thou  art  a  right  noble  being,  and  a  brilliant  reward  is  thy  due."  What 
is  this  but  idolatry  in  its  worst  form  ? 

Then,  again,  it  is  profanity,  for  it  gives  God  the  distinct  lie.  The  Lord 
declares  that  no  man  is  righteous.  He  saith  that  he  looked  from  heaven 
and  surveyed  the  sons  of  men,  and  he  saw  that^'  there  is  none  righteous, 
no,  not  one."  To  this  divine  assertion  self-righteousness  gives  a  flat 
contradiction,  for  it  claims  to  be  itself  holy.  God  declares  that  we  have 
gone  astray  and  altogether  become  unprofitable,  and  he  proves  thai  he 
believes  this,  for  he  sets  Christ  to  bleed  and  die  for  the  world  of  sinnera, 
as  it  is  written,  '^^AU  we  like  sheep  have  gone  aptray ;  we  have  turned  every 
one  to  his  own  way,  and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us 
all."  But  he  could  not  lay  our  iniquity  upon  Jesus  if  we  had  none,  nor 
impute  transgression  to  Christ  if  there  were  no  sin  in  us,  and  thns  the 
self-righteous  man  virtually  declares  that  God  is  false,  and  speaks  not  the 
strict  truth,  since  he  claims  to  be  an  exception  to  the  rule.  He  teatifi^ 
that  God's  "  No,  not  one,"  is  &lse,  for  he  tdmself  is  one  righteous  person, 
and  therefore  there  may  be  others.  Though  Qod  saith  that  by  the 
works  of  the  law  no  flesh  shall  be  justified  in  his  sight,  yet  this  man 
saith,  "  By  the  works  of  the  law  I  shall  be  justified,"  and  so  he  pro&n^ 
the  word  of  the  Most  High,  and  questions  the  truth  of  God,  which  is  as 
the  apple  of  Jehovah's  eye.  It  is  clear  beyond  all  question  that  aelf- 
ri^hteousness  is  in  itself  a  great,  God-defying  sin.  May  the  Lord 
deliver  us  from  it,  and  by  the  Holy  Spirit  work  in  us  a  humble,  lowly 
&ith  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord. 

lY.  In  the  fourth  place  we  would  remark  that  self-kighteousksss 
IS  THE  FRUIT  OF  han's  OWN  THOUGHTS.  Look  at  the  secoud  Terse 
of  the  chapter — **  I  have  spread  out  my  hands  all  the  day  unto  a  re- 
bellious people,  which  walketh  in  a  way  that  was  not  good,  after  their 
own  thoughts."  Those  who  have  high  thoughts  of  themselves  do  not 
walk  according  to  God's  commandments,  but  according  to  their  own 
notions.  If  any  man  thinketh  himself  to  be  righteous  in  himself,  he 
has  never  derived  that  idea  from  God's  law.  £ead  the  ten  commands, 
understand  their  spirituality,  and  know  that  they  concern  not  only  overt 
deeds  but  thoughts  and  imaginations,  and  you  will  see  that  the  law  con- 
demns us  all  without  exception.  It  proves  our  guilt,  repeals  our  prone- 
ness  to  evil,  pronounces  a  curse  upon  us,  and  gives  us  over  to  condemna- 
tion. It  pays  us  no  respect,  but  shuts  us  up  in  hopeless  despair.  A 
man  who  is  self-righteous,  therefore,  did  not  aerive  his  seli-est^m  from 


SSLF-BIGHTEOURNSSS.  559 

a  trae  consideratioii  of  the  law.  No  Jew  that  stood  at  Sinai  and  saw 
the  mountain  on  a  smoke,  and  heard  the  words  which  sounded  forth  with 
noise  as  of  tempest  and  trumpet,  dared  to  stand  there  and  saj,  '^I  am 
righteous'*;  but  crouching  away,  moving  further  and  further  from  the 
burning  mount,  the  best  Israelite  besought  that  these  words  might  not 
be  spoken  to  him  any  more,  for  he  could  not  endure  the  terror  of  that 
thrice  holy  law.  A  rharisee  stands  on  an  elevation  raised  by  his  own 
&ncy,  for  the  law  would  pull  him  down,  and  never  for  a  moment  set  him 
up.  His  proud  notions  come  not  from  the  law,  and  certainly  not  from 
tfis  gospel,  for  the  gospel  knows  no  man  after  the  flesh  as  righteous, 
bat  it  regards  all  men  as  siimers,  and  comes  to  them  with  panlon ;  it 
treats  men  as  lost  and  comes  to  save  them.  If  there  be  a  man  in  the 
world  who  is  pure  and  perfect  by  nature  the  gospel  has  nothing  to  say  to 
him,  for  it  was  not  intended  to  meet  such  a  case.  Its  medicines  are  not 
for  those  upon  whom  the  sickness  of  sin  has  never  come,  for ''  the  whole 
have  no  need  of  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick.''  Our  great  Lord 
came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance.  Jesus  is  the 
sinner's  friend.  Christ  came  to  wash  away  stams,  not  to  flatter  men 
into  a  notion  of  their  spotlessness;  he  came  to  heal  the  sick,  not  to 
applaud  the  vigorous.  To  such  as  are  righteous  in  themselves  there  is 
not  a  single  syUable  of  promise  in  the  entire  gospel :  why  should  there 
be,  for  they  need  it  not  ?  Self-righteousness  is  a  child  which  neither 
law  nor  gospel  will  own ;  it  is  bom  in  the  house  of  folly,  and  it  is  nursed 
by  human  mncy. 

Self-righteous  people  are  not  much  inclined  to  search  Ihe  Scripturea, 
they  do  not  read  them  with  an  understanding  heart,  so  as  to  get  the 
meaning;  they  rather  make  the  Bible  say  their  own  meaning,  and  twist 
it  to  support  their  own  pleasing  dream.  Like  a  battery  of  ordnance  of 
the  strongest  kind,  both  law  and  gospel  fire  into  the  sinner's  righteousness 
and  sink  it,  like  a  riddled  hulk,  into  the  deeps  of  the  sea. 

**  But  cannot  a  man  arrive  at  a  rdigion  by  his  own  unaided  thoughts  ?" 
says  one.  A  great  many  have  tried  it,  but  the  very  idea  is  absurd.  Facts 
about  God  and  man  are  to  be  learned,  and  not  invented.  Suppose  a 
man  were  to  think  out  the  science  of  botany,  but  never  went  to  see  the 
flowers,  he  would  deliver  strange  botanical  lectures,  nusleadinc;  and 
absurd,  for  no  cogitation  upon  what  a  flower  ought  to  be  would  ever 
enable  a  man  to  guess  at  what  flowers  really  are.  Suppose  a  man  who 
never  looked  at  the  stars  were  to  despise  the  telescope  and  depend  on 
his  thoughts  for  his  astronomy,  would  he  not  make  strange  work  of 
it?  We  have  heard  of  the  German  who  excogitated  a  camel  out  of  his 
inward  consciousness,  and  there  are  many  people  of  the  same  order  of 
learned  ignorance  and  profound  folly.  Such  do  not  look  at  what  the 
gospel  is,  but  they  have  their  own  notions  of  what  it  ought  to  be ; 
they  do  not  look  at  what  revelation  declares,  but  at  what  their  own  precious 
thoughts  can  manufacture.  Half  the  people  in  the  world  make  their 
own  theology,  and  are  either  too  idle  or  too  proud  to  be  guided  by  in- 
&llible  Scripture.  As  many  a  vintner  composes  his  own  wine,  so  do 
these  concoct  their  own  doctrine,  and  by  this  means  they  arrive  at  a  high 
opinion  of  their  own  goodness.  Like  the  spider,  they  make  their  web 
out  of  their  own  boweb :  they  are  righteous,  and  by  no  means  the  sort 
of  persons  which  the  Word  of  €k)d  declares  them  to  be.    He  whose 


560  METROPOLTTAW  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

foundation  is  his  own  drccams  is  certain  to  be  deceived.  Listen,  O  man, 
and  learn  wisdom.  God's  thoughts  are  not  your  thonghts,  neither  are 
his  ways  yonr  ways,  and  in  the  day  when  he  comes  to  deal  with  your 
fiEincied  righteousness,  he  will  mjie  short  work  of  it,  and  you  will 
have  to  cry,  "  We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf,  and  all  onr  righteousnesses  are  as 
filthy  rags,  and  our  iniquities  like  the  wind  have  carried  us  away.'*  The 
sooner  that  happens  the  better,  for  if  it  comes  not  until  you  get  into  the 
next  world,  it  will  be  dreadful  then  to  be  found  naked  where  you  never 
can  be  clothed,  to  have  your  fancied  riches  melt  into  a  poverty  from 
which  you  never  can  recover,  to  be  made  a  bankrupt  where  yon  thought 
yourself  wealthy,  and  in  a  world  where  you  never  can  begin  again.  Woe 
to  those  who  make  eternal  shipwreck  while  they  dream  that  thej  are 
steering  straight  to  the  desired  haven.  God  save  you  from  setting  np  to 
furnish  yourselves  with  inspiration.  Yon  are  not  oracles,  and  should 
never  dream  of  being  so.  Search  the  Scriptures  to  know  the  fects  of 
your  case,  and  then  you  will  recoil  from  the  very  idea  of  tilie  righteous- 
ness of  unrenewed  man.  Your  glory  will  become  your  shame,  your 
spangled  robes  will  turn  to  worthless  rags,  and  you  will  accept  with 
humble  gratitude  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith. 
Y.    This  leads  us  on  to  our  fifth  remark,  which  is  this:  selp- 

RIGHTEOUSNBSS  HAS  THIS  VICE  ABOUT  IT,  THAT  IT  ALWAYS  LEADS  TO 

DBSPISING  OTHERS.  That  is  the  pith  of  the  text.  They  said,  "  Stand 
by  thyself,  come  not  near  to  me;  for  I  am  holier  than  thou."  The 
self-righteous  think  thus  of  one  another:  one  sinner  dreads  pollution 
from  another,  one  rebel  is  alarmed  lest  he  should  be  made  disloyal  by 
another.  Think  of  a  wretch  condemned  to  die  fi)r  his  sin,  and  yet 
afraid  that  a  fellow  criminal  might  soil  his  innocence.  To  what  a  pitch 
of  madness  does  pride  lift  itself !  "  Do  not  come  near  me ;  I  am  holy," 
cries  the  man  steeped  in  sin.  Oh,  the  absurdity  of  aelf-righteouaiesB ! 
This  pride  is  loathsome  to  the  last  degree. 

This  pride  is  seen  to  be  still  more  loathsome  when  the  proud 
self-deceiver  bids  the  lowly  penitent  man  stand  oflP.  The  repenting 
publican  has  his  eyes  opened  to  his  real  state,  and  he  goes  up  to  the 
temple  and  he  prays,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  He  does  not 
dare  to  look  up,  he  is  so  broken-hearted ;  but  yonder  Pharisee  is  bold  to 
thank  God  for  his  own  surpassing  virtues.  See  how  he  gathers  up  his 
skirts  for  fear  the  fringe  of  his  raiment  should  touch  the  ground  whereon 
the  publican  has  set  his  polluting  foot.  Why,  sirs,  that  publican  was  one 
of  God's  jewels,  and  tMs  abominable  Pharisee  was  a  mere  dunghiU,  reeking 
with  offensive  self-conceit.  He  did  not  know  it,  but  his  self-righteous- 
ness made  him  despise  the  very  man  of  whom  God  hath  said^ ''  To  this 
man  will  I  look,  ana  with  him  will  I  dwell ;  even  to  him  tiiat  is  poor  and 
of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  that  trembleth  at  my  word." 

"Oh,"  says  one  of  my  free-thinking  but  sel^righteons  hearers,  "I 
hate  such  cant.  Confessing  sin  is  all  nonsense.  I  cannot  endure  to  hear 
such  talk."  We  are  well  aware  of  that,  good  car,  but  this  weighs  not  with 
us.  We  know  you  very  wdl,  and  recognise  in  yon  an  old  amfnaintanoe 
of  some  nineteen  hundb^d  years  standing.  Proud  Pharisees-fiever  oan 
endure  penitent  publicans,  nor  their  Saviour  either.  They  are  always 
saying  of  the  Lord's  ministers  that  which  they  once  said  of  himself 
**  This  man  receiveth  sinners  and  eateth  with  them."    They  find  fault 


8BLF-BIGHTE0nSKE8S.  561 

with  the  great  Advocate  and  his  clients,  with  the  great  Physician  and 
hifl  patients,  bat  the  fiedeemer's  kingdom  waits  not  their  patronage  and 
fears  not  their  opposition.  If  you  reject  the  banqnet  of  mercy,  and  will 
not  come  to  it,  there  are  others  who  shally  and  your  refusal  shall  bring 
en  yonr  own  head  i^e  contempt  yon  now  reserve  for  others. 

Yes,  and  this  self-righteous  q>irit  dares  to  pour  its  bitterness  upon  the 
most  gracious  men.  If  yon  want  a  thorough-paced  persecutor  find  a 
self-righteous  man.  I  tdl  yon  there  is  no  venom  in  tb&  heart  of  disao- 
late,  debauched  men  against  Ohristianity  that  is  at  all  comparable  to  the 
poison  of  asps  which  lies  in  the  heart  of  the  self-righteous  man.  Who 
was  it  in  Jerusalem  that  hunted  down  the  saints  ?  It  was  nut  some  son 
of  Belial  who  railed  at  them.  I  daresay  that  many  a  Jerusalem  rioter 
said,  '^  What  matters  it  ?  They  have  their  ways  and  I  have  mine ;  let 
the  men  alone."  But  there  was  one  man  in  Jerusalem  who  above  most 
others  thought  that  verily  he  had  kept  all  the  commandments  of  God  &om 
his  yonth  up,  and  was  utterly  blameless,  and  he  hated  the  Christians 
because  they  preached  a  doctrine  which  struck  at  his  self-esteem.  There- 
fore he  despised  men  who  were  a  hundred  times  better  than  himself,  he 
dragged  them  into  the  synagogue,  aind  scourged  them,  to  compel  them 
to  blaspheme ;  and  when  he  had  done  all  he  oould  in  his  own  country 
to  worry  them,  he  obtained  letters  firom  the  high  priest  that  he  might 
go  to  Damascus  to  hunt  them  even  in  strange  cities.  He  verily  thought 
he  did  God  service  when  he  breathed  out  threatenings  and  bloodsb^ 
against  God's  own  children.  Yes,  it  is  so,  and  must  be  so :  they  that 
are  bom  after  the  flesh  persecute  them  that  are  bom  after  the  Spirit. 
Ishmael,  the  child  of  Hagar,  the  bondwoman,  which  cometh  &om  Sinai, 
in  Arabia,  hateth  the  Isaac  that  is  bom  of  the  free  woman,  according  to 
promise.  There  is  a  deadly  feud  between  these  two,  and  this  is  a  part  of 
the  sin  of  self-righteousness,  that  it  sets  itself  so  bitterly  against  Christ 
and  hispeople,  and  is  the  direst  opponent  that  the  gospel  has  among 
men.  We  see  the  self-righteous  spirit  at  times  display  itself  in  the 
papers  when  they  touch  on  religions  sabjects.  One  of  them  lately  con- 
demned the  hymn— 

"  Sinner,  nothing  do,  either  great  or  small, 
Jesus  did  it,  did  it  all,  long,  long  ago.** 

This  is  shocking  doctrine,  so  they  say,  for  it  denies  salvation  by  good 
works!  Of  course,  editors  of  papers  are  good  judges,  for  they  are  so 
exceedingly  careful  of  our  moraUty,  and  so  studious  never  to  insert  any- 
thing that  could  injure  our  purity.  That  precious,  plain-spoken  bit  of 
gospel  verse  is  too  much  for  our  pious  friend,  tind  editor,  ana  he  is  afraid 
that  it  will  hurt  oar  morals.  Self-righteousness  is  always  afraid  of  the 
gospel,  lest  the  uncompromising  truth  should  unmask  its  self-deceit. 
Why,  sirs,  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  alone  is  the  essence  of 
Protestantism,  and  the  soul  of  the  gospel.  That  Christ  Jesus  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners,  and  that  Ovation  is  not  by  works  of  righteous- 
ness which  we  have  done,  but  by  the  sovereign  grace  of  God  who  passeth 
by  transgression,  iniquity,  and  sin,  is  the  great  tmth  for  which  reformers 
protested  and  martyrs  died.  Let  those  who  gainsay  it  look  to  themselves. 
YI.  But  I  mast  pass  on  to  observe  that  sslf-righteoitsness  is 
MOST  ABOHiKABLE  IN  THB  SIGHT  OF  GoD.    What  does  he  Compare 


562  UETBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

it  to?  He  says,  ^*It  is  a  smoke  in  my  nose,  a  fire  that  bnrnetb 
all  the  day."  At  the  bottom  of  the  garden  we  gather  together  tha 
dead  leaves,  and  all  the  mbbish  of  the  garden,  and  the  heap  is 
lighted,  and  it  keeps  on  bnming  and  smomdering  all  the  day ;  and 
if  yon  go  and  stand  in  the  eye  of  the  wind  yoor  eyes  will  amart, 
your  nose  will  be  offended,  and  yon  will  feel  that  yon  cannot  bear 
it.  As  yon  see  the  refdse  bnming,  smoking,  smouldering  all  the  day  it 
will  tell  you  what  the  Lord  thinks  of  man's  righteousness.  This  is  his 
opinion  of  those  who  say,  **  Stand  by,  I  am  holier  than  thou";  their 
boasted  righteousness  is  a  burning  heap  of  mbbish,  pouring  forUi  a  liiick 
smoke  most  obnoxious  to  Mm.  We  do  not  wonder  that  he  thus  sooms 
and  abhors  proud,  self-righteousness,  for  God  is  a  God  of  tmth,  and 
tmth  cannot  bear  a  lie,  and  self-righteousness  is  a  mass  of  lies.  He  who 
is  of  perfect  nature  cannot  bear  mere  pretence.  It  ia  so  among  men  in 
common  matters.  Ton  introduce  a  man  of  real  learning  to  a  person  who 
has  purchased  for  himself  a  sham  degree,  and  who  boasts  that  he  is  a 
classical  scholar.  Mark  his  disgust  when  the  pretender  quotes  a  Ladn 
author,  and  in  the  very  first  sentence  gives  fJBJse  quantities.  The  truly 
learned  man  says,  '^  He  is  a  disgrace  to  his  title ;  let  me  get  away  from 
him ;  he  pretends  to  be  a  doctor,  and  yet  he  makes  all  these  blunders." 
He  who  possesses  the  reality  is  indignant  with  the  counterfeit.  Now» 
God  is  truly  holy,  and  cannot,  therefore,  bear  that  these  men  should 
talk  about  a  holiness  which  they  have  no  claim  to,  and  vaunt  themselves, 
and  brag  within  themselves  of  a  thing  that  is  not  theirs.  The  true 
God,  therefore,  calls  them  a  smoke  in  his  nose. 

Moreover,  self-righteousness  is  such  a  proud  thing.  God  is  always 
provoked  with  pride.  It  is  one  of  the  evils  which  ySb  soul  hates.  He 
daily  fits  his  arrow  upon  his  string  to  fetch  down  the  prond  in  heart. 
The  self-righteous  man  is  proud  in  himself  and  proud  with  a  con- 
temptuous sneer  at  others,  and  therefore  the  Lord  abhors  him. 

Self-righteousness  also  denies  the  wisdom  of  God's  plan,  and  is  utterly 
opposed  to  it.  God's  present  plan  of  working  in  the  world  goes  upon 
the  theory  that  we  are  gniltv ;  being  guilty,  he  provides  a  Saviour  for 
us,  and  sends  us  a  gospel  full  of  grace.  His  whole  system  is  a  gigantic 
blunder  if  we  are  or  can  be  righteous  in  and  of  ourselves.  The  work  of 
the  Holv  Spirit  is  needless  if  we  can  be  of  ourselves  fit  for  heaven.  The 
whole  character  of  this  gracious  dispensation  is  a  mistake  if  man  is  not 
guilty.  The  man  who  says  ^'I  am  righteous,"  virtually  casts  a  slur  upon 
a  work  which  is  meant  to  be  the  highest  display  of  the  divine  love  and 
wisdom.  He  is  like  the  Greek  to  whom  the  cross  of  Christ  was  **  foolish- 
ness." I  venture  to  say  that  self-righteousness  in  effect  makes  Christ 
himself  to  be  a  superfluity,  and  this,  my  brethren,  is  the  unkindest  cut  of 
all.  This  is  a  stab  at  the  heart  of  the  great  Father.  Did  Jesus  come 
down  from  heaven  and  take  our  nature  tecause  we  were  sinnerB»  and  in 
that  nature  did  he  give  himself  a  sacrifice  that  he  might  put  away  sin, 
and  was  all  this  a  mistake  ?  Calvary,  art  thou  a  blunder  ?  Bleeding 
Saviour,  wert  thou  an  amiable  enthusiast,  putting  away  sin  which  did  not 
exist,  and  filling  a  fountain  for  the  removal  of  stains  which  are  not  to  be 
found  ?  Tet  self-righteousness  involves  all  this.  If  one  sinner  has  a 
right  to  be  self-righteous  so  has  another ;  and  then  it  comes  to  this,  that 
God  should  deal  with  us  aU  on  quite  another  theory,  and  instead  of  his 


BELP-BIGHTEOUSNESS.  563 

dear  Son  comiDg  to  the  world  to  die  for  as  as  sinners,  we  might  all  go 
to  heaven  without  an  atonement  or  a  Saviour.  Do  yon  think  God  can 
l)ear  sach  a  slor  upon  Christ,  such  a  trampling  on  the  precious  blood 
of  his  own  Son  ?    Can  even  long-suffering  bear  this  ? 

I  may  be  speaking  to  some  who  have  not  before  considered  what  their 
self-rignteousness  means,  but  I  hope  they  see  it  now.  Get  rid  of  it,  my 
dear  Mends ;  put  off  your  ornaments  of  &ncied  virtue,  and  put  the  dust 
and  ashes  of  oon&ssion  on  your  heads.  Go  home  and  tear  your  finery 
to  pieees,  and  pat  on  the  robe  of  heavenly  righteousness,  otherwise  you 
ynu  be  as  long  as  you  live  nothing  but  that  smoking  heap  of  weeds  at  the 
bottom  of  the  garden ;  and  whereas  you  think  you  are  a  bright  and 
shining  hght,  God's  thoughts  will  be  the  reverse,  for  he  will  count  yon 
to  be  a  mere  smother  of  smoke  in  his  nose,  a  fiie  that  smouldereth  all 
the  day. 

YII.    The  last  point,  and  one  of  the  most  practical  is  this,  that  sblf- 

BIOHTBOUBNESS  MOST  EFFEOTUALLY  BARS  A  MAN  FROM  ALL  HOPE  OF 

salvaxion;  We  cannot  be  saved  unless  we  become  truly  hol^,  but,  my 
brethcen,  no  man  ever  becomes  truly  holy  who  ia  content  with  a  false 
holiness.  If  he  says,  "  I  am  holy  "  he  never  will  be  holy.  The  student 
who  enteiB  college  as  a  wise  man  will  probably  remain  a  fool.  Yon 
never  can  win  wisdom  till  you  confess  your  folly.  The  man  who  says, 
''I  am  rich,"  but  is  under  a  delusion  which  makes  him  call  counters 
gold,  will  never  be  rich ;  it  is  a  first  necessity  that  he  be  able  to  estimate 
bis  true  estate.  So  that  self-righteousness  shuts  a  man  out  from  real 
righteousness  most  effectually. 

It  also  prevents  the  heart  from  repentance.  How  can  you  repent  if 
you  have  never  sinned?  How  can  you  mourn  your  failure  to  obey  while 
yon  conceive  that  yon  have  kept  the  law  ?  It  shuts  you  out,  too,  firom 
faith.  Ton  never  will  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  while  you  believe  in  your- 
self. "How  can  ye  believe,"  said  Christ,  "that  receive  honour  one  of 
another  ?"  If  you  can  save  yourself  you  do  not  want  a  Saviour,  and 
consequently  you  will  never  trust  in  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  Man,  whilst 
thou  art  righteous,  Christ  and  thy  heart  will  never  agree.  He  brings 
thee  water,  but  thon  art  not  thiisty :  he  brings  thee  the  bread  of  life, 
but  thou  art  not  hungry :  he  has  made  for  thee  a  raiment  of  needle- 
work, but  thou  art  not  naked ;  he  comes  to  enrich  thee,  but  thon 
art  not  poor :  he  comes  to  give  thee  pardon,  but  thou  art  not  guilty ;  he 
comes  to  give  thee  everlasting  life,  but  thou  art  not  dead.  What  is  there, 
then,  in  Christ  for  thee  ?  Just  nothing,  and  so  thou  V7ilt  never  have 
Christ. 

All  the  entreaties  of  God,  even  such  as  are  described  in  this  chapter, 
when  he  stretches  out  his  hands  all  the  day,  will  never  make  a  self-righteous 
man  come  to  him.  The  prodigal  did  not  say,  "I  will  arise,  and  go  unto 
my  father  "  while  he  could  fill  his  belly  with  the  husks  that  the  swine 
did  eat.  Soul  poverty  and  destitution  bring  a  man  to  God ;  but  God 
may  call  as  long  as  he  wills,  man  never  will  come  as  long  as  he  can  be 
independent  of  his  heavenly  Father :  so  that  self-righteousness  is  the  ruin 
of  all  who  harbour  it. 

Let  me  warn  you  who  have  heard  the  gospel  continually,  that  if  yon 
are  self-righteous  the  privileges  which  you  enjoy  will  be  all  neutralized 
and  cease  to  be  privileges ;  for  if  you  do  not  come  to  Jesus  when  he 


564  METROPOLITAN  TABEENACLB  PULPIT. 

stretches  ont  his  hands,  he  will  call  others  who  are  not  now  a  people, 
and  he  will  be  found  of  those  that  sought  him  not.  You  are  firet  now 
in  point  of  privilege,  but  the  first  shall  be  last ;  while  those  outside  that 
have  not  heard  the  gospel  shall  hear  it  and  be  saved ;  and  so  the  last  shaD 
be  first.  God  will  turn  the  tables  upon  you :  the  children  of  the  kingdom 
shall  be  cast  out  into  outer  darkness,  where  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing 
of  teeth,  while  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  fix)m  the  west,  and 
shall  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  Beware,  you  who  are  self- 
righteous,  lest,  because  you  put  yourselves  to  be  the  head,  Gkxi  should 
make  you  the  tail,  for  then  ail  your  Sabbath  privileges,  and  gospel  hear- 
ings, will  be  like  millstones  about  your  necks,  to  sink  you  low  as  the 
lowest  hell. 

What  is  the  remedy  for  all  this  ?  The  remedy  is  just  this.  Qod  saitb, 
"Behold  me;'*  that  is  to  say,  he  bids  thee  oease  from  doting  upon  thine 
own  fancied  beauties  and  worshipping  thine  own  foolish  image.  Look 
first  to  the  holy  God  and  tremble.  Oanst  thou,  of  thyself,  ever  be  like 
him,  pure,  spotless,  glorious  ?    Canst  thou  ever  hope  to  deserve  ani 


of  him  ?  Look  to  him  and  despair.  Then  comes  the  second,  "  ISeho^ 
me.''  See  Christ  Jesus  on  the  cross  dying,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to 
bring  us  to  God.  As  thou  seest  him  dying  thy  self-righteousness  will  die. 
Thou  wilt  say,  "  He  would  never  have  suffered  thus  for  me  unless  I  had 
sin  to  repent  of.  God  would  never  have  put  him  to  this  grief  for  me 
unless  I  had  been  sadly  guilty.  I  shoula  never  have  wanted  such  a 
Saviour  if  I  had  not  been  a  great  transgressor.  In  the  heights  and 
depths  of  dying  love  I  read  the  heights  and  depths  of  mv  accursed 
sin ;  in  the  infinity  of  the  atonement  I  read  the  boundless  blacknesB  of 
my  guilt,  and  lie  humble  before  God.  At  the  same  time  in  that  perfect 
righteousness  divine,  which  has  put  away  sin,  I  see  the  hope  of  a  sinner, 
and  as  a  sinner  I  look  to  Christ  for  everything."  If  thou  doest  this,  it 
is  welL  God  bless  thee.  May  every  one  here  be  enabled  to  do  tiiis 
inmiediately,  and  unto  God  shall  be  the  glory  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Sceiptxtbe  Bead  before  Sermon-— Isaiah  kv* 


Hymns  from  ''Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 551,  554,  580. 


"  THE  SWOBD  AND  THE  TROWEL."    Edited  by  0.  H.  SPURGEON. 

CoxTxyTs  ros  Octobsk,  1879. 


"Predoiu    Faith.'*     A    Sennon    by   Thomai 

Sporgeon.    ( With  Portrait.) 
The  best  oonduot  tow»rdi  nnbrotherly  Brethren. 
Uncle  John  Vasaar. 
To  a  Young  Minister. 
The  Bible  in  the  South  Seat.    By  O.  Holden 

Pike. 
The  Old  CIerk*8  oondnding  Hymn. 
**Up  Qnatda  and  at  them."     By  Frederick 

Buutin^ 
Letter  written  by  John  Berridge. 
Women's  Work  among  Sailors. 


Sententious  Fragments. 

Teachers  of  Dissent  in  declining  timetL 

Speak  plainly. 

Much  ado  about  nothing. 

Notioeaof  Books. 

Notes. 

Paston^  OoUese. 

StockweU  Orphanage. 

Qirls*  Orphanage. 

Oolportage  Association. 

Soaety  of  Evangelists. 


Price  3d.    Post  free,  4  stamps. 


Passmoeb  &  Alabasteb,  4,  Paternoster  Buildinga;  and  all  BookBellen* 


^etilj)|dttan  ^^tmxAz  fnlpl. 


MISTEUST  OP  GOD  DEPLORED  AND  DENOUNCED. 


^    T 


Dblitebed  on  Lord's-dat  Mobning,  October  5th,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  HETEOPOLITAK  TABEBNAOLE,  NEWIKGTON. 


"  How  long  will  it  be  ere  they  Mieve  me  F* — ^Numbers  ziv.  11. 

Thb  children  of  Israel  were  very  prone  to  unbelief.  They  wanted 
something  visible  to  worship  and  to  trust :  they  could  not  learn  the 
lesson  of  faith  in  the  One  great  Invisible,  and  hence  they  were  one  day 
bowing  before  an  idol,  and  the  next  they  were  murmuring  against  the 
true  God.  Their  life  was  according  to  the  flesh,  after  the  sight  of  the 
eyes  and  the  hearing  of  the  ears,  and  hence  they  praised  Qoi  when 
Pharaoh  was  drowned,  and  when  manna  lay  round  about  their  camp ;  but 
the  moment  they  were  in  want  or  difficulty,  and  saw  no  supply  or  relief, 
they  could  not  trust  in  God,  but  began  to  mistrust  and  murmur.  With 
what  wonderful  longsuffering  the  Lord  bore  with  them !  His  mercy 
seemed  to  outrun  their  unbelief.  They  cried  for  water,  and  they  doubted 
Grod's  power  to  give  it  to  them  amid  the  desert  sands,  but  lo,  the  smitten 
rock  poured  focth  a  crystal  stream !  Then  they  cried  for  bread,  and 
charged  the  Lord  with  bringing  them  into  the  wilderness  to  kill  them 
with  hunger ;  and  yet  in  answer  to  their  murmuring  the  heavens  were 
opened,  and  there  fell  a  shower  of  angels'  food  for  them  to  feast  upon. 
They  then  clamoured  for  flesh,  and  they  had  not  long  began  their  un- 
believing murmurs  before  a  strong  wind  brought  them  up  (][uails  tOl 
they  fed  even  to  the  full.  Such  liberal  answers  to  their  vexatious  mur- 
murings  ought  to  have  silenced  their  fears,  and  they  should  henceforth 
have  exhibited  confidence  in  their  great  Friend :  yet  they  did  not  so, 
but  for  forty  years  they  provoked  the  Lord.  The  incident  before  us 
relates  to  that  great  and  terrible  provocation  in  which  the  longsufiTering 
of  God  came  to  a  pause.  They  sent  spies  into  Canaan,  and  when  they 
were  informed  by  ten  false-hearted  men  that  the  giants  were  in  the  land, 
and  that  the  inhabitants  of  it  dwelt  in  walled  cities  which  they  could 
not  hope  to  capture,  they  then  began  to  accuse  the  Lord  according  to 
their  former  manner,  denying  his  power  to  fulfil  his  ancient  covenant, 
and  give  them  the  land  that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey.  This  time 
the  Lord  lifted  his  hand  and  swore  that  they  should  not  enter  into  his 
No.  1,498. 


5C()  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PLT.PIT. 

rest.  Lefc  tu  be  warned  bj  this  fact,  that  there  is  a  limit  to  the  long- 
BufFerinor  of  God,  and  especially  when  it  is  tried  by  distrust.  He  may 
bear  with  unbelief  for  a  time,  and,  blessed  be  his  name,  for  a  lonj?  time, 
for  he  remembers  that  we  are  dust ;  but  when  it  comes  to  wilful  per- 
severance in  unbelief  the  Lord  will  not  for  ever  be  thus  proYoked.  It 
behoves  us  to  listen  to  the  words  of  Paul :  "  Let  us  therefore  fear,  lest,  a 
promise  bein^  left  us  of  entering  into  his  rest,  any  of  you  should  seem 
to  come  short  of  it." 

This  morning  my  one  subject  is  this  sin  of  unbelief,  which  I  desire 
to  deal  with  in  the  fear  of  Cfod  and  in  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit. 

I.  Our  first  head  shall  be — the  sin  of  Israel  is  here  definbd  : — "  How 
long  will  it  be  ere  they  believe  msT'  Observe  that  God's  account  of  all 
the  murmuring,  and  discouragement,  and  fear  which  these  people  felt 
was  simply  that  they  did  not  l^lieve  him.  They  doubtless  said  that  they 
were  naturally  afraid  of  their  enemies :  the  Anakim,  the  sons  of  the 
giants,  these  would  overtop  and  overcome  them.  They  seemed  like 
grasshoppers  in  the  si.2:ht  of  such  gigantic  beings,  and  therefore  they 
might  well  tremble.  Had  they  been  ordinary  men,  however  numerous 
their  bands,  they  declared  that  they  should  not  have  been  afraid ;  but 
these  huge  monsters  created  a  natural  and  unavoidable  fear.  *'  Xo/' 
says  God,  "  that  is  an  idle  excuse.  No  fear  of  giants  would  enter  their 
minds  if  they  believed  me.  How  long  will  it  be  ere  they  believe  meT* 
If  these  sons  of  Anak  had  been  ten  times  as  high  as  they  were,  yet  the 
almighty  Lord  could  vanquish  them,  and  if  their  cities  had  been  literally 
as  well  as  figuratively  walled  up  to  the  skies,  yet  Jehovah  could  smite 
them  out  of  heaven,  and  cast  their  ramparts  into  the  dust.  Gigantic  men 
and  battlemented  cities  are  nothing  to  him  who  divided  the  Red  Sea. 
When  the  Omnipotent  is  present  opposition  vanishes.  This  was  so  clear 
that,  if  the  Israelites  were  afraid,  the  real  reason  was  that  they  did  not 
believe  their  God.  Ho,  my  brethren,  let  us  strip  our  discoun^ments 
and  murmurings  of  all  their  disguises,  and  sec  them  in  their  true  charac^ 
ter,  and  they  will  appear  in  their  own  naked  deformity  as  discrediting 
God.  It  is  true  the  difficulty  before  us  may  appear  great,  bat  it 
cannot  be  great  to  the  Lord,  who  has  promised  to  make  us  more  than 
conquerors.  It  is  true  the  circumstances  may  appear  unusually  perplex- 
ing, but  they  cannot  perplex  him  who  has  promised  to  guide  us  with 
his  counsel ;  and,  since  we  are  well  aware  of  this,  it  is  clear  that  the 
true  reason  why  we  are  so  dismayed  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  difficulties 
and  the  circumstances,  but  in  our  misgivings  of  God. 

"  Ah,*'  but  these  people  might  have  replied,  "  we  fear  because  of  our 
our  weakness.  We  are  not  a  drilled  host,  like  the  armies  of  Egypt.  We 
know  not  how  to  fight  against  chariots  of  iron :  we  are  only  feeble  men. 
with  all  these  women  and  children  to  encumber  our  march.  We  cannot 
hope  to  drive  out  the  hordes  of  Amalekites  and  Canaanites.  A  sense  of 
weakness  is  the  cause  of  our  terror  and  complaint."  But  the  Lord  puts 
the  matter  very  differently.  Wliat  had  their  weakness  to  do  with  his 
promise  ?  IIow  could  their  weakness  affect  his  power  to  give  them  the 
land?  He  could  conquer  Amalek  if  they  could  not.  Caleb  had  told 
them,  "  If  the  Lord  delight  in  us,  then  he  will  bring  us  into  this  land.** 
They  knew  that  their  fcL'l)leness  had  not  prevented  the  Lord's  bringing 
them  out  of  Egypt,  despite  the  pride  and  power  of  Pharaoh,  and  they 


MISTRUST  OF  GOD  DEPLORKD  AND  DKNOUNCEDi  567 

must  have  known  that  he  conld  with  equal  ease  overthrow  the  Canaan* 
ites  and  their  armies.  Their  weakness  conld  only  be  a  foil  to  the  glory 
of  the  divine  power,  so  that  it  wonld  be  made  the  more  conspicuous. 
We  also,  when  we  plead  our  weakness,  ought  to  be  ashamed,  for  we  know 
that  we  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  us.  If  we 
probe  to  the  bottom  of  those  doubts  and  fears  which  apparently  arise  out 
of  a  sense  of  our  own  weakness,  we  shall  find  that  they  spring  from  mis- 
trust of  God.  Our  trembling  is  not  humility,  but  unbelief.  We  may 
mask  it  how  we  please,  but  that  is  the  state  of  the  case  as  God  sees  it, 
and  he  sees  it  in  tmth.  The  question  is  not,  "  How  long  will  they  bo 
weak?"  but  "  How  long  will  it  oe  ere  they  believe  me .*" 

"  No,  no,"  the  people  may  have  said,  "  we  are  not  murmuring  against 
God,  it  is  against  Moses  and  Aaron.  They  made  a  mistake  when  they 
brought  us  into  the  wilderness,  and  they  have  undertaken  an  enterprise 
which  they  cannot  carry  through:  we  blame  these  two  men  for  their 
foolhardiness."  But  the  Lord  would  not  have  it  so.  Moses  and  Aaron 
were  only  his  instruments,  and  mere  second  causes,  and  the  Lord  will 
not  allow  that  the  quarrel  is  with  them,  but  he  asks,  "  How  long  will 
it  be  ere  they  believe  nu?'^  Thus,  brethren,  we  sometimes  fix  upon 
our  fellow-man,  his  infirmity,  his  shortsightedness,  his  want  of  wisdom, 
and  we  say  that  we  do  not  doubt  God,  but  we  can  never  feel  secure  while 
our  leaders  or  our  friends  are  such  poor,  unwise  creatures.  If  you  put 
this  pretext  to  the  test  you  will  see  that  it  avails  nothing,  for  God  can 
use  what  instruments  he  pleases,  whether  Paul,  or  ApoUos,  or  Cephas, 
and  he  can  accomplish  his  purposes  despite  their  frailty.  His  word  is 
not  to  fall  to  the  ground  because  of  the  medium  through  which  he 
carries  it  into  effect.  Strip  our  distrust  of  the  agents  whom  Qoi  employs 
of  all  the  masks  with  which  it  seeks  to  disguise  itself,  and  it  comes  to 
this, — we  do  not  believe  God. 

Our  dreading  and  complaining  are  often  a  kind  of  practical  atheism. 
I  mean  this,  that  if  God  hath  pronounoed  a  promise  and  we  doubt  its 
fulfilment  from  any  cause  whatever,  we  think  and  feel  as  if  there  were 
no  God.  We  profess  to  believe  that  the  promises  of  Scripture  are  the 
promises  of  God  himself,  and  it  follows  that,  if  we  doubt  their  fulfilment, 
we  do  as  good  as  deny  the  godhead  of  the  promiser,  since  he  who  cannot 
or  will  not  keep  his  promises  cannot  be  God  at  all.  The  word  of  the 
true  God  has  been  proven  to  be  omnipotent  by  its  creating  force,  and 
therefore  promises  which  are  not  of  like  power  cannot  be  the  word  of 
the  one  almighty  God.  Dare  we  make  it  out  that  God  speaketh  frivo- 
lously, and  that  his  solemn  promises  are  like  the  folse  words  of  man, 
which  mock  the  ear  and  disappoint  the  hope  ?  Are  God*s  promises  like 
von  sere  leaves,  which  the  passing  wind  bears  into  forgetfulness  ?  Then 
1  say  that  such  a  God  is  no  God  at  all,  and  such  a  conception  sets  up  a 
false  god,  and  robs  the  true  God  of  his  essential  character.  Is  it  not  so  ? 
Sometimes  we  put  our  doubts  in  one  shape  and  sometimes  in  another, 
and  we  are  apt  to  claim  that  we  do  not  really  doubt  God — ^for  we  know 
that  he  both  can  and  will  keep  his  promises  as  a  rule — but  for  certain 
reasons  we  doubt  whether  he  will  keep  his  word  to  ua.  We  talk  of  our 
nnworthiness,  and  so  on,  but,  being  interpreted,  our  inmost  thought  is 
that  we  can  believe  anything  of  God  but  that  which  it  is  the  most 
necessary  for  us  to  believe.     We  believe  all  other  words  but  that  very 


568  HETHOPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

one  which  we  ate  mosb  called  upon  to  credit.  Strange  faith,  whidi 
will  exert  itself  everywhere  but  where  it  is  wanted !  We  claim  that 
if  things  were  otherwise  than  they  are  we  could  believe  God,  and 
what  is  this  but  to  say  that  under  existing  circumstances  we  do  not 
conceive  him  to  be  worthy  of  confidence.  He  who  doubts  that  par- 
ticular promise  which  God  speaketh  to  him  may  as  well  doubt  all  the 
rest,  since  they  all  hang  together,  and  they  are  either  all  of  them  false- 
hoods or  all  of  them  eternal  verities.  Yes,  this  is  the  essence  of  it,  our 
timorous  suspicions  of  any  one  promise  are  a  reflection  upon  the  Lord 
himself. 

So,  brethren,  I  come  back  to  that  first  point,  and  solemnly  declare 
that  though  our  doubts  and  fears  are  called  oftentimes  by  more  respect- 
able names,  because  we  do  not  like  to  see  their  sin  in  all  its  nakedn^s, 
yet  they  come  to  this,  that  we  do  not  believe  the  ever4)les8ed  God.  If 
we  look  at  our  discouragement  and  mistrust  in  this  light  we  shall  no 
longer  pity,  but  blame  ourselves,  and  instead  of  excusing  we  shall  aocnse 
our  heart  of  a  great  crime.  Mistrust  towards  God  is  not  a  mere 
weakness,  it  is  a  wickedness  of  the  gravest  order. 

II.  We  will  now  proceed,  in  the  seoond  place,  further  to  descuibe 
this  sin  of  not  believing. 

I  would  remark,  first,  that  at  tiie  first  blush  it  would  seem  incredihk 
that  there  should  be  such  a  thing  in  the  universe  as  unbelief  of  God. 
That  Grod  should  manifest  himself  to  man  so  as  to  make  a  promise  to 
him  is  indescribable  condescension.  One  would  think  that  the  high  and 
lofty  One  would  abide  in  his  eternal  silence,  or  conmiunicate  himself  to 
the  most  exalted  creatures,  rather  than  speak  to  such  a  being  as  man. 
What  is  man  that  God  should  be  mindful  of  him  and  speak  to  him  ? 
Yet  we  believe  that  the  Lord  has  spoken  to  us  often  by  his  prophet^  and 
in  these  last  days  by  his  Son.  Now,  if  an  angel  altogether  unaoquainted 
with  human  history  could  be  informed  that  (rod  had  spoken  to  men,  I 
imagine  that  his  astonishment  would  be  overwhelming  if  we*  also  in- 
formed him  that  men  have  disbelieved  him.  "What!"  he  would  say; 
"what!  dare  to  disbelieve  the  Lord!  Doubt  the  Lord,  whose  infinite 
love  stooped  to  speak  with  his  creature  !  God,  who  is  essential  truth, 
and  cannot  possibly  lie  nor  deceive,  have  there  been  creatures  vile  enough 
to  perpetrate  such  an  insult  upon  their  Maker,  their  Benefactor?  Can 
they  suspect  the  infinitely  pure  of  deceit  ?  Dare  they  question  the  truth 
of  the  perfect  One  whom  cherubim  adore  ?  *'  I  say  that  an  angel  would 
be  staggered  at  such  blasphemy.  Why,  look  ye,  sirs,  the  Lord  spoke  to 
nothingness,  and  out  came  this  globe,  swathed  in  the  swaddling  bands 
of  darkness.  He  spoke  again  and  forth  leaped  the  lights  and  aU  things 
were  quickened  into  life  and  clothed  with  beauty.  The  power  of  his 
word  was  all-creating ;  and  is  it  to  be  imagined  or  conceived  that  this 
word  can  be  a  lie  ?  Jehovah's  word  is  but  himself  in  action,  his  will 
making  itself  manifest ;  and  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  this  can  be  a  lie 
under  any  conceivable  circumstances  whatsoever?  My  brethren,  it  is 
sorrowful  to  have  to  confess  that  what  looks  like  inconceivable  blas- 
phemy has  nevertheless  been  perpetrated  abundantly  by  the  sons  of 
men.  Shame  on  our  race  that  ever  it  should  thus  have  insulted  the 
Most  High  God !  Oh,  the  incredible  infamy  which  lies  even  in  tlie 
bare  thought  of  calling  in  question  the  veracity  of  God.    It  is  so  vile. 


MISTRUST  OP  GOD  DEPtX)nED  AND  DENOUNCED.  569 

SO  unjust,  so  profane  a  thing  that  it  ought  to  be  regarded  with  horror, 
as  a  monstrous  wrong. 

Consider,  next,  that,  though  unbelief  certainly  exists,  it  is  a  most  un- 
reasonable  thing.  If  God  hath  made  a  promise,  on  what  groimds  do  we 
doubt  its  fulfilment?  Which  of  all  the  attributes  of  God  is  that  which 
comes  under  suspicion  ?  Probably  the  first  distrusted  attribute  will  be 
his  power.  Have  not  men  said,  "  Can  God  furnish  a  table  in  the  wilder- 
ness ?  or,  can  he  deliyer  us  out  of  the  deep  waters  ?  "  Let  us  think  of  this. 
Has  tiie  Lord  promised  to  supply  and  deliver  ?  Then,  my  dear  friend, 
do  you  really  in  your  sober  senses  question  the  power  of  God  to  do  as 
he  has  said  ?  Hath  he  not  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ?  Do  not 
all  things  subsist  by  his  continuous  power  ?  Is  anything  too  hard  for 
the  Lord  ?  Is  his  arm  shortened  that  he  cannot  save  ?  Is  his  hand 
paralysed  that  he  cannot  achieve  his  purpose  ?  The  more  we  consider 
the  supposition  that  God  is  unable  to  keep  his  promises,  the  more  we 
discard  it  with  indignation.  It  is  not  to  be  entertained  for  a  moment. 
What,  then,  is  it  God's  goodness  that  we  suspect  ?  After  he  hath  filled 
the  world  with  bounty,  and  multiplied  his  lovingkindnesses  to  his  crea- 
tures ;  above  all,  after  he  has  given  fix)m  his  bosom  his  only-begotten 
Son  to  die,  as  the  fulfilment  as  well  as  the  seal  of  the  great  promises  of 
his  covenant,  dare  we  question  his  goodness  ?  Do  we  call  God  evil  ? 
Do  we  impute  unkindness  to  him  ?  Let  horror  seize  us  at  the  suggestion 
of  such  a  thought ;  let  our  bones  quake  that  we  should  ever  tolerate 
the  hideous  libel  upon  him  whose  very  name  is  good :  for  what  is  "God" 
but  "good"  written  in  brief?  It  must  come  back  to  this  with  which  we 
started,  that  we  suspect  the  truth  of  God ;  and  yet  the  more  we  shall 
consider  the  supposition  the  more  we  shall  be  alarmed  by  its  blasphemous 
character.  Dost  thou  believe,  0  man,  the  creature  of  God,  that  thy 
Maker  can  belie  himself?  Dost  thou  imagine  that  he  can  forswear  him- 
self? With  reverence  do  I  speak  the  word,  and  awe  is  upon  me  as  I 
utter  it,  dost  thou  profanely  dream  that  he  can  perjure  himself?  Yet 
every  promise  of  his  is  virtually  sealed  with  that  oath  by  which  the 
covenant  is  confirmed.  He  has  lifted  his  hand  to  heaven  and  sworn  by 
himself,  because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  that  by  two  immutable 
things  wherein  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  lie  we  might  have  strong 
consolation.  Reason  itself  teaches  that  the  Judge  of  all  must  himse& 
be  just,  and  this  he  could  not  be  if  he  were  not  crue.  Truth  enters  into 
the  very  conception  of  God :  a  fialse  god  is  no  God.  Any  other  doubt 
in  the  world  may  plead  some  ground  and  warrant,  but  a  doubt  of  God's 
truthfulness  is  utterly  unreasonable,  and  if  sin  had  not  filled  man  with 
madness,  unbelief  would  never  find  harbour  in  a  single  bosom. 

Again,  because  this  sin  is  so  unreasonable,  it  is  also  most  vuxcusable. 
Let  me  try,  if  I  can,  to  frame  an  excuse  for  doubting  the  truthfulness  of 
the  Lord  our  Gbd.  Look  back  upon  your  own  experience,  and  take  with 
it  the  experience  of  all  men  that  have  ever  lived,  and  find  if  you  can  a 
single  instance  in  which  God  has  been  untrue  to  the  word  he  has  spoken. 
We  challenge  eternity  to  divulge  such  an  instance :  we  appeal  to  all 
mankind,  from  Adam  to  the  latest  born,  and  to  angels,  ay,  and  to  devils 
themselves,  to  produce  one  single  case  in  which  Jehovskh  has  turned 
from  promise  or  from  threatening  so  as  to  forfeit  his  word.  His  faith- 
:^ilne8s  is  indisputable,  the  ages  witness  it.    Now,  if  there  had  been  one 


570  HETROFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

instance,  we  might  be  justified  in  our  mi8givinj2:s.  If  we  conld  find  oue 
authenticated  case,  fiilly  established,  in  which  God  had  acted  contrary  ti) 
his  promise,  or  failed  to  keep  his  word,  then  might  we  lawfully  distrust, 
but  as  we  can  never  find  such  a  case,  what  excuse  can  we  make  ? 

Moreover,  when  a  man  is  suspected  of  untruthfulness  we  nsnallj  impnte 
to  him  some  motive  for  it ;  he  has  something  to  gain  by  the  lie,  and  there- 
fore we  suppose  he  will  prove  false.  But  what  motive  can  be  imputed 
to  the  Lora  Most  High  which  could  lead  him  to  forfeit  his  word  ?  He 
knows  all  things  from  the  beginning,  and  therefore,  even  if  it  were  snp- 
posable  that  to  keep  a  promise  would  be  inconvenient  to  himself,  be 
would  never  have  made  it,  for  he  must  have  foreseen  that  inconvenience. 
Ood  is  not  bound  to  promise,  and  therefore,  if  the  good  deed  were  not  to 
his  mind,  he  would  not  promise  to  perform  it.  Nor  has  God  changed. 
since  immutability  is  essential  to  his  oeing,  If,  therefore,  he  has  uttered 
a  word  you  may  rest  quite  sure  that  it  will  stand  fast :  an  unchangeable 
being  cannot  be  fickle,  and  run  back  from  his  promise.  Why,  my  friends, 
it  is  to  God's  glory  to  keep  his  word.  As  it  is  to  the  glory  of  every  man 
to  be  upright,  so  is  it  to  the  glory  and  honour  of  God  to  be  fiiithful  to 
his  solemn  declarations.  Even  on  the  lowest  conceivable  ground,  tbe 
Lord's  own  interests  are  bound  up  with  his  truth.  All  the  glory  of  his 
name  and  the  honour  of  his  divine  person  bend  towards  the  keeping  of 
his  word.  There  is  no  supposable  reason  why  the  Lord  should  not  be 
true :  how  dare  we  then,  without  the  slightest  cause,  cast  suspicion  upon 
the  truthfulness  of  the  Most  High  ? 

My  dear  brethren,  I  venture  to  say  that  unbelief  of  God's  word  ok^K 
therefore,  to  be  impossible.  It  ought  to  be  impossible  to  every  reverent- 
hearted  man.  Doth  he  know  God  and  tremble  in  his  presence,  and  shall 
he  think  of  distrusting  and  doubting  him  ?  No  one  that  hath  ever  seen 
him  in  contemplation,  and  bowed  before  hiui  in  sincere  adoration,  but 
must  be  amazed  at  the  impertinence  that  would  dare  to  think  that  God 
can  lie.  0  reverent  heart,  it  ought  to  be  to  thee  beyond  the  bound  of 
possibility  that  thou  shouldst  doubt  the  truth  of  the  promises  of  Go^  • 
And  this  ought  to  be  more  impossible  still,  if  such  an  expression  roaj  be 
used,  to  God's  own  children,  xou  could  not  make  a  true-hearted  child 
suspect  his  father  of  fiilsehood.  If  he  heard  such  an  accusation  brought 
against  a  loving  and  kind  father  he  would  be  indignant :  he  would  not 
want  to  hear  rebutting  evidence,  he  would  say, "  It  is  impossible ;  I  knov 
my  fiather,  I  know  his  character,  I  have  seen  him,  I  understand  him,  I 
cannot  endure  to  hear  him  slandered,  and  I  do  not  need  to  hear  bim 
defended,  for  of  this  I  am  sure— that  he  cannot  lie."  In  the  child's 
cose  there  might  be  a  partiality,  and  the  father  might  have  been  guilty ; 
but  in  the  case  of  the  children  of  God  no  such  possibility  exists,  for  our 
Father  is  the  God  of  truth.  Oh,  my  brethren,  shall  it  ever  be  said  that 
the  children  of  God  doubt  their  Father?  I  have  heard  some  professii  " 
Christians  say  that  they  find  it  hard  to  believe  his  promis^  and  j( 
tiiey  do  not  appear  to  think  that  they  have  said  a  dreaafol  thing:  J^^ 
very  dreadful  thing  it  is.  What  must  be  their  opinion  of  God  if  ^^ 
find  it  hard  to  believe  him  ?  Think  of  it  agam :  of  a  child  of  ^^^ 
finding  it  hard  to  believe  his  own  Father,  his  heavenly  Father! 
wretched  sin  I  Wretched  insult  to  God !  If  we  were  not  so  ialse-he« 
ourselves  we  should  never  dream  ol  the  Lord's  being  so,  and  if  "      ^ 


HISTBUST  OF  G.OD  DEPLORED  AKD  DENOUNCED.  571 

not  conscious  o*  being  chargeable  with  untrath,  the  thought  that  per- 
chance God  might  fail  to  fuSl  his  word  would  never  be  tolerated.  It  is 
honible !  If  it  has  crossed  your  mind,  scout  it,  and,  with  many  tears, 
confess  it  before  God ;  for  to  a  child  of  God  it  ought  to  be  impossible  to 
doubt  his  Father's  truthfulness. 

To  some  children  of  God  that  impossibility  ought  to  be  still  more 
striking,  because  certain  of  us  have  received  special  and  infallible  proofs 
of  the  Lord's  faithfuhiess  to  his  promises.  He  has  answered  the  prayers 
of  some  of  us  in  a  way  that  has  drowned  our  eyes  with  tears  of  joy.  He 
has  made  us  laugh  like  Sarah  when  the  child  of  promise  was  given  to 
her.  We  have  felt  amazed  at  the  mighty  goodness  of  our  God ;  and  for 
OS  to  doubt  now  should  be  impossible.  We  ought  to  settle  it  in  our 
minds  that,  come  what  may,  though  the  earth  were  removed  and  the 
mountains  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  sea,  though  everything  should  alter, 
and  the  laws  of  nature  should  be  changed,  and  day  and  night  forget 
their  time,  yet  would  we  never  suppose,  nor  allow  others  to  suppose, 
that  God  could  be  false  to  his  promises  and  break  his  word.  I  am  re- 
solved, and,  my  brethren,  you  will  join  with  me  in  it,  and  may  God  give 
us  grace  to  carry  it  out,  to  doubt  the  evidence  of  my  eyes,  but  not  to 
doubt  my  God,  for  our  eyes  have  often  deceived  us,  but  Jehovah  never. 
Light  may  play  tricks  with  these  poor  optics,  but  the  Lord  has  never 
spoken  to  mock  us,  nor  said  what  he  cannot  perform.  Resolve,  my 
brethren,  to  doubt  your  ears  and  deny  your  hearing  sooner  than  doubt 
your  God,  for  sounds  are  often  imaginair  and  ears  are  speedily  duped. 
Besolve  to  doubt  your  most  deliberate  judgment  rather  than  one  word  of 
the  Lord.  How  often  have  you  been  mistaken !  Even  when  according 
to  mathematical  calculation  it  seelns  as  certain  as  that  twice  two  make 
four  that  God  cannot  execute  his  word,  deny  the  mathematics  but  never 
doubt  God.  There  is  nothing  certain  under  heaven  but  God.  Uncer- 
tainty is  upon  all  things  but  upon  his  word.  If  you  consult  with  friends, 
and  in  their  judgment  they  all  unanimously  conclude  that  the  case  is 
hopeless,  and  that  the  promise  cannot  be  fulfilled,  reject  them  all,  and 
reftise  to  consult  with  flesh  and  blood.  Let  God  be  true  and  every  man 
a  liar,  yea,  and  every  thing  a  liar.  Doubt  as  much  as  you  please  your 
own  feelings,  it  is  seldom  that  they  are  to  be  relied  upon :  mistrust,  as  I 
have  already  said,  your  own  senses,  they  are  but  very  fallible  reporters 
of  fact,  bat  never  distrust  your  God.  If  devils,  or  even  angels,  could 
stand  in  squadrons  and  swear  unanimously  that  God  had  failed,  call  them 
liars  too ;  for  God  cannot,  cannot,  cannot  lie.  The  things  which  are 
seen  are,  after  all,  but  mere  shadows  and  dependent  for  their  appearing 
and  continuing  upon  the  Lord  alone ;  why,  then,  confide  in  them  at  the 
expense  of  your  confidence  in  God  ?  God  only  is,  and  when  you  have 
no  hope  but  in  him  alone  you  have  all  the  hope  worth  having.  They  say 
of  us  who  trust  in  God  alone  that  we  have  nothing  to  look  to.  Our 
answer  is  that  faith  in  the  unseen  God  is  the  highest  reason,  and  is 
grounded  on  the  surest  fact.  His  unseen  arm  is  stronger  than  all  that 
angel  or  human  eye  can  ever  see,  and  there  is  more  potency  in  God,  who 
18  neither  to  be  heard  nor  seen,  than  in  all  the  crash  of  whirlwinds  or  the 
glare  of  tempests.  There  is  no  power  but  in  him,  and  therefore  no 
certainty  of  infallible  truth  but  in  the  word  which  he  has  spoken. 

Look  ye,  sii-s,  every  promise  in  God's  word  comes  to  you,  first,  from 


572  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  POfcPIT. 

tlic  Father's  lip;  Tvili  yon  doubt  him?  It  next  comefl  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  ivho  reveals  it ;  will  yoa  donbt  him  ?  Beivnre  le«t  ye  sin  againat 
the  Holy  Ghost.  It  comes  next  sealed  with  the  blood  of  Jesus ;  will  yoo 
doubt  him — will  yon  suspect  yonr  Saviour  ?  A  single  doubt  of  a  promise 
of  God  casts  a  sti<!;mii  upon  Fatlior.  Son,  and  Holy  Qhost,  and  is  a  triple 
transgression  a^rninst  the  triimc  God.  0  the  venom  that  lies  in  a  dngle 
8ng)icion  of  the  Most  High ! 

It  is  strange  how  yon  and  I  can  enter  into  confidence  and  otrnvictioa 
about  many  things,  and  yet  we  cannot  exercise  the  same  confideooe 
towards  our  God.  You  all  believe  in  the  laws  of  niatt«r.  Ton  eicpeet 
that  the  law  of  gmTitation  will  bring  a  weight  downward  if  yon  throw 
it  from  the  window ;  why  are  you  so  certain  ?  Because  yoa  haxe  wcd 
the  rule  in  action  so  often  that  you  now  expect  to  see  it  carried  ont :  and 
yet  the  law  of  gravitation  might  be  suspended ;  indeed,  it  has  beeti  soi- 
pended,  for  at  the  Red  Sea  the  floods  stood  upright  as  an  heiq>,  and  the 
depths  were  congealed  in  the  heart  of  the  eea.  You  all  expect  the  son 
to  rise  in  the  morning  and  to  set  at  his  ^pointed  time,  becaoee  he  has 
kept  his  daily  marclies  for  many  years ;  and  yet  there  was  a  time  what 
there  was  no  sun  to  rise  or  set,  and  there  will  be  a  time  when  the  aim 
shall  be  turned  into  darkness,  and  day  and  night  shall  cease.  Can  yoo 
trust  the  temporary  and  yet  doubt  the  eternal  ?  Yon  all  expect  the 
seasons  of  the  year  to  come  and  go,  but  they  might  be  reversed  by  God 
right  easily.  Noiv,  if  we  can  believe  in  the  lawB  of  nature,  which  are 
evidently  changeable,  and  which  will  one  day  certainly  come  to  an  ead, 
how  is  it  that  we  cannot  beheve  in  God  whose  regularity  in  the  keepisg 
of  his  promises  has  been  as  great  ae  the  regularity  of  day  and  night,  or 
seed  time  and  harvest,  cold  and  heat,  and  ivhose  permanent  immutability 
will  run  on  throughout  eternity?  0  that  we  were  wise!  0  that  we 
were  commonly  honest  with  God,  and  spoke  of  him  as  we  have  foimd 
him!  Then  we  should  doubt  him  no  more,  but  abide  in  fixed  and 
Btead^t  confidence.     0  Holy  Spirit,  work  ns  to  this  end! 

III.  This  brings  me,  in  the  third  place,  to  dwell  npon  this  sin  very 
much  in  the  same  way,  only  ivith  this  heading. — the  sin  bitterly 
DEPLORED.  We  have  all  been  guilty  of  it.  Some  here  are  living  con- 
stantly in  the  commission  of  it.  But  what  I  want  to  caU  to  your 
remembrance  is  this,  that  in  any  one  caee  of  doubting  the  trutfaiuliteas 
of  God  there  is  the  full  venom  of  the  entire  sin  of  unbelief  That  is  to 
flay;  if  you  distrust  the  Lord  in  one,  you  donbt  him  altogethw.  Yonaay 
that  you  can  believe  the  Lord  about  other  things,  but  there  is  one  par- 
ticular point  which  staggers  you.  But  is  it  not  clear  that  the  man 
who  is  convicted  of  one  falsehood  is  no  longer  trastworthy  ?  The 
Scripture  calls  him,  "God  who  cannot  lie."  Do  yon  think  he  can  UeoQCCi 
then  he  can  lie  and  the  Scriptnre  is  broken  ?  "  Ah,  but  I  mean  he  may 
not  keep  his  promise  tome;  I  am  such  an  unworthy  person."  Yes,  but 
when  a  man  forfeits  his  word  it  is  no  defence  for  him  to  say,  "I  told  an 
untruth,  but  it  was  only  to  an  unworthy  person."  No,  the  truth  must  be 
spoken  iiTespective  of  persons.  I  have  no  right  to  deceive  even  a 
criminal.  Do  you  dare  say  that  to  one  person  Vob  Lord  can  bo  untrue? 
If  it  can  be  so,  he  16  not  a  true  God  any  more  ?  It  only  wanta  one 
falsehood,  one  breach  of  promise,  one  lie  to  be  proved,  and  yon  hare 
smitten  the  character  of  the  accused  to  the  very  heart ;  you  wonld  not 


MISTRUST  OF  GOD  DEPLORED  AKD  DENOUNCED.  573 

dream  of  doing  such  a  thin.^^  to  the  great  God.  Yoa  may  as  well  doubt 
him  about  ereiything  if  joii  distrust  him  upon  any  one  matter.  Oet  but 
the  promise  from  God,  and  there  is  an  infallible  necessity  that  he  shall 
keep  it)  be  it  a  little  promise  or  a  great  one,  for  the  character  of  a 
truthfiil  being  is  all  square,  and  he  is-  Mm  in  nothing. 

Do  you  reply  that  you  doubted  him  upon  a  veiy  trivial  matter,  and  it 
was  only  a  httle  mistrust  ?  Alas,  there  is  a  world  of  iniquity  in  the 
faintest  discredit  of  the  thrice-holy  Lord.  Reflect,  then,  with  sorrow 
that  we  have  been  guilty  of  this  sin,  not  once,  but  a  great  many  times. 
Timorousness  and  suspicion  spring  up  in  some  bosoms  like  weeds  in  the 
farrows.  They  sing  the  Lord's  praises  for  a  great  deliverance  just  ex- 
perienced, but  the  next  cloud  which  darkens  the  sky  fills  them  with  fear, 
and  they  again  mistrust  divine  love.  Their  heavenly  Father  delivers  tiiem, 
and  helps  them,  and  comforts  them,  and  they  say  they  will  never  doubt 
again,  but  in  a  short  time  another  trial  looms  in  the  distance,  and  they 
are  despondent  and  dismayed.  Now,  I  will  read  to  you,  and  I  will  read 
to  myself  these  words  of  God,  which  make  up  our  text :  "  How  long  will 
this  people  provoke  me  ?  and  how  long  will  it  be  ere  they  believe  me, 
for  all  the  signs  which  I  have  showed  among  them?" 

Another  thought  upon  this  point,  and  it  is  this :  are  there  not  some 
professing  people  of  God  who  do  not  seem  to  live  a  life  of  faith  at 
all  ?  I  mean  some  who  have  no  faith  about  their  temporal  circumstances 
at  all,  and  almost  look  upon  living  by  faith  as  if  it  were  a  kind  oi 
fanaticism  which  they  admit  to  be  very  pious  and  good,  but  they 
can  never  come  up  to  it.  Yet  faith  should  be  an  evcry-day  thing  with 
us.  In  the  life  of  Abraham  how  few  acts  are  mentioned  of  outward 
religion,  of  long  retirements,  fasts,  public  services,  sacraments^  and  so 
forth,  but  how  olear  it  is  that  his  daily  secular  and  domestic  life  was 
a  living  unto  God  as  a  pilgrim  and  a  sojourner  with  him.  There  is  no 
visible  line  between  secular  and  sacred  in  the  patriarch's  life :  it  was  all 
sacred.  It  is  an  evil  distinction  which  saith  so  far  is  spiritual  and  so  far 
is  secular.  My  brethren,  your  whole  lives  must  be  spiritual  lives,  there 
must  be  faith  in  God  about  your  home,  your  families,  and  your  neigh- 
bours. Some  look  upon  faidi  as  a  kind  of  Sunday  grace  to  be  laid  up 
in  the  ark  of  the  covenant  with  Aaron's  rod;  but,  indeed,  it  is  an 
every-day  faculty,  a  grace  for  the  table,  a  grace  for  the  cupboard,  a 
grace  for  the  pocket,  a  grace  for  the  market,  a  grace  for  the  nursery,  and 
a  grace  for  the  sick  bed.  The  life  of  God's  people  is  not  to  be  lived 
within  the  four  narrow  walls  of  a  meeting-house,  it  is  lived  wherever  they 
are,  for  in  every  place  the  just  shall  live  by  faith.  The  religion  of  a 
Christian  is  to  be  the  whole  of  his  life,  and  faith  is  to  run  through  it 
like  a  thread  through  a  necklace  of  coral.  We  are  to  beheve  God  aa 
much  when  ho  saith  "Thy  bread  shall  be  given  thee  and  thy  water  shall 
be  sure,"  as  when  he  saith,  "  He  that  believe th  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved."  Oh,  for  more  household  faith,  more  Saturday  faith,  more  real 
&ith !  Let  us  blush,  and  never  cease  to  blush,  that  we  have  had  so 
little  of  it. 

IV.  Lastly,  as  we  have  now  deplored  this  sin,  we  shall  conclude  by 
spending  a  moment  or  two  in  heartily  denouncing  it. 

This  sin  of  unbelief,  if  there  were  no  other  reason  for  denouncing  it, 
let  it  be  reprobated  because  it  insults  God,    I  feel  an  infinite  enmity  to 


574  HETROi'OLITAK  TABBUNAa^E  PULPIT. 

unbelief  because  it  so  terribly  misrepresents  and  calnmniates  my  God. 
If  any  man  were  to  say  to  me  "  Your  &ther  breaks  his  word,"  I  would 
not  suffer  the  accuser  to  go  unanswered ;  and  assuredly  I  cannot  be  silent 
when  my  heavenly  Father  is  thus  slandered.  Our  race  fell  by  betieTin^ 
the  old  dragon's  base  charge  against  God  when  he  said  to  the  woman  in  his 
vile  serpentine  language,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die."  He  thus  gave  God 
the  lie.  Away  with  thee,  thou  subtle  serpent !  Away  with  thee !  Go 
and  eat  the  dust  that  is  thy  predestinated  meat ;  for  God  cannot  speak 
that  which  is  not  true ;  he  is  truth  itself.  How  greatly  does  nnl^Uef 
dishonour  the  Lord!  What  shame  it  casts  upon  the  splendour  of  his 
name!  Alas,  that  there  should  be  going  up  and  down  this  worid 
creatures  denying  the  existence  of  their  Creator,  and  other  beings  who 
admit  that  there  is  a  God,  and  believe  that  he  has  spoken  and  given 
promise  of  good  things  to  come,  but  treat  his  word  as  if  it  were  worth- 
less and  unfit  to  be  trusted.  Oh,  hateful,  abominable,  loathsome  mistrust^ 
which  dares  to  treat  the  Lord  as  unworthy  to  be  believed. 

This  is  sufficient  reason  for  denouncing  it,  and  yet  since  weaker  reasons 
may  perhaps  help  the  stronger,  let  me  mention  that  we  are  bound  to  bate 
unbelief  because  it  is  the  ruin  offM  great  mass  of  our  race.  Why  are  men 
lost  ?  All  their  sins  which  they  have  done  cannot  destroy  them  if  they 
believe  in  Jeeus,  but  the  damning  point  is  that  they  will  not  believe  in 
him.  Thus  saith  the  Scriptures — **  He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned 
already."  Why?  '*  Because  he  hath  not  believed  on  the  Son  of  Grod.*' 
God  himself  hangeth  on  a  tree  in  human  form,  and  bleeds  to  death 
bearing  the  sin  of  man,  and  yet  men  turn  their  backs  on  this  infinite 
display  of  love,  and  refuse  to  believe  it,  and  therefore  do  they  sink  to 
death  and  hell.  I  look  upon  the  myriads  now  in  oncer  darkness  and  I 
ask,  "  Who  slew  all  these  ?  "  The  answer  is,  **  They  could  not  enter 
into  heaven  because  of  unbelief ;  they  perished  because  they  would  not 
believe  in  the  testimony  of  God  concerning  reconciliation  by  the  blood 
of  his  Son."    May  we  not  well  hate  this  murderous  unbelief? 

We  may  hate  it,  again,  because  it  hrmgs  so  much  misery  and  weak- 
ness upon  the  children  of  Ood.  Mj  brethren,  if  we  believed  God*s  pro- 
mises we  should  no  longer  be  bowed  down  with  sorrow,  for  our  »>itow 
would  be  turned  into  joy.  We  should  glory  in  our  infirmities — ^yea,  we 
should  glory  in  tribulation  also,  seeing  the  good  result  which  the  Lord 
bringeth  forth  from  them.  The  man  who  steadily  believes  his  God  is 
calm,  quiet,  and  strong.  If  men  fail  him  his  God  supports  him.  Sup- 
pose his  business  flEiils  him,  his  chief  business  is  to  serve  his  God,  and 
that  has  not  failed.  If  he  is  himself  sick  and  racked  with  pain  he  re- 
signs himself  to  the  great  Father's  chastening  hand,  and  patience  is 
given.  If  health  is  utterly  failing  he  leaves  himself  with  Qod,  that  he 
may  take  down  his  tabernacle  curtain  by  curtain,  confident  that  he  will 
build  it  again  in  nobler  form.  When  death  approaches  he  so  fully 
believes  in  God  that  he  feels  it  will  be  gain  to  him  to  pass  out  of  this 
state  of  trial  into  everlasting  blessedness  at  the  Lord's  nght  hand ;  and 
so  he  is  always  happy.  How  strong  such  a  man  becomes :  the  weakness 
which  comes  of  fear  and  trembling  does  not  touch  him,  his  heart  is 
fixed,  and  therefore  he  has  all  his  strength  under  control,  and  can  bring 
it  to  bear  upon  the  place  where  it  is  needed.  I  do  not  know  whether  you 
have  thought  of  the  prowess  of  Samson.    His  is  a  very  poor  character  in 


MISTRUST  OF  GOD  DEPLORED  AND  DENOUNCED.       575 

many  aspects,  but  yet  what  a  true  hero  he  is  when  you  view  him  in  the 
light  of  his  faith.  It  was  not  that  he  was  physically  strong  by  nature, 
bat  that  he  believed  God,  and  strength  came  upon  him.  As  a  believer 
in  God  he  trusted  that  the  Lord  could  make  his  thews  and  muscles 
strong  enough  for  any  task  which  was  allotted  him,  and  so  when  the 
gates  of  Gaza  shut  him  in  he  rose  up  trom  his  sleep  and  bowed  himself 
before  the  huge  doors,  and  with  a  mighty  tug  uplifled  them ;  and  as  the 
bars  were  fastened  to  the  posts  he  pulled  up  posts  and  all,  and  carried  the 
whole  away  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  not  as  a  feat  of  herculean  strength, 
bat  as  an  act  of  Mth  in  God.  But  now  the  Philistines  are  upon  him ; 
he  is  upon  a  rock,  and  cannot  escape.  He  believes  in  God  and  he  quails 
not  before  the  host.  There  are  a  thousand  of  the  enemy,  and  he  is  but 
one  ;  he  looks  for  a  weapon  and  there  is  nothing  handy  for  him  to  fighl 
with  but  a  dried  bone,  which  once  had  made  the  jaw  of  an  ass.  What 
matters  ?  He  trusts  in  God  and  not  in  the  weapon.  See  how  the  Philis- 
tines fly  before  him,  or  would  do  so  if  they  coula,  for  with  foot,  and  knee, 
and  hand  he  is  upon  them,  and  his  terrible  arm  sweeps  them  down  in 
rows.  This  great  child-man  was  a  terrible  believer,  and  when  the  divine 
fury  of  his  faith  was  upon  him  he  was  altogether  irresistible.  Odds  he 
never  reckoned,  nor  staggered  at  the  promise  through  unbelief.  It  was  a 
grand  deed  for  one  man  to  fling  himself  upon  a  thousand.  I  like  him 
better  in  such  silent  daring  than  even  when  he  cries, "  Heaps  upon  heaps, 
with  the  jawbone  of  an  ass  have  I  slain  a  thousand  men."  Only  believe 
God  and  you  can  do  anytliing.  If  the  Lord  should  bid  you  shake  the 
world  you  could  do  it  by  faith.  Plucking  up  sycamore  trees  by  the 
roots,  and  hurling  mountains  into  the  sea,  arc  mere  sport  for  faith,  which 
ere  now  has  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness,  stopped  the 
mouths  of  lions,  and  quenched  the  violence  of  fire.  She  hath  grander 
things  to  do  than  the  mere  slaying  of  Philistines,  for  she  wrestles  with 
principalities,  and  powers,  and  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places,  and 
comes  off  more  than  conqueror  through  him  that  loved  her. 

And  yet,  my  friend,  you  are  hiding  in  the  rear  ?  You  are  lying  in 
the  ambulance :  you  are  being  nursed  and  cared  for  as  a  babe !  Shall 
it  always  be  so  ?  Will  you  for  ever  be  a  mere  child  ?  If  you  do  not 
believe  you  will  never  grow  strong,  but  he  that  believeth  comes  to  the 
full  development  of  that,  celestial  manhood  which  is  akin  to  the  manhood 
of  the  Christ  of  God  in  whom  we  live. 

One  very  shocking  point  about  this  unbelief  is  that  it  has  hampei'ed 
iJie  work  of  Christ  in  the  world.  The  Christ  that  can  save  is  a  Christ 
believed  in,  but  of  a  Christ  who  is  not  believed  in  it  is  written — "  He 
did  not  many  mighty  works  there  because  of  their  unbelief."  The 
reason  why  at  this  time  whole  nations  lie  under  popery  or  heathenism  is 
that  the  church  has  not  faitli  enough  for  their  conquest.  There  is 
no  straitening  in  God  ;  our  limit  lies  in  our  own  timorous  hearts.  The 
first  thing  to  be  done  is  for  Zion  to  believe  in  God,  and  then  the  rod  of 
his  strength  shall  go  forth  out  of  her  midst,  and  she  shall  become 
"  Fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with 
banners."  If  the  Son  of  man  should  now  come  on  the  earth,  where 
would  he  find  faith?  Where  could  he  discover  a  high  degree  of  it? 
You  know  what  most  churches  do ;  there  is  the  regular  performance  of 
divine  service ;  the  regular  preaching  of  an  orthodox  sermon  as  dry  as  it  is 


576  METUOVOLITAN  TABKRNACLS  J-aLPtT. 

orthodox ;  the  regalar  meeting  of  a  few  people  for  a  prajer-meetJng,  in 
which  there  is  no  real  prayer ;  and  the  regular  revolution  of  a  spiritual 
barrel  organ,  from  which  all  spirituality  has  long  ago  been  ground  out 
Nothing  comes  of  this  lifeless  routine,  and  it  was  never  likely  tiiat  there 
could  be  anything,  tor  out  of  death  death  alone  can  come.  When  we  began 
to  preach  in  faith,  believing  that  men  must  be  saved  by  the  gospel,  tiiej 
will  be  saved  by  it.  When  we  go  torth  to  battle  confident  that  the 
weapon  of  the  gospel  in  the  hand  of  God  cannot  faO,  it  will  not  fail. 
It  is  want  of  faith  on  our  part  which  causes  the  eternal  God  to  put  his 
right  hand  into  his  bosom,  and  keep  it  there.  When  once  tbe  Holy 
Spirit  has  wrought  a  mighty  faith  in  us,  and  we  shall  never  have  it  tiH 
he  does,  then  will  the  Lord  lay  bare  his  arm,  and  we  shall  see  mar- 
vellous things.  His  own  right  hand  and  his  holy  arm  will  get  unto 
him  the  victory.  The  world  has  never  seen  since  apostolic  times  what 
yet  shall  happen  in  our  own  day  if  we  will  but  believe.  If  we  will  but 
confide  in  God  our  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and  our  old  men  shall 
dream  dreams,  and  then  shall  be  poured  out  upon  the  Lord's  servants 
and  handmaidens  of  his  own  Spirit,  and  they  shall  prophesy.  Then  will 
the  world  wake  up,  and  cry,  '^  The  old  fanaticism  has  come  back.  These 
men  are  drunk  with  new  wine."  It  will  only  be  that  they  speak  as  the 
Spirit  gives  them  utterance,  for  he  works  mightily  where  faith  is  mighty, 
and  he  is  restrained  because  of  this  wretched,  wicked,  insulting,  blas- 
phemous unbelief  of  ours  that  will  persist  in  suspecting  the  Lord. 

Forward,  brethren.  God  the  Holy  Ghost  helping  you,  resolve  in  your 
hearts  this  day  that  all  the  boasted  discoveries  of  science  you  will  doubt^ 
all  the  affirmations  of  the  wise  you  will  doubt,  all  the  speculations  of 
great  thinkers  you  will  doubt,  all  your  own  feelings  and  idl  the  oondu- 
sions  drawn  from  outwaixl  circumstances  you  will  doubt,  yea,  and  every- 
thing that  seems  to  be  demonstrable  to  a  certainty  you  will  doubt,  but 
never,  never,  never,  while  eternity  shall  last,  will  you  suffer  the  thought 
to  pass  your  mind  that  God  can  ever  in  the  least  degree  run  back  firom 
anything  that  he  has  spoken,  or  change  the  word  that  hath  gone  forth 
of  his  lips. 

Thus  have  I  spoken  for  him :  may  his  Holy  Spirit  make  it  powerful 
on  your  minds,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


PoBTiONS  OP  Scriptuhb  bead  before  Sermon — Numbers  xiii. 
20—38,  xiv.  1—25;  Hebrews  iii.  7—19. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 192,  229,  670. 


The  October  number  of  "The  Sword  and  the  Trowel"  contains  a  Seimon 
by  Mr.  Thomas  Spurgeon,  with  a  Portrait.  Price  Sd.  of  all  Bookaellers, 
or  post  free  of  the  Publishers  for  four  stamps. 


^^it(i>|0liten  ^i^mMt  fuljjit. 


THE  TEACHING  OP  THE  FOOT-WASHING. 


t 


DSLIYEBED   ON  LorD'S-DAY  MOBNING,  OCTOBER  12TH,   1879,  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  HETROFOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  KEWINGTOK« 


**  Jmoi  knowing  ibat  the  Father  had  giren  all  things  into  his  hands,  and  that  he 
was  come  from  (tod,  and  went  to  Gk>d ;  he  riseth  from  supper,  and  laid  aside  his 
garments ;  and  took  a  towel,  and  girded  himself.  After  that  he  poureth  water  into 
a  bason,  and  began  to  wash  the  dbciples'  feet,  and  to  wipe  them  with  the  towel 
wherewith  he  was  girded/'— John  xiiL  8—5. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  true  text  of  this  enacted  sermon  of  the  foot- 
^vashing  is  to  be  found  in  the  first  Terse  of  the  chapter :  ''  Having  loved 
his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end."  Our 
Lord  washed  the  feet  of  his  disciples  to  show  that  to  the^last  moment 
of  his  intercourse  with  them  he  was  full  of  the  deepest  and  truest  love 
to  them,  and  was  willing  to  perform  the  most  menial  action  for  their 
good.  Nor  was  this  all,  for  we  may  regard  that  one  condescending  act  as 
the  pledge  and  type  of  his  daily  kindness  towards  all  his  own  which  are 
in  the  world.  Those  deeds  of  love,  which  the  foot-washing  sets  forth, 
are  continuous  among  us,  and  are  the  sure  tokens  of  his  abiding  love  to 
u&  Our  Lord's  affection  for  his  people  is  not  a  transient  passion.  He 
loved  them  or  ever  the  earth  was,  he  continues  still  to  lov«  them,  and  he 
always  will  love  them  when  these  heavens  and  this  earth  shall  have 
passed  away.  In  token  of  the  continuance  of  his  love,  he  has  left  on 
record  this  washing  of  his  disciples'  feet,  not  because  he  did  it  once  only, 
but  because  it  is  the  type  of  what  he  is  always  doing.    Even  in  his 

f^lory  he  is  caring  for  his  saints  with  that  same  condescending  love  which 
ed  him  to  wash  their  feet,  and  he  is  acting  towards  them  spiritually  in 
the  sel&ame  way. 

The  love  of  Christ  will  assuredly  endure  all  the  strain  that  can  ever 
he  put  upon  it,  for  at  the  time  when  he  acted  as  menial  servant  to  his 
disciples  nis  love  was  enduring,  and  enduring  right  gloriously,  three  great 
trials,  anyone  of  which  might  have  broken  it  had  it  not  been  altogether 
omnipotent.  For,  first,  he  was  about  to  ^o  away  from  them.  Much  of 
human  love  needs  the  presence  of  its  object  for  its  maintenance ;  it  is, 
alas,  seldom  true  that  "  absence  makes  the  heart  grow  fonder."  Jesus 
was  about  to  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father,  and,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  one  brief  interval,  he  was  no  11^91:9  to  walk  in  the  midst  of  his 
Nos,  1,499-1,600.  


578  M^ROPOLITAK  TABBRKACUB  PtTLriT. 

chosen,  or  sit  at  taUe  vith  thetiu    Ont  of  sighl^  however,  they  ¥n>tM  not 

be  out  of  mind.  Though  he  was  just  about  to  take  the  last  terrible 
journey  of  death,  yet  he  forgot  them  not,  but  graciously  made  them  see 
that  he  would  remember  them  stiil.  If  you  will  romeraber  the  style  of  his 
going,  his  thonghtfulness  of  his  friendb  becomes  the  more  remarkable. 
He  was  about  to  leave  them  .by  a  cruel  and  ignominious  death,  ami 
according  to  the  common  conduct  of  men  it  would  not  have  been  won- 
derful if  he  had  sought  pity  and  comfort  from  his  friends ;  instead  of 
which,  he  forgot  himself  and  all  the  pain,  and  grief,  and  death  which  lay 
before  him,  and  spent  all  his  time  and  strength  upon  the  comfort  and 
establishment  of  his  followers.  When  he  knew  that  the  hour  was  oomc 
when  he  must  depart  out  of  the  world  with  pangs  unutterable,  he  still 
loved  his  own  witn  an  alKabsorbing  love.  There  wbb  much  in  the  pros- 
pect of  his  grievous  departure  which  might  for  a  season  have  diverteti 
nis  thoughts  from  them ;  but  they  lay  so  close  to  the  centi'e  of  his  soul 
that  even  under  such  circumstances  he  washed  their  feet. 

Next,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  that  our  Lord  was  well  aware  that  one 
of  them  had  already  entertained  the  idea  of  betraying  him.  There  sat 
one  at  the  table  who  had  held  a  secret  interview  with  the  Pharisees  and 
chief  priests^  and  had  taken  money  as  a  bribe  for  his  Master's  blood. 
Tou  cannot  so  dissociate  a  leading  disciple  firom  the  rest  as  not  to  feel 
that  the  whole  band  was  thereby  disgraced,  and  the  Lord  might  veiy 
well  have  said,  "I  will  discard  my  apostles,  for  they  have  betrayed  me"; 
especially  when  you  recollect  that  those  who  did  not  sell  him  or  betray 
him  nevertheless  all  forsook  him  and  fled, — forsook  him  when  they  ought 
to  have  rallied  round  him,  and  have  spoken  up  for  him  at  the  judgment- 
seat.  None  of  them  appeared  in  answer  to  the  question,  "  Who  shall 
declare  his  generation  ?  Like  timid  hares,  they  fled  at  the  first  bark 
of  the  dogs.  It  would  not  have  been  wonderful,  had  his  been  a  human 
love,  if  he  had  said,  "  They  are  unworthy  of  me :  their  confidence  dies 
out  when  they  see  my  sorrow :  they  betray  me,  they  forsake  me,  there- 
fore I  will  let  them  go,  and  care  for  them  no  more."  No,  but  knowinjc 
what  they  were,  our  Lord  took  a  towel  and  girded  himself  and  washed 
their  feet,  ay,  washed  the  traitor's  feet,  and  gently  handled  tJiat  heel 
which  had  been  lilted  up  against  him ;  washing  from  it  the  dust  gathered 
in  its  secret  walk  upon  the  traitor's  errand. 

"  The  sight  might  kings  themselves  convert, 
tjod  only  could  so  far  submit : 
^tftti  is  in  the  traitor's  heart, 
The  Lord  Most  High  is  at  his  feet** 

Tliis  act  of  tender,  considerate  affection,  performed  nnder  such  drctira- 
stances,  to  men  who  acted  towards  him  in  such  ungenerous  style,  proves 
to  us  that  his  love  will  bear  the  strain  of  our  ill-behaviour,  our  want  of 
fidelity,  and  our  thousand  grievous  failures.  Having  loved  his  o\tu, 
which  are  in  the  world,  he  loves  them  to  the  end. 

There  was  a  third  Strain,  and  a  powerftil  one,  too.  Our  Saviour  knew 
that  the  Father  had  committed  all  things  into  his  hands,  he  knew  that 
there  was  but  a  brief  interval  before  he  should  die,  and  then  he  would 
ascend  to  the  Father's  right  hand,  and  sit  there  eternally  as  God  o^-er  all, 
blessed  for  evermore,  yet  he  did  not  disdain  to  do  a  slave's  work  for  his 
beloTied  ones.   -Oftentimes  drcumstanoes  alter  affections.    A  man  ^[rows 


THE  TEACHING  OF  THE  FOOT-WASHINO.  579 

rich  and  greafc,  and  &>rgefcs  his  friends.  This  we  would  nofc  suspecfc  of  JesoA 
if  his  had  not  been  a  greater  chwige  than  we  mortals  can  possibly 
experience;  bnt  his  was  a  surpassing  accession  of  glory:  from  being 
planned  in  ignominy  and  shame  he  was  exalted  to  receive  tlie  homage  ot 
ange»»  and  the  adoration  of  the  whole  aniyerse.  One  would  think  that  in 
the  prospect  of  nich  honours,  though  he  loved  bis  own,  he  would  not  so  love 
than  aa  to  become  their  servit(»:,and  all  in  disarray  stoop  down  before  themi 
even  to  their  feet,  and  do  the  service  of  a  bondsman.  No  wonder  that 
Peter  raised  an  objection  suggested  by  reverential  awe»  Who  could 
without  protest  receive  suoh  humble  service  from  such  hands  ?  Yet  our 
Lord  did  this  with  heaven's  supernal  glory  descending  on  him  I  He 
disrobed  himself,  though  angels  longed  to  cast  the  imperial  purple  about 
his  shoulders.  With  all  things  in  his  hand,  be  yet  took  a  towel  and 
wiped  the  disciples'  feet. 

Beloved,  if  our  Lord's  love  bw<e  these  three  strains,  we  may/ like  the 
apoetie,  be  persuaded  that  neither  death  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  princi- 
palities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height, 
nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  Qod  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

I  invite  you  bow,  tberrfore,  to  see  your  Saviour's  enduring  and  con- 
tinuing love  as  set  forth  to  us  in  tiiis  symbolic  washing  of  his  disciples' 
feet,  and  in  like  acts  of  which  it  is  an  emblem.  I  shaU  ask  you  to  view 
it,  first,  as  thfi  it/pe  of  his  eanUrvmus  love;  and  secondly,  as  the  example  of 
thai  love  as  it  should  be  reflected  by  his  people.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  be 
our  interpreter,  and  open  to  us  this  choioe  cabinet  of  love-tokens. 

I.    First :  We  will  look  upon  this  washing  of  the  disciples'  feet  as 

THE  TYPE  OF  OUE  LoBD'B  COJrTINUOUS  LOVE  TO  US.  We  will  view 
it  in  four  lights.  First,  ChHst  Jestis  still  acts  as  the  host  of  his  people. 
Has  it  never  struck  you  how  much  the  life  of  Christ  with  his  people 
lay  in  intense  familiarity  with  them  ?  How  in  common  things  he  dis- 
played his  brotherhood  with  them  ?  He  began  his  ministry  at  a  feast  at 
Cana  of  Galilee,  working  his  first  miracle  at  a  wedding.  Again  and 
again  we  find  him  eating  with  his  disciples.  The  last  tiling  he  did  was 
to  sit  at  supper  with  them,  and  he  still  saith  to  his  church,  "  Behold,  I 
stand  at  the  door  and  knodc :  if  any  man  open  to  me  I  will  enter  in  and 
sup  witib  him  and  he  with  me.''  His  ow«  figure  for  the  opening  of  the 
new  dii^nsation  is  a  supper :  "  Blessed  is  he  thai^  shall  eat  bread  at 
the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  We  do  not  always  view  our  inter- 
course with  Christ  in  this  homely  light,  and  I  lear  we  forget  that  the 
acquaintance  of  Christ  with  his  people  ^?as  one  of  great  intimacy  and 
familiar  oommumon,  for  they  did  oat  and  drink  with  him  and  be  with 
them.  At  this  time  also  Jesus  is  the  host  of  his  church,  providing  the 
gospel  supper  and  entertaining  us  right  royally.  Instead  of  meat  he  gives 
us  nis  flesh  to  eat»  rarest  of  dainties,  and  h^  cries,  "  My  flesh  is  meat 
indeed,  and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed."  He  prepares  a  table  before  us 
in  the  presence  of  our  enemies.  He  satisfies  our  mouth  with  good  things, 
so  that  our  youth  is  renewed  like  the  eagle's.  And,  mane  you,  the 
Lord  is  a  host  who  goes  through  with  his  divine  hospitalities,  and 
leaves  nothing  incomplete.  In  the  Eaat  the  master  of  the  house  would 
wash  his  guest^'  feet  if  they  were  persons  whom  he  soi^ht  ix)  honour. 
You  remember  liow  Abraham  bftde  the  angels  tun^  in  to  his  tent^  and  also 


580  METROPOLrrAV  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

said  to  them,  *'  Let  a  little  water,  I  pray  yon,  be  fetched,  and  wash  your 
feet."  Even  bo  oar  Master  entertains  ub  at  his  table,  not  as  panpers,  bat 
as  gaests,  ay,  and  not  as  gaests  of  an  ordinary  land,  bat  as  mends  of  the 
bluest  class,  dear  to  his  soal,  whose  feet  he  will  wash.  He  can  tral  j  say 
of  ns,  "  Since  thon  wast  precious  in  my  si^ht  thou  hast  been  honoorable, 
and  I  haye  loved  thee."  He  treats  ns  as  distinguished  persons  who  shall 
not  sit  among  mean  men,  bat  shall  have  their  portion  among  minoes. 
This  foot-washing  once  done  was  a  feir  representation  of  that  honour- 
able  entertainment  which  the  King  extends  to  all  believing  sonls  when 
he  bids  them  come  to  his  banqueting  table  and  drink  of  the  wine  which 
he  has  mingled.  I  like  to  think  of  the  Lord  as  my  host»  and  of  myself 
as  no  mere  waif  and  stray,  but  as  a  welcome  guest,  to  whom  he  is  daily 
falfilling  all  a  host*s  part,  grantiug  me  all  I  want,  yea,  all  that  I  wish 
for.  He  himself  gives  us  honours  and  comforts  more  than  could  be 
expected  even  from  our  most  familiar  friend.  See,  he  even  washes  our  feet ! 
What  better  token  need  we  of  his  abiding  love  ?  Since  he  continues  to 
entertain  his  whole  church,  and  treats  us  all  as  distinguished  visitors, 
it  is  clear  that  he  loves  us  still. 

My  second  rendering  of  the  passage  is  that  he  cares  fifr  our  mmar  mat- 
ters taiih  a  personal  inieresL  Jesus  washed  theur  feet — ^this  showed 
a  very  tender  and  familiar  consideration  of  their  little  wants.  That 
he  should  ease  their  weary  hearts  I  can  understand,  that  he  should 
enlighten  their  clouded  brains  I  can  understand ;  but  that  he  should 
wash  their  feot  is  wonderful.  A  little  soil  on  their  ancles,  will  he  attend 
to  that  ?  Ay,  that  he  will,  and  personally  too.  He  will  himself  take  the 
basin  and  the  towel  and  wash  their  feet.  Had  they  been  diseased  with 
leprosy  it  would  seem  natural  that  he  should  touch  them  and  say,  **  Be 
clean  ;  or  had  they  been  blind  or  halt  it  would  have  been  probable  that 
he  woidd  touch  their  eyes  or  heal  their  limbs ;  but  a  mere  defilement  of 
their  feet  is  so  a  small  a  matter,  would  he  attend  to  that  ?  He  might  have 
left  them  to  wash  one  another's  feet,  might  he  not  ?  Surely  he  had  but 
to  suggest  it  and  they  would  have  cheerfully  waited  on  each  other.  Peter, 
at  any  rate,  would  have  been  first  to  obey,  and  to  his  Lord's  command 
he  would  have  replied,  "  Wash  them  ?  That  I  will,  with  delight."  But 
no ;  the  Lord  laid  aside  his  own  garments  and  took  a  towel,  and  himself 
peifomed  the  kindly  deed  for  them.  Brothers  and  sisters,  take  your 
little  things  to  Christ,  those  trials  of  which  your  heart  says, ''  They  are 
too  small :  though  they  prick  me  like  thorns  in  the  flesh,  and  give  me 
pain,  vet  they  are  really  too  trifling  for  me  to  mention  in  prayer."  Not 
so ;  the  Lord  loves  us  to  trust  him  thoroughly.  This  is  a  token  of  his 
love,  of  his  continued  affection,  that  even  to  the  little  things  he  will 
look,  even  to  your  small  afiairs  he  will  condescend,  and  you  may  ask 
him— oh,  it  is  bold  asking,  but  you  may  do  it — ^you  may  ask  him  to  wash 
vour  feet^  for  he  will  do  even  that.  Do  not,  I  pray  you,  cause  your  own 
love  to  be  put  under  suspicion  through  a  deficiency  in  your  childlike 
confidence  in  your  condescending  Lord.  I  confess  I  have  often  required 
more  faith  to  pray  about  some  tiny  matter  of  my  own  than  about  a 
thousand  things  which  concern  my  Master's  kingdom,  and  yet  when 
faith  is  broad  and  large,  love  knows  that  all  matters  which  grieve  the 
minds  of  his  servants  touch  the  heart  of  the  Master,  and  that  all  whidi 
works  our  good  works  also  his  delight.  We  must  believe  in  him  so  much 


\  THE  TEJLOHnrO  07  THE  FOOT-WASHING.  581 

that  we  can  trust  each  day's  caies  with  him,  believing  that  he  still  washes 
his  disciples*  feet,  by  attending  to  their  minor  needs  and  griefs. 

'*  He  overrules  all  mortal  ihinjfs. 
And  manages  our  mean  affairs ; 
.  On  bumble  souls  the  King  of  kings 

Bestows  bis  counsels  and  bis  cares.** 

We  will  now  take  a  third  reading  of  it.  This  washing  of  the  disciples' 
feet  means  that  ?ie  pi'ovidea  refreshment  for  his  people,  I  do  not  suppose 
that  many  here  present  know  what  an  intense  jpleasnre  it  is  in  extremely 
hot  oonntries  to  naye  the  feet  washed  npon  coming  in  after  a  weary  walk. 
The  servant  from  a  pitcher  pours  forth  fir^h  cool  water  npon  the  feet 
when  they  are  aching  with  a  long  journey  and  hot  with  bummg  heat  and 
dust,  and  the  result  is  delightfully  refreshing.  Our  Lord  washed  his 
disciples'  feet,  not  only  becanse  cleansing  was  desirable,  but  also  for  their 
pleasure  and  solace.  He  takes  great  pleasure  in  giving  joy  to  his. 
followers.  He  desires  that  his  joy  should  be  in  ns  that  our  joy  may 
be  full.  He  does  not  want  us  to  be  like  paupers,  who  have  to  be  content 
with  bare  necessaries,  but  to  be  gentlemen-commoners  upon  his  bounty 
who  shall  be  served  right  royally,  like  princes  of  the  blood  whom  even  the 
king  himself  doth  not  disdain  to  wait  upon. 

When  doth  the  Lord  give  ns  these  refreshments?  He  often  docs  this 
after  a  journey, — I  mean  after  a  severe  trial.  When,  as  pilgrims  to 
heaven,  we  have  been  wearied  by  the  greatness  of  the  way,  the  Master 
comes,  and  manifests  himself  to  us,  and  refredies  us.  Sometimes,  also, 
this  good  cheer  comes  before  the  trial,  for  these  disciples  were  naw  abont 
to  enter  upon  a  very  rough  road :  they  were  doomed  to  travel  through  the 
rest  of  their  lives  without  the  personal  presence  of  their  Master,  and  he 
-  seems  to  say,  "Before  yon  set  out  I  will  wash  your  feet.  A  little  refresh* 
ment  of  this  kind  will  strengthen  yon  at  the  starting,  and  when  you  are 
further  on  your  way  the  very  remembrance  of  it  will  come  to  you  like 
a  cool  stream  of  water  fresh  from  the  ewer."  So  the  Master  was  pleased 
to  refresh  them  after  a  journey  and  before  a  journey,  and  the  refresh- 
ment  was  intended,  as  I  have  already  said,  for  their  souls'  delight.  It 
was  a  feast  at  which  thev  sat,  and  he  wished  them  to  enjoy  everything 
that  could  make  them  happy  at  his  table.  Brethren,  I  have  told  you 
that  this  foot-washing  is  a  type  of  our  Lord's  continuous  love  to  us,  a 
type  which  is  foUowea  by  action  like  itself;  and  so  it  is  in  this  respect, 
for  he  is  often  refreshing  us.  Have  you  not  tasted  of  his  cordials  ?  We 
speak  &r  less  of  onr  spiritual  delights  than  we  mi^ht  do ;  but  if  we  would 
open  our  mouths  we  could  tell  of  rapturous  times,  when,  though  sore 
weary  and  cast  down,  we  have  been  graciously  revived.  Sweet  promises 
have  beGU  applied  to  us  by  our  Lord's  own  hands,  like  cold  water  poured 
upon  hot  and  weary  feet,  and  by  this  means  we  have  been  batned  in 
rest.  A  sense  of  his  love  has  come  over  us  like  a  dream,  and  yet  we 
were  never  more  awake  in  our  lives.  We  have  been  entranced  and  yet 
most  sober  and  calm.  Our  Lord's  love  is  a  dear  delight,  and,  when  we 
rcalisse  it,  the  beUs  of  heaven  seem  to  be  ringing  dose  against  our  ears, 
and  choirs  of  aigels  to  have  oome  down  from  glory  to  make  music  in 
our  chambers.  At  such  times  we  often  wonder  why  we  were  so  glad« 
dened,  but  wlnm  next  day  an  extraordinary  trouble  seto  in  we  dis^v^r 


i8t  MRTROPOUTAN  TABIIRNAOLB  TVhm. 

the  reason,  and  perceive  thafc  we  have  been  well  nooriahed  that  we  may 
go  a  fortyndayB'  journey  in  the  strength  of  thia  meat. 

Yes,  we  have  had  those  refreshments  in  this  house  when  the  word  has 
been  preached,  or  when  some  jojfal  hymn  has  borne  us  on  its  wings  to 
heaven ;  or,  best  of  all,  at  the  communion  table.  Nor  here  alone,  for  in 
our  own  quiet  chambers,  and  in  the  night  watches,  the  Lord  has  re- 
freshed our  hearts,  for  he  givcth  songs  in  the  night.  These  sweet 
renewals  and  upliftings  are  the  tokens  that  having  loved  his  own  he 
loves  them  to  the  end.  Tlxis  is  the  foot-washing  over  ^in,  for  Christ 
is  still  busy  at  his  works  of  love.  Though  he  lays  not  aside  his  garment 
to-day,  nor  comes  among  ns  like  a  servant,  yet  even  Irom  the  highest 
throne  in  glory  he  has  ways  of  executing  the  same  purposes  of  kindness. 
Still  he  gives  us  inward  delight,  and  this  joy  becomes  oar  strength, 
making  us  swift  as  a  young  roe,  to  run  upon  his  graeioos  errands.  The 
weariness  which  makes  the  feet  heavier  is  removed  by  joyfiil  fellowship, 
and  so  we  are  washed  and  refreshed.  We  who  are  his  ministers  need 
mnch  of  this,  that  we  may  be  as  hinds  let  loose,  giving  goodly  words. 

Our  fourth  view  of  the  text  is  more  fiill  and  accurate,  namely,  that 
Christ  canHnues  to  guard  the  puriiy  of  his  church ;  for  though  it  was 
not  all  his  meaning,  yet  by  washing  their  feet  he  certainly  intended 
their  cleansing ;  for  after  he  had  done  it  he  said, ''  Ye  are  clean :  he  that 
is  washed  is  clean  eveiy  whit."    Our  Lord  watches  over  the  purification 
of  aU  those  who  are  his  own,  and  this  is  a  great  joy  to  us  who  love  his 
church,  and  are  concerned  for  her  honour.    To  see  professors  defile 
themselves  is  heart-breaking  work  to  loving  pastors,  and  our  only  com- 
fort is  that  Jesus  is  quite  as  jealous  of  the  holiness  of  his  people  as  ever 
we  can  be.    Beloved,  I  live  while  I  see  your  pure  and  holy  conversation ; 
bat  when  I  see  impurity,  worldliness,  and  evil  among  yoa,  it  cuts  me  to 
the  heart,  and  were  it  not  that  I  luiow  my  Lord  is  watohing  over  the 
purity  of  his  people  I  would  fsxa  lay  me  down  and  die.    From  the  occa- 
sion which  our  Lord  selected  for  the  foot-washing  it  is  clear  that  he 
would  have  us  seek  the  special  purifying  power  of  his  presence  during 
religious  ordinances.    I  really  cannot  tell  at  what  pcnnt  of  the  evening's 
proceedings  our  Lord  washed  his  disciples'  feet;  and  if  you  read  the 
chapter  you  will  be  somewhat  puzzled.    It  is  "  before  the  passover,"  yet 
it  is  said,  ''supp»  being  ended,"  which  I  suppose  would  be  better 
rendered,  '^ supper  being  in  progress";  for  after  the  washing  our  Lord 
took  a  sop,  dipped  it,  and  gave  it  to  Jodas^  and  therefore  the  supper 
was  not  over.    Or  if  one  supper  may  have  come  to  an  end  another  was 
just  commencing.    Was  this  feast  the  passover?    Was  it  the  Lord's 
Sapper  ?   Was  it  the  first  of  the  aaaph^  or  love  feasts^  in  which  the  earl  v 
chnroh  delighted  ?    Which  was  it  f    I  do  not  know,  and  I  am  not  much 
concerned  to  know.    The  Lord  Jesus  Ohrist  made  the  passover  melt  into 
the  Lord's  Supper ;  so  that  you  cannot  tell  where  one  ends  and  the  other 
begins.    No  violent  jerk  occurred  in  leaving  the  lines  of  the  Jewish  dis- 
pensation for  the  Christian;  for  our  Lord's  disciples  went  up  to  the 
temple  to  pray  after  the  veil  was  rent  in  twm,  aod  the  legal  ceremonies 
had  lost  their  meaning.    There  was  a  gradual  diding  of  the  one  economy 
into  the  other,  and  on  the  memorable  night  of  the  washing  of  the  feet  I 
suspect  that  our  Master  ate  and  drank  with  his  disciples  at  a  oommon 
meal,  jost  as  the  eariy  Christians  did  when  they  met  together  at  their 


THE  TEAGHIKO  OF  THE  FOOT-WASHING.  588 

love-feasts:  then  probably  followed  the  actual  passover  celebration,  a 
night  before  its  time;  and  this  gradually  dissolved  into  the  Lord's 
Supper,  of  which  the  cup  was  "  the  cup  after  supper."  Anyhow,  it  does 
not  matter  much ;  but  it  is  clear  that  we  need  our  feet  washed  before  wo 
come  to  his  table, — "  Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of 
this  bread."  We  also  need  our  feet  washed  while  we  are  at  his  table,  for 
there  is  sin  in  our  holiest  things,  and  even  when  we  come  most  near  to 
our  Lord  we  need  that  he  wash  ns,  according  to  that  text,  ''If  we 
walk  in  the  light  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship  one  with 
another,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin." 
Even  when  we  walk  in  the  light,  and  have  clearest  fellowship  with  God, 
the  Lord  Jesus  continues  to  cleanse  us  from  all  sin.  And  I  am  sure  we 
want  washing  after  supper.  When  vfe  come  away  from  worship  we 
have  need  to  get  alone,  and  cry^ ''  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults. 
Let  my  want  of  devotion  or  my  coldness  in  it  be  forgiven.  Let 
my  lacK  of  zeal,  my  scantiness  of  ndth,  and  the  wandering  of  my  heart 
be  all  washed  away  by  thee,  my  liord  and  Master,  for  much  I  need  it." 

Our  Lord  is  so  anxious  for  the  purification  of  his  people  that  he  is 
frequently  giving  them  a  sweet  sense  that  their  transgressions  in  holy 
things  are  put  away,  and  thus  he  seems  to  say  to  them,  "  I  have  accepted 
your  sacrificei  I  have  received  vour  prayers  and  tears,  and  presented  them 
unto  my  Father.  I  have  wasned  you,  and  you  are  clean :  go  in  peace." 
This  is  one  of  the  acts  of  his  continuous  love,  this  daily  washing  of  our  feet. 

This  frequent  washing  by  our  Lord  we  must  all  have  ;  it  is  alsoluiely 
necessary.  There  is  a  "must"  in  the  case :  as  we  must  be  bom  again,  so 
we  must  be  made  holy.  It  would  be  to  our  Lord's  dishonour  to  be  fol- 
lowed by  disciples  who  do  not  walk  in  integrity  and  upnghtneaa  As 
he  is  himself  perfectly  holy  he  desires  to  have  around  him  a  holy  peoplo 
purged  from  all  defilement.  He  is  so  anxious  that  he  should  have  such 
a  people,  that  sooner  than  they  shall  not  be  washed  he  will  act  the  part 
of  a  servant  and  wash  their  feet  himself.  ''  Be  ye  dean  that  bear  the 
vessels  of  tJie  Lord."  Ye  that  follow  in  his  footsteps,  walk  with  clean  feet. 
Come  not  up  with  the  miry  clay  still  sticking  to  you,  but  wash,  wash 
daily,  and  fouow  your  pure  Master  with  pure  and  cleansed  hearts,  with 
careAil  and  obedient  feet,  so  that  all  may  see  that  you  are  the  disciples  of 
the  Undefiled.  His  ministers  especially  need  this  or  the  people  will  never 
cry, ''  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth 
good  tidings."  Brethren,  pray  for  m  that  we  may  experience  this  to  the 
highest  degree. 

These  constant  washings  which  are  the  t^timonial  of  Christ's  con- 
tinned  love  we  must  all  receive.  Did  he  not  say  to  Peter,  "If  I  wash 
thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me  "  ?  If  Jesus  does  not  make  you 
ioly  you  are  not  his.  Brother,  if  you  live  in  sin,  and  love  it,  you 
cannot  love  God.  Unless  he  truly  purges  your  life  and  makes  you  to  walk 
in  a  clean  path,  you  are  not  his,  for  he  purges  his  own :  such  as  riot  in 
iniqui^  prove  that  they  are  of -their  father,  tlie  devil,  for  his  works  they 
do.  Whom  Jesus  loves  he  purifies.  He  loved  his  church  and  gave  him- 
self for  it  that  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it.  If,  then,  you  are  unholy, 
ungracioup,  dishonest,  unrighteous,  how  can  you  say  that  you  belong  to 
his  church  ?  He  wadies  the  feet  of  all  who  are  his  disciples,  and  if  your 
feet  are  filthy  you  belong  not  to  the  faithfiil  band. 


684  MBTBOPOLITAH  TABEEHACLE  PULPIT. 

This  wasliing  mtut  bo  Bpiritual:  no  external  form  will  sofficc.  Christ 
washed  ttie  feet  of  Judas  with  water,  bnt  inasmuch  as  Jndas  hod  never 
been  bathed  in  the  laver  of  regeneration,  and  had  never  been  pui^:ed  in  the 
fount  of  forgiving  love,  tbtit  washing  which  Christ  gave  to  his  fact  did 
him  no  spiritual  good ;  and  you,  my  friend,  may  use  what  external  abla- 
tions you  will,  and  perform  whatever  religious  ceremonies  yon  please,  bat 
nnlesa  yonr  spirit  has  been  renewed  by  tiie  Holy  Ghost,  and  yonr  heart 

Snrged  in  the  sight  of  God,  yon  still  have  no  part  nbr  lot  with  Christ's 
isciples. 

The  mercy  is  that  this  pnrification,  which  is  eo  ncedfiil,  and  which 

must  be  of  a  spiritnal  kind,  is  very  readily  given.    I  admire  the  beaat; 

of  the  figure  m  it3  simple  ease.    The  Scripture  does  not  say  that  our 

Haat«r  was  nailed  to  the  cross  and  poured  forth  a  stream  from  his  heart, 

in  order  to  wash  his  disciples'  feet.     No,  although  the  act  by  which  he 

cleansed  them  was  very  condescending,  yet  it  was  not  painful  or  laborious. 

He  layeth  aside  his  garments,  girdcth  on  the  towel,  and  takcth  the 

ewer,  and  straightway  proceeds  therewith  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet.     It 

was  easily  done,  and  whatever  there  was  upon  the  feet  was  soon  removed : 

it  netted  no  suffering,  no  dire  grief  on  Jesus'  part.     For  our  first  washing 

from  the  guilt  and  condemnation  of  sin  it  needed  that  Jesus  should  Uj 

down  his  hfc,  and  fill  the  cleansing  fonnt  witbatouing  blood;  bat  for 

the  after  removal  of  sin  the  Lord  nscth  an  easy  process  of  love.    He 

doth  by  his  Spirit  speedily  cleanse  us  fixim  iniquity,  even  as  our  feet  are 

soon  washed.     How,  readily,  therefore,  we  ought  to  go  to  Christ  about 

the  putting  of  our  consciences  from  dead  works.    I  nave  heard  it  said 

that  the  sinner  finds  great  difiioulty  in  going  to  Christ  at  first ;  that  is 

sadly  true,  but  I  have  also  noticed  that  sometimes  there  is  a  dilQcolty  io 

continuing  to  go  to  him  every  day  of  onr  lives.    To  go  as  a  sinner  and 

get  washed  from  sin  needs  &ith,  nut  it  also  requires  a  steadv  confidence 

to  resort  to  Jesna  under  a  thousand  conscious  failures  and  backslidingt 

year  after  year.    I  sit  down  in  my  chamber,  and  I  feel  I  am  a  for- 

(riven  man :  about  that  I  am  quite  sure,  and  therefore  I  shall  never  be 

but  this  day  I  spoke  unadvisedly  with  my  lips,  or  I  grew 

It,  or  I  am  conscious  that  I  was  proud,  or  else  I  have  been 

Torldly,  or  I  have  been  selfish ;  and  at  the  remembrance  of 

Me  my  peace  and  feel  I  cannot  pray.    Communion  with 

le  while  these  fiinlts  store  me  in  the  face.    The  arch-enemy 

n  cannot  get  back  into  your  former  happ^  state."    At 

us  say  to  him,  "  0  thou  enemy,  I  can  and  vviH  return  iute   . 

my  dear  I^rd  and  Master  has  onlr  to  take  the  basin  and 

and  this  he  can  do  right  speedily.'     Q  my  brother,  when 

revives  upon  the  conscience,  do  not  be  persuaded  by  nn* 

re  is  an  impossibility  of  i^ain  escaping  it,  hut  go  straight 

Master  ana  say, "  Wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  wniter  than 

will  cleanse  yon,  and  once  again  yon  shall  joy  and  rejoice 

ember  the  words  of  our  hymn  concerning  the  fountain  of 

Thb  fvniitain  from  guilt  not  only  makes  pure, 
And  KiTet,  toon  aa  felt,  infallible  cure  ; 
But  if  guilt  KDUivM  retnrn,  and  Fcmain, 
Its  power  pmy  be  proved  nrrriin  and  spiin.*" 


TUK  TEACUING  OF  TUB  FOOT-WASIII>'a.  585 

Mark,  hou'erer,  that  this  washing  must  be  given  us  hy  our  Lord  him- 
self.  He  must  first  wash  our  feet  before  we  can  wash  one  another's  feet. 
I  think  I  see  the  Well-beloved  now  as  he  pours  the  pure  water  on  their 
ancles !  Mark  how  he  takes  their  feet  into  his  kind  and  tender  hands, 
and  washes  them  clean,  and  then  wipes  them  with  the  towel!  He  con* 
tinues  to  do  this  to  us  even  now  in  a  spiritual  sense.  It  is  his  own  dear 
loye  that  takes  away  sin  from  the  conscience,  so  that  it  does  not  linger 
there  to  foul  and  mar  it  Often  methinks  he  seems  to  kiss  those  feet  and 
saj,  **  Dear  child,  thou  art  clean  now.  Watch  thy  footsteps,  and  keep 
thy  garments  that  they  be  not  defiled  again :  yet  even  if  they  be  I  will 
wash  them  again,  for  I  live  still  to  cleanse  thee  and  put  away  thy  trans- 
gressiona  I  mean  ere  long  to  make  thee  as  perfect  as  myself,  without 
spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing."  Nor  may  I  leave  this  poist  till  I 
bid  you  mark  the  condescension  of  this  personal  washing,  for  Abraham 
did  not  himself  wash  the  angels'  feet,  but  said,  ''Let  a  little  water  be 
fetched,  and  wash  your  feet;  and  Joseph  did  not  personally  wash  his 
brethren's  feet,  but  the  steward  of  his  house  brought  them  in  and  gave 
them  water,  and  they  washed  their  feet;  but  Jesus  does  it  all  himself. 
O  my  soul,  bow  down  before  him  and  adore  his  love  unparalleled. 

Thus  I  have  shown  you  that  this  foot- washing  is  a  symbol  of  our 
Bedeemer's  continuous  acts  of  love.  Jesus  is  always  our  host,  and 
therefore  he  washes  our  feet ;  he  always  cares  for  our  little  matters,  and 
in  this  sense  washes  even  our  feet ;  he  is  always  providing  refreshments 
for  his  people  in  their  pilgrimage  to  heaven,  and  thus  he  washes  their 
feet ;  he  is  always  guarding  the  purity  of  his  church  and  people,  and  so 
in  the  fullest  sense  he  washes  their  feet. 

II.  Secondly,  we  come  to  practical  matters  as  to  ourselves.  As  the 
HODBL  OF  HIS  OWK  liOVB  IN  HIS  PROPLE  our  Lord  washed  their  feet. 
The  love  of  the  saints  is  their  Ijord's  love  in  them,  which  has  filled  their 
vessels  to  the  brim  and  is  now  running  over.  Christ's  love  is  the  sun  and 
our  love  is  the  moonlight  which  we  are  able  to  give  forth  because  the  sun 
hath  looked  upon  us.  liove  is  first  freely  imparted  and  then  plenteously 
difi'used.  Jesus  says,  "  The  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him 
a  well  of  water ;"  and  then  again,  ''Out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers 
of  living  water."  What  we  receive  we  impart,  and  the  grace  which  works 
in  us  at  the  first  ere  long  works  by  us. 

Ijet  us  look  at  this  foot-washing  in  reference  to  ourselves,  and  our 
duty  and  ofiice  in  the  midst  of  our  brethren.  We  learn,  first,  that  there 
mil  always  be  need  of  service  in  the  church,  and  always  need  of  service 
in  the  particular  direction  of  promoting  purity.  The  apostles  were  twelve 
strong  men,  surely  thev  did  not  require  a  servant !  Tes,  they  did.  They 
must  have  a  servant,  they  could  not  do  without  a  servant ;  and  therefore 
their  Lord  supplied  the  vacant  place.  And  now  that  the  Lord  is  gone  his 
church  still  needs  servants,  and  servants  to  wash  feet,  or  else  all  will  go 
amiss.  On  earth  the  church  will  never  be  so  clean  that  it  will  have  no 
need  of  foot-washing ;  the  church  wiU  never  bo  able  dispense  with  puri- 
fying service  till  the  Lord  shall  come.  You,  my  brother  Christian*  may 
never  expect  to  join  a  church  where  there  will  hie  nothing  for  you  to  do  ; 
do  not  even  desire  such  a  position  of  idleness.  We  shall  never  get  among 
a  community  so  pure  that  we  shall  see  no  faults  in  our  brethren,  and  never 
shall  we  ourselves  be  so  good  that  they  will  see  no  faults  in  us ;  therefore. 


686  MKTBOPOLITAM  TABEBNAOLB  PULPIT. 

let  us  render  and  receive  a  happy,  mntiial  sertioe  in  the  chorch  by 
which  the  sanctificafeion  of  one  ana  flJl  will  be  promoted.  In  those  words, 
'*  If  I  then,  yonr  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet ;  ye  also  ought 
to  wash  one  another's  feet/'  our  Lord  speaks  as  though  he  would  hare 
us  reckon  upon  acting  as  seryanta  for  the  benefit  of  each  other.  Let  us 
eheerfhlly  accept  the  position. 

We  see  next  that  t&e  are  not  tc  ad/voeats  ^  abrogaUen  ^  vuibk  turvk/ty 
or  pretend  that  we  hare  reached  a  point  at  Irhioh  we  eati  dispense  with 
it.    The  Stoio  wduld  say,  ''Washing  fbetl    What  is  the  good  of  it? 
What  need  of  washing  a  man's  feet  ?    If  be  needs  it^  let  him  wash  Uiem 
himself.    The  first  law  of  nature  is  self^loTe :  let  every  man  see  to  him- 
self. What  have  I  to  do  with  my  brother's  ftet  t   Let  him  wash  hie  own. 
What  has  he  to  do  with  my  feet  ?  Let  him  mind  his  own  business."  That 
is  anti-Christianity :  but  Christianity  says,  "  I  am  willing  that  others 
should  help  me  to  be  holy,  and  I  am  also  willii^  to  help  others  to  the 
same  end.    I  am  so  imperfect  that  I  am  willing  tfiat  anybody  should 
point  out  my  fekults,  and  rebuke  me  for  them,  and  I  am  so  amdocM  that 
my  brother  should  be  holy  that  I  will  lovingly  help  him  to  conouer  sin." 
Sometimes  it  is  more  humbling  to  have  your  own  feet  washea  than  to 
wash  other  people'si  and  hence  sometimes  our  naughty  pride  says, 
''Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet."    Yet  it  must  be  so,  and  pride  must 
sit  still  like  a  child,  and  be  both  washed  and  wiped.    Againi  I  perceive 
that  to  many  it  is  easy  to  stoop  to  the  poor,  but  hard  to  yield  to  their 
equals  in  estate  or  in  ability.    I  know  those  who  will  do  a  thoi^and 
things  for  a  poor  man,  but  they  ^rould  not  do  the  like  service  to  those 
of  their  own  rank.    Tou  say,  "  As  for  that  poor  soul,  I  do  not  mind 
conceding  many  points  to  him,  but  this  other  man  will  crow  over  me  if 
I  yield  to  his  weakness,  and  he  will  expect  me  to  do  it  again,  and  ao  I 
may  be  thought  to  be  a  person  of  no  spirit,  who  can  easily  be  put  upon, 
and  made  a  general  hack."    That  also  is  the  speech  of  anti-ChrisUanity. 
True  Christianity  impels  us  to  render  and  to  accept  that  service  which 
is  mutual  among  true  saints.    He  who  kindly  reminds  me  of  my  fenlts 
helps  me  to  be  better ;  let  me  not  be  angry  with  him>  but  value  him  for 
his  faithfulness.    On  the  other  hand,  I  must  never  hint  at  a  failing  in  a 
brother  unless  I  believe  that  he  will  be  the  better  for  it,  and  even  then 
I  must  do  it  gently,  for  I  am  not  to  scald  my  brethren's  feet,  but  to  use 
cool,  sparkling,  living  water  in  the  washing  of  them.    Refining  by  fire  is 
God's  work :  refreshing  with  water  is  ours.    We  are  to  rebuke  in  love, 
not  in  wrath;  we  are  to  wipe  as  well  as  wet,  to  comfort  as  well  as 
correct. 

In  the  world  they  criticise :  this  is  the  business  of  the  public  press, 
and  it  is  veiy  much  the  business  of  private  circles.  Hear  how  gossips 
say,  "  Do  you  see  that  spot  ?  What  a  terrible  walk  that  man  must  have 
had  this  morning :  look  at  his  feet !  He  has  been  very  much  in  the  mire 
you  can  see,  for  there  are  the  traces  upon  him."  That  is  the  world's 
way.  Christ's  way  is  very  different.  He  says  nothing,  but  takes  the 
basin  and  begins  to  wash  away  the  stain.  Do  not  judge  and  condemn, 
but  seek  the  restoration  and  the  improvement  of  the  erring.  Say  to  your 
feulty  brother,  "  I  am  very  anxious  if  I  may  to  take  awiy  your  spots.  I 
would  not  wish  to  point  them  out  if  I  did  not  feel  that  1  should  therebv 

Ip  you  to  get  rid  of  them,"  I  fear  that  many  professors  follow  the  worUs 


THB  TBAOHIKG  OF  THE  FOOT-WABHING.  587 

x^aj,  and  indnlge  in  what  we  call  gossip^  which  is  usnally  slander  and  mis- 
representation, or,  in  other  words,  lying.  The  best  of  men  may  have  to 
endure  this,  bnt  it  is  a  great  pity  it  should  be  so.  Why  will  people  find 
pleasure  in  throwing  dirty  water  over  their  neighbours  ?  Do  you  make 
yourself  any  better  by  blackening  others  ?  Do  you  expect  to  rise  bv 
pulling  others  down?  Scorn  such  attempts.  An  ambition  which 
suggests  such  evil  means  is  only  worthy  of  a  fiend.  0  ye  who  truly  love 
your  Lord  cease  from  cruel  witticisms,  and  spend  yonr  strength  in  humble 
and  loving  washings  of  your  brethren's  feet,  and  so  shall  we  all  become 
more  happy,  because  more  like  our  Lord. 

This  foot-washing  among  disciples  sfiotild  le  done  very  cheerfuUy, 
Nobody  asked  the  Master  to  bring  the  basin :  no  one  would  have  thought 
of  such  a  thing :  it  was  his  own  heart  of  love  that  made  him  do  it,  out 
of  spontaneous  affection  for  those  whom  he  had  chosen.  Let  us  be  also 
ready  to  perform  any  office  for  our  brethren,  however  lowlv.  If  there  is 
a  position  in  the  church  where  the  worker  will  have  to  tou  hard  and  get 
no  thanks  for  it,  take  it,  and  be  pleased  with  it.  If  you  can  perform 
a  service  which  few  will  ever  seek  to  do  themselves,  or  appreciate  when 
performed  by  others,  yet  occupy  it  with  holy  delight.  Covet  humble 
work,  and  when  you  get  it  be  content  to  continue  in  it.    There  is  no 

?-eat  rush  after  the  lowest  places,  you  will  rob  no  one  by  seeking  them, 
he  first  place  we  must  have  an  election  for  and  poll  the  whole  com- 
munity, but  for  the  very  lowest  there  is  no  great  ambition,  therefore  select 
such  a  place,  and  while  you  will  escape  envy  you  will  also  gain  a  quiet 
conscience.  If  we  were  Christ's  more  thoroughly  we  should  cheerfully 
and  voluntarily  push  ourselves  into  the  places  of  self-sacrifice,  counting 
it  our  chief  honour  to  serve  God  and  the  church  in  ways  which  are 
obscure  and  despised,  because  in  so  doing  we  shall  be  saved  from  the 
phnrisaic  spirit  wnich  desires  the  praise  of  man. 

When  we  do  anything  for  Christ's  people,  not  only  should  we  do  it 
cheerfully  but  ihoroiighly.  How  well  our  Lord  took  up  the  servant's 
place.  He  disrobed  himself  until  he  stood  prepared  for  his  task  in  much 
the  same  undress  as  an  attendant  at  the  Turkish  baths,  who  takes  off  all  his 
npper  garments.  Our  Lord  was  ready  to  do  his  work ;  he  put  off  all  that 
would  hinder  him,  for  he  meant  real  washing,  and  not  a  mere  form.  When 
you  are  going  to  serve  your  brethren,  do  it  heartily ;  give  your  Lord 
zealous  and  earnest  service ;  strip  to  your  shirt  sleeves,  if  need  be,  to 
serve  Christ  and  his  people.  Do  not  attempt  to  play  the  fine  gentleman ; 
is  it  not  &r  nobler  to  be  a  real  Christian  ? 

Observe  how  each  point  of  our  Lord's  procedure  is  marked  by  the 
evangelist.  ^'He  riseth  from  supper,  and  laid  aside  his  garments;  and 
took  a  towel,  and  girded  himself.  After  that  he  poureth  water  into  a 
bason,  and  began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and  to  wipe  them  with  the 
towel  wherewith  he  was  girded."  He  might  have  left  them  to  wipe 
themselves,  but,  no,  he  must  finish  his  love  work — **He  wiped  them 
with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was  girded."  Whenever  you  serve  a  brother 
for  Christ's  sake  do  it  thoroughly.  Begin  it  heartily,  go  on  with  it  stead- 
fastly, and  do  not  leave  off  till  the  deed  is  done.  If  anything  is  to  be 
done  slovenly  let  it  be  something  which  is  done  for  yourself;  but  Jesus 
and  his  people  must  have  the  best  which  our  ability  can  render.  Give 
the  saints  of  God  the  pick  and  choice  of  your  productions :  if  you  wash 


SS8  HKTROFOUTAN  TABBENACLB  rULPIT. 

their  feet  wash  thorn  welL  The  foot  of  the  meanest  Berrani  of  Christ  ia 
more  honourable  than  the  head  of  the  greatest  emperor  that  ever  wore  a 
diadem.  It  will  be  seen  in  eternity  to  be  a  greater  honour  to  hare  per- 
formed the  most  menial  servioe  for  a  tme  child  of  God  than  to  have  been 
honoured  and  decorated  with  stars  and  garters  in  the  servioe  of  the 
mightiest  monarch.  Lay  yourselves  out  for  thorough  service  of  your 
Iiord  in  his  people,  and  try  to  be  always  doing  this. 

I  feel  quite  sure  of  my  ground  in  having  said  that  this  foot-washing 
was  meant  to  be  a  type  of  what  our  Lord  is  always  doing,  becaoae  he 
puts  it  thus:  ''If  I  then,  your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet;  ye 
also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet."  Evidently  the  inference  would  be 
*'  If  I  £d  this  but  once,  ye  ought  to  wash  one  another  s  feet  once ; "  but 
since  the  moral  is,  *'  Ton  ought  always  to  wash  one  another's  feet,**  the 
doctrine  is  that  in  effect  our  Lord  is  always  washing  the  feet  of  his  people. 
Let  us  carry  out  the  lesson,  and  be  always  in  a  servant's  attitude  among  our 
fellow  disciples.  Let  us  be  always  on  bended  knee  with  the  basin  and  the 
towel  near  at  hand ;  let  us  be  willing  to  relieve  those  who  are  in  need,  to  re- 
store those  who  stumble,  to  reclaim  those  who  wander,  and  to  edify  and 
pedect  all  the  body  of  Christ  as  far  as  our  ability  will  permit  Be  it 
ours  to  promote  the  holiness  of  all  our  fellow  Christians  at  all  times. 
Tou  say  it  is  the  pastor's  business  to  look  after  the  church.  I  know  it 
is,  but  the  true  pastor's  wisdom  is  to  set  the  members  of  the  churdi 
looking  after  one  another.  **  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil 
the  law  of  Christ."  In  m^  own  case  the  pastorate  of  one  person  over 
five  thousand  members  is  ridiculous,  unless  it  be  exercised  oy  impress- 
ing all  the  members  with  the  necessity,  the  duty,  the  privilege  of  mutual 
oversight,  each  one  seeking  to  do  good  to  the  other  according  as  he 
hath  opportunity.  Let  this  mind  be  in  you  which  is  also  in  Christ 
Jesus,  wno  washed  his  disciples'  feet.  Love  one  another,  I  do  implore 
you,  and  in  honour  prefer  one  another.  Look  not  every  man  on  his 
own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others.  Let  brotherly 
love  continue,  and  ever  so  live  that  when  your  Master  looks  down  upon 
you  he  may  joy  and  rejoice  in  you,  as  I  trust  he  does  diis  day. 

May  this,  our  beloved  church,  be  for  many  a  year  a  pattern  of  unity 
and  peace  within,  and  of  strength  and  activity  without,  that  so  a  witness 
ma^  be  borne  for  pure  and  undcfiled  religion,  and  a  model  set  up  in 
which  shall  be  seen  the  handiwork  of  the  Spirit,  who  creates  love  in  the 
hearts  of  the  saints.    Little  children,  love  one  another.    Amen. 


PoBTiON  OF  Scripture  bead  before  Sermon — John  xiii.  1 — 17. 


HYirK8  FROM  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 18«,  262,  263, 


i 


Jjll«tt(flj(rIiJm»  i^at^made 


NUMBER  1,500,  OE  LIPTINQ  UP  THE  BRAZEN  SERPENT. 


%  ^mn 


DxLiV£BKi>  OS  Lobd's-day  MoBmsQ,  October  19th,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METBOPOLITAK  TABERNACf.E,  NBWIKQTON. 


''And  lloies  made  a  serpent  of  Inrass,  and  pnt  it  upon  a  pole»  and  it  came  to  pass. 
that  if  a  ferpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived." 
—Numbers  zxi.  9. 

This  disoourso  when  it  shall  be  printed  will  make  fifteen  hundred 
of  my  sermons  which  have  been  published  regularly  week  by  week.  This 
is  certainly  a  remarkable  fact.  I  do  not  know  of  any  instance  in  modem 
times  in  which  fifteen  hundred  sermons  have  thus  followed  each  other 
from  the  press  from  one  person,  and  have  continued  to  command  a  large 
circle  of  readers.  I  desire  to  utter  most  hearty  thanksgivings  to  God 
for  divine  help  in  thinking  out  and  uttering  tnese  sermons, — sermons 
which  have  not  merely  been  printed,  but  have  been  read  with  eagerness, 
and  have  also  been  translated  into  foreign  tongues  ;  sermons  which  are 
publicly  read  on  this  very  Sabbath  day  in  hundreds  of  places  where  a 
minister  cannot  be  found ;  sermons  which  God  has  blessed  to  the  con- 
Tersion  of  multitudes  of  souls.  I  may  and  I  must  joy  and  rejoice  in  this 
great  blessing  which  I  most  heartily  ascribe  to  the  undeserved  favour  of 
the  Lord. 

I  thought  the  best  way  in  which  I  could  express  my  thankfulness 
would  be  to  preach  Jesus  Christ  again,  and  set  him  forth  in  a  sermon  io 
which  the  simple  gos])el  should  be  made  as  clear  as  a  child's  alphabet. 
I  hope  that  in  closing  the  list  of  fifteen  hundred  discourses  the  Lord  will 
give  me  a  word  which  will  be  blessed  more  than  any  which  have  preceded 
it,  to  the  conversion  of  those  who  hear  it  or  read  it.  May  those  who  sit 
in  darkness  because  they  do  not  understand  the  freeness  of  salvation  and 
the  easy  method  by  which  it  may  be  obtained,  be  brought  into  the  light 
by  discovering  the  way  of  peace  through  believing  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Forgive  this  prelude ;  my  thankfulness  would  not  permit  me  to  with- 
hold it. 

Concerning  our  text  and  the  serpent  of  brass.  If  you  turn  to  John's 
gospel  you  will  notice  that  its  commencement  contains  a  sort  of  orderly 
list  of  types  taken  from  Holy  Scripture.    It  begins  with  the  creation. 


590  KSTBOPOLITAH  TABBRNAOLB  PULPIT. 

God  said, "  liet  there  be  light/'  and  John  begins  bydedsrin^  tinft 
the  eternal  Word,  ig  'Hhe  tme  light,  which  lighteth  ever^  man  that 
cometh  into  the  world."  Before  he  closes  his  first  chapter  John  baa  in- 
troduced a  type  supph'ed  by  Abel,  for  when  the  Baptist  saw  Jesns  oomins: 
to  him  he  said, ''  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  fcfae  sin  of 
the  world."  Nor  is  the  first  chapter  finished  before  we  are  reminded  of 
Jacob's  ladder,  for  we  find  our  Lord  declaring  to  Nathanael,  '*  Here- 
after ye  shall  see  heaven  open,  and  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  de- 
scending npon  the  Son  of  man."  By  the  time  we  have  reached  the  third 
chapter  we  have  come  as  fiir  as  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  and  we  read  the 
joyful  words,  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wildemess,  even  so 
must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  np,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlastmg  life."  We  are  going  to  speak  of 
this  act  of  Moses  xim  morning,  that  we  may  all  of  ns  l^hold  the  brazen 
sei*pent  and  find  the  promise  true, ''  every  one  that  is  bitten,  when  he 
looketh  upon  the  brazen  serpent,  shall  live."  It  may  be  that  yon  who 
have  looked  before  will  derive  fresh  benefit  from  looking  again,  while 
some  who  have  never  turned  their  eyes  in  that  direction  may  gaze  npon 
the  uplifted  Saviour,  and  this  morning  be  saved  from  the  burning  venom 
of  the  serpent,  that  deadly  poison  of  sin  which  now  lurks  in  their  nature, 
and  breeds  death  to  their  souls.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  make  the  woid 
bfiTectnal  to  that  gracious  end. 

I.  I  shall  invite  you  to  consider  the  subject  first  by  noticing  the 
PERSON  IN  MORTAL  PERIL  for  whom  the  brazen  serpent  was  made  and 
lifted  up.  Our  text  saith,  *'It  came  to  pass  that  if  a  serpent  had  bitten 
any  man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived." 

Let  ns  notice  that  the  fiery  serpents  first  of  all  came  among  the  people 
because  they  had  despmd  OocTs  way  and  QoSa  bread.  "The  soul  of  the 
people  was  much  discouraged  because  of  the  way."  It  was  God's  way,  he 
had  chosen  it  for  them^  and  he  had  chosen  it  in  wisdom  and  mercy,  but 
they  murmured  at  it.  As  an  old  divine  says,  "  It  was  lonesome  and 
longsome,"  but  still  it  was  Qod's  way,  and  therefore  it  ought  not  to  have 
been  loathsome :  his  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  went  before  them,  and  his 
servants  Moses  and  Aaron  led  them  like  a  flock,  and  they  ought  to  have 
followed  cheerfully.  Every  step  of  their  previous  journey  had  been 
rightly  ordered,  and  they  ought  to  have  been  quite  sure  that  this  com- 
passing of  the  land  of  Edom  was  rightly  ordered,  too.  But,  no ;  they 
quarrelled  with  God's  way,  and  wanted  to  have  their  own  way.  This  is 
one  of  the  great  standing  follies  of  men ;  they  cannot  be  content  to  wait 
on  the  Lord  and  keep  his  way,  but  they  prefer  a  will  and  way  of  their 
own. 

The  people,  also,  quarrelled  with  God's  food.  He  gave  them  the  best 
of  the  best,  for  *'  men  did  eat  angels'  food  ; "  but  they  called  the  manna 
bv  an  opprobrious  title,  which  in  the  Hebrew  has  a  sound  of  ridicule 
about  it,  and  even  in  our  translation  conveys  the  idea  of  contempt 
They  said  "  Our  soul  loatheth  this  light  bread,"  as  if  they  thought  it 
unsubstantial,  and  onlv  fitted  to  puff  them  out,  because  it  was  easy  of 
digestion,  and  did  not  breed  in  them  that  heat  of  blood  and  tendency  to 
disease  which  a  heavier  diet  would  have  brought  with  it.  Being  dis« 
contented  with  their  God  they  quarrelled  with  the  bread  whidi  \xd 
set  upon  their  table,  though  it  surpassed  any  that  mortal  man  has  ever 


mjHBEB  l^OOy  OB  LIPTma  UP  THB  BRAZEN  SERPENT.         591 

eaten  before  or  since.  This  is  another  of  man's  follies ;  his  heart  refuses 
to  feed  upon  God's  word  or  believe  God's  truth.  He  craves  for  the 
flesh-meat  of  carnal  reason,  the  leeks  and  the  garlic  of  superstitions 
tradition,  and  the  encumbers  of  speculation  ;  he  cannot  bring  his  mind 
do\rn  to  believe  the  Word  of  God,  or  to  accept  trutii  so  simple,  so  fitted 
to  the  capacity  of  a  child.  Many  demand  som^thine  deeper  than  the 
divine,  more  profound  than  the  infinity  more  liberid  than  free  grace. 
They  quarrel  with  Ctod's  way,  and  wi&  God's  breads  and  hence  there 
comes  among  them  the  fiery  serpents  of  evil  lusting,  pride,  and  sin.  I 
may  be  speaking  to  some  who  have  up  to  this  moment  quarrelled  with 
ike  preoeptB  and  the  doctrines  of  the  Lord,  and  I  would  affectionately 
warn  them  that  their  disobedienoe  and  presumption  will  lead  to  sih 
and  miiery.  Babels  agunst  God  are  apt  to  wax  worse  and  worse.  The 
world's  fiishions  and  modes  of  thought  lead  on  to  the  world's  vices  and 
crimes.  If  we  long  for  the  fruits  of  Egypt  we  shall  soon  feel  the  ser- 
pents of  Egypt.  The  natural  conseqiienoe  of  turning  against  God  like 
serpents. is  to  find  serpents  waylaying  our  path.  If  we  forsake  the  Lord 
in  spirit,  or  in  doctrine,  temptation  will  lurk  in  our  path  and  sin  will 
sting  our  feet. 

I  beg  you  carefully  to  observe  concerning  those  persons  for  whom  the 
brazen  serpent  was  specially  lifted  up  that  t?iey  had  been  actually  bitten  by 
the  serpents.  The  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents  among  them,  but  it  was  not  the 
serpents  being  among  them  that  involved  the  lifting  up  of  a  brazen  ser- 
pent, it  was  the  serpents  having  actually  poisoned  them  which  led  to 
the  provision  of  a  remedy.  ^'  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  everyone  that 
is  bitten,  when  he  looketh  upon  it,  shall  live."  Tne  only  people  who  did 
look  and  derive  benefit  from  the  wonderful  cure  uplifted  m  tne  midst  of 
the  camp,  were  those  who  had  been  stung  by  the  vipers.  The  common 
notion  is  that  salvation  is  for  good  people,  salvation  is  for  those  who 
fight  against  temptation,  salvation  is  for  the  spiritually  healthy :  but 
how  different  is  God's  word.  God's  medidne  is  for  the  sick,  and  his 
healing  is  for  the  diseased.  The  grace  of  God  through  the  atonement  of 
onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  for  men  who  are  actually  and  really  guilty.  We 
do  not  preach  a  sentimental  salvation  from  fancied  guilt,  but  real  and 
true  pardon  for  actual  offences.  I  care  nothing  for  sham  sinners :  you 
who  never  did  anything  wrong,  you  who  are  so  good  inyourselves  that  you 
ard  all  right— I  leave  you,  for  I  am  sent  to  preach  Christ  to  those  who 
are  full  of  sin,  and  worthy  of  eternal  wrath.  The  serpent  of  brass  was  a 
remedy  for  those  who  had  been  bitten. 

What  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  be  bitten  by  a  serpent  I  I  dare  say 
some  of  you  recollect  Uie  case  of  Guriing,  one  of  the  keepers  of  the 
reptiles  in  the  Zoological  Gardens.  It  happened  in  October,  1852,  and. 
therefore  some  of  you  will  remember  it.  This  unhappy  man  was 
about  to  part  with  a  friend  who  was  Roing  to  Australia,  and  acoording 
to  the  wont  of  many  he  must  nee&  drink  with  him.  He  drank 
considerable  quantities  of  gin,  and  though  he  would  probably  have 
been  in  a  great  passion  if  any  one  had  call^  him  drunk,  yet  reason  and 
common-sense  had  evidently  become  overpowered.  He  went  back  to 
his  post  at  the  gardens  in  an  excited  state.  He  had  some  months 
beford  seen  an  exhibition  of  snake- charming,  and  this  was  on  his 
poor  muddled  brain.     He  must  emulate  the  Egyptians,  and  {day 


S92  HtTEOPOLITAS  TABEHHACIJB  rULPIT. 

\rith  BerpcntB.     First  he  took  out  of  its  cage  a  Morocco  renom-snke, 

Eat  it  round  his  neck,  twisted  it  about,  and  whirled  it  ranad  about 
im.  Happily  for  him  it  did  not  aronse  itaelf  so  as  to  bite.  The  aaststaat- 
kecper  cned  out,  "  For  Qod's  sake  put  back  the  snake,"  but  the  fooUsb 
man  replied,  "  I  am  inspired."  Putting  back  the  Tei)ona<8nake,  he  ex- 
claimed, "Now  for  the  cobra."  This  deadly  serpent  was  eomeirbat 
torpid  nkh  the  cold  of  the  previoos  night,  and  therefore  the  rash  mu 
placed  it  in  his  bosom  till  it  renved,  and  glided  downward  till  its  head 
appeared  below  the  back  of  his  waistcoat.  He  took  it  bj  the  body, 
about  a  foot  from  the  head,  and  then  seized  it  lower  down  by  the  other 
hand,  intending  to  hold  it  by  the  tail  and  swing  it  round  his  bead.  He 
held  it  for  an  instant  opposite  to  his  face,  and  like  a  flash  of  lighbiing 
the  serpent  struck  himhetween  the  eyes.  The  blood  streamed  down  hn 
ftce,  and  he  called  for  help,  but  his  companion  fied  in  horror ;  and,  as  he 
told  the  jury,  he  did  uot  know  how  long  he  was  ^ne,  for  he  was  "in  a 
maze."  When  assistance  arrived  Qnrling  was  sitting  on  a  chair,  having 
restored  the  cobra  to  its  place.  He  said,  "  I  am  a  dead  man."  They 
put  him  in  a  cab,  and  took  him  to  the  hospital.  First  hia  speech  wea^ 
ne  could  only  point  to  his  poor  throat  and  moan ;  then  his  tlsiod  failed 
him,  and  lastly  his  hearing.  His  pulse  gradually  sank,  and  in  one  hoar 
from  the  time  at  which  he  had  beoi  struck  he  was  a  corpse.  There  was 
only  a  little  mark  upon  the  bridge  of  his  nose,  but  the  poison  spread 
over  the  body,  and  he  was  a  dead  man.  I  tell  you  that  story  that  yoa 
may  use  it  es  a  parable  and  leam  never  to  play  with  sin,  and  also  in  oids 
to  bring  vividly  before  you  what  it  is  to  be  bitten  by  a  serpenL  Sup- 
pose that  Gurling  could  have  been  cured  by  looking  at  a  piece  of  hna, 
would  it  not  have  been  good  news  for  him  ?  There  was  no  remedy  for 
that  poor  infatuated  creature,  but  there  is  a  remedy  for  you.  For  men 
who  have  been  bitten  by  the  fiery  serpents  of  sin  Jesus  Christ  is  lifted 
up :  not  for  you  only  who  are  as  yet  playing  with  the  serpent,  not  for  yoa 
only  who  have  warmed  it  in  your  bosom,  and  felt  it  creeping  over  your 
flesh,  but  for  yon  who  are  actually  bitten,  and  are  mortally  wounded. 
If  any  man  be  bitten  so  that  he  has  become  diseased  with  sin,  and  feels  the 
deadly  venom  in  hia  blood,  it  is  fur  him  that  Jesus  is  set  fortji  to-daj. 
Though  he  may  think  himself  to  be  an  esttcme  case,  it  is  for  such  that 
aoTcreJga  grace  provides  a  remedy. 

T/i»  bile  of  the  serpent  Ka»  painful.    Wo  are  told  in  the  test  that  these 

serpents  were  "fiery"  serpents,  which  may  perhaps  refer  to  their  colour, 

hut  more  probably  has  reference  to  the  burning  effects  of  their  venom. 

'  It  heated  itnd  inflamed  tiie  blood  so  that  every  veiu  became  a  boiliug 

river,  swollen  with  anguish.     In  some  men  that  poison  of  aspe  which 

wB  nail  Bin  has  inflamed  their  minds.    They  are  restless,  discontentei, 

.  of  fear  and  anguish.    They  write  their  own  damnation,  they  are 

at  they  are  lost,  they  refuse  all  tidings  of  hope.    Tou  cannot  get 

1  give  a  cool  and  sober  hearing  to  the  message  of  grace.    Sin 

n  them  such  t«nor  that  they  give  themselves  over  as  dead  meo. 

re  in  their  own  apprehension,  as  David  aays,  "  &ee  among  the 

ike  the  slaiu  that  lie  in  the  grave,  whom  Qod  remembers  no 

It  was  for  men  bitten  by  the  fiery  serpents  that  the  brazen 

was  lifted  up,  and  it  is  for  men  actually  envenomed  by  sin  that 

I  preached.    Jesus  died  for  such  as  are  at  their  wits'  end :  for 


NUMBER  1,500,  OE  LIFTING  UP  THE  BRAZEN  SERPENT.         698 

Bach  as  cannot  think  straight,  for  those  who  are  tumbled  up  and  down 
in  their  minds,  for  those  who  are  condemned  already — for  such  was 
the  Son  of  man  lifted  up  upon  the  cross.  What  a  comfortable  thing 
that  wc  are  able  to  tell  you  tiiis. 

Tfie  Me  of  these  serpenU  was,  as  I  have  told  yot^  mortal    The 

Israelites  could  have  no  question  about  that,  because  in  their  own 

presence  "  much  people  of  Israel  died."    They  saw  their  own  friends  die 

of  the  snake-bite,  and  they  helped  to  bury  them.    They  knew  why  they 

died,  and  were  sure  that  it  was  because  the  renom  of  the  fiery  serpents 

was  in  their  veins.    They  were  left  Avithout  an  excuse  for  imagining  that 

they  could  be  bitten  and  yet  live.    Now,  we  know  that  many  have 

perished  as  the  result  of  sin.    We  are  not  in  doubt  as  to  what  sin  will 

do,  for  we  are  told  by  the  infallible  word,  that  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death," 

and,  yet  again, "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  We  know, 

also,  that  this  death  is  endless  misery,  for  the  Scripture  describe  the  lost 

ajs  being  cast  into  outer  darkness,  "  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and 

their  fire  is  not  quenched."    Our  Lord  Jesus  speaks  of  the  condemned 

going  away  into  everlasting  punishment,  where  there  shall  be  weeping, 

and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth.    We  ought  to  have  no  doubt  about 

this,  and  the  most  of  those  who  profess  to  doubt  it  arc  those  who  fear  that 

it  will  be  their  own  portion,  who  know  that  they  are  going  down  to  eternal 

woe  themselves,  and  therefore  try  to  shut  their  eyes  to  their  inevitable 

doom.    Alas,  that  they  should  find  flatterers  in  the  pulpit  who  pander  to 

their  love  of  sin  by  piping  to  the  same  tune.    We  are  not  of  their  order. 

We  believe  in  what  the  Lord  has  said  in  all  its  solemnity  of  dread,  and, 

knowing  the  teiTors  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men  to  escape  therefrom. 

But  it  was  for  men  who  had  endured  the  mortal  bite,  for  men  upon  whose 

pallid  faces  death  began  to  set  his  seal,  for  men  whose  veins  were  burning 

with  the  awful  poison  of  the  serpent  within  them — for  them  it  was  that 

God  said  to  Moses,  '*  I^Inke  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  upon  a  pole  : 

and  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  every  one  that  is  bitten^  when  he  looketh 

upon  it,  shall  live." 

There  t's  no  limii  set  to  the  stage  ofmieonmg:  however  far  gone,  the 
remedy  still  had  power.  If  a  person  nad  been  bitten  a  moment  before, 
though  he  only  saw  a  few  drops  of  blood  oozing  forth,  and  only  felt  a 
little  smart,  he  might  look  and  live,  and  if  he  had  waited,  unhappily 
waited,  even  for  half  an  hour,  and  speech  failed  him,  and  the  pulse 
grew  feeble,  yet  if  he  could  but  look  he  would  live  at  once.  No  bound 
was  set  to  the  virtue  of  this  divinely  ordained  remedy,  or  to  the  freedom 
of  its  application  to  those  who  needed  it.  The  promise  had  no  qualifying 
clause, — **  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  everyone  that  is  bitten,  when  ho 
looketh  upon  it,  shall  live,"  and  our  text  tells  us  that  God's  promise 
came  to  pass  in  every  case,  without  exception,  for  we  read — "  It  came  to 
pass,  that  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of 
brass,  be  lived,"  Thus,  then,  I  have  described  the  person  who  was  in 
mortal  peril. 

11.  Secondly,  let  us  consider  the  behedy  pbovided  fob  hih. 
This  was  as  singular  as  it  was  effectual.  It  was  purely  ofdwine  origin^ 
and  it  is  dear  that  the  invention  of  it,  and  the  putting  of  power  into  it, 
was  entirely  of  God.  Men  have  prescribed  several  fomentations,  deooc* 
tions,  and  operation^  for  pei-pcnt  bites ;  J  do  pot  know  how  far  any  of 


594  MXTBOFOUTAK  TA3SR1IACLB  PULPIT. 

tbem  may  be  depended  upon,  bat  diis  I  know — ^I  wonld  rather  sot  be 
bitten  in  order  to  try  any  of  them,  even  those  that  are  most  in  vogae. 
For  the  bites  of  the  fiery  serpents  in  the  wilderness  there  was  no  remedy 
whatever,  except  this  which  God  had  provided^  and  at  first  sight  that 
remedy  must  have  seemed  to  be  a  very  unlikely  one.  A  simple  look  to 
the  figure  of  a  serpent  on  a  pole — ^how  unlikely  to  avail !  How  and  by 
what  means  could  a  cure  be  wrought  through  merely  looking  at  twisted 
brass  ?  It  seemed,  indeed,  to  be  almost  a  mockery  to  bid  men  look  at  the 
very  thing  which  had  caused  their  misery.  Shall  the  bite  of  a  serpent  be 
cured  by  looking  at  a  serpent  ?  Shall  that  which  brings  death  also  bring 
life  ?  But  herein  lay  the  excellency  of  the  remedy,  that  it  was  of  divine 
origin ;  for  when  God  ordains  a  cure  he  is  by  that  very  fact  bound  to 
put  potency  into  it.  He  will  not  devise  a  lailure,  nor  prescribe  a  mockeir. 
it  should  always  be  enough  for  us  to  know  that  God  ordains  a  way  of 
blessing  U8»  for  if  he  ordains,  it  must  accomplish  the  promised  result 
We  ne^  not  know  how  it  will  work,  it  is  quite  sufficient  for  us  that 
God's  mighty  grace  is  pledged  to  make  it  bring  forth  good  to  onr  souls. 

This  particular  remedy  of  a  serpent  lifted  on  a  pole  was  Bxeeedmgl^ 
mstructive,  though  I  do  not  suppose  that  Israel  understood  it  We  have 
been  taught  by  our  Lord  and  know  the  meaning.  It  was  a  serpent  im- 
paled  upon  a  pole.  As  you  would  take  a  sharp  pole  and  drive  it 
through  a  serpent's  head  to  kill  it,  so  this  braaen  serpent  was  exhibited 
as  killed,  and  hung  up  as  dead  before  all  eyes.  It  was  the  image  of  a 
dead  snake.  Wonder  of  wonders  that  our  Lord  Jesus  should  oonde- 
soend  to  be  symbolised  by  a  dead  serpent.  The  instruction  to  us  after 
reading  John*8  gospel  is  this :  our  Lorn  Jesus  Christ,  in  infinite  humilia- 
tion, deigned  to  come  into  the  world,  and  to  be  made  a  curse  for  ql 
The  brazen  serpent  had  no  venom  of  itself,  but  it  took  the  form  of  a  fieiy 
serpent.  Christ  is  no  sinner,  and  in  him  is  no  sin.  But  the  brazen  ser- 
pent was  in  the  form  of  a  serpent ;  and  so  was  Jesus  sent  forth  by  God 
**  in  the  likeness  of  sinfol  fiesh."  He  came  under  the  law,  and  sin  was 
imputed  to  him,  and  therefore  he  came  under  the  wrath  and  cnise  of 
CKmI  for  our  sskes.  In  Christ  Jesus,  if  you  will  look  at  him  upon  the 
cross,  yon  will  see  that  sin  is  slain  and  hung  up  as  a  dead  ser- 
put :  there  too  is  death  put  to  death,  for  '*  he  hath  abolished  death  and 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light:"  and  there  also  is  the  curse  for 
ever  ended  because  he  has  endured  it,  being  **  made  a  curse  for  ua»  as  it  is 
written,  cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  Thus  are  these 
serpents  hung  np  upon  the  cross  as  a  spectacle  to  aU  beholderSi  M  slain 
by  our  dving  Lord.  Sin,  deaths  and  the  curse  are  as  dead  Rerpenti 
now.  On,  what  a  sight  I  If  yon  can  see  it  what  jov  it  will  give 
you.  Had  the  Hebrews  understood  it.  that  dead  serpent,  dansUng  from 
a  pole,  would  have  prophesied  to  them  the  glorious  sight  whicm  this  da; 
onr  faith  eases  upon — Jesus  slain,  and  sin,  death,  and  hell  slain  in  him. 
The  remedy,  then,  to  be  looked  to  was  exceedingly  instructive,  and  we 
know  the  instruction  it  was  intended  to  convey  to  us. 

Please  to  recollect  that  in  all  the  camp  of  Israel  t?mti  usn  hut  om 
remedy  for  serpent-bite,  and  that  was  the  brazen  serpent ;  and  there  was 
but  one  brazen  serpent,  not  two.  Israel  might  not  make  another.  If 
they  had  made  a  second  it  would  have  had  no  effect :  there  was  one,  and 
only  one,  and  that  was  lifted  high  in  the  centre  of  the  camp,  that  if  any 


KUHBBB  1,600,  OB  LIFTINO  UP  THB  BBAZBN  BERPENT.        596 

roan  wis  btttoi  by  a  serpent  he  might  look  to  it  and  live.  There  is  one 
Saviour,  and  only  one.  There  is  none  other  name  given  under  heaven 
among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved.  All  grace  is  concentrated  in 
Jesus,  of  whom  we  read, ''  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all 
fulness  dwell"  Christ's  bearing  the  ourse  and  ending  the  curse,  Christ's 
being  slain  by  sin  and  destroying  sin,  Christ  bnused  as  to  his  heel  by  the 
old  serpent,  but  breaking  the  serpent's  head, — ^it  is  Christ  alone  that  we 
most  look  to  if  we  would  live.  0  sinner,  look  to  Jesus  on  the  cross,  for 
he  is  the  one  remedy  for  ail  forms  of  sin's  poisoned  wounds. 

There  was  but  one  healing  serpent,  and  that  one  was  bright  and 
lustrous.  It  was  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  brass  is  a  shining  metal.  This 
was  newly-made  brass,  and  therefore  not  dimmed,  and  whenever  the  sun 
shone,  there  flashed  forth  a  brightness  from  this  brazen  serpent.  It  might 
have  been  a  serpent  of  wood  or  of  any  other  metal,  if  God  had  so 
ordained ;  but  he  commanded  that  it  must  be  of  brass,  that  it  might 
have  a  brightness  about  it.  What  a  brightness  there  is  about  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ !  If  we  do  but  exhibit  him  in  his  own  tnie  metcil  he  is 
lustrous  in  the  eyes  of  men.  If  we  will  but  preach  the  gospel  simply, 
and  never  think  to  adorn  it  with  our  philosophical  thought,  there  is 
enough  brightness  in  Christ  to  catch  a  sinner  s  eye,  aye,  and  it  does 
catch  the  eyes  of  thousands.  From  afar  the  everlasting  gospel  gleams 
in  the  person  of  Christ.  As  the  brazen  standard  reflected  the  beams  of 
Uie  sun,  so  Jesus  reflects  the  love  ot  God  to  siuuers,  and  seeing  it  they 
look  by  iaith  and  live* 

Once  more,  this  remedy  was  an  enduring  one.  It  was  a  serpent  of 
brass,  and  I  suppose  it  remained  in  the  midst  of  the  camp  from  that  day 
forward.  There  was  no  use  for  it  after  Israel  entered  Canaan,  but^  as 
long  as  they  were  in  the  wilderness,  it  was  probably  exhibited  in  the 
centre  of  the  camp,  hard  by  the  tabernacle  door,  upon  a  lofty  standard. 
Aloft  and  open  to  the  gaze  of  all  hung  this  Image  of  a  dead  snake — 
the  peipetual  cure  for  serpent  venom.  Had  it  been  made  of  other 
materials  it  might  have  been  broken,  or  have  decaved«  but  a  serpent  of 
brass  would  last  as  long  as  flery  serpents  pestered  the  desert  camp.  As 
long  as  there  was  a  man  bitten  there  was  tne  serpent  of  brass  to  heal  him. 
What  a  comfort  is  this,  that  Jesus  is  still  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost 
all  that  come  to  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  them.  The  dyin^  thief  beheld  the  brightness  of  that  serpent  of  brass 
as  he  saw  Jesus  hangmg  at  his  side,  and  it  saved  him ;  and  so  may  vou 
and  I  look  and  live,  for  he  is  '*  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever." 

<'  Faint  my  head,  and  sick  my  heart, 
Wonnded,  bruisM,  in  every  port, 
Satan's  fi|^  sting  I  feel 
Poiaon*d  with  the  pride  of  hcU : 
But  if  at  the  point  to  die. 
Upward  I  direct  mine  eye, 
Jesas  lifted  up  I  see, 
live  by  him  who  died  for  me.** 

I  hope  I  do  not  overhv  my  subject  bv  these  Qgurea  I  wish  not  to  do 
so,  but  to  make  it  very  plain  to  you.  All  you  that  are  really  guilty,  all 
you  who  are  bitten  by  tne  serpent,  the  sure  remedy  for  yon  is  to  look  to 


596  MRTBOPOLITAN  TABfiBHACIiB  PULPIT* 

Jesas  Christ;,  who  took  our  sin  upon  himself,  and  died  in  the  miMi's 
stead,  ''bein^  made  sin  for  as  that  we  might  be  made  therighteonsieaof 
God  in  him.*"  Tour  only  remedy  lies  in  Christ,  and  nowhere  else.  LoA 
unto  him  and  be  ye  saved. 

III.  This  brings  us,  in  the  third  plaQe,  to  consider  thb  applicatiot 
OF  THE  KEHEDT,  or  the  link  between  the  serpent-bitten  man  and  the 
brass  serpent  which  was  to  heal  him.  What  was  the  link?  It  wa« rf 
the  most  simple  kind  imaginable.  The  biuzen  serpent  might  have  been, 
if  God  had  so  ordered  it,  carried  into  the  house  where  the  sick  man 
wns,  but  it  was  not  so.  It  might  have  been  applied  to  him  by  mbbing: 
he  might  have  been  expected  to  repeat  a  certain  form  of  prayer,  or  to 
have  a  priest  present  to  perform  a  ceremony,  but  there  was  no^ng  of 
the  kind ;  he  had  only  to  look.  It  was  well  that  the  cure  was  so 
simple  for  the  danger  was  so  frequent.  Bites  of  the  serpent  came  in 
many  ways ;  a  man  might  be  gathering  sticks,  or  merely  walking  along, 
and  be  bitten.  Even  now  in  the  desert  seipents  are  a  danger.  Mr.  Sibiee 
says  that  on  one  occasion  he  saw  what  he  thought  to  be  a  round  stone, 
beautifully  marked.  He  put  forth  his  hand  to  take  it  np,  when  to  ha 
horror  he  discovered  that  it  was  a  coiied-up  living  serpent.  All  the  day 
long  when  fiery  serpents  were  sent  among  Uiem  the  Israelites  must  hare 
been  in  danger.  In  their  beds  and  at  their  meals,  in  their  houses  and 
when  they  went  abroad,  they  were  in  danger.  These  serpents  are 
called  by  Isaiah  "flying  serpents,"  not  because  they  do  fly,  but  be- 
cause they  contract  themselves  and  then  suddenly  spring  up,  so  as  (^ 
reach  to  a  considerable  height,  and  a  man  might  be  well  busldned  uid 
yet  not  be  beyond  the  reach  of  one  of  these  malignant  reptiles.  What 
was  a  man  to  do  ?  He  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  stand  outside  his  tent 
door,  and  look  to  the  place  where  gleamed  afar  the  brightness  of  Hie 
serpent  of  brass,  and  the  moment  he  looked  he  was  healed.  He  bad 
nothing  to  do  but  to  look, — ^no  priest  was  wanted,  no  holy  water,  no 
hocus-pocus,  no  mass-book,  nothing  but  a  look.  A  Somish  bishop  said 
to  one  of  the  early  Reformers,  when  he  preached  salvation  by  simple 
faith,  "  0  Mr.  Doctor,  open  that  gap  to  the  people  and  we  are  ^^^^ 
And  so  indeed  they  are,  for  the  business  and  trade  of  priestcraft  are  ended 
for  ever  if  men  may  simply  trust  Jesus  and  live.  Yet  it  is  even  so. 
Believe  in  him,  ye  sinners,  for  this  is  the  spiritual  meaning  of  lookinp 
and  at  once  your  sin  is  forgiven,  and  what  perhaps  is  more,  its  deadly 

Sower  ceases  to  operate  within  your  spirit.    There  is  life  in  a  look  at 
esns ;  is  not  this  simple  enough  ?  ^  w» 

Bat  please  to  notice  how  very  personal  it  was.  A  man  o6^W  not  be 
cured  by  anything  anybody  else  could  do  for  him.  If  he  had  bean  bitten 
by  the  serpent  and  had  refused  to  look  to  the  serpent  of  brass,  ^^.^ 
gone  to  his  bed,  no  physician  could  hdp  him.  A  pious  mother  bPS^^ 
Kneel  down  and  pray  for  him,  but  it  would  be  of  no  use.  Sisteni  mi^^ 
come  in  and  plead,  ministers  might  be  called  in  to  pray  that  the  i 
might  live ;  but  he  must  die  despite  their  prayers  if  be  did  not  looJ 
There  was  only  one  hope  for  his  life — hB  muBt  took  io  thai  serpent  of  irasi 
It  is  jast  so  with  you.  Some  of  you  have  written  to  me  beggini 
me  to  pray  for  you :  so  I  have,  but  it  avails  nothing  wkes  Jo^\ 
yourselves  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  There  is  not  beneath  the  oopes 
of  heaven,  nor  in  heaven,  any  hope  for  any  one  of  you  unlefiSToa  ww'i 


NUMBEB  1,600,  OE  LIFTIKG  UP  THB  BKAZBlf  BBUPENT.         597 

believe  in  Jesus  Gbiist.  Whoever  you  may  be,  however  much  bitten 
of  the  serpent,  and  however  near  to  die,  if  you  will  look  to  the 
Saviour  yon  shall  live;  but  if  you  will  not  do  this  you  must  be 
damned,  as  surelv  as  you  live.  At  the  last  great  day  I  must  bear  wit* 
ncss  against  you  that  I  have  told  vou  this  straight  out  and  plainly.  "  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved :  he  that  believeth  not  shall 
be  damned."  There  is  no  help  for  it;  you  may  do  what  you  will, 
join  what  church  you  please,  take  the  Lord's  Supper,  be  baptized,  go 
through  severe  penances,  or  give  all  your  goods  to  ^d  the  poor,  but  you 
are  a  lost  man  unless  you  look  to  Jesus,  for  this  is  the  one  remedy ;  and 
even  Jesus  Christ  himself  cannot,  will  not,  save  you  unless  vou  look  to 
him.  There  is  nothing  in  his  death  to  save  you,  there  is  nothing  in  his 
life  to  save  you,  unless  you  will  trust  him.  It  has  come  to  this,  you 
must  look,  and  look  for  yourself. 

And  then,  again,  it  is  very  instrucHve,  This  looking,  what  did  it 
mean  ?  It  meant  this — self-help  must  be  abandoned,  and  God  must  be 
tnisted.  The  wounded  man  would  say,  ^*  I  must  not  sit  here  and  look 
at  my  wound,  for  that  will  not  save  me.  See  there  where  the  serpent 
struck  me,  the  blood  is  oozing  forth,  black  with  the  venom !  How  it 
burns  and  swells !  My  very  heart  is  iailinff.  But  all  these  reflections 
will  not  ease  me.  I  must  look  away  irom  this  to  the  uplifted  serpent  of 
brass."  It  is  idle  to  look  anywhere  except  to  Qod's  one  ordained  remedy. 
The  Israelites  must  have  understood  as  much  as  this,  that  Ood  requires 
us  to  trust  him,  and  to  use  his  means  of  salvation.  We  must  do  as  he 
bids  us,  and  trust  in  him  to  work  our  cure ;  and  if  we  will  not  do  this 
we  shall  die  eternally. 

This  way  of  curing  was  intended  that  they  might  magnify  the  love  of 
God,  and  attribute  their  healing  entirely  to  divine  gitice.  The  brazen  ser- 
pent was  not  merely  a  picture,  as  I  have  shown  you,  of  God's  putting 
away  sin  by  spending  his  wrath  upon  his  Son,  but  it  was  a  display  of  divine 
love.  And  this  I  know  because  Jesus  himself  said,  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the 
serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up.  For 
God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten  Son":  plainly 
saying  that  the  death  of  Christ  upon  the  cross  was  an  exhibition  of  God's 
love  to  men ;  and  whosoever  looks  to  that  grandest  display  of  God's  love 
to  man,  namely,  his  giving  his  only-begotten  Son  to  become  a  curse  for 
us,  shall  surely  live.  Now,  when  a  man  was  healed  by  looking  at  the  scr* 
pent  he  coula  not  say  that  he  healed  himself;  for  he  only  looked,  and 
there  is  no  virtue  in  a  look.  A  believer  never  claims  merit  or  honour  on 
account  of  his  &ith.  Faith  is  a  self-denying  grace,  and  never  dares  to 
boast.  Where  is  the  great  credit  of  simply  believing  the  truth,  and 
humbly  trusting  Christ  to  save  you  ?  Faith  glorifies  (xod,  and  so  our 
liord  has  chosen  it  as  the  means  of  our  salvation.  If  a  priest  had  come 
and  touched  the  bitten  man  he  might  have  ascribed  some  honour  to  the 
priest ;  but  when  there  was  no  priest  in  the  case,  when  there  was  nothing 
except  looking  to  that  brazen  serpent,  the  man  was  driven  to  the 
conclusion  that  God's  love  and  power  had  healed  him.  I  am  not  saved 
by  anything  that  I  have  done,  but  by  what  the  Lord  has  done.  To  that 
conclusion  God  will  have  us  all  come ;  we  must  all  confess  that  if  saved 
it  is  by  his  free,  rich,  sovereign,  undeserved  grace  displayed  in  the  person 
of  his  dear  Son, 


598  KKTROPOLITAV  TABXEHAOLB  PULPIT. 

IV.  Allow  me  one  moment  npoQ  the  fourth  head,  which  is  thb  cctbi 
BFFECfTED.  We  are  told  in  the  text  that  ''if  a  serpent  had  bitten  anj 
man,  iiriUn he  beheld  the  serpent  of  braes^  he  lived;"  that  is  to  ea^,  Aa  tr<u 
healed  at  cnee.  He  had  not  to  wait  five  minntos,  nor  five  eeconcb.  Dear 
hearer,  did  yon  ever  hear  this  befoxe?  If  you  have  not,  it  may  startle  jon, 
bat  it  is  true.  If  yon  have  lived  in  the  blackest  sia  that  is  possible  up 
to  this  very  moment,  yet  if  yon  will  now  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  yon  shall 
be  saved  liefore  the  olock  ticks  another  time.  It  is  done  like  a  flash  of 
lightning ;  pardon  is  not  a  work  of  time.  Sanctification  needs  a  V\k- 
time,  but  jostification  needs  no  mora  than  a  moment  Thou  believest, 
thou  hvest.  Thou  dost  trust  to  Ohrist,  thy  sins  are  gone,  thou  art  a 
saved  man  the  instant  thou  believest.  ''Oh,"  saith  one,  "that  is  a 
wonder.'*  It  is  a  wonder,  and  will  remain  a  wonder  to  all  eternity.  Oar 
Lord's  miracles  when  he  was  on  earth  were  mostly  instantaueoos.  He 
touched  them  and  the  fevered  ones  were  able  to  sit  up  and  minister  to 
him.  No  doctor  can  cure  a  fever  in  that  fiuhion,  for  there  is  a  resultant 
weidmess  left  after  the  heat  of  the  fever  is  abated.  Jesus  works  perfect 
cures,  and  whosoever  believeth  in  him,  though  he  hath  only  fadieved  one 
minute,  is  justified  from  all  his  sins.    Oh  the  matchless  grace  of  God ! 

Thds  remedy  healed  again  and  aaain.  Very  possibly  after  a  man  had 
been  healed  he  might  go  back  to  his  work,  and  be  attacked  by  a  second 
serpent,  for  there  were  broods  of  them  about.  What  had  he  to  do  ? 
Why,  to  look  again,  and  if  he  was  wounded  a  thousand  times  he  must 
look  a  thousand  times.  Yon,  dear  child  of  God,  if  you  have  sin  on  your 
conscience,  look  to  Jesus.  The  healthiest  way  of  hving  where  serpents 
swarm  is  never  to  take  your  eye  off  the  brazen  Serpent  at  all.  Ah,  ye 
vipers,  ye  may  bite  if  ye  will ;  as  long  as  my  eye  is  upon  the  brazen  ser- 
pent I  defy  your  fangs  and  poison-bags,  for  I  have  a  continual  remedj 
at  work  within  me.  Temptation  is  overcome  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
"  This  is  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  £utlu" 

Thie  cure  woe  of  universal  efficacy  to  all  who  used  it.  There  was  not 
one  case  in  all  the  camp  of  a  man  that  looked  to  the  serpent  of  bian  and 
yet  di^,  and  there  never  will  be  a  case  of  a  man  that  looks  to  Jesus  who 
remains  under  condemnati(m.  The  beHever  mutt  be  saved.  Some  of 
the  people  had  to  look  fimn  a  long  distance.  The  pole  ooold  not  be 
equally  near  to  everybody,  but  so  &ng  as  they  could  see  the  serpent  it 
healed  those  that  were  anr  off  as  well  as  those  who  were  nigh.  Nor  did 
it  matter  if  their  eyes  were  feeble.  All  eyes  were  not  atike  keen ;  aod 
some  may  have  had  a  aquint,  or  a  dimness  of  vision,  or  only  one  eye,  but 
if  thev  did  but  look  th^  lived.  Ptf  haps  the  man  could  hardlv  make  ou* 
the  shape  of  liie  aerpent  as  he  looked.  "Ah,''  he  said  to  himself,  "  1 
cannot  disoem  tine  coils  of  the  brasen  snake,  but  I  can  see  the  shining 
of  the  brass ; "  and  he  lived.  Oh,  poor  soul,  if  thou  canst  not  aee  Uie 
whole  of  Cttirist  nor  all  his  beauties,  nor  all  the  riches  of  his  pace,  yet  if 
thou  canst  but  see  him  who  was  made  sin  for  us  thou  shalt  live.  If  thou 
sayest,  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief"  thy  &ith  will  save 
thee ;  a  little  faith  will  give  thee  a  great  Christ,  and  thou  rtialt  find 
eternal  life  in  him. 

Thus  I  have  tried  to  describe  the  cure.    Oh  that  the  Lord  would 
work  tfiat  cure  in  every  sinner  here  at  this  moment.    I  do  pray  he  may. 

It  is  a  pleasant  thought  that  if  they  looked  to  that  brasen  aeipent  bj 


NUMBER   1^500,  OB  LIFTINa  UP  THE  BBAZBN  SERPENT.         599 

any  kind  of  light  they  lived.  Many  beheld  ifc  in  the  glare  of  noon,  and 
saw  its  shining  coils,  and  lived ;  but  I  should  not  wonder  that  some  were 
bitten  at  night,  and  by  the  moonlight  they  drew  near  and  looked  up  and 
lived.  Perhaps  it  was  a  dark  and  stormy  night,  and  not  a  star  was 
visible.  The  tempest  crashed  overhead,  and  from  the  murkv  doud  out 
flashed  the  lightning,  cleaving  the  rocks  asunder.  By  the  glare  of  that 
sudden  flame  the  dying  man  made  out  the  brazen  serpent,  and  though  he 
saw  but  for  a  moment  yet  he  lived.  So^  sinner,  if  your  soul  is  wrapped 
in  tempest,  and  if  from  out  the  cloud  there  comes  but  one  single  flash 
of  light,  look  to  Jesus  Christ  by  it  and  you  shaH-  live. 

Y.     I  close  with  this  last  matter  of  consideration :  here  is  A  lesson 
FOR  THOSE  WHO  LOVE  THEIR  LoRD.      What  ought  we   to  do  ?      We 
should  imitate  Moses,  whose  business  it  was  to  set  the  brazen  serpent 
upon  a  pole.    It  is  your  business  and  mine  to  lift  up  the  gospel  of  Christ 
Jesus,  so  that  all  may  see  it.    All  Moses  had  to  do  was  to  hang  up  the 
braaten  serpent  in  the  sight  of  all.    He  did  not  say.  '^  Aaron,  brmg  your 
censer,  ana  bring  with  you  a  score  of  priests,  and  make  a  perfumed  cloud." 
Nor  did  he  say»  "  I  myself  will  go  forth  in  my  robes  as  lawgiver,  and 
stand  there."  No,  he  had  nothing  to  do  that  was  pompous  or  ceremonial, 
he  had  but  to  exhibit  the  brass  serpent  and  leave  it  naked  and  open  to 
the  gaze  of  all.    He  did  not  say,  '*  Aaron,  bring  hither  a  cloth  of  gold, 
wrap  up  the  serpent  in  blue  and  scarlet  and  fine  linen."    Such  an  act 
would  have  been  clean  contrary  to  his  orders.    He  was  to  keep  the  ser- 
pent unveiled.     Its  power  lay  in  itself,  and  not  in  its  surroundings. 
The  Lord  did  not  tell  him  to  paint  the  pole,  or  to  deck  it  with  Uie 
colours  of  the  rainbow.    Oh,  no.    Any  pole  would  do.    The  dying  ones 
did  not  want  to  see  the  pole,  they  only  needed  to  behold  the  serpent.    I 
dare  say  he  would  make  a  neat  pole,  for  God's  work  should  be  done 
decently,  but  still  the  serpent  was  the  sole  thing  to  Look  at.    This  is 
what  we  have  to  do  with  our  Lord.    We  must  preach  him,  teach  Mm, 
and  make  him  visible  to  all.     We  must  not  conceal  him  by  our  attempts 
at  eloquence  and  learning.    We  must  have  done  with  the  polished  lance- 
wood  pole  of  fine  speech,  and  those  bits  of  scarlet  and  blue,  in  the  form 
of  gi'and  sentences  and  poetic  periods.    Everything  must  be  done  that 
Christ  may  be  seen,  and  nothing  must  be  allowed  which  hides  him. 
Moses  may  go  home  and  go  to  t^d  when  the  sernent  is  once  uplifted. 
All  that  is  wanted  is  that  the  brazen  serpent  shoula  be  within  view  both 
by  day  and  night.    The  preacher  may  hide  himself,  so  that  nobody  may 
know  who  he  is,  for  if  he  nas  set  forth  Christ  he  is  best  out  of  the  way. 

Now,  you  teachers,  teach  your  children  Jesus.  Show  them  Christ 
crucified.  Kieep  Christ  before  them .  You  yousg  men  that  trv  to  preach, 
do  not  attempt  to  do  it  grandly.  The  true  grandeur  of  preacning  is  for 
Christ  to  be  grandly  displayed  in  it.  No  other  grandeur  is  wanted. 
Keep  self  in  the  background,  but  set  forth  Jesus  Christ  among  the 
people,  evidently  crucified  among  them.  None  but  Jesus,  none  but 
Jesus.    Let  him  be  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  your  teaching. 

Some  of  vou  have  looked  to  the  brazen  serpent^  I  know,  and  yon  have 
been  healed,  but  what  have  you  done  with  the  brazen  serpent  since  ? 
You  have  not  come  forward  to  confess  your  faith  and  join  the  church. 
You  have  not  spoken  to  any  one  about  his  soul.  You  put  the  brazen 
serpent  into  a  chest  and  hide  it  away.    Is  this  right  ?    Bring  it  out,  and 


coo  METROPOLITAN  TABERKACLB  PULPFP. 

set  it  on  a  pole.  Publish  Christ  and  his  salvation.  He  was  nerer  meant 
to  be  treated  as  a  curiosity  in  a  museum ;  he  is  intended  to  be  ex- 
hibited in  the  highways  that  those  who  are  sin-bitten  may  look  at  him. 
**  But,  I  have  no  i>roper  pole,"  says  one.  The  best  sort  of  pole  to 
exhibit  Christ  upon  is  a  high  one,  so  that  he  mav  be  seen  the  mrther. 
Exalt  Jesus.  Speak  well  of  his  name.  I  do  not  know  any  other  virtue 
that  there  can  be  in  the  pole  but  its  height.  The  more  you  can  speak  in 
your  Lord*s  praise,  the  nigher  yon  can  lift  him  np  the  better,  but  for 
all  other  styles  of  speech  there  is  nothing  to  be  saia.  Do  lift  Christ  up. 
"  Oh,"  says  one,  "  but  I  have  not  a  long  standard."  Then  lift  him  up 
on  such  as  you  have,  for  there  are  snort  people  about  who  will  be 
able  to  see  by  your  means.  I  think  I  told  you  once  of  a  picture 
which  I  saw  of  the  brazen  serpent.  I  want  the  Sunday-school  teachers 
to  listen  to  this.  The  artist  represented  all  sorts  of  people  clostering 
round  the  pole,  and  as  they  looked  the  horrible  snakes  dropped  off  their 
arms,  and  they  lived.  There  was  such  a  crowd  around  the  pole  that 
a  mother  could  not  get  near  it.  She  carried  a  little  babe,  which  a 
serpent  had  bitten.  You  could  see  the  blue  marks  of  the  venom. 
As  she  could  get  no  nearer,  the  mother  held  her  child  aloft,  and  turned 
its  little  head  that  it  might  gaze  with  its  in&nt  eye  npon  the  brazen 
serpent  and  live.  Do  this  with  your  little  children,  you  Sunday-school 
teachers.  Even  while  they  are  yet  little,  pray  that  they  may  look  to 
Jesus  Christ  and  live ;  for  there  is  no  bound  set  to  their  age.  Old  men 
snake-bitten  came  hobbling  on  their  crutches.  "  Eighty  years  old  am 
I,"  saith  one,  "but  I  have  looked  to  the  brazen  serpent,  and  I  am 
healed."  Little  boys  were  brought  out  by  their  mothers,  though  as 
yet  they  could  hardly  speak  plainly,  and  they  cried  in  chUd  language, 
"I  look  at  the  great  snake  and  it  bless  me."  All  ranks,  ai^ 
sexes,  and  characters,  and  dispositions  looked  and  lived.  Who  will 
look  to  Jesus  at  this  good  hour?  0  dear  souls,  will  you  have  life  or 
no  ?  Will  you  despise  Christ  and  perish  ?  If  so,  your  blood  be  on  your 
own  skirts.  I  have  told  you  God*s  way  of  salvation,  lay  hold  on  it. 
Look  to  Jesus  at  once.   May  his  Spirit  gently  lead  you  so  to  do.  Amen. 


PoETiOKS  OF  ScniPTUEB  READ  BEFORE  Sbrmon— Numbers  xxi. 

4 — 9  ;  John  iii.  1 — 18. 


IItmns  fbom  "Oue  Own  Hymk  Book"— 240,  589,  881. 


I  should  be  greatly  rejoiced  if  this  sermon  could  be  widely  distributed.  1 
have  requested  Messrs.  Passmore  and  Alabaster  to  republish  it  in  book  fbniL 
It  can  be  had  at  one  penny  a  copy,  or  68.  per  hundred.— C.  H.  S. 


llltttijqratito  ^iiibmaxk  inlpt 


REFUGES  OP  LIES  AND  WHAT  WILL  BECOME  OP  THEiT. 


1 1 


Dblivebed  on  Lobd's-day  Mornino,  Octobee  26th,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METaOFOLlTAN  TABEEKAGLE^  NEWINGTOir, 


**  Jiid8;ment  also  will  1  lay  to  tlie  line,  and  riffhteonmeu  to  the  plnmmet :  and  the 
hail  ahall  sireep  awa^  the  refiige  of  lisfb  and  ue  waters  sliaU  overflow  ttie  hiding 
ptaoe."— -Isaiah  xzriii.  17. 

Oyer  against  amazing  mercy  the  Holy  Spirit  sets  awakening  judg- 
ment. The  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  is  also  the  day  of  vengeance 
of  our  God ;  and  the  sentence  which  shall  confirm  the  righteous  in  his 
righteousness  is  attended  by  another  which  saith^  '^  He  that  is  unjust  let 
him  be  unjust  still."  When  the  Lord  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his 
saints  he  will  at  the  sel&ame  time  take  vengeance  in  flaming  fire  upon 
those  that  know  him  not.  In  the  present  instance,  in  the  sixteenth 
verse  of  this  chapter,  the  Lord  declares  **  Behold  /  lay  in  Zion  for  a 
foundation  a  stone,  a  tried  stone  **;  and  then  immediately  in  our  text  he 
speaks  of  another  laying :  **  Judgment  also  mil  I  lay  to  the  line,  and 
righteousness  to  the  plummet."  Upon  the  roses  of  grace  grow  the  thorns 
of  justice.  Whenever  the  Lord  bares  his  arm  for  mercy  towards  believers 
he  gives  a  back  stroke  to  his  enemies.  Hence  even  the  activity  of  love 
wears  a  threatening  aspect  to  those  who  abide  impnitent — wedded  to 
their  sins — since  it  is  accompanied  by  an  energetic  display  of  justice. 
Take  care  that  ^e  remember  this,  ye  who  are  unbelievers  and  yet  dream 
of  some  millennial  benediction,  or  latter  day  glory,  which  may  bring  sal- 
vation to  you.  Is  it  not  written,  "Woe  unto  you  that  desire  the  day  of 
the  Lord !  to  what  end  is  it  for  you  ?  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  darkness, 
and  not  light"?  Whatever  good  may  be  in  store  for  believers  there  is 
none  for  yon.  The  pillar  of  fire  which  will  give  light  to  the  Lord's  Israel 
will  be  darkness  to  you,  0  ye  Egyptians.  To  those  who  are  out  of  Christ, 
even  the  greatest  triumphs  of  divine  love  will  be  terrible ;  they  shall 
behold,  and  wonder,  and  perish :  they  shall  see  the  plentiful  goodness  of 
the  Lord  but  they  shall  not  eat  thereof,  but  die  in  the  gate. 

These  are  heavy  tidings  for  you  who  love  not  the  lK)rd,  but  they  are 

as  true  as  they  are  heavy :  as  certainly  as  mercy  lays  her  foundation,  so 

surely  will  judgment  sweep  away  those  who  reject  it  and  build  upon 

another.    Nor  shall  there  be  long  space  between  the  rejection  of  the 

No.  1,501. 


C02-  KKTBOFOUTAK  TABEBHACLS  PULPIT. 

lUessii^  and  the  eseontion  of  the  cnne :  longBafiering  win  have  in  9A, 
aod  then  the  Bwift-footed  executioner  shall  overtake  the  dnner,  ud  me 
Khali  be  unto  the  bmr;  scalp  of  him  that  goeth  on  in  iiifl  irnqoitio. 
Now,  therefore,  be  ye  not  mockere,  leat  jonr  bands  be  made  strong. 
Another  great  truth  should  never  be  forgotten ;  it  is  this — a  great  privi- 
lege involves  a  great  reaponBibilitj.  It  is  a  great  privil^e  to  hear  to 
gospel,  but  woe  unto  those  who  shat  their  ears  to  ibs  warnings  and  in- 
vitations ;  for  it  shall  ring  out  their  death-knell.  It  is  a  very  high  faToni 
to  see  the  foundation  which  God  has  laid  in  Zion  and  to  be  exhorted  la 
build  upon  it ;  bnt  of  those  who  reject  that  foundation  vengeance  will  be 
exactetf.  Upon  whomsoever  this  stone  shall  &U  it  shall  grind  tbcm  td 
powder.  In  proportion  to  the  love  which  gave  the  Only-Begotten  to  bt 
the  foundation  of  a  sinner's  hope  will  be  the  divine  indignation  ag&inst 
those  who  reject  him.  You  who  see  Jesus  set  fsrth  before  yon  as  tbe 
comer-stone  of  the  Lord's  own  chooBiog  and  yet  perversely  torn  aside 
to  prepare  false  refuges  of  your  own  will  have  to  answer  to  God  for  this 
insult  to  his  Son,  this  despite  to  hia  Spirit.  Every  hour  in  which  Jon 
make  hes  your  refuge  and  hide  yourselves  nnder  ^sehood  yon  increase 
your  guilt.    0  that  you  would  consider  this. 

But  I  hear  one  say,  "  We  have  no  refuge  or  hidii^  place,  and  do  tkA 
feel  that  we  need  any."  I  answer  that  this  very  self-conceit  of  yonnu 
your  refuge.  Every  man  knows  in  his  own  conscience  that  he  needs  a 
shelter  of  some  sort  wherein  to  screen  himself  from  stem  justice.  He 
supplies  his  conscience  with  something  in  the  form  of  a  shield,  becaoK 
he  inwardly  knows  that  he  is  not  able  to  appear  before  God  without 
some  sort  of  apology,  or  attempt  at  justification.  Let  him  stultiff  !u' 
conscience  as  much  as  he  pleases,  there  is  a  sometfaing  within  him  viucli 
tells  him  that  everything  is  not  right.  He  may  brag  as  he  likes,  but  be 
has  at  least  a  suspicion  of  danger,  a  fear  of  coming  judgment.  Even 
as  a  man  needs  the  shelter  of  a  cave,  a  hut,  or  a  house  for  his  body,  ^ 
he  needs  a  refuge  for  his  soul ;  and  when  he  rejects  the  soUd  lefusfi 
which  the  mercy  of  God  has  provided  in  Christ  Jesus  he  sets  to  work  to 
mild  another  shelter,  and  to  lay  for  himself  another  foundation  wbereon 
.e  may  repose.  Our  desire  this  morning  is  ansionsly  and  solemnly  1<| 
ram  men  of  what  will  come  of  their  wilfulness,  aud  to  lead  them  tfllook 
■  little  before  them  and  spv  out  through  the  telescope  of  Scripture  the  snrc 
Liture  of  their  ungronuded  hopes.  Thus  I  trust  they  may  be  1m  W 
bandon  all  false  refuges,  and  may  be  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to 
ccept  the  sure  foundation  which  God  has  laid  for  his  behoving  pco#' 
)  how  I  long  that  you  may  aU  of  you  be  right  for  eternity.  ^  '^^  ,? 
ot  have  one  of  you  perish,  any  more  than  I  would  wish  to  periph  rayseu- 
)  Holy  Spirit,  bless  my  feeble  words  to  the  good  of  these  my.belovw 
icople.  May  my  weakness  of  thought  and  speech  never  hinder  thw 
L'om  working,  but  the  rather,  in  this  hour  of  my  infirmity,  speafc  "lo" 
I'ith  the  greater  power. 

First,  Ut  us  see  the  Lord  judging  faUe  refuges;  secondly,  Ul  ?«/'«■''"* 
'lev  destruclioH;  and  thirdly.  Id  us  tiUce  the  wamtny  which  suclf  * 
ubject  should  convey  to  every  thoughtful  mind.  \ 

I.  Let  us  bee  the  Lord  judgino  uan'b  refuges.  H^  ^^ 
'  Judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plum™^'- 1 
Jbserve  that,  however  carelessly  we  may  judge  ourselves,  God  in"""' ^'' 


ESFUGES  OF  LIS8  AND  WHAT  WILL  BEOOKE  OF  TH£^.         003 

judge  118.  We  may  take  things  at  second  hand,  and  tiqw  them  very 
lightly,  but  God  makes  personal  observation  and  takes  a  careful  survey, 
"^Ye  may  foolishly  say,  *'  Do  not  let  us  trouble  ourselves  too  much  or  become 
tx)o  anxious,  things  will  no  doubt  come  right  one  of  these  days";  but  God, 
is  in  earnest,  and  there  is  no  trifling  with  him.  Obsen^e  that  hissurveji' 
is  performed  with  the  utmost  accuracy.  He  will  not  judge  according  to 
"the  sight  of  the  eyes  or  the  hearing  of  the  ears,  but  he  will  go  into 
matters  and  make  a  thorough  search.  An  ordinaiy  builder  who  should 
be  sent  to  examine  a  house  would  probably  content  himself  with  hastily 
looking  to  see  whether  the  walls  were  perpendicular,  and  whether  the 
work  was  of  the  quantity  and  quality  specified  in  the  contract ;  he  could 
tell  this  pretty  nearly  with  his  eye,  or  by  measuring  with  his  foot ;  but 
if  a  very  careful  and  scientific  survey  was  wanted,  he  would  then  produce 
his  plununet  and  his  line,  and  try  everything  by  the  regular  accepted 
tests  of  builder's  work :  hence  our  text  describes  the  Lord  as  laying 
judgment  to  the  line  and  n'ghteousness  to  the  plummet ;  that  is  to  say, 
lie  makes  a  deliberate  trial  of  our  confidences,  compares  our  hopes  with 
our  conduct,  our  beliefs  with  the  truth,  and  our  expectations  with  t^e 
iucts'  of  the  case.  He  measures  and  gauges  and  gives  in  an  accurate 
ostiipate  of  what  we  are  and  where  we  are.  0  that  we  might  have  grace 
to  invite  such  a  test  at  once  by  praying,  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and  know 
my  peart ;  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts,"  If  the  Lord  will  help  us  to 
^no^  ourselves  now  it  will  save  us  from  a  sad  discovery  at  the  last  Let 
us  examine  ourselves,  because  God  will  examine  us  at  the  judgment 
-day.  Let  us  come  to  the  plummet  and  to  the  measuring-line,  and  give 
up  random  hopes  and  hasty  confidences.  Better  the  distress  of  honest 
anxiety  than  the  presumption  of  foolhardy  rashness.  It  is  much  better 
to  be  afraid  where  there  is  no  cause  for  fear  than  to  be  at  ease  where 
there  is  no  ground  for  confidence.    Well  did  Cowper  say — 

'<  He  that  never  doubted  of  his  state, 
He  may,  perhaps  he  may,  too  late.*' 

He  who  takes  things  for  granted  may  find  himself  out  to  be  a  fool  in 
that  day  when  folly  will  never  again  have  opportunities  for  wisdom.  All 
things  will  in  the  end  be  put  into  the  scales  and  weighed,  and  infaUible 
justice  shall  give  in  its  final  decision ;  it  is  wise  to  anticipate  that  final 
and  irreversible  verdict  by  a  present  and  honest  searching  of  the  grounds 
of  our  hope. 

According  to  the  connection  of  our  text  there  are  three  ways  by  which 
we  may  all  of  ns  judge  whether  our  confidences  are  refuges  of  lies  or 
not.  ]Por,  first,  if  they  are  safe  hiding-places,  such  as  will  l^r  the  brunt 
of  the  coming  storm,  they  are  found^  upon  Christ.  '*  Behold,  I  lay  in 
Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone,  a  tried  stone,  a  precious  corner-stone,  a 
«ure  foundation."  Now  examine,  my  dear  friend,  your  hope  for  eternity. 
Is  it  the  hope  which  Gk)d  has  set  forth  in  Scripture?  Is  it  based  and 
bottomed  upon  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus?  For  if  not,  as  the  Lord 
my  God  liveth,  and  as  thy  soul  liveth,  it  will  fail  th^  in  the  day  of  triaL 
If  God  lay  the  foundation,  and  thou  accept  it,  thou  mayest  feel  quite 
sure  about  it^  for  God  never  yet  laid  down  a  fiction  as  the  groundwork  of 
faith.  He  never  mocked  human  reliance  yet,  and  never  will.  If  the 
Lord  laid  the  foundation  you  need  not  scruple  to  build  on  it,  for  the 


C04  KETEOPOLITAK  TABEEKACLS  PULPIT. 

responsibility  of  its  security  is  with  the  Lord  and  not  with  na.    TTe  may 
fairly  put  it  thus  with  our  hearts  in  hours  when  ^I  things  are  questioned, 
— ^if  our  faith  be  Tain,  at  least  we  have  grounded  it  where  divine  revda- 
tion  commanded  us  to  ground  it.    If  uiere  be  a  &ilure,  it  is  not  ours 
only,  but  a  &ilure  on  the  part  of  him  who  laid  the  foundation  for  ns. 
"But  SDch  a  thing  shall  never  be  :  the  Christ  of  God  foileth  never.     Wc 
shall  find  Jesus  to  be  what  the  Father  declares  him  to  be,  a  sure  fonn- 
dation,  which  shall  support  us  in  life,  bear  us  up  in  death,  and  sustaiii  ns 
throughout  eternity.    Come,  search  yourselves,  and  try  your  hopes  bj 
b^  tliis  test.    Hang  this  plummet  against  your  wall :  do  you  stand  eveii 
with  it  ?    Is  Jesus  Christ  all  in  all  to  you  ?    Do  you  rest  on  him  and  on 
him  alone  ?    If  so^  you  are  surely  saved ;  but  if  not,  you  have  made  lies 
jour  refuge. 
^  He  then  gives  ns  a  second  test,  and  that  is,  if  our  confidence  be  a 
right  one  it  comes  to  us  through  faith,  for  it  is  written  in  the  IGth 
Verse,  *^  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."    He  shall  not  be  con- 
founded ;  he  shall  not  run  away  in  trepidation  and  alarm ;  he  shall  not 
be  in  a  hurry  to  anticipate  the  day  of  olessing,  nor  be  in  distress  about 
the  hour  of  trial.    **  He  that  believeth  "  is  the  man  whose  soul  is  fixed 
on  the  sure  foundation  and  therefore  abides  in  peace.    Now,  my  hearers^ 
do  you  believe  for  your  salvation,  or  do  you  look  to  your  own  feelings 
and  doings  ?  If  your  hope  S&  grounded  upon  sight,  or  feeling,  or  worldng, 
it  will  one  day  foil  you.    Do  you  rest  on  ceremonies,  upon  something 
performed  by  a  priest  or  a  minister,  or  are  you  resting  upon  outwaid 
religiousness,  upon  attending  the  means  of  grace,  and  bowing,  kneel- 
ing, and  standing  like  Christians?    Then  I  warn  you  that  these  sandy 
foundations  will  be  washed  away  when  the  floods  come.    Have  you  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ  ?    Do  you  believe  the  in&llible  Word  of  God,  and  do 
you  confide  in  his  in&llible  Son  ?    If  you  do  this,  heaven  and  eaiiJi 
shall  pass  away,  but  never  shall  your  foundation  be  moved.    Your  hope 
shall  stand  firm  as  the  throne  of  God.    Judge  yourselves  then  by  this : 
bring  this  plummet  and  this  line  to  bear  upon  the  building  that  yon  have 
been  erecting  for  years,  and  remember  that  if  it  be  not  of  &ith  it  is  all 
in  vain.    Salvation  is  of  grace  through  faith.    By  faith  the  sinner  is 
justified,  and  the  just  lives  by  faith.    Without  fiaith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God,  therefore  see  to  it  that  you  have  the  faith  of  God  s  elect,  or 
your  hope  is  vanity. 

A  third  test  seems  to  me  to  be  proposed  in  my  text — "Judg- 
ment will  I  lay  to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet."  Here, 
then,  is  the  test  of  righteousness,  if  our  hope  is  sound,  it  is  a  holy,  sancti- 
fying hone,  which  purges  us  from  sin,  and  breeds  in  us  all  that  is  true 
and  good.  This  is  a  test  which  some  do  not  like  to  apply.  They  are 
wonderfully  pleased  when  we  are  preaching  the  gospel  oi  believing,  but 
t?hen  it  comes  to  fruit,  to  the  declaration  that  true  faith  works  by  love, 
they  fight  shy  of  it ;  but  I  beseech  you,  my  brethren,  be  not  like  unto 
these  foolish  persons.  Court  those  tests  which  are  the  most  searching 
and  thorough,  that  you  may  make  sure  work  for  eternity.  Exercise  a 
loving  severity  toward  your  own  soul.  Be  lenient  to  every  other  person, 
but  be  stenily  severe  to  your  own  case.  Without  holiness  no  man  shali 
see  the  Lord.  Have  you  this  holiness  ?  The  faith  that  is  without  works 
is  dead;  being  alone.    Have  you  the  works  ^hich  prove  the  sincerity 


BEFUOES  OF  LIES  AKD  WHAT  WILL  BECX)HB  OF  TH£3f.         G05 

of  faith?  If  the  grace  of  Ood  does  not  change  jonr  character;  if 
it  does  not  make  yon  hate  sin  and  strive  after  that  which  is  right,  and 
jast,  and  good,  then  it  is  not  the  grace  of  God  at  all :  70a  have  bat  the 
form,  and  are  without  the  power  of  it.  Is  this  the  case  with  you  ? 
Oome,  do  not  flinch,  but  go  throagli  with  it,  and  deal  fairly  with  your 
own  soul. 

We  shall  now  apply  these  tests  to  certain  refuges  which  I  am  sure 
will  turn  out  to  be  rei^ges  of  lies.  A  few  of  these  we  will  mention  at 
length.  The  first  is  the  hope  which  some  men  ground  upon  thmr  own  moral 
go^ness,  "  It  will  be  all  right  with  me,"  says  one, "  lor  I  have  not  done 
anything  much  amiss.  If  I  have  been  faulty,  we  are  poor,  imperfect 
creatures,  and  we  cannot  help  it.  On  the  whole  my  aims  and  objects  have 
been  greatly  superior  to  those  of  the  bulk  of  mankind.  I  do  not  think  I 
can  have  incurred  much  wrath  from  God,  or  that  I  need  be  under  any 
apprehension  as  to  being  judged  of  him  at  the  last  great  day."  Alas,  my 
friend,  yours  must  be  a  refuge  of  lies,  for  it  will  not  stand  trial  by  the 
fost  plummet ;  it  is  not  based  upon  the  foundation  which  God  has  laid. 
Your  hope  has  nothing  to  do  with  Ghrist/that  precious  comer-stone.  It 
is  evident  that  you  do  not  want  him,  or  his  blood,  or  his  rio^hteousnesSy 
for  you  are  altogether  independent  of  such  help.  Why  should  God  have 
taken  the  trouble  to  lay  a  foundation  in  the  blood  of  his  own  Son,  when 
it  is  evidently  quite  a  superfluity,  since  you  can  save  yourself?  Do  you 
not  see  that,  inasmuch  as  you  rely  upon  your  own  moral  goodness,  you  as 
good  as  tell  the  Lord  that  the  gift  of  nis  dear  Son  and  his  death  on 
Calvary  were  all  a  uiistake,  a  Saviour  was  not  required,  and  an  atone- 
ment was  not  wanted.  If  you  can  save  yourself  so  can  others,  and  the 
whole  plan  of  grace  becomes  an  absurdity.  I  feel  sure  that  since  you 
cannot  stand  this  first  test  your  refdge  is  a  felse  one. 

Now,  try  the  second  touchstone  as  to  faith.  Ton  have  no  feith  in 
Ood ;  your  hope  is  not  based  on  faith  in  Jesus ;  you  have  no  faith  except 
&ith  in  yourself.  Ton  are  trusting  to  the  works  of  the  law,  but  do  you 
not  know  what  the  Scripture  saith,  ''By  the  works  of  the  law  there  shall 
be  no  flesh  justified  in  nis  sight"?  Ton  are  opposing  the  revelation  of 
God :  he  declares  that  men  are  not  saved  by  works  but  by  grace,  and 
you,  on  the  other  hand,  claim  salvation  by  your  own  works.  You  are 
under  a  gross  delusion,  and  your  trust  is  a  refuge  of  lies  I 

Moreover,  my  gentle  boaster,  is  not  this  plea  of  moral  goodness  a 
falsehood  irom  top  to  bottom  ?  In  the  calmness  of  your  mind  can  you 
prove  this  excellency  of  yours  ?  Your  outward  life  may  have  been  com- 
paratively pure,  but  I  am  not  sure  of  that  if  all  were  known.  Look  back 
and  see  whether  there  are  not  more  stains  than  you  thought,  more  grave 
faults  than  you  would  like  to  confess.  You  have  a  very  flattering  memory, 
which  obliges  you  by  forgetting  things  which  it  would  be  inconvenient 
to  remember.  Your  righteousness  is  little  better  than  a  house  of  cards, 
and  if  you  ever  blow  upon  it  with  anxious  breath  it  will  come  tumbling 
down.  I  call  upon  you  to  put  away  such  folly,  and  to  open  your  eyes  to 
fects.  Please  to  recollect  that  even  if  your  outward  life  may  have  been 
correct  God  regards  the  heart,  and  takes  account  of  the  inner  life.  Your 
thoughts,  have  they  not  gone  after  evil  ?  Your  imagination,  has  it  never 
delighted  in  sin?  Have  there  been  no  corrupt  desires,  no  selfish  ambi- 
tions ?    Have  you  come  up  to  the  standard  of  Ch)d's  perfection  ?    I  wiQ 


COG  MBTBOPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

ask  Yoa  no  more  questions :  I  know  you  have  not,  for  the  testimony  of 
the  Searcher  of  all  hearts  is  this — "  There  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no, 
not  one."  Therefore  I  know  that  you  have  not  done  good,  xoa^  like 
yonr  fellow-men,  are  a  sinner  and  condemned,  and  I  beseech  you  pot 
away  this  vain  glorying  and  seek  a  better  refuge.  A  spider's  web  is  not 
more  slight  than  this  confidence  of  joxm,  a  bubble  is  not  more  frail  or  a 
breath  more  unsubstantial.  If  this  be  your  belter  it  is  worse  than 
none ;  the  fig  leaves  of  our  first  parents  when  they  were  all  dry  and 
shrivelled  were  a  better  covering  than  our  poor  merits.  If  we  were  not 
maddened  by  our  sins  we  should  never  be  so  insane  as  to  dream  of  pleading 
our  own  excellence  before  God.  If  we  had  any  just  idea  of  what  holi« 
ness  is  we  should  confess  our  iniquity,  and  then  close  our  mouth  in  the 
silence  of  self-condemnation.  Lay  but  justice  to  the  line,  and  righteous- 
ness to  the  plummet,  and  our  personal  moral  excellence  is  seen  to  be  as  a 
bowing  wall  and  as  a  tottering  fence. 

I  have  noticed,  however,  in  the  second  place,  that  a  namber  of  persons 
make  a  refuge  for  themselves  out  of  Ae  notion  of  fals.  They  say, 
"  Everything  is  settled  and  determined  and  ordained :  and,  therefore,  if 
I  am  to  be  saved  I  shall  be  saved,  and  if  I  am  to  be  lost  I  shall  be  lost. 
After  all,  we  are  creatures  of  circumstances,  and  are  like  the  fish  of  the 
sea  taken  in  a  net,  or  sea  birds  caught  in  the  wind,  driven  we  scarce 
know  whither.  Let  us  hope  that  all  may  come  right  at  last,  but  we  can* 
not  help  it  whatever  may  occur."  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that 
this  refuge  is  a  refuge  of  lies.  It  would  not  endure  one  of  the  tests,  and 
assuredly  not  the  last,  for  its  tendency  is  to  deny  all  moral  obligation^ 
and  hence  it  is  no  friend  to  holiness.  It  deliberately  charges  Qod  with 
the  creature's  sin,  and  makes  out  the  sinner  to  be  the  injured  person,  and 
clear  of  the  guilt  of  his  own  acts.  Many  persuade  themselves  that  they 
believe  it,  but  it  is  such  a  poor,  paltry  shelter  that  I  wonder  they  are 
not  ashamed  to  mention  it :  in  the  bottom  of  their  hearts  those  who 
urge  it  know  better.  Look  you,  here,  good  sir,  and  see  your  own 
inconsistency.  Why  did  you  punish  your  boy  this  morning  for  wilful 
disobedience  ?  "VVTiy  did  you  not  say  to  him,  "  I  will  not  chide  with 
you,  my  son,  nor  chasten  you,  though  you  provoke  me,  for  you  caimot 
help  it,  you  are  ordained  to  it"?  The  thief  that  broke  into  your  house 
the  other  day, — did  you  lie  still  and  let  him  take  your  plate?  If 
he  was  ordained  to  have  it,  he  would  have  it,  why  did  you  open  the 
window  and  cry  for  help?  When  the  thief  was  taken,  did  yon  say  to 
the  magistrate,  ''Do  not  punish  him,  he  could  not  help  it;  no  doubt 
some  divine  decree  led  him  thereto"?  The  scoundrel  that  called  you 
"  liar  "  the  other  day,  and  knocked  you  down  in  the  street,— did  you  rise 
up  and  with  a  quiet  smile  thank  him  for  it,  for  he  could  not  help  it^  he 
was  only  the  agent  of  a  divine  purpose,  and  the  instrument  of  an  om- 
nipotent predestination  which  he  could  not  resist?  You  never  thought 
of  such  folly.  Ton  feel  that  those  who  injure  you  are  responsible,  and 
you  treat  them  accordingly.  Now  mark — ^you  are  responsible  too.  It 
is  a  truth  that  all  things  are  fixed,  but  it  is  not  a  truth  that  therefore 
men  may  live  in  sin  and  lay  the  blame  upon  God.  Whatever  foieordi- 
nation  and  predestination  may  be  or  mav  not  be  they  leave  men  free 
agents  and  responsible  beings,  or  else  both  law  and  gospel  are  absurditiei^ 
and  the  Bible  is  ill  written.    In  other  matters  men  act  not  on  the 


REFUOES  OF  LIES  Aim  WHAT  WILL  BECOME  OF  THEM.         607 

supposed  inferences  of  &te,  but  on  the  evident  necessities  of  everj-daj 
life,  why  not  in  religion?  It  may  be  true  that  everything  is  fixedf, 
and  doubtless  so  it  is,  but  because  it  is  fixed  whether  I  shall  live 
or  not  do  I  therefore  refuse  to  eat  ?  Because  it  is  fixed  whether  I  shall 
sleep  or  not  do  I  refuse  to  undress  and  get  into  my  bed?  Because 
it  is  predestinated  whether  I  shall  be  rich  or  not  do  I  leave  my  shop 
and  get  me  away,  and  leave  my  goods  to  sell  themselves?  Nay; 
Terily,  predestination  or  no  predestination  you  are  all  eager  to  get 
gain.  Men  are  not  such  idiots  in  other  things  as  they  pretend  to  be  in 
the  things  of  God.  The  plea  of  fate  is  a  fooFs  refuge,  worthy  only  of  a 
brainless  sot.  Since  it  will  not  stand  even  my  feeble  brash  you  may  be 
sure  that  it  will  all  dissolve  beneath  the  iron  rod  of  the  Prince  of  truth. 
It  is  in  vain  for  you  to  say,  **  We  were  delivered  to  work  this  iniquity," 
for  ye  know  that  ye  sin  willingly  and  ye  refuse  Christ  deliberately.  Ye 
choose  the  evil  and  turn  your  backs  on  the  good,  and  therefore  your  rain 
must  be  laid  at  your  own  doors.  Cease,  then,  from  the  vain  endeavour 
to  justify  yourselves,  and  seek  unto  the  Lord  and  his  Christ. 

The  third  shelter  of  lies  which  many  fly  to  is  a  hope  bcused  upon  novel 
doctrines.  Each  age  would  fain  have  its  own  gospel,  and  the  present  is 
not  behindhand  in  the  desire  to  be  its  own  prophet.  Many  are  ready 
to  help  in  this  presumptuous  design.  Certain  divines  attain  to  emi- 
nence oy  undermming  the  gospel  they  pretend  to  defend,  and  forging  new 
theories  upon  the  anvils  of  their  own  fancy.  Men  who  would  never  have 
been  known  if  they  had  acted  honestly  have  gained  a  cheap  notoriety  by 
Tending  heresy,  and  yet  wearing  the  garb  and  eating  the  bread  of 
orthodoxy.  The  most  fashionable  form  of  this  evil  just  now  is  the 
production  of  novelties  with  regard  to  the  future  punishment  of  the 
wicked.  False  prophets  prophesy  smooth  things,  and  talk  of  a  larger 
hope — ^which  being  interpreted  is  this,  that  men  may  live  very  much 
as  they  like;  but  some  time  or  other,  and  somehow  or  other,  cnaracter 
will  cease  to  operate  upon  destiny,  and  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  will 
stand  on  a  par.  This  is  the  old  doctrine  of  falsehood  with  which  the 
sinner  blesses  himself  in  his  heart,  saying,  ^*  I  shall  have  peace,  though 
I  walk  in  the  imagination  of  mine  heart."  The  punishment  of  sin  has 
been  doubted  from  the  very  beginning.  The  chief  of  all  subtle  thinkers 
said  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  **  Ye  sh^l  not  surely  die."  By  this  larger 
l)ope,  insinuated  rather  than  boldly  stated,  the  serpentine  philosopher 
tempted  the  woman,  and  ruined  our  race.  Pfeased  with  his  success,  he 
continues  to  use  the  same  artifice,  asserting  either  that  sin  is  trivial,  or 
that  penance  can  remove  it,  or  that  hell  is  temporary,  or  that  the  soul 
will  be  annihilated,  or  some  other  form  of  the  same  radical  lie.  His  per- 
petual cry  is, "  You  shall  not  surely  suffer  what  God  threatens ;  ypu  may 
sin,  and  yet  there  is  a  hope  larger  than  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ, 
wider  than  the  Saviour  has  proclaimed."  In  this  refuge  there  is  no  Christ, 
and  no  faith  in  him,  and  assuredly  there  is  nothing  in  it  that  conduces 
to  holiness.  Mark  its  influence  wherever  it  is  received.  When  any  of 
our  friends  embrace  the  novel  theology,  do  they  become  more  devout, 
more  earnest,  moi'e  gracious,  more  holy,  as  the  result  of  it  ?  I  think  not. 
Are  these  the  persons  who  make  our  prayer-meeting  a  power  ?  Are 
these  the  winners  of  sools?  Are  these  the  men  who  speak  much  of 
Jesus,  and  live  in  daily  fellowship  with  him  ?    Do  we  see  them  more 


608  XETBOPOLITAH  TABBBHACLE  FULPFT. 

carefol  to  avoid  conformity  to  the  world?    Oar  witneaa  is  that  tlH^ 
consequences  are  the  reverse.    Did  70a  ever  hear  of  a  man  who  was  oon- 
vertea  from  vice  by  hearing  that  sin  would  be  hghtly  punished^  and  who, 
in  proportion  as  he  grew  pnrer  in  life,  grew  more  heterodox  in  his 
views  ?  Such  an  instance  would  be  a  rarity,  if  indeed  it  ever  existed ;  but 
when  a  man  who  holds  orthodox  doctrine  backslides  and  declineB,  as 
a  general  rule  he  finds  it  convenient  to  adopt  some  novel  hypothesiSy  in 
order  that  he  may  feel  comfortable  in  his  sm.    Is  it  not  so  ?      So  &r 
as  my  observation  goes,  these  modem  notions  go  with  looeeness  of 
li&y  with  worldliness  of  heart,  with  decay  of  prayerfiilness,  and  with 
backsliding  from  the  living  God,  and  as  you  lay  this  line  and  plunm^^ 
to  them  it  will  soon  be  seen  that  thev  are  refdges  of  lies.     At  any 
rate,  sirs,  suppose  your  larger  hope  should  turn  out  to  be  correct,  in  what 
respect  will  the  orthodox  be  the  losers  ?    But  suppose  your  larger  hope 
should  turn  out  to  be  a  mere  delusion,  what  will  become  of  yon  who 
venture  your  all  upon  it  ?    We  are  in  anv  case  upon  the  safe  $dAe  of  the 
hedge,  and  this  is  no  small  advantage  when  the  weightiest  interests  are 
at  stake.    Suppose  there  shall  be  no  hell,  if  I  am  a  believer  in  Christ 
it  matters   not  to  me;  but  suppose  there  is — and  there    ia — th^i 
you  who  are  unbelievers  are  in  an  evil  plight    If  you  do  not  catdt 
this  will-o'-the-wisp  of  a  larger  hope,  as  I  believe  you  never  will,  then 
where  are    you  ?     It  behoves   every  man  not  only  to  make   sure, 
but  to   make   doubly  sure.     About  the  soul  we  want  the  utmost 
certainty.     I  would  counsel  you  to  dig  deep,  and  see  what  yon  are 
resting  on.    I  would  have  you  make  sure  that  you  do  not  permit  a 
falsehood  to  lie  like  a  worm  at  the  root  of  your  hope.    Seek  to  know  the 
reason  for  your  building  on  Christ,  and  wnen  you  have  ascertained  that^ 
then  look  for  God's  warrant  for  placing  stone  upon  stone  in  the  upbuild- 
ing, and  without  this  do  not  rest.    Nothing  but  divine  authority  ought 
to  content  you  in  the  business  of  eternity.    The  views  and  hypotheses 
of  the  learned  Dr.  Somebody  are  of  no  value  to  me,  for  I  can  theorise  for 
myself  if  I  have  a  mind  to.    I  want  fisu^t  and  certainties,  for  I  dread  every 
refuge  of  lies. 

Alas,  we  have  another  brood  of  men  whose  refuge  is  that  they  make 
aprofesBum  of  religion.  ''I  am  always  at  a  place  or  worship,"  says  one ; 
'U  am  never  absent  from  a  single  service,  and,  what  is  more,  I  joined  the 
church  some  years  ago,  and  I  have  kept  up  my  membershin.  I  have 
been  baptized,  and  I  come  to  the  Lord's  tabfe  with  great  regularity.,  and 
I  feel  a  good  deal  of  pleasure  in  religious  exercises.  I  am  not  sure  that 
I  was  ever  bom  again ;  I  am  not  sure  that  I  ever  repented  of  sin ;  I  am 
not  sure  that  I  try  to  live  a  holy  life,  but  still  I  am  a  member  of  a 
church,  and  that  is  a  great  comfort  to  me."  Ah,  my  brethren,  this  will 
not  do ;  for  unless  this  membership  of  yours  with  a  visible  church  is  backed 
up  by  holy  living,  and  unless  Uiere  is  an  inward  resting  upon  Jesuf 
tinrist  and  a  vital  faith  whereby  you  held  last  to  him,  your  name  may  b( 
on  the  church  roll,  but  it  will  not  be  found  written  in  the  Lamb's  boo] 
of  life,  and  this  profession  of  yours  instead  of  blessing  you  will  curse  you! 
If  you  are  not  savingly  converted,  you  are  guilty  of  a  daily  hypocrisy, 
and  chargeable  with  sacrilege  for  appropriating  sacred  things  to  which  yoi 
have  no  right.  Unconverted  one,  you  are  an  intruder  into  the  familv  ol 
Christ,  an  interloper  at  the  feast  of  the  King  of  kings*    Search  yourselvc 


BEFUOEB'OS'  LIJSS  AND  WHAT  WILL  BECOME  OF  THEM.         609 

lesfcy  being  fonnd  at  the  bridal  feast  without  a  wedding  garment^  you 
should  be  cast  out  into  outer  darkness.  You  need  not  be  hurt  by  the 
exhortation,  for  those  of  us  who  speak  to  you  are  often  forced  to  cany 
out  a  seyere  search  within  our  own  hearts.  How  often  I  put  myseUT 
through  my  paces  with  many  an  anxious  question !  I  have  taught  others, 
Ibut  do  I  know  the  truth  for  myself?  1  have  brought  others  to  Christ, 
but  have  I  come  to  Christ  myself?  What  if  after  having  preached  to 
others  I  myself  should  be  a  castaway !  What  the  Lord's  miuisters  feel 
bound  to  do  to  themselves  surely  you  need  not  be  too  proud  to  endure. 
If  you  are  doing  very  little  for  your  Lord  and  Master  compared  with 
others  yon  may  well  be  very  anxious  and  careful,  for  the  doom  of  un- 
profitable servants  is  not  a  light  one,  and  barren  trees  are  not  always 
allowed  to  stand.  "  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  but  I  do  not  like  heart  searching." 
TThen  I  am  a&aid  of  you.  Ton  who  do  not  examine  yourselves,  you  who 
are  not  willing  to  be  tested  and  tried  by  the  word  of  Ood,  you  cause  us 
jserions  suspicion  lest  you  may  have  built  very  rapidly  with  wood,  hay, 
stubble,  and  yet  your  whole  structure  will  be  consumed  in  the  last  great 
fire. 

Let  me  speak  a  word  concerning  certain  who  have  a  hope  of  Jmng  saved 
tahich  does  not  sanctify  them;  for  tliere  are  professors  who  feel  sure  they 
are  Christians  .and  will  go  to  heaven,  and  yet  they  show  no  sign  of  being 
prepared  for  it.  They  live  as  others  live,  and  yet  imagine  that  they  shaU 
not  die  as  others  die.  They  have  an  outward  film  of  morality  upon  their 
lives,  but  underneath  it  there  is  worldliness  and  love  of  sinful  pleasure. 
How  dare  they  hope  ?  If  they  sow  iniquity  shall  they  reap  perfection  ? 
Oan  a  man  go  to  heaven  who  is  not  heavenly?  Can  lovers  of  worldly 
pleasure  enter  into  the  dwellings  of  the  perfect?  0  sirs,  if  your  hope 
does  not  lead  you  to  follow  aft;er  holiness,  away  with  it.  God  help  you  to 
away  with  it  at  once  and  to  begin  aright.  Above  all  things,  aread  an 
«mpty,  baseless  hope  of  heaven,  for  it  wm  make  hell  all  the  more  terrible. 

Some,  too,  make  a  refuge  of  their  old  es^erience.  Now,  an  old  expe- 
rience which  is  all  old  is  a  manifest  deception.  A  true  experience  con- 
tinues and  grows  day  by  day.  Not  with  one  even  pace  each  day ;  but 
still,  as  a  whole,  the  divine  life  goes  forward  to  perfection ;  and  where  it 
does  not  do  so,  but  comes  to  an  end,  it  is  not  the  divine  life  at  all.  Have 
j^ou  never  heard  of  the  man  who  wrote  out  his  experience  of  religion 
M'hen  a  young  man,  that  he  might  fell  back  upon  it  in  aft^r  years  ?  He 
lived  in  neglect  of  all  godliness ;  but  having  already  experienced  religion, 
as  he  said,  and  having  made  a  record  of  it,  and  put  it  away  with  the 
titl^eeds  of  his  farm,  he  dreamed  that  when  he  came  to  die  he  might 
fetch  it  out  and  comfort  himself  with  his  evidences  of  salvation.  His 
daughter  went  to  the  drawer  and  found  that  the  mice  had  eaten  it. 
Ah,  dear  me,  it  was  not  much  loss,  for  that  hope  whioh  is  grounded 
on  a  musty  experience,  which  is  not  supported  by  a  present  love  of 
God,  and  present  prayer,  and  present  fellowshii),  and  present  striving 
against  sin,  is  a  lie.  It  is  all  in  vain  to  say,  "  I  know  I  did  experience 
such-and-such  a  thing  a  dozen  years  ago  when  I  joined  the  church." 
What  of  that?  If  a  man  is  alive  now  he  does  not  need  to  prove 
it  by  ^oing  back  to  the  records  of  his  youth.  Present  life  is  its 
own  evidence.  If  you  are  not  living  to  God  to-dav,  I  care  not  a  button 
'what  you  profess  to  hate  done  twenty  years  ago.  If  you  had  a  true  feith 


610  XETBOFOLITAJf  TABEBJTAGIiB  PULPIT. 

then,  yon  have  it  now ;  and  if  yon  have  no  iaith  noWfjon  are  in  the  call 
of  bitterness.  It  is  true  that  he  that  believeth  in  Christ  is  saved,  bat 
we  must  have  proof  of  it  in  the  consequent  life.  If  the  man  is  not  saved 
from  living  in  sin,  we  infer  that  he  has  not  believed ;  and  if  he  does  not 
persevere  to  the  end,  we  are  sure  that  he  is  not  one  of  the  Lord's  own; 
'^ for  if  any  man  draw  back,"  saith  the  Lord,  ''my  soul  shall  have  no 
pleasure  in  him."  This  is  the  test  of  true  fiuth;  those  who  have 
really  believed  do  not  draw  back  unto  perdition,  for  they  have  believed 
unto  the  salvation  of  their  souls.  Oh,  then,  I  pray  you,  if  your  imaginary 
experience  in  former  times  has  dissolved  into  present  carelessness  and  sin, 
do  not  attempt  to  hide  behind  it.  It  will  not  endure  the  line  and  the 
plummet,  therefore  put  it  away,  and  seek  unto  God  this  day  that  he  may 
begin  a  sound  work  of  grace  upon  your  souls. 

I  hope  I  have  said  enough  by  way  of  laying  the  line  and  the  plnmmet 
to  fiedse  refuges.  May  the  Lord  arouse  the  carnally  secure,  and  lead  them 
to  forsake  their  useless  hiding  places  to  shelter  themselves  in  Christ. 

IL  Very  briefly  let  us  in  the  second  place  pictuhe  the  destructiox 
OF  THESE  REFUGES  OF  LIES.  A  man  has  been  very  comfortable  in  one 
or  other  of  these  refiiges  for  a  good  number  of  years,  but  at  last  he  is 
getting  old,  and  is  laid  aside  to  think ;  infirmities  are  increasing,  death 
is  drawing  nigh,  and  he  takes  a  look  into  the  dark  future.  Ke  finds 
himself  facing  an  eternal  state,  and  he  has  need  of  all  his  confidences  and 
hopes  to  sustain  him.  Now,  what  happens  ?  His  spirit  undergoes  a  great 
storm,  and  what  is  the  result  ?  Does  he  dwell  in  a  fortress  which  defi^ 
the  hurricane  ?  No,  his  shelter  is  so  frail  that,  according  to  the  text^ 
**  the  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuges  of  lies."  A  cold,  hard  truth  falls 
from  heaven  like  a  hailstone,  and  crashes  right  through  the  glass  roof  of 
his  fiUse  confidence.  He  looks  up  astonisheo,  and,  lo,  another  and  anoth^ 
forgotten  truth  descends  with  like  violence  and  crushes  through  all  oppo- 
sition till  it  smites  his  soul.  He  had  always  hoped,  good,  easy  man,  that 
sunshine  and  quiet  would  last  for  ever,  and  then  his  glass-honse  woold 
have  been  all  he  needed.  He  never  reckoned  on  these  hailstctees.  Great 
truths  which  he  forgot,  neglected,  and  despised,  come  rattling  down 
upon  him  from  heaven  pitilessly,  in  awful  earnest  and  with  deadly  aim. 
He  mt^st  think,  and  he  has  much  to  think  o^  and  no  means  of  forget- 
ting any  of  it.  His  conscience,  which  he  tried  to  smother,  awakes,  and 
as  it  awakes,  the  big  hailstones  of  truth  come  through  his  roof  faster  and 
jGuter.  Down  falls  all  his  comfort  and  peace  of  mind,  as  hailstone  after 
hailstone  pounds  all  his  hope  to  pieces.  *'  After  all,  I  never  was  bom 
again,  and  the  Scripture  hath  well  said,  'Ye  must  be  bom  again.'  I 
never  yielded  up  my  selfishness,  and  I  cannot  be  saved  unless  Christ  is 
jny  Emg.  I  did  not  really  dose  in  with  Christ  and  cast  my  naked 
soul  on  him ;  I  trusted  in  something  else,  and  I  am  lost  for  ever.** 
Great  hailstones  thus  follow  each  other,  and  against  them  the  deceived 
heart  has  no  defence.  Presently  the  storm  comes  up  with  tremeadoos 
wind,  and  the  hailstones  are  hurled  forward  like  terrible  artillery,  and  the 
n^ed  soul  finds  its  refuge  utterly  swept  away ;  not  a  vestige  of  it  remains. 
Befuge  bils  the  man,  and  his  soul,  unhoused,  unsheltered,  starts  back  in 
horror.  It  starts  back  in  vain.  God  has  now  to  be  met,  and  the  soul 
has  no  hiding-place.  The  fire  eyes  of  the  Most  High  are  burning  the 
heart  throagn  and  through,  and  rocks  and  hills  refuse  a  shelter.    Crod 


REFUGES  OF  LIES  ASD  WHAT  WILL  BECOME  OF  THEM.         611 

•  ' '  # 

mint  that  this  may  not  be  your  case^  and  that  it  may  not  be  mine. 
May  it  never  be  said  of  us,  "  When  they  shall  say,  Peace  and  safety ; 
tiien  sadden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as  travail  upon  a  woman 
with  child ;  and  they  shall  not  escai)e."  Let  ns  fly  to  Jesus  at  once. 
Let  us  most  solemnly  exercise  faith  in  him  now.  I  pause  while  this  is 
^one.  Is  it  so  ?  Have  you  rested  upon  the  Son  of  Qod  for  everything  ? 
Then  you  may  go  forward,  and  neither  fear  hailstones  nor  coals  of  fire, 
for  he  that  believeth  in  him  shall  never  be  confounded. 

Another  impressive  picture  is  set  before  us  in  the  text.  "  The  flood 
fihall  overflow  nis  hiding-place."  Imagine  one  who,  in  the  time  of  Noah's 
dood,  does  not  choose  to  enter  into  the  ark,  for  he  does  not  care  to  be 
iied  down  to  God's  way  of  deliverance.  Salvation  by  an  ark  is  too 
«imp]e,  too  childish,  he  wants  a  more  philosophic  way.  Besides,  he  does 
not  care  to  be  cooped  up  with  Noah  and  a  handful  of  narrow-minded 
people,  who  shut  themselves  in  and  shut  everybody  else  out.  He  has 
broader  views,  and  therefore  he  has  found  a  shelter  on  the  side  of  the 
hill,  in  a  great  cave  where  thousands  can  assemble,  and  enjoy  a  Uberty 
denied  them  within  the  pale  of  the  ark.  It  is  utterly  preposterous  to 
suppose  the  flood  mil  ever  reach  so  high  as  this  elevated  cave.  It  is 
hundreds  of  feet  above  the  plain,  and  in  the  judgment  of  the  wisest 
men  it  is  more  than  safe.  After  a  day  or  two  of  extraordinary  rain  the 
man  would  look  down  from  his  hiding-place  and  see  the  waters  covering 
all  the  lower  area,  and  creeping  up  the  valleys  foot  by  foot,  and  he  would 
remark  upon  the  abundance  of  rain,  but  scoff  at  the  idea  of  a  ^neral 
deluga  He  would  be  easy,  hoping  that  the  rain  would  cease,  but  as  it 
continued  he  would  begin  to  think,  "  I  may  not  be  quite  so  safe  after 
all."  Imagine  his  horror  when  the  flood  at  last  fills  up  the  ravine,  and 
creeps  up  the  roclqr  steep.  With  cruel  lip,  seeking  his  destruction,  the 
water  threatens  the  cave  wherein  he  thought  to  dwell  so  safely.  At  last 
it  penetrates  his  hiding-place,  it  climbs  to  the  very  roof,  it  sweeps  over 
his  head,  and  his  false  confidence  has  proved  his  ruin.  Such  will  be  the 
end  of  all  who  hide  themselves,  but  hide  not  in  Christ. 

I  will  tell  you  in  what  fashion  this  overthrow  will  come.  First,  the 
mirth  of  the  mind  is  damped  with  doubt.  The  man  does  not  feel  so  easy 
as  he  used  to  be ;  he  is  a&aid  that  God's  Word  may  be  true,  and  that 
things  will  go  amiss  with  him.  Soon  the  doubt  has  oozed  into  his  refuge, 
■and  become  a  pool  of  fear :  the  man  is  sadly  afraid,  and  the  dread 
saturates  and  dissolves  all  his  joy.  The  truth  of  God's  Word  still  further 
comes  home  to  his  conscience,  and  he  begins  to  be  more  and  more 
alarmed  :  nor  does  he  continue  long  in  one  stay,  for  he  is  growingly  dis- 
tressed, the  waters  are  evidently  advancing  upon  him  and  he  cannot 
escape.  He  has  come  to  be  altogether  dismayed,  he  hardly  knows  what 
will  become  of  him ;  and  within  a  little  while,  unless  God's  mercy  shall 
prevent  and  enable  him  to  find  the  true  shelter,  he  will  be  drenched  in 
-despair  and  washed  away  in  terror.  At  last  he  cannot  believe  that  there 
is  any  salvation  possible  for  him ;  he  hears  death  and  hell  approaching, 
and  his  flesh  creeps  with  horror.  Let  him  alone,  and  you  will  find  him 
filled  with  terror.  If  his  conscience  is  really  awake  he  will  dread  to  go 
to  sleep  at  night  lest  he  should  never  wake  again.  I  have  seen  such  in 
.their  Sying  moments  afraid  of  everything,  fearing  alike  to  live  or  to 
die.    At  last  the  man  is  taken  away,  and  where  is  he  ?    Lost,  lost. 


012  XETBOPOUTAN  TABJBSHACUB  FULPIT. 

lost!  The  hail  has  swept  away  his  refdge».aiid  the  flood  has  otov 
whelmed  his  hiding-plape.  He  hath  perish^  for  ever  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord  and  from  the  gloiy  of  his  power.  None  can  find  a  ranaom 
for  him ;  he  rejected  the  foundation  which  God  laid,  and  songfat  to  find 
^  refuge  for  himself,  and  he  has  been  taken  away  in  his  preeamption. 

III.  Time  fails  u8^  bat  I  want  yoa  to  IaEABS  thk  lsssov  of 
WABNiNa  which  I  have  iost  strength  enough  to  indicate  in  a  few  wonk. 
May  the  Holy  Spirit  bless  it,  though  I  am  scarcely  able  to  ezpreaa  mj 
thoic^htB.    . 

The  first  lesson  of  warning  is — Ui  tu  buHd  on  GocTsfoundaiitnL,    Ha 
knows  bettter  than  we  do  what  is  right  and  safe.    Come,  ye  wise  people* 
be  as  children  and  believe  your  Gk^    Come,  ye  who  like  somcwiiig  ot 
your  own  imagining,  and  yield  your  own  fiincies  for  once.    Indulge  your 
whims  upon  some  common  business,  but  in  this  matter  it  wiH  be  safer 
surely  to  oelieve  Gh)d's  word  than  to  continue  dreaming  and  dcTising  for 
yourself.    You  may  be  a  very  intelligent  person,  but  will  you  compete 
in  intelligence  with  God?     Very  likely  you  may  know  a  hundred  tunes 
more  than  /  do ;  you  may  know  a  thousand  times  more  if  you  choose  to 
think  so,  but  you  cannot  have  a  better  hope  than  mine,  for  I  rest  on 
Jesus  Christ  alone.    You  may  have  what  hope  you  like,  but  I  would  not 
change  with  you  for  all  your  learning.    My  no|)e  lies  in  simply  ooming 
to  Jesus,  and  depending  upon  him,  and  learning  how  to  loye  him.    I 
recommend  the  same  to  you.    Come,  and  from  the  love  of  Jesus  leam 
how  to  be  a  Christian ;  leam  to  be  holy ;  leam  to  be  unselfish ;  leam  to  live 
according  to  God's  word.    There  is  a  power  about  faith  in  Christ  to  give  a 
man  the  mastery  over  himself,  a  power  to  be  found  nowhere  else.    I 
have  seen  the  drunkard,  the  thief,  the  harlot,  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  and 
become  converted,  and  from  that  very  day  they  have  become  gracioas, 
godly,  puie-minded  people.    I  have  never  seen  anything  else  make  such 
a  change  in  men  as  laith  does.    We  maysurely  speak  as  we  find,  and  use 
a  remedy  of  which  we  see  the  cure.     We  have,  moreover,  tried  it  our- 
selves, and  therefore  we  speak  what  we  do  know.    Therefore  oome  and 
rest  in  Jesus,  and  when  you  come  to  die  you  will  at  least  be  able  to  feel, 
*'  I  have  God's  sanction  for  the  foundation  I  have  built  upon,  and  there- 
fore it  cannot  faiL"    0  may  the  Holy  Spirit  bring  you  to  this. 

Again,  let  your  refuge  be  wholly  built  up  of  divine  troth.  Do  not 
try  to  comfort  yourself  with  a  lie.  Dear  friend,  let  truth  be  all  in  all  to 
yon.  Counterfeit  coin  enriches  no  man.  Have  nothing  to  do  with  &lse 
And  flattering  teachings.  If  your  hope  is  not  built  on  solid,  substantial 
matters  of  met,  give  it  up,  and  get  one  that  is.  If  your  hope  of  being 
saved  depends  on  a  dream,  or  a  voice  you  thought  you  heard  iki  the  air, 
or  some  other  such  nonsense,  put  it  away.  Build  upon  your  Lord's  life, 
death,  and  resurrection :  buila  upon  Goa's  promises ;  build  by  the  work 
of  tiie  Holy  Ghost  with  faith,  and  you  shall  have  the  reward  of  eternal 
life.  In  a  word,  rest  on  Jesus,  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  made  flesh,  and 
bleeding  to  the  death  for  man ;  build  on  his  complete  work  and  there 
only,  and  then  if  winds  blow  and  waters  rage  yon  shall  be  safe,  safe  for 
ever.    God  bless  you,  for  Christ's  sake.    Amen. 

Portions  or  Scripturb  rbad  bbfore  Sbruon— Matthew  vii. 

HmNs  PROM  '' Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 118  (Song  II.),  822,  881. 


jnetitopattlan:  IFafrmmcIe  futpt. 


SATAN    IN    A    RAGE. 


^     T 


DSLIVEBED  ON  LoBD'S-DAY  MoBNING,  NOYISMBEB  2ND,    1879,  BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  HETBOPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


**Woe  to  the  inhabiten  of  the  earth  and  of  the  sea!  for  the  devil  is  come  down 
unto  you,  having  great  wrath, because  he  knoweth  that  he  hath  but  a  short  time." — 
Beveiation  xii.  12. 

The  great  battle  in  the  heavenlies  has  been  fought ;  our  glorious  Michael 
has  for  ever  overthrown  the  dragon,  and  cast  Inm  down.  In  the  highest 
regions  the  great  principle  of  evil  has  received  a  total  defeat  through  the 
life  and  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  For  human  sin  atonement  has  been 
made,  and  the  great  quarrel  between  Qod  and  man  has  come  to  a  happy 
end.  Everlasting  righteousness  has  been  brought  in,  and  the  peace  of 
Qod  reigns  in  heaven.  The  conflict  henceforth  rages  here  below,  and  in 
these  inferior  regions  the  prince  of  this  world  is  warring  mightily  against 
the  cause  of  God  and  truth.  Much  woe  does  this  cause  to  the  sons  of 
men,  woe  which  will  never  end  till  his  power  is  altogether  taken  away. 

Observe  concerning  our  arch-enemy  that  he  exercises  forethought  and 
care  as  to  the  evil  enterprise  to  which  he  has  set  his  hand.  Whatever 
foolish  men  may  do,  the  devil  thinks.  Others  may  be  heedless  and 
thoughtless,  but  he  is  anxious  and  full  of  consideration.  He  knows  that 
his  time  or  "  opportunity  "  is  short,  and  he  looks  forward  to  its  close, 
for  he  is  no  careless  waster  of  time  and  forgetter  of  the  end.  He 
values  his  opportunity  to  maintain  his  kingdom,  to  distress  the  people  of 
God,  and  to  dishonour  the  name  of  Christ,  and  since  it  is  but  a  short 
one  he  treats  it  as  such. 

He  infers  the  brevity  of  his  time  from  the  victory  which  Jesns  has 
ahready  gained  over  him.  In  reading  the  chapter  we  saw  how  the  man* 
child  who  is  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron  was  caught  up  unto 
God  and  to  his  throne,  and  then  we  saw  the  war  in  heaven  and  how  the 
devil  was  cast  out  into  the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast  out  with  him. 
Then  was  a  loud  voice  heard  on  high,  ''Now  is  come  salvation  and 
strength,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  power  of  his  Christ :  for 
the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast  down,  which  accused  them  before  our 
God  day  and  night.''  Right  well  may  the  old  serpent  conclude  that  he 
will  be  routed  on  earth  since  he  has  already  sustained  so  dire  a  defeat  that 
No.  1,502. 


614  MBTROPOLITAN  TABEttSTACLE  PITLPIT. 

ke  faaa  &llea  from  heaTen*  neyer  to  rue  agam.  Becanae  the  man-diild 
Christ  Jesus  has  met  him  in  conflict,  met  him  when  as  jet  all  )ui 
power  was  nnbroken,  and  has  cast  him  down  from  his  high  places,  he  is 
persuaded,  and  well  he  may  be,  that  his  reign  is  ended,  and  that  his  op- 
portunity is  short.  He  feels  about  him  even  now  a  chain  which  is 
lengthened  for  awhile,  but  which  shall  be  drawn  into  shorter  compass, 
and  festened  down  by-and-by,  so  that  he  shall  roam  the  earth  no  longer, 
but  lie  as  a  captive  in  his  prison-house.  Fallen  as  this  apostate  spirit  has 
become  he  has  wit  enough  to  look  forward  to  the  fature.  O  that  men 
were  half  as  wise,  and  would  remember  their  latter  end.  I  beg  you  to 
notice  this  fact  concerning  the  evil  spirit,  that  you  too  may  leam  to 
acquire  knowledge,  and  tbooi  use  it  for  practical  purposes.  Why  shonld 
it  always  be  that  the  powers  of  darkness  appear  to  act  more  wisely  than 
the  children  of  light  ?  For  once  I  would  point  out  a  matter  in  which 
our  worst  foe  may  read  us  a  lesson. 

Among  men  there  are  some  who  know  a  great  many  important  matters, 
but  act  as  if  they  did  not  know  them :  their  knowleage  is  so  much  waste 
stored  up  in  the  lumber-room  of  their  minds  and  never  brought  into  the 
workshop  to  be  used  for  practical  puiposes.  For  instance,  we  know  our 
mortal  ity,  and  yet  live  as  if  we  never  meant  to  die.  There  is  great  neces- 
sity foi  many  of  us  to  pray,  '^  Lord,  teach  us  to  number  our  days,  that  we 
may  apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom.*'  We  must  know  that  our  time  is 
short,  and  that  our  life  will  soon  come  to  an  end,  and  yet  we  £ui  to 
know  it  practically,  for  we  are  not  as  earnest  as  dying  men  ought  to  be. 
In  this  the  arch-enemy  is  not  so  foolish  as  we  are,  for  he  so  well  knows 
that  his  time  is  short  that  he  remembers  the  fact  and  is  actuated  by  it. 

Note  well  the  direction  in  which  this  knowledge  operates  upon  him. 
It  excites  his  emotions.  The  deepest  emotion  of  which  he  is  capable  is 
that  of  anger,  for  he  knows  not  how  to  love.  Wrath  is  his  very  soul,  as 
hatred  is  his  very  life ;  he  knows  nothing  of  gentleness,  nothing  of  affection, 
and  therefore  the  fact  that  his  time  is  short  moves  within  him  his  master 
passion,  and  he  hath  great  wrath.  His  evil  nature  is  all  on  fire,  and  his 
excitement  is  terrible.  How  much  the  shortness  of  our  time  ought  to  stir 
our  hearts !     With  what  ardency  of  love  and  fervency  of  zeal  ought  we  to 

Sass  the  days  of  our  sojourning  here !  Knowing  that  the  time  of  our 
eparture  is  at  hand,  and  that  the  season  in  which  we  can  serve  God 
among  the  sons  of  men  is  very  brief,  we  ought  to  be  excited  to  flaming 
zeal  and  passionate  love.  We  are  not  half  stirred  as  we  ought  to  be. 
Devils  feel  great  hatred,  how  is  it  that  we  do  not  feel  great  love  ?  Shall 
they  be  more  ei^r  to  destroy  than  we  are  to  save  ?  Shall  they  be  all 
alive  and  shall  we  be  half  dead  ? 

Nor  is  the  result  of  knowing  that  his  time  is  short  merely  emotional 
on  the  part  of  the  arch  enemy,  for  in  consequence  of  his  great  wratli  he 
is  moved  to  make  earnest  eflforts.  His  energy  is  excited,  he  persecutes  the 
woman  whose  seed  he  dreads,  and  he  pours  floods  out  of  his  mouth  against 
her.  There  is  nothing  which  Satan  can  do  for  his  evil  cause  which  he 
does  not  do.  We  may  be  half-hearted,  but  he  never  is.  He  is  the  very 
image  of  ceaseless  industry  and  indefatigable  earnestness.  He  will  do  all 
that  can  be  done  in  the  time  of  his  permitted  range.  We  may  be  sure 
that  he  will  never  lose  a  day.  My  brethren,  you  and  I,  on  the  other 
hand,  should  be  moved  by  the  shortness  of  our  opportunity  to  an  equal 


BATAN  IN  A  EAGE.  615 

energy  of  incessant  indastry,  serving  God  continnalljr,  becaase  "the 

night  Cometh  wherein  no  man  can  work."    My  friend,  if  you  want  your 

ohildren  brought  to  Christ,  speak  to  them,  for  they  will  soon  be  without 

a  father ;  if  yon  wish  your  servants  to  be  saved,  labour  for  their  con- 

"version,  for  they  will  soon  be  without  a  mistress ;  if  you  desire  your 

"brother  to  be  converted,  speak  to  him,  for  your  sisterly  love  will  not  much 

longer  avail  him.    Minister,  if  you  would  save  your  congregation  by  the 

Spirit  of  God,  seek  to  do  it  at  once,  for  your  tongue  will  soon  be  silent. 

Teacher  in  the  Sunday-school,  if  you  would  have  vour  class  gathered  into 

the  good  Shepherd's  fold,  treasure  up  every  Saboath's  opportunities,  for 

in  a  short  time  the  place  which  knows  you  now  shall  know  you  no  more 

for  ever. 

Thus  Bs  of  old  the  Israelites  went  down  to  the  Philistines  to  sharpen 
erery  man  his  share,  and  his  axe,  and  his  mattock,  so  have  I  bidden  yon 
quicken  your  diligence  by  the  example  of  the  prince  of  darkness.  Shall 
^'e  not  learn  wisdom  from  his  subtlety,  and  zeal  from  his  fury  ?  Shall  he 
discern  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  therefore  bestir  himself;  and  shall  we 
sleep  on  ?  Shall  evil  compass  sea  and  land,  and  shall  the  children  of  God 
creep  about  in  idleness  ?  God  forbid.  By  the  great  wrath  of  the  old 
dragon,  I  beseech  you,  my  brethren,  awake  out  of  your  sleep. 

The  text  tells  us  that  the  shortness  of  Satan's  opportunity  excites  his 
iirrath,  and  we  may  gather  a  general  rule  from  this  one  statement, — 
namely,  that  in  proportion  as  the  deviVe  time  is  shortened  his  energy  is 
increased,  and  we  may  take  it  as  an  assured  fact  that  when  he  rages  to 
the  uttermost  his  opportunities  are  nearly  over.  He  hath  great  wrath, 
knowing  that  his  time  is  short.  I  hope  there  will  be  something  of  in- 
struction in  this,  and  somewhat  of  comfort  for  all  those  who  are  on  the 
right  side.    May  the  Holy  Ghost  make  it  so. 

In  the  world  around  us  we  must  not  consider  that  things  go  altogether 
amiss  when  the  powers  of  evil  become  strong.  We  should  be  foolish  if  we 
wept  in  des^ir  because  the  tares  are  ripening,  for  is  not  the  wheat  ripen* 
ing  too  ?  True,  the  dead  become  more  and  more  corrupt,  but  if  the 
living  become  more  and  more  active  why  should  we  lament  ?  Because 
blasphemy  grows  loud,  because  infidels  seek  to  undermine  the  foundation 
of  the  faith,  or  because  the  clouds  of  superstition  grow  more  dense,  we 
must  not  therefore  conclude  that  we  have  fallen  upon  evil  times,  the  like 
of  which  were  never  seen  before.  Not  so.  Oftentimes  the  development 
of  evil  is  an  indication  that  there  is  an  equal  or  a  greater  development 
of  good ;  and  the  climax  of  ill  is  frequently  its  end.  Do  you  not  know 
that  in  the  world  of  nature  the  darkest  time  of  the  night  is  that  which 
precedes  the  dawning  of  the  day  ?  May  it  not  be  the  same  in  the  spiritual 
and  moral  world  ?  Does  not  the  old  proverb  tell  us  concerning  the  year, 
that  **  as  the  day  lengthens  the  cold  strengthens  "?  As  the  spring  comes 
with  lengthened  days  the  frosts  often  grow  more  sharp  and  hard.  Is  it 
not  also  plain  to  the  simplest  mind  that  the  turning  of  the  tide  happens 
when  the  ebb  has  reached  its  utmost.  Even  so  when  evil  is  at  its  height 
it  is  nearest  to  its  fall.  Look  for  confirmation  to  the  page  of  history. 
When  the  tale  of  bricks  was  doubled  Moses  came  to  deliver  the 
oppressed.  When  Pharaoh  would  by  no  means  let  the  people  go,  and 
his  yoke  seemed  rivetted  upon  the  neck  of  Israel,  then  the  right  arm  of 
God  was  made  bare,  and  the  Bed  Sea  beheld  his  vengeance.    When 


tic  METBOFOUXAV  TABSBSACUS  PULPIT. 

despots  grow  most  tynumical  liberty's  hour  ia  coming.  Whea  the  lie 
'beeomes  exceeding  bold,  and  wean  a  brazen  forehead,  then  it  ia  that 
-ftmth  oonfonnda  her.  When  Gk>liath  afeaUcB  abroad  and  defies  tlie  armies 
«f  Israel,  then  is  the  stone  already  in  the  sling,  and  the  David  hard  at 
land,  to  lay  the  giant  low.  Do  not,  therefore,  dread  the  advent  of  greater 
opposition,  nor  the  apparent  increase  in  strength  of  those  oj^iositions 
which  alrnidj  exist,  for  it  has  ever  been  so  in  the  history  of  events  that 
the  hour  of  the  Miunph  of  evil  is  the  honr  of  its  doom.  When  Bel* 
shazzar  pro&nes  the  holy  vessels  the  handwriting  blazes  on  the  wall,  and 
when  Haman  is  at  the  king's  banquet  of  wine  (Peking  the  blood  of  ^e 
whole  race  of  the  JeivB  the  gallows  are  prepared  for  him  upon  his  own 
roof. 

It  shall  be  seen,  even  to  the  last  hour  of  history,  that  the  devil  rages 
the  more  when  his  empire  is  the  nearer  to  its  end.    At  the  very  last  he 
'Shall  go  about  to  deceive  the  nations  which  are  in  the  four  quarters  of 
the  earth,  6<^  and  Magog,  to  gather  them  together  to  battle.     They 
shall  come  up  in  great  lu)stis,  fierce  for  the  conflict,  to  '^  the  battle  of 
the  great  day  of  God  Almighty,'*  at  Armageddon.    It  shall  then  seem  as 
if  the  light  of  Israel  must  be  quenched,  ^id  the  truth  of  God  utterly 
extinguished ;  but  in  that  dread  hour  t^  Lord  shall  triumph  gloriously, 
and  he  shall  smite  his  adverBaries  to  their  final  overthrow.    Then  shall 
the  angel  standing  in  the  sun  invite  the  vultures  and  all  the  fowls  that 
fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven  to  gather  to  the  grim  feast  of  vengeance, 
to  eat  the  flesh  of  horaemen  and  men  of  might :  then  also  shall  the 
devil  that  deceived  them  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,  and  shall  be  tor- 
mented day  and  night  for  ever  and  ever."    Then  also  shall  the  shout  be 
lieard,  '^  Hallelujah,  hallelujah,  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth." 
On  the  greatest  possible  scale  the  greatness  of  the  dragon's  wrath  is  a 
sure  prophecy  of  the  end  of  his  reign. 

Now,  what  is  true  on  a  great  scale  is  true  in  the  smaller  one.  Mis- 
sionaries in  any  country  will  generally  find  that  the  last  onslaught  of 
heathenism  is  the  most  ferocious.  We  shall  find,  whenever  the  truth 
eomes  into  contacb  with  felsehood,  that  when  error  is  driven  to  its  last 
•entrenchments  it  fights  for  life,  tooth  and  nail,  with  all  its  might ;  its 
wrath  is  great  because  its  time  is  short.  In  any  tillage  or  town  in 
England,  or  in  any  other  country,  whenever  the  opposition  to  the  gospel 
Teaches  its  most  outrageous  pitch,  and  men  seem  as  if  they  would  murder 
ihe  preacher  of  the  word,  you  may  reckon  that  the  power  of  the  oppo- 
sition is  almost  over.  After  the  mad  fit  active  persecution  will  cease, 
and  there  will  come  a  time  of  calm,  and  perhaps  of  general  reception  of 
the  gospel.  When  once  the  bad  passious  of  mankind  shall  have  boiled 
up  they  will  cool  down  again ;  hath  not  the  Lord  promised  to  restrain 
it?  As  the  burning  heat  of  the  noontide  sun  lasts  not  for  ever,  but 
gradually  abates  when  it  has  reached  the  hottest  point,  so  is  it  with  the 
wrath  of  man,  which  the  foul  fiend  so  often  uses  for  his  base  purposes. 

The  same  truth  will  apply  to  every  individual  man.  When  God  begins 
his  great  woric  in  a  sinner's  heart,  to  lead  him  to  Christ,  it  is  no  t)ad 
«gn  if  the  man  feels  more  hatred  to  God  than  ever,  more  dislike  to  good 
things  than  before  :  nor  need  we  despair  if  he  is  driven  into  greater  sin 
than  over.  The  icrocity  of  the  temptation  indicates  the  vigour  with 
which  Satan  contends  for  any  one  of  his  black  sheep.     He  will  not  lose 


BATiiK  IN  A  RAGB.  617 

his  subjects  if  he  can  help  it^  and  so  he  puts  forth  all  his  strencrth  to 
keep  them  under  his  power,  and  he  is  especially  vigilant  and  furious 
when  the  power  of  grace  is  about  to  prevail  for  their  salvation.  I  will 
not,  however,  dwell  upon  this  point,  because  it  is  to  be  the  subject  of  our 
discourse. 

The  general  fact  is  further  illustrated  in  the  cases  of  many  believers* 
There  are  times  when  in  the  behever's  lieart  the  battle  rages  horribly,^ 
when  he  hardly  knows  whether  he  is  a  child  of  God  at   all,  and  is 
ready  to  give  up  all  hope.     He  cannot  pray  or  praise,  for  he  is  so  dis- 
tracted ;  he  cannot  read  the  Scriptures  without  horrible  thoughts.     It 
seems  as  if  he  must  utterly  perish,  for  no  space  is  given  him  in  which  to 
refresh  his  heart,  the  attacks  are  so  continual  and  violent.    Such  dreadful 
excitements  are  often  followed  by  years  of  peace,  quiet  usefulness,  holi- 
ness, and  communion  with  God.     Satan  knows  that  God  is  about  to  set 
a  limit  to  his  vexations  of  the  good  man,  and  so  he  rages  extremely 
because  his  opportunity  is  short.    It  is  very  remarkable  that  some  of  the 
greatest  of  the  saints  have  died  in  the  midst  of  the  most  fearful  conflicts,. 
from  the  same  reason :  the  dog  howled  at  them  because  he  knew  that  they 
would  soon  be  out  of  his  reach.     You  would  not  suppose  that  Martin 
Luther,  a  man  so  brave  and  strong  that  he  could  defy  the  Pope  and  the 
devil,  should  on  his  dying  bed  be  woefully  put  to  it,  and  yet  it  was  so — his 
worst  struggle  was  the  closing  one.    He  was  more  than  a  conqueror,  but 
the  fight  was  severe,  as  if  the  devil,  that  old  coward,  waited  until  he  had 
his  antagonist  down,  waited  until  he  was  weak  and  feeble,  and  then: 
leaped  upon  him  to  worry  if  he  could  not  devour  him.    Truly  Luther 
had  worried  the  devil,  and  we  do  not  wonder  at  the  malice  of  the  fiend. 
Satan  knew  that  he  would  soon  be  out  of  the  reach  of  his  fiery  arrows  for 
ever,  and  therefore  he  must  needs  have  a  last  shot  at  him.    It  was  pre- 
cisely the  case  with  John  Knox,  who  being  observed  to  sigh  deeply  was 
asked  the  cause  of  it,  and  replied,  "  I  have  formerly^  during  my  frail  life, 
sustained  many  tests,  and  many  assaults  of  Satan ;  but  at  present  he 
hath  assailed  me  most  fearfully,  and  put  forth  all  his-  strength  to  devour^ 
and  nmke  an  end  of  me  at  once.    Often  before  has  he  placed  my  sin& 
before  my  eyes,  often  tempted  me  to  despair,  often  endeavoured  to  enr 
snare  me  by  the  allurements  of  the  world;  but  tliese  weapons  wera 
broken  by  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  the  word  of  God,  and  the  enemy 
failed.    Now  he  has  attacked  me  in  another  way :  the  cunning  serpent 
has  laboured  to  persuade  me  that  I  have  merited  heaven  and  eternal 
blessedness  by  the  faithful  discharge  of  my  ministry.    But,  blessed  be 
God,  who  has  enabled  me  to  beat  down  and  quench  this  fiery  dart  by 
suggesting  to  me  such  passages  of  Scripture  as  these : — ^  What  hast  thou 
that  thou  hast  not  received  ? '     *  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am : 
not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  in  me.'    Upon  this>  as  one  vanquished,  he 
left  me.    Wherefore  I  give  thankEh  to  my  God  through  Jesus  Christ, 
who  has  been  pleased  to  give  me  the  victory ;  and  I  am  persuaded  that 
the  tempter  shall  not  again  attack  me,  but^  within  a.  short  time,  I  shall, 
without  any  great  pain  of  body  or  anguish  of  mind,  exchange  this  mortal 
and  miserable  life  for  a  blessed  immortality  through  Jesus  Christ." 

Do  you  wonder  that  the  devil  was  eager  to  have  another  knock  at  one 
who  had  given  so  many  knocks  to  his  dominion?  Do  not  therefore  be 
at  all  surprised  if  Satan  rages  against  yon,  nor  marvel  if  you  yourself 


618  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Bhould  seem  to  be  given  into  hia^power,  bnt  the  rather  rejoice  in  this,  that 
his  great  wrath  is  the  token  of  the  shortness  of  his  time.  He  wages 
war  with  ns  all  the  more  cruelly  because  he  knows  that  he  will  nltimatelj 
be  defeated.  His  degraded  mind  delights  in  petty  malice :  if  he  cannot 
destroy  he  will  disturb,  if  he  cannot  kill  he  will  wound.  Snbtie  as 
he  is  he  acts  right  foolishly  in  pursuing  a  hopeless  object.  In  his  war 
against  any  one  of  the  seed  of  the  woman  he  knows  that  he  is  doomed 
to  defeat,  and  yet  he  gnaws  at  the  heel  which  breaks  his  head.  It  is  the 
doom  of  evil  to  persevere  in  its  spite  after  it  knows  that  it  is  all  in  vain, 
— ^to  be  for  ever  vanquished  by  the  invincible  seed  of  the  living  God, 
and  yet  for  ever  to  return  to  the  fray.  Sisyphus  for  ever  rolling  upward 
a  huge  stone  which  returns  upon  him  is  a  true  picture  of  the  devil  vainly 
labouring  to  remove  the  truth  out  of  its  place.  His  is  indeed  **  labour 
in  vain." 

I  thought  this  morning  that  I  would  call  attention  to  one  particular 
instance  of  the  fact  which  is  seen  in  the  soul  that  is  coming  to  Christ,  in 
whom  Satan  often  hath  great  wrath  •  knowing  that  his  time  is  short. 
My  object  is  to  comfort  those  who  are  awakened,  and  are  seeking  the 
Saviour.  If  they  are  sore  beset  I  long  that  they  may  find  peace,  and 
rest,  and  hope  very  speedily.  When  the  poor  man  who  was  possessed 
with  an  evil  spirit  was  being  brought  to  Christ,  we  read  that  *'  as  he  was 
a  coming,  the  devil  threw  him  down,  and  tare  him."  That  is  the  way  with 
the  great  enemy :  when  he  is  about  to  be  cast  out  his  energy  is  more 
displayed  than  ever,  that  if  possible  he  may  destroy  the  soul  before  it  has 
obtained  peace  with  God.  May  the  sacred  Comforter  help  me  while  I 
try  to  speak  encouragingly  upon  this  subject. 

I.  Our  first  head  shall  be,  how  does  Satan  know  when  his  time 
18  SHORT  in  a  SOUL?  He  watches  over  all  souls  that  are  under  his 
power  with  incessant  maliciousness.  He  goeth  about  the  camp  like  a 
.-sentinel,  spying  out  every  man  who  is  likely  to  be  a  deserter  from  his 
army.  In  some  men's  hearts  he  dwells  at  ease,  like  a  monarch  in  his 
pavilion ;  their  minds  are  his  favourite  mansions ;  he  goes  in  and  out 
whenever  he  pleases,  and  he  makes  himself  wonderfully  much  at  home. 
He  counts  the  man's  nature  to  be  his  own  inheritance,  and  be  works 
within  him  after  his  own  evil  pleasure.  Alas,  the  deceived  man  yields 
his  members  instruments  of  unrighteousness,  and  is  willingly  held  ih 
thraldom.  In  such  a  case  all  the  man's  faculties  are  so  many  chambers  for 
Satan  to  dwell  in,  and  liis  emotions  are  so  many  fires  and  forges  for  Satan 
to  work  with.  But  by-and-by,  if  divine  grace  interposes,  there  comes  a 
•change,  and  Satan,  who  has  lived  there  twenty,  thirty,  forty,  fifty,  sixty 
jears,  begins  to  think  that  he  shall  not  be  able  to  keep  this  residence 
of  his  much  longer.  He  perceives  that  his  time  is  short,  and  I  suppose 
he  perceives  it  first  by  discovering  that  Jie  is  not  quite  so  welcome  as  he 
tised  to  be.  The  man  loved  sin,  and  found  pleasure  in  it,  but  now  sin  is 
not  so  sweet  as  it  was,  its  flavour  ia  dull  and  insipid.  The  charms  of 
vice  are  fading,  and  its  pleasures  are  growing  empty,  vain,  and  void, 
and  this  is  a  token  of  a  great  change.  Once,  whenever  a  pilgrim  sin 
came  that  way,  the  soul  kept  open  house  to  entertain  it  with  all  hos- 
pitality, but  now  it  is  not  half  so  eager ;  even  the  home-dwelling  habitual 
lusts  do  not  yield  so  much  content  as  aforetime,  neither  is  so  much  pro- 
vision made  for  them.    The  black  prince  and  his  court  are  out  of  favour. 


SATAN  IN  A  BAQE.  G19 

and  this  is  an  intimation  that  he  must  soon  be  gone.  When  sin  loses 
its  sweetness,  Satan  is  losing  his  power.  The  adversary  perceives  that 
he  must  soon  stretch  his  dragon  wings  when  he  sees  that  the  heart  is 
growing  weary  of  him  and  is  breaking  away  from  his  fascinations. 

He  grows  more  snre  of  his  speedy  ejectment  when  he  does  not  get  the 
accammodatian  he  used  to  have.  The  man  was  once  eager  for  sin,  he  went 
in  the  pursuit  of  vice,  hunted  after  it,  and  pub  himself  in  the  way  of 
temptation,  and  then  Satan  reigned  securely  ;  bat  now  he  begins  to 
forsake  the  haunts  where  sin  walks  openly,  and  he  abandons  the  cups 
of  excitement  which  inflame  the  soul ;  you  find  him  going  to  a  place 
of  worship,  listening  to  a  sermon,  whereas  before  he  frequented  the 
theatre,  and  enjoyed  a  loose  song  at  a  music-hall.  The  devil  does  not 
like  this  change,  and  takes  it  as  a  warning  that  he  will  soon  have  to 
give  up  the  key.  The  man  does  not  drink  as  once  he  did,  nor  swear 
as  once  he  did ;  nor  does  he  yield  himself  up  with  readiness  to  every 
temptation.  The  fish  is  getting  shy  of  the  bait.  The  awakened  man  has 
not  decided  for  Christ,  but  he  is  no  longer  at  ease  in  bondage,  no  longer 
the  glad  slave  of  iniquity.  He  is  on  the  wrong  road,  but  he  does  not 
run  in  it;  on  the  contrary,  he  pauses,  he  heaves  a  sigh  and  wishes  he 
could  leave  the  evil  road,  wishes  he  knew  how  to  leap  a  hedge  and  get 
into  the  narrow  way.  Satan  marks  all  this,  and  he  says  to  himself, 
^'  There  is  not  the  preparation  made  for  me  that  there  used  to  be,  there 
is  little  readiness  to  run  on  my  errands,  and  therefore  I  perceive  that  my 
time  is  short." 

He  is  still  more  convinced  of  the  shortness  of  his  possession  of  a  man's 
heart  when  he  hears  knocking  at  that  heart's  door  a  hand  whose  power  ho 
has  felt.  He  knows  the  kind  of  knock  it  is :  a  gentle,  but  an  irresistible 
knocking  upon  the  heart.  Continual,  perpetual,  persevering,  the  knock 
of  one  who  means  to  enter ;  the  knock  as  of  one  that  hath  a  hole  in  his 
hand.  He  knocketh  not  as  one  whose  power  lies  in  a  blow,  but  as  one 
whose  tears  and  love  are  his  battery  of  attack.  He  hath  an  energy 
of  compassion,  an  irresistibleness  of  gentle  love  ;  and  as  Satan  hears  his 
knock,  and  perceives  that  the  tenant  of  the  house  hears  it  too,  and  is 
half  inclined  to  open  the  door,  he  is  afraid.  When  the  heart  relents  at 
Che  sound  of  the  gospel  summons,  he  trembles  more.  If  the  knocking 
still  continues,  waking  up  the  tenant  in  the  dead  of  night,  a  sound  heard 
amid  the  noise  of  traffic  and  above  the  laughter  of  fools,  he  says,  '^  My 
time  is  short."  He  knows  the  hand  which  broke  his  head  of  old,  and 
its  knocking  is  ominous  to  him. 

He  Imowsthat  in  the  gentleness  of  Jesus  there  is  an  irresistible  energy 
which  must  and  will  prevail,  and  he  therefore  counts  that  his  possession 
of  the  tenement  is  precarious  when  the  gospel  is  felt  upon  the  heart. 
Between  the  knocks  he  hears  a  voice  that  saith,  "  Open  to  me  !  Open 
to  me,  for  my  head  is  wet  with  dew,  and  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the 
night  1 "  and  he  knows  that  this  pleading  voice  bodes  the  downmil  of  his 
power. 

Another  indication  to  the  enemy  that  his  time  is  short  is  when  he 
knows  that  the  tenant  of  the  house  steals  away  sometimes  to  court,  and 
asks  for  a  warrant  of  ejectment  against  him.  You  know  what  I  mean, — 
when  the  man  feels  that  he  cannot  himself  get  rid  of  sin,  and  cannot  in 
his  own  strength  conquer  Satan,  and  therefore  cries, ''  0  God  help  me, 


620  METROPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

O  God  for  Christ's  sake  drive  ont  the  old  dragon  from  mj  soul,  I  beBeecb 
thee."  This  is  asking  for  a  warrant  of  ejectment,  this  is  going  to  the 
conrt  of  heaven  and  pleading  with  the  great  King  to  issue  a  summons, 
and  send  his  officer  to  tarn  oat  the  intruder,  that  he  may  no  longer  pol- 
lute the  spirit.  '^  Ah,^  saith  the  evil  one,  "  this  is  not  &e  place  for  me 
much  longer,  behold  he  prajeth."  More  fierce  than  the  flames  of  hell  to 
Satan  are  the  prayers  of  convinced  sinners :  when  they  praj  he  must  be 
gone.  He  must  cry >' boot  and  saddle''  when  men  sound  the  tnunpet 
of  prayer.  There  is  no  tarrying  in  the  camp  any  longer  when  the 
advance  guard  of  prayer  has  come  to  take  possession. 

One  thing  more  always  makes  Satan  know  that  his  time  is  shorty  and 
that  is  when  the  Holy  Spirits  power  is  widmiiiy  at  work  wU&in  the  mmL 
Light  has  come  in,  and  the  anner  sees  and  knows  what  he  was  ignorant 
of  before :  Satan  hates  the  light  as  much  as  he  loves  darkness,  and  like 
an  owl  in  the  daylight  he  feels  that  he  is  out  of  place.    Life  comes  io^ 
too,  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  maafBela,  he  becomes  sensitive,  he  becomi»^ 
penitent,  and  Satan  who  loves  death,  and  ever  abides  among  the  tombs.^ 
is  bound  to  fly  before  ^iritual  life.    The  Holy  Spirit  is  beginning  to 
work  upon  the  man  very  graciously,  and  Satan  knows  every  tiirob  of  the 
Spirit's  power,  for  it  is  the  death  of  his  power,  and  so  he  saith — **  I  vili 
go  to  the  place  from  whenoe  I  came  out,  for  this  house  trembles  as  if  ii^ 
were  shaken  with  earthquake,  and  affords  me  no  rest."    Joyful  tidings 
for  a  heart  long  molested  by  this  fierce  fiend  !    Away,  thou  enemy,  thy 
destructions  shall  soon  come  to  a  perpetual  end ! 

II.    This  brings  me,  secondly,  to  notice  that,  inasmuch  as  the  short- 
ness of  his  tenure  excites  the  rage  of  Satan,  we  must  next  observe  how 
HE  DISPLAYS  HIS  GREAT  WRATH.    His  fury  rages  differently  in  diffWent 
persons.    On  some  he  displays  his  great  wrath  by  stirring  up  outward 
persecution.    The  man  is  not  a  Christian  yet,  he  is  not  actually  converted 
yet,  but  Satan  is  so  afraid  that  he  will  be  saved  that  he  sets  all  his 
dogs  upon  him  directly.    The  poor  soul  goes  into  the  workshop,  and 
though  he  would  give  his  eyes  if  he  could  say, ''  I  am  a  Christian,"  he 
cannot  quite  say  so ;  and  yet  his  workmates  begin  to  pounce  upon  him 
as  much  as  if  he  was  in  very  deed  one  of  tdie  hated  followers  of  Jesus. 
They  scoff  at  him  because  he  is  serious  and  sober,  because  he  is 
beginning  to  think  and  to  be  decent,  because  he  b^ns  to  listen  to  tha 
gospel  and  to  care  for  the  best  things.    Before  the  man-child  is  born  the 
dragon  is  longing  to  devour  him*:  before  the  man  gets  to  be  a  Christian 
the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  labours,  if  possible,  to  destroy  him. 
The  devil  will  lose  nothing  through  being  behind.    He  begins  as  soon 
as  ever  grace  begins.    Now,  if  the  grace  of  Gtod.  be  not  in  the  awakened 
man,  and  his  reformation  is  only  a  spasm  of  remorse,  it  is  very  likely  that 
he  will  be  driven  back  from  all  attendance  upon  the  means  of  grace  by  the 
ribald  remarks  of  the  ungodly,  but  if  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  roally 
been  knocking  at  his  door,  and  the  Spirit  of  God.  has  begun  to  work, 
this  opposition  will  not  answer  its  purpose.     The  Lord  will  find  wingB- 
fi)r  this  poor  soul  that  he  may  flee  away  from  the  trial  which  as  yet  he  is 
not  able  to  bear.    I  have  sometimes  known  such  opposition  even  tend  to 
undo  Satan's  work,  and  answer  quite  the  opposite  purpose.    I  know 
one  who  was  much  troubled  about  the  truth  of  Scripture  and  about  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel,  although  he  was  a  sincere  searcher  into  the 


BATAN  Itf  i.  BAQIU  621 

troth.  He  commenced  to  attend  this  house  of  prayer,  and  to  listen  to 
the  gospel,  rather  as  an  enqnirer  than  as  a  believer.  As  yet  he  oonld 
not  Biiy  that  he  was  a  C^iristian,  though  he  half  wished  he  could.  Now, 
it  came  to  pass  that  the  opposition  which  he  immediately  received  firom  the 
world  strengthened  his  raith  in  the  Bible,  and  became  a  sort  of  missing 
link  between  him  and  the  truth.  The  sneers  of  his  comrades  acted  in 
this  way.  He  said  to  himself,  '^  Why  should  they  all  attack  me  on  the 
bare  supposition  of  my  being  a  Christian  ?  If  I  had  been  a  Mahometan 
or  a  Jew  they  would  have  regarded  me  with  curiosity,  and  let  me 
nlone ;  but  inasmuch  as  they  only  suspect  me  of  becoming  a  Christian 
they  are  all  down  upon  me  with  contempt  and  anger.  Now  (said  he), 
why  is  this?  Is  not  this  a  proof  that  I  am  right,  and  that  the  word  of 
God  is  right,  for  did  it  not  say  that  there  should  be  enmity  between  the 
seed  of  the  serpent  and  the  seed  of  the  woman  ? "  The  devil  did  not 
know  what  he  was  doing  when  he  opposed  that  young  man  and  made  a 
believer  of  him  by  that  which  was  meant  to  drive  him  into  unbelief.  If 
the  men  of  this  world  oppose  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  more 
fiercely  than  any  ctther,  surely  it  must  be  that  there  is  something  special 
in  it,  something  opposed  to  their  sinful  ways  or  to  their  proud  hopes, 
something  which  is  of  God.  That  was  the  inference  which  my  young 
friend  diew  from  the  treatment  he  received,  and  that  inference  estab- 
lished him  in  the  faith.  Thus,  you  see,  Satan  often  hopes  to  save  his 
dominion  when  his  time  is  short  by  vehement  persecution  against  the 
awakened  sinner. 

Much  worse,  however,  is  his  other  method  of  showing  his  wrath, 
namely,  by  vomiting  floods  out  of  his  mouth  to  drown,  if  possible,  our 
new-born  hope.  Wben  the  hopeful  hearer  as  yet  has  not  really  found 
peace  and  rest,  it  will  sometimes  happen  that  Satan  will  try  him  with 
doubts,  and  blasphemies,  and  temptations  such  as  he  never  knew  before. 
The  tempted  one  has  been  amazed  and  has  said  to  himself, "  How  is  this  ? 
Can  ray  desire  after  Christ  be  fche  work  of  Gk)d  ?  I  get  worse  and  woi-se. 
I  never  felt  so  wicked  as  this  till  I  began  to  seek  a  Saviour."  Yet  this 
is  no  strange  thing,  flery  though  the  trial  be. 

Satan  will  suggest  all  the  doubts  he  can  upon  the  inspiration  of  Scrip- 
ture, the  existence  of  a  God,  the  deity  of  Christ,  and  everything  else  that 
is  revealed,  till  the  poor  heart  that  is  earnestly  longing  for  salvation  will 
scarcely  know  whether  there  is  anything  true  at  all.  The  man  will  be  so 
tumbled  up  and  down  in  his  thoughts  that  he  will  hardly  know  whether 
he  is  on  his  head  or  his  heels.  **  They  reel  to  and  fro,  and  stagger  like  a 
drunken  man,  and  are  at  their  wits'  end."  The  more  they  read  the  Bible, 
the  more  they  attend  the  means  of  .grace,  the  more  are  they  tempted  to 
be  sceptical  and  atheistic.  Boubts  they  never  knew  before  will  torment 
them  even  while  they  strive  to  be  devout.  The  evil  tenant  has  notice  to 
quit,  and  he  makes  up  his  mind  to  do  all  the  damage  within  his  power, 
while  he  is  yet  within  the  doors.  See  how  he  breaks  up  precious  truths, 
and  dashes  down  the  richest  hopes,  and  all  with  the  detestable  design  of 
venting  his  spite  upon  the  poor  soul. 

At  such  time,  also,  Satan  will  often  arouse  all  the  worst  passions  of  our 
nature,  and  drive  them  into  unwonted  riot.  The  awakened  sinner  will 
be  astonished  as  he  finds  himself  beset  with  temptations  more  base  and 
foul  than  he  has  ever  felt  before.    He  will  resist  and  strive  against  the 


622  UETROPOLITAK  TABBBNAGLB  PULPIT. 

assanlt,  but  it  may  be  so  violent  as  to  stamper  him.  He  can  scaioely 
believe  that  the  flesh  is  so  utterly  comipt  The  man  who  is  anxiondy 
seeking  to  go  to  heaven  seems  at  such  a  time  as  if  he  were  dragged  down 
by  seven  strong  demons  to  the  eternal  deeps  of  perdition.  He  feels  as  if 
he  had  never  known  sin  before,  nor  been  so  completely  beneath  its 
power.  The  Satanic  troopers  sleep  as  a  quiet  garrison  while  the  man  is 
under  the  spell  of  sin,  but  when  once  the  heart  is  likely  to  be  captured 
by  Immanuel's  love  the  infernal  soldiery  put  on  their  worst  manner,  and 
trample  down  all  the  thoughts  and  desires  of  the  soul. 

Satan  may  also  attack  the  seeker  in  another  form,  with  fierce  accnsationB 
and  judgments.  He  does  not  accuse  some  men,  for  he  is  quite  sure  of 
them,  and  they  are  his  very  good  friends ;  but  when  a  man  is  likely  to 
be  lost  to  him,  he  alters  his  tone  and  threatens  and  condemns.  He  cries, 
**  What,  you  be  saved !  It  is  impossible !  You  know  what  you  used 
to  be.  Think  of  your  past  life."  Then  he  rakes  up  a  very  hell  before  the 
man's  eyes.  "  You  !"  saith  he,  "  why  even  since  you  have  pretended  to 
be  a  little  better,  and  have  begun  to  attend  the  means  of  grace,  you  know 
you  have  looked  back  with  a  longing  eye,  and  hungered  for  your  old  plea- 
sures. It  is  quite  out  of  the  question  that  you  should  be  a  servant  of 
Christ  I  He  will  not  have  such  a  tatterdemalion  as  you  in  his  house.  The 
great  Captain  will  never  march  at  the  head  of  a  regiment  which  is  disgraced 
by  receiving  such  as  you."  Bunyan  describes  ApoUyon  as  standing  across 
the  road  and  swearing  by  his  infernal  den  that  the  pilgrim  should  go  no 
further ;  there  would  he  spill  his  soul.  Then  he  began  to  fling  at  him  all 
manner  of  fiery  darts,  and  among  them  was  this  one,  ''Thou  didst 
faint  at  first  setting  out,  when  thou  wast  almost  choked  in  the  gulf  of 
Despond.  Thou  wast  almost  persuaded  to  go  back  at  the  sight  of  the 
Lions.  Thou  hast  been  false  already  to  thy  new  Lord  !"  Think  for  a 
moment  of  the  devil  chiding  us  for  sin  !  Oh,  that  the  poor  burdened 
soul  could  laugh  at  this  hypocritical  accuser,  for  he  hates  to  be  despised, 
and  yet  he  right  well  deserves  it  Laugh  at  him,  0  virgin  daughter  of 
Zion,  for  this  great  wrath  of  his  is  because  his  time  is  short.  Who  is  he 
that  he  should  bring  an  accusation  against  us  ?  Let  him  mind  himself ; 
he  has  enough  to  answer  for.  When  he  turns  an  accuser  it  is  enough  to 
make  the  child  of  Grod  laugh  him  to  scorn.  Yet  it  is  not  easy  to  hmgfa 
when  you  are  in  this  predicament,  for  the  heart  is  ready  to  break  with 
anguish. 

Once  more.  Satan  at  such  times  has  been  known  to  pour  into  the 
poor  troubled  mind  floods  of  blasphemy.  I  do  not  recollect  as  a  child 
having  heard  blasphemy.  Carefully  brought  up  and  kept  out  of  harm's 
way,  I  think  it  could  only  have  been  once  or  twice  that  I  ever  heard 
pro&ne  language ;  and  yet,  when  I  was  seeking  the  Lord,  I  distinctly 
remember  the  spot  where  the  most  hideous  blasphemies  that  ever  passed 
the  human  mind  rushed  through  my  mind.  I  clapped  my  hands  to  my 
mouth  for  fear  I  should  utter  one  of  them.  They  were  none  of  my  in- 
venting, neither  had  I  revived  them  from  my  memory,  they  were  the 
immediate  suggestions  of  Satan  himself,  who  was  determined,  if  possible^ 
to  drive  me  to  despair.  Bead  the  story  of  John  Bunyan's  five  years  of 
torture  under  this  particular  misery,  and  you  will  see  how  Satan  would 
say  to  him,  "  Sell  Christ,  Sell  Christ,  Give  up  Christ,"  and  as  he  wenfc 
about  his  daily  business  he  would  have  it  ringing  in  his  eai*s  ''Sell  Christy 


SATAN  IN  A  BAQX.  623 

Sell  Christ."  When  at  last,  in  a  moment  of  worry,  he  thought  he  said, 
'^liCt  him  go  if  he  will ":  then  came  the  accnsation,  "  Now  it  is  all  over 
with  you.  Jesus  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  you,  you  have  given  him 
up.  You  are  a  Judas,  you  have  sold  your  Lord."  Then  when  the  poor 
man  sought  the  Lord  with  tears,  and  found  peace  again,  some  other 
dreadful  insinuation  would  dog  his  heels.  John  Bunyan  was  too  precious 
a  servant  of  the  devil  for  him  to  lose  him  readily,  and  the  enemy  had 
perhaps  some  idea  of  what  kind  of  servant  of  Ood  the  converted  tinker 
would  become,  and  what«ort  of  dreams  would  charm  the  hearts  of  many 
generations,  and  so  he  would  not  let  him  go  without  summonii^  all  the 
tribes  of  hell  to  wreak  their  vengeance  on  him  if  they  could  not  detain 
him  in  their  service.  Yet  Bunyan  escaped,  and  so  will  others  in  like 
case.  Oh,  bondslave  of  the  devil,  may  you  have  grace  to  steal  away  to 
Jesas.  Hasten  away  from  Satan's  pow^  at  once,  for  otherwise  he  will  as 
long  as  he  has  any  opportunity  manifest  his  great  wrath  towards  you. 

III.  Thirdly,  and  briefly,  let  us  think— uow  are  we  to  meet  all 
THIS?  How  must  Satan  be  dealt  with  while  he  is  showing  his  .great 
wrath  because  his  power  is  short  ? 

I  should  say,  firat,  if  he  is  putting  himself  in  this  rage,  let  us  get  him 
out  all  the  more  quickly.  If  he  would  remain  quiet  even  then  we  ought 
to  be  anxious  to  be  rid  of  his  foul  company,  but  if  he  shows  this  great 
rage  let  us  out  with  him  straight  away.  In  God's  name  let  the  dragon 
be  smitten  if  he  must  needs  be  raving.  If  there  is  any  opportunity  of 
getting  him  out,  back  door  or  front  door,  straight  away,  do  not  let  ns 
loiter  or  linger  even  for  a  single  hour:  a  devil  raging,  making  us 
blaspheme,  and  then  accusing  us,  tempting  us  and  betraying  us,  is  such 
a  dangerous  occupant  of  a  heart  that  he  is  not  to  be  borne  with.  Out  be 
must  go,  and  out  at  once.  Better  have  a  den  of  lions  dwelling  in  our 
house  than  the  devil  within  our  heart.  Lord,  turn  him  out  at  once  by 
thine  own  grace.  We  decide  once  for  all  to  wage  war  with  him ;  we  will 
linger  no  longer,  we  dare  not ;  we  will  procrastinate  no  more,  it  is  more 
than  our  liv^  are  worth.  Nay,  not  to-morrow,  but  to*day  out  must  the 
tyrant  go.  Nay,  not  after  we  leave  this  Tabernacle,  but  Jiere,  in  this 
very  pew,  0  Lord,  drive  the  old  dragon  from  his  throne  with  all  his 
hellish  crew !  That  is  the  first  advice  I  give  you,  let  the  enemy  be  cast 
out  at  once  by  grace  divine. 

And  the  next  thing  is,  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  get  him  out  by  our 
own  unaided  efforts,  let  us  cry  to  the  strong  for  strength,  who  can  drive 
out  this  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air.  There  is  life  in  a  look  at  Jesus 
Christ,  and  as  soon  as  that  life  comes  away  goes  this  prince  of  darkness 
as  to  his  domination  and  reigning  power.  Oh,  soul,  there  is  nothing  left 
for  thee  but  to  look  to  Jesus  Christ  alone.  Worried  as  thou  art,  and 
almost  devoured,  now  is  thy  time  to  nut  thy  trust  in  Jesus,  who  is 
mighty  to  save.  You  know  the  text  which  spcaketh  of  the  shepherds 
taking  out  of  the  lion's  mouth  two  legs  and  a  piece  of  an  ear.  The  sheep 
was  ahnoBt  devoured,  but  still  he  pulled  out  frt)m  between  the  lion's  jaws 
the  last  relics  of  his  prey,  and  if  you  seem  to  be  reduced  to  two  legs  and 
a  piece  of  an  ear,  yet  still  our  glorious  Shepherd  can  pull  you  out  from 
between  the  lion's  teeth  and  make  you  whole  again,  for  he  will  not  lose 
his  sheep  even  at  its  last  extremity.  What  canst  thou  do  against  Satan? 
Thou  wouldst  fain  be  rid  of  him,  what  canst  thou  do  ?    Do  nothing  but 


624  METROPOLITAN  TABEBKACLE  PULPIT. 

this,  C17  to  his  Master  against  him.  He  is  mighty,  set  the  Almighty 
One  upon  him.  He  accuses  thee,  refer  him  to  thine  Advocate.  Thy  sin 
he  brings  before  thee,  throw  the  blood  of  atonement  in  his  face,  bere 
is  a  text  that  will  drive  him  down  to  his  den :  *'  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  And  ''This  is  a  faithful  say- 
ing and  worthy  of  all  acceptation  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners,  of  whom  1  am  chief."  Have  done  with  battling  with 
the  wily  foe  ;  do  not  answer  the  old  deceiver.  If  he  tells  thee  thou  art 
a  blasphemer,  own  it ;  if  he  says  thou  art  utterly  lost,  own  it;  and  then 
cast  thyself  at  Jesus's  feet,  and  he  will  overcome  thy  foe  and  set 
thee  free. 

One  more  comfort  for  you,  and  it  is  this — the  more  he  rages  the  more 
must  your  poor,  troubled  heart  be  encouraged  to  believe  that  he  will  soon 
be  gone.  I  venture  to  say  that  nothing  will  make  him  go  sooner  than 
vour  full  belief  that  he  has  to  go.  Courageous  hope  is  a  weapon  which 
he  dreads.  Tell  him  he  must  soon  be  gone.  He  has  been  accusing  you, 
and  pouring  venom  into  your  ear,  aifd  making  you  believe  that  it  is  your 
own  blasphemy,  whereas  it  is  not  yoiu*s  but  his.  Say  to  him,  ''Ah,  but 
you  will  be  gone  soon.  You  may  rage,  but  you  will  have  to  be  gone." 
**  I  have  full  possession  of  you,"  he  says,  "  soul  and  body,  and  I  triumph 
over  you."  Say  to  him,  "  And  would  you  triumph  over  me  as  you  do 
if  you  did  not  taiow  that  you  will  soon  be  driven  out  ?"  '*  Ah,"  saith  he, 
"you  will  be  lost,  you  will  be  lost."  He  howls  at  you  as  if  ready  to 
devour.  Say  to  him,  **  If  I  was  sure  to  be  lost  you  would  not  tell 
me  so,  you  would  sing  sweet  songs  in  my  ears,  and  lure  me  to  destmc- 
tion :  you  have  to  go,  you  know  you  have."  *'  Oh,"  saith  he,  *'  it  is 
impossible  you  should  be  saved;  you  will  be  damned;  you  will  have 
the  hottest  place  in  hell."  "  Yes,  say  you,  "  but  who  sent  yon  to  tell 
me  that?  xou  never  spoke  the  truth  yet.  You  are  a  liar  from  the 
beginning,  and  you  are  only  saying  this  because  you  have  to  go.  You 
know  you  have  to  go."  Tell  him  so,  and  it  is  not  long  before  he  will 
.  depart.  Say,  "  Rejoice  not  over  me,  0  mine  enemy ;  though  I  &I1  yet 
ihall  I  rise  again."  Tell  him  you  know  his  Master.  Tell  him  he  may 
nibble  at  your  heel,  but  you  recollect  one  that  broke  his  head.  Point  to 
his  broken  head — he  always  tries  to  hide  it  if  he  can.  TeU  him  his 
crown  is  battered  to  pieces,  and  tell  him  where  that  deed  was  done, 
and  by  whose  blessed  hand ;  and  as  you  tell  him  these  things  he  will 
shrink  back,  and  you  shall  find  yourself  alone  with  Jesus  only.  Then 
will  Jesus  say  to  you,  "  Where  is  thine  accuser  ?  "  You  will  look  around 
and  the  enemy  will  be  gone,  and  then  your  blessed  Master  will  say, 
''Neither  do  I  condemn  thee,  go  and  sin  no  more."  The  Lord  grant  us 
to  get  such  a  riddance  of  our  arch-enemy,  and  to  get  it  this  very  moment^ 
for  Christ's  dear  sake.    Amen. 


PoETiOK  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Revelation  xii. 


Htmns  from  "Our  Own  Hymk  Book"— 817,  385,449. 


^ 


||l«tt[0$olttan  i^afrtmmle  fttlpt 


HOW  TO  BEAD  THE  BIBLE. 


%      I 


DSLIYEBED  BT 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THB  MST&OPOLITAK  TABSSNACLS,  HEWIKaTOK. 


**  HaTe  ye  not  read  P Have  ye  not  xead  P  •••».;  If  ye  had  known  what 

thia  meaDeth/* — Matthew  ziL  3—7. 

Thb  BcribeB  and  PhariBees  were  great  readers  of  the  law.  They  studied 
the  sacred  books  continnallj,  poring  over  each  word  and  letter.  They 
made  notes  of  very  little  importance,  bnt  still  very  cnrions  notes — as  to 
which  was  the  middle  verse  of  the  entire  Old  Testament,  which  verse 
was  half-way  to  the  middle,  and  how  many  times  such  a  word  occurred, 
and  even  how  many  times  a  letter  occnrred,  and  the  size  of  the  letter, 
and  its  peculiar  position.  They  have  left  us  a  mass  of  wonderful  notes 
upon  the  mere  words  of  Holy  Scripture.  They  might  have  done  the 
same  thing  upon  another  book  for  that  matter,  and  the  information 
would  have  been  about  as  important  as  the  facts  which  they  have  so 
industdpusly  collected  concerning  the  letter  of  the  Old  Testament. 
They  were,  however,  intense  readers  of  the  law.  They  picked  a  quarrel) 
with  the  Saviour  upon  a  matter  touching  this  law,  for  they  carried 
it  at  their  fingers'  ends,  and  were  ready  to  use  it  as  a  bird  of  prey  does 
its  talons  to  tear  and  rend.  Our  Lord's  disciples  had  plucked  some  ears, , 
of  com,  and  rubbed  them  between  their  hands.  According  to  Pharisaic 
interpretation,  to  rub  an  ear  of  com  is  a  kind  of  threshing,  and,  as  it  is 
very  wrong  to  thresh  on  the  Sabbath  day,  therefore  it  must  be  very 
wrong  to  rab  out  an  ear  or  two  of  wheat  when  you  are  hungry  on  the 
Sabbath  morning.  That  was  their  argument,  and  they  came  to  the 
Saviour  with  it,  and  with  their  version  of  the  Sabbath  law.  The  Saviour 
generally  carried  the  war  into  the  enemy's  camp,  and  he  did  so  on  this 
occasion.  He  met  them  on  their  own  ground,  and  he  said  to  them, 
**  Have  ye  not  read  ?  " — a  cutting  question  to  the  scribes  and  Pharisees, 
though  there  is  nothing  apparently  sharp  about  it.  It  was  a  veij  fair  and 
proper  question  to  put  to  them  ;  but  only  think  of  Pitting  it  io  them. 
**  Have  ye  not  read  ?  "  **  Read ! "  they  could  have  said,  *•  Why,  we  have 
read  the  book  through  very  many  times.  We  are  always  reading 
it.  No  passage  escapes  our  critical  eyes."  Yet  our  Lord  proceeds 
to  put  the  question  a  second  time — *'  jfiave  ye  not  read?"  as  if  they 
No.  1,508. 


626  METBOPOLITAK  TABERKACLE  PULPIT. 

had  not  read  after  all,  thoagh  they  were  tlie  greatest  readers  of  the 
law  then  living.  He  insinuates  that  they  have  not  read  at  all ;  and  then 
he  giyes  them  incidentally  the  reason  why  he  had  asked  them  whether 
they  had  read.  He  says,  *'  If  ye  had  known  what  this  meaneth/'  as  much 
as  to  say,  ''Ye  have  not  read,  because  ye  hare  not  understood."  Your 
eyes  have  gone  over  the  words,  and  you  have  counted  the  letters,  and 
you  have  marked  the  position  of  each  verse  and  word,  and  you  have 
said  learned  things  about  all  the  books,  and  yet  you  are  not  even  readers 
of  the  sacred  volume,  for  you  have  not  acquired  the  true  art  of  reading ; 
you  do  not  understand,  and  therefore  you  do  not  truly  read  it.  You 
are  mere  skimmers  and  glancers  at  the  Word :  you  have  not  read  it,  for 
you  do  not  understand  it. 

I.  That  is  the  subject  of  our  present  discourse,  or,  at  least,  the  first 
point  of  it,  that  in  obdeb  to  the  tbub  beadikg  of  thb  ikmrF- 

TUBES,  THEBB  must  BE  AN  UKDEBSTAKDINO  OF  THEM. 

I  scarcely  need  to  preface  these  remarks  by  saying  that  we  must  read 
the  Scriptures.  You  know  how  necessary  it  is  that  we  should  be  fed 
upon  the  truth  of  holy  Scripture.  Need  I  suggest  the  question  as  to 
wnether  you  do  read  your  Bibles  or  not  ?  I  am  afraid  that  this  is  a 
magazine  reading  age — a  newspaper  reading  age — a  periodical  reading 
age,  but  not  so  much  a  Bible  reading  age  as  it  ought  to  be.  In  the  old 
*  Puritanic  times  men  used  to  have  a  scant  supply  of  other  literatoie,  but 
they  found  a  library  enough  in  the  one  book,  the  Bible.  And  how  they 
did  read  the  Bible  I  How  little  of  Scripture  there  is  in  modem  sermons 
compared  with  the  sermons  of  those  masters  of  theology,  the  PDritanic 
divines!  Almost  every  sentence  of  theirs  seems  to  cast  side  lights 
upon  a  text  of  Scripture ;  not  only  the  one  they  are  preaching  al^ut, 
but  many  others  as  well  are  set  in  a  new  light  as  the  discourse  pnxxeds. 
They  introduce  blended  lights  from  other  passages  which  are  parallel 
or  semi-parallel  thereunto,  and  thus  they  educate  their  readers  to  com- 
pare spiritual  things  with  spiritual.  I  would  to  God  that  we  ministers 
kept  more  closely  to  the  grand  old  book.  We  should  be  instructive 
preachers  if  we  did  so,  even  if  we  were  ignorant  of  *'  modem  thought," 
and  were  not  '*  abreast  of  the  times."  I  warrant  you  we  should  be 
leagues  ahead  of  our  times  if  we  kept  closely  to  the  word  of  God. 
As  for  you,  my  brothers  and  sisters,  who  have  not  to  preach,  the  best 
food  for  you  is  the  word  of  God  itself.  Sermons  ana  books  are  well 
enough,  but  streams  that  ran  for  a  long  distance  above  ground  gradually 
gather  for  themselves  somewhat  of  the  soil  through  which  they  flow, 
and  they  lose  the  cool  freshness  with  which  they  started  from  the 
spring  head.  Trath  is  sweetest  where  it  breaks  from  the  smitten 
£ock,  for  at  its  firet  gush  it  has  lost  none  of  its  heavenliness  and 
vitality.  It  is  always  best  to  drink  at  the  well  and  not  from  the  tank. 
You  shall  find  that  reading  the  word  of  God  for  yourselves,  reading 
it  rather  than  not^  upon  it,  is  the  surest  way  of  growing  in  grace. 
Drink  of  the  unadulterated  milk  of  the  word  of  Qoi,  and  not  of  the 
skim  milk,  or  the  milk  and  water  of  man's  word. 

But,  now,  beloved,  our  point  is  that  much  apparent  Bible  reading 
is  not  Bible  reading  at  all.  The  verses  pass  under  the  eye,  and 
the  sentences  glide  over  the  mind,  but  there  is  no  true  reading.  An 
old  preacher  used  to  say,  the  Word  has  mighty  free  coui'se  among  many 


HOW  TO  BKAD  TUB  BIBLE.  627 

nowadays,  fbr  it  goes  in  at  one  of  their  ears  and  out  at  the  other ;  bo 
it  seems  to  be  with  some  readiers — tbev  can  read  a  yerj  great  deal, 
becsmse  they  do  not  read  anything.  The  eye  glances  bat  the  mind 
neter  rests.  The  sonl  does  not  light  npon  the  tmth  and  dtay  there. 
It  flits  over  the  landscape  as  a  binl  might  do,  but  it  builds  no  nest 
therein,  and  finds  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  its  foot.  Such  reading  is  not 
veading.  Understanding  the  meaning  is  the  essence  of  true  reading. 
Sending  has  a  kernel  to  it,  and  the  mere  shell  is  little  worth.  In  prayer 
tiiere  is  such  a  tiring  as  praying  in  pmyer — a  praying  that  is  the  bowels 
of  the  prayer.  Bo  in  praise  there  is  a  praising  in  song,  an  inward  fire  of 
intense  devotion  which  is  the  life  of  the  hallelujah.  It  is  so  in  fasting : 
there  is  a  fasting  which  is  not  ftsting,  and  there  is  an  inward  fasting, 
a  fnsting  of  the  sonl,  whicsh  is  the  soid  of  fasting.  It  is  even  so  with  the 
reading  of  the  Scriptures.  There  is  an  interior  reading,  a  kernel 
reading — a  tme  and  living  reading  of  the  Word.  This  is  the  soul  of 
reading ;  and,  if  it  be  not  there,  the  reading  is  a  mechanical  exercise, 
and  profits  nothing.  Now,  beloved,  unless  we  understand  what  we  read 
we  have  not  read  it ;  the  heart  of  the  reading  is  absent.  We  commonly 
oondemn  the  fiomanists  for  keeping  the  daily  service  in  the  Latin 
tongne ;  yet  it  might  as  well  be  in  the  Latin  language  as  in  any  other 
tongne  if  it  be  not  understood  by  the  people.  Some  comfort  them- 
selves with  the  idea  that  they  have  done  a  good  action  when  they  have 
read  a  chapter,  into  the  meaning  of  whidi  they  have  not  entered  at  all ; 
bat  does  not  nature  herself  reject  this  as  a  mere  supei^tition.  If  you 
had  turned  the  book  upside  down,  and  spent  the  same  time  in  looking  at 
the  characters  in  that  direction,  yon  would  have  gained  as  much  good 
fiom  it  as  yon  will  in  reading  it  in  the  regular  way  without  understanding 
it.  If  you  had  a  New  Testament  in  Greek  it  would  be  very  Greek 
to  some  of  you,  but  it  would  do  you  as  much  good  to  look  at  t?uU  as  it 
does  to  look  at  the  English  New  TeetMnent  unless  you  read  with  under- 
standing heart.  It  is  not  the  letter  which  saves  the  soul ;  the  letter 
killeth  in  many  senses,  and  never  can  it  give  life.  If  you  haip  on  the 
letter  alone  you  mav  be  tempted  to  use  it  as  a  weapon  against  the  truth, 
as  the  Pharisees  did  of  old,  and  your  knowledge  of  the  letter  may  breed 
pide  in  yon  to  your  destruction.  It  is  the  spirit,  the  real  inner  mean- 
ing, that  is  sucked  into  the  soul,  by  which  we  are  blessed  and  sanctified. 
We  become  saturated  with  the  word  of  God,  like  Gideon's  fleece,  which 
was  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven ;  and  this  can  only  come  to  pass  by  our 
receiving  it  into  our  minds  and  hearts,  accepting  it  as  God's  truth,  and 
ao  fitr  understanding  it  as  to  delight  in  it.  We  must  understand  it, 
then,  or  else  we  have  not  read  it  aright. 

Certainly,  the  benefit  of  reading  must  come  to  the  soul  by  the  way  of 
the  und^'Standing.  When  the  high  priest  went  into  the  holy  place  he 
always  lit  the  goiaen  candlestick  before  he  kindled  the  incense  upon  t&e 
farasen  altar,  as  if  to  show  that  the  mind  must  have  illumination  before 
the  affections  can  properly  rise  towards  their  divine  object.  There  must 
be  knowledge  of  God  before  there  can  be  love  to  God :  there  must  be 
a  knowledge  of  divine  things,  as  they  are  revealed,  before  there  can  be 
an  enjoyment  of  than.  We  must  try  to  make  out,  as  far  as  our  finite 
mind  can  grasp  it,  what  God  means  by  this  and  what  he  means  by  that ; 
otherwise  we  nuqr  kiss  the  book  and  have  no  lov«  to  its  oontents,  we  may 


638  HBTBOFOLITIH  TABBBHACLB  PULPIT. 

rcrerenoe  the  letter  and  7^  really  hare  no  devotion  towarda  the  Lord 
who  speaks  to  as  in  these  words.  BeloTed,  700  will  oerer  get  comfort 
to  foar  boqI  ont  of  what  70a  do  not  nuderstand,  oor  find  gnidaoce  for 
yoor  life  ont  of  what  yon  do  not  comjaehend ;  nor  can  any  practic*] 
bearing  upon  yonr  character  oome  ont  of  that  which  ia  not  nndentood 
by  yon. 

Now,  if  we  are  thns  to  nnderatand  what  we  read  or  othrawiae  we 
read  in  Tain,  this  shows  na  that  when  we  come  to  the  atndy  of  Holy 
Scriptnre  tee  a/umld  try  to  hav»  owr  mind  wall  auxikt  to  it  We  are 
not  always  fit,  it  seems  to  me,  to  read  the  Bible.  At  times  it  were  wdl 
for  ns  to  stop  before  we  open  the  volume.  "  Pnt  off  thy  shoe  fhim  thy 
foot,  for  the  place  whereon  thon  staadest  is  holy  gronnd."     Ton  hare 

i'nst  come  in  from  carefU  thought  and  anxiety  abont  yonr  worldly 
•osiness,  and  yon  cannot  immediately  take  that  book  and  enter  into  its 
heavenly  mysteries.  Aa  yon  ask  s  blessing  over  yonr  meat  before  yon  &D 
to,  eo  it  wonld  be  a  good  mle  for  yon  to  ask  a  blessing  on  the  word  before 
yon  partake  of  its  heavenly  food.  Pray  the  Lord  to  strengthen  yoor 
eyes  before  yon  dare  to  look  into  the  eternal  light  of  Scripture.  A* 
the  priests  washed  their  feet  at  the  laver  before  they  went  to  their  holy 
work,  so  it  were  well  to  wash  the  soul's  eyes  with  which  yon  look  npon 
God's  word,  to  wash  even  the  fingers,  if  I  may  so  speak — the  mental 
fingers  with  which  yon  will  turn  from  page  to  page, — that  with  a  holy 
book  you  may  deal  after  a  holy  fashion.  Say  to  yonr  eonl — "  Oome, 
soul,  wake  np :  thou  art  not  now  abont  to  read  the  newspaper ;  thou 
art  not  now  perusing  the  pages  of  a  human  poet  to  be  dassled  by  bis 
flashing  poetry ;  thou  art  coming  very  near  to  Qod,  who  sits  in  the 
Word  like  a  crowned  monarch  in  his  halls.  Wake  np,  my  glory ;  wake 
np,  all  that  is  within  me.  Thoogh  just  now  I  may  not  be  praisiDg 
and  glorifying  Qod,  I  am  about  to  consider  that  which  ahould  lead  me 
eo  to  do,  and  therefore  it  is  an  act  of  devotion.  80  be  on  the  stir,  my 
soul :  be  on  the  stir,  and  bow  not  sleepily  before  che  awfhl  throne  of  the 
EternaL"  Scripture  reading  is  our  spiritual  meal  time.  Sound  the 
nd  call  in  every  faculty  to  the  Lord's  own  table  to  feast  upon  the 
IS  meat  which  is  now  to  bo  partaken  of;  or,  rather,  ring  tbe 
-bell  as  for  worship,  for  the  stodyit^  of  the  Holy  Scriptnre 
to  be  as  solemn  a  deed  as  when  we  lift  the  psalm  upon  the 
h  day  in  the  courla  of  the  Lord's  house. 

lese  things  be  so,  yon  will  see  at  once,  dear  friends,  that,  if  yt« 
understand  what  you  read,  ymi  loill  need  to  jneditale  i^on  iL 
passages  of  Scriptnre  lie  clear  before  us — blessed  shallows  in 
the  Umbs  may  wade ;  but  there  are  deeps  in  which  our  mind 
rather  drown  herself  than  swim  with  pleasure,  if  she  came  there 
t  caution.  There  are  texts  of  Scripture  which  are  made  and  ood- 
d  on  purpose  to  make  ns  think.  By  this  means,  among  others, 
ivenly  Father  wonld  educate  us  for  heaven — ^by  making  us  think 
J  into  divine  mysteries.  Hence  he  puts  the  word  in  a  somewhat 
id  form  to  compel  ns  to  meditate  upon  it  before  we  reach  the 
ess  of  it.  He  might,  you  know,  have  explained  it  to  ns  so  that 
;ht  catch  the  thought  in  a  minnte,  but  he  does  not  please  to  do  so 
J  case.  Many  of  the  veils  which  are  cast  over  Scriptnre  »ik  not 
to  hide  the  meaning  from  the  diligent,  but  to  compel  the  mind 


HOW  TO  BEAD  THE  BIBLE.  Q2d 

(o  be  active,  for  oftentimes  the  diligence  of  the  heart  in  seeking  to  know 
the  divine  mind  does  the  heart  more  good  than  the  knowledge  itself. 
Meditation  and  carefal  thonght  exercise  us  and  strengthen  the  soal  for 
the  reception  of  the  yet  more  loftj  tmths.  I  have  heard  that  the  mothers 
in  the  Balearic  isles,  in  the  old  times,  who  wanted  to  bring  their  boys 
up  to  be  good  slingers,  would  put  their  dinners  up  above  them  where 
they  could  not  get  at  them  until  they  threw  a  stone  and  fetched  them 
down :  our  Lord  wishes  us  to  be  good  slingers,  and  he  puts  up  some 
precious  truth  in  a  lofty  place  where  we  cannot  get  it  down  except  by 
slinging  at  it ;  and,  at  last,  we  hit  the  mark  and  find  food  for  our  souls. 
Then  have  we  the  double  benefit  of  learning  the  art  of  meditation  and 
partaking  of  the  sweet  truth  which  it  has  brought  within  our  reach.  We 
mustmeditate,  brothers.  These  grapes  will  yield  no  wine  till  we  tread  upon 
them.  These  olives  must  be  put  under  the  wheel,  and  pressed  again  and 
again,  that  the  oil  may  flow  therefrom.  In  a  dish  of  nuts,  you  may  know 
which  nut  has  been  eaten,  because  there  is  a  little  hole  which  the  insect 
has  punctured  through  the  shell — ^just  a  little  hole,  and  then  inside 
there  is  the  living  thing  eating  up  the  kernel.  Well,  it  is  a  grand  thing 
to  bore  through  the  shell  of  the  letter,  and  then  to  live  inside  feeding 
upon  the  kernel  I  would  wish  to  be  such  a  little  worm  as  that, 
living  within  and  upon  the  word  of  God,  having  bored  my  way  through 
the  shell,  and  having  reached  the  innermost  mystery  of  the  blessed  gospel. 
The  word  of  Ood  is  always  most  precious  to  the  man  who  most  lives  upon 
it.  As  I  sat  last  year  under  a  wide-spreading  beech,  I  was  pleased  to 
mark  with  prving  curiosity  the  singular  habito  of  that  most  wonderful 
3f  trees,  which  seems  to  have  an  intelligence  about  it  which  other  trees 
have  not.  I  wondered  and  admired  the  beech,  but  I  thought  to  myself, 
[  do  not  think  half  as  much  of  this  beech  tree  as  yonder  squirrel  does. 
I  see  him  leap  fix)m  bough  to  bough,  and  I  feel  sure  that  he  dearly 
values  the  old  beech  tree,  because  he  has  his  home  somewhere  inside 
it  in  a  hollow  place,  these  branches  are  his  shelter,  and  those  beech-nuts 
are  his  food,  tie  lives  upon  the  tree.  It  is  his  world,  his  playground, 
his  granary,  his  home ;  indeed,  it  is  evervthing  to  him,  and  it  is  not  so 
to  me,  for  I  find  my  rest  and  food  elsewhere.  With  Ood's  word  it  is 
well  for  us  to  be  like  squirrels,  living  in  it  and  living  on  it.  Let  us 
sxercise  our  minds  by  leaping  from  bough  to  bough  of  it,  find  our  rest 
and  food  in  it,  and  make  it  our  all  in  aU.  We  shall  be  the  people  that 
get  the  profit  out  of  it  if  we  make  it  to  be  our  food,  our  medicine,  our 
treasury,  our  armourv,  our  rest,  our  delight.  May  the  Holy  Ohost  lead 
ns  to  do  this  and  make  the  Word  thus  precious  to  our  souls. 

Beloved,  I  would  next  remind  you  that  for  this  end  tve  shall  he  com- 
pelled to  pray.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  be  driven  to  think,  it  is  a  grander 
thing  to  be  driven  to  pray  through  having  been  made  to  think.  Am  I 
not  ^dressing  some  of  you  who  do  not  read  the  word  of  Ood,  and  am  I 
not  speaking  to  many  more  who  do  read  it,  but  do  not  read  it  with  the 
strong  resolve  that  they  will  understand  it  ?  I  know  it  must  be  so. 
Bo  you  wish  to  begin  to  be  true  readers  ?  Will  you  henceforth  labour  to 
anderstand  ?  Then  you  must  get  to  your  knees.  You  must  cry  to  Ood 
for  direction.  Who  understands  a  book  best  ?  The  author  of  it.  If 
I  want  to  ascertain  the  real  meaning  of  a  rather  twisted  sentence, 
and  the  author  lives  near  me,  and  I  can  call  upon  him,  I  shall  ring  at 


630  METROFOIilTAN  TABEBHAGLX  PULPIT. 

his  door  and  saj,  **  Would  yoa  kindly  tell  me  what  you  mean  by  that 
sentence  ?    I  haTe  no  doabt  whaterer  that  it  is  very  clear,  bnt  I  am 
such  a  simpleton,  that  I  cannot  make  it  oat.    I  have  not  the  know- 
ledge and  grasp  of  the  sabject  which  yoa  possess,  and  therefore  yoor 
allusions  and  descriptions  are  beyond  my  range  of  knowledge.     It  is 
quite  within  your  range,  and  coamionplace  to  yoa»  but  it  is  very  difficult 
to  me.    Would  you  kindly  explain  your  meaning  to  me  ?*'    A  good 
man  would  be  glad  to  be  thus  treated,  and  would  tiiink  it  no  troub^  ta 
unrayel  his  meaning  to  a  candid  enquirer.    Thus  I  should  be  sure  to 
get  the  correct  meaning,  for  I  should  be  going  to  the  fountain  head 
when  I  consulted  the  author  himself.    So,  belayed,  the  Holy  ^rit  is 
with  us,  and  when  we  take  his  book  and  begin  to  read,  and  want  to 
know  what  it  means,  we  must  ask  the  Holy  Spirit  to  reveal  the  meaning. 
He  will  not  work  a  miracle,  but  he  will  elevate  our  minds,  and  he  will 
suggest  to  us  thoughts  which  will  lead  us  on  by  their  natural  relation 
the  one  to  the  other,  till  at  last  we  come  to  the  pith  and  mairow  of  his 
divine  instruction.    Seek  then  veiy  earnestly  the  goidanoe  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  for  if  the  verj  soul  of  reading  be  the  understanding  of  what  we 
r^ad,  then  we  must  m  pr^rer  call  upon  the  Holy  Ghost  to  unlock  the 
secret  mysteries  of  the  mspired  word. 

If  we  thus  ask  the  guioance  and  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  will 
follow,  dear  friends,  that  w&  shall  be  ready  to  use  all  means  and  he^ 
towards  the  understanding  of  ike  Scriptures.  When  Philip  asked  the 
Ethionian  eunuch  whether  he  understood  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  he 
repliea,  ''  How  can  I,  unless  some  man  should  guide  me  ?**  Then 
Philip  went  up  and  opened  to  him  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Some,  under 
the  pretence  of  being  taught  of  the  Spirit  of  God  refuse  to  be  instructed  by 
booKS  or  by  living  men.  This  is  no  honouring  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  it  is 
a  disrespect  to  him,  for  if  he  gives  to  some  of  his  servants  more 
light  than  to  others — and  it  is  clear  he  does — then  they  are  bound  to 
give  that  light  to  others,  and  to  use  it  for  the  good  of  the  church.  But  if 
the  other  part  of  the  church  refuse  to  receive  that  light,  to  what  end 
did  the  Spirit  of  God  give  it  ?  This  would  imply  that  there  is  a  mis- 
take somewhere  in  the  economy  of  gifts  and  graces,  which  is  managed 
b^  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  cannot  bs  so.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  pleases  to 
give  more  knowledge  of  his  word  and  more  insight  into  it  to  some  of  hia 
servants  than  to  others,  and  it  is  ours  joyfully  to  accept  the  knowledge 
which  he  gives  in  such  ways  as  he  chooses  to  give  it.  It  would  be 
most  wicked  of  us  to  say,  ^'  We  wilt  not  have  the  heavenly  tteasure 
which  exists  in  earthen  vessels.  If  God  will  give  us  the  heavenlj  trea- 
sure out  of  his  own  hand,  but  not  through  the  earthen  vessel,  we  will 
have  it;  but  we  think  we  are  too  wise,  too  heavenly  minded,  too 
spiritual  altogether  to  care  for  jewels  when  they  are  placed  in  earthen 
pots.  We  will  not  hear  anybody,  and  we  will  not  read  anything  except 
(he  hook  itself,  neither  will  we  accept  any  light,  except  that  which  comes 
in  through  a  crack  in  our  own  roof.  We  will  not  see  by  another  man's 
candle,  we  wotdd  sooner  remain  in  the  dark."  Brethren,  do  not  let  us 
fall  into  such  folly.  Let  the  light  come  from  God,  and  Uiough  a  child 
shall  bring  it,  we  will  joyfully  accept  it.  If  any  one  of  his  servants, 
whether  Paul  or  ApoUos  or  Cephas,  shall  have  received  light  from  him, 
behold, ''  all  are  yours,  and  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's,"  and 


HOW  TO  BSAD  THE  BIBLE.  6S1 

therefore  accept  of  the  light  which  Ood  has  kindled,  and  aak  for  grace  that 
joa  may  turn  that  light  upon  the  word  so  that  when  you  read  it  yon 
m^  understand  it. 

1  do  not  wish  to  say  much  more  about  this,  but  I  should  like  to  push 
it  home  upon  some  of  you.  You  have  Bibles  at  home,  I  know ;  you 
would  not  like  to  be  without  Bibles,  you  would  think  you  were 
heathens  if  you  had  no  Bibles.  You  hare  them  very  neatly  bound,  and 
they  are  very  fine  looking  volumes :  not  much  thumbed,  not  much  worn, 
and  not  likely  to  be  so,  for  thev  only  come  out  on  Sundays  for  An  airing, 
and  they  lie  in  lavender  with  the  clean  pocket-handkerchiefs  all  the  rest 
of  the  week.  You  do  not  read  the  woid,  you  do  not  search  it,  and  how 
can  you  eiq)ect  to  get  the  divine  blessing  ?  If  the  heavenly  gold  is  not 
worth  digging  for  you  are  not  likely  to  discover  it.  Often  and  often  have  I 
told  you  that  the  searching  of  the  Scriptures  is  not  the  way  of  salvation. 
The  Lord  hath  said,  '*  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt 
be  saved."  But,  still,  the  reading  of  the  word  often  leads,  like  the 
hearing  of  it,  to  faith,  and  faith  bringeth  salvation ;  for  faith  cometh  by 
hearing,  and  reading  is  a  sort  of  hearing.  While  you  are  seeking  to 
know  what  the  gospel  is,  it  may  please  God  to  bless  your  souls.  But 
what  poor  reading  some  of  you  give  to  your  Bibles.  I  do  not  want  to 
say  anything  whidx  is  too  severe  because  it  is  not  strictly  true — ^let  your 
own  consciences  speak,  but  still,  I  make  bold  to  enquire, — Do  not  many 
of  you  read  the  Bible  in  a  very  hurried  way — ^just  a  little  bit,  and  off 
you  go  ?  Do  you  not  soon  forget  what  you  have  read,  and  lose  what 
little  effect  it  seemed  to  have  ?  How  few  of  you  are  resolved  to  get  at 
its  soul,  its  juice,  its  life,  its  essence,  and  to  drink  in  its  meaning. 
Well,  if  you  do  not  do  that,  I  tell  you  again  your  reading  is  miserable 
reading,  dead  reading,  unprofitable  reading;  it  is  not  reading  at  all,  the 
name  would  be  misapplied.  May  the  blessed  Spirit  give  you  repentance 
touching  this  thing. 

II.  But  now,  secondly,  and  very  briefly,  let  us  notice  that  IK  reading 

WE  OUGHT  TO  SEEK  OUT  THE  SPIRITUAL  TEAOHING  OF  THE  WORD.     I 

think  that  is  in  my  text,  because  our  Lord  says,  "  Have  ye  not  read  ?*' 
Then,  again,  *'  Have  ye  not  read  ?"  and  then  he  says,  "  If  ye  had  known 
what  this  meaneth  " — and  the  meaning  is  something  very  spiritual 
The  text  he  quoted  was,  '*  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice '' — a  text 
out  of  the  prophet  Hosea.  Now,  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  were  all  for 
the  letter — the  sacrifice,  the  killing  of  the  bullock,  and  so  on.  They 
overlooked  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  passage,  "  I  will  have  mercy, 
and  not  sacrifice  — ^namely,  that  God  prefers  that  we  should  care  for 
our  fellow-creatures  rather  than  that  we  should  observe  any  ceremonial 
of  his  law,  so  as  to  cause  hunger  or  thirst,  and  thereby  death,  to  any 
of  the  creatures  that  his  hands  have  made.  They  ought  to  have  passed 
beyond  the  outward  into  the  q)iritual,  and  aU  our  readings  ought  to  do 
the  same. 

Notice,  that  this  should  be  the  case  when  we  read  the  historical 
passages.  **  Have  ye  not  read  what  David  did,  when  he  was  an  hungered, 
and  they  that  were  with  him ;  how  he  entered  into  the  house  of  Goa,  and 
did  eat  the  shew-bread,  which  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  eat,  neither 
for  them  which  were  with  him,  but  only  for  the  priests  ?*'  This  was  a 
piece  of  history^  and  they  ought  so  to  have  read  it  as  to  have  found 


CS2  HETROPOLITAK  TA6EBNACLE  PULPIT. 

spiritaal  instruction  in  it.    I  have  heard  yery  stupid  people  saj,  **  Well, 
1  do  not  care  to  read  the  historical  parts  of  Scripture/'     Beloved 
friends,  you  do  not  know  what  yon  are  talking  about  when  yon  say  so. 
I  say  to  you  now  by  experience  that  I  hare  sometimes  found  eren  a 
greater  depth  of  spirituality  in  the  histories  than  I  have  in  the  Psalms. 
Xou  will  say,  "How  is  that  ?"    I  assert  that  when  you  reach  the  inner 
and  spiritual  meaning  of  a  history  you  are  often  surprised  at  the  won- 
drous clearness — the  realistic  force — ^with  which  the  teaching  comes 
home  to  your  souL    Some  of  the  most  marvellous  mysteries  of  revela- 
tion are  better  understood  by  being  set  before  our  eyes  in  the  histories 
than  they  are  by  the  verbal  declaration  of  them.     When  we  have 
the  statement  to  explain  the  illustration,  the  illustration  expands  and 
vivifies  the  statement.    For  instance,  when  our  Lord  himself  would 
explain  to  us  what  &ith  was,  he  sent  us  to  the  history  of  the  brasen 
serpent ;  and  who  that  has  ever  read  the  story  of  the  brazen  serpent  has 
not  felt  that  he  has  had  a  better  idea  of  faith  through  the  picture  of  the 
dying  snake-bitten  persons  looking  to  the  serpent  of  brass  and  living, 
than  from  any  description  which  even  Paul  has  given  us,  wondrooslj  as 
he  defines  and  describes.    Never,  I  pray  you,  depreciate  the  historical 
portions  of  Ood's  word,  but  when  you  cannot  get  good  out  of  them, 
say,  "  That  is  my  foolish  head  and  my  slow  heart.    0  Lord,  be  pleased 
to  clear  my  brain  and  cleanse  my  soul."    When  he  answers  that  prayer 
you  will  feel  that  every  portion  of  Ctod's  word  is  given  b^  inspiration, 
and  is  and  must  be  profitable  to  you.    Cry,  *'  Open  thou  mme  eyes,  that 
I  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law. 

Just  the  same  thing  is  true  with  regard  to  oil  ih$  ceremonial  prw- 
eepts,  because  the  Saviour  ^oes  on  to  say,  **  Have  ye  not  read  in  the 
law,  how  that  on  the  Sabbath  d^s  the  priests  in  the  temple  profane  the 
Sabbath,  and  are  blameless?"  There  is  not  a  single  precept  in  the  old 
law  but  has  an  inner  sense  and  meaning ;  therefore  do  not  turn  away 
from  Leviticus,  or  say,  "  I  cannot  read  Uiese  chapters  in  the  Books  of 
Exodus  and  Numbers.  They  are  all  about  the  tribes  and  their  standards, 
the  stations  in  the  wilderness  and  the  halts  of  the  march,  the  taber- 
nacle and  furniture,  or  about  golden  knops  and  bowls,  and  boards, 
and  sockets,  and  precious  stones,  and  blue  and  scarlet  and  fine 
linen."  No,  but  Iook  for  the  inner  meaning.  Make  thorough  search ; 
for  as  in  a  king's  treasure  that  which  is  the  most  closely  locked  up 
and  the  hardest  to  come  at  is  the  choicest  jewel  of  the  treasure,  so  is 
it  with  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Did  you  ever  go  to  the  British  Museum 
library  ?  There  are  manv  books  of  reference  there  which  the  reader  is 
allow^  to  take  down  when  he  pleases.  There  are  other  books  for 
which  he  must  write  a  ticket,  and  he  cannot  get  them  without  the 
ticket;  but  they  have  certain  choice  books  which  you  wiD  not  see 
without  a  specid  order,  and  then  there  is  an  unlocking  of  doors,  and 
an  opening  of  cases,  and  there  is  a  wateher  with  you  while  yon  make 
your  inspection.  You  are  scarcely  allowed  to  put  your  eye  on  the 
manuscript,  for  fear  you  should  blot  a  letter  out  by  glancing  at  it ;  it 
is  such  a  precious  treasure ;  there  is  not  another  copy  of  it  in  aU  the 
world,  and  so  you  cannot  get  at  it  easily.  Just  so,  there  are  choice 
and  precious  doctrines  of  God's  word  which  are  locked  up  in  such  cases 
as  Leviticus  or  Solomon's  Song,  and  you  cannot  get  at  them  without  a 


HOW  TO  BEAD  THE  BIBLE.  68& 

deal  of  unlocking  of  doors ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  himself  must  be  with 
yon,  or  else  yon  will  never  come  at  the  priceless  treasure.  The  higher 
tmths  are  as  choicely  hidden  awav*  as  the  precious  regalia  of  princes ; 
therefore  search  as  well  as  read.  Do  not  be  satisfied  with  a  ceremonial 
TOeoept  till  you  reach  its  spiritual  meaning,  for  that  is  true  reading. 
xon  haTC  not  read  till  you  understand  the  spirit  of  the  matter. 

It  is  just  the  same  with  Ihe  doctrinal  statements  of  God's  word.  I 
have  sorrowfully  observed  some  persons  who  are  very  orthodox,  and 
who  can  repeat  their  creed  very  glibly,  and  yet  the  principal  use  that 
they  make  of  their  orthodoxy  is  to  sit  and  watch  the  preacher  with  the 
view  of  framing  a  charge  against  him.  He  has  uttered  a  single  sen- 
tence which  is  judged  to  be  half  a  hair's  breadth  below  the  standard! 
**  That  man  is  not  sound.  He  said  some  good  things,  but  he  is  rotten 
at  the  core,  I  am  certain.  He  used  an  expression  which  was  not  eighteen 
ounces  to  the  pound."  Sixteen  ounces  to  the  pound  are  not  enough 
for  these  dear  orethren  of  whom  I  speak,  they  must  have  something 
more  and  over  and  above  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary.  Their  know- 
ledge is  used  as  a  microscope  to  magnify  trifling  differences.  I  hesitate 
not  to  say  that  I  have  come  across  persons  who 

"  Could  a  hair  divide 
Betwixt  the  west  aud  north-west  side," 

in  matters  of  divinity,  but  who  know  nothing  about  the  things  of  God 
in  their  real  meaning.  They  have  never  drank  them  into  their  souls, 
but  only  sucked  them  up  into  their  mouths  to  spit  them  out  on  others. 
The  doctrine  of  election  is  one  thing,  but  to  know  that  God  has  pre* 
destinated  you,  and  to  have  the  fruit  of  it  in  the  good  works  to  which 
yon  are  ordained,  is  quite  another  thing.  To  talk  about  the  love 
of  Christ,  to  talk  about  the  heaven  that  is  provided  for  his  people,  and 
anch  things — all  this  is  very  well ;  but  this  may  be  done  without  any 
personal  acquaintance  with  them.  Therefore,  beloved,  never  be  satis- 
ned  with  a  sound  creed,  but  desire  to  have  it  graven  on  the  tablets  of 
your  heart.  The  doctrines  of  grace  are  good,  but  the  grace  of  the 
doctrines  is  better  still.  See  that  you  have  it,  and  be  not  content  with 
the  idea  that  you  are  instructed  until  yon  so  understand  the  doctrine 
that  you  have  felt  its  spiritual  power. 

This  makes  us  feel  tnat,  in  order  to  come  to  this,  we  shall  need  to  feel 
Jesus  present  with  us  whenever  we  read  the  word.  Mark  that  fifth  verse, 
which  I  would  now  bring  before  you  as  part  of  my  text  w^hich  I  have 
hitherto  left  out.  "  Have  ye  not  read  in  the  law,  how  on  the  Sabbath  days 
the  priests  ini;he  temple  profane  the  Sabbath,  and  are  blameless  ?  But 
I  say  unto  you.  That  in  this  place  is  one  greater  than  the  temple." 
Ay,  they  thought  much  about  the  letter  of  the  word,  but  they  did  not 
know  that  ?ie  was  there  who  is  the  Sabbath's  Master — ^nian's  Lord 
and  the  Sabbath's  Lord,  and  Lord  of  everything.  Oh,  when  you  have 
got  hold  of  a  creed,  or  of  an  ordinance,  or  anything  that  is  outward  in 
the  letter,  prav  the  Lord  to  make  you  feel  that  there  is  something 
greater  than  the  printed  book,  and  something  better  than  the  mere  shell 
of  the  creed.  There  is  one  person  greater  than  they  all,  and  to  him 
we  should  cry  that  he  may  be  ever  with  us.  0  living  Christ,  make  this 
a  living  word  to  me.    Thy  word  is  life,  but  not  without  the  Holy 


684  UETBOPOLITAK  TABBHKACLS  PULPIT. 

Spirit.  I  may  know  ibis  book  of  tbine  from  beginning  to  end,  and 
repeat  it  all  fix>m  Genesis  to  Berelation,  and  jet  it  may  be  a  dead  book, 
and  I  may  be  a  dead  sonL  But,  Lord,  be  present  here ;  then  will  I 
look  np  from  the  book  to  the  Lord ;  from  the  preoq>t  to  him  who  ful- 
filled it ;  from  the  law  to  him  who  honoured  it ;  firom  the  threataiing 
to  him  who  has  borne  it  far  me,  and  from  the  promise  to  him  in 
whom  it  is  ''Yea  and  amen."  Ah,  then  we  shall  read  the  book  so 
differently.  He  is  here  with  me  in  this  chamber  of  mine :  I  mnst  not 
trifle.  He  leans  OTer  me,  he  puts  his  finger  along  the  lines,  I  can  see 
his  pierced  hand :  I  will  read  it  as  in  his  presraoe.  I  will  read  it, 
knowing  that  he  is  the  substance  of  it, — ^that  he  is  the  proof  of  this 
book  as  well  as  the  writer  of  it ;  the  sum  of  this  Scripture  as  well 
as  the  author  of  it.  That  is  the  way  for  true  stodents  to  become 
wise !  You  will  get  at  the  soul  of  Scripture  when  you  can  keep  Jesas 
with  you  while  yon  are  reading.  Did  you  never  hear  a  sermon  as  to 
which  you  felt  that  if  Jesus  had  come  into  that  pulpit  while  t^  man 
was  making  his  oration,  he  would  have  said, ''  Go  down,  go  down ;  what 
business  have  you  here  ?  I  sent  you  to  preach  about  me,  and  you  pveacdi 
about  a  dozen  other  things.  Gk)  home  and  learn  of  me,  and  then  come  and 
talk."  That  sermon  which  does  not  lead  to  Christ,  or  of  which  Jesus 
Christ  is  not  the  top  and  the  bottom,  is  a  sort  of  sermon  that  will 
make  the  devils  in  hell  to  laugh,  but  might  make  the  angels  of  God  to 
weep,  if  they  were  capable  of  such  emotion.  You  remember  the  eUxj 
I  told  you  of  the  Welshman  who  heard  a  young  man  preach  a  very  fine 
sermon — a  grand  sermon,  a  htghfaluting,  spread-ei^le  sermon ;  and  when 
he  had  done,  he  asked  the  Welshman  what  he  thought  of  it.  The 
man  replied  that  he  did  not  think  anything  of  it.  "And  why  not?" 
"  Because  there  was  no  Jesus  Christ  in  it."  "  Well,*'  said  he,  "  but  my 
text  did  not  seem  to  run  that  way."  •*  Never  mind,"  said  the  Welsh- 
man, "  your  sermon  ought  to  run  that  way."  "  I  do  not  see  that,  how- 
ever," said  the  young  man.  "  No,"  said  the  other, "  you  do  not  see  how 
to  preach  yet.  This  is  the  way  to  preach.  From  every  little  village  in 
England — it  does  not  matter  where  it  is — there  is  sure  to  be  a  road  to 
London.  Though  there  may  not  be  a  road  to  certain  other  places, 
there  is  certain  to  be  a  road  to  London.  Now,  from  every  text  in  the 
Bible  there  is  a  road  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  way  to  preach  is  just  to 
say,  '  How  can  I  get  from  this  text  to  Jesus  Christ  ?'  and  then  go 
preaching  all  the  way  along  it."  "  Well,  but/*  said  the  young  man, 
"suppose  I  find  a  text  that  has  not  got  a  road  to  Jesus  Christ."  "I 
have  preached  for  forty  years,"  said  the  old  man,  "  and  I  have  never 
found  such  a  Scripture,  but  if  I  ever  do  find  one  I  will  go  over  hedge 
and  ditch  but  what  I  will  get  to  him,  for  I  will  never  finish  without 
bringing  in  my  Master."  Perhaps  you  will  think  that  I  have  gone  a 
little  over  hedge  and  ditch  to-night,  but  I  am  pensuadod  that  I  have 
not,  for  the  sixth  verse  comes  in  here,  and  brings  our  Lord  in  most 
sweetly,  setting  him  in  the  very  forefront  of  you  Bible  readers,  so  that 
you  must  not  think  of  readinp;  without  feeling  that  he  is  there  who  is 
Lord  and  Master  of  everything  that  you  aro  reading,  and  who  shall 
make  these  things  precious  to  you  if  you  realize  him  in  them.  If  you 
do  not  find  Jesus  in  the  Scriptures  they  will  be  of  small  service  to  yon, 
for  what  did  our  Lord  himself  say  ?    "  Ye  searoh  the  Scriptures,  for  in 


HOW  TO  BBAD  THE  BIBLB.  635 

them  ye  think  ye  hare  eternal  life,  but  ye  will  not  eome  unto  me  that  ye 
might  have  life  ";  and  therefore  your  searching  comes  to  nothing ;  you 
find  no  hfe,  and  remain  dead  in  your  sins.    May  it  not  be  so  with  ns  ? 

III.  Lastly,  8UCH  A  bbading  of  Scbiptubb,  as  implies  the  nnder-* 
standing  of  and  the  entrance  into  its  spiritoal  meaninp;,  and  the  dis- 
oorery  of  the  diyine  Person  who  is  the  spiritual  meaning,  is  pbofit- 
ABLB,  for  here  our  Lord  says,  ''  If  ye  h^i  known  what  this  meaneth, 
I  will  hare  merc;^ ,  and  not  sacrifice,  ye  would  not  hare  oondenmed  the 
guiltless."  It  wiU  saye  us  from  making  a  great  many  mistakes  if  we 
get  to  understand  the  word  of  God,  and  among  other  good  things  we 
shall  not  condemn  the  guiltless. 

I  hare  no  time  to  enlarge  upon  these  benefits,  but  I  will  just  say, 
putting  all  together,  that  the  diligent  reading  of  the  word  of  God  with 
the  strong  resolve  to  get  at  its  meaning  often  begets  spiritual  life.  We 
are  begotten  by  the  word  of  God :  it  is  the  mstrumental  means  of 
regeneration.  Therefore  love  your  Bibles.  Keep  close  to  your  Bibles. 
You  seeking  sinners,  you  who  are  seeking  the  Lord,  your  first  business 
is  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but  while  you  are  yet  in  dark- 
ness and  in  gloom,  oh  love  your  Bibles  and  search  them  I  Take  them 
to  bed  with  you,  and  when  you  wake  up  in  the  morning,  if  it  is  too 
early  to  ^o  downstairs  and  disturb  the  house,  get  half-an-hour  of  read- 
ing upstairs.  Say,  **  Lord,  guide  me  to  that  text  which  shall  bless  me. 
Help  me  to  understand  how  I,  a  poor  sinner,  can  be  reconciled  to  thee." 
I  recollect  how,  when  I  was  seeking  the  Lord,  I  went  to  my  Bible  and 
to  Baxter's  "  Gall  to  the  Unconverted,"  and  to  Allen's  *'  Alarm,"  and 
Doddridge's  ''Rise  and  Progress,"  for  I  said  in  myself,  ''I  am  afraid  that 
I  shall  be  lost,  but  I  will  know  the  reason  why.  I  am  afraid  I  never 
shall  find  Christ,  but  it  shall  not  be  for  want  of  looking  for  him."  That 
fear  used  to  haunt  me,  but  I  said,  "  I  will  find  him  if  he  is  to  be 
found.  I  will  read.  I  will  think."  There  was  never  a  soul  that 
did  sincerely  seek  for  Jesus  in  the  word  but  by-and-by  he  stumbled  on 
the  precious  truth  that  Christ  was  near  at  hand  and  did  not  want  any 
looking  for ;  that  he  was  really  there,  only  they,  poor  blind  creatures, 
were  in  such  a  maze  that  they  could  not  just  then  see  hinL  Oh,  cling 
you  to  Scripture.  Scripture  is  not  Christ,  but  it  is  the  silken  clue  which 
will  lead  you  to  him.    Follow  its  leadings  faithfully. 

When  jou  have  received  regeneration  and  a  new  life,  keep  on  reading, 
because  it  will  comfort  you.  You  will  see  more  of  what  the  Lord  has 
done  for  you.  You  will  learn  that  you  are  redeemed,  adopted,  saved, 
sanctified.  Half  the  errors  in  the  world  spring  from  people  not 
reading  their  Bibles.  Would  anybody  think  that  the  Lord  would  leave 
any  one  of  his  dear  children  to  perish,  if  he  read  such  a  text  as  this, 
— ^''I  give  unto  mv  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish, 
neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand "  ?  When  I  react  that, 
I  am  sure  of  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints.  Bead,  then,  the  word 
and  it  will  be  much  for  your  comfort. 

It  will  be  for  your  nourishment,  too.  It  is  your  food  as  well  as  your 
life.  Search  it,  and  you  will  grow  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power 
of  his  might. 

It  will  be  for  your  guidance  also.  I  am  sure  those  go  rightest  who 
keep  closest  to  the  book.    Ol'tentiuies  when  you  do  not  know  what  to  do,  / 


686  HETBOPOUTAN  TABE&NACLE  PULPIT. 

yon  will  see  a  text  leaping  up  out  of  the  book,  and  saying. "  FoHow 
^  I  me."  I  hare  seen  a  promise  sometimes  blaze  ont  before  my  eyeSy  just 
as  when  an  illuminated  device  flames  forth  npon  a  pnbKc  building.  One 
tonch  of  flame  and  a  sentence  or  a  design  flashes  ont  in  gas.  I  hare  seen 
a  text  of  Scriptnre  flame  forth  in  that  way  to  my  sonl ;  I  have  known 
that  it  was  God's  word  to  me,  and  I  hare  gone  on  my  way  rejoicing. 

And,  oh,  yon  will  get  a  thousand  helps  out  of  that  wondrous  bM>k  if 
you  do  but  read  it ;  for,  understanding  the  words  more,  you  will  prize  it 
more,  and,  as  you  get  older,  the  book  wiU  grow  with  your  growth,  and 
turn  out  to  be  a  grey-beard's  manual  of  devotion  just  as  it  was  afore- 
time a  child's  sweet  storybook.  Yes,  it  will  always  be  a  new  book — just 
as  new  a  Bible  as  if  it  was  printed  yesterday,  and  nobody  had  erer  seen 
a  word  of  it  till  now ;  and  yet  it  wiU  be  a  deal  more  precious  for  all  the 
memories  which  cluster  round  it  As  we  turn  over  its  pages  how  sweetly 
do  we  recollect  passages  in  our  history  which  will  never  be  forgottm 
to  all  eternity,  but  will  stand  for  ever  intertwined  with  gracious  promises. 
BeloTed,  the  Lord  teach  us  to  read  his  book  of  1&  which  he  has 
opened  before  us  here  below,  so  that  we  may  read  our  titles  clear  in 
that  other  book  of  love  which  we  hare  not  seen  as  yet,  but  whicdi  will 
be  opened  at  the  last  great  day.    The  Lord  be  with  you,  and  bless  yon. 


POBTIOK  OF  SOBIFTUBE  BEAD  BEFOBB  SSBMON — ^Psalm  CXTT.  97 — 112. 


Hymns  fbom  "Oub  Own  Hymn  Book"— 445,  119  (Song  L),  478. 


Thb  Pastobs'  Collbob  for  the  education  of  young  men  for  the  ministzy  is 
conducted  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  supported  by  the  goodness  of  the  God  of 
rrace.  If  he  moves  any  of  his  children  to  send  help  for  this  best  of  works 
Ineir  snbscripttons  will  be  very  gratefully  received  by  Mr.  Spomon,  Nij^htiiigfale 
Lane,  Balham.  The  College  is  more  than  ordinarily  full,  and  increased  assist- 
ance is  needed.  To  aid  young  men  in  their  8tu<&c8  of  the  Word  of  €k>d  so 
that  the  grand  truths  of  the  gospel  may  never  lack  earnest  eomounders  is  one 
of  the  most  useful  and  most  needed  of  Christain  works.  If  by  Qod*s  grace  tiie 
Colleges  send  out  fiiithful  men  the  days  of  infidelity  and  free  thought^  on  the 
one  hand,  and  of  superstitions^  on  the  other,  will  soon  be  ended. 


^etit^plito  iUakrnark  fttlpit 


THE    DROMEDARIES. 


t 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  UETROFOLITAN  TABERNAOLB,  NEWIKGTON. 


We  will  read  a  few  yerses  first,  and  at  the  close  of  them  yon  will  find 
the  text. 

<'  Jadah  and  Israel  were  many,  as  the  eand  which  ia  hy  the  lea  in  mnltitnde, 
eating  and  drinking,  and  making  merry.  And  Solomon  reigned  OTer  aU  kingdoms 
from  the  river  unto  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  and  unto  the  border  of  Egypt :  they 
brought  presents,  and  serred  Solomon  all  the  days  of  his  life.  And  Solomon's  pro- 
vision for  one  day  was  thirty  measures  of  fine  flour,  and  threescore  measures  of  meal, 
Ten  fat  oxen,  and  twenW  oxen  out  of  the  pastures,  and  an  hundred  sheep,  beside 
harts,  and  roebucks,  and  mllowdeer,  and  fatted  fbwL  For  he  had  dominion  over  aU 
the  region  on  this  side  the  river,  from  Tiphsah  even  to  Asaah,  over  aU  the  kings  on 
this  sidS  Uie  river:  and  he  had  peace  on  aU  sides  round  about  him.  And  Judah  and 
Israel  dwelt  safely,  every  man  under  his  vine  and  under  his  fig  tree,  from  Dan  even 
to  Beer-sheba,  all  the  days  of  Solomon.  And  Solomon  had  forty  thousand  stalls  of 
horses  for  his  chariots,  and  twelve  thousand  horsement  And  those  officers  provided 
victual  for  King  Solomon,  and  for  all  that  oame  unto  King  Solomon's  table,  every 
man  in  his  montn:  they  lacked  nothing.  Barley  also  and  stnw  for  the  horses  and 
dromedaries  brought  they  unto  the  place  where  the  officers  were^  every  man  aooording 
to  his  charge."—!  Kings  iv.  20—28. 

The  last  words  are  the  text  for  this  occasion; 

From  the  whole  passage  yon  will  see  that  the  kingdom  of  Israel  nnder 
the  sway  of  Solomon  was  a  &ir  l^pe  of  the  reign  of  onr  Lord  Jesns 
Christ.  Perhaps  it  most  exactly  aescribes  his  fiitnre  dominion,  in  the 
long-expected  glory  of  the  latter  days.  The  present  state  of  thex^hnrch 
may  be  compa^  to  the  reign  of  Dayid,  splendid  with  yictories,  but  dis- 
turbed with  battles ;  bnt  there  are  better  aays  to  come,  days  in  which  the 
kingdom  shall  be  extended  and  become  more  manifest;  and  then  the 
Lord  Jesns  Christ  diall  be  even  more  oonspicnonsly  seen  as  the  Solomon 
of  the  kingdom,  *'  who  shall  hare  dominion  from  sea  to  sea.'*  Yet  even 
now,  as  **  we  that  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest,"  so  do  we  also  enter 
into  the  richest  provision  which  is  made  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  even 
at  this  present;  and  I  may  say  of  all  who  have  come  nnder  the  sway  of 
Christ,  that  we  dwell  in  a  region  of  peace,  seated  eveiy  man  under  his 
vine  and  figtree,  and  none  making  ns  afraid.  "  There  is,  therefore,  now 
no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesns,'*  and,  "  therefore, 
being  justified  by  &ith,  we  have  peace  with  Ood  through  our  Lord 
2^0.  1,504. 


638  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Jesns  Christ/*  **  The  peace  of  God  which  paBseth  all  understanding  " 
doth  keep  our  heart  and  mind  bv  Jesus  Christ.  Isi'ael  under  Solomon 
had  ahundance  as  well  as  peace.  What  says  the  historian  ?  They  were 
**  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  in  multitude,  eating  and  drinking,  and 
making  merry."  It  is  said  that  there  w^as  such  plenty  in  the  land  in 
Solomon's  time  that  gold  was  of  no  more  value  than  silver,  and  silver 
became  of  little  more  value  than  iron ;  and  as  for  the  other  metals,  they 
were  httle  accounted  of.  So  common  had  precious  metals  become  that 
they  were  scarcely  precious  any  longer,  they  were  so  plentiful.  The 
whole  land  flowed  with  milk  and  honey,  and  the  people  rejoiced  and 
were  glad.  Certainly  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  brought  his  people  into 
a  state  of  the  greatest  plenty,  for  **all  things  are  yours;  whether  things 
present,  or  things  to  come ;  or  life,  or  deatii ;  all  ace  yours ;  and  ye  arc 
Christ's ;  and  Christ  is  God's."  What  plenty  must  that  man  have  to 
whom  the  Lord  has  said,  "  Xo  good  thing  will  I  withhold  from  them 
that  walk  uprightly" !  **  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing, 
ye  shall  receive."  He  has  given  us  carte  blanclie  in  prayer.  He  has 
put  into  our  hands  the  keys  of  his  treasury,  and  has  bidden  us  take 
what  we  will.  He  has  said, ''  Delight  thysdf  also  in  the  Lord,  and  he 
shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart " ;  and  he  has  added,  ^^  Open 
thy  mouth  wide  and  I  will  fill  it."  If  we  have  not,  it  is  "  because  we 
ask  noty  or  because  we  ask  amiss." 

So,  too,  we  dwell  in  a  kingdom  which  is  raled  with  wisdom.  It  is  said 
of  Solomon  in  this  chapter  that  he  had  wisdom  and  understanding  ex- 
ceeding much,  and  largeness  of  heart,  even  as  the  sand  on  the  sea  shore : 
and  Solomon's  wisdom  excelled  tlie  wisdom  of  all  the  children  of  the  east 
country,  and  all  the  msdom  of  the  Egyptians.  Is  not  this  also  onr 
honour  and  privilege  ?  Behold,  this  day  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  ^'  made 
unto  us  wisdom."  "  We  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  know 
all  things"  while  we  dwell  in  him ;  for  *'  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  Ti%ith 
th^n  that  fear  him,  and  he  will  show  them  his  covenant."  *^  If  any 
man  will  do  his  will  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  "  All  thy  diildren 
shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord,  and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  chil- 
dren." Hence  we  dwell  under  a  rule  of  wisdom,  which  wisdom  imparts 
itself  to  each  one  of  us  according  to  his  capacity  to  receive  it,  yea,  even 
to  those  whoee  experience  is  but  shallow :  ''  to  tevadi  the  young  men 
wisdom,  and  the  babes  knowledge  and  discretion."  *'  If  any  man  lack 
wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  up- 
braideth  not." 

Israel  had  a  king  who  was  full  of  power.  Solomon  had  squadrons  of 
horse  and  chariots  of  war,  and  he  was  bo  strong  that  the  kings  of  the 
earth  dared  not  come  into  conflict  with  him,  but  paid  him  tribute.  As 
for  our  King,  he  has  better  forces  than  horses  and  chariots  of  war,  for  he 
has  but  to  speak  to  his  Father,  and  he  will  poresently  send  him  twenty 
legions  of  angels.  All  power  is  delivered  unto  him  in  heaven  and  in 
ei^h.  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells  in  him  for  the  defence  and 
help  of  his  people,  and  if  you  will  but  open  your  eyes  you  shall  see 
horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  your  Lord.  Hosts  of 
angels  are  ascending  and  descending  unon  the  Son  of  man,  and  all  heaven 
is  in  motion  for  the  purposes  of  God  in  Ohmt  Jesus.  Not  an  angel 
stands  still  beneath  the  sway  of  Christ,  but  each  one  either  ascends  or 


THE  DROMEDAUIES.  G89 

descends  to  do  his  Master's  bidding.  Talk  of  mighty  princes — he  is  the 
Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  **  blessed  and  only  Potentate,"  to 
whom  belongeth  role  over  all  principalities  and  powers.  I  might  go  on 
with  the  parallel,  bnt  that  is  not  the  object  of  my  discourse. 

The  great  kingdom  of  Solomon  was  managed  by  a  well-appointed 
body  of  officers,  and  certain  persons  were  set  over  each  province,  who> 
amongst  other  duties,  had  to  provide  for  king  Solomon's  table  and  stable. 
The  table  was  very  sumptuously  furnished,  as  you  saw  in  the  reading; 
and  in  the  stable  stood  horses  of  war,  and  also  swill  dromedaries,  which 
were  used  in  the  same  manner  as  our  modem  post-horses,  to  carry  mes- 
sages rapidly  from  one  station  to  another.  These  swift  horses  and 
dromedaries  were  made  to  run  from  town  to  town  with  the  royal  mandates, 
and  thus  the  whole  country  was  kept  in  speedy  communication  with  the 
capital.  Appointed  officers  were  bound  to  provide  for  these  horses  and 
dromedaries,  and  all  else  that  concerned  the  king's  business ;  and  my  sub- 
ject at  this  time  will  illustrate  the  likeness  between  this  arrangement  and 
the  methods  of  our  Lord's  kingdom. 

I.  First  we  shall  note  that  each  of  Solomon's  offiobrs  had  a 
CHARGE.  The  text  says,  *^  Every  man  according  to  his  charge."  We 
have  officers  about  modem  courts  who  may  be  highly  ornamental,  but 
when  yon  have  said  that,  there  is  very  little  else  to  add.  On  high  days 
and  holidays  they  wear  many  decorations,  and  glitter  in  their  stars  and 
garters,  and  sumptuous  garments,  but  what  particular  charge  they  fulfil 
it  is  beyond  my  power  to  say.  In  Solomon's  court  all  hta  officers  had  a 
service  to  carry  out,  "  every  man  according  to  his  charge."  It  is  exactly 
so  in  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  If  we  are  tmly  his,  he  has 
called  us  to  some  work  and  office,  and  he  wills  us  to  discharge  that  office 
diligently.  We  are  not  to  be  gentlemen-at-ease,  bnt  men-at-arms ;  not 
loiterers,  but  labourers ;  not  glittering  spangles,  but  burning  and  shining 
lights. 

It  is  an  exceeding  glory  to  be  the  lowest  servant  of  King  Jesus.  It 
is  more  honour  to  be  a  scullion  in  Christ's  kitchen  than  to  be  a  peer  of 
the  realm.  The  meanest  position  that  can  be  occupied  in  the  kingdom 
of  Jesus  Christ,  if  any  can  be  mean  in  such  a  service,  has  a  touch  of 
divine  glory  about  it ;  and  if  we  rightfully  discharge  it,  though  it  be 
only  to  wash  the  saints'  feet,  we  partake  in  the  honour  of  our  Master, 
who  himself  did  not  disdain  to  do  the  like.  Bnt  no  man  iM>ut  in  any 
office  in  the  church  that  he  may  be  merely  ornamental.  We  are  set  in 
our  places  with  an  end  and  design,  every  man  according  to  his  charge — 
every  woman  according  to  her  charge.  My  dear  brother,  you  do  not 
occupy  the  post  of  a  minister  or  a  pastor  that  you  may  be  respected, 
but  that  you  may  "adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  your  Saviour  in  all 
things."  lou  are  not,  my  dear  brother,  ordained  to  be  an  elder  or  a 
deacon  in  a  church  that  our  Lord  may  put  honour  upon  you,  though  he 
does  put  honour  upon  you  in  it,  but  that  you  may  brine  glory  to  Qod 
— that  the  people  may  see  the  grace  of  Qod  in  you,  and  may  magnify 
God  in  you.  Churches  were  not  made  for  ministers,  but  ministers  for 
churches.  We  who  are  officers  in  the  church  are  not  ordained  for  our 
own  sakes,  but  for  the  people's  sake,  and  we  should  always  recollect  that 
fact,  and  live  with  it  in  our  eye.  Dear  friend,  if  you  are  called  to  teach  in 
the  school,  if  you  are  called  to  visit  from  house  to  house,  or  to  act  as  a 


640  MBTROPOLITAN  TABBBNACLB  PULPIT. 

City  ^  ioiiary,  or  a  Bible  woman,  you  have  work  to  do,  and  yon  must 
do  JL  l,  or  render  a  Borrowful  account  at  the  last.  Office  is  not 
friven  Ut  you  that  you  may  get  credit  by  it.  and  have  the  lionour  of 
filliiifl:  ir,  liut  that  you  may  do  real  service  to  your  Lord  and  Master  Jesus 
Christ.  Xo  servant  of  Christ  can  be  faithful  if  he  regards  that  title  as 
one  of  l>a  ren  honour  involving  no  responsibility.  If  we  would  be  servants 
and  of!i<oi-s  under  our  great  King  we  must  bow  our  necks  to  the  yoke, 
and  not  irnajo^iue  that  it  will  suffice  to  bind  burdens  upon  other  men's 
shouldei-s,  and  act  as  lookers-on  ourselves.  It  is  said  of  Job's  cattle,  tliai 
**the  oxen  were  ploughing,  and  the  asses  were  feeding  beside  them"; 
but  in  our  Lord's  field  we  must  all  be  oxen,  and  steadily  keep  to  the 
fiirrow. 

Those  trho  served  Solomon  were  officers  under  a  strict  Icing ^  for  such 
was  his  wisdom  that  he  would  not  tolerate  unfaithfulness  in  any  office. 
He  chose  the  best  men,  and  so  long  as  he  retained  them  he  meant  busi- 
ness  and  expected  prompt  attention.  If  they  did  not  do  their  duty,  he 
did  his,  and  sent  them  packing.  It  is  very  much  so  in  the  church  of 
Jesus  Christ.  I  am  not  speaking  as  if  the  children  of  God  could  perish ; 
but  I  do  say  this,  that  in  the  service  of  Christ  if  you  are  not  a  faithful 
servant  you  will  soon  have  to  make  room  for  another.  Yon  may  be 
laid  aside  by  sickness,  and  then  you  will  have  suffering  instead  of  serving, 
or  you  may  be  made  to  drop  into  the  rear  rank  and  go  behind  and  weep 
in  sorrow  because  you  did  not  faithfully  do  your  duty  in  the  front 
Becollect  that  text,  '^  The  Lord  thy  God  is  a  jealous  God,"  and  rest 
assured  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  like  his  Father,  he  will  have  the 
diligent  obedience  of  his  servants,  and  their  &ithful  zeal,  or  else  he  will 
cashier  them,  and  take  away  their  commissions.  *'  Be  ye  clean,"  saith 
he, ''  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord,"  for  he  will  be  had  in  reverence 
of  them  that  are  about  him,  and  unholy  servants  and  unfaithful  servants 
shall  soon  find  that  their  Master  can  do  without  them.  Many  a  minister 
has  had  to  come  away  from  a  place  of  vantage  because  he  has  not 
zealously  used  it  to  win  souls  and  lead  on  the  people  to  the  holy  war.  I 
do  not  donbt  that  many  rising  officers  have  been  sent  back  to  the  ranks 
because  the  Commander-in-Chief  could  not  have  patience  with  them 
any  longer  in  their  positions.  They  were  removed  because  they  dis- 
couraged their  fellow-soldiers  and  checked  the  progress  of  the  campaign. 
Do  not  suppose  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  any  less  strict  in  his  disci- 
pline than  Moses,  for  love  is  always  severe  towards  those  it  liighly 
favours.  I  greatly  question  the  love  of  that  man  who  can  tolerate  un- 
chastity  in  his  wife ;  certainly  the  husband  of  the  church  will  not  do 
so.  Tlie  love  of  our  Lord  Jesus  is  of  so  fervent  a  character  that 
he  cannot  bear  a  divided  heart,  or  a  negligent  walk  in  any  one  of  us. 
There  is  a  text  which  some  Christian  people  do  not  like,  and  so  they 
cut  the  heart  out  of  it :  "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  They  say, 
**  God,  out  of  Christ,  is  a  consuming  fire."  The  text  does  not  say  so ;  it 
spealcs  of  ''  Our  God,"  and  that  means  our  covenant  God,  our  God  t>t 
Christ,  and  it  is  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  a  consuming  fire.  Beware 
how  you  deal  with  him ;  for  while  his  love  is  strong  as  death,  his  jealousy 
is  cruel  as  the  grave ;  and  if  our  hearts  and  motives  and  aims  in  his  ser- 
vice once  become  di\ided,  it  will  be  as  great  a  crime  as  if  one  of  Solomon's 
servants  should  have  been  playing  into  the  hands  of  Pharaoh,  the  king  of 


THB  BHOHEDARIES.  64t 

Egypt.  Solomon  would  have  taken  care  that  a  man  who  had  two 
lords  should  not  have  him  for  one  of  them.  None  of  us  can  serve 
two  masters :  certainly,  if  Christ  he  one  of  them  he  will  be  the  only  one. 
A  divided  heart  is  an  abhorrence  to  the  lo\ing  Saviour,  and  we  must  not 
insult  him  with  it. 

The  officers  of  Solomon  were  also  obliged  to  recollect  that  the  ordifUf 
working  of  the  whoh  system  depended  upon  each  one  of  them.  That  ift 
to  say,  Solomon  had  so  arranged  it  that  there  was  a  certain  troop  of 
horses  in  a  certain  town,  and  the  appointed  officer  must  see  to  their 
fodder :  barley  and  straw  were  to  be  on  the  spot  in  full  quantity  for  the 
horses  at  that  particular  depot.  It  would  not  have  done  to  send  it  any- 
where else ;  and  if  an  officer  had  failed  to  supply  his  department,  the  horses 
must  have  starved  and  the  system  been  thrown  out  of  gear.  Now,  in  any 
well  arranged  Christian  church  a  Christian  who  is  not  faithful  to  his  charge 
little  knows  what  mischief  he  does ;  but,  as  far  as  he  can,  he  puts  the 
whole  machine  out  of  gear,  and,  apart  from  the  interposing  mercy  and 
supreme  Tsasdom  of  ChSrist,  he  would  throw  the  whole  economy  of  the 
Lord's  house  into  disorder.  Brethren  and  sisters,  we  think  when  we 
neglect  a  part  of  our  service  that  it  ends  there,  but  it  does  not.  A 
father  neglects  his  duty  to  his  children  :  there  is  mischief  to  the  child, 
but  it  goes  further ;  that  child  in  after  life  spreads  the  evil  by  his  example, 
and  transmits  it  to  his  descendants ;  ay,  to  his  children's  children  after 
him.  A  Christian  man  in  a  church  keeps  in  the  background  when  he 
should  be  in  the  front,  or  he  comes  to  the  front  when  he  should  be  in  the 
rear,  and  this  is  just  the  upsetting  of  the  whole  business,  so  that  af^rs 
cannot  move  smoothly.  The  little  church  cannot  prosper  because  an  in- 
fluential member  is  where  he  ought  not  to  be.  In  a  great  house  the  servants 
must  keep  their  places,  and  if  the  cook  will  persist  in  doing  the  chamber- 
maid's duties,  and  does  not  prepare  the  meals,  everything  is  in  a  muddle ; 
and  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  maid  who  has  to  clean  the  rooms  neglects 
that  duty,  but  must  needs  be  in  the  kitchen,  there  will  be  no  comfort 
either  by  day  or  by  night.  You  can  all  see  the  bearing  of  this  upon  a 
Christian  church. 

To  change  the  figure,  a  church  is  like  a  house,  and  if  the  windows 
are  put  where  the  doors  should  be ;  or  if  what  should  make  the  roof  is 
laid  on  the  floor,  the  house  is  out  of  order.  To  be  "  fitly  framed  together  " 
is  the  true  condition  of  the  Lord's  house.  The  church  is  also  compared 
to  the  body.  If  the  eye  should  transfer  itself  to  the  foot,  or  if  the  ear 
should  move  to  the  hand,  or  if  the  hand  should  take  the  place  of  the  foot^ 
or  the  foot  should  attempt  to  do  the  work  of  the  mouth,  our  comely 
frames  would  become  monstrosities.  So  it  must  be  in  the  system  of  the 
church  of  Jesus  Christ  if  his  arrangements  are  broken  through.  Under 
God  everything  depends  upon  each  child  of  God  having  his  "  charge," 
and  looking  well  to  it.  If  he  does  not  look  well  to  his  own, department 
the  Christian  man  does  damage  to  others  as  well  as  to  himself. 

In  Solomon's  kingdom  it  came  to  paas  that  the  spirit  of  the  king  m- 
fused  itself  into  all  his  officers,  and  therefore  the  country  was  well 
governed.  Beloved,  I  pray  that  it  may  be  so  with  this  church,  and  with 
all  the  churches  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  the  Spirit  of  our  great  King  may 
infuse  itself  into  us  all.  Nothing  makes  men  figlit  like  having  a  hero 
for  a  leader.    When  Cromwell  came  to  the  front  nobody  was  afraid* 


M2  MBiaOPOTilTAN  TABEHNACLE   PULPn. 

Awaj  went  the  cavaltere  like  chaff  before  the  wind,  when  once  he  was 
present.  And,  surely,  when  our  glorions  Master,  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation,  the  standard  bearer  among  ten  thousand,  is  seen  to  be  in  the 
midst  of  a  church,  then  everything  goes  well,  and  we  all  fight  with  con- 
fidence and  daring.  One  man  sometimes  seems  to  have  the  power  of 
pervading  thousands  of  other  men;  his  spirit  appeara  to  govern,  to 
move,  to  stir  the  hearts  of  his  fellow  men  till  the  man  lives  in  them  all ; 
and  so  is  it  sapremely  with  the  Lord  Christ.  We  live  in  him,  and  he 
lives  in  us.  If  we  are  all  moved  by  the  spirit  which  dwells  in  Jesiia 
— the  spirit  of  love,  of  self-denial,  of  consuming  zeal,  and  of  ardonr, 
then  all  will  he.  done  gloriously.  If  we  copy  his  consecration,  his  prayer- 
folnesB,  his  boldness  and  hia  gentleness,  what  a  troop  shall  we  make,  and 
how  well  will  our  Solomon's  kingdom  be  administered ! 

Only  one  more  thought  here.  When  Solomon's  kingdom  came  to  ma- 
chief  it  was  through  one  of  his  oncers.  You  recollect  that,  when  Solomon 
died,  Jeroboam  split  the  kingdom  in  twain,  and  he  was  a  runaway  servant. 
"Whenever  a  church  comes  to  ruin,  we  grieve  to  confess  that  it  is  generally 
through  its  own  officers.  I  fear  it  is  oflener  the  ministers  than  any  other 
perBona  The  great  heresies  which  have  infested  the  church  have  not 
aprnng  from  the  mass  of  the  people,  but  from  certain  famous  leaders ;  and 
at  this  day  the  heart  of  ourchurcnes,  I  believe,  is  infinitelymore  sound  than 
the  ministry.  I  wish  it  were  not  so,  but  I  cannot  conceal  my  fears. 
When  our  Lord  was  betrayed  it  was  not  by  private  foIloweiB,  such  as 
Mary  Magdalene,  Zaccheus,  or  Joseph  of  Arimathsa,  but  by  Judas,  the 
treaBorer  of  the  College  of  Apostles.  It  was  an  apostle  who  sold  his 
Master  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  Still  the  feult  is  equally  grievous  if 
it  be  committed  by  the  lowest  officer.  As  I  have  already  said,  we  are 
all  servants :  we  are  all  clothed  with  responsibilities,  and  we  can,  if  the 
Holy  Spirit  shall  leave  us  to  it,  do  grievous  damage — more  damage  than 
the  outeide  world  can  ever  accomplish.  Let  the  raging  crowd  surround 
Zion's  wall,  let  them  cast  up  their  banks  and  seek  to  eboot  their  arrows 
there ;  but  lo,  the  virgin  daughter  of  Zion  hath  shaken  her  head  at  her 
foea  and  laughed  them  to  scorn.  But  when  the  traitor  comes  within — 
when  it  is  written  that  "Judas  also  which  betrayed  him  knew  the  place" 
■ — then  is  the  Master  betrayed  in  the  garden  where  he  resorted  for  prayer. 
When  from  the  bowels  of  the  church  there  springs  a  serpent,  even  her 
head  must  be  stung  thereby.  Let  the  question  go  round,  "Lord,  is  it 
I?  "  and  may  God  of  hia  grace  grant  that  none  of  ns  may  ever  betray 
our  charge,  and  so  bring  damage  to  the  glorious  cause  and  kingdom  of 
onr  blessed  King. 

II.    Our  second  head  is  somewhat  like  the  first.    We  now  note  that 

EACH  MAN  WAS  BOUMD    TO    ACT  AOCORDINO  TO   HIS  CHABQE — "  Eveiy 

man  according  to  his  charge."  The  officers  were  bound  to  obey  their 
orders ;  first,  as  to  mailer.  Certain  of  them  had  to  provide  fat  oxen  for 
Solomon's  table,  and  others  had  to  see  that  the  roebucks  were  hunted 
and  that  the  fowls  were  fetted  for  the  same  purpose ;  while  others  were 
commissioned  to  provide  the  barley  and  the  straw  for  the  horses  and  the 
di'omedaries.  As  I  have  already  said,  if  they  had  gone  out  of  place— if 
the  man  who  had  to  provide  the  barley  for  the  horses  nad  fed  the  chickens 
with  it,  and  if  the  officer  who  was  bound  to  hunt  the  roebucks  had 
occupied  himself  with  carting  the  straw,  there  would  have  been  great 


THE  DBOMSDABIES.  643 

confusion.  And  bo,  dear  brother,  when  you  will  not  do  what  you  were 
evidently  meant  to  do,  and  are  quite  able  to  do,  but  must  needs  attempt 
something  quite  out  of  your  ran^e,  all  goes  amiss.  Observe  your  own 
body :  if  your  ear  were  to  have  a  feeling  that  it  ought  to  eat  instead  of 
hearing,  the  mouth  would  be  interfered  with,  and  the  feeding  of  the 
firame  would  be  ve^r  badly  done.  The  eye  is  a  very  serviceable  member, 
but  if  it  persisted  in  refusing  to  see,  and  must  neeos  take  to  hearing,  we 
should  be  run  over  in  the  streets.  Each  member  has  its  own  office  in 
the  body,  and  must  attend  to  its  own  work,  and  not  to  the  office  of 
another.  Dear  friend,  have  you  found  out  what  you  can  do— what  the 
Lord  has  fitted  you  to  do,  ana  what  he  has  blessed  you  in  doing?  Then 
keep  to  it,  and  do  it  better  and  better,  and  by  no  means  complain  of  your 
vocation.  Do  not  find  fault  with  others  whose  work  differs  from  your 
own.  The  eye  would  be  very  foolish  if  it  should  say,  **  Do  not  tell  me 
about  that  fnvolous  member  the  ear ;  it  is  of  no  use,  for  it  only  knows 
what  it  is  told,  and  it  is  so  blind  that  it  could  not  see  a  house  if  it  were 
within  a  yard  of  it,  nor  even  a  mountain  a  mile  high."  Equally  idle 
would  it  be  if  the  ear  should  say,  *'  Do  not  tell  mc  about  the  mouth ; 
it  is  a  selfish  organ,  always  wanting  to  be  fed.  It  is  good  for  nothing, 
for  it  cannot  hear,  and  if  a  cannon  were  fired  off  close  to  it,  it  would 
not  perceive  it."  Neither  may  the  mouth  say,  "  That  roving  foot  is 
always  running  about.  Why  does  it  not  work  hke  the  hand  ?*'  Nor 
may  the  hand  find  fault  with  the  tongue  because  it  boasts  great  things, 
and  does  nothing.  There  would  be  s^  confusion  in  the  Ix^y  if  such  a 
spirit  prevailed :  but  the  hand  keeps  to  its  work,  and  even  there  there  is 
a  subdivision  of  service.  The  little  finger  plays  a  part  which  the  thumb 
cannot  fulfil,  and  there  is  something  for  the  thumo  which  the  forefinger 
cannot  do.  So  should  it  be  in  the  church  of  God :  you  should  each  find 
out  what  you  can  do,  and  then  seek,  God  the  Holy  Spirit  helping  you, 
to  do  that,  to  the  very  best  of  your  ability,  out  of  love  to  Jesus. 

Observe  that  with  Solomon  it  was  ''every  man  according  to  his 
charge  "  as  to  measure;  for  if  a  man  had  charge  of  a  barrack  where 
there  were  two  thousand  horses,  he  had  to  send  in  more  barley  and  straw 
than  the  officer  who  superintended  a  smaller  barrack  of  only  five  hundred 
horse.  The  purveyor  who  was  ordered  to  supply  Solomon's  table  with  fat 
bullocks  had  to  send  more  than  he  who  fed  the  tables  of  the  inferior  officers. 
Kote  this  well,  for  certain  of  us  are  bound  to  do  much  more  than  others. 
Some  of  us  bear  heavy  responsibilities,  and  if  we  were  to  say,  "  I  shall 
do  no  more  than  anybody  else,  I  need  not  overburden  myself,"  we  should 
be  unfit  to  occupy  the  position  to  which  God  has  called  us.  Dear  friends, 
I  am  not  afraid  that  any  of  you  will  do  too  much  for  Jesus  Christy  but 
I  would  like  you  to  try.  Just  see  now  whether  you  can  be  too  ardent, 
too  self-sacrificing,  too  zealous,  or  too  consecrated.  It  were  a  pity  that 
such  a  thing  should  not  be  attempted.  I  have  never  known  anybody 
who  could  accuse  himself  of  so  rare  a  crime.  Oh,  no ;  we  all  feel  that 
all  we  can  do,  and  more,  is  well  deserved  by  oxur  blessed  Master  who  has 
given  us  our  charge.  Do  not  forget  that  you  who  are  fathers  ought  to  be 
better  men  than  those  single  men  who  have  no  children  to  look  up 
to  them,  and  to  copy  their  example.  You  who  are  large  employers 
ought  to  be  better  men,  because  your  workmen  will  watch  how  you  live. 
You  who  have  talents  and  abilities  ought  to  be  more  active  tlian  those 


Bii  METBOPOLITAH  TABEBKAOLB  PULPIT. 

who  have  none,  for  five  talents  call  for  more  interest  than  one.  Do 
remember  the  rule  of  proportion.  If  yon  have  five  talents,  and  yonr 
brother  has  only  one,  yon  may  do  twice  as  mnch  as  he  does  and  yet  fall 
short.  He  is  ^ithfal  with  his  small  capital,  but  yonr  proportion  Is  five 
times  as  mach,  and  therefore  twice  as  much  falls  short  of  what  is  expected 
from  yon.  Many  a  servant  girl  gives  her  fourpenny-piece  to  the  offering, 
and  if  the  same  proportion  were  carried  out  among  those  who  are  wealthy, 
gold  would  not  be  so  rare  a  metal  in  the  Lord's  treasury.  A  tithe  may 
be  too  much  for  some,  but  a  half  might  not  be  enough  for  another.  Lei 
it  be,  '*  Every  man  according  to  his  charge/*  as  to  measure  as  well  as  to 
matter. 

"Every  man  according  to  his  charge,"  applied  to  plots;  for  if  tlie 
servant  who  had  to  send  in  barley  for  the  dromedaries  to  Jerusalem  had 
sent  it  off  to  Joppa,  or  if  the  Joppa  man  had  sent  all  his  fodder  to 
Jericho,  there  would  have  been  considerable  trouble  and  outcry  in  the 
stables ,  and  if  the  fatted  beef  and  the  venison  for  Solomon's  table  when 
he  stopped  in  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  had  been  sent  over  to 
his  other  house  on  Mount  Zion,  the  king  would  have  had  his  table  ill 
supplied.  Some  men  are  not  satisfied  to  serve  God  in  their  proper  place ; 
they  must  run  fifty  miles  off,  or  a  hundred,  before  they  can  work.  Is 
this  right  ?  I  remember  a  little  text  in  the  Proverbs, — **  As  a  bird  that 
wandereth  ii-om  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that  wandereth  from  his  place." 
There  is  a  sphere  for  every  star  which  decks  the  sky.  and  a  blade  of  grass 
for  every  drop  of  dew  which  spangles  the  mead.  Oh  that  every  one  would 
keep  his  place.  Very  much  depends  on  position.  Statues  upon  a  build- 
ing may  look  magnificent,  and  seem  to  be  in  fine  proportion,  bat  it  those 
statues  were  one  night  to  say,  "  We  do  not  like  standing  up  here  in  this 
exposed  place ;  we  will  walk  down  and  stand  in  the  public  square,"  yon 
would  see  at  once  that  the  artist  never  meant  them  to  be  there,  for  they 
would  be  out  of  proportion  in  their  new  position.  So  a  man  is  a  man  when 
he  keeps  his  niche,  but  he  may  be  a  nobody  if  he  leaves  it.  Many  a  man 
have  I  known  who  has  done  nothing  till  he  has  found  his  place,  and  then 
he  has  astonished  his  friends.  I  find  it  so  with  young  men  entering  the 
ministry :  a  brother  has  not  succeeded,  in  fact,  he  has  been  an  utter 
failure  in  his  first  position,  and  yet,  when  Ood  has  opened  the  proper 
door  for  him,  he  has  done  marvels.  Why  did  he  not  succeed  before  ? 
Because  he  was  out  of  his  place.  The  best  thing  applied  to  the  purpose 
for  which  it  is  not  suited  is  a  mere  waste,  and  the  best  man  in  an  un- 
suitable position  may  unwittingly  be  a  hindrance  to  the  cause  he  love& 
Solomon  s  officer  would  have  been  very  foolish  ii  he  had  sent  his  barley 
down  to  Dan  when  it  was  his  duty  to  supply  Beersheba.  Find  yonr 
place,  good  brother,  and  do  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  move.  He  who  keeps 
a  shop  in  a  dozen  towns  in  a  dozen  years  will  at  the  end  look  in  vain  for 
a  shop  which  will  keep  him.  The  spirit  of  roving  tends  to  poverty. 
Those  who  are  eager  to  move  because  they  imagine  that  they  will  leave 
their  troubles  behind  them  are  mnch  deceived,  for  these  are  found  every- 
where. You  may  soon  get  into  some  such  predicament  as  Jonah,  who 
thought  that  all  would  be  well  if  he  could  avoid  Nineveh  trials,  but  he 
had  forgotten  the  troubles  of  being  aboard  ship  in  a  storm.  I  do  not 
suppose  he  ever  ran  away  to  Tarshm  again.  That  one  experiment  satis- 
fied him,  and  I  hope  you  will  profit  by  his  experience.    Do  not  try  running 


THE  DROMEDARIES.  645 

away  on  yonr  own  account,  for  if  you  do  endeavour  to  escape  your  Lord's 
hard  work,  I  would  have  you  remember  that  the  sea  is  quite  as  tempes- 
tuous now  as  ever,  and  whales  are  fewer  now  than  in  Jonah's  day,  and 
not  at  all  so  likely  to  carry  a  live  man  to  shore.  Keep  your  place : 
"  every  man  according  to  his  charge." 

Once  more,  every  man  was  to  act  according  to  his  charge  as  to  tirmj 
because  the  passage  speaks  of  each  one  "  in  his  month."  If  the  January 
man  had  taken  care  to  provide  for  Solomon's  table  in  February,  w^iat 
would  have  happened  ?  There  waB  a  man  for  February,  and  there  would 
have  been  two  supplies  for  one  month,  but  none  for  the  first  weeks  of  the 
year.  If  the  August  officer  had  kept  back  till  September  the  corn  which 
was  wanted  by  the  horses  and  the  dromedaries  in  August,  what  would  the 
poor  creatures  have  done  during  that  month  ?  While  the  barley  was 
coming  the  steeds  would  have  been  starving.  In  serving  Christ  there  is  a 
great  deal  in  being  up  to  time,  punctual  in  everything.  Not  to-morrow, 
brother  :  not  to-morrow,  that  is  somebody  else's  day :  to-day  is  the  day 
for  you.  Up  and  do  the  day's  work.  Some  soul  is  to  be  w^on  for  Christ, 
Bome  truth  to  be  vindicated,  some  deed  of  kindly  charity  to  be  wrought, 
some  holy  prevalent  prayer  to  be  offered,  and  it  is  to  be  done  at  once.  Or 
ever  to-morrow's  sun  has  risen,  see  that  thou  hast  carried  out  thy  charge, 
for  time  in  reference  to  these  solemn  matters  is  life.  Promptness  we  always 
admire  in  responsible  persons.  If  they  have  any  public  duty  to  do,  we 
cannot  endure  to  see  men  leaving  matters  in  arrears,  to  be  done  by-and-by, 
or  never  done  at  all.  If  Jesus  Christ  "  straightway  "  did  this  and  that, 
as  Mark  always  takes  care  to  tell  us  he  did,  let  us  imitate  his  prompti- 
tude, and  serve  God  without  the  sluggard's  delays. 

III.  I  close  with  the  third  point,  that  each  man  would  receive 
SUPPLIES  "  according  TO  HIS  CHARGE."  I  do  not  quite  understand  the 
precise  and  definite  bearing  of  my  text.  Surely  it  means,  not  only  that 
one  set  of  officers  was  to  send  in  the  barley,  but  that  another  set  of  officers 
was  to  receive  the  barley  and  the  straw  in  proportion  to  the  number  of 
horses  and  dromedaries.  "  Barley  also  and  straw  for  the  horses  and  drome- 
daries brought  they  unto  the  place  where  the  officers  were,  everyone  ac- 
cording to  his  charge  ";  that  is  to  say,  according  to  the  number  of  horses 
to  be  provided  for,  such  was  the  amount  of  corn  and  of  straw  that  was  sent 
in  for  their  food. 

So  I  gather,  first,  that  concerning  the  servants  of  onr  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  a  great  cJiarge  from  him  is  a  guarantee  of  great  supplies.  There  is 
something  very  comfortable  about  this  as  to  temporals.  Some  declare 
that  God  sends  moutlis  and  does  not  send  bread ;  or  at  least  they  say  he 
sends  the  mouths  to  one  house  and  the  bread  to  another.  If  it  be  so, 
those  who  get  too  much  bread  should  send  it  round  to  their  neighbours. 
Yet  I  note  that  somehow  where  there  are  mouths  bread  does  come.  It 
often  amazes  me,  I  must  confess,  and  it  brings  tears  to  my  eyes  when  I 
see  it,  and  indeed  it  is  perfectly  wonderful,  that  poor  widows  with  a  swarm 
of  little  children  do  feed  them  in  some  fashion.  The  poor  woman  comes  to 
the  Orphanage  about  a  little  boy,  and  she  does  not  hke  to  part  with  him, 
but  want  compels ;  and  when  We  have  said,  "  My  good  woman,  how  many 
children  had  you  when  your  husband  died  ?  "  she  has  replied,  "  Seven, 
sir,  and  none  of  them  able  to  earn  a  penny."  "  You  have  been  fighting 
your  way  alone  these  three  or  four  years,  how  have  you  done  it  ?  "     "  Ah, 


6iS  HKTBOFOLITAK  TABRONACLK  PULPIT. 

sir/'  she  answers^  "  God  only  knows.  I  cannot  tell  yon."  No,  no;  and 
there  arc  many  of  6od*8  dear  children  who  conld  not  tell  yon  how  they 
livedi  bat  they  have  lived,  and  their  children  too.  The  Lord  leaves  tiiem 
a  great  charge,  and  in  his  own  way  he  sends  a  supply.  Most  of  ns  have 
found  that  if  our  King  sends  us  the  dromedaries  he  sends  ns  the  bariey. 
It  has  been  so  in  my  case  in  the  matter  of  our  two  hundred  and  fifty 
orphan  children  at  Stockwell;  our  gracious  God  has  always  sent  ns 
enough,  and  the  boys  have  known  no  lack ;  and  when  we  receive  another 
two  hundred  and  fifty  children,  and  have  girls  as  well  as  boys,  I  feel 
sure  our  heavenly  Father  will  provide  for  them  all.  I  hope  you  will  all 
recollect  that  the  provision  must  come  instrumentally  through  the  Lord's 
own  people,  and  much  of  it  through  the  readers  and  hearers  of  the 
sermons,  but;  come  it  will.  If  my  Lord  puts  more  dromedaries  into  my 
stable  I  shall  look  for  the  corresponding  increase  in  the  barley  and  the 
straw,  for  I  am  quite  sure  he  will  send  it.  When  I  think  of  my  dear 
friend,  Mr.  George  MUller,  with  2050  orphan  children,  and  nothing  to 
depend  upon,  as  they  say,  but  just  prayer  and  faith,  I  rejoice  greatly. 
He  never  has  a  fear  or  a  want,  and  is  as  restful  as  if  he  were  an  incar- 
nate Sabbath.  If  we  had  twenty  thousand  orphans  to  feed,  our  Master  is 
quite  able  to  supply  them  all.  He  feeds  the  universe,  and  we  may  wcJI 
trust  him.  If  we  have  a  simple,  childlike  faith,  we  shall  find  that  a 
great  charge  is  a  guarantee  of  a  great  snpply :  ''  Every  man  according 
to  his  charge." 

As  it  is  in  temporals,  so  is  it  in  grace.  When  Ood  gives  a  man  a  few 
people  to  look  after,  he  gives  him  grace  enough ;  and  when  he  gives  him 
ten  times  that  number,  he  gives  him  more  of  his  Holy  Spirit;  and  when 
he  gives  him  a  hundred  times  that  number,  he  increases  the  divine 
anointing.  If  the  Lord  sends  you  a  little  trial,  dear  brother,  you  shall 
have  grace  enough,  and  if  he  sends  you  a  huge  trial  you  shall  still  have 
grace  enough.  If  he  gives  you  some  little  work  to  do  in  the  back 
settlements,  your  strength  shall  be  as  your  day,  and  if  he  allots  yon  a 
great  charge  in  the  front  of  the  enemy's  fire  you  shall  not  come  short 
*'  Every  man  according  to  his  charge."  You  will  not  have  a  farthing's 
worth  of  grace  over.  You  shall  never  have  so  much  that  you  can  boast 
about  it,  and  talk  of  having  lived  for  months  without  sinning,  and  the 
like  kind  of  nonsense.  You  shall  be  forced  to  feel  that,  when  yon  have 
done  all,  you  are  an  unprofitable  servant.  Never  in  my  life  have  I  had 
in  t<he  morning,  left  from  yesterday's  manna,  as  much  as  would  cover  a 
threepennv-piece.  I  have  always  been  so  hungry  that  I  have  had  to 
devour  all  I  could  get  there  and  then.  I  have  lived  from  hand  to 
mouth ;  the  hand  has  been  that  of  my  liord,  which  is  ever  full,  and  the 
mouth  has  been  mine,  and  it  has  been  always  gaping  for  more.  When 
in  my  ministry  I  have  had  a  double  quantity  of  food,  I  have  had  a 
double  number  to  feed  upon  it.    The  liord's  grace  has  been  sufficient  for 

a  necessities,  but  it  has  never  left  me  room  for  glorying  in  self.  Still, 
e  it  as  a  sure  fact  that  a  great  charge  is  a  guarantee  of  a  great  supply. 
Now  we  will  turn  the  truth  over,  and  say  that  a  great  supply  indkaies 
a  great  charge.  0  that  some  would  think  of  this !  A  man  has  grown 
richer  than  he  used  to  be.  Brother,  with  more  barley  and  more  straw 
you  ought  to  keep  more  dromedaries ;  I  mean,  that  God  did  not  send 
that  corn  for  the  mice  to  destroy,  but  he  means  it  to  be  eaten.    When 


THE  DROMEDAltlES.  G47 

God  gives  men  money  or  means  of  any  sort,  they  ought  to  feel  that 
they  are  his  stewards,  and  must  use  all  they  have  for  their  Master. 
If  you  do  not  use  it,  but  hoard  it,  it  will  happen  to  you  as  once  befell  a 
little  brook.  It  had  always  been  running,  rippling  along,  rolling  its 
gladsome  stream  down  to  the  river,  and  thus  ever  emptying  itself,  but 
remaining  ever  full.  This  little  brook  became  greedy,  and  said,  "  I  have 
been  too  extravagant.  I  have  made  no  provision  for  the  hot  summer 
weather.  I  always  give  all  I  get ;  it  keeps  running  through  me  in  one 
pci*petual  stream,  and  none  of  it  stays,  xhis  must  be  altered.  I  will 
make  a  great  store,  and  become  full."  So  there  came  a  bank  across  it: 
it  ^vas  dammed  up,  and  the  waters  kept  on  swelling  and  rising.  After  a 
little  time  the  water  turned  green  and  foul.  It  became  encumbered 
with  all  sorts  of  weeds,  was  the  haunt  of  all  manner  of  creeping  things, 
and  gave  forth  an  offensive  smell.  It  became  a  very  great  nuisance  to 
the  villagers,  and  they  called  in  the  sanitary  commissioners  to  get  rid 
of  it,  for  it  was  breeding  fever.  How  now,  thou  once  sparkling  brook  I 
What  an  end  has  come  to  thy  bright  and  cheerful  life.  Do  you  see  the 
drift  of  the  parable  ?  Recollect  that  in  Palestine  there  is  one  sea  which 
always  receives  and  never  gives  out.  "What  is  its  name  ?  The  Dead  Sea. 
It  must  always  be  the  Dead  Sea  while  this  is  its  character.  If  they 
were  to  cut  a  channel  into  the  great  ocean,  to  let  its  waters  run  away,  it 
might  grow  sweet,  but  otherwise  it  never  can  do  so.  The  man  who  much 
receives  but  nothing  gives  is  dead  while  he  lives.  He  who  has  great 
receipts  should  reckon  that  he  has  a  great  charge,  and  act  accordingly. 
When  a  brother  has  great  talents,  great  possessions,  great  influence — 
when  he  is  great  at  anything — by  God's  grace  let  him  say,  "  God  re- 
quireth  gi-eat  tilings  of  me ;  for  to  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  shall 
much  be  required."  It  is  a  law  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ-— a  law  which 
he  will  take  care  is  always  carried  out. 

So  I  finish  up  with  this :  somebody  will  say,  "  I  could  almost  wish 
that  I  could  escape  from  the  responsibility  of  being  a  servant  of  Christ." 
Dear  brother,  take  note  of  these  two  or  three  facts. 

Ton  cannot  better  your  circumstances  as  a  servant  of  Christ  by  di- 
minishing your  char^.  If  you  say,  "  I  shall  not  attempt  quite  so 
much,"  you  will  not  improve  your  circumstances  by  that  course ;  for  if 
you  diminish  work,  the  Lord  will  diminish  the  strength.  Our  great 
Solomon  will  stop  some  of  the  supplies  if  you  have  fewer  dromedaries 
to  feed,  and  so  you  will  be  no  better  off.  If  you  have  to  keep  six  he 
will  give  you  provision  for  six ;  if  you  take  to  keeping  three  he  will  only 
give  you  supplies  for  three,  and  you  will  be  poorer  rather  than  richer. 

Neither  can  you  improve  your  circumstances  by  entirely  and  only, 
increasing  the  supply ;  for,  if  you  receive  more  straw  and  barley,  cer- 
tainly our  Solomon  will  send  you  more  dromedaries.  When  you  have 
more  strcngth  you  will  have  more  trials.  When  God's  children  do  not 
disclinrge  their  service  with  the  means  which  he  entrusts  to  them,  he 
frequently  lets  them  take  shares  in  a  "limited  liability  company,"  which 
is  the  same  thing  as  throwing  your  money  into  the  river;  or  he  leaves 
them  to  become  shareholders  in  a  breaking  bank,  with  unlimited 
catastrophe  as  its  capital,  and  this  is  more  terrible  still.  It  often  hap- 
pens to  a  man  who  has  scraped  and  saved,  and  stinted  the  cause  of 
Christ,  that  in  his  later  years  he  is  in  straits,  and  he  cries  to  himself. 


648  METBOPOLITAN  TABERKAOLE  PULPIT. 

"  It  is  all  gone,  and  I  wish  I  had  used  it  better  before  it  went.  It 
would  have  been  far  better  to  give  it  to  the  Lord  than  to  see  the  lawyers 
devour  it."  Ah,  your  sin  has  found  you  out.  Your  Master  could  not 
trust  you,  and  so  he  has  taken  away  his  goods  from  you,  and  now  jon 
wish  that  you  had  behaved  yourself.  Let  us  take  warning  from  such 
bad  managers;  and  let  us  see  that,  as  our  charge  is  so  we  cry  for  sap- 
plies,  and  that  as  the  supplies  come  we  use  them  wisely. 

Everything  for  Jesus,  the  glorious  Solomon  of  our  hearts,  the  Beloved 
of  our  souls !  Life  for  Jesus  !  Death  for  Jesus !  Time  for  Jesns ! 
Eternity  for  Jesus !  Hand  and  heart  for  Jesus !  Brain  and  tongue  fi»r 
Jesus!  Night  and  day  for  Jesus!  Sickness  or  health  for  Jesus! 
Honour  or  dishonour  for  Jesus !  Shame  or  glory  for  Jesus !  Everything 
for  Jesus,  "  every  man  according  to  his  charge."    So  may  it  be !    Amen. 

Portion  of  Soriptitre  bead  before  Sbrmoit — Psabn  ku. 


Hymnb  frok  "Our  Owk  Hymn  Book"— 686,  681,  745. 

TO  MY  CHURCH,  CONGREGATION,  AND  SERMON  READERS. 

DsAB  FsiBNDS, — ^Doring  my  absence  you  expect  to  hear  from  me  by  means 
of  a  little  note  at  the  end  of  the  weekly  sermon.  The  kindly  interest  which 
suggests  this  expectation  is  very  precious  to  me,  and  therefore  I  will  not  dis- 
appoint it.  I  would  run  the  risk  of  being  egotistical  rather  than  treat  Christian 
affection  with  coolness.  There  is  none  too  much  of  it  in  the  world,  and  where 
it  survives  it  deserres  to  be  cultivated.  More  than  most  men  I  am  favoured 
with  brotherly  love,  and  I  am  most  grateful  for  it. 

I  have  commenced  a  short  period  of  rest  in  this  delightful  region.  Taking 
the  advice  of  physicians,  I  leu  before  rheumatic  affections  had  prostrated  me, 
and  I  am  in  hope  that  I  shall  in  this  genial  climate  escape  my  usual  attack, 
and  gather  strength,  and  then  return  in  the  middle  of  January  fortified  to 
endure  the  rest  of  the  winter.  On  former  occasions  ihe  major  part  of  mj 
vacation  has  been  spent  in  slowly  recoveriiuf  from  weakness  of  body  and  de- 
pression of  spirit,  but  this  time  I  trust  it  wm  be  used  in  gathering  thoughts 
and  storing  rorce  for  future  use.  Pray  for  me  that  it  may  be  so,  for  I  would 
frdn  carry  on  the  work  of  the  Lord  without  the  serious  hindrances  caused  by 
the  sicknesses  of  former  years. 

Dear  friends  at  home,  I  entreat  you  suffer  nothing  to  decline.  Cheer  by 
your  presence  those  who  preach  for  me.  Keep  up  uie  prayer-meetings  and 
the  week-night  services,  and  sustain  the  offering  tor  the  College,  which  ia  at 
present  somewhat  behind.  It  will  need  more  than  £40  each  week  to  make  up 
the  £1,879. 

The  weekly  sermon  is  always  carefully  prepared  by  me,  and  it  will  not  be 
less  interestaug  because  it  does  not  happen  to  have  been  preached  last  Simday. 
The  discourse  will  be  as  new  to  most  of  my  readers  as  if  it  were  delivered 
yesterday,  since  they  have  never  seen  or  heard  it  before.  I  hope  to  write  a 
few  sennonettes  under  the  olive  trees,  and  I  will  do  my  very  best  to  make 
f  hem  interesting.  I  pray  my  readers,  therefore,  not  to  imagine  that  my  absence 
from  London  will  make  any  difference  to  the  weekly  publication  of  these  scr^ 
mens.  I  hope  that  a  littie  thoughtful  repose  will  enable  me  to  preach  better 
when  I  return,  but  otherwise  my  teooporary  absence  from  England  will  not 
affect  the  regular  weekly  issue  of  the  Tabernacle  Pulpit. 

A  month  or  so  a^o  the  sermon  entiUed  ^^  Among  the  Lions*^  excited  unusual 
interest  I  hope  that  the  present  sermon,  entitled  "  Thb  DsoMBDAsna,**  will 
be  found  equally  useful,  though  it  is  not  a  solace  for  the  slandered,  but  a 
stimulus  for  the  active.  With  fervent  Christian  affection, 

Mentone,  Hotel  de  la  Faix,  Yours  most  heartily, 

November  14, 1879.  C.  H.  STURGEON. 


^jti[flpltla«  ii;ali«nradc  iulpt. 


PRAYER    TO    GOD    IN    TROUBLE    AN 
ACCEPTABLE    SACRIFICE. 


%  I 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  MoRirasrG,  November  9th,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  metropolitan  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"And  call  npon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble ;  I  will  deliver  thee*  and  thou  ahalt 
glorify  me." — Psalm  L  15. 

The  Lord  God  in  this  Psalm  is  described  as  having  a  controversy  with 
his  people.  He  summons  heaven  and  earth  to  hear  him  while  he  ntters  his 
reproof.  This  indictment  will  show  us  what  it  is  that  the  Lord  sets  the 
greatest  store  by,  for  his  complaint  will  evidently  touch  upon  that  point. 
We  are  informed  most  plainly  that  the  Lord  had  no  controversy  with 
his  people  concerning  the  externals  of  his  worship ;  he  does  not  reprove 
them  for  their  sacrifices  and  burnt  offerings ;  he  even  speaks  depreciatingly 
of  these  symbolical  sacrifices,  and  s^s — **  I  will  take  no  buUock  out  of 
thy  house,  nor  he  goats  out  of  thy  folds."  His  complaint  was  not  con* 
ceming  visible  ceremony  and  outward  ritual ;  and  this  shows  that  he 
does  not  attach  so  much  importance  to  outward  things  as  most  men 
suppose  him  to  do.  His  complaint  was  concerning  inner  worship,  soul 
worship,  q>iritual  worship :  his  reproof  was  that  his  people  did  not  offer 
thanksgiving  and  prayer,  and  that  their  conduct  was  so  inconsistent 
with  their  professions  that  clearly  their  hearts  went  not  with  their 
outward  formalities.  This  was  the  essence  of  the  charge  against  them. 
They  were  &ulty,  not  in  visible  religiousness,  but  in  the  intern^  and 
vital  part  of  godliness :  they  had  no  true  intercourse  with  God  though 
they  kept  up  the  appearance  of  it.  We  see  then  that  heart  worship 
is  the  most  most  precious  thing  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  We  learn 
what  is  that  priceless  jewel,  whidi  must  be  set  in  the  gold  ring  of  reli- 
gion if  the  Lord  is  to  accept  it. 

Nor  is  it  hard  to  see  why  it  is  so ;  for  it  is  plain  that  if  a  man  had  kept 
the  ritual  of  the  old  law  to  the  very  full  yet  he  might  not  be  in  sincerity 
a  worshipper  of  God  at  all.  He  might  drive  whole  flocks  of  his  sheep  to 
the  temple  door  for  sacrifice,  and  yet  he  might  feel  no  spiritual  reverence 
for  the  Most  High ;  for  it  has  been  proved  times  without  number  that  the 
most  careful  and  zealous  attention  to  external  ceremonies  is  quite  con- 
mstent  with  the  absolute  absence  of  any  true  apprehension  of  God  and 
No.  1,605. 


650  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

hearty  lore  for  him.  Httbil  may  keep  a  maa  outwardly  reHgions  lomtr 
after  his  mind  has  fbrgotten  the  Loni ;  yea,  the  consdons  lack  of  in- 
ward and  vital  grace  may  drive  a  man  to  a  more  intense  zeal  in  formali- 
ties in  order  to  conceal  his  defect.  It  is  written,  "  Israel  hath  forsaken 
his  M^er,  and  biiildeth  templea."  Yon  would  think  if  he  buUt  temples 
he  must  recognise  his  God,  but  it  was  not  so ;  within  those  buildings  he 
hid  himself  from  him  who  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands. 
Beneath  the  folds  of  vestments  men  smother  up  their  hearts,  so  that 
they  come  not  to  God ;  fine  music  drowns  the  cry  of  the  contrite  soul : 
and  the  smoke  of  incense  becomes  a  cloud  which  conceals  the  &ce  of 
the  Most  High. 

Great  sacrifices  might  often  be  an  offering  made  to  a  rich  man's 
personal  pride.  No  doubt  certain  kings  that  gave  great  oontcibutions 
to  the  house  of  God  did  it  to  show  their  wealth,  or  to  display  their 
generosity,  somewhat  in  the  spirit  of  Jehu,  who  said  to  Jehonadab,  the 
son  of  Eechab,  "  Come  with  me,  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord."  A 
great  sacrifice  might  be  nothing  more  than  a  bid  for  popularity,  and  so 
an  offering  to  selfishness  and  vanity.  With  such  sacrifices  God  would 
not  be  well  pleased.  Alas !  how  easy  it  is  to  defile  the  worship  of  God 
and  nullify  its  quality,  till  like  milk  which  is  soured  it  may  be  utterly 
rejected.  I  am  sure  you  know  right  well  that  it  may  be  so  in  the  sim- 
plest form  of  public  worship,  such  as  our  own.  Bare  as  is  our  mode  of 
s^vice  there  is  room  for  self.  Singers  may  lift  up  their  sweet  voices 
that  others  may  hear  how  charmingly  they  sing ;  ministers  may  preach 
with  graceful  eloquence  that  they  may  oe  admired  as  men  who  are 
models  of  exquisite  speech;  believers  may  even  pray  devoutly,  that  theii* 
fellow  Christians  may  see  how  gracious  they  are.  Alas !  this  blight  of  self 
may  come  into  any  and  every  part  of  outward  service,  and  turn  the  worship 
of  God  into  an  occasioEi  for  self-glorification.  Thus  does  Belrikaezar  driuk 
out  of  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,  while  the  buyers  and  sellem  torn  the 
temple  into  a  den  of  thieves.  Wonder  not».therefore,  that  God  looks  with 
but  scant  compdaecncy — I  was  about  to  say  with  bare  tolerance — upon 
the  abundance  of  outward  wonhip,  because  he  sees  how  easy  it  is  for  it  not 
to  be  his  worship  at  all,  but  a  mere  exhibition  of  man's  carnal  glorying. 

Many,  too,  have  performed  outward  worship  with  a  view  to  meht 
somewhat  of  the  Lord :  they  hove  supposed  that  God  would  be  their 
debtor  if  they  were  zealous- in  furnishing  liia  altars  and  frequenting  bis 
courts.  If  they  have  not  put  it  in  that  coarse  form  it  has  certainly 
come  to  that,  that  they  hoped  to  be  held  worthy  of  particalar  regard  if 
they  were  zealous  above  others.  Some  have  superstitioasly  droamed 
of  obtaining  prosperity  in  this  world  by  observing  holy  days  and  seasons, 
uid  many  more  have  hoped  to  have  it  set  to  their  account  at  the  last 
great  day  that  they  have  heaped  up  the  offertory,  or  given  a  painted 
window,  or  built  an  almshouse,  or  attended  daily  service  year  by  year. 
Now,  what  is  tins  but  an  offering  to  selfishness  ?  The  man  performs  piou^ 
and  charitable  deeds  for  his  own  good,  and  this  motive  flavours  the  whole 
of  his  life,  so  that  the  taint  of  self  is  in  every  particle  of  it.  The  Jew 
might  offer  bullocks  or  sheep  for  his  own  salvation,  and  what  would  this 
be  but  the  manifest  worship  of  self  ?  It  brought  no  glory  to  God,  aud 
did  not  mean  his  praise.  Wonder  not,  therefore,  if  the  Lord  speaks  thus 
slightingly  of  it  all. 


PBAYEB  TO  GOD  IN  TBOUBLB  AK  AOOEFTABLE  SACRIFICE.   651 

What  the  Lord  missed  in  his  people  was  not  temple  rites  and  offerings, 
for  in  these  they  aboanded,  but  he  missed  the  miit  of  the  h'ps  giving 
glory  to  his  name.  He  missed  first  their  thankfohiesSy  for  he  says  unto 
them, ''  Offer  unto  God  thanksgiving ;  and  pay  thy  tows  unto  the  Most 
High;*'  and  next  he  missed  in  them  that  holy,  trustful  confidence 
which  would  lead  them  to  resort  to  him  in  the  hour  of  their  need :  hence 
he  says,  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble ;  I  will  deliver  thee,  and 
thou  shalt  glorify  me."  Brethren  and  sisters,  have  you  &iled  in  these 
two  precious  things  ?  Do  you  fi^il  in  thanldulness  ?  The  Lord  mul- 
tiplies his  favours  to  many  of  us,  do  we  multiply  our  thanks?  The  earth 
gives  back  a  floweret  for  every  dew-drop :  are  we  alike  responsive  to 
plenteous  mercy  ?  Do  the  bounties  of  his  providence  and  the  favours  of 
his  grace  teach  us  how  to  sing  psalms  unto  the  Ever-merciful  ?  Do  we 
not  too  often  permit  divine  mercies  to  come  and  go  in  silence  as  if  they 
were  not  worthy  of  a  thankful  word  ?  Have  we  a  time  and  season  for 
God's  praise  ?  Is  it  not  too  often  huddled  into  a  oomer  ?  We  have  a 
closet  for  our  prayers,  but  no  chamber  for  our  praises.  Do  we  make  it  a 
point  in  life  that  whatever  is  neglected  the  praises  of  Gk)d  shall  have  full 
expression?  Do  vou,  my  brethren,  in  everything  give  thanks?  Do 
you  carry  out  to  me  full  this  sentence  :  ''  From  the  rising  of  the  sun  to 
the  going  down  of  the  same  the  Lord's  name  is  to  be  praised"  ? 

May  I  also  venture  to  ask  whether  you  pay  your  vows  to  him  ?  In 
times  of  sickness  and  sorrow  you  say,  ^'  Gracious  Lord,  if  I  am  re- 
covered, or  if  I  am  brought  out  or  this  condition,  I  will  be  more 
believing,  I  will  be  more  consecrated.  I  will  devote  myself  alone  to 
thee,  0  my  Saviour,  if  thou  wilt  now  restore  me."  Are  you  mindful  of 
these  vows  ?  It  is  a  delicate  question,  but  I  put  it  pointedly,  because  a 
vow  unredeemed  is  a  wound  in  the  heart,  if  yon  have  failed  in  your 
grateful  acknowledgments,  remember  that  these  are  the  things  which 
God  looks  for  more  than  for  any  ceremonial  observance  or  religious 
service.  He  would  have  you  bring  your  daily  thankfulness  and  your 
faithful  vows  unto  him,  for  he  is  worthy  to  ud  praised,  and  it  is  meet 
that  unto  him  should  the  vow  be  performed. 

It  is  not  to  thankfulness,  however,  that  I  am  going  to  ask  attention 
this  morning,  so  much  as  to  the  other  sacrifice — namely,  prayer  in  the 
day  of  trouble.  Let  me  say  at  the  outset  that  I  am  struck  with  wonder 
that  God  should  regard  it  as  being  one  of  the  most  acceptable  forms  of 
worship,  that  we  should  call  upon  him  in  the  day  of  trouble.  Such 
prayers  seem  to  be  all  for  ourselves,  and  to  be  forced  from  us  by  our 
necessities,  and  yet  such  is  his  condescending  love  that  he  puts  them 
down  as  being  choice  sacrifices,  and  places  them  side  by  side  with 
the  thankful  paying  of  our  vows.  He  tells  us  that  our  call  for  his  help 
in  the  hour  of  distress  will  be  more  acceptable  to  him  than  the 
oblations  which  his  own  law  ordained,  more  pleasing  than  all  the 
bullocks  and  rams  which  liberal  princes  could  present  at  his  altars.  Be 
not  backward  then,  beloved,  to  cry  to  him  in  your  hour  of  need.  If  it 
pleases  him  and  profits  you,  you  ought  not  to  want  a  single  word  from  me 
to  excite  you  to  do  what  seems  so  natural,  so  comforting,  so  beneficial. 
Are  our  cry  of  anguish  and  our  appeal  of  hope  acceptable  to  God  ?  Then 
let  us  cry  mightily  unto  him.  A^  any  of  you  in  the  black  waters  ?  Call 
upon  him.    Are  you  in  the  hungry  desert  ?    Call  upon  him.    Are  you 


e^2  XETBOPOUEAK  TABESKACLB  PULPIT. 

HL  the  lions'  dens,  and  among  the  monntains  of  the  leopards  ?  Call  apon 
him.  Whether  yon  are  in  peril  as  to  your  Bonis  or  your  bodies,  do  not 
hesitate  to  pray  at  once,  but  say  to  yourself,  "  Wiiy  should  I  linger  ? 
Let  me  tell  the  Lord  my  grief  right  speedily ;  for  if  he  counts  my  call  a 
worthy  sacrifice  assuredly  I  will  present  it  with  my  whole  heart." 

Let  us  look  to  this  matter  and  see  the  value  of  this  form  of  adoration. 
Our  first  head  shall  be,  that  Calling  upon  Ood  in  the  day  of  trouhh  brings 
honour  to  Ood  in  the  very  act;  secondly,  it  brings  honour  to  God  in  iU 
anewer,  for  there  is  coupled  with  such  a  prayer  the  blessed  assunmoe,  ^*  I 
will  deliver  thee";  ana  thirdly,  it  brings  honour  to  God  in  our  afUr 
conduct,  for  it  is  written,  ''Thou  shalt  glorify  me." 

I.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Comforter  enable  us  to  see  that  cali^ikg 
UPON  God  in  tub  day  of  tboublb  brinos  glory  to  hik  in 
ITSELF.  I  beg  you  to  notice  the  time  that  is  specially  mentioned. 
Calling  upon  God  at  any  time  houonrs  Urn,  but  calling  upon  him  in  the 
day  of  trouble  has  a  special  mark  set  against  it  as  peculiarly  pleasing  to 
the  Lord  becaose  it  yields  peculiar  glory  to  his  name. 

Note  then,  first,  that  when  a  man  caUs  upon  God  sincerely  in  the  day 
of  trouble  it  is  a  truthful  recognition  of  God.  Outward  devotions  suppose 
a*  God,  but  prayer  in  the  day  of  trouble  proves  that  God  is  a  fact  to  the 
suppliant.  The  tried  pleader  has  no  douht  that  there  is  a  God,  for  he  i? 
caUing  upon  him  when  mere  form  can  yield  no  comfort.  He  wants  prac- 
tical matter-of-&ot  help,  and  he  so  realises  God  that  he  treats  him  as  real^ 
and  appeals  to  him  to  be  his  Helper.  God  is  not  a  mere  name  or  a 
superstition  to  him ;  he  is  sure  that  there  is  a  €k)d,  for  he  is  calling  upon 
him  in  an  hour  when  a  farce  would  be  a  tragedy,  and  an  impostunf 
would  be  a  bitter  mookeiy.  The  afflicted  suppliant  perceives  that  God  is 
near  him,  for  he  wonld  not  call  upon  one  who  was  not  within  hearing. 
He  has  a  perception  of  God's  omnipotence  by  which  he  can  help,  and  of 
God's  goodness  which  will  lead  him  to  help.  You  can  see  that  he 
believes  in  God's  hearing  prayer,  for  a  man  does  not  call  upon  one  whom 
he  judges  to  be  a  deaf  deity,  or  upon  one  whose  palsied  hand  is  never 
out-stretched  to  help.  The  man  who  calls  upon  God  in  the  day  of 
trouble,  evidently  possesses  a  real  and  sinoere  beUef  in  the  existence  of 
God,  in  his  personality,  in  his  power,  m  his  condescension,  and  in  hi;^ 
continual  active  interposition  in  the  stairs  of  men ;  otherwise  he  would 
not  call  upon  him.  Many  of  your  beliefe  in  God  are  a  sort  of  religious 
parade,  and  not  the  actual  walk  of  faith.  Many  have  a  holiday  iaith 
which  enables  them  tx)  repeat  the  creed,  and  say  with  the  congregation, 
"  I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty";  but  in  very  deed  they  have  no 
such  belief.  Do  you,  my  hearer,  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almight}' 
when  you  are  in  trouble  ?  Do  you  go  to  the  great  Father  at  such  times  and 
expect  help  from  him  ?  This  is  real  wori^  and  not  hypocritical  play. 
There  is  solid  metal  about  the  faith  which  follows  the  Lord  in  the  dark, 
cries  to  him  when  the  rod  is  in  his  hand,  and  looks  to  him  not  for  senti- 
mental comforts  in  prosperity,  but  for  substantial  help  in  bitter  advjBr- 
sities.  What  we  want  is  facts,  and  trial  is  the  test  of  fact.  Sharp  fur- 
nace work  does  away  witli  mere  pretence,  and  this  is  one  of  its  great  uses, 
for  that  grace  which,  like  the  salamander,  lives  in  the  fire  is  ^raco  indeed. 

I  say,  again,  that  vary  many  publicly  declared  crecd*faitlis  are  men^ 
shams,  which  like  the  leaves  of  autumn's  trees  would  wither  aud  fall  if  one 


PRAYER  TO  QOD  IN  TROUBLE  AN  ACC£FXABLE  SACRIFICE.       G53 

sharp  ivinter*B  irost  should  pass  over  them.  It  is  not  so  when  a  man 
in  the  dire  hour  of  his  distress  casts  himself  upon  God,  and  belieTes  that 
he  is  able  to  succour  and  to  help  him.  Then  there  is  eyidcnee  of  true 
reliance  and  real  confidence  in  a  real  God^  whom  the  mind's  eye  sees  and 
rejoices  in.  It  is  this  actuality,  this  making  God  real  to  the  soul,  which 
makes  our  calling  upon  God  in  the  day  of  trouble  so  acceptable  to  him. 

There  is  more  here,  however,  than  this  first  good  thing.  When  a  man 
calleth  upon  God  in  the  day  of  trouble  it  is  because  he  seeks  and  in  some 
measure  enjoys  a  sph^iual  inter  course  with  God,  **  Call  upon  me  in  the 
day  of  trouble."  That  call  is  heart  language  addressed  to  God ;  it  is  the 
soul  really  speaking  to  the  great  Father  beyond  all  question.  How  easy 
it  is  to  say  a  prayer  without  coming  into  any  contact  with  God !  Year 
afiier  year  the  tongue  repeats  pious  language,  just  as  a  barrel-organ 
grinds  out  the  old  tunes,  and  there  may  be  no  more  converse  with  the 
Lord  than  if  the  man  had  muttered  to  the  ghosts  of  the  slain.  Many 
prayei'B  might  as  well  be  said  backwards  as  forwards,  for  there  would  be 
as  much  in  them  one  way  as  the  other.  The  ahraeadabra  of  the  magician 
has  quite  as  much  virtue  in  it  as  my  other  set  of  mere  words.  The  Lord's 
Prayer,  if  it  be  merely  rehearsed  as  a  form,  may  be  a  solemn  mockery. 
But  prayer  in  the  day  of  trouble  is  honest  speech  with  God,  or  at  least  a 
sincere  desire  in  that  direction.  Many  are  the  words  which  pass  between 
the  Lord  and  the  afflicted  satnt.  He  criel^,  "  Make  haste  to  help  me, 
0  Lord,  my  salvation.  Be  pleased,  0  Lord,  to  deliver  me.  Hide  not  thy 
^jLce  from  me,  for  I  am  in  trouble.  Hear  my  cry,  0  God,  attend  anto 
my  prayer ! "  With  multiplied  entreaties  does  the  heart  thus  hold  con- 
verse with  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  taketh  pleasoxe  in  it.  He  loves  to 
have  his  people  draw  near  to  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  because 
calling  upon  him  in  the  day  of  trouble  is  an  undoubted  form  of  fellow- 
ship, therefore  he  regards  it  with  complacency. 

Now,  as  I  have  already  said,  in  the  sacrifice  of  bnllocks  there  was  no 
intercourse  with  God  in  the  case  of  a  great  many,  and  in  external  devo- 
tion, whether  it  is  performed  in  a  cathedral  or  in  a  humble  bam,  there 
is  frequently  no  coming  near  to  God ;  but  when  we  believingly  call  upon 
God  in  the  day  of  trouble  then  there  is  no  mistake  in  the  matter,  we  are 
holding  converse  with  God, — "  the  righteous  cry,  and  the  Lord  heareth." 
Intercourse  with  the  unseen,  spiritual  Father  is  genuine  indeed  when  it 
is  carried  on  against  wind  and  tide,  under  pressure  of  sorrow  and  weight 
of  distress :  the  Lord  give  us  to  carry  it  on  whatever  may  hi^pen  to  us. 

Yet  is  there  more  than  this,  for  the  soul  -not  <mly  comes  into  God's 
presence,  but  in  calling  upon  God  in  the  day  of  trouble  it  m  filled  tinth 
a  manifest  hope  in  God.  It  hopes  in  God  tor  his  goodness,  for  it  is  a 
belief  in  that  goodness  which  is  the  reason  why  it  feels  able  to  pray  at 
all.  The  soul  hopes  in  his  mercy,  or  it  would  dwell  in  silence  and  never 
lift  up  another  cry  to  heaven.  Amid  a  sense  of  deserved  wrath  the  heart 
has  a  trust  in  infinite  grace,  and  hence  its  call. 

A  soul  calling  upon  God  honours  his  condescension.  The  troubled 
one  saith  within  himself,  **  I  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  his  mercies,  yet 
he  will  regard  me.  When  I  consider  the  heavens,  the  work  of  his 
fingers,  I  wonder  that  he  should  visit  man,  but  I  believe  that  he  will  do 
so,  and  that  he  will  condescend  to  look  upon  the  contrite  and  humble, 
and  will  deliver  them  out  of  their  distresses."    There  is  a  hope,  then,  in 


6S4  UETBOPOLITAK  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

such  a  prayer  which  honours  God's  goodness  and  coDdeecension,  and 
eqn ally  pays  tribute  to  his  faithfulness  and  his  all-snSiciency.  He  hu 
promised  to  help  those  that  call  upon  him,  therefore  do  we  call  upon  him ; 
and  he  has  all  power  to  keep  his  promise,  therefore  do  we  come  to  him, 
and  spread  our  case  before  him.  Little  as  the  act  of  calling  upon  God 
in  the  day  of  trouble  seems  to  be,  it  puts  crornis  upon  all  the  attributes 
of  God  in  proportion  to  the  spiritual  knowledge  of  the  suppliant.  I 
venture  to  say  that  if  the  greatest  king  of  Israel  had  presented  before 
God,  on  some  solemn  day,  ten  thousand  of  the  fat  of  fed  beasts,  and 
poured  out  rivers  of  oil,  it  might  be  highly  possible  that  God  would  not 
be  so  well  pleased  with  all  that  royal  zeal  as  with  the  cry  of  a  poor, 
humble  woman  whose  husband  was  dead,  and  whose  two  sons  were  about 
to  be  taken  for  bondmen,  who  had  nought  in  the  house  save  a  little  oil, 
and  then  in  her  extremity  cried,  "  0  God,  the  Father  of  the  fatherless, 
and  the  Judge  of  the  widow,  out  of  the  depths  deliver  me."  There 
may  be  more  honouring  of  the  Lord  in  a  ploughboy's  tear  than  in  a 
princely  endowment ;  more  homage  to  the  Lord  in  the  humble  hope  of  a 
dying  pauper  than  in  the  pealing  anthems  of  the  cathedral,  or  the  great 
shout  of  our  own  mi^ty  congregation.  The  publican's  confession,  and 
his  hope  in  the  mercy  of  God,  had  more  worship  in  it  than  the  blast  ot 
the  silver  trumpets,  and  the  ringing  out  of  the  golden  harps,  and  the 
songs  of  the  wliite-robed  choriBters,  who  stood  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's 
house,  and  icd  the  Eir-sonndiag  hallelujahs  of  Israel. 

This  calling  upon  God  in  the  day  of  trouble,  again,  pleases  the  Lord 
becanso  it  exhibits  a  cUngwig  affection  to  him.    When  an  ui^odb  nun 

{trofesses  religion,  as  snch  men  often  do,  he  is  all  very  well  with  God  as 
ong  as  God  pleases  him.  Sunshiny  weather  makes  such  a  man  bless 
the  sun :  if  God  smiles  upon  him  he  says  that  God  is  good.  Ay,  hot 
a  true  cliild  of  God  loves  a  chastening  God.  He  does  not  turn  his 
back  whcu  the  Lord  seems  augry  with  him;  hut  then  it  is  he  fiiUs 
prostrate  in  humble  supplication,  and  cries,  "  Show  me  wherefore  thou 
contendest  with  me:  1  will  not  believe  thee  to  have  any  real  spite 
against  me ;  if  thon  smite  me  there  must  be  some  wise  and  good  cause 
for  it :  therefore  show  me,  I  beseech  thee."  It  is,  very  sweet,  brethren, 
when  God  sends  you  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  love  him  all  the  more  for 
it.  This  is  a  sure  way  of  proving  that  ours  is  not  a  hireling  love,  which 
abides  while  it  gets  its  price,  and  goes  when  w^s  fait.  God  forbid  that 
we  should  have  Balaam's  love  of  reward,  and  Judas's  treacherous  greed. 
A  dog  will  follow  a  man  as  long  as  he  throws  him  a  hone,  hut  that  is  a 
man's  own  dog  which  will  follow  him  when  he  strikes  him  with  the  whip, 
and  will  even  fiiwn  upon  him  when  he  speaks  roughly  to  him.  Such 
Christians  ought  we  to  be  who  will  keep  close  to  God  when  he  is  robed 
in  thunder,  it  is  ours  to  will  that  God  shall  do  what  he  wills,  and 
ours  to  call  upon  him  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  not  to  call  out  against 
him  when  times  are  hard.  I  would  trust  my  God  as  unreservedly  as 
Alexander  trusted  his  friend,  who  was  also  his  physician.  The  physician 
had  mixed  a  medicine  for  Alexander,  who  was  sick,  and  the  potion  stood 
by  Alexander's  bed  for  him  to  drink.  Jnst  before  he  drank,  a  letter 
was  delivered  to  him  in  which  he  was  warned  that  his  physician  had 
been  bribed  to  poison  him,  and  had  mingled  poison  with  the  medicine. 
Alexander  read  the  Ietter,and  summoned  the  physician  into  his 


PBAYEB  TO  GOD  IN  TROXTBLB  AN  ACCEPTABLE  SACRIFICE.      655 

and  when  he  came  in  Alexander  at  once  drank  np  the  cup  of  medicine, 
and  then  handed  his  friend  the  letter.  What  grand  confidence  was  this ! 
To  risk  his  life  npon  his  friend's  fidelity  I  Sach  a  man  might  well  have 
firiends.  He  wonld  not  let  the  accused  know  of  the  libel  till  he  had 
proved  beyond  all  dispute  that  he  did  not  believe  a  word  of  it. 

Is  not  our  heavenly  Father  in  Christ  Jesus  worthy  of  even  a  grander 
feith  ?  Shall  I  ever  mistrust  him  ?  The  devil  tells  me,  my  Lord,  that 
this  afi9iction  which  I  am  sufiering  will  work  me  ill.  I  do  not  believe  it. 
Not  for  a  moment  do  I  believe  it,  and  to  prove  that  I  have  no  suspicion, 
I  accept  it  joyfully  at  thy  hands.  I  joy  and  rejoice  in  it,  because  thou 
hast  ordained  it,  and  I  call  upon  thee  to  make  it  work  my  lasting  good. 
I  will  take  bitter  at  thy  hand  as  well  as  sweet,  and  the  gall  shall  be  honey 
to  me.  If  we  act  thus  we  shall  be  imitating  the  patience  of  Job.  When 
his  wife  bade  him  curse  Ood  and  die,  what  said  he  ?  ''Thou  speakest  as 
one  of  the  foolish  women  speaketh.  What  I  shall  we  receive  good  at  the 
hand  of  Ood,  and  shall  wo  not  receive  evil?"  It  seems  to  me  we 
cannot  glorify  God  better  than  by  thus  calling  upon  him  in  the 
day  of  trouble,  and  thus  showing  that  we  do  not  believe  ill  of  him,  or 
snspect  him  either  of  error  or  unkindness.  We  go  further,  and  are 
assured  that  infallible  wisdom  and  infinite  love  are  at  the  bottom  of  every 
trial  which  afflicts  our  spirit :  thus  we  glorify  the  Lord. 

There  is  in  connection  with  this  clinging  affection  a  most  steadfast 
confidefice.  They  who  call  upon  God  in  the  day  of  trouble  become  quiet 
and  unshaken,  and  abide  in  full  assurance  as  to  the  Lord  on  whom  they 
rely.  O  troubled  one,  do  not  be  agitated,  do  not  run  away  to  others,  but 
call  upon  God  in  calm  faith.  Do  not  sit  down  in  silent  despair  and  fret- 
fulness,  but  call  npon  God  ;  do  not  be  soured  into  a  morose  state  of  mind, 
nor  go  into  the  sulks,  but  call  upon  the  Lord  as  one  who  cannot  be  driven 
to  curse  or  to  be  in  a  passion,  but  gives  himself  to  prayer.  It  is  a  blessed 
thing  when  we  can  say,  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him," 
and  can  feel  that  whatever  happens  to  us  we  never  will  start  aside  from 
our  firm  conviction  that  the  Lord  is  good,  and  his  mercy  endureth  for 
ever.  It  was  a  brave  speech  of  Zwingle  when  amid  furious  persecutions 
he  said  ''Had  I  not  perceived  that  the  Lord  was  preserving  the  vessel  I 
should  long  ago  have  abandoned  the  helm.  I  behold  him  through  the 
tempest  strengthening  the  cordage,  adjusting  the  yards,  spreading  the 
sails,  and  commanding  the  very  winds.  Should  I  not,  then,  be  a  coward, 
and  imworthy  the  name  of  a  man,  were  I  to  abandon  my  post  ?  I  commit 
myself  wholly  to  his  sovereign  goodness.  Let  him  govern;  let  him 
hasten  or  delay ;  let  him  plunge  us  into  the  bottom  of  the  abyss  :  we  will 
fear  nothing."  That  is  the  word  which  I  admire.  "  Let  him  plunge  us 
into  the  bottom  of  the  abyss :  we  will  fear  nothing."  This  is  the  bravery 
of  a  child  who  knows  no  dread  because  he  is  in  his  father's  hand,  and  his 
trust  in  his  father  cannot  admit  a  fear.  Calling  upon  God  enables  men 
to  face  trouble,  and  play  the  man,  since  they  doubt  not  of  a  blessed  out- 
come from  all  things,  however  contrary  they  may  seem  to  be.  Our 
business  is  to  be  as  confident  in  God  at  one  time  as  at  another,  since 
he  is  the  same  evermore,  and  mere  changes  in  circumstances  are  matters 
unworthy  to  be  taken  into  the  estimate.  What  are  circumstances  while 
Almighty  God  has  the  rule  of  them  ? 

In  fine,  this  it  is  which  God  accepts  as  honouring  him,  that  in  the  day 


656  METROPOLITAN  TABERKACLE  PULPXT. 

of  trouble  we  should  take  all  our  troubles  to  him,  pour  out  our  hearts 
before  him,  and  then  leave  the  whole  case  in  his  hands.  The  childlike 
uncovering  of  the  heart  to  God  alone  is  very  precious  to  him.  There  arc 
times  when  it  is  wise  to  advise  a  troubled  heart  to  be  quiet  before  msiL 

*^  fiear  and  forbear  and  silent  be, 
Tell  no  man  thj  misery." 

But  it  is  always  wise  to  bare  the  bosom  to  the  J^ord^s  eye.  Is  the  Blander 
too  vile  to  be  communicated  even  to  a  fdngle  fiiend  ?  Then  follow  the 
example  of  Hezekiah  and  spread  Eabshakeh's  letter  before  the  Lord.  Is 
the  tnal  too  severe,  inasmuch  as  others  are  obliged  to  suffer  with  you, 
and  are  therefore  turned  to  speak  bitterly  against  you?  Then  imitate 
David  at  Ziklag,  and  encourage  yourself  in  the  Lord  your  God.  Hide 
nothing.  Eeserve  nothing.  Tell  it  all,  and  then  trust  about  it  all.  When 
you  have  once  put  the  burden  before  the  Lord  leave  it  with  him.  Do  all 
that  lieth  in  you,  that  prudence  can  dictate,  or  common  fiense  suggest^  or 
industry  effsct,  but  still  make  the  Lord  yom*  mainstay,  your  buckler,  your 
shield,  your  fortress  and  high  tower.  Say  to  yourself  "  My  soul,  wait 
thou  only  upon  God,  for  my  expectation  is  from  him."  If  you  can  do 
this,  not  once  and  again,  but  throughout  your  whole  life,  you  will  glorify 
the  Lord  greatly,  and  in  your  holy  confidence  and  childlike  fiEtith  the  Loid 
will  take  as  much  delight  as  in  the  golden  harps  which  ring  out  his  perfect 
praises  before  his  eternal  throne.  If  we  could  reproduce  Job  and  Enoch 
in  one  person,  the  patient  saint  continually  walking  with  God,  we  should 
indeed  show  forth  the  glory  of  our  heavenly  Father.  And  why  not  ? 
Blessed  Spirit  of  God,  thou  canst  work  us  to  this  selfsame  thing ! 

A  critic  may  fineeringly  say,  '*  It  is  a  very  natural  thing  for  a  man  to 
cry  out  to  Goa  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  certainly  a  selfi;^  thing  to  run 
to  the  Lord  because  you  need  his  help."  "  Besides,"  says  another,  "  it 
must  be  a  very  distracted  prayer  that  such  a  person  offers,  and  faith 
under  troublous  circumstances  is  a  very  elementary  virtue."  But,  my 
good  sirs,  hearken.  Surely  the  Lord  knows  best  what  pleases  him,  and 
H  he  declares  his  delight  in  our  calhng  upon  him  in  the  day  of  trouble, 
why  should  we  dispute  with  him  ?  It  is  so,  for  he  has  said  it.  As  for 
us,  who  dare  not  raise  such  quibbles,  let  us  not  be  moved  by  them,  but 
continue  to  call  upon  him  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  we  shall  certainly 
glorify  his  name. 

II.    When  we  call  upon   God   in  the  day  of  trouble  rr  b&ikgs 
HONOUR  TO  God  through  the  answer  which  the  prayer  obtains.     **  I 
will  deliver  thee."     I  ask  you,  troubled  saints,  to  fi)Uow  me  while  I 
repeat  Mie  text  with  variations,  for  that  is  about  all  I  shall  attempt. 
"  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble  " — there  is  the  prayer  comi»^ded. 
"  I  will  deliver  thee  " — there  is  the  answer  promised.    In  these  \\^fi» 
we  have  a  practical  afiswer.    It  is  not  merely  "  I  will  think  about  thee, 
I  will  hear  thee,  I  will  propose  plans  for  thee,  and  somewhat  aid  thee  in 
working  them  out,"  but,  "  I  will  deliver  thee."    Thou  shalt  have  solid, 
substantial  aid.    Either  I  will  keep  thee  out  of  the  trouble  of  which  thou 
art  afraid ;  thou  shalt  be  delivered  by  never  having  to  endure  it :  the 
Egyptians  that  thou  seest  to*day  thou  shalt  see  uo  more  for  ever :  thou 
dreadest  the  stone  at  the  mouth  of  the  sepulchre,  but  thou  shalt  lit  id  it 
rolled  away.     Or  else,  if  thou  must  come  into  the  trouble,  I  will  deli\er 


I 


PRAYER  TQ  MP  IN  TROUBLB  AN  AOGEPTABLE  SACRIFICE.      G57 

thee  whilst  thou  art  in  it :  like  Noah,  thou  shalt  be  surrounded  by  the 
deluge,  but  the  floods  shall  not  overflow  thee ;  like  the  three  holy  children, 
thou  shalt  be  in  the  fdrnace,  but  the  Are  shall  not  kindle  upon  thee. 
Thou  shalt  go  through  the  trouble  triumphantly,  as  Israel  went  through 
the  Bed  Sea  on  foot.  Thou  shalt  have  such  sustaining  grace  that  thou 
shalt  glory  in  tribulation,  and  rejoice  in  affliction.  I  will  also  bring 
thee  out  of  it  altogether :  for  these  things  have  an  appointed  end.  Like 
Joseph,  thou  shalt  come  forth  out  o£  prison  to  sit  upon  the  throne ;  Uke 
David,  thou  shalt  leave  the  caves,  and- the  rocks  of  the  wild  goat^  and 
I  will  set  thy  ^t  in  a  large  room ;  like  Daniel,  thou  shalt  be  taken  from 
among  lions  and  set  among  princes.  The  promise  may  be  kept  in  several 
forms,. but  in  one  shape  or  another  it  must  be  carried  out;  for  he  who 
cannot  lie  hath  said,  **I  will  deliver  thee.''  Dear  friend,  grip  those  words 
and  never  let  them  go.  You  troubled  ones,  the  Lord  says,  "  Call  upon 
me."  Have  you  been  already  much  in  supplication?  Now,  then,  take 
to  yourselves  what  the  Lord  himself  gives  you :  "  I  will  deliver  thee." 
Somehow  or  other  a  way  of  escape  must  be  made,  for  God's  word  never 
fails,  and  he  hath  said,  *'  I  will  deliver  thee." 

Notice,  next,  that  it  is  a  positive  answer.  It  is  not, ''  I  may,  perhaps, 
deUverthee";  but,  "/ft'i//."  It  is  not,  "I  will  endeavour  to  do  it," 
but,  "  I  will  deliver  thee."  Did  unbeUef  say,  "  But  how  ?"  Friend, 
leave  the  "  how  "  with  God.  Ways  and  means  are  with  him.  He  says, 
"  I  will  deliver  thee."  To  turn  round  and  ask  "  How  ?"  is  to  forget 
that  he  is  God  all-sufficient. 

*'  Bemember  that  omnipotenco 
Has  servants  everywhere." 

Unbelief  is  very  ready  with  its- questions,  and  too  often  it  enquires^ 
**  When?"  Friend,  leave  the  "  when"  with  God.  He  does  not  tell  us 
when,  but  the  deliverance  must  come  at  the  right  time,  because  if  he 
were  not  to  deliver  us  till  after  we  had  perished  it  would  be  no  deliver- 
ance at  all.  If  deliverance  came  too  late  it  would  be  a  mere  mockery. 
The  promise  comprehends  within  itself  the  implied  condition  that  it 
shall  be  a  timely  deliverance,  for  otherwise  how  should  the  delivered  one 
live  to  glorify  the  name  of  the  Lord  ?  Again  I  would  say  to  you,  dear 
friend,  get  a  grip  of  this  promise,  "  I  will  deliver  thee."  Do  not  let  my 
Master's  promise  be  blown  away  like  the  sere  leaves  from  the  trees,  but 
hold  it  fast  as  for  hfe.  AVnve  this  before  thee,  and  thy  foes  will  flee  as 
from  a  two-edged  swoi-d.  Quote  the  divine  word,  **  I  will  deliver  thee," 
and  legions  of  devils  will  flee  before  thee.  Eemember  how  Paul  put  it : 
**  Who  delivered  us  fi-ora  so  great  a  death,  and  doth  deliver :  in  whom 
we  trust  that  he  will  yet  deliver  us." 

Notice  next,  that  the  promise  is  personal  "/  will  deliver  thee."  It 
is  not  said,  "My  angels  shall  do  it,"  but  "/^vill  deliver  thee."  The 
Lord  God  himself  undertakes  to  rescue  his  people.  *'  I  will  be  a  wall  of 
fire  round  about  them."  "I  the  Lord  do  keep  it;  I  will  water  it  every 
moment :  lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day." 

Then,  too,  it  is  personal  to  its  object :  it  is  the  same  man  who  calls 
upon  God  in  trouble  who  shall  be  a  partaker  of  the  blessing.  "  Call 
upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  I  will  deliver  thee,''  It  is  personal, 
personal  to  you;  therefore,  dear  friend, personally  beUeve  in  this  personal 
promise  of  thy  God. 


658  METBOPOLITAK  TABSBNAOUB  PUIiPlT. 

BeooIIect,  also,  that  it  is  permanenL  Yon  pleaded  this  piomise^  some 
of  you,  fifty  years  ago :  it  is  as  sure  to-day  as  it  was  then.  If  yon  have  a 
banknote,  and  take  it  to  the  bank  and  get  the  cash,  it  is  done  with:  but 
my  Master's  banknotes  are  self-renewing.  Ton  can  plead  his  promise  a 
hundred  times  over,  for  his  word  abides  for  ever ;  it  is  fulfilled  only  to 
be  fulfilled  again.  Like  a  springing  well,  which  is  always  fall  and 
flowing,  so  my  Lord's  grace-words  abide  and  continue  in  all  their  wealth 
of  blessing.  Grod's  promise  made  two  thousand  years  ago  is  as  valid  as 
if  it  had  been  uttered  this  morning,  and  never  yet  expended  upon  a  single 
soul.  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  I  will  deliver  thee  "  is 
a  word  for  this  very  hour.  Where  are  you  at  this  moment,  you  troubled, 
downcast  one  ?  You  said  just  now,  "  I  shall  never  be  happy  any  more." 
Becall  those  words.  Eat  them  with  bitter  herbs  of  repentance :  ^'Tmst 
in  the  Lord  for  ever,  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength." 
You  said ''  That  blow  has  crushed  me ;  I  could  have  borne  anything 
else,  but  this  trial  I  cannot  bear."  Tush !  Do  you  know  what  you  can 
bear ?  What  said  the  apostle ?  "I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ 
which  strengtheneth  me."  Only  have  faith  in  God,  and  obey  and  believe 
the  text :  **  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble ;  I  will  deliver  thee." 
Can  you  not  take  God  at  his  word?  If  you  can  you  shall  find  his  pro- 
mise true,  and  God  will  be  glorified  in  delivering  you.  What  praise  will 
come  to  his  name  if  he  lifts  you  up  out  of  the  low  dungeon ;  if  he  snaps 
your  fetters ;  if  he  tears  away  your  entanglements ;  if  he  makes  plain 
your  intricate  path ;  if  he  brings  you  through  difficulties  which  now 
seem  to  be  impossibilities,  and  gives  you  to  rejoice  in  him  through  them  ail ! 
Why,  then,  his  name  will  be  glorified  far  more  than  by  the  offering  of 
ten  thousand  buUocks,  and  rivers  of  oil. 

III.  Lastly,  if  you  trust  your  God  in  your  distress  and  are,  therefore, 
delivered,  the  Lord  will  be  OTiORiFiKD  in  your  conduct  aftee- 
WARDS.  When  a  man  prays  to  God  in  the  hour  of  trouble,  and  gets 
deliverance,  as  he  is  sure  to  get  it,  then  he  honours  his  great  Helper 
by  admiring  the  way  tn  which  ihs  promise  has  been  kept,  and  by  adorvig 
and  blessing  the  loving  Lord  for  such  a  gracious  interposition,  I  know 
some  of  you  have  seen  enough  of  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  your  own  cases 
to  make  you  wonder  and  admire  for  ever  and  ever.        ^ 

Next,  you  will  honour  him  by  the  gratitude  of  your  ^itimrt,  in  which 
the  memory  of  his  goodness  will  for  ever  be  recorded,  ^ffhis  devout 
gratitude  of  yours  will  lead  you  in  due  season  to  bear  teswfmny  to  his 
faithfulness.  You  will  be  indignant  at  unbelief  and  will  wai:  against 
it  by  personal  witnessing.  You  will  be  very  tender  towards  thi>?e  who 
are  now  in  trouble,  as  you  once  were,  and  you  will  long  to  tell  them^f  the 
blessed  rescue  wliich  God  is  prepared  to  perform  for  them  as  he  did  for 
you.  Your  mouth  will  be  open,  your  witness  will  be  enlarged,  you  Vill 
speak  as  a  man  who  has  tasted  and  handled  these  things  for  himsolf- 
Others  will  be  impressed  as  you  tell  the  story  of  what  the  Lord  haT' 
done  for  your  soul.  At  the  same  time,  you  will  personally  grow  infaitAJ 
by  the  experience  of  your  heavenly  Father's  love  and  power,  and  in  daja* 
to  come  you  will  glorify  him  by  increased  patience  and  confidence,  Youl 
will  say,  "  He  has  been  with  me  in  six  troubles,  and  he  will  be  with  rae  I 
in  the  seventh.  I  have  tried  and  proved  my  God,  and  I  dare  not  doubt 
him."    Your  serenity  of  mind  will  be  more  deep  and  lasting,  and  you; 


FBAYEB  TO  GOD  IN  TROUBLE  AN  ACCEPTABLE  SACBIFICE.   659 

will  be  able  to  defy  the  power  of  Satan  to  drive  you  ont  of  your  joy  in 
God.  I  know  also  that  you  will  tiy  to  live  mora  to  his  praise.  As  you 
see  him  bring  you  out  of  one  difficulty  and  then  another  you  will  feel 
bound  to  his  service  by  fresh  bonds.  Ton  will  become  more  a  conse- 
crated man  than  you  ever  have  been.  You  will  jealously  protect  your 
remaining  days  from  being  wasted  by  sloth  or  desecrated  by  sin.  And 
let  me  tell  you  that  even  when  you  die,  and  come  up  the  banks  of 
Jordan  on  the  other  side,  you  will  long  to  glorify  your  (Jod.  When 
the  angels  meet  you  I  should  not  wonder  but  what  one  of  the  first  things 
you  will  do  will  be  to  say,  ^'  Bright  spirits,  I  long  to  tell  you  what  the 
Lord  has  done  for  me.*'  £ven  as  you  are  going  up  towards  the  celestial 
gates,  as  Bunyan  pictures,  I  should  not  wonder  if  you  began  to  say  to 
your  guide,  **  Help  me  to  sing ;  I  cannot  be  silent    1  feel  I  must 


'  Sing  with  rapture  and  surprise 
His  loTingkindness  in  the  skies.* 


ft 


Should  the  bright  ^irit  remind  you  that  you  are  climbing  to  the  choirs 
where  all  the  singers  meet,  you  may  answer,  '^  Yes,  but  I  am  a  special 
case  :  I  came  through  such  deep  waters ;  I  was  greatly  af9icted.  if  one 
in  heaven  can  praise  him  more  than  another,  I  am  just  that  one."  The 
angel  will  smile  and  say,  "  I  have  escorted  many  a  score  up  to  glory  who 
said  just  the  same.*'  We  each  one  owe  most  to  God's  grace,  and  hope  to 
praise  him  best.  Some  of  you  may  think  that  you  are  love's  deepest 
debtors,  but  I  know  better.  I  am  not  going  to  quarrel  with  you,  but  I 
know  one  who  is  so  undeserving  and  yet  receives  such  mercy  that  he 
claims  to  take  the  lowest  place,  and  most  humbly  to  reverence  bound- 
less grace.  Yea,  I  myself,  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  daim  to  have 
received  most  at  his  hands.  I  would  fain  love  him  most,  for  towards  me 
he  has  shown  the  utmost  love  in  treating  me  as  he  has  done.  Am  I  not 
saying  for  myself  that  which  you  each  would  say  for  yourself?  I  know 
it  is  so,  and  hence  it  is  that  God  is  glorified  by  the  reverence  and  love 
of  those  whom  he  delivers  in  answer  to  prayer. 

I  want  you  to  notice  with  care  the  persons  mentioned  in  the  first  clause 
of  the  text.  You  do  not  see  yourself ;  you  only  hear  of  yourself.  It  is 
"  Call  upon  me."  God  is  there.  There  is  no  direct  mention  of  you ; 
you  are  hidden ;  you  are  such  a  poor,  broken-down,  dispirited  creature 
that  all  you  can  do  is  to  utter  a  cry  and  lie  in  the  dust.  There  stands 
the  mighty  God,  and  you  call  upon  him. 

Now,  look  at  the  next  clause,  '*I  will  deliver  thee."  Here  are  two 
persons  :  the  Lord  stands  first,  the  Ever-Glorious  and  Blessed,  "  I,"  and 
far  down  there  are  you.  "  /  will  deliver  thee,*'  poor,  humble,  but 
grateful  "Thee."  Thus  we  see  the  Lord  unites  with  his  poor  servant, 
and  the  link  is  deliverance. 

When  you  come  to  the  third  clause,  do  you  see  where  you  are  ?  You 
are  placed  first,  for  the  Lord  now  calls  you  into  action — ''  Thou  shalt 
glorify  meJ'  What  a  wonderful  thing  it  is !  For  God  to  put  glory  upon 
us  is  easy  enough,  but  for  us  to  put  glory  upon  him,  this  is  a  miracle  of 
condescension  on  the  part  of  our  God.    '^  Thou  shalt  glorify  me." 

"  But,"  saith  one  in  this  place,  "  I  do  love  the  Lord,  but  I  cannot 
glorify  him.  I  wish  I  could  preach,  I  wish  I  could  write  sweet  hymns,  I 
wish  1  had  a  clear  voice  with  which  to  sing  out  the  Redeemer's  praises, 


660  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

but  I  have  no  gifts  or  talents,  and  theretore  I  shall  never  be  able  to 
glorify  him.*'    Listen  :  you  will  be  cast  into  trouble  one  of  these  days, 
and  when  you  are  in  trouble  you  will  find  out  how  to  glorify  him.    Your 
extremity  will  be  your  opportunity.    Like  a  lamp  which  shines  not  by 
day  you  will  blaze  up  in  the  dark.    When  the  day  of  trouble  is  come  you 
will  cry, "  Lord,  I  could  not  do  anything  for  thee,  but  thou  canst  do 
everything  for  me.  I  am  nothing,  but  Lord,  in  my  nothingness,  I,  poor 
I,  do  trust  thee,  and  fling  myself  upon  thee."    Then  you  shall  find  that 
you  have  glorified  him  by  your  faith.    I  think  you  might  almost  be  oon- 
tent  to  have  the  trouble,  mi^ht  you  not  ?    It  seems  as  if  you  could  not 
glorify  him  anyhow  else,  and  to  glorify  him  is  the  main  object  of  your 
existence.    Some  Christians  would  scarcely  have  brought  any  glory  to  God 
if  they  had  not  been  led  by  paths  of  sorrow,  and  made  to  wade  through  seas 
of  grief.    God  gets  very  little  glory  out  of  many  professors,  and  he  would 
have  still  less  if  they  had  been  allowed  to  rust  their  souls  away  in  com- 
fort.   The  brightest  of  the  saints  owe  much  of  their  clearness  to  the 
fire  and  the  file.    It  is  by  the  sharp  needle  of  sorrow  that  we  are  em- 
broidered with  the  praises  of  the  Lord.    We  must  be  tried  that  the  Lord 
may  be  glorified.    We  cannot  call  upon  him  in  the  day  of  trouble  if  we 
have  no  such  day ;  and  he  cannot  deliver  us  if  we  have  no  trouble  to  be 
delivered  from :  and  we  cannot  glorify  him  if  we  are  not  made  to  see 
the  danger  and  the  need  in  which  he  displays  his  love. 

I  leave  the  blessed  subject  of  the  text  with  you,  as  a  souvenir,  till  we 
meet  again.  The  Lord  be  with  you  till  the  day  break  and  the  shadows 
flee  away.  Pray,  also,  that  he  may  abide  with  me,  and  with  all  my 
brethren  in  the  ministry ;  and  may  we  all  in  yonder  world  of  rest  glorify 
him,  who  will  then  have  delivered  us  completely  from  all  evil,  to  whom 
be  glory  for  ever.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — ^Psalm  L 


Htmns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 194,  196,  700. 


LETTER  FROM  MR.  SPURGEON. 

Deab  FRiBKDa,— I  have  prmred  this  aerman  for  the  pren  in  a  wann  and  many  dime,  irbcn 
the  leaTBB  have  not  vet  left  the  troee,  and  one  may  ait  under  his  vine  and  flgtree  from  aimnae  to 
tmnflet  and  feel  no  chUL  I  am  most  happy  to  hare  eeeaped  mj  annual  season  of  pain  and  afltto 
tion,  and  I  am  gratefully  consecrating  ererr  day  to  suon  mingled  rest  and  study  ss  may,  under 
the  diTine  blessing,  enable  me  to  return  phymoally,  mentally,  and  spiritually  fitted  for  my  work. 

My  heart  im  athome  with  my  people,  with  the  College,  with  the  Orphanage,  and  aU  the  other 
works.    Specially  do  I  miss  the  Jttonoay  evening  prayer-meetings,  dear  seasons  of  holr  interoonrss 
and  sacred  joy.    Do  not  forget  me  when  it  is  well  wiu  yon.    If  I  haTS  eru- been  made  the 
of  blessing  U  ..      -  -.  .  _  ..       - 

tween  us  for 


of  blessing  to  your  souls  implore  the  smile  of  the  great  Father  for  me.    If  there  be  any  love  b^ 
Mr  the  truth's  sake,  and  because  of  the  union  of  the  sainta  in  Christ  Jesus,  pray  for  m«. 


How  much  I  need  the  aid  of  your  prayos  for  the  dischaise  of  my  ministry  over  so  neat  a  flock 
God  alone  knows.  I  am  persuaded  that  the  Lord  will  bo  wuh  you,  and  cause  you  to  aoonnd  in  all 
Kpiritual  blessings,  for  he  is  faithful  to  his  promise,  and  evermore  preserves  and  saactiflea  those 
who  abide  in  the  truth.  The  Holy  (Hiost  will  teach,  comfort,  and  perfect  you,  f or  it  is  hia  deligbt 
to  bless  hii  people. 

May  it  come  to  pass  that  our  churches  may  be  more  and  more  the  saviooe  of  the  age,  the  lauit 
amid  surrounding  corruption,  the  lights  of  a  dark  time.  Watch  for  the  good  of  o«ir  bdoved 
country  in  changes  which  may  soon  tranroire,  and  be  in  earnest  for  the  cause  of  trath  and 
righteousness,  and  Hie  cause  and  kingdom  of  oar  Lord  Jesns.  ' 

My  hearty  Christian  love  is  withaUthe  brethren  in  Christ  Jesos.  C.  H.  SFUBOBONL 

Mentone,  Nov.  90, 1879.  | 

I 

\ 

\ 


ADVKRTISBlfENTS. 


DEAFNESS, 

AND  OTHER  DISEASES. 
Immediate   Belief  and   TTltimate   Cure. 

The  Eev.  E,  J.  SILVERTON, 

PARK  ST.,  NOTTINGHAM, 

la  sending  ont  free  by  post  thousands  of 
his  Health  Advocate  to  suflFerers  from  Deaf- 
ness, Noises  and  offensive  discharges  in  the 
Bare,  Indigestion,  Epileptic  Fits,  and  per- 
sons  of  broken  down  health.     Thousands 

benefited. 


NEW  LINCOLNSHIRE 

FEATHER  BEDS 

AND  LINCOLNSHIRE 

DOWN  aUILTS 

AT  HAIf  THE  OSIML  PRICE. 

Send  post-card  for  Price  List  free  to  the 
London  Agent  of  the  Lincolnshire  Bedding 
Company,  T.  SMITH,  16,  Wine  Office- 
court,  Fleet  Street,  £.0.,  where  specimen 
Bed  and  Quilt  may  be  seen.  Hundreds  of 
Testimonials. 


FRAMPTOK'S   PILL   OP  HEALTH. 

T"iSL5wS."  "^^C™*  «•  ">•  "«»»  •««««  «m«ly  tor  l>>di8..ti<»,  bUloiu  «id  Urer 

SMITH'S    TASTELESS   DANDELION    ANTIBILIOUS    PILLS. 


I  comfort  and  safety.    ThsjffrMUv  aid  im  thmnse  of  l^ 

TTOLLOWAY'S  PILLS  preeerye  the  body  from  diseaae,  and  the  mind 
W^«.J^«  J  ^°        T'.^'""  ^'y  ?*  *•'""  occMionaUy  at  bed-tima.    Their  iltem- 


CLARKE'S 


WORLD  FAMED 


BLOOD  MIXTURE. 


Ii  wamated  to  olMiisa  tiM  blood  firom  all  impwrttlM 
from  wbatorer  eauw  arlsiiif .  For  flcnftUa.  Benrry. 
BoTM  of  aU  Uads,  SUn  and  Blood  I)lseaMtriti  «ffe«lf 
an  aurraltoask     ThooMuids  of  TMtimoiiJais  fhn  all 

Ca    InbotUssat.6d.Meh,s]idln  eases  ofiixtimas 
qaantity,  lis.  each,  tOah  ehsmitte.    Bent  to  aaj 

addnsi  lor  ao  or  isa  stamps  by  the  Fiopiittoiv 

F.   J.    CLARKE, 

m^lit,  Jfsttaeaiiea' HalL  Xiasola. 

[ IfiOb  Oafad  ■twet 

CHAMBSSLAIN'S  OFHTHALHIC  OINT%ENT» 

rOR  THE  CURB  OP 

WaAMMATIONS,  8KCK8,  FILMS,  BRUI8E8,  AND  OTHER  EXTERNAL  DISORDERS  OF  THE 

EYES   AND    EYELIDS. 

In  numberless  instanees  has  proved  superior  to  ererr  other  specific,  and  has  been  snoeessftil  after 
the  treatment  of  the  most  eminent  praotltioners  had  signally  failed,  as  preyed  by  Testimonials. 

Boxes  Is,  l}d.,  or  post  free,   16  stamps,  from  the  Proprietor,  J.  HoLLnros, 

4,  Hanover  Terrace,  Peckhazn,  S.E. 

HOW   CAN    I   BEST   HELP   MY   CHILDREN? 
PABEITTS  are    enabled   to    do   it  by  the  Lessons  contained  in 

THE    SYSTEMATIC   BIBLE    TEACHER,    700  Lessons         )     Post    free 
BIBLE  VOICES  for  the  Yonng,  Id.,  2d.,  8d.  (2a  6d. 

Testimonials—"  Besolts  wonderfully  cheering  snd  satlsfaetorr.*'  "Has  been  so  snoeessAil  in 
my  parish,  I  am  induced  to  invite  the  attention  of  my  brethren  to  it/*.  -  *'  1  can  recommend  it  with 
the  fpreatest  satisfaction  and  confidence."  "  The  wonders  wrought  under  God  in  my  pariih  slone 
deBMBd  that  I  should  wish  It  Ood>speed."    For  farther  panioulars  apply  to 

THE   SYSTEMATIC   BIBLE   TEACHER  DEPOSITORY, 

67,  Paibbhostbb  Row,  Lohdon,  E.O. 


ADVERTISEMENTS. 


BOOKS    SUITABLE    FOR 

CHRISTMAS  &  NEW  YEAR'S  GIFTS, 

Published  by  JAMES  NISBET  &  Co- 

Just  Publuhfld,  "New  Edition.    Small  4to,  cloth  elegant,  128. 

THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.      With   niustrations  by  Sir  JoBX  Qilbbbt.     Exquisitely 

iminted  by  Brans  and  bound  by  Bum. 
*'  In  its  pretty  binding     .     .     .     tbia  must  be  a  Teiy  acceptable  gift  book  of  the  aeaeon ;  uid  the  pic- 
turesque  uid  animated  deeigns  of  Sir  John  Gilbert  renaer  it  both  attraotiYe  and  ill^>ree■iTe.'* — TVmm. 

Beautiful  Ghrietmaa  Preeent, 

WILD    FLOWERS  OF  THE   HOLY   LAND.     Fifty-four  Plates  printed  in 

Oolours ;  Drawn  and  Painted  after  Nature  by  Har ha  Zbllka,  Kacareth.    With  a  Frehce  by  tke 

Bev.  H.  B.  TaisTRAx,  Canon  of  Durham,  and  an  Intxodootian  by  Bdwau>  ATKimov,  Beq.* 

F.L.S.,  F.Z.S.    4to.  2Is.,  cloth  gilt 

MEMORIES   OF   PATMOS  :    or,  Some  of  the  Great  Words  and  Yiaionfl  of  the 
Apooalypee.  By  the  Ber.  J.  B.  Macdupk,  D.D.  New  and  Gheuer  Edition.  Poet  Sro^Sa.  6d.^«tlL 
**The  Dook,  from  beginning  to  end,  is  one  that  well  merits  a  careful  and  thoughtflol  pemiial." — JhAim 
Evening  Matt. 

BRIGHTER  THAN  THE  SUN :    or,  Christ  the  Light  of  the  World.    A  Life  of 
our  liord  for  the  Young.    By  the  Ber.  J.  B.  MAcnrpp,  D.  D.   "With  Thirteen  f  uU-page  Dhutratioiui 
by  A.  BowAH.    Post  4to,  Ts.  6d.,  doth.    Also,  New  and  Cheaper  Edition,  Ssw  6d.,  cloth. 
"  This  handsome  yolume     ...     is  simply  and  reverently  written,  and  oni^t  to  proYe  a  ralnable 

gift  to  the  juvenile  public."— Jfomtn^  Po$t. 

EVENTIDE    AT    BETHEL:    or,   The  Night  Dream  of    the  Desert.      An  Old 
Testamoit  Chapter  in  Providence  and  Grace.    By  the  Same.    Crown  8vo,  Sa.  6dL    Cloth  extra. 
"  A  worthy  production  of  its  author's  charming  powers." — Sword  and  IVoweL 

Just  Published.    Crown  8vo,  Ss.  6d.,  cloth. 
THE  WHITE  FIELDS  OF  FRANCE.    An  Account  of  Hr.  M<All*8  Misdon  to 
the  Working  Men  of  Paris.    By  the  Bev.  HoaATirs  BoirAn,  D.D.,  Author  of  *<  Hymns  of  Faith 
and  Hope,"  etc. 

GATES   INTO  THE  PSALM  COUNTRY.     By  IAartise  R.  YnranT,  DJ)., 

Pastor  of  the  **  Church  of  the  Covenant,"  New  York.    Crown  ttvo,  8s.  6d.,  cloth. 
**  The  title  of  this  volume  wins  the  reader  before  the  book  is  opened,  and  the  expectation  of  pluaiiirii  is 
not  disappointed."— CAtm^mmi. 

A    SOLDIER'S    EXPERIENCE    OF    GOD'S    LOVE    AND    OF    HIS 

FAITHFULNESS  TO  HIS  WORD.    By  0.  H.  Mauoi,  once  a  Ua^  in  the  British  Amy. 
Crown  8vo,  Revised  and  Cheaper  Edition,  Is.  6d.,  cloth. 
**  It  is  full  of  inddoit,  and  pervaded  by  a  fine  religious  spirit." — Daily  Meview, 

BIBLE  CHILDREN.     Studies  for  the  Young.     By  the  Rev.  James  Wslli,  HJL^ 
Author  of  "  Bible  Echoes."    Illustrated.    Small  Crown  8vo,  Ss.  6d.,  oloth. 
"  One  of  the  wisest  and  best  sets  of  addresses  to  children  we  remembw  to  have  BC9a.'*^'BapHtt. 

BIBLE  ECHOES.    Addrosses  to  the  Young.    By  the  Rot.  Jambs  Wbixs,  MJL, 
Glasgow,  Author  of  "Bible  Children."    With  lUustrations.    Small  Crown  SvOj  8s.  6d.,  eloth.  ^ 
"We  would  strongly  recommend  parents  to  procure  it  for  themselves  and  their  cnildren.    No  better 
book  could  be  given  them." — Duinfrtes  and  Qatloway  SUuidard. 

MY  OLD  LETTERS.    A  Poem.    By  Hobatiub  Bonab,  D.D.    Royal  82mo.    2yoU. 
Cloth,  Gilt  Edges,  Ss. 

Crown  8ve,  8s.  6d.,  cloth. 
OUR  COFFEE  ROOM.    By  Lady  Hope.    With  Preface  hy  Lieut.-Gen.  Sir  Abtbob 

CoTTOir.  B.E.,  K.C.S.I. 
<*A  story  of  Christian  effort    ....   told  in  a  simple,  unostentatious  manner,  that  Is  esoeeding^ 
pleasant.    .    .    •    Will  be  read  with  interest  of  no  ordinary  kind."— iKorib. 

Small  Crown  8vo,  8a.  6d.,  cloth, 

MORE  ABOUT  OUR  COFFEE  ROOM.    By  Lady  Hofb,  Authonss  of  ''Oar 
Coffee  Room,"  etc. 
'*Thi8  volume  is  even  more  interesting  than  the  last." — Bngliah  Independent, 

A  CHILD  FOR  A  MOTHER    By  Mrs.  Umphelbt.    Small  Grown  8to,  28.,  cloth. 

The  Last  Poems  of  the  late  Fbances  Ridley  Hayeboal  : — 
UNDER  HIS  SHADOW.    With  a  Preface  by  her  Sister.    Just  Published.    Royal 
SSmo,  Is.  6d.,  doth. 

MORNING  STARS :  or,  Names  of  Christ  for  His  Little  Ones.    By  the  Ute  Fbaxges 
RiDLXT  Havekoal.    Roysl  82mo,  9d.,  cloth. 
"A  beautiful  litUe  volume. "-~i2oc*. 
**  Another  precious  littie  volume  for  the  children." — CfhritHan  Progreia, 

Elegsnt  Gift  Book.    Post  4to,  in  extra  cloth,  gilt,  19s. 
LIFE  MOSAIC.    **  The  Ministry  of  Song  "  and  «  Under  the  Surface "  in  One  Volume. 
By  FaAMCKs  R.  HAVxaoAL.    With  Twelve  Dlustratious  of  Alpine  Scenery  and  Flowers,  by  the 
a  Hkloa  vok  CaAXx.    Printed  in  Colours  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Arttit,  by 
kw«,  of  Baden, 
most  handsome  book  in  the  list  is  'Life  Mosaic'    Apart  from  its  litersry  merit  il  It  a 
"'ntgow  Serald, 

don,  JAMES  NISBET  &  Co.,  SI,  Bemen  Street 


Jifl(ti[0^«fit»n  ^^ttmdt  f  tdpt 


CHOICE  COMFOET  FOR  A  YOUNG  BELIEVER. 


%,  ^^mift( 


BKLIVEBED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGE  ON, 

AT  THE  MBTBOPOLITAK  TABBBNACLE,  NEWIKGTO:!?, 


**  The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  concemeth  me :  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  endureth 
for  CTer :  forBake  not  the  works  of  thine  own  hands." — Psalm  cxxxviii.  8. 

CoNTiNUALiiT  I  am  clearing  the  gTonnd  and  laying  the  foundation  of 
eternal  salvation  in  the  grace  of  God  which  was  manifested  in  Christ 
Jeans  wheA  he  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  This  I  did  this 
morning,*  and  the  Lord  has  set  his  seal  thereon  right  speedily,  which 
is  to  me  a  sure  proof  that  the  frequent  preaching  of  the  foundation 
truths  is  according  to  the  mind  of  God.  That  necessary  work  cannot 
be  done  too  often,  for  men  need  to  hear  the  true  gospel  as  often  as 
they  hear  the  striking  of  the  hour,  and  even  then  they  forget  it.  Yet 
do  not  all  forget ;  there  are  a  few,  like  those  who  were  saved  with  'Sosh, 
who  seek  the  ark  of  salvation  and  live.  To  those  who  have  newly 
come  to  put  their  trust  in  Jesus  I  wish  to  speak  this  evening,  and  I  do 
80  with  much  delight,  for  as  the  sight  of  the  new-born  babe  makes  elad 
the  mother,  so  does  the  news  of  a  new-bom  soul  fill  me  with  exceeding 
joy.  Good  tidings  have  come  to  my  ears.  We  do  not  often  sow  and 
reap  ^uite  so  quickly  as  I  have  done  on  this  occasion,  for  since  this 
inommg*s  service  I  have  hopeful  evidence  that  God  has  blessed  the  word 
to  many  souls,  and  my  beloved  fellow-helpers,  who  watch  around  this 
congregation  Uke  scouts  around  an  army,  report  that  the  slain  of  the 
Lo^  have  been  many. 

Now,  between  half-past  twelve  o'clock  this  morning  and  this  time  in 
tiie  evening  such  souls  have  gone  a  day's  journey  towards  heaven^ 
and  already  they  have  b^un,  I  dare  say,  to  question  themselves, 
and  possibly  to  be  exercis^  with  some  few  fears*  Thus  early  they 
may  have  met  with  lions  in  the  way,  or  have  found  worse  than  real 
lions  in  their  own  fears.  They  have  only  lately  known  the  Lord,  but 
already  they  are  growing  anxious,  and  looking  into  the  future  with  a 


« 

Na  1,506,  •  «« The  Faitfaftl  Saying,"  Ko.  1,4M« 


66a  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

somewhat  troubled  gaze.  Therefore  come  we  forth  loTingly  as  a  shep- 
herd hastens  to  cherish  the  new-bom  lambs.  We  come  to  the  little  onai 
with  words  of  good  cheer,  for  they  need  them,  and  we  have  special  orders 
from  onr  Master  to  see  that  they  are  tenderly  comforted.  We  trost  also 
to  speak  to  those  who  have  known  the  Lord  for  many  years  some  words 
of  help  with  regard  to  matters  which  may  now  be  .causing  them  alaniL 
The  consolations  of  the  Lord  are  very  reviving,  and  in  number  tJiey 
abound,  therefore  let  small  and  great  partake  of  them.  **  Comfort  ye, 
comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God." 

When  a  man  becomes  a  dhristian,  and  the  grace  of  God  commences 
its  work  in  his  soul,  he  begins  to  be  serious  and  thoughtfoL  That  is  one 
of  the  first  noticeable  changes  in  him :  he  renounces  his  former  care- 
lessness and  indifference,  and  becomes  a  sober,  considerate  man,  in  whose 
mind  there  is  a  deep  concern  as  to  his  own  character  in  the  sight  of  Gk)d. 
He  is  concerned  about  the  temptations  he  meets  with  in  his  walk  among 
the  sons  of  men,  lest  tkese  temptations  should  be  too  much  for  him,  and 
he  should  be  betrayed  into  sin.  He  longs  to  lead  a  holy  life :  in  &ct, 
holiness  islus  great  concern.  He  prays  uiat  he  may  leave  such  a  life 
behind  him  for  others  to  remember  as  shall  be  worth  their  following 
as  an  example.  He  asks  himself,  '^  Will  the  hope  I  have  just  obtained 
really  endure  to  the  last  days  of  my  life  ?  Will  it  sustain  me  amidst  ihe 
pangs  and  weaknesses  of  death  ?  Is  it  truly  such  that  when  I  go  belbre 
the  burning  throne  of  Gk)d  himself  I  need  not  tremble  ?"  Such  matters 
were  sport  to  him  once,  they  are  serious  questions  now.  He  has  thrown 
down  the  cap  and  bells  of  the  jester  and  taken  up  the  staff  of  a  pilgrim 
and  the  sword  of  a  warrior,  confessing  in  an  unmistakeable  manner  that 
^'life  is  real,  life  is  earnest."  He  is  a  man  of  concern  now,  concerned 
about  his  soul's  affairs,  his  sins,  his  life,  his  death,  his  eternal  salvation ; 
a  solemn  air  is  about  him,  he  hears  the  wheels  of  eternity  sounding  in 
his  ears,  he  girds  his  loins  for  his  life-work,  and  he  puts  away  childish 
things. 

This  is  well ;  but  as  every  state  has  its  dangers,  so  the  peril  of  religions 
concern  is  despondency.  Thoughtfulness  soon  degenerates  into  distrust, 
and  holy  anxiety  easily  rusts  into  unbelief.  The  more  a  man  looks  within 
him  the  less  he  can  trust  himself,  and  the  more  a  man  looks  around 
him  the  more  he  feels  that  he  is  in  dan^r,  and  so  he  is  apt  very  early  in 
his  Christian  course  to  be  downcast  and  much  afraid,  and  to  say  within 
himself,  *'  I  shall  surely  one  day  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  Mv 
confidence  will  prove  to  be  a  delusion,  and  my  conversion  a  fiction. 
He  is  fearful  as  to  the  result  of  future  temptations,  like  a  fresh  recruit 
in  the  battle  who  feels  certain  that  every  boom  of  the  cannon  prcx^laima 
his  death.  Now  I  want,  if  God  will  help  me,  to  meet  such  fears  to-ni^t. 
Hay  the  divine  Spirit  enable  us  now  to  have  a  strong  and  mighty  feith 
in  God»  not  only  with  r^ard  to  past  transgression,  which  is  clean  gone 
through  the  atoning  blood,  but  with  regard  to  aU  the  difficulties  and 
dangers  of  the  present  and  future ;  and  may  we  drink  into  the  spirit  of 
the  text  which  is  now  before  us — "  The  Lord  will  perfect  that  whidi 
concemeth  me :  thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  endureth  for  ever:  forsake  not  tbB 
works  of  thine  own  hands." 

Here  first  we  see  that  Ood  fitts  ua  taiih  assurance'^**  The  Lord  will 
perfect  that  which  concemeth  me."    Secondly,  he  gwes  us  rest  m 


OHOIOl  OOUFOBT  KXE  A  TOmTQ  BBXJSTEB.  W^, 

4nercy — *^  Thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  endnretti  for  eTer  ";  and  thirdly^  h$  puts 
jpraym-  into  our  hearts  and  supplies  us  with  a  plea — ''  Forsake  not  the 
works  of  thine  own  hands."  May  God,  the  Holy  Qhost,  most  gradonaly 
help  OS  in  this  meditation. 

I.  At  the  beginning  of  our  text,  to  meet  onr  fears  about  the  ftitare, 
THE  Lord  fills  us  with  assu&akce.  **  The  Lord  will  perfect  that 
which  concerneth  me."  Ton  see  the  assurance  is,  first,  that  dod  is  really 
at  work  on  our  behalf.  Get  a  grip  at  this,  thou  troubled  one,  and  by  a 
personiJ  &at^  say,  **  The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  concerneth  me.** 
Thou  hast  come  to  Jesus  and  trusted  thy  soul  in  his  hands,— we  take 
it  for  granted  that  thou  hast  done  so,  then  it  is  certain  that  the  Lord  has 
brought  thee  to  this  state  of  mind,  for  never  did  a  man  in  this 
world  simply  come  and  trust  in  Christ  unless  the  Spirit  of  God  had  led 
him  to  it.  What  says  the  Saviour  ?  **  No  man  cometh  unto  me  except 
the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw  him."  You  would  never  have  come 
to  a  simple  reliance  upon  the  mediatorial  work  and  sacrifice  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  if  there  had  not  been  a  work  of  grace  in  your  soul.  Every  effect 
has  a  cause,  and  all  spiritual  faith  is  created  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy 
Ohost.  Since,  then,  the  Lord  has  begun  to  save  you,  your  confidence 
with  regard  to  the  future  must  be  that  he  who  began  this  good  work 
will  continue  to  operate  in  your  soul.  If  the  work  of  God  upon  your 
heart  were  discontinued,  your  life,  your  hope,  your  faith,  your  love  would 
he  discontinued  too,  for  you  only  live  because  the  Holy  Spirit  lives  and 
works  in  yon.  The  same  power  which  first  made  the  world  and  bnilded 
jonder  arch  of  azure  must  sustain  it  stiU,  or  the  world  would  feel  its  final 
crash,  and  the  cerulean  dome  would  utterly  dissolve.  Gontinued  out- 
goings of  power  frem  the  Creator  are  essential  to  the  continued  exist- 
ence of  creation ;  there  is  neither  power,  nor  life,  nor  being  apart  Irom 
God.  This  is  true  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  as  much  as  in  that  of  nature 
— ^we  are  gracious  because  God  gives  us  grace,  and  we  keep  his  way 
hecause  the  Lord  keeps  us  by  his  power  unto  salvation.  The  new  life 
within  us  has  been  created  by  .the  Lord,  and  by  him  it  must  be  sua- 
tained.  Let  no  one  of  my  hearers  forget  this.  You  are  to  put  your 
reliance  upon  the  working  of  the  eternal  power  and  godhead  within  your 
4aoul,  for  there  is  the  fountain  of  grace,  and  thence  the  streams  must 
flow.  Now  mind,  if  you  base  your  reliance  upon  your  own  persever- 
imce,  your  own  prayerfnlness,  your  own  spirituality,  your  own  strength 
of  resolution,  or  your  own  settledness  of  purpose,  vou  will  learn  that 
'^cursed  is  he  that  trusteth  in  man  and  msdceth  fiesli  his  arm";  for  of 
all  the  men  in  the  world  who  are  unfit  to  be  trusted  the  most  unfit  one 
is  yonrselfl  It  were  almost  better  to  trost  your  fellow  man  than  to  trust 
in  yourself  "  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  tor  ever :  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah 
is  everlasting  strength." 

I  think  you  will  see  that  the  first  clause  of  the  text  just  means  this 
— **  The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  concerneth  me,"  not  ^'I  will  per- 
fect it  myself"  but  **  The  Lord  will  do  it."  There  is  a  consciousness 
that  God  is  at  work,  and  the  full  assurance  that  he  will  be  at  work  still 
in  order  to  complete  that  which  he  has  commenced.  Have  you  obtained 
A  religion  which  is  not  the  work  of  God?  Then  I  would  exhort  you 
to  get  rid  of  it.  If  your  religion  shines  and  glitters,  and  seems  to  yon 
to  be  inei^ressibly  lovely,  yet  it  it  has  budded  out  of  your  own  nature^ 


664  KETROPOLITIS  TIBBRHICLB  PTTLFIT. 

or  is  the  result  of  jwa  own  firee  wQl,  and  ib  not  tnceable  to  the  openttiw 
of  divine  graoe,  and  to  that  alone,  do  as  the  man  did  with  the  bad  bank- 
note,— tlirovr  it  down  an  the  highwar,  or  into  a  ditch,  and  ran  awa; 
from  it.    Let  no  one  know  that  the  home-made  counterfeit  belongs  to 

Sin :  for  it  is  worthless  now,  and  it  will  ^rove  deceptive  at  the  last 
at  and  if  the  reb'gion  yoa  have  received  is  the  work  of  Ood,  then  be 
certain  that  he  who  began  the  work  will  perfect  it.  Be  well  aaanred 
that  he  who  worketh  in  yoa  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own  good  pleasnie 
will  alwavB  find  a  pleasure  in  thus  working,  and  will  never  forsake  the 
Tork  of  his  own  hands. 

The  psatmist,  however,  did  not  merely  beliewe  that  God  was  at  work, 
and  would  be  at  work,  bat  he  affirms  that  he  toUl  complete  Uu  work, 
"  The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  oonceraeth  me."     Has  he  begun  it  ? 
Then,  mj  soul,  rest  thou  sure  of  this,  that  he  will  finish  it.    Uaat  thoa 
ever  seen  an  trnfinished  work  of  God  ?    If  thon  hadst  been  piesent  on 
the  second  or  the  third  day  of  the  week  of  creation  thou  mightest  have 
Been  a  work  unfinished.    Before  the  morning  stars  eaug  tt^ther  over  a 
perfect  creation  many  things  were  made,  but  the  complete  t^ain  of  being 
was  not  as  yet  visible.    But  did  the  Almighty  pause  in  the  middle  of  tbe 
week  and  leave  his  design  unfinished  ?    Haw  would  the  record  of  crea- 
tion run  ?    That  God  had  made  the  light  but  had  not  made  the  son  ? 
That  he  had  made  the  waters,  but  had  not  divided  them  from  the  land, 
or  said  to  the  sea,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  go,  but  no  farther"?    No,  the 
first  day  of  creation  was  a  goarantee  of  the  five  which  followed  it,  and  of 
the  grand  rest-day  which  crowned  the  week.    You  might  have  been 
certam  from  that  very  first  day  when  he  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  that 
he  meant  to  make  eyes  to  see  the  light ;  and  when  there  were  hving 
creatures  for  each  domain  of  natnre,  beasts  of  the  field,  fowl  of  the  air, 
and  fish  of  the  sea,  you  mifrht  be  morally  certain  that  he  meant  to 
orown  the  kingdom  of  natnre  by  bringing  forth  into  it  a  being  to  whom 
he  should  say,  "  I  have  made  thee  to  have  dominion  over  tbe  fowl  of  tbe 
air  and  the  fish  of  the  eea,  and  whatsoever  pasaetfa  throagh  tbe  paths  of 
the  sea."    God's  beginnings  ensure  his  endings.    He  makes  no  mistake 
in  the  plan,  and  feels  no  weariness  in  the  execution,  and  hence  vriien  be 
puts  forth  bis  hand  he  never  draws  it  back  till  his  work  is  done.    It  is 
always  so.    Devils  of  hell  and  men  nnder  their  influenoe  no  donbt  think 
to  stop  the  path  of  God  in  divine  providence,  but  he  who  can  lift  tbe 
telescope  of  prophecy,  and  can  see  the  end  of  the  present  age,  may  also 
hear  the  ultimate  millennial  song  ot  "Hallelujah,  halleluiah,  for  tbe 
Lord  God  omnipotent  reigueth  "  going  up  ii-om  every  hill  and  dale  of 
idpoted  earth.    No  machinations  ot  hell  or  craft  of  the  prince 
as  can  ever  prevent  the  Lord  from  bringing  about  the  oon- 
1  of  his  promise,  for  which  his  church  is  daily  praying, 
en,  youthful  believer,  is  your  confidence :  you  have  begun  t> 
istUn.     God's  grace  has  just  changed  your  heart.    You  ar« 
a^ing,  "How  shall  I  persevere  to  the  end?    How  shall  I 
tterifection  ?  "    You  shall  be  kept  and  perfected  by  tbe  Lord  in 
trust.    The  same  power  whicn  commenced  a  good  woric  in 
mplete  it,  and  will.    Do  you  doubt  it  ?    Think  of  what  is  dona 
;inning  of  spiritual  life,  and  let  this  confirm  yon  as  to  its  tsA. 
Spirit  raises  men  from  ^le  dead — can  he  not  keep  them  alive 


OHOieB  OOBiFOBT  FOR  A  TOITVa  BBfJEVEB.  665 

after  he  has  made  them  alive?  He  brings  his  people  out  of  Egypt  ia 
the  day  that  they  belieTe :  do  ^oa  think  that  he  wno  brings  them  out 
cannot  preserve  them  in  the  wilderness  till  he  lands  them  in  Canaan  ? 
He  has  abeady  given  us  Christ  to  be  the  bread  of  heaven,  ivill  he  not 
famish  us  still  with  that  bread  till  we  shaH  enter  into  the  purchased 
possession?  Let  us  rest  in  confidence.  Our  Alpha  will  be  our  Omega, 
and  he  will  secure  every  letter  which  lies  between,  for  it  is  not  his  way 
to  lay  a  foundation  without  building  thereon  even  to  the  topstone. 

Now,  I  want  you  to  have  this  bfessed  confidence  that  Ood  is  at  work 
and  will  finish  whac  he  has  begun,  and  I  would  have  you  carry  this  con- 
fiidence  into  everything.  Tou  may  take  it  into  providence :  the  Lord 
will  perfect  that  which  concerns  you  there.  Dear  Mend,  you  have  a 
plan  on  hand.  Yon  say,  "  I  wish  I  could  be  sure  that  I  snail  carry  it 
through.  Can  you  tdl  me  ?  "  No,  I  cannot :  I  can  tell  you  this,  how- 
ever, that  if  it  really  ought  to  be  your  purpose,  if  it  is  God's  plan  for 
you  for  life,  you  will  carry  it  through.  I  have  known  men,  actuated  by 
their  own  folly,  obstinately  choose  a  pursuit  for  which  they  were  not  fit ; 
and  in  such  cases  one  of  the  best  things  that  the  Lord  can  do  for  them  is 
to  make  them  suffer  shipwreck  and  lose  their  all.  It  would  have  been  a 
bad  case  for  our  friend  Jonah  if  he  had  really  gone  down  to  Tarshiah, 
for  I  do  not  know  what  he  would  have  done  there :  he  could  not  have 
tamed  sailor,  for  no  crew  would  ha?e  endured  so  sour  a  comrade.  It 
was  a  gi*eat  mercy  for  him  when  he  was  thrown  into  the  sea,  and  was 
forced  to  travel  towards  Nineveh  in  the  fish's  belly :  and  so  sometimes 
we  enter  upon  a  giant  scheme  of  our  own  inventing,  but  it  is  not  the 
Lord's  scheme,  and  so  it  comes  to  nought  Like  Jehosopbat,  we  make 
ships  of  Tarshjsh  go  to  Ophir  for  gold,  but  they  go  not,  for  they  are 
broken  at  Ezion-geber  as  Jehosophat's  navy  was:  and  we  complain, 
perhaps,  but  it  is  better  to  submit,  for  it  cometh  forth  from  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  who  is  wonderful  in  counsel  and  excellent  in  working.  He 
often  perfects  that  which  truly  concerns  us  by  taking  us  away  from  that 
which  never  ought  to  concern  us.  It  may  be,  dear  hearer,  that  the 
Lord  is  dealing  thus  with  you.  You  have  been  setting  up  in  business 
in  the  direction  of  your  own  choice,  and  not  of  his  choice;  so  he  ends 
that  matter,  by  a  heavy  less  and  you  may  be  verv  thankftd  that  he  does 
so.  But  that  course  of  life  whioi  you  have  submitted  to  his  wisdom, 
which  you  have  taken  up  in  obedience  to  the  plain  indications  of  his 
providence,  which  you  follow  out  with  integrity,  walking  before  the  Lord 
with  all  singleness  of  purpose,  and  committing  your  way  unto  him — that 
course  of  life,  I  say,  shaU  have  his  blessmg,  and  none  shall  be  able  to 
put  you  on  one  side.  He  will  perfect,  in  your  case,  that  which  con- 
cerns you.  The  Lord  told  Davia  that  he  should  be  a  king.  It  did  not 
look  very  likely  when  he  was  a  lowly  shepherd,  but  since  such  was  the 
purpose  of  the  Eternal  there  was  no  keepmg  the  son  of  Jesse  out  of  the 
throne.  He  is  called  to  court,  and  there  Saul*s  javelin  almost  makes  an 
end  of  him ;  he  goes  to  battle  and  t^es  a  giant's  head,  and  that  brings 
the  king's  envy  upon  him ;  he  is  hunted  like  a  partridge  on  the  moun- 
tains by  those  who  thirsted  for  his  life,  but  Tie  must  he  king ;  no  Saul  or 
Doeg  could  hinder  the  divine  decree:  David  must  be  king.  Though  he 
will  not  lift  a  hand  to  smite  Saul,  yet  must  his  persecutor  vacate  the 
royal  seat  for  hinu    Judah  shall  own  him;  but  ha&  a  croiMi  shall  not 


66(i  ICRBOPOLITAar  TABBBHAOLB  7ULRT. 

be  enoagh,  speedily  shall  Israel  sabmit  to  Um.  The  Lord  most  peifddt 
that  which  concemeth  him,  and  make  him  kin^  over  the  whole  nation 
and  establish  the  throne  to  his  seed  after  him.  N«w»  mj  brotiier,  if  the 
Lord  has  called  you  to  the  work  of  the  ministry,  the  devil  cannot  shnt 
the  mouth  that  uod  opens.  If  he  has  called  yon  to  any  post  of  honour 
or  difficnlty  in  his  chnrch,  or  for  his  cause,  yon  will  arrive  at  i^  and 
your  hands  shall  be  sufScient  for  yon.  Whatever  may  stand  in  the  way, 
the  Lord  will  canr  you  through,  and  perfect  that  which  concemeth  yon. 
Bc»t  you  sure  of  that.  **  If  I  thought  so,"  says  one,  "  I  should  be  much 
more  quiet  than  I  am.^  Think  so,  my  brother,  and  be  quiet.  '^  Oh, 
but  I  should  feel  more  confidence."  Have  confidence,  brother.  Peiiiaps 
that  very  confidence  will  be  the  means  to  the  end,  and  help  you  to  suc- 
ceed. '*  Such  assurance  would  make  me  more  patient,  and  i  should  not 
put  out  my  hand  so  hastily  if  I  knew  that  what  I  am  hoping  for  would 
come  in  due  time."  Do  not  put  out  your  hand  hastily,  broUier.  Keep 
back  just  as  David  did  when  there  was  Saul  lying  before  him  sound 
asleep,  and  his  spear  was  ready  for  fatal  use.  llien  his  friend  said  to 
him,  ''Let  me  smite  him  but  this  once."  It  could  have  been  done  on 
the  instant,  and  the  crown  would  have  been  gained  by  a  single  stroke. 
But  David  did  not  take  the  business  into  his  own  hands ;  he  could  leave 
matters  with  God.  Though  a  sin  may  seem  to  be  the  straight  line  which 
leads  to  an  end,  yet  be  sure  of  this,  that  it  is  always  the  longest  way. 
The  nearest  way  to  be  a  gainer  for  ever  is  to  be  a  loser  for  the  present 
for  conscience  sake,  while  the  road  to  failure  and  to  shame  is  fonnd  in 
the  tempting  path  of  hasting  to  be  rich.  Be  sure  that  it  is  no  business 
of  yours  to  perfect  that  which  concerns  ^ou  in  providence ;  Ood  has 
promised  to  do  it,  and  only  presumption  will  dare  to  interfere.  *'  Stand 
still  and  see  the  salvation  of  God  "  is  often  the  wisest  policy  as  well  as 
the  truest  heroism.  Take  care  that  you  put  not  forth  an  unbelieving 
hand  to  snatch  the  unripe  firuit  fix>m  the  tree.  Wait,  and  in  patience 
possess  vour  soul. 

But  this,  dear  Mends,  is  more  espeoially  true  in  the  work  of  grace  in 
the  heart.  In  that  case  the  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  concerns  yon. 
You  have  only  a  little  faith ;  it  looks  hke  a  spark,  and  scarcely  can  be 
called  a  flame,  but  it  will  increase,  until  it  bums  aloft  like  a  beacon  fire. 
The  Lord  will  give  von  an  Abrahamic  faith  if  you  will  wait  upon  him 
for  it,  and  exercise  what  feith  you  abeady  possess.  Trust  him,  trust  him 
with  your  faith;  trust  him  with  your  trust  Yon  have  a  little  love, 
and  you  sigh  to  be  altogether  taken  up  with  affection  for  your  Lord : 
such  affection  shall  be  wrought  in  you  before  long,  even  that  "  perfect 
love  which  casteth  out  fear."  Trust  God  with  your  love  and  the  God 
of  love  will  reveal  himself  in  you  till  your  whole  soul  is  saturated  with 
gratitude.  You  have  some  little  of  the  likeness  of  Christ  aheady.  Walk 
before  the  Lord  in  all  confidence,  and  he  will  sketch  the  image  of  Christ 
upon  your  character  to  perfection,  and  you  shall  become  so  manifestly 
Cnristly  that  men  shall  know  yon  to  be  Christ's  disciple  by  your  very 
speech.  You  are  a  long  way  off  being  perfect  yet,  you  say.  Ah,  but  yon 
shall  be  perfect ;  the  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  concemeth  yon.  Will 
yon  know  yourself,  brother,  when  yon  are  made  perfect?  I  do  not 
expect  to  see  you  coming  np  these  aisles  when  you  have  reached  that 
pomt,  for  another  and  better  assembly  will  daim  yoa  and  gain  yon.    If 


CHOICE  COICFOET  fOB  A  TOUVa  BKLISTXB.  667' 

at  some  fatare  period  of  yonr  sojoam  here  I  should  hear  yon  say  *'  T 
am  perfect,"  I  shall  know  better  at  onoe,  for  yon  will  prove  yonr  pride- 
by  your  silly  bi*ag.  Yet  yon  will  one  day  be  completely  holy  and  spot^ 
lessly  pnre.  Yon  and  I,  and  all  those  who  tru^  in  Christ  shall  be 
perfect — every  sin  cast  out,  every  virtue  brought  to  harmonious  com- 
pleteness. We  shall  be  holy  as  our  Father  in  heaven.  "  Oh/'  says  one, 
"  it  is  the  best  news  I  ever  heard.  Shall  I  be  perfect  ?"  Yes,  as  surely 
as  you  are  in  the  perfect  Christ  so  surely  shall  yon  be  perfect  with  him.. 
We  shall  be  holy,  unblameable,  and  unreprovable  in  his  si^ht  in  the  day 
of  his  appearing.  Even  while  we  are  here  we  are  stmgglmg  after  per- 
fectness :  this  is  the  goal  to  which  we  run,  this  is  the  ta^t  at  which  we- 
aim.  That  we  may  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  be  sanc- 
tified spirit,  soul,  and  body  is  the  high  ambition  of  our  lives.  Let  ns 
never  despair  of  it,  for  there  stands  the  promise ;  "  The  Lord  will  perfect- 
that  which  concemeth  me." 

Now,  if  this  be  true  in  providence,  and  true  of  the  work  of  grace  in  us, 
it  is  also  true  of  the  work  of  grace  all  around  ns.  How  often  do  I  go 
before  the  Lord  with  the  weight  of  this  church  and  all  its  institutions 
upon  me:  and  I  cry  from  my  heart,  ''What  will  come  of  them  all?" 
Then  it  is  my  confidence  and  delight  that  the  Lord  will  perfect  that- 
which  concemeth  me.  Hitherto  he  has  helped  me  in  a  marvellous 
manner,  and  why  should  I  fancy  that  he  will  forsake  me,  seeing  that, 
with  all  my  heart  I  desire  to  honour  him?  Only  have  trust  in  God, 
thou  who  livest  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  and  as  thy  day  thy  strength  shall 
be.  Thou  shalt  go  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer,  if  thy  sword  be* 
drawn  alone  in  Christ's  quarrel.  If  thy  charge  be  but  a  few  children  in 
the  Sunday-school,  or  if  it  be  the  raising  of  a  cause  for  Christ  in  a  hamlet* 
or  a  village,  only  give  thy  whole  soul  to  it,  and  rest  thou  in  God,  and 
thou  shalt  find  him  perfecting  that  which  concemeth  thee.  Why,  we> 
have  not  half  the  confidence  in  God  about  our  religious  efforts  that  we 
ought  to  have.  We  go  to  work  with  a  faint  heart,  and  tremblingly  hope: 
that  perhaps  we  shall  succeed.  Look  how  amazed  we  are  when  we  find  a. 
fionl  converted  here  and  there,  and  what  a  noise  we  make  over  a  solitary 
convert,  like  a  hen  that  has  laid  a  single  egg  and  must  tell  all  the 
parish  about  it.  If  we  had  more  confidence  in  God  we  should  expect, 
converts  by  the  hundred,  and  we  should  have  them ;  we  should  go  to 
work  with  the  great  weapon  of  the  gospel  which  God  has  put  into  our 
« hands,  and  with  the  power  which  God  has  promised,  and  we  should  see 
the  kingdom  given  unto  Messiah,  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  would 
prosper  in  his  hands.  May  we  have  feilh  enough  to  be  certain  that  our 
unchanging  God  will  perfect  that  which  concemeth  us* 

So  I  leave  that  first  part,  trusting  that  our  hearts  may  be  filled  with 
quiet  assurance  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  And  now,  secondly  and  very  briefly,  thb  Lobd  gives  us  rest* 
nr  HIS  KEBCY,  for  what  says  the  text,  **  Thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  endureth- 
for  ever." 

See,  my  brethren,  how  this  works  in  us  rest  from  fear.  ''Alas ! "  sighs* 
one  troubled  heart, ''  I  fear  I  shall  fell  into  many  sins  between  here  and 
heaven."  Well  may  yon  have  that  dread,  my  brother.  But  you  mav 
readily  overcome  the  fear  by  singiufi^  in  your  heart,  ''Thy  mercy,  6* 
Lordy  endureth  for  ever."    The  bbod  of  atonement  will  never  fail,  audi 


668  XBTBOPOLITAir  TABBBVAULB  PULPIT. 

therefore  mercy  will  always  endure.  ''If  any  num  Bin,  we  have  ai» 
advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesns  Christ  the  righteous." 

**  Dear  dying  Lamb,  thy  precioua  blood 
Shall  never  lose  its  power, 
Till  all  the  ran8om*d  church  of  God 
Be  saved  to  sin  no  more.'* 

Your  Bins  between  here  and  heaven  shall  be  forgiven  you,  so  let  the  dread 
of  condemnation  be  banished. 

Then  comes  np  another  fear—''  Bat  I  do  not  see  how  I  am  to  be 
perfected.  My  nature  is  so  vile.  I  find  snch  resistance  to  the  divine 
operations.  The  flesh  struggles  against  the  Spiht,  and  I  cannot  get  my 
rebellious  flesh  to  be  subject  to  the  law  of  God."  The  answer  to  th» 
distressing  lament  is  the  same  as  in  the  former  case, — "  His  mercj  en* 
dureth  for  ever;"  he  will  bear  with  you  and  forbear  beyond  all  bounds. 
None  but  a  God  could  have  patience  with  you;  but  &e  Lord  is  God 
and  not  man.  Some  of  Gtod's  children  are  the  crookedest  people  that 
ever  were  in  this  world,  and  it  must  be  sovereignty  which  c^ose  them, 
for  they  are  by  no  means  naturally  desirable  or  attractive.  It  was  hud 
work  even  for  a  Moses  to  have  patience  with  them  of  old.  Though  he 
was  the  meekest  of  men,  yet  his  anger  waxed  hot  against  them,  and  he  aaid, 
"  Hear  now,  ye  rebels ; "  but  their  God  had  no  such  angzy  word  for  them, 
he  was  still  patient^  and  bore  with  them  for  forty  years.  Brother,  sister, 
he  will  have  patience  with  vou  because  his  mercy  enduieth  for  ever.  He 
has  been  teaching  you  £eiith,  but  how  slowly  you  have  learned!  Th^e 
is  a  man  who  has  been  learning  Mth  these  five-and-twenty  years,  and 
he  is  an  unbeliever  still  at  times.  Doubts  frequently  mar  the  fiioe  of 
his  assurance,  but  the  Lord  still  bears  with  his  unbelief  and  goes  on  to 
teach  him  little  by  little,  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept.  There  is 
one  here  who  has  been  taught  love.  Ay,  for  the  forty  years  past  that 
brother  has  been  learning  love  to  the  Lord  and  love  to  the  brethren, 
spelling  out  the  lessons  of  love  letter  by  letter.  He  is  in  the  infiint  dasi 
even  now,  but  the  Lord  i&  having  a  deal  of  patience  with  him,  and  h» 
will  vet  make  him  tender,  considerate,  and  affectionate.  Let  us  hope  it 
will  be  soon,  for  his  own  sake,  and  still  more  for  the  sake  of  his  bretnien 
to  whom  he  acts  so  roughly.  Many  of  God's  people  are  very  slow  learners ; 
they  have  been  at  school  these  twenty  years,  and  cannot  yet  read  their 
own  titles  to  eternal  mansions,  though  penned  in  capitals  by  their 
Redeemer's  own  hand.  As  for  myseli^  I  am  more  brutish  than  any  man, 
and  other  teachers  would  long  ago  have  lost  patience  with  me,  but  "  the 
Lord  will  perfect  that  which  oonoerneth  me,  tor  his  mercy  endureth  for 
ever." 

Between  now  and  heaven,  dear  brethren,  some  of  you  will  perhapa  have 
to  pass  through  a  great  deal  of  affiotion,  and  some  of  us  who  are 
called  daily  to  sec  others  suffer  feel  much  tenderness  towards  those  who 
are  thedbildrcn  of  affliction,  and  therefore  we  speak  with  great  sympathy 
when  we  say,  "  Do  not  shudder  with  regard  to  those  pains  and  tremors 
which  may  come  over  your  poor  trembling  frame,  for  his  mercy  endoreth 
for  ever.  He  wiU  make  your  bed  in  your  sickness,  and  underneath  yon 
ahall  be  the  everlasting  arms." 

Between  h^re  and  heaven  perhaps  yon  will  eqierienoe  a  great  many 


CHQIOB  OQHVOBT  FOB  A  TOITHa  BXLDEVBB.  669 

wants.  It  may  be  yon  have  been  afiraid  of  poverty.  Yon  haye  not  a 
very  large  sam  of  money  in  the  bank,  and  yon  nave  not  a  very  large  snm 
in  yonr  pocket  either,  and  aometimes  yon  are  ont  of  work,  and  yon 
hardly  know  what  yon  ahidl  eat  or  what  yon  shall  drink;  be  this  yonr 
coniiK)rt,  **  his  mercy  endnreth  for  oyer."  '*  Having  food  and  raiment 
let  ns  be  therewith  content,  for  he  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor 
forsake  thee."  AM  the  streams  may  dry,  bnt  the  brook  Oherith  will  flow 
on ;  and  even  if  that  chosen  rivnlet  shonld  fail,  behold  God  has  a  widow 
woman  at  Zarephath  who  will  feed  yon :  thon^  she  has  nothing  herself 
bnt  a  handfiil  of  meal  and  a  little  oil  in  the  erase,  yet  yon  shall  both 
live  npon  it  till  the  famine  is  over.  The  heir  of  heaven  shall  not  lack 
for  the  bread  of  earth  while  Ood  liveth,  for  it  is  written,  '*  Tmst  in  the 
Lord  and  do  good ;  so  shalt  then  dwell  in  the  land,  and  verily  thon  shalt 
be  fed.''  "  He  giveth  food  nnto  all  flesh,  for  his  mercy  endnreth  for 
ever."    "  Yonr  bread  shall  be  given  yon." 

At  last,  nnless  the  Lord  shonld  suddenly  appear,  there  will  come  the 
honr  of  death,  which  by  many  is  exceedingly  dreaded.  Yon  will  gather 
np  yonr  feet  in  the  bed,  and  bid  adien  to  all  temporal  things,  ana  then 
the  enduring  mercy  of  Qod  shall  be  yonr  abounding  consolation.  A 
large  part  of  our  fears  about  death  are  idle.  One  man  of  Ood  always 
feared  death,  bnt  he  might  have  spared  himself  his  wretchedness,  for  ne 
feM  asle^  one  night  in  apparently  excellent  heaUh,  and  died  in  his 
sleep.  He  never  could  have  known  anything  about  dying,  for  on  his 
face  were  no  tokens  of  pain  or  struggle,  nor  was  there  any  reason  to 
believe  that  he  ever  awoKe  till  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  amid  the  cherubim. 
Beloved,  if  we  die  awake,  and  even  if  we  die  in  pain,  we  shall  yet  hope 
to  die  triumphantly.  If  we  do  not  die  shouting  victory,  we  hope  tmit 
we  shall  peacefully  foil  asleep,  the  Lord  himself  kissing  away  our  sonl 
into  the  eternity  of  joy,  "  for  his  mercy  endnreth  for  ever."  "  He  will 
perfect  that  which  concemeth  me." 

Now^  I  want  you  young  friends  especially,  who  are  just  beginning  life» 
each  one  to  feci  "  Now,  I  am  going  to  put  myself  and  all  my  temporal 
circumstances,  all  my  fears,  aJl  my  engagements,  my  living,  my  dying, 
everything  into  the  hand  of  God,  and  tiiere  I  am  going  to  leave  it.  I 
will  trust  him  with  my  alL  In  the  beginning  I  will  trust  him,  and  I  will 
do  so  even  to  the  end,  and  go  my  way  witn  this  calm  confldeuce, '  He 
will  perfect  that  which  concemeth  me,  for  his  mercy  endnreth  for  ever.'" 
I  remember  hearing  one  of  our  evangelists  once  say  that  some 
Christian  people,  when  they  first  profess  to  be  Christians,  are  like 
a  man  who  is  going  a  long  distance  by  rail,  but  only  takes  a  ticket  for  a 
diort  distance,  and  then  he  has  to  get  out  and  make  a  rush  for  new 
tickets  as  he  goes  along.  ''  Now,"  said  he,  '*  there  are  other  believers  who 
know  better  and  take  a  ticket  all  the  way  through  at  the  first,  which  is 
by  far  the  wiser  way."  Some  trust  the  Lord  to  keep  them  for  a  quarter 
of  a  year,  and  others  for  a  month,  but  when  I  believed  in  Christ  Jesus,  I 
thank  his  name,  I  trusted  him  to  save  me  to  the  end.  I  sought  for  and 
obtained  a  finished  salvation,  which  is  my  joy  and  hope  at  this  moment. 
I  took  a  ticket  all  the  way  through,  and  I  have  not  had  to  get  a  fresh 
ticket  yet.  I  have  sometimes  thought  I  should,  but  when  I  have  run  to 
the  office  they  have  handed  me  bade  my  old  ticket,  the  one  I  lost,  the 
same  one  as  before,  and  I  knew  it  to  be  the  same,  for  it  bore  this  stamp 


€70 


VRBOPOIJIUV  TABlBKiaLB  FULPIT. 


opon  iiy — ^'^  He  that  bdieveth  and  k  baptused  shall  be  nTed.'*  The 
believer  is  saved  at  fint  by  believing^  and  he  riiall  be  so  to  the  last.  Do 
not  trnst  a  rickety  salvation  which  may  break  down  with  yon — a  tempo- 
rary, trnrnpry  salvation  wUch  may  only  last  yon  for  a  time  andtli«ifiu3 
von.  Embrace  with  all  your  heart  that  divine  promise,  ''I  will  never 
leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee/*  €ry  out  after  the  living  water  whidi  shall 
be  in  you  as  a  well  of  water  springing  up  unto  everlasting  life,  and  andc 
the  marrow  out  of  this  text,  "  He  that  believeth  in  me  hath  " — haih 
there  and  then,  down  on  the  nail — ^''hath" — now,  to-day,  ''hath  wer- 
lasting  Itfe " — ^not  life  &r  a  time,  bat  life  eveiiasting  as  sorely  as  he 
believes  in  Ohrist. 

III.  This  brings  me  to  conclude  with  the  third  clause  of  onr  text, 
which  is  a  prayer.  The  Lord  having  given  his  people  grace  to  rest  in 
his  mercy,  ne  puts  rr  nrro  their  hbabts  to  prat,  and  supplies 
THEM  WITH  A  PLEA — ''  Forsakc  Hot  the  works  of  thine  own  hands.** 

To  my  mind,  it  is  a  very  touching  prayer.  "  Lord,  thou  hast  begun 
the  work  upon  me  ;  go  on  to  finish  it^  for  if  thou  do  not,  it  never  will  be 
finished,  if  thou  leave  it,  it  is  left  undone,  and  I  am  undone  indeed* 
Bat  do  not  ibrsake  the  work  of  thine  own  hands."  It  is  such  a  prayer  ss 
the  cla^  might  put  up  when  it  is  revolving  on  the  potter's  wheel.  The 
ix)tter  IS  usin^  his  best  skill,  and  producing  an  article  of  great  beauty, 
oringing  out  its  shape  and  form  as  it  spins  round  before  him.  Already 
you  can  see  something  of  what  it  will  be :  the  design  does  not  yet  perfedtly 
appear,  but  you  can  guess  it.  But  suppose  the  potter  were  to  stop  the 
wheel,  take  up  the  day  and  fling  it  back  again  into  the  lump,  that  vessd 
never  would  De  finished,  for  it  cannot  finish  itself.  It  has  no  power  to 
shape  itself  in  any  degree ;  and  so  if  it  were  rational  day  and  could  speak, 
it  would  say,  **  Forsake  not  the  work  of  thine  own  hands.  Persevere  in 
what  thou  hast  begun."  This  is  a  prayer  whidi  you  and  I  may  well 
bring  before  God,  whose  workmanship  we  are.  ''0  God,  if  I  have  only 
a  litUe  faith,  yet  thou  didst  give  it  me.  Oh,  give  me  more.  If  tboii  hast 
:given  me  only  a  desire  after  thee,  yet  that  desire  is  a  divine  creation : 
have  respect  unto  it,  I  pray  thee,  and  ftdfil  it."  This  is  a  powerfol 
argument  with  our  gradous  God,  for,  brethren,  he  does  not  give  yon  a 
lit&e  grace  to  tantalize  you.  Now  he  has  given  you  a  hunger  and  thirst 
after  him,  suppose  he  does  not  satisfy  yon,  that  hunger  and  that  thirst 
will  be  cruel  gifts.  He  has  taken  away  from  yon  the  power  to  be  happy 
in  the  world,  has  he  not  ?  Well,  if  he  does  not  intend  to  give  you  his 
own  divine  happiness,  why  has  he  made  you  weary  of  the  world  and  the 

gleasures  of  sm?  A  dog  likes  bones,  and  I  am  sure  I  would  not  teach 
im  to  leave  his  bones  or  tnm  him  into  a  man,  if  afterwards  I  had  &> 
say,  ^Now  yon  have  become  a  man,  there  is  nothing  for  you.  If  yon 
want  a  meal  yon  must  try  the  bones  again."  No,  no.  He  who  makes 
us  hate  the  world  means  to  give  us  something  better.  He  who  makes  ns 
loathe  sin  means  to  cleanse  us  from  it  He  who  begins  to  build  in  onr 
.souls  is  not  a  foolish  builder,  of  whom  it  shall  be  sai(^  **  This  man  began 
'to  bnOd,  but  was  not  able  to  finish."  Do  you  think,  brother,  that  the 
Lord  has  found  out  something  in  you  which  is  so  bad  that  it  b^es  him 
'.and  compels  him  to  give  up  his  work.  If  it  were  so,  why  did  he  ever 
begin  it  ?  He  knew  what  would  bo  in  you.  The  presdent  eye  of  God 
/foresaw  every  sin,  and  every  tendency  to  sin  in  the  heart  of  every  man 


CHOICB  COMTOBT  FOB  A  YOXTNa  BBLnSVSB.  671 

that  lives;  and  so  when  he  began  his  work  he  knew  all  Chat  it  wonld 
reqnire  to  perfect  it.  He  has  not  gone  forth  to  fight  the  devil  in  yon  to 
discover  that  he  is  not  strong  enough  to  meet  him.  Oh,  no^  he  knows 
the  force  of  yonr  evil  nature^  the  force  of  your  hasty  temper,  the  force  of 
that  obstinate  self-love,  the  force  of  that  imperions  pride,  the  force  of  that 
doggei  will :  he  knows  all  this,  nor  can  anything  take  him  by  surprise, 
and  therefore,  since  he  has  begun  to  save  you,  rest  assured  that  he 
will  accomplish  his  design.  His  hand  is  not  shortened,  nor  his  heart 
dismayed ;  you  may  cry  to  him  out  of  the  utmost  depths,  and  be  quite 
assured  that  he  can  and  will  even  there  carrv  on  his  purposes  of  love,  for 
he  will  not  foisake  the  work  of  his  own  hands. 

Go  to  him,  then,  in  prayer :  plead  with  him  mightily.  Prayer  is  the 
channel  appointed  to  convey  to  you  the  blessing;  open  the  valves,  and 
let  the  stream  flow  into  your  heart.  Whenever  you  feel  as  if  you  must 
be  broken  in  pieces  like  a  poor  earthen  pot,  then  cry  to  him — **  Lord, 
forsake  not  the  work  of  thine  own  hands.  Oh,  do  not  leave  me,  for  I 
bear  the  print  of  thy  hand :  be  patient  with  this  ill-wrought  clay,  and 
work  upon  me  till  thou  shalt  have  made  me  a  vessel  unto  honour  fit  for 
thine  own  special  use." 

In  fine,  the  closing  word  is  just  this.  I  have  often  preached  to  you 
salvation  to  sinners,  as  sinners,  just  as  vou  are,  and  I  have  bidden  yon 
in  my  Master's  name  come  and  receive  that  free  mercy  which  he  presents 
to  the  guilty,  even  to  the  guiltiest  of  all,  when  they  will  but  take  it  and 
trust  in  his  dear  name.  Now,  I  supplement  that  by  advising  you  to 
carry  the  rule  of  fiuth  into  every  part  of  your  life.  Trust  the  Lord 
Jesus  for  evcTything.  Do  not  come  to-night  to  trust  in  Christ  half  wav, 
but  for  aH  things  commit  yourself  into  his  eternal  keeping,  for  he  is  able 
to  keep  you  from  &lHng,  and  to  present  you  fEiultless  nefore  his  presence 
with  exceeding  great  joy.  If  you  believers  have  been  trusting  the  divine 
Lord  to  keep  von  if  you  keep  yourselves,  get  beyond  that  and  trust  in  him 
to  keep  you  that  you  may  keep  yourselves.  If  you  have  said,  **  I  believe 
that  he  will  be  faithful  to  me  if  I  am  faithful  to  him,"  go  much  farther, 
for  it  will  never  do  to  stop  there.  Trust  in  him  to  make  vou  fidthful  to 
him.  Do  not  snifer  the  pivot  to  rest  in  you,  put  the  whole  stress  and 
burden  upon  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  you  retain  any  ''if"  or  ''but"  about 
jour  eternal  salvation,  it  will  be  a  thorn  in  your  pillow,  and  a  serpent 
at  your  heel.  If  you  are  the  comer-stone  and  mainstay  of  your  own 
salvation  you  are  a  lost  man.  You  must  han^  upon  the  sure  nail,  Christ 
Jesus,  all  the  burden  and  all  the  glory  of  his  Father's  house.  As  for 
depending  on  your  own  watchfulness,  or  constancy,  or  anything  else  of 
vour  own,  I  want  you  to  get  right  away  ftom  it ;  and  now,  once  for  all, 
by  an  act  which  you  shful  rejoice  in  as  long  as  you  live,  commit  your 
whole  future — time  and  eternity — ^into  the  pierced  hand  of  him  who  says 
that  he  gives  to  his  sheep  eternal  life,  and  thev  shall  never  perish,  neither 
shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand.  In  this  one  thing  I  wonld  have 
you  be  as  I  am,  for  I  have  no  shade  of  hope  apart  from  the  Lord  Jesus, 
either  as  to  my  pardon  or  my  perseverance,  my  new  birth  or  my  ultimate 
perfectioiL  I  need  to  know  what  is  to  become  of  me  in  death,  and  what 
18  to  become  of  me  when  I  live  again  in  eternity ;  and  if  I  could  not 
have  a  far-reaching  &ith  which  flung  itself  across  the  awfal  gulf  that  sepa- 
rates this  world  from  the  next^  my  religion  would . jidd  me  but  small 


♦672 


HBXaOPOLITAV  TABEBNAGLB  PULPIT. 


^comfort.  Bat  now  to-night — and  may  eyerTbody  here  be  enaUed  ao  to 
4o— I  do  put  my  whole  self,  my  soul,  my  body,  my  engagements,  my  pro- 
apective  sofferings,  myfdtnre  tFonblea,  my  laboura— everything  which 
has  to  do  with  me  or  abont  me  into  that  same  hand  which  bongfat  me 
when  it  was  nailed  to  the  tree.  He  shall  keep  me,  or  I  never  mall  be 
'kept.  Once  for  all  I  make  a  deposit  of  my  eternal  interests,  and  leave 
them  with  him  whose  honour  it  is  to  keep  ^ely  that  which  is  committed 
to  him.  He  is  able  to  preserve  me,  ana  I  have  done  with  it.  I  hand 
over  my  all  to  him.  Gome,  my  brethren,  do  the  same,  and  when  yon 
have  done  so  be  of  good  cheer.  A  man  takes  his  money  into  his  bank 
and  leaves  it.  He  does  not  go  back  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  and  say, 
"  Mr.  Cashier,  have  you  my  money  safely?"  "  Yes,  sir."  "  Well  I  want 
to  sec  it"  They  would  not  want  such  a  man  to  deal  with  the  bank  kMig« 
for  he  has  no  c(mfidence,  and  will  be  more  trouble  than  profits  Pat  in 
your  all  with  Jesus  and  leave  it  there.  Make  a  permanent  investment. 
Draw  the  interest  of  it  and  spend  it  in  present  enjoyment,  but  leave 
your  all  as  a  permanent  investment,  and  sing  with  me — 

^*  I  know  that  safe  with  him  remainSi 
Protected  by  his  power. 
What  IVe  committed  to  his  hands 
Till  the  decisiTe  hoar. 

**  Then  will  he  own  my  worthless  name 
Before  his  Fsther*a  face, 
And  in  the  New  Jerusalem  / 

Appoint  my  eouI  a  place.'* 


Portions  of  Sgbiptubb  Rbad  bsforb  Qebmok— Ftalm  cxzzviiL; 

Bomans  viii.  28 — 39. 


Hymks  fboh  ''Oub  Own  Hymn  Book"— G85, 213,  738. 


LETTER  FROM  MR.  SPURGEON. 
Mr  i>BAB  FxiEiij>s, — ^I  am  very  soriy  that  I  am  altogether  OTerwhdmed  by 
A  similar  attack  to  that  which  has  laid  me  prostrate  during  fonner  years.  I 
earnestly  ask  your  prayers,  for  I  am  brought  very  low.  I  trust  that  the  wans 
>and  genial  weather  win  enable  me  to  rally  much -sooner  than  if  I  had  been  at 
iiome.    I  cannot  write  more,  for  I  am  very  ill. 

Yours  very  truly. 
Hotel  de  la  Faix^  Menfeoa^  U  H.  SPURafiON. 

IflfoTember  27, 1870. 


^tixmaBm  ^nibtrMtk  §»Ipt 


SOUL  SAVING  OUR  ONE  BUSINESS. 


%  ^tmtft[ 


DELIYEBED  B7 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINOTON. 


''I  am  made  all  things  to  all  men,  that  I  might  by  all  means  pave  soms.*' 

I  Corinijians  is..  22. 

It  is  a  grand  thing  to  see  a  man  thoroughly  possessed  with  one  master- 
passion.  Such  a  man  is  sure  to  be  strong,  and  if  the  master-principle 
be  excellent,  he  is  sure  to  be  excellent  too.  The  man  of  one  object  is 
a  man  indeed.  Lives  with  many  aims  are  like  water  trickling  through 
innumerable  streams,  none  of  which  is  wide  enough  or  deep  enough  to 
float  the  merest  cockleshell  of  a  boat;  but  a  life  with  one  object  is  like 
a  mighty  river  flowing  between  its  banks,  bearing  to  the  ocean  a  multi- 
tude t)f  ships,  and  spreading  fertility  on  either  side.  Give  me  a  man  not 
only  with  a  great  object  in  his  soul,  but  thoroughly  possessed  by  it,  his 
powers  all  concentrated,  and  himself  on  fire  with  vehement  zeal  for  his 
^upreme  object,  and  you  have  put  before  me  one  of  the  greatest  sources 
of  power  which  the  world  can  produce.  Give  me  a  man  engrossed  with 
holy  love  as  to  his  heart,  and  filled  with  some  masterly  celestial  thought 
as  to  his  brain,  and  such  a  man  will  be  known  wherever  his  lot  may  be 
cast,  and  I  will  venture  to  prophecy  that  his  name  will  be  remembered 
long  after  the  place  of  his  sepulchre  shall  be  forgotten. 

Such  a  man  was  Paul.  I  am  not  about  to  set  him  upon  a  pedestal, 
that  you  may  look  at  him  and  wonder,  much  less  that  you  may  kneel 
down  and  worship  him  as  a  saint.  I  mention  Paul,  because  what  he  was 
we^ught  every  one  of  us  to  be ;  and  though  we  cannot  sha]*e  in  his 
office,  not  being  apostles ;  though  we  cannot  share  in  his  talents  or  in 
his  inspiration,  yet  we  ought  to  be  possessed  by  the  same  spirit  which 
actuated  him,  and  let  me  also  add  we  ought  to  be  possessed  by  it  in  the 
same  degree.  Do  you  demur  to  that  ?  I  ask  you  what  there  was  in 
Paul  by  the  grace  of  God  which  may  not  be  in  you,  and  what  had  Jesus 
done  for  Paul  more  than  for  you  ?  He  was  divinely  changed ;  and  so 
have  you  been  if  you  have  passed  from  darkness  into  marvellous  hght. 
He  had  much  for|jiJi7en;  and  so  have  you  also  been  freely  pardoned* 
He  was  redeemed  1^  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  so  have  you  been 
—at  leasts  so  you  profess  to  have  been.    He  was  filled  with  the  Spirit  of 

No.  1,507. 


671  HETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULriT. 

God;  and  bo  arc  joa,  if  jon  are  trnly  such  aa  yonr  Omatian  profenion 
makes  yan  out  to  be,  Owiug,  then,  your  salvation  to  Christ,  being 
debtors  to  the  precioua  blood  of  JeRus,  and  hemg  qnickened  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  I  ask  yon  why  there  should  not  be  the  some  fruit  from  the  same 
■owing?  Why  not  tiie  same  effeot  from  the  same  cause?  Do  not  tell 
me  that  the  apostle  was  an  exception,  and  cannot  be  set  up  as  a  rule  or 
model  for  commoner  folk,  for  I  shall  have  to  tell  you  that  we  must  be 
such  as  Paul  was  if  we  hope  to  be  where  Paul  is.  Paul  did  not  think 
that  he  had  attained,  neither  was  already  perfect.  Shall  we  think  him 
to  be  BO — so  think  him  to  be  so  as  to  regard  him  to  be  inimitable,  and.  so 
be  content  to  fall  short  of  what  he  was?  Nay,  verily,  but  let  it  be  oar 
incessant  prayer  as  believers  in  Christ  that  we  may  be  followers  oC  him 
80  &r  as  lie  folloived  Christ,  and  wherein  he  &iled  to  set  his  feet  io  his 
liOid's  footprints  may  we  even  outstrip  him,  md  be  more  zealous,  more 
devotfd  to  Christ  than  even  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  0  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  would  bring  ua  to  be  lU;e  onr  Lord  Jeans  himself. 

At  this  time  I  shall  have  to  speak  to  yon  npon  PauV»  great  obfeet  in 
life;  he  tells  ns  it  was  to  "save  some";  we  will  then  look  into  Paul's 
heart  and  show  you  a  few  of  Ihs  great  reasona  whkh  made  km  Ihmk  it  to 
vrqiortant  that  some  at  least  should  be  saved;  then,  thirdly,  we  will  in- 
dicate certain  of  the  means  ivhich  the  apostle  used  to  that  end ;  aud  all 
with  this  view,  that  you,  my  dear  heareia,  may  seek  to  "save  some'*; 
that  yon  may  seek  this  because  of  potent  reaaons  which  you  cuioot 
withstand,  and  that  you  may  seek  it  with  wise  methods  such  as  shall  in 
the  end  snoceed. 

I.  First,  then,  brethren,  what  wab  Paul's  qrkat  objxci  m  his 
DAILY  LI7IC  AND  UiNisTBT?     Ho  Bays  it  was  to  save  some. 

There  are  ministers  of  Christ  present  at  this  hour,  together  with  City 
missionaries,  Bible-women,  Sunday-achool  t«achera,  and  other  workere  in 
my  Master's  vineyard,  and  I  make  bold  to  enquire  of  each  one  of  them 
^Is  this  your  object  in  all  yonr  Christian  service  ?  Do  you  above  all 
tbiDgs  aim  at  saving  souls?  I  am  atraid  that  some  have  fot^tten  this 
grand  object ;  but,  dear  Mends,  anything  short  of  this  is  unworthy  to  be 
the  great  end  of  a  Christian's  life.  I  fear  there  are  some  who  preach 
with  the  view  of  amvutmg  men,  and  as  long  as  people  Kan  be  gathered  in 
crowds,  and  their  ean  can  be  tickled,  and  they  can  retire  pleased  with 
what  they  have  beard,  the  orator  is  content,  and  folds  his  hands,  and 
goes  back  aelf-satisfied.  Bot  Paul  did  not  lay  himself  out  to  i^eaae  the 
pubhc  and  collect  the  crowd.  If  he  did  not  save  them  he  felt  that  it 
was  of  no  avail  to  interest  them.  Unless  the  truth  had  pierced  tb»r 
hearts,  affected  their  lives,  and  made  new  men  of  them,  Paul  would  have 
gone  home  crying,  "  Who  hath  believed  onr  report,  and  to  whom  is  the 
arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  ? " 

as  to  be  the  opinion  of  a  large  party  in  the  present  day  that  the 
Christian  effort  should  be  to  educate  men.  I  grant  yon  that 
1  is  in  itself  an  exceedingly  valuable  thing,  so  valuable  that  I 
ihe  whole  Christian  church  rejoices  greatly  that  at  Last  we  havB 
J  system  of  education,  which  only  needs  to  be  carefully  carried 
ivery  child  in  this  Ituid  will  have  the  keys  of  knowledge  in  his 
Whatever  price  others  may  set  upon  ignotance  we  are  promoters 
edge,  and  the  more  it  can  be  spread  the  better  stuUl  we  be 


SOUL  SAVING  OUR  ONE  BUSINESS.  675 

pleased.  Bat  if  the  church  of  God  thinks  that  it  is  sent  into  the  world 
merely  to  train  the  mental  facnlties,  it  has  made  a  veiy  Berioos  mistake^ 
for  the  object  of  Christianity  is  not  to  edncate  men  for  their  secular 
callings,  or  even  to  train  them  in  the  politer  arts,  or  the  more  elegant 
professions,  or  to  enable  them  to  enjoy  the  beaaties  of  nature  or  the 
charms  of  poetry.  Jesus  Christ  came  not  into  the  world  for  any  of 
these  things,  but  he  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost,  and 
on  the  same  errand  has  he  sent  his  church,  and  she  is  a  traitor  to  the 
Master  who  sent  her  if  she  is  beguiled  by  the  beaaties  of  taste  and  art  to 
forget  that  to  preach  Christ  and  him  crucified  is  the  only  object  for 
which  she  exists  among  the  sons  of  men.  The  business  of  the  church  is 
salTstion.  The  minister  is  to  use  all  means  to  save  some ;  he  is  no 
minister  of  Christ  if  this  be  not  the  one  desire  of  his  heart.  Missionaries 
sink  far  below  their  level  when  they  are  content  to  civilize :  their  first 
object  is  to  save.  The  same  is  true  of  the  Sunday-school  teacher,  and 
of  all  other  workers  among  children ;  if  they  have  merely  taught  the 
child  to  read,  to  repeat  hymns,  and  so  forth,  they  have  not  yet  touched 
their  true  vocation.  We  must  have  the  children  saved.  At  this  nail  we 
must  drive,  and  the  hammer  must  come  down  upon  this  head  always — 
If  by  all  means  I  may  save  some,  for  we  have  done  nothing  unless  some 
are  saved. 

Paul  does  not  even  say  that  he  tried  to  nwralm  men.  The  best  pro* 
moter  of  morality  is  the  gospel.  When  a  man  is  saved  he  becomes 
moral — ^he  becomes  more,  he  becomes  holy.  But,  to  aim  first  at  morality 
is  altogether  to  miss  the  mark,  and  if  we  did  attain  it — as  we  shall 
not — ^yet  we  should  not  have  attained  that  for  which  we  were  sent  into 
the  world.  Dr.  Chalmers'  experience  is  a  very  valuable  one  to  those  who 
think  that  the  Christian  ministry  ought  to  preach  up  mere  morality,  for 
he  says  that  in  his  first  parish  he  preached  morality,  and  saw  no  good 
whatever  arising  out  of  Ms  exhortations.  But,  as  soon  as  he  began  to 
preach  Christ  crucified,  then  there  was  a  buzz  and  a  stir,  and  much 
opposition,  but  grace  prevailed.  He  who  wishes  for  perfumes  must  grow 
tne  flowers ;  he  who  desires  to  promote  morality  must  have  men  saved. 
He  who  wants  motion  in  a  corpse  should  first  seek  life  for  it,  and  he  who 
desires  to  see  a  rightly  ordered  life  should  first  desire  an  inward  renewal 
by  the  Holv  Spirit.  We  are  not  to  be  satisfied  when  we  have  taught 
men  their  duties  towards  their  neighbours,  or  even  their  duties  towards 
God :  this  would  suffice  for  Moses,  but  not  for  Christ.  The  law  came  by 
Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesas  Christ.  We  teach  men  what 
they  ought  to  be,  but  we  do  far  more ;  by  the  power  of  the  gospel  applied 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  we  make  them  what  thev  ought  to  be  by  the  power 
of  Grod's  Spirit  We  put  not  before  the  blina  the  things  that  they  ought 
to  see,  but  we  open  their  eyes  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  We  tell  not  the 
captive  how  free  he  ought  to  be,  but  we  open  the  door  and  take  away 
his  fetters.  We  are  not  content  to  tell  men  what  they  must  be,  but  we 
show  them  how  this  character  can  be  attained,  and  how  Jesus  Christ 
fb^y  presents  all  that  is  essential  to  eternal  life  to  all  those  who  come 
Maad  put  their  trust  in  him. 

Now  observe,  brethren,  if  I,  or  yon,  or  any  of  us,  or  all  of  us,  shall 
have  spent  our  lives  merely  in  amusing  men,  or  educating  men,  or 
moraliiang  men,  when  we  shall  oome  to  give  in  our  accoimt  at  the  last 


.   676  METBOPOIJTAtf  TABBBNAOLS  PULPIT. 

great  day  we  shall  be  in  a  very  sorry  condition,  and  we  shall  hare  bat 
a  very  sorry  record  to  render ;  for  of  what  avail  will  it  be  to  a  man  to  be 
educated  when  he  comes  to  be  damned  ?  Of  what  service  will  it  be  to 
him  to  have  been  amused  when  the  trompNBt  sounds,  and  heaven  and 
earth  are  shaking,  and  the  pit  opens  wide  her  jaws  of  fire  and  swallows  cp 
the  soul  unsaved  ?  Of  what  avail  even  to  have  moralized  a  man  if  stiu 
he  is  on  the  left  hand  of  the  judge,  and  if  stilly  '^  Depart,  ye  cursed," 
shall  be  his  portion  ?  Blood-red  with  the  murder  of  men's  souls  will  be 
the  skirts  ox  professing  Christians,  unless  the  drift,  and  end,  and  aim  of 
all  their  work  has  been  to  ''save  some."  Oh!  I  beseech  you,  especially 
you,  dear  Mends,  who  are  working  in  Sunday  and  Eagged  Schools,  and 
elsewhere,  do  not  think  that  you  have  done  anything  mileas  the  <^uld- 
ren's  souls  are  saved.  Settle  it  that  this  is  the  top  and  bottom  of  the 
business,  and  throw  your  whole  strength,  in  the  name  of  Christy  and 
by  the  power  of  the  Eternal  Spirit,  into  this  one  object — if  bv  any  means 
you  may  save  some,  and  bring  some  to  Jesus  that  they  may  oe  delivered 
from  the  wrath  to  oome. 

What  did  Paul  mean  by  saying  that  he  desired  to  save  some  ?  What 
is  it  to  be  saved  ?  Paul  meant  by  that  nothing  less  than  i^t  some  skouU 
he  horn  again;  for  no  man  is  saved  until  he  is  made  a  new  creature  in 
Christ  Jesus.  The  old  nature  cannot  be  saved ;  it  is  dead  and  corrupt ; 
the  best  thing  that  can  be  done  with  it  is  to  let  it  be  crucified  and  boxied 
in  the  sepulchre  of  Christ.  There  must  be  a  new  nature  implanted  in 
us  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Grhoet,  or  we  cannot  be  saved.  We  must 
be  as  much  new  creations  as  if  we  had  never  been :  we  must  come  a 
second  time  as  fresh  from  the  hand  of  the  Eternal  God  as  if  we  had  been 
to-day  moulded  by  divine  wisdom  as  Adam  was  in  Paradise.  The  Great 
Teacher's  words  are,  "The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou 
hearest  the  sound  th^eof,  but  thou  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  nor 
whither  it  goeth ;  so  is  every  one  that  is  bom  of  the  Spirit."  "  Except 
a  man  be  bom  again  from  above  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.** 
This,  then,  Paul  meant,  that  men  must  be  new  creatures  in  Ghrkt 
Jesus,  and  we  must  never  rest  tiQ  we  see  such  a  change  wrought  upon 
them.  This  must  be  the  object  of  our  teaching,  and  of  our  praying, 
indeed,  the  object  of  our  lives,  that  "some"  may  be  regenerated. 

He  meant,  beside  that,  that  some  might  he  cleansed  from  their  past 
iniquity  through  the  merit  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God. 
No  man  can  be  saved  from  his  sin  except  by  the  atonement.  Under  ttie 
Jewish  law  it  was  written,  "Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in 
all  things  that  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  Hat 
curse  has  never  been  reversed,  and  the  only  way  to  escape  from  it  is  this  : 
Jesus  Christ  was  made  a  curse  for  us,  as  it  is  written,  "  Cursed  is  evezj 
one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  Now,  he  who  believes  in  Jesus,  who  puts 
his  hand  upon  the  head  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  scapegoat  of  his  people, 
has  lost  his  sins.  His  &ith  is  sure  evidence  that  his  iniquities  were  of 
old  laid  upon  the  head  of  the  great  Substitute.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
was  punished  in  our  room,  and  we  are  no  longer  obnoxious  to  the  wrath 
of  God.  Behold,  the  sin-atoning  sacrifice  is  slain  and  offered  on  the 
altar,  aud  the  Lord  has  accepted  it,  and  is  so  well  pleased  that  he  has 
declaimed  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus  is  fully  and  et^maDy  for- 
given.   Now,  we  long  to  see  men  thus  forgiven.    We  pine  to  "bring 


SOUL  SAvma  oxm  one  bttsikess.  677 

the  prodigal's  head  into  the  Father's  bosom,  the  wandering  sheep  to  the 
gooa  Shepherd's  shoulder,  the  lost  piece  of  money  into  the  owner's 
hands,  and  until  this  is  done  nothing  is  done.    I  mean,  brethren,  nothing 

Sriritually,  nothing  eternally,  nothing  that  is  worthy  of  the  agony  of  a 
hristian's  life,  nothing  that  can  be  looked  upon  as  deserving  of  an 
immortal  spirit's  spending  all  its  fires  upon  it.  0  Lord,  our  soul  yearns 
to  see  Jesus  rewarded  by  the  salvation  of  the  blood-bought.  Aid  us  to 
lead  souls  to  him. 

Once  more  ;  when  the  apostle  wished  that  he  might  save  some  he 
meant  that,  being  regenerated,  and  being  pardoned,  theij  might  also  he 
purified  and  made  holy;  for  a  man  is  not  saved  while  he  lives  in  sin.  Let 
a  man  say  what  he  will,  he  cannot  be  saved  from  sin  whilst  he  is  the  slave 
of  it.  How  is  a  drunkard  saved  from  drunkenness  whilst  he  still  riota 
as  before  ?  How  can  you  say  that  the  swearer  is  saved  from  blasphemy 
while  he  is  still  profane?  Words  must  be  used  in  their  true  meaning. 
Now,  the  great  object  of  the  Christian's  work  should  be  that  some  might 
be  saved  from  their  sins,  purified,  and  made  white,  and  made  examples  of 
integrity,  chastity,  honesty,  and  righteousness  as  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  of 
Grod,  and  where  this  is  not  the  case  we  have  laboured  in  vain  and  spent 
our  strength  for  naught. 

Now,  1  do  protest  before  you  aJl  that  I  have  in  this  house  of  prayer 
never  sought  anything  but  the  conversion  of  souls,  and  I  call  heaven  and 
earth  to  witness,  and  your  consciences,  too,  that  I  have  never  laboured 
for  anything  except  this,  the  bringing  of  yon  to  Christ,  that  I  might 
present  vou  at  last  unto  God  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  I  have  not  sought 
to  gratify  depraved  appetites  either  by  novelty  of  doctrine  or  ceremonijj, 
bnt  I  have  kept  to  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel.  I  have  kept  back  no 
part  of  the  price  of  God's  word  from  you,  but  I  have  endeavoured  to  give 
you  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  I  have  sought  out  no  fineries  of  speech, 
but  have  spoken  plainly,  and  right  straight  at  your  hearts  and  consciences, 
and  if  you  be  not  saved,  I  mourn  and  lament  before  God  that  up  to  this 
day,  though  I  have  preached  hundreds  of  times  to  you,  yet  I  have  preached 
in  vain.  If  you  have  not  closed  in  with  Christ,  if  you  have  not  been 
washed  in  the  fountain  filled  with  blood,  you  are  waste  pieces  of  soil  from 
which  no  harvest  has  yet  come.  You  tell  me,  perhaps,  that  you  have  been 
kept  from  a  great  many  sins,  that  you  have  learned  a  great  many  truths 
by  coming  here.  So  far  so  good  ;  but  could  I  aiford  to  live  for  this,  merely 
to  teach  you  certain  truths  or  keep  you  back  from  open  sins?  How 
could  this  content  me  if  I  knew  all  the  while  that  you  were  still  un- 
saved, and  must,  therefore,  after  death,  be  cast  into  the  flames  of  hell  ? 
Nay,  beloved,  before  the  Lord  I  count  nothing  to  be  worthy  of  your 
pastor's  life,  and  soul,  and  energy  but  the  winning  of  you  to  Christ. 
Nothing  but  your  salvation  can  ever  make  me  feel  that  my  heart's  desire 
is  granted.  I  ask  every  worker  here  to  see  to  this,  that  he  never  turns 
aside  from  shooting  at  this  target,  and  at  the  centre  of  this  target,  too, 
namely,  that  he  may  win  souls  for  Christ,  and  see  them  born  to  God, 
and  washed  in  the  fonnttiin  filled  with  blood.  Let  the  workers'  hearts 
ache,  and  yearn,  and  their  voices  cry  till  their  throats  are  hoarse,  but 
let  them  judge  that  they  have  accomplished  nothing  whatever  until,  at 
least,  in  some  cases,  men  nre  really  saved.  As  the  fisherman  longs  to 
take  the  fish  in  his  net,  as  the  himtcr  pants  to  bear  home  his  spoil,  as 


(;7S  METROPOLrTAK  TABEBKACLE   PULPIT. 

the  mother  pinca  to  clasp  her  lost  child  to  her  boRom,  bo  do  ve  &int  for 
the  salvation  of  souls,  and  we  must  have  them,  or  ve  are  readr  to  die. 
Hava  them,  0  I^ord,  save  them  for  Christ's  sake. 

Hut  now  we  must  leave  that  point  for  another. 

II.    The  Afootlb  had  qskat  beasonb  fob  electisq  such  as 

OBJECT   IN   LIFB. 

"Were  he  here  I  think  he  would  tell  you  that  his  reasons  were  some- 
thing of  tliia  kind.     To  save  souls !     1/  they  he  nol  saved  hole  ia  God  dit- 
honomtd!    Did  you  ever  think  over  the  amomit  of  dishonour  that  is 
dune  to  the  Lord  our  Ood   in  London  in  any  one  hour  nf  the  day. 
Tiikc,  if  you  will,  this  prayer  hour,  when  we  are  gathered  here  oeten- 
aibly  to  pray.     If  the  thoughts  of  ttds  great  assembly  could  all  be   read, 
how  many  of  them  would  be  dishonouring  to  the  Moat  High  I     But 
outside  of  every  house  of  prayer,  outside  of  every  place  of  worship  of 
vvcry  kind,  think  of  the  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands,  the  hundreds 
of  thousands,  who  have  all  this  day  neglected  the  very  Bemblauce  of  the 
worship  of  the  God  who  has  made  them,  and  who  keeps  them  in  being  ! 
Think  of  how  many  times  the  door  of  the  gin-palace  has  swung  on  its 
hinges  during  this  holy  hour :  how  many  times  God's  name  has  been 
blasphemed  at  the  drinking-bar  I    There  ore  worse  things  than  these,  if 
worse  can  be,  but  I  shall  not  lift  the  veil.    Transfer  your  thoughts  to  an 
hour  or  so  later,  when  the  reil  of  darkness  has  descended.    Shame  will 
not  permit  us  even  to  think  of  how  God's  name  is  dishonoured  in  the 
persons  of  those  whose  first  father  was  made  alter  the  image  of  God, 
out  who  pollute  themselves  to  be  the  slaves  of  Satan  and  the  prey  of 
bestial  lusts!     Alaa !  alas !  for  this  city,  it  is  full  of  abominations,  of 
which  the  apostle  said,  "  It  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of  those  things 
which  were  done  of  them  in  secret."    Christian  men  and  women,  nothing 
can  sweep  away  the  social  evil  but  the  gospel.    Vices  are  like  vipers, 
and  only  the  voice  of  Jesus  can  drive  them  out  of  the  land.    The  gospel 
is  the  great  besom  with  which  to  cleanse  the  Slthiness  of  this  city,  and 
nothine  else  will  avail.    Will  yon  not,  for  God's  sake,  whose  name  is 
every  (uy  proiiuied,  seek  to  save  some  ?   If  you  will  enlarge  your  thonghts 
and  take  in  all  the  great  cities  of  the  Continent ;  ay,  further  still,  take 
lators  of  China  and  Hindoetan,  the  worshippers  of  the  fiilse 
d  the  antichrist,  what  a  mass  of  provocatioa  have  we  here ! 
toke  in  Jehovah's  nose  must  this  &lse  worship  be !    How  he 
put  his  hand  to  the  hilt  of  his  sword  as  though  he  would  say, 
ill  ease  me  of  my  adversaries."     But  he  b^irs  it  patiently, 
become  indifferent  to  his  loogsuffering,  but  day  and  night  let 
1  him,  and  daily  let  us  labour  for  him  if  by  any  means  we 
ome  for  his  glory's  sake. 

ear  friends,  also,  of  the  exfy-eme  misery  of  ihii  our  human  race. 
>  a  very  dreadful  thine  to-night  if  you  could  get  any  ides  of 
ate  of  the  misery  of  London  at  tlie  present  moment  in  the 
d  the  workhouse.  Kow,  I  would  not  say  half  a  word  against 
lerevcr  it  cornea  it  is  a  bitter  ill ;  but  you  will  mark  as  yon 
Fully  that,  while  a  few  are  poor  because  of  unavoidable  circum- 
■ery  large  mass  of  the  poverty  of  London  is  the  sheer  and 
of  profuseness,  want  of  forethought,  idleness,  and,  worst  of 
kenness.    Ah,  that  drunkenness  I   That  is  the  master  eviL    If 


80UL  SAYINa  OUB  ONE  BUSrETESB.  679 

drink  could  but  be  got  rid  of  we  might  be  sure  of  conquering  the  very 
deTil  himself.  The  drunkenness  created  b^  the  infernal  liqruor-dens 
which  plague-spot  the  whole  of  this  huge  city  is  appalling.  No,  1  did  not 
speak  in  haste,  or  let  slip  a  hasty  word ;  many  of  the  drink-houses  are 
nothing  less  than  infernal:  in  some  respects  they  are  worse,  for  hell  has 
its  uses  as  the  divine  protest  against  sin,  but  as  lor  the  gin-palace  there 
is  nothing  to  be  said  in  its  fiEiYOur.  The  vices  of  the  age  cause  three- 
fourths  of  all  the  poverty.  If  you  could  look  at  the  homes  to-night,  the 
wretched  homes  wnere  women  will  tremble  at  the  sound  of  their  husband's 
foot  as  he  comes  home,  where  little  children  will  crouch  down  with  fear 
upon  their  little  heap  of  straw  because  the  human  brute  who  calls  him- 
self **  a  man  "  will  come  reeling  home  from  the  place  where  he  has  been 
indulging  his  appetites — ^if  you  could  look  at  such  a  sight,  and  remember 
that  it  will  be  seen  ten  thousand  times  over  to-night,  I  think  you 
would  say, ''  God  help  us  by  all  means  to  save  some."  Since  the  great 
axe  to  lay  at  the  root  of  the  deadly  upas  tree  is  the  gospel  of  Christ,  may 
God  help  us  to  hold  that  axe  there,  and  to  work  constantly  with  it  till 
the  huge  trunk  of  the  poison  tree  begins  to  rock  to  and  fro,  and  we  get 
it  down,  and  London  is  saved,  and  the  world  is  saved  irom  the  wretched- 
ness and  the  misery  which  now  drips  from  every  bough. 

Again,  dear  friends,  the  Christian  has  other  reasons  for  seeking  to  save 
some;  and  chiefly  because  of  (he  terrible  future  ofimpemteni  eouU.  That 
veil  which  hangs  before  me  is  not  penetrated  by  every  glance,  but  he 
who  has  his  eye  touched  with  heavenly  eye-salve  sees  through  it,  and 
what  does  he  see  ?  Myriads  upon  myriads  of  spintA  in  dread  procession 
passing  from  their  bodies,  and  passing — whither?  Unsaved,  unre- 
generate,  unwashed  in  precious  blood,  we  see  them  so  up  to  the  solemn 
bar  whence  in  silence  the  sentence  comes  forth,  and  they  are  banished 
from  the  presence  of  God,  banished  to  horrors  which  are  not  to  be 
described  nor  even  to  be  imagined.  This  alone  were  enough  to  cause  us 
distress  day  and  night.  This  decision  of  destiny  has  about  it  a  terrible 
solemnity.  But  the  resurrection  trumpet  sounds.  Those  spirits  come 
forth  from  their  prison-house.  I  see  them  returning  to  earth,  rising 
from  the  pit  to  tne  bodies  in  which  they  lived :  and  now  I  see  them 
stand— multitudes,  multitudes,  multitudes,  multitudes — ^in  the  Valley  of 
Decision.  And  he  comes,  with  the  crown  upon  his  head  and  the  books 
before  him,  sitting  on  a  great  white  throne.  And  there  they  stand  as 
prisoners  at  the  l^r.  My  vision  now  perceives  them — ^how  they  tremble  I 
How  they  quiver  like  aspen  leaves  in  the  gale !  Whither  can  they  flee  ? 
Bocks  cannot  hide  them,  mountains  will  not  opn  their  bowels  to  con- 
ceal them  I  What  shall  become  of  them  ?  The  dread  angel  takes  the 
sickle,  reaps  them  as  the  reaper  cuts  up  the  tares  for  the  oven,  and  as  he 
gathers  he  casts  them  down  where  despair  shall  be  their  everlasting 
torment !  Woe  is  me,  my  heart  sinks  as  I  see  their  doom,  and  hear  the 
terrible  cries  of  their  too  late  awaking.  Save  some,  0  Christians !  By 
all  means  save  some.  By  yonder  flames,  and  outer  darkness,  and  the 
weeping,  and  the  wailing,  and  the  gnashing  of  teeth,  seek  to  save  some. 
Let  this,  as  in  the  case  of  the  apostle,  be  your  great,  your  ruling  object 
in  life,  that  by  all  means  you  may  save  some. 

For,  oh  !  if  t^ey  be  saved,  observe  the  contrast.  Their  spirits  mount 
to  heaven,  and  after  the  resurrection  their  bodies  ascend  also,  and  there 


680  METROPOLITAir  TABERITACLE  PITLPIT. 

they  praise  redeeming  love.  No  fingers  more  nimble  on  the  harp-ali.'.i^ 
than  theirs !  No  notes  more  sweet  than  theirs,  as  they  sing,  "  Unto  Wm 
that  loved  ns,  and  washed  ns  from  onr  sins  in  his  blood,  be  glory  for  erer 
and  eyer."  What  bliss  to  see  the  once  rebelhons  brought  home  to  God, 
and  heirs  of  wrath  made  possessors  of  heaven.  Alt  this  is  involved 
in  salvation.  0  that  myriads  may  come  to  this  blessed  state.  **  Save 
some " — oh !  some  at  least.  Seek  that  some  may  be  there  in  glorr. 
Behold  your  Master.  He  is  your  pattern.  He  left  heaven  to  save  some. 
He  went  to  the  cross,  to  the  grave,  to  *'save  some  ":  this  was  the  greet 
object  of  his  life,  to  lay  down  his  life  for  his  sheep.  He  loved  his  church 
and  gave  himself  for  it,  that  he  might  redeem  her  unto  himself.  Imitate 
your  Master.  Learn  his  self-denial  and  his  blessed  consecration  if  bjany 
means  you  may  save  some. 

My  soul  yeameth  that  I  personally  may  "  save  some,"  but  broader  k 
my  desire  than  that.  I  would  have  every  one  of  you,  my  beloved  friends, 
associated  here  in  chnrch-fellowship  to  become  spiritual  parents  of  child- 
ren for  God.  Oh,  that  every  one  of  you  might  "save  some."  Yes,,  my 
venerable  brethren,  you  are  not  too  old  for  service.  Yes,  my  young 
friends,  ye  young  men  and  maidens,  ye  are  not  too  young  to  be  recmits  in 
the  King's  service.  If  the  kingdom  is  ever  to  come  to  our  Lord,  and 
come  it  will,  it  never  will  come  through  a  few  ministers,  missionaries^ 
or  evangelists  preaching  the  gospel.  It  must  come  through  every  one  of 
you  preaching  it — in  tne  shop  and  by  the  fireside,  when  walking  abroad 
and  when  sitting  in  the  cnJEanber.  You  must  all  of  you  be  always 
endeavouring  to  ''save  some."  I  would  enlist  you  all  afreeh  to-night, 
and  bind  anew  the  King's  colours  upon  you.  1  would  that  you  would 
fell  in  love  with  my  Master  over  anew,  and  enter  a  second  time  upon 
the  love  of  your  espousals.  There  is  a  hymn  of  Co^^per's  which  we 
sometimes  sing — 

"  O  for  a  closer  walk  with  God !  * 

May  we  get  to  have  a  closer  walk  with  him,  and  if  we  do  so  we  shall  also 
feel  a  more  vehement  desire  to  magnify  Christ  in  the  salvation  of  sinners. 
I  would  like  to  press  the  inquiry  upon  my  hearers  to-night,  you  who  are 
saved — How  many  others  have  you  brought  to  Christ  ?  You  cannot  do 
it  by  yourself,  I  know ;  but  I  mean  how  many  has  the  Spirit  of  God 
brought  by  you  ?  How  many,  did  I  say  ?  Is  it  quite  certain  that  yon 
have  led  any  to  Jesus?  Can  you  not  recollect  one?  I  pity  you,  then  ! 
"  Write,"  said  Jeremiah,  "  Write  that  man  childless."  That  was  con- 
sidered to  be  a  f^arftil  curse.  Shall  I  write  you  childless,  my  beloved 
.friends  ?  Your  children  are  not  saved,  your  wife  is  not  saved,  and  you 
are  spiritually  childless.  Can  you  bear  this  thought  ?  I  pray  you  Wake 
from  your  slumbering  and  ask  the  Master  to  make  you  usefdl.  *'  I  wsh 
the  saints  cared  for  us  sinners,"  said  a  young  man.  "They  do  care  for 
you,"  answered  one,  "  care  very  much  for  you."  "  Why  don't  they  show 
it,  then  ?  "  said  he,  "  I  have  often  wished  to  have  a  talk  about  good 
things,  but  my  friend,  who  is  a  member  of  the  church,  never  broi^es 
the  subject,  and  seems  to  study  how  to  keep  clear  of  it  when  I  am  with 
him."  Do  not  let  them  say  so.  Do  tell  them  about  Christ  and  things 
divine,  and  make  this  your  resolve,  every  one  of  you,  that  if  men  perish 
'ley  shall  not  perish  for  want  of  your  prayers,  nor  for  want  of  your 


flOTXL  BAVISrO  CUB  QNB  BirBQIES&  G81 

earnest  and  loving  instractions.  Otod.  give  yon  grace,  each  one  of  you, 
to  resolve  by  all  means  to  save  flome,  and  tl^n  to  carry  out  your 
intention. 

III.  But  my  time  is  almost  gone,  and  therefore  I  have  to  mention,  in 
the  last  plaoe,  th£  gsbat  mkchoob  which  the  apostlb  u&ed. 

How  did  he  who  so  longed  to  *'  save  some  "  set  about  it  ?  Why,  first  of 
all,  by  singly  pnaMng  the  gotpd  of  Christ  He  did  not  attempt  to 
create  a  sensation  by  startling  statements,  neither  did  he  preach  erro* 
neous  doctrine  in  orckr  to  obtain  the  assent  of  the  multitude.  I  fear 
that  some  evangelists  preach  what  in  their  own  minds  they  must  know 
to  be  untrue.  They  keep  bade  certain  doctrines,  not  because  they  are  un- 
true but  because  they  do  not  give  scope  enough  for  their  ravmgs,  and 
they  make  loose  statemonte  l^canse  ttiey  hope  to  reach  more  minds. 
However  earnest  a  man  may  be  for  the  salvation  of  sinners  I  do  not 
believe  that  he  has  any  right  to  make  any  statement  which  his  sober 
judgment  will  not  justify.  I  think  I  have  heard  at  revival  meetings 
of  things  said  and  done  which  were  not  according  to  soond  doctrine^  but 
^'hich  were  always  excused  by  ^'  tiie  excitement  of  the  oocasion."  I  hold 
that  I  have  no  right  to  state  fUlse  doctrine,  even  if  I  knew  it  would 
save  a  soul.  The  sopposition  is,  of  course,  absurd ;  but  it  makes  you  see 
Tvhat  I  mean.  My  business  is  to  bring  to  bear  upon  men,  not  falsehood, 
but  truth ;  and  I  shall  not  be  excused  if  under  any  pretence  I  palm  a 
lie  upon  the  people.  Srat  assured  that  to  keep  back  any  part  of  the 
gospel  is  not  the  right,  nor  the  true  method  for  saving  men.  Tell  tlic 
sinner  idl  the  doctrines.  If  you  hold  Galvim'stic  doctrine,  as  I  hope  you 
do,  do  not  stutter  abont  it,  nor  stammer  over  it,  but  q)eak  it  out.  Depend 
upon  it,  many  revivals  have  been  evanescent  because  a  full-orbed  goq)el 
was  not  proclaimed.  Give  the  people  every  truth,  every  truth  baptized  in 
holy  fire,  and  each  truth  will  have  ito  own  usefal  effect  upon  the  mind. 
But  the  great  truth  is  the  cross,  the  truth  that ''  God  so  loved  the  world 
that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Bon  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
should  not  peri^,  but  have  everlastbg  life."  Brethren,  keep  to  that. 
That  is  the  bell  for  you  to  ring.  Bing  it,  man  I  Bing  it  I  Keep  on 
ringing  it.  Sound  forth  that  note  upon  your  silver  trumpet,  or  if  you 
arc  only  a  ram's  bom,  sound  it  forth,  and  the  walls  of  Jericho  will  come 
down.  Alas  for  the  fineries  of  our  "cultured"  modem  divines.  I  hear 
them  crying  out,  and  denouncing  my  old*fashioned  advice.  This  talking 
about  Christ  crucified  is  said  to  be  archaic,  conventional,  and  antique, 
and  not  at  all  suitable  to  the  refinement  of  this  wonderful  age.  It  is 
astonishing  how  learned  we  have  all  grown  lately.  We  are  getting  so  very 
wise,  I  am  afraid  we  shall  ripen  into  fools  before  long,  even  if  we  have 
not  arrived  at  it  already,  People  want  "  thinkmg  "  nowadays,  so  it  is 
said,  and  the  working  men  will  go  where  science  is  deified  and  profound 
**  thought"  is  enshrined.  I  have  noticed  that  as  a  general  rule  wherever 
the  new  "thinking*'  drives  out  the  old  gospel  tJiere  are  more  spiders 
than  people,  but  where  there  is  the  simple  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  place  is  crowded  to  the  doors.  Nothing  else  will  crowd  a  meeting- 
house, after  all,  for  any  length  of  time,  but  the  {Nreaching  of  Christ 
crucified.  But  as  to  this  matter,  whether  it  be  popular  or  unpopular, 
our  mind  is  made  up  and  our  foot  is  put  down.  Question  we  have  none 
as  to  our  own  course.   If  it  be  foolish  to  preach  up  atonement  by  blood, 


^2  HETROPOLTTAH  TABEBKAOLS  PULPIT. 

we  will  be  foolfl ;  and  if  it  be  madness  to  stidc  to  the  old  tmth,  just « 
F&al  deliyered  it,  in  all  its  simplicity,  without  any  refinement,  or  b* 
provement,  we  mean  to  stick  to  it,  even  if  we  be  pilloried  as  bdn^ 
mcapable  of  progressing  with  the  age,  for  we  are  persaaded  that  iks 
"foolishness  of  preaching"  is  a  divine  ordinance,  and  that  the  croasof 
Christ  which  stumbles  so  many,  and  is  ridiculed  by  so  many  more,  is 
still  the  power  of  Ood  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  Yes,  jost  the  old* 
fashioned  truth — ^if  thou  believest  thou  shalt  be  saved — that  will  we  stick 
to,  and  may  God  send  his  blessing  upon  it  according  to  his  own  eternal 
purpose.  We  do  not  expect  this  preaching  to  be  pofKilar,  bat  we  kno? 
that  God  will  justify  it  ere  long.  Meanwhile,  we  are  not  staggered 
because 

"  The  troths  we  loTe  s  lightlefls  woiid  bltsphemes 

As  childish  dotage,  and  delirioiu  dreams ; 

The  danger  they  diBcern  not  they  deny ; 

Laugh  at  their  only  remedy,  and  die.** 

Next  to  this,  Paul  used  much  prayer.  The  gospel  alone  will  not  be 
blessed  ;  we  must  pray  over  our  preaching.  A  great  painter  was  asked 
what  he  mixed  his  colours  with,  and  he  replied  he  mixed  them  wiUi  braios. 
'Twas  well  for  a  painter,  but  if  anyone  shonld  ask  a  preacher  what  be 
mixes  truth  with,  he  ought  to  be  able  to  answer — with  prayer,  maeh 

Srayer.    When  a  poor  man  was  breaking  granite  by  the  roadside,  he  wv 
own  on  his  knees  while  he  gave  his  blows,  and  a  minister  passing  bj 
said,  **  Ah,  my  friend,  here  you  are  at  your  hard  work  ;  your  work  is  jmt 
like  mine  ;  you  have  to  break  stones,  and  so  do  I."    ''Yes,"  said  the 
man,  **  and  if  you  manage  to  break  stony  hearts,  yon  will  liAve  to  do 't- 
as  I  do,  go  down  on  your  knees."    The  man  was  right,  no  one  can  use 
the  gospel  hammer  well  except  he  is  much  on  his  knees,  but  the  gospel 
hammer  soon  splits  flinty  hearts  when  a  man  knows  how  to  pray.    F^ 
vail  with  God,  and  you  will  prevail  with  men.    Fresh  from  Uie  closet  to 
the  polpit  let  us  come,  with  the  anointing  oil  of  Crod's  Spirit  fresh  npon 
us.    TVnat  we  receive  in  secrecy  we  are  cheerfrdly  to  dispense  in  puUic* 
Let  us  never  venture  to  speak  for  God  to  men,  until  we  nave  spoken  for 
men  to  (rod.    Yes,  dear  hearers,  if  you  want  a  blessing  on  ^onr  Sondaj- 
school  teaching,  or  any  other  form  of  Christian  labour,  mix  it  up  vi^ 
fervent  intercession. 

And  then  observe  one  other  thing.  Paul  wmt  to  hia  work  almfi 
With  an  intMM  syn^thy  for  those  he  dealt  with — a  sympathy  tol^ 
made  him  adapt  himself  to  each  case.  If  he  talked  to  a  Jew,  he  did  not 
begin  at  once  blurting  out  that  he  was  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  bat 
he  said  he  was  a  Jew,  as  Jew  he  was.  He  raised  no  questions  about 
nationalities  or  ceremonies.  He  wanted  to  tell  the  Jew  of  him  of  whom 
Isaiah  said,  **  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a  man  of  sorrows 
and  acquainted  with  grie^"  in  order  that  he  might  believe  in  Jesus  and 
so  be  saved.  If  he  met  a  Gentile,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  never 
showed  any  of  the  squeamishness  which  might  have  been  expected  to 
cHng  to  him  on  account  of  his  Jewish  education.  He  ate  as  the  Geniiie 
ate,  and  drank  as  he  did,  sat  with  him,  and  talked  with  him ;  was,  as  it 
were,  a  Gentile  with  him ;  never  raising  any  question  about  circumcision 
or  uncircumcision,  but  solely  wishing  to  tell  him  of  (%rist,  who  came 
into  the  world  to  save  botii  Jew  and  Gentile,  and  to  make  them  one. 


BQVJa  HAYISQ  OUR  ONS  BUSINESS.  688 

If  Paul  met  with  a  ScjthiaQy  he  spoke  to  him  in  the  Barbarian  tongue, 
and  not  in  classic  Gredc    If  he  met  a  Greek,  he  spoke  to  him  as  he  did 
at  the  AreopagoSy  with  language  that  was  fitted  for  the  polished  Athenian, 
He  was  all  things  to  all  men,  that  he  ought  by  all  means  save  some. 
80  with  you.  Christian  people :  your  one  business  in  life  is  to  lead  men 
to  believe  in  Jesus  Chnst  by  the  power  of  the  Hol;^  Spirit,  and  every 
other  thing  should  be  made  subservient  to  this  one  object;  if  you  can  but 
get  them  saved,  everything  else  wiU  come  right  in  due  time.    Mr.  Hnd- 
8on  Taylor,  a  dear  man  of  God,  who  has  laboured  much  in  Inland 
China,  finds  it  helpfid  to  dress  as  a  Chinaman^  and  wear  a  pigtail.    He 
always  mingles  with  the  people,  and  as  &r  as  possible  hves  as  they 
do.    This  seems  to  me  to  be  a  truly  wise  policy.    I  can  understand 
that  we  shall  win  upon  a  congregation  of  Chmese  by  becoming  as 
Chinese  as  possible,  and  if  tms  be  the  case  we  are  bound    to  be 
Chinese  to  the  Chinese  to  save  the  Chinese.    It  would  not  be  amiss  to 
become  a  Zulu  to  save  the  Zulns^  tiiough  we  must  mind  that  we  do  it  in 
another  sense  than  Colenso  did.    If  we  can  put  ourselves  on  a  level  with 
those  whose  good  we  seek,  we  shall  be  more  likely  to  effect  our  purpose 
than  if  we  remain  aliens  and  foreigners,  and  then  talk  of  love  ana  unity. 
To  sink  myself  to  save  others  is  the  idea  of  the  apostle.    To  throw  over- 
board all  peooliaritieB,  and  yield  athonsaod  indifferent  points,  in  order  to 
bring  men  to  Jesus,  is  our  wisdom  if  we  would  extend  our  Master's  king- 
dom. Never  may  any  whim  or  conventionality  of  ours  keep  a  soul  fix)m  con- 
sidering the  gospel, — that  were  horrible  indeed.  Better  &r  to  be  personally 
inconvenient  oy  compliance  with  things  indifferent,  than  to  retard  a 
sinner's  coming  bv  quarrelling  about  trifles.    If  Jesus  Christ  were  here 
to-day,  I  am  sure  he  would  not  put  on  any  of  those  gaudy  rags  in  which 
the  Puseyite  delights  himself.    I  cannot  imagine  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
dressed  out  in  tlu^  titfk.    Why,  the  apostle  tells  our  women  that  they 
are  to  dress  themselves  modestly,  and  I  do  not  think  Christ  would  have 
his  ministers  set  an  example  of  tomfoolery :  but  yet  even  in  dress  some- 
thing may  be  done  on  the  principle  of  our  text.    When  Jesus  Christ 
was  here,  what  divsa  did  he  wear  ?  To  put  it  in  plain  English,  he  wore  a 
smock  frock.    He  wore  the  conmion  dress  of  his  countrymen — ^a  garment 
woven  fix>m  the  top  throughout,  without  seam ;  and  I  think  he  would 
have  his  ministers  wear  that  costume  which  is  most  like  the  dress  which 
their  hearers  wear  in  common,  and  so  even  in  dress  associate  with  their 
hearers,  and  be  one  among  them.    He  would  have  you  teachers,  if  you 
want  to  save  your  children,  talk  to  them  like  children,  and  make  your- 
selves children  if  yon  can.    You  who  want  to  get  at  young  peoples* 
hearts  must  try  to  be  young.    You  who  wish  to  visit  the  sick  must  sym- 
pathise with  them  in  their  sickness.    Get  to  speak  as  you  would  like  to 
he  spoken  to  if  yon  were  sick.    Come  down  to  those  who  cannot  come 
up  to  you.    You  cannot  puU  people  out  of  the  water  without  stooping 
down  and  getting  hold  of  them.   If  you  have  to  deal  with  bad  characters 
you  must  come  down  to  them,  not  in  their  sin,  but  in  their  roughness 
and  in  their  style  of  language,  so  as  to  get  a  hold  of  them.    I  pray  God 
that  we  may  learn  the  sacred  art  of  soul-winning  by  adaptation.    They 
called  Mr.  Whitefield's  chapel  at  Moorfields  "  The  Soul  Trap."    White- 
field  was  delighted,  and  said  he  hoped  it  always  would  be  a  soul  trap. 
Oh  that  all  our  places  of  worship  were  soul  traps,  and  every  Christian  a 


681  KETBOPOLTTAH  TABSRHACLB  PULPIT. 

fi§lier  of  men,  each  one  doing  his  best,  as  the  fisherman  does,  by  evert 
art  and  artifice  to  catch  those  they  fish  for.  Well  may  we  nse  all  mesiH 
to  win  so  great  a  prize  as  a  spirit  destined  for  eternal  weal  or  woe.  Tbe 
diver  plnnges  deep  to  find  pe&ris,  and  we  may  accept  an^  laboor  or  hasari 
to  win  a  soul.  Boose  yourselves,  my  brethren,  for  tois  God-Uke  woit 
and  may  the  Lord  bless  yon  in  it. 

I  commend  these  wandeiing  thonghts  to  yonr  earnest  attention.  I 
pray  the  nngodly  to  bethink  themselves  of  what  their  rain  will  be  except 
they  come  to  Jeans  and  trust  in  him ;  and  I  ask  belieren  to  be  donblr 
earnest  from  this  time  forth  in  laboaring  to  save  tbe  souls  of  men,  and 
may  God  send  us  such  a  blessing  that  we  shall  not  have  room  to  receire 
it. 


POBTtON  OF  SCKirmUB  BEAD  BSFOBI  Se&XOIT — 1  Coi 


Hyiqib  feom  "Oua  Owk  Hyidi  Book"— 072,  488,  SG5. 


LETTER  FBOM  MR.  SPUBGBON. 

Da*a  Fkibriw, — I  hod  hoped  to  have  prepared  a  new  Bermon  for  yoo  Hat 
week,  but  instead  thereof  I  hare  beea  altogether  laid  aside,  and  quite  unable 
either  to  use  braia  to  think  or  hand  to  write  with.  It  must  be  right  that  I 
ahould  thns  be  periodicallj  rendered  naelua,  but  I  wish  I  were  fit  to  b« 
trusted  with  the  privilege  of  conatant  actiTity.  Some  tooU  are  not  well 
enough  constructed  to  be  kept  in  conatant  use  ;  mnch  of  their  time  miiat  ba 
■pent  in  beinx  repaired.  Flease  pray  for  me  that  in  mj  case  the  repar»tinm 
may  be  well  done,  and  that  I  may  be  strengthened  to  accomplish  better  and 
greater  serrice  for  m;  Master  than  ever  before. 

This  week's  sermon  is  one  tonching  the  matter  nearest  my  heart.     Ob  that 

it  may  be  read  with  such  practical  attention  as  to  lead  to  its  being  carried  oat! 

lera  are  tbe  great  need  of  the  times.     We  all  do  eaongh  of  talking 

ning,  but  living  in  the  life  of  God  and  going  forth  is  the  divine 

iTM  therefrom  to  pluck  eiimera  &om  the  bumiug  ate  &r  too  rare. 

Receive,  dear  friends,  the  warmest  affection  of 

Tour  greatly  aoflering  Pastor, 
e  la  Paix,  Mentooe,  C  H.  SPOROEUN. 

;ember  4, 1879. 


^ett[ii|oIiton:  iFalrtnmcte  f  ulpt 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  PROMISE. 


%  $ 


DBTilVETtBD   ON  LoBD'S-DAY  EvEBTINQ,  JuNB  29TH,   1879,  CT 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  MBTEOPOMTAN  TABBRKAOLB,  NBWINGTOST. 


•*  New  things  do  I  declare :  before  they  spring  forth  I  tell  yon  of  them." — 

Isaiah  zlii*  9. 

God  has  often  foretold  things  to  come  by  the  lips  of  his  prophets.  I 
need  not  give  you  even  a  single  specimen  of  the  multitudes  of  in- 
stanoee  in  which  eyents  which  could  not  have  been  guessed  at,  which 
indeed  were  hii 
by  the  Si 

The  Lord  claims  this  as  a  proof  of  hfs  Godhead ;  it  is  his  special  pre- 
rogative to  possess  omniscience,  the  knowledge  of  everythingy  and 
therefore  prescience,  or  the  knowledge  of  that  which  will  happen  in  years 
to  come.  These  are  attributes  of  God  alone,  and  often  ne  challenges 
the  idols  to  produce  instances  in  which  they  have  exercised  foresight, 
and  predictea  things  to  come.  They  had  their  oracles,  which  were  the 
mimicry  of  prophecy,  but  they  continually  failed,  whereas  Jehovah's 
word  stood  fast  even  in  jots  and  tittles,  and  thus  his  eternal  Godhead 
was  proved  The  imitation  of  this  attribute  bv  the  magicians  and 
prophets  of  the  false  gods  proved  that  they  saw  this  to  be  an  exclusive 
attribute  of  deity,  and  their  perpetual  confusion  in  their  attempts 
proved  with  equal  dleamess  that  their  mock  deities  did  not  possess  it. 

I  think  it  most  admirable,  and  it  seems  another  instance  of  the  fore- 
sight of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  the  words  of  my  text  should  stand  where 
they  do ;  for  it  may  not  be  unknown  to  some  of  you  that  the  modem 
critics,  who  always  try,  if  they  can,  to  tear  the  bowels  out  of  every 
text,  and  are  never  satisfied  until,  like  swine,  they  trample  beneath 
their  feet  every  cluster  of  Eshcol,  have  daxed  to  ascribe  one  part  of  the 
Book  of  Isaiah  to  a  second  Isaiah,  as  they  call  him,  who  wrote  after 
the  times  of  Christ ;  because,  you  see,  the  prophecy  so  plainly  describes 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  men  who  will  not  believe  in  God  or  in  the 
inspiration  of  his  holy  book  are  driven  to  invent  the  notion  that  the 
prophecy  was  written  after  the  event.  Truly,  it  might  as  well  have 
been  written  afterwards  as  before,  for  it  is  so  accurate ;  but  here,  as  if 
the  Lord  foresaw  that  there  would  come  in  the  last  days  scoffers,  he 
No.  1,608. 


6g6  METBOPOLTTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

bids  his  servant^  in  these  express  words,  claim  that  he  speaks  things 
before  they  come  to  pass — "Behold,  the  former  things  are  come  to 
pass,  and  new  things  do  I  declare :  before  they  spring  forth  I  tell  yon 
of  them."  It  remains,  therefore,  for  these  sham  Christian  critics  either 
to  accept  the  fact  that  Isaiah's  book  contains  actual  prophecies,  or  else 
to  reject  it  altogether.  Their  specious  pretence  of  belicTing  the  book 
to  be  authentic  while  they  deny  its  prophetic  character  is  exposed  by 
the  words  before  us. 

It  is  not,  however,  about  prophecy  that  I  am  going  to  speak  at  this 
time.  I  wish  to  bring  forth  a  general  principle — the  principle  that  our 
gracious  Lord  usually  gives  a  promise  of  that  which  he  means  to  bc»tow. 
Before  his  favours  come  into  our  hands  the  sound  of  them  falls  upon 
our  ears. 

Since  God  is  full  of  mercy  and  grace,  he  has  resolved  to  give  great 
blessings  to  the  sons  of  men,  but  he  gives  not  ^vithout  prudent  arrange- 
ment, and  therefore  his  wisdom  fixes  times  for  the  bestowal  of  his  gifts. 
A  certain  fulness  of  time  of  which  he  often  speaks  was  necessary  before 
the  coming  of  Christ.    Our  Lord  could  not  appear  in  human  fl^  until 
that  appointed  time  had  come ;  but  while  his  wisdom  bade  him  stay  the 
fulfilment  his  love  was  so  great  that  he  must  b^in  to  speak  of  the 
grand  covenant  blessing.    Before  the  Lord  Jesus  came,  the  Father  was 
continually  speaking  of  his  coming.    Or  ever  he  had  given  him  from 
his  bosom  to  die,  he  so  delighted  in  what  he  was  going  to  do,  and  he 
took  such  pleasure  in  the  result  of  his  glorious  gift,  that  he  must  speak 
about  it,  and  so  in  countless  promises  he  spake  with  iiie  sons  of  men 
concerning  the  great  deed  of  love.    This  seems  to  me  a  clear  proof  of 
how  heartily  he  went  about  the  great  work  of  our  redemption ;  becaoae 
he  dwelt  so  much  upon  the  prospect  of  it  that  he  revealed  his  thoughts 
in  prophecy  and  promise,    if  you  are  going  to  do  some  kindness  to  a 
friend,  and  the  time  has  not  quite  come  for  it,  yet  yon  cannot  keep 
your  purpose  a  secret.    If  you  think  it  will  minister  to  his  comfort  to 
receive  a  promise  of  it  you  are  snre  to  give  him  some  cheering  hint  or 
comforting  intimation.    The  thought  is  pleasant  to  yonrself,  and  yon 
wish  him  to  share  your  anticipation.    You  wish  him  to  get  a  sight  of 
the  good  thing  before  he  gets  a  taste  of  it.    Before  he  actually  obtains 
the  nelp  itself  you  wish  to  see  him  cheered  with  the  prospect,  and  so 
you  turn  his  mind  hopefully  in  the  kindly  direction.    Love  is  so  fond 
of  its  object  that  it  is  not  content  with  blessing  it  by  a  solitary  act ; 
before  the  time  comes  for  the  actual  blessing  love  casts  forth  a  fragrance, 
as  a  forecast  of  the  flower  which  is  yet  in  the  bloom  and  not  fully 
opened.    It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Lord  antedates  his  mercy,  and 
informs  his  people  of  things  to  come  before  they  actnally  spring  forth. 
Wisdom  waits  its  time  to  fulfil,  as  we  have  said,  but  grace  gives  the 
promise  beforehand  that  it  may  ease  its  own  soul  of  the  load  of  its 
beneficence,  and  give  comfort  to  those  who  are  to  receive  the  blessing. 

Hence  almost  eveirthing  that  God  gives  to  his  people  is  made  a 
matter  of  promise.  He  not  only  means  to  bestow  the  fiivour,  but  he 
tells  us  he  means  to  bestow  it,  and  he  has  a  practical  purpose  in  this 
information.  The  philosophy  of  promise  is  my  topic  at  this  time. 
Why  are  covenant  blessings  the  subject  of  promises  ?  Why  does  not 
the  Lord  give  us  the  blessing  without  previous  intimation  ?    It  would 


THB  PHIL060PHT  07  PROMISE.  687 

be  aB  effectual.    Why  does  he,  before  it  comes,  promise  it  again  aad 
agftin  ?    I  shall  give  fi?e  answers  to  a  question  which  might  admit  of 

I.    And  the  first  is  this.    God  bpbaks  tsebb  thchqs  befokb  the 

BI^BSSINO  GOMES,  IN  OBBEE  TO  DISPLiiT  HIS  GRAOB. 

First,  to  display  the  freensBs  of  hi8  grace.  Yon  will  notice  that  the 
promise  to  which  he  specially  idlades  is  thiSy  ''To  open  the  blind  eyes,  to 
bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison-hoose,"  Now  these  blind  and 
captive  persons  had  not  sought  grace,  they  had 'not  pleaded  for  eyes,  nor 
asked  for  liberty ;  in  fact,  they  were  not  even  bom  in  the  days  of  Isaiah. 
It  is  a  case  like  that  of  Jacob  quoted  by  Paol,  "  The  children  not  being 
yet  bom  " ;  the  promise  was  made  ircefi^ctivdy  of  them.  Unsought, 
uabonght,  untfaoBgfat  of,  the  promise  came,  that  he  would  open  the 
blind  eyes  and  bring  the  prisoners  out  of  the  prison-house.  This^  I 
say,  proves  the  freeness  of  Qod's  grace,  that  he  makes  a  promise  before 
we  raiow  our  need  or  seek  his  f^e.  When  he  makes  a  promise  of  pure 
grace  he  does  not  come  to  us  and  say,  ''If  this,"  and,  "if  that,"  and, 
"if  the  other;"  but  he  comes  with,  "I  will,"  and,  "I  will,"  and,  "I 
vrill,"  and,  "I  will,"  before  we  seek  him,  before  we  have  any  desire 
towards  him,  ay,  and  before  we  have  any  sense  of  need  of  him.  There 
are  many  conditional  promises  for  which  we  ought  to  be  very  thankftd, 
but  the  foundation  of  them  all  is  an  absolute,  unconditioned  covenant 
of  grace.  A  redemption  was  provided  for  me  beftre  I  lived,  and  con- 
sequfiitly  before  I  conid  have  known  that  I  was  a  slave.  The  Spirit 
of  Ood  was  given  that  I  might  live,  before  I  knew  that  I  was  dead, 
and  consequently  before  I  could  have  made  an  appeal  for  spiritual 
life.  The  blessings  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  my  dear  hearers,  were 
laid  up  in  store  for  God's  chosen  people  ages  ago ;  before  the  Fall 
actaally  took  plaee  the  covenant  had  arranged  for  the  recovery  of  the 
chnrch  of  Christ.  These  blessings  have  b^n  in  existence  and  provided 
for  many  of  yon,  albeit  that  even  now  perhaps  you  do  not  know  your 
need  of  them,  and  have  not  yet  begun  to  seek  unto  the  Lord  that  you 
may  find  him ;  for  the  Lord,  in  mighty  grace,  comes  to  men  long  before 
they  come  to  him.  Their  first  sincere  thought  towards  him  is  caused  by 
his  baring  thought  of  them. 

**  No  sinner  can  be  beforehand  with  thee  : 
Thy  grace  is  most  sovereign,  most  rich,  and  most  free.** 

The  promise  of  the  covenant  mns  thus — "  I  will  call  them  my  peq>le 
that  were  not  my  people,  and  her  beloved  that  was  not  beloved."  The 
grace  of  God  comes  thus  spontaneously  from  the  heart  of  God,  and  he 
f<»etells  its  working,  and  declares  that  he  will  save  his  chosen,  in  order 
that  it  maj  be  seen  beyond  all  dispute  to  be  the  ontcome  of  his  own 
deliberate  purpose,  and  the  act  of  his  sacred  sovereignty  and  boundless 
love. 

Methinks  the  Lord  also  tells  us  what  he  is  going  to  do  before  he 
does  it  that  we  may  see  the  fulness  of  his  grace.  The  Lord  says  that 
he  will  come,  not  to  m^  who  are  looking  for  him,  but  to  those  who 
have  blind  eyes  and  therefore  cannot  look ;  that  he  will  come,  not  to 
those  who  are  coming  to  him,  though  he  will  do  that,  but  to  those  who 
cannot  come  to  him,  because  they  are  straitly  shut  up  as  in  a  prison- 


egg  HETBOPOLTTAIT  TABBSHACLE  PDLPTT. 

bonae.  Notice  the  pan^e :  they  ue  blind  priaonen,  and  cuinot  oome 
fortb,  and  yet  the  Lord  cornea  to  take  the  film  firom  the  ejre,  and  to 
tear  the  iron  bar  fixim  the  window  and  set  the  captive  &ee,  not  becaoae 
there  is  any  goodnesa  in  the  poor  blind  prisoner  at  the  present  moment, 
nor  because  there  erer  will  be  any,  bnt  simply  becatue  the  Lord  is  foil 
'  of  mercy  and  delights  to  display  hia  grace.  Christ  died  for  the  nn- 
'  godly.  Jeans  came  to  seek  uid  to  save  that  which  was  k>Bt.  He  is  « 
^ysician,  and  therefore  comes  not  to  seek  the  whole,  bnt  the  sick. 
To  make  na  know  this  glorions  fnlneaa  of  his  grace  he  inf<Miiu  db 
beforehand  of  what  he  ia  ^wnt  to  do. 

HoreoTer,  I  think  it  ia  not  only  to  show  the  freeness  sod  the  fhlnest 
of  hia  grace,  bnt  tAepowtr  of  it;  for  he  apeaks  very  poeitirely,  he  aaya 
'  that  he  will  open  tiie  blind  eyes,  and  he  will  bring  ont  the  priaiHiei* 
from  the  priaon-honae.   Can  he  do  this?   Ay,  that  be  can.    There  can  be 
no  qneaCion  about  his  ability.    When  the  Lord  reBoIvee  to  sBTe,  sare 
he  can.     Borne  people  beliere  in  a  great  Ood  in  natnre,  bnt  in  a  very 
little  Qod  in  grace.    The  God  of  nature  can  do  everything,  and  they 
belicTe  in  physical  miracles,  but  according  to  their  notions  the  God  of 
grace  hns  to  consult  the  will  of  man,  and  he  has  to  halt  and  hesitate, 
unless  dead  man  will  arise  and  give  himself  life,  and  unwilling  man 
wiU  change  hia  own  will.    I  believe  in  the  omnipotence  of  God  in  the 
kingdom  of  grace,  and  that  he  can  change  a  heart  of  atone  to  flesh,  and 
break  the  iron  sinew  of  the  stubborn  will,  and  bow  men  before  bim.   To 
me  the  Almighty  is  as  anpreme  in  the  realm  of  mind  aa  in  the  world  of 
matter.    I  do  not  doubt  the  free  agency  of  man ;  on  the  contraiy,  I 
aee  daily  evidence  of  it.    I  believe  man  to  be  a  free  agent,  and  yet  he 
ia  not  and  cannot  be  more  powerful  in  any  respect  than  the  Ijord  of  all 
The  Lord  knows  how  to  be  master  in  the  kingdom  of  the  human  will, 
and,  without  violating  that  will  in  any  degree,  lie  can  achieve  the  eternal 
purpose  of  his  love.   To  triumph  over  mere  dead  matter  ia  nothing  com- 
pared with  the  glory  of  the  Lord's  rule  over  mind,  thought,  intell^  and 
will.     He  will  have  mercy  on  whom  be  will  have  mercy,  and  be  will 
have  compassion  on  whom  he  will  have  compassion,  and  yet  him  that 
Cometh  to  him  he  will  in  no  wise  cast  ont    The  Lord's  grace  is  ine- 
sietible :  hia  pm^ae  shall  stand,  and  he  will  do  all  hia  plearare.     "  This 
is  taking  high  ground,"  says  one.     It  is  ground  blessedly  high  for 
sinking  sinners ;  it  is  such  ground  as  we  wont  who  are  utterly  lost  and 
mined  and  undone.    You  that  can  help  yonraelvea  may  go  and  do  it, 
bnt  we  who  cannot  do  so  are  glad  to  find  that  God  knows  what  be  is 
— ; —  .„  j„  ^j  apeaka  with  the  tone  of  a  aovereign,  and  with  the 
i  who  has  not  to  aek  help  from  others,  but  who  can 
igs  according  to  the  counsel  of  bis  own  will.    "  Before  they 
I   tell  you  of  them,"  saith  he:   because  hia  gtaoe   is 
ins  apeaks  of  what  is  going  to  be  done, 
to  me,  je  blinded  ones,  who  cannot  open  your  own  eyes. 
>me  to  open  them.     0  ye  lost  sinnera,  who  cannot  save 
!hrist  baa  come  to  save  ^u.    Oh,  yon  that  we  all  but 
1  lie  at  hell's  gate  expecting  the  flame,  have  hope,  for 
ime  to  save  that  which  was  lost.    0  ye  firebrand  that 
3  in  the  burning,  he  comes  to  pluck  yon  out  of  the  fire, 
come  to  help  you  to  save  yourselves,  bat'  to  save  yon.    He 


THE  PHHiOSOPHY  OF  FBOMISE.  C89 

does  not  approach  joa  with  measored  steps  in  order  that  you  may 
come  half  way  to  meet  him,  bnt  he  comes  all  the  way  to  you  in  your 
death,  yonr  rain,  your  poverty,  your  misery,  your  blindness,  your  cap- 
tivity. He  comes  to  achieve  salvation,  and  he  prockims  what  he  is 
About  to  do,  in  order  that  he  may  have  iiie  glory  of  it. 

That  is  our  first  head,  then.    The  Lord  announces  his  purposes  of 
bve  to  display  his  grace. 

II.    Secondly,  brethren,  I  think  the  Lord  announces  the  covenant 
blessings  he  is  about  to  bestow  in  obder  to  abouse  oub  hopes. 

Many  poor  souls  would  actually  die  before  they  were  saved  if  they 
did  not  get  some  little  hope  every  now  and  then  while  they  are  in  a 
decking  state.  I  am  not  speaking  at  haphazard  now,  I  am  speaking  of 
cases  that  I  do  know, — ^poor  tempted,  troubled  ones,  to  whom  the  pro- 
mises are  as  a  brook  by  tne  way  of  which  they  drink  and  lift  up  tneir 
heads.  Some  of  you  come  to  Christ  apparently  very  easily.  Thank  God 
for  it ;  but  I  know  others  who  cannot  get  at  the  Lord  Jesus  for  the 
press.  They  try  even  to  look  to  him,  but  they  are  blinded  by  their 
tears.  I  cannot  excuse  their  unbelief,  but  I  do  pioy  their  poor  trembling 
spirits.  They  are  coming  to  Christ,  but  they  are  like  the  child  of 
whom  we  read  that  ''when  he  was  a  coming  the  devil  threw  him 
down  and  tare  him."  They  are  sadly  torn  ana  cannot  get  to  Christ. 
Now,  when  the  Lord  tells  his  people  what  he  will  do  they  are  cheered 
with  expectation.  When  they  read  such  texts  as  these,  "  A  new  heart 
also  will  I  give  yon,  and  a  right  spirit  will  I  put  within  you,'*  and  "  I 
will  put  my  law  in  your  hearts,  and  ye  shall  not  depart  from  me,"  and 
^' Their  sins  and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more  for  ever"; 
''  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though 
they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  he  as  wool,"^these  poor  souls  catch 
at  such  words  of  promise,  and  learn  how  to  hope.  ''  Oh ! "  say  they, 
*^it  that  promise  might  be  true  to  me,  then  I  should  not  perish. 
Perhi^  the  Lord  will  look  in  mercy  upon  me."  Every  now  and  then 
the  Lord  saves  a  great,  big  sinner — an  unusually  black  sinner;  and 
what  does  he  do  with  him  ?  He  makes  him  a  walking  advertisement 
of  his  mercy,  so  that  others  see  the  infinite  grace  of  God.  Men  cry 
cmt  in  wonder,  **  What,  has  So-and-so  found  Christ  ?  Then  why  should 
aot  we  ?  "  Perhaps  the  man  may  have  been  guilty  of  great  iniquities. 
He  may  have  been  a  ringleader  in  wickedness;  but  the  Lord  takes 
faim  and  washes  him  from  his  sin,  and  opens  his  mouth  to  praise  his 
name.  When  such  an  one  begins  to  speak  of  divine  love  poor  tormented 
spirits  catch  at  the  word,  and  they  say,  ''Why  should  not  I  find 
mercy  ?  Why  should  not  I  be  saved  ?  "  When  such  a  man  becomes  a 
living  proof  of  what  God  can  do,  the  promise  stands  out  to  the  life 
beforo  we  poor  sinner's  eye,  and  he  says  "  Ah,  perhaps,  perhaps,  perhaps 
there  is  salvation  for  me."  John  Bunyan,  who  had  been  a  orunken 
tinker,  went  about  preaching  the  everlasting  Rospel  like  a  man  who  had 
been  in  the  condenmed  ceU,  and  had  received  a  pardon ;  and  I  tell  vou 
the  villagers  gathered  to  listen  to  such  a  one  as  he,  because  they 
wondered  at  God's  mighty  grace.  They  said  one  to  another,  "  Has  Mr. 
Bad-man  become  a  pugrim  ?  Then  why  should  we  not  start  on  pil- 
grimage also?  Has  ii^nite  mercy  changed  his  heart?  Then  why 
iuiould  it  not  change  ours?" 


690  MtTBOPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PULPIT.  |  i 

I  would  haye  yon  pluck  up  cour^fe,  any  sinners  ainoDgpnvteiie 
here  at  this  time.  Supposing  yon  to  be  the  rerj  wont  penone  tbaieier 
lived,  and  supposing  yon  to  haye  the  worst  temper,  and  the  ^raiik^^ 
sition,  and  the  worst  besetting  sins,  and  the  worst  habits  that  eier  men 
had,  I  tell  yon  the  Lord  in  great  mercy  has  saved  just  sach  as  joa^ai 
he  has  promised  still  to  deal  with  great  sinnera  in  a  way  of  gnitloTe. 
Seize  hold  of  this  blessed  fact,  weave  a  hope  out  of  it,  aiMi  say,  *4  need 
not  despair — ^not  even  I.  I  need  not  plunge  into  great  sin  under  tbe 
notion  that  I  cannot  be  saved.  *  He  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the 
uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him.'  He  can  save  me.  He  bis 
said,  'Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  oaat  out^'  ind  if  I 
come  to  him,  he  will  not  cast  me  out.  I  will  not  despair,  then,  or  ait 
down  and  say  there  is  no  hope.  I  deserve  to  be  with  tbe  de?ilB  in  hd; 
but  why  should  I  not  be  among  the  saints  in  heaven  ?  I  desene  to  be 
banished  for  ever,  but  why  should  there  not  be  a  crown  in  heaven  far 
me  ?  Ah,  will  not  the  saints  wonder  when  they  see  tiM  come  in  ?  The 
angels  will  look  down  from  their  harps  and  say, '  What^  is  h$  then?' 
Then  I  will  tell  the  story  of  what  the  Lord  has  done,  and  set  then 
wondering  over  again,  till  even  they  shall  say,  'It  has  never heenio 
seen  befOTe.  Here  comes  the  biggest,  blackest,  most  hell-deserving 
wretch  that  ever  did  enter  heaven.  Lift  up  a  loftier  song  than  ewr. 
Louder,  and  louder  yet,  let  the  song  ring  through  the  heavenly  aidMS, 
for  love  has  out-loved  itself,  and  grace  has  out-graced  itself  aboye  all  it 
has  ever  done  before.'  *'  I  pray  God  that  some  despairing  aool  inay 
grasp  these  cheering  facts  and  be  comforted.  I  am  trying  to  throw  ^ 
big  net  to  catch  a  whale  of  a  sinner  if  he  is  floating  anywhere  near  my 
barque.  I  know  if  the  gospel  net  onoe  encloses  him  it  will  hold  him, 
for  not  a  single  mesh  of  it  will  give  way,  despite  his  siae  and  his 
struggling.  I  would  like  to  put  the  gospel  so  wide,  and  so  broad, 
that  the  sheep  which  is  hunted  bv  the  dog  of  hell  farthest  away  torn 
the  fold  may,  nevertheless^  come  back  to  the  great  and  gracious  Step- 
herd  of  souls. 

Why,  beloved,  even  €ted*s  own  helieving  people  need  to  be  told  of 
what  €k>d  will  do,  in  order  to  encourage  their  hope  at  times.  See  how 
the  Lord  deals  with  his  prsecuted  ones.  When  the^^^mhunted, 
slandered,  despoiled  of  their  goods,  what  does  he  do  ?  He  mat!F  ^'^ 
know  that  they  have  a  richer  inheritance  in  heaven.  He  set^^^ 
them  the  jovs  which  he  has  prepared  for  them  that  love  him.  ^^* 
he  might,  if  he  liked,  have  kept  all  about  heaven  to  himself  aadaolP^ 
made  it  a  surprise  to  us ;  and,  indeed,  some  seem  to  think  that  he^ 
done  so,  but  in  this  they  are  ill  advised.    We  know  much  about  liAAt 


to  say.  Hear  the  whole  of  it.  **  Eye  hath  not  seen  not  ear  h^^ 
neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  the  things  which  Qod  ha^ 
prepared  for  them  that  love  him ;  hut  hs  hath  reveakd  them  taiio  tisb 
his  SpiriV*  By  chopping  it  in  halves  you  made  the  passage  aar  a} 
very  opposite  of  what  it  intended.  Your  eye  has  not  seen  it,  and  vo 
ear  has  not  heard  it,  but  his  Spirit  has  told  yon  concerning  the  tbui^^ 
which  he  has  prepared  for  you,  and  this  is  no  little  privilege,     ]^  /^f 


I. 

IfiO 


THE  FHILOSOPHT  OF  PUOMISE.  691 

not  Btaj  to  tell  70a  how  much  the  Lord  has  told  us  about  the  eternal 
state,  as  to  onr  being  with  JesQS  where  he  \b,  that  we  may  behold  his 
glory,  and  may  be  sharers  in  that  glory  for  ever.  He  has  told  us  this, 
to  cheer  as  up  while  on  the  road,  to  encourage  us  that  we  may  never 
sink  in  despair.  Going  to  lie  down  and  die,  brother?  Do  you  know 
how  near  you  are  to  heaven  ?  Perhaps  you  will  be  there  in  a  month. 
Going  to  give  it  all  up  now?  Will  yon  be  so  foolish  as  to  leave  the 
battle  jaat  as  the  victory  is  won.  Brother,  does  the  devil  tell  you  to 
turn  back?  He  knows  how  near  you  axe  U)  the  glory-land,  xon  are 
something  like  Columbus  when  he  was  within  three  days'  sail  of  America, 
and  the  sailors  bade  him  stay  his  conne.  He  coidd  not,  would  not, 
reyerse  his  ventorous  prow,  hat  pushed  on  and  found  the  new  world. 
Some  of  iM  mav  be  within  a  very  few  days'  sail  of  heaven,  and  yet  do 
not  know  it,  and  the  devil  has  the  impudenee  to  persuade  us  to  go  back. 
Shall  we  listen  to  the  impudent  fiend  ?  No,  by  the  grace  of  God, 
never!  If  the  journey  be  long,  the  end  will  repay  us  for  it  If  the 
voyage  be  rough,  the  brave  country  will  make  amends  for  all  the 
tempests  which  have  wreaked  their  vengeance  upon  us.  Onward,  on- 
ward, be  our  coarse :  to  help  us  to  persevere  even  to  the  end,  the  Lord 
has  made  the  new  things  known  to  us,  and  has  told  us  of  them  before 
they  spring  forth. 

Two  gowl  answers  to  the  question  are  now  bef(He  us,  and  each  one  is 
an  aignment  for  adoration. 

III.  Bat  now,  thirdly,  why  has  the  Lord  told  us  about  the  mercies 
he  intends  to  give  ?  To  sxnnciSE  our  faith.  The  gospel  of  God  is 
a  gospel  for  bdievers;  and  one  of  God's  great  objects  in  the  whole 
arrangement  of  the  gospel  system  is  to  educate  our  confidence  in  him. 
I  remember  speaking  once  with  a  brother  upon  the  room  which  God 
has  left  for  faith  to  work  in.  We  were  q)eaking  about  the  various  de- 
fences which  have  been  used  to  prove  the  veracity  of  the  Christian 
religion  against  infidel  assaults,  and  I  was  remarking  upon  the  manifest 
failure  of  certain  of  them  which  appeared  exceedingly  strong  at  one 
time,  but  are  now  abandoned,  because  under  new  attacks  they  have 
manifestly  failed.  My  friend  was  deploring  that  this  book,  and  the 
other,  which  had  once  been  considered  as  standard  works,  seemed  to 
have  lost  power  over  this  generation.  It  came  to  the  minds  of  both  of 
lis,  that  if  God  had  made  the  Christian  religion  so  clear  that  you  could 
make  an  axiom  of  it,  or  prove  it  as  easily  as  you  show  that  twice  two 
make  four,  there  would  have  been  no  room  for  faith  at  all ;  and  then 


,  1^^  ^tfae  divine  system  of  salvation  must  have  taken  another  coarse,  for 
'L^^ith  would  have  occupied  a  very  narrow  space  in  it.  The  Lord  in- 
oi  gee!?**  ^^^^  ™«n  should  exercise  faith  in  his  word,  for  he  knows  that 

rpith  is  necessary  to  us  if  we  are  to  be  delivered  from  sin.  A  man 
ri'^^^*^  be  saved  if  he  does  not  trust  his  God,  and  when  a  man  is 
r  h^?^^^^  to  trust  his  God,  he  is  practically  saved.  You  say,  "How  is 
:  Tw,kat  ?"  If  a  man  has  a  servant,  and  that  servant  has  fiallen  out  with  his 
f  ,.  Aw>8ter,  if  it  be  desirable  to  bring  that  servant  to  obedience,  the  fosb 
LvtteP^  to  do  is  to  make  him  believe  in  his  master.  If  he  believes  his 
«7«ttr  r^'^  to  be  good,  and  true,  and  kind,  and  noWe,  you  have  gained  the 

h^  pant's  obedience.  He  wiU  be  reconciled  to  hia  master  now,  and  wi  I 
I0i  •  "S^*"  ^«^1  content  to  serve  him.    So  that  faith  and  trust,  though 


692  MErrROPOiiiTAN  tabbrkacls  pulpit. 

they  appear  to  be  Bach  minor  things  that  we  wonder  why  they  shonki 
be  the  great  requirement  of  the  gospel,  are  not  small  matters  after  alL 
They  are  the  pivot  upon  which  character  turns.  When  I  bring  my 
mind  down  to  this,  that  I  jnst  believe  God,  and  accept  the  Bible  as  his 
revelation,  I  am  getting  right.  If  when  I  cannot  understand  the  word 
of  Ood  I  believe  it  as  mnch  as  if  I  did  understand  it,  then  I  have  in 
heart  become  obedient  to  Ood.  I  have  taken  up  the  place  which  a 
creature  ought  to  occupy  towards  his  Greater ;  ana  the  act  of  trostin? 
.  and  believing  has  become  the  pivot  upon  which  I  turn  as  my  mind  seeks 
the  Lord,  and  by  its  means  I  get  into  a  right  condition  with  him. 
Therefore  does  the  Lord,  before  he  gives  us  a  mercy,  say  to  us.,  '^Be- 
lieve in  me,  and  you  shall  have  it.  Believe  in  the  atonement  made  by 
my  dear  Son,  and  you  shall  have  pardon.  Believe  in  my  willingness  to 
forgive  you,  and  subnut  yourself  and  cast  yourself  at  my  feet,  and  I 
will  forgive,  and  bless  you."  It  is  not  a  haid  thing  that  he  requires. 
It  is  not  a  wrong  thing.  It  is  an  act  of  the  heart  which  is  good  for 
us  all  round,  and  becomes  the  instrument  in  the  hand  of  the  Spirit  of 
reconciling  us  to  Ood. 

The  Lord  has  told  us  what  great  things  he  is  going  to  do  for  sinners ; 
and  I  want  you  just  to  answer  the  question :  Do  you  believe  that  he 
,  can  do  this  ?  Come  now,  thou  that  art  ungodly  and  graceless,  dost  thou 
believe  that  Ood  can  save  thee  ?  can  make  thee  holy  ?  can  make  thee 
gracious?  Thou  hast  many  sins,  but  dost  thou  believe  that  Christ 
can  blot  them  all  out  in  a  moment,  and  make  thee  to  be  as  though  thou 
hadst  never  conmiitted  them,  casting  them  behind  the  back  of  God 
himself,  so  that  they  shall  never  be  mentioned  against  thee  any  more 
for  ever  ?  Canst  thou  believe  all  this  ?  If  thou  canst  believe  it,  canst 
thou  also  believe  another  thing,  namely,  that  he  is  wiUmg  to  do  this 
deed  of  love  ?  Canst  thou  believe  that  the  great  Father  does  not  will 
that  thou  shouldst  perish,  and  has  no  joy  that  thou  shouldst  be  lost? 
Canst  thou  believe  that  it  will  give  him  delight  to  receive  thee,  that  he 
will  be  glad  to  press  thee  to  his  bosom  and  make  thee  his  child,  and 
that  thou  shouldst  be  reconciled  to  him  ?  Canst  thou  believe  this  ? 
By  the  wounds  of  Ood,  by  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  on  Calvary,  I 
say  thou  oughtest  to  believe  it,  for  he  that  loved  sinners  well  enough  to 
die  cannot  be  unwilling  that  they  should  be  saved.  Thou  canst  believe 
his  power  and  his  wiUingness,  thou  sayest.  Well,  the  only  thing  that 
thou  hast  now  to  do  in  order  to  be  this  moment  saved  is  to  act  out 
thy  belief  upon  these  two  points.  He  can  and  he  is  willing, — throw 
yourself  upon  that  power  and  will.  Trust  yourself  with  Jesus  now. 
That  is  the  one  demand  of  the  gospel :  '' Believe  and  live."  Rest  in 
the  fact  that  he  has  reconciled  you  to  himself  in  Christ,  that  he  forgive 
you  now,  because  you  trust  alone  in  his  Son  for  your  eternal  salvation. 
Will  yon  do  this  at  once  ?  Will  you  rest  on  Christ  Jesns  ?  Then, 
^' Your  sins,  which  are  many,  are  all  forgiven."  You  are  a  saved  man. 
"  Oh,  but  how,"  say  you,  *'  do  I  know  that  I  am  saved  ?  "  Thou 
shalt  feel  and  know  that  thou  art  saved  if  thou  believest,  for  thou 
shalt  find  thyself  fix>m  this  time  loving  the  things  which  thou  didst 
aforetime  hate,  and  hating  the  things  which  thou  didst  once  love ;  and 
that  simple  act  of  trusting  which  seems  so  insignificant  will  transform 
thee,  and  will  so  become  the  hinge  on  which  thy  life  shall  turn. 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OP  PROMISE.  693 

Selieying  in  GhriBt,  then  shalt  go  ont  of  this  house  saying,  ^'  I  am  a 
forgiven  man,  and  I  lore  the  Otod  who  has  forgiven  me.  I  am  washed 
in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  henceforth  will  I  serve  him. 

*•  Lord,  in  the  strength  of  grace. 

With  a  glad  heai't  and  free, 
SJyseir,  my  residue  of  da^s, 
1  consecrate  to  thee.* 

I  am  Christ's  man  for  ever ;  I  will  not  grieve  him ;  by  the  help  of 
his  Holy  Spirit  I  will  live  to  his  praise.  I  will  tell  others  what  he  has 
done  for  me,  and  my  entire  life  shall  be  a  life  of  obedience  if  he  will  bat 
help  me  and  keep  me  and  sustain  me  by  his  CTacions  power."  You  see 
now  why  the  blessings  of  grace  are  foretold — ^that  tliey  may  become 
objects  of  faith.    God  give  vou  faith  to  exercise  upon  them  now. 

ly.  Fourthly,  and  very  briefly,  these  things  are  told  us  before  they 
come  to  pass  that  thet  may  excite  ouk  pbayeb. 

After  hope  and  &ith,  prayer  is  quite  sure  to  follow.  Note  the  order  r 
the  Lord  says  that  Chnst  shall  come  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind, — 
here  is  grace.  I  pictured  the  blind  man  just  now  as  saying,  **  Jesus  is 
come  to  open  the  blind  eyes ;  why  should  he  not  open  mine?"  Here 
is  ?wpe,  'Next  the  blind  man  goes  on  to  say,  "  He  says  that  he  will  do 
it  if  I  trust  in  him.  I  know  he  can.  I  believe  he  will.  I  will  trust 
him."  Here  is  faith.  What  is  the  very  next  thing  that  the  blind  man 
does  ?  Why  he  begins  to  pray  to  him.  "  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David, 
have  mercy  on  me."  Here  ib  prayer.  As  soon  as  the  first  little  drop 
of  faith  &ll8  into  a  man's  soul,  he  begins  to  pray,  '^Lord,  thou  hast 
promised  pardon  to  believers;  give  that  pardon  to  me.  Thou  hast 
promised  a  new  heart ;  give  a  new  heart  to  me.  Thou  hast  promised 
eternal  salvation  to  as  many  as  obey  Christ;  Lord,  give  me  eternal 
salvation."  Oh  that  blessed  eifb  of  faith !  It  soon  Brings  a  man  to 
his  knees.  When  he  hopes  that  he  may  gain  the  blessing,  when  he 
believes  that  he  may  have  it — then  he  tegins  to  cry  for  it ;  and  if  he 
cries  with  real  faith  he  has  already  obtain^  the  blessing  for  which  he 
is  seeking.    While  he  is  pleading  God  is  hearing. 

Think  of  those  poor  people  in  the  prison-house  too.  There  they  sit 
in  darkness,  and  they  make  no  sound  but  groans :  but  suddenly  a  voice 
is  heard.  Jesus  comes  to  set  the  captives  free.  It  is  repeated,  "  He 
comes,  he  comes  to  loose  the  bondaged  ones."  Inside  the  prison-house 
there  shines  a  light  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness,  and  the  prisoners 
say,  ''If  he  comes,  why  should  not  he  come  to  us?  Blessed  be  his 
name,  we  hope  he  will  come  to  us."  And  now  you  can  hear  them  cry, 
**  Come !  Come !  Come,  Lord !  Come  quickly !  Break  these  chains ! 
Dispel  this  darkness.  Set  us  free."  And  it  is  not  lone,  when  the 
prisoner  of  hope  begins  to  pray,  before  the  walls  totter,  ana  the  captive 
is  free  as  a  bira  of  the  air.  The  I^rd  thus,  as  it  were,  holds  out  the 
mercy  that  his  dear  ones  may  ask  for  it,  cry  for  it,  stmgele  for  it,  and 
that  so  they  may  get  the  double  blessing  of  being  taught  to  pray  as 
well  as  to  receive  the  answer  of  their  prayers. 

O  you  that  are  the  people  of  God,  I  want  yon  to  learn  this  lesson, 
that  all  God's  promises  which  are  not  fulfilled  are  meant  to  stimulate 
you  to  pray.    We  read  a  chapter  just  now  in  which  the  Lord  says  that 


694  METIIOPOLITAN  TABEftNAOLB  PULPIT. 

the  iaka  Bhall  wait  for  God ;  pray  for  it  He  has  promiaed  to  gire 
his  Sou  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance ;  praj  that  the  heathen  maj 
be  the  heritage  of  yonr  Prince.  Every  promise  should  be  tamed  into 
prayer.  I  believe  that  the  whole  earth  will  yet  be  "  filled  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea ;  "  bat  not  without 
prayer.  Even  Christ  must  pray.  Is  it  not  written  ''  Ask  of  me,  and  I 
shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost 
parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  possession"  ?  Christ  is  to  come,  but  he  has 
taught  his  church  to  say  ''  Even  so,  come  Lord  Jesus.*'  Thete  is  no 
picture  of  the  princely  reign  of  Christ  but  what  should  at  once  arouse 
our  desires,  and  those  desires  should  be  set  on  fire  with  prayer.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord, ''  For  this  will  I  be  enquired  of  by  the  hoose  of  Israel 
to  do  it  tar  them."  And  yet  if  the  Lord  does  not  do  some  great  Uiing 
before  his  church  prays  greatly,  the  good  time  is  not  coming  just  yet. 
We  do  have  good  prayer  meetings  in  this  Tabernacle,  thank  God.  It 
is  the  joy  of  my  heart  to  see  so  many  assemble  to  pray,  though  some 
of  you  do  not  come  as  I  wish  you  did.  You  do  not  know  what  you 
lose,  you  who  do  not  come  to  oar  delightful  prayer  meetings.  You 
are  moie  losers  by  being  away  than  we  are  by  losing  your  cempany. 
We  are  sorry  to  miss  you,  but  our  sorrow  is  on  your  account,  for  you 
do  not  know  what  you  bse.  We  ought  to  meet  for  prayer,  we  cannot 
expect  the  blessing  except  we  do.  I  hiave  little  to  say  on  that  score,  by 
way  of  rebuke,  to  you  who  compose  my  regular  congregation,  for  yoa 
do  not  many  of  you  sin  in  that  direction  ;  but  I  know  some  churches 
where  the  prayer-meeting  is  a  mere  form.  It  is  such  a  little  a&ir  that 
they  might  put  it  in  a  dish,  cover  it  up,  and  lock  it  up  in  the  pantry, 
and  say  nothing  about  it  It  is  a  miniature  concern,  a  very  sickiy 
dwarf.  If  God  blessed  some  churches  in  London  in  proportion  to  their 
prayers,  he  would  not  bless  them  much :  for  the  prayer  meetings  are 
held  in  the  vestry,  and  that  is  not  full,  nor  one*half  full  at  the  best. 
A  prayer  meetiag  in  the  chapel  itself  would  look  like  a  drop  in  a  backet, 
and  so  they  hide  the  nakedness  of  the  land  by  holding  a  hole-and- 
corner  meeting  in  the  vestry.  Such  things  as  prayer  meetings  ia  the 
chapel  are  not  expected,  a  snug  little  room  is  quite  large  enough. 
Alas,  there  axe  not  many  brethren  to  pray.  Two  or  three  prose  so 
long  and  so  drearily,  that  they  fill  up  the  evening,  and  then  thej  ask 
the  Lord  to  forgive  their  shortcomings;  they  would  do  better  to  ask 
forgiveness  for  tiieir  longcomings,  which  are  the  death  of  all  fervency. 
There  is  not  much  prayer  in  tnese  long  sermonizings,  and  the  whole 
business  is  ikr  more  formal  than  real.  Scant  will  be  the  blessing  if 
the  Lord  is  going  to  bless  them  in  proportion  to  their  prayers.  Do 
you  wonder  that  the  minister  cannot  preach  when  the  pec^e  do  not 
pray?  I  see  some  of  you  up  from  the  coontry;  pernaps  you  are 
deacons,  and  yet  do  not  attend  the  prayer  meetings  yourselves.  I 
have  known  such  things;  and  I  cry  shame  upon  you.  And  then 
yoa  find  faolt  with  the  minister.  Have  you  never  heard  of  the  minister 
who  suddenly  seemed  to  fiaily  and,  when  the  people  complained,  he 
said,  ''Ah,  I  may  well  fail,  for  I  have  lost  my  prayer-book T'  Some- 
one said,  ''  I  did  not  know  you  used  a  prayer-book,  sir.''  ^*  Oh  ! " 
said  he,  ''my  prayer-book  used  to  be  written  on  the  hearts  of  my 
people,  and  while  they  prayed  for  me  God  blessed  me  and  I  had  sucoeas^ 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  PROMISB.  695 

but  they  have  given  np  praying  for  me,  and  what  can  I  do  ?  "  Do  yon 
want  the  man  to  make  bricks  without  straw  ?  Surely  the  least  thing 
yon  can  do  is  to  find  him  straw  for  the  bricks,  and  you  can  only  find 
that  by  means  of  earnest,  united  prayer.  The  sinew  of  the  minister's 
strength  under  God  is  the  supplication  of  his  church.  We  can  do  any- 
thing and  everything  if  we  have  a  praying  people  aroond  us;  but, 
when  our  dear  friends  and  fellow-helpers  cease  to  pray,  the  Holy  Ghost 
hastens  to  depart,  and  ''Ichabod"  is  written  upon  the  place  of  assembly. 
Promises  of  the  mercy  of  the  Lord,  dear  friends,  are  sent  to  you  on 

Enrpose  that  you  may  pray  for  the  covenanted  boons,  and  you  shall  not 
ave  them  unless  you  seek  his  face  for  them. 

y.  Last  of  aU,  the  Lord  tells  you  what  he  is  going  to  do,  and  in  this 
he  has  yet  another  object  in  view,  namely,  to  fostee  oaATiruDE  and 

ASSUBAKCB  WHEN  THE  XEBOY  HAS  SEEK  RBOBiySD. 

When  the  blessing  comes,  the  man  who  has  received  it  declares,  "  I 
know  that  this  came  from  Qod,  because  he  promised  to  give  it.  I  know 
that  God  was  in  all  this  because  I  can  see  he  has  acted  aocordingto  his 
own  declaration.  His  word  has  not  returned  to  him  void.  He  has 
done  what  he  said,  when  he  said,  and  as  he  said :  surely  this  thing  is 
of  the  Lord.  Then  comes  the  inference, — If  he  has  done  all  this  for 
me  in  the  past,  he  will  do  as  much  for  me  in  the  future.  He  told  me 
that  he  would  help  me,  and  he  has  helped  me ;  he  assures  me  still  that 
he  will  be  my  helper,  and  I  am  sure  he  will,  for  he  changes  not. 

"  Each  sweet  Ebcnezer  I  have  in  review, 
Confirms  lus  good  pleasure  to  help  me  quite  through." 

This  is  God's  way  of  breeding  assurance  in  the  minds  of  his  people. 
If  you  notice  in  the  next  chapter,  the  one  argument  which  God  seems 
to  use  there  is,  ^'  I  will  because  I  have."  I  will  read  it  to  you.  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  that  creati^  thee,  0  Jacob,  and  he  that  formed  thee,  0 
Israel,  Fear  not :  for  /  have  redeemed  thee,  /  have  called  thee  by  thy 
name ;  thou  art  mine."  What  then  ?  **  *  When  thou  passest  through 
the  waters  /  mil  be  with  thee,  and  through  the  rivers  they  shall  not 
overflow  thee.'  Dost  thou  thiuk  that  I  have  redeemed  thee  to  drown 
thee?  'When  thou  walkest  through  the  fire  thou  shalt  not  be 
bnmed.'  Dost  thou  think  that  I  created  thee  to  be  destroyed,  and  re- 
deemed thee  that  the  flames  should  consume  thee  ?  I  have  loved  thee. 
I  have  redeemed  thee ;  therefore  I  will  help  thee,  and  keep  thee  even 
to  the  end."  This  is  God's  argument  of  consolation.  Do  you  not  see 
the  force  of  it.  Look  in  the  third  verse,  **  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom, 
Ethiopia  and  Seba  for  thee.  Since  thon  wast  precious  in  my  sight, 
thou  hast  been  honourable,  and  I  have  loved  uiee :  therefore  will  I 
give  men  for  thee,  and  people  for  thy  life."  If  I  paid  a  fiill  ransom 
once,  I  will  stick  at  no  expense  to  Rain  my  precious  purchase.  If  I 
gave  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  once,  I  will  give  the  same  again  but  what 
I  will  have  my  redeemed  ones  set  free.  Thou  art  mine,  and  I  will  not 
lose  thee.  I  will  spend  all  heaven  but  what  I  will  bring  thee  safely 
home  to  myself,  oee,  he  says,  **  I  have  created  him ;  /  have  formed 
him,  yea,  /  have  made  him,"  and  therefore  he  says,  **  I  will  bring  thy 
seed  from  the  east  and  gather  thee  from  the  west."  I  know  of  nothing 
except  the  sure  promise  and  oath  of  the  glorious  Jehovah  which  is 


696  ICETROPOUTAS  TABKBVAGLV  PULPIT. 

worthy  to  l)c  the  ultimate  ibandation  of  our  hope.  Bejond  that,  I 
know  of  nothing  that  is  so  firm  a  foundation  for  oor  hope  as  our  past 
experience  of  the  faithfulness  of  God.  If  the  Lord  hsd  meant  to  be 
nnfaithfal  he  would  have  been  nnfaithfol  long  ago.  If  it  had  been 
possible  for  him  to  cast  away  his  people  he  would  have  cast  you  aod 
me  away  years  ago.  Does  a  man  bestow  much  care  and  labour  and 
expense  on  that  which  he  intends  to  leave  unfinished  ?  Does  a  wise 
man  begin  to  build  a  house,  and  then  leave  the  structure  unroofed  and 
incomplete?  Will  God  begin  the  woric  of  grace  in  you  and  noi  com- 
plete it  ?  WiH  he  bring  you  so  far  on  the  read  to  the  Golden  City,  and 
then  leave  you  and  put  you  to  shame  ?  Shall  it  be  said  in  eternity, 
"  This  man  trusted  in  God,  and  God  failed  him.  lliis  poor  sinner 
rested  in  the  blood  of  Christy  but  Christ  oould  not  save  him"  ?  Never, 
oh  never !  The  Lord  has  given  you  many  a  promise,  and  he  has  ful- 
filled it  in  order  that  to-day  in  your  present  difficulties,  and  to-morrow 
in  your  new  treubles,  you  may  stand  firm  as  a  rock,  and  feel,  '-He  will 
help  me ;  yea,  he  will  uphold  me ;  yea,  he  wiU  deliver  me.  Therefore 
my  heart  is  fixed^  my  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord.'' 

*'  I  know  that  safe  with  him  remainfl 

Protected  by  his  power, 
What  Fve  committed  to  his  hands 

Till  the  decisive  hour. 
Then  will  he  own  his  servant's  name 

Before  his  Father's  face, 
And  in  the  New  Jerusalem 

Appoint  my  soul  a  place," 

Sach  faith  as  this  is  God's  due.  He  deserves  nothing  less  than  on- 
mingled  confidence.  He  has  never  lied  to  any  one  of  you :  nercr  doubt 
him  till  he  gives  you  cause  for  suspicion,  but  rest,  and  quietly  wait,  and 
patiently  hope,  and  you  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God.  As  surelj  as  the 
Lord  liveth,  he  will  not  forsake  your  believing  soul,  but  will  be  ever  at 
your  side  till  he  Imth  done  that  which  he  hath  spoken  to  you  of,  and 
brought  you  home  to  dwell  at  his  right  hand  with  his  dear  4(m  for  ever 
and  ever.    Amen. 


PoBTiON  OF  Scripture  biad  beforb  SBBMOB-^Isaiah  xliL  1—16; 

xliii.  1 — 7. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Owk  Hyi^ar  Book"— 191,  257,  193. 


The  Publiiihcrs  regret  to  have  to  inform  the  readers  of  the  sermon  that  do 
letter  has  boen  received  from  Mr.  Spnrgeon  for  insertion  in  this  wcek*s  issue  t 
the  latest  report  from  Mentone  stating  that  he  is  very  nnwelly  and  qnite 
imablc  to  write. 


^rtraplttoi  SUattiittafle  falpi 


THE  BEST  OP  ALL  SIGHTS. 


%  ^¥ti 


tmtit{ 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 


"  But  we  see  Jesua.'* — Hebrewe  ii.  9. 

In  holy  Scriptare  faith  is  placed  in  opposition  to  the  sight  of  the  eyes, 
and  yet  it  is  frequently  described  as  looking  and  seeing.  It  is  opposed 
to  carnal  sight  because  it  is  spiritual  sight;  a  discernment  which  comes 
not  of  the  body,  but  arises  out  of  the  strong  belief  of  the  soul,  wrought 
in  us  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Faith  is  sight  in  the  sense  of  being  a  clear 
and  vivid  perception,  a  sure  and  indisputable  discovery,  a  realising  and 
unquestionable  aiscernment  of  fact.  We  see  Jesas,  for  we  are  sure  of 
his  presence,  we  have  unqaestionable  evidence  of  his  existence,  we  have 
an  intelligent  and  intimate  knowledge  of  his  person.  Our  soul  has  eyes 
&r  stronger  than  the  dim  optics  of  the  body,  and  with  these  we  ac- 
tually see  Jesus.  We  have  heard  of  him,  and  upon  the  witness  of  that 
hearing  we  have  believed,  and  through  believiog  there  has  come  to  us 
a  new  life,  which  rejoices  in  new  light  and  in  opened  eyes,  and  **  we  see 
Jesus."  In  the  old  sense  of  sight  we  speak  of  him  as  of  one  **  whom 
having  not  seen  we  love,"  but  in  the  new  sense  "we  see  Jesus." 
Beloved  reader,  have  you  such  a  renewed  nature  that  you  have  new 
senses,  and  have  you  with  these  senses  discerned  the  Lord?  If  not, 
may  the  Holy  Spirit  yet  quicken  you ;  aud  meanwhile,  let  us  whom  he 
has  made  alive  assure  you  that  we  have  heard  his  voice,  for  he  saith, 
"My  sheep  hear  my  voice" ;  we  have  **  tasted  the  good  word  of  God"; 
we  have  touched  him  and  have  been  made  whole ;  we  have  also  known 
the  smell  of  his  fragrance,  for  his  name  to  us  is  '^as  ointment  poured 
forth";  and  now,  in  the  words  of  our  text,  "  we  see  Jesus."  Faith  is  all 
the  senses  in  one,  and  infinitely  more ;  and  those  who  have  it  not  are 
in  a  worse  case  than  the  blind  and  deaf,  for  spiritual  life  itself  is  absent. 
I.  Come,  then,  brethren  beloved,  whose  eyes  have  been  illuminated, 
let  us  muse  awhile  upon  our  privileges,  that  we  may  exercise  them  with 
delight  and  praise  the  Ijord  with  them.  First,  let  us  regard  the  glorious 
sight  of  Jesus  as  a  compensation.  The  text  begins  with  "  but,"  because 
it  refers  to  some  things  which  we  do  not  yet  see,  which  are  the  objects 
of  strong  desire.  "  We  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him."  We  do 
not  as  vet  see  Jesus  acknowledged  as  King  of  kings  by  all  mankind,  and 
Nos.  1,609-10. 


698  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

this  causes  us  great  sorrow,  for  we  would  fain  see  him  crowned  with  glory 
and  honour  in  every  corner  of  the  earth  by  every  man  of  woman  bora. 
Alas,  he  is  to  many  quite  unknown,  by  multitudes  rejected  and  despised, 
and  by  comparatively  few  is  he  regarded  with  reverence  and  love. 
Sights  surround  us  which  might  well  make  us  cry  with  Jeremiah,  "  Oh 
that  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears  " ;  for  blas- 
phemy and  rebuke,  idolatry,  superstition,  and  unbelief  prevail  on  everj 
side.  "But,"  saith  the  apostle,  "we  see  Jesus,"  and  this  sight  compen- 
sates for  all  others,  for  we  see  him  now,  no  longer  made  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels,  and  tasting  the  bitterness  of  death,  but  "  crowned  with 
glory  and  honour."  "We  see  him  no  more  after  the  flesh,  in  shame  and 
ansruish  ;  far  more  ravishing  is  the  sight,  for  we  see  his  work  accom- 
plished, his  victory  complete,  his  empire  secure.  He  sits  as  a  priest  upon 
the  throne  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  from  henceforth  expecting  till  his 
enemies  are  made  his  footstool. 

This  is  a  divine  compensation  for  the  tarrying  of  his  visible  kingdom, 
because  it  is  the  majm'  part  of  it.  The  main  battle  is  won-  In  our 
Lord's  endurance  of  his  substitutionary  griefs,  and  in  the  overthrow  of 
sin,  death,  and  hell  by  his  personal  achievements,  the  essence  of  the 
conflict  is  over.  Nothing  is  left  to  be  done  at  all  comparable  with  that 
which  is  already  performed.  The  ingathering  of  the  elect,  and  the  sub- 
jection of  all  things,  are  comparatively  easy  of  accomplishment  now  that 
the  conflict  in»  the  heavenly  places  is  over,  and  Jesus  has  led  captivity 
captive.  We  may  look  upon  the  conquest  of  the  kingdoms  of  this 
world  as  a  mere  routing  of  the  beaten  host,  now  that  the  power  of 
the  enemy  has  been  efiectually  broken  by  the  great  Captain  of  our 
salvation. 

The  compensation  is  all  the  greater  because  our  Lord's  enthronement 
is  the  pledge  of  all  ilie  rest.  The  putting  of  all  things  under  him,  which 
as  yet  we  see  not,  is  guaranteed  to  us  by  what  we  do  see.  The  exalted 
Saviour  has  all  power  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  with 
this  "all  power"  he  can,  at  his  own  pleasure,  send  forth  the  rod  of  his 
strength  out  of  Sion,  and  reign  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies.  With  him 
are  all  the  forces  needful  for  universal  dominion,  his  white  horse  waits  at 
the  door,  and  whensoever  he  chooses  he  can  ride  forth  conquering  and  to 
conquer.  At  a  word  from  his  lips  the  harlot  of  Babylon  shall  perisli,  and 
the  false  prophet  shall  die,  and  the  idols  of  the  heathen  shall  be  ntceriy 
abohshed.  The  empire  of  wickedness  is  as  a  vision  of  the  night,  a  black 
and  hideous  nightmare  pressing  on  the  soul  of  manhood,  but  when  he 
awaketh  he  wiu  despise  its  image,  and  it  shall  melt  away. 

Turn  we  then,  wiping  our  tears  away,  from  the  wretched  spectacles  of 
human  superstition,  scepticism,  and  sorrow,  to  the  clear  vision  above  ns 
in  the  opened  heaven.  There  we  sec  "  the  Man,"  long  promised,  the 
desire  of  all  nations,  the  deliverer,  the  death  of  death,  the  conqueror  of 
hell ;  and  we  see  him  not  as  one  who  girdeth  on  his  harness  for  the  battle, 
but  as  one  whose  warfare  is  accomplished,  who  is  waiting  the  time 
appointed  of  the  Father  when  he  shall  divide  the  spoil.  This  is  the 
antidote  to  all  depression  of  spirit,  the  stimulus  to  hopeful  perseverance, 
the  assurance  of  joy  unspeakable. 

II.  Nor  is  this  sight  a  mere  compensation  for  others  which  as  yet  are 
denied  us,  it  is  in  itself  the  cause  of  present  exultation.    This  is  true 


THE  BEST  OF  Ahh  BIGHTS.  699 

in  so  many  ways  that  time  would  fail  us  to  attempt  to  enumerate  them. 
"  We  see  Jesus/*  and  in  him  we  see  our  farmer  unnappy  condition  for  over 
ended.  We  were  &llen  in  Adam,  but  we  see  in  Jesus  our  ruin  retrieved 
by  the  second  Adam.  The  legal  covenant  frowned  upon  us  as  we 
beheld  it  broken  by  our  first  federal  head ;  the  new  covenant  smiles  upon 
us  with  a  whole  heaven  of  bliss  as  we  see  it  ordered  in  all  things  and 
sure  in  him  who  is  head  over  all  things  to  the  church.  Sin  once  doomed 
us  to  eternal  despair,  but  not  now,  for  he  who  hath  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  himself  hath  justified  his  people  by  his  resurrection.  The 
debt  no  longer  burdens  us,  for  there  in  eternal  glory  is  the  Man  who  paid 
it  once  for  all.  A  sight  of  Jesus  kills  each  guilty  fear,  silences  each 
threat  of  conscience,  and  photographs  peace  upon  the  heart.  There 
remains  nothing  of  aU  the  past  to  cause  a  dread  of  punishment,  or  arouse 
a  fear  of  desertion ;  for  Christ  that  died  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us,  to  represent  us  before  the  Father,  and  to  prepare  for  us  a  place  of 
everlastuig  rest.  We  might  see  ourselves  as  dead  under  the  law  were  it 
not  that  he  has  blotted  out  the  handwriting  which  was  against  us ;  we 
might  see  ourselves  under  the  curse  were  it  not  that  he  who  was  once 
msde  a  curse  for  us  now  reigns  in  fulness  of  blessing.  We  weep  as  we 
confess  our  transgressions,  but  we  see  Jesus,  and  sing  for  joy  of  heart, 
since  he  hath  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  brought  in 
everlasting  righteousness. 

The  same  is  sweetly  true  of  the  present,  for  we  see  our  present  eon^ 
dition  to  be  thrice  blessed  by  virtue  of  our  union  with  him.  We  see  not 
as  yet  our  nature  made  perfect,  and  cleansed  from  every  tendency  to 
evil ;  rather  do  we  groan,  being  burdened,  because  of  the  sin  which 
dwelleth  in  us,  the  old  man  which  lusteth  and  rebelleth  against  the ; 
blessed  dominion  of  grace ;  and  we  might  be  sorely  cast  down  and  | 
dragged  into  despair  were  it  not  that  '^  we  see  Jesus,''  and  perceive  that 
in  him  we  are  not  what  the  flesh  would  argue  us  to  be.  He  represents 
us  most  truthfully,  and  looking  into  that  mirror  we  see  ourselves  justified 
in  Christ  Jesus,  accepted  in  the  beloved,  adopted  of  the  Father,  dear  to 
the  Eternal  heart,  yea,  in  him  raised  up  together,  and  made  to  sit 
together  in  the  heavenlies.  We  see  self,  and  blush  and  are  ashamed  and 
dismayed ;  ''but  we  see  Jesus,"  and  his  joy  is  in  us,  and  our  joy  is  full. 
Think  of  this,  dear  brother  in  Christ,  the  next  time  you  are  upon  the 
dungliill  of  self-loathing.  Lift  up  now  your  eyes,  and  see  where  ne  is  in 
whom  your  life  is  hid  I  See  Jesus,  and  know  that  as  he  is  so  are  you  also 
before  the  Infinite  Majesty.  You  are  not  condenmed,  for  he  is  en- 
throned. You  are  not  despised  nor  abhorred,  for  he  is  beloved  and 
exalted.  You  are  not  in  jeopardy  of  perishing,  nor  in  danger  of  being 
cast  away,  for  he  dwells  eternally  in  the  bosom  of  the  Lord  6od 
Almighty.  What  a  vision  is  this  tor  you,  when  you  see  Jesus,  and  see 
yourself  complete  in  him,  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus ! 

Such  a  sight  effectually  clears  our  earthly  future  of  all  apprehension.  It 
is  true  we  may  yet  be  sorely  tempted,  and  the  battle  may  go  hard  with 
us,  but  we  see  Jesus  triumphant,  and  by  this  sign  we  grasp  the  victory. 
We  shall  perhaps  be  subjected  to  pain,  to  poverty,  to  slander,  to  persecu- 
tion, and  yet  none  of  these  things  move  us  because  we  see  Jesus  exalted, 
^d  therefore  know  that  these  are  under  his  power,  and  cannot  touch  us 
except  as  he  grants  them  his  permit  so  to  do.    Death  is  at  times 


700  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

terrible  in  prospect,  but  its  terror  ceases  when  we  see  Jesns,  who  has 
passed  safely  through  the  shades  of  the  sepulchre,  vanquished  the  tyraut 
of  the  tomb,  and  left  an  open  passage  to  immortality  to  all  his  own. 
We  see  the  pains,  the  groans,  and  dying  strife;  see  them,  indeed^ 
exaggerated  by  our  fears,  and  the  only  cure  for  the  consequent  alarm  is 
a  sight  of  him  who  hath  said,  "  He  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he 
were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live.  And  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  me 
shall  never  die."  When  we  see  Jesus,  past,  present,  and  to  come  are 
summed  up  in  him,  and  over  all  shines  a  glorious  life  which  fills  our 
souls  with  unspeakable  delight. 

III.  Thirdly,  "we  see  Jesus"  with  gladdest  expectation.  His 
glovions pef'son  is  to  us  the  picture  and  the  pledge  of  what  we  shall  be: 
for  "  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be :  but  we  know  that,  when 
he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  In 
infinite  love  he  condescended  to  become  one  with  us  here  below,  as  saith 
the  apostle,  "  Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and 
blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same  ";  and  this  descent 
of  love  on  his  part  to  meet  us  in  our  low  estate  is  the  assurance  that  his 
love  will  lift  us  up  to  meet  him  in  his  high  estate.  He  will  make  us 
partakers  of  his  nature,  inasmuch  as  he  has  become  partaker  of  om^ 
nature.  It  is  written,  "Both  he  that  sanctifieth  and  they  who  are 
sanctified  are  all  of  one :  for  which  cause  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them 
brethren."  What  bliss  is  this,  that  we  should  be  like  to  the  incarnate 
€rod !  It  would  seem  too  good  to  be  true,  were  it  not  after  the  maimer 
of  our  Lord  to  do  great  things  for  us,  and  unsearchable. 

Nor  may  we  alone  derive  comfort  as  to  our  future  from  his  person,  we 
may  also  be  made  glad  by  a  hope  as  to  his  place.  Where  we  see  Jesns 
to  be,  there  shall  we  also  be.  His  heaven  is  our  heaven.  His  prayer 
secures  that  we  shall  be  with  him  where  he  is,  that  we  may  behold  his 
glory.  To-day  we  may  be  in  a  workhouse,  or  in  the  ward  of  a  hospital, 
or  in  a  ruinous  hovel,  "  but  we  see  Jesus,"  and  we  know  that  ere  long  we 
shall  dwell  in  the  palace  of  the  great  King. 

The  glory  of  Jesus  strikes  the  eye  at  once,  and  thus  we  are  made  to 
exult  in  his  position,  for  it,  too,  is  ours.  He  will  give  to  us  to  sit  upon 
his  throne,  even  as  he  sits  upon  the  Father's  throne.  He  hath  made  us 
kings  and  priests  unto  God,  and  we  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  What- 
ever of  rest,  happiness,  security,  and  honour  our  glorious  Bridegroom 
has  attained,  he  will  certainly  share  it  with  his  spouse ;  yea,  and  all  his 
people  shall  know  what  it  is  to  be  heirs  of  God,  joint  heirs  with  Jesus 
Christ,  if  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  him  that  we  may  also  be  glorified 
together. 

How  soon  our  condition  shall  rise  into  complete  likeness  to  the 
ascended  Lord  we  cannot  tell,  but  it  cannot  be  long,  and  it  may  be  a  very 
short  time.  The  veil  of  time  is  in  some  cases  very  thin,  another  week 
may  be  the  only  separation.  And  then !  Ah,  then !  We  shall  see  Jesus, 
and  what  a  sight  will  it  be  I  Heaven  lies  in  that  vision.  'Tis  all  the 
heaven  our  loving  hearts  desire. 

The  sight  of  tfesus  which  we  now  enjoy  is  a  foretaste  of  the  clearer 
sight  which  is  reserved  for  us,  and  therefore  it  will  be  a  happy  wisdom 
to  be  much  in  the  enjoyment  of  it.  A  thousand  things  tempt  us  away, 
and  yet  there  is  not  one  of  them  worth  a  moment's  thought  in  comparison. 


THE  BEST  OF  ALL  SIGHTS.  701 

What  are  works  of  art  and  discoveries  of  science  if  compared  with 
our  Beloved  ?  What  are  the  gems  which  adorn  the  brow  of  beauty,  or 
J  he  eyes  which  flash  from  the  face  of  loveliness,  if  placed  in  rivalry  with 
him  ?  Other  matters,  weighty  and  important,  call  for  our  thought ;  and 
jet  even  these  we  may  place  in  a  second  rank  when  Jesus  is  near. 

We  may  not  be  doctors  of  divinity,  much  as  we  would  desire  to  be  deeply 
instructed  in  the  truth ;  **  but  we  see  Jesus."  Into  many  mysteries  we 
cannot  pry ;  **  but  we  see  Jesus."  Where  the  divine  sovereignty  harmo- 
nizes with  human  responsibility  is  too  deep  a  problem  for  us ;  "  but  we 
see  Jesus."  The  times  and  the  seasons  battle  us,  the  dispensation  of  the 
end  is  dark  to  us,  "  but  we  see  Jesus."  Glory  over  us,  ye  far-seeing 
prophets !  Deride  us,  ye  deep-glancing  philosophers  !  We  leave  you  to 
your  boastings.  We  are  poor,  short-sighted  beings,  and  know  but  little, 
but  one  thing  we  know,  whereas  we  were  once  blind,  now  we  see,  and  "  we 
see  Jesus." 

This  sight  has  made  us  unable  to  see  many  things  which  now  dazzle 
our  fellow  men.  They  can  see  priestly  power  in  a  certain  set  of  men  like 
themselves.  This  we  cannot  see,  for  "  we  see  Jesus,"  as  ending  the  line 
of  sacrificing  priests,  and  bestowing  a  common  priesthood  upon  all  the 
saints.  Many  see  great  wisdom  in  the  various  schools  of  doubt,  in  which 
we  see  nothing  except  pretentious  folly,  for  "  we  see  Jesus,"  and  all 
liuraan  wisdom  pales  before  the  wisdom  of  God,  which  is  perfected  in  him. 
Certain  of  our  brethren  see  perfection  in  the  flesh,  **but  we  see  Jesus  "; 
others  see  the  church,  and  their  own  sect, "  but  we  see  Jesus."  A  few  see 
nothing  but  their  own  separateness  from  everybody  else,  and  the  pecu- 
liar excellence  of  their  exclusiveness,  "  but  we  see  Jesus." 

Come,  beloved,  let  us  get  to  our  secret  chambers  of  communion,  and 
see  Jesus  there  as  from  the  hill  of  Pisgah.  Let  us  turn  the  pages  of 
Scripture,  and  see  Jesus  there  amid  the  beds  of  spices.  Let  us  frequent 
ordinances,  especially  the  breaking  of  bread,  and  see  Jesus  there.  Let 
us  watch  in  our  experience,  as  we  are  conformed  unto  his  suflerings,  and 
5ee  him  there.  Let  us  go  into  the  field  of  holy  labour,  and  as  we  gird  our- 
selves and  put  on  the  yoke  of  service,  let  us  see  our  Master  there.  Yea, 
in  all  things  let  us  learn  to  see  our  Lord,  for  nature  and  Providence, 
experience  and  Scripture  are  hung  with  mirrors  which  reflect  him.  Till 
the  day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away  let  us  continue  to  gaze  upon 
him,  till  our  eyes  shall  actually  see  him  for  ourselves  and  not  another.  Be 
this  the  grand  distinction  of  our  lives :  whatever  others  may  see  or  not 
see, 

"WE    S££    JSSVS." 


jn^ttrn^jtUtmr  ^dbmmk 


THE    HUN6EE-BITB. 


^1 


DSUVERED  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  URTROPOLITAN  TABEBKACLE,  NEWIKOTON, 


"  HU  Btrengih  fhall  be  hunger-bitten."— Job  xviiL  12. 

BiLDAB  was  declaring  the  history  of  the  hypocritical,  presmnptnons, 
and  wicked  man ;  and  he  intended,  no  doubt,  to  insinuate  that  Job 
was  just  such  a  person,  that  he  had  been  a  deceiver,  and  that  therefore 
at  last  God's  proTidence  had  found  him  out  and  was  visiting  him  for 
his  sins.  In  this  Bildad  was  guilty  of  great  injustice  to  his  friend. 
All  the  three  miserable  comforters  of  Job  were  mistaken  in  the  special 
aim  of  their  discourses,  and  yet  concerning  the  speeches  of  each  one  it 
may  be  said  that  their  general  statements  were,  for  the  most  part, 
true.  They  uttered  truths,  but  they  drew  mistaken  inferences,  and  they 
were  ungenerous  in  the  imputations  which  they  cast  upon  Job.  It  is 
true  that,  sooner  or  later,  eitlier  in  this  world  or  the  next,  all  conceiTable 
curses  do  fall  upon  the  hypocrite  and  the  ungodly  man,  but  it  is  not 
true  that  when  a  Christian  is  in  tix)uble  we  are  to  judge  that  he  is 
suffering  for  his  sin.  It  would  be  both  cruel  and  wicked  for  us  to 
think  so.  Nevertheless,  because  what  Bildad  said  was,  in  the  main, 
true,  though  unkindly  and  wrongly  applied,  we  feel  ourselves  quite  at 
liberty  to  take  a  text  out  of  his  mouth. 

It  is  tnie  of  many  persons  that  their  strength  shall  be  hunger- 
bitten,  and  I  shall  speak  concerning  these  words  in  three  ways,  noticing 
first,  that  this  is  a  curse  which  will  surely  he  fulfilled  upon  the  ungodly. 
Secondly,  ihis  is  a  discipline  which  Ood  often  exercises  upon  the  self- 
righteous  when  he  means  to  save  them.  And,  thirdly — and  it  is  grievous 
work  to  have  to  say  it — this  is  a  form  of  chastisement  upon  believers  tcho 
are  not  living  near  to  Ood  as  they  ought  to  be — their  strength  becomes 
hunger-bitten. 

I.  First  we  shall  view  our  text  as  A  curse  which  will  be  ful- 
yiLLBD  UPON  THE  UNGODLY.    "  His  Strength  shall  be  hunger-bitten." 

It  is  not  said  that  they  are  hunger-bitten  merely,  but  that  their 
strength  is  so ;  and  if  their  strength  be  hunger-bitten  what  must  their 
weakness  be  ?  When  a  man's  sti'ength  is  bitten  with  hunger,  what  a 
hunger  must  be  raging  throughout  the  whole  of  his  nature. 


THE  HUKGBR-BITE,  703 

Now,  a  large  proporfcion  of  men  make  their  gold  to  be  their  strength, 
their  castle  and  their  high  tower,  and  for  awhile  they  do  rejoice  in  their 
wealth,  and  find  great  satisfaction  in  gathering  it,  in  seeing  it  multiplied, 
and  in  hoping  by-and-by  that  it  shall  come  to  great  store.  But  every 
ungodly  man  ought  to  know  that  riches  arc  not  for  ever,  and  often  they 
take  to  themselves  wings  and  fly  away.  Men  of  colossal  fortunes  have 
dwindled  down  to  beggars;  they  made  great  ventures  and  realized  great 
failures.  None  are  secure.  As  long  as  a  man  is  in  this  world  he  is 
like  a  ship  at  sea,  he  is  still  liable  to  be  shipwrecked.  0  you  that  are 
boasting  in  your  gold,  and  calling  your  treasure  your  chief  good,  the 
day  may  come  to  you  when  your  strength  wifl  be  hunger-bitten,  and, 
like  the  victims  of  famine,  you  will  find  yourselves  helpless, — you  whose 
money  aforetime  answered  all  things,  and  made  you  feel  omnipotent. 

But  it  will  be  said,  of  course,  that  it  is  not  in  every  case  that  the 
ungodly  man's  strength  of  wealth  is  huuger-bitten ;  and  I  willingly  con- 
cede it.  But  it  comes  to  pass  in  another  fashion.  How  many  there 
are  who  keep  their  wealth,  and  yet,  for  all  that,  are  very  poor.  It  is 
not  that  the  gold  goes,  but  it  stays  by  them  and  does  not  comfort 
them.  I  do  not  know  which  would  be  the  worse  of  the  two — to  be 
hungry  for  want  of  bread,  or  to  have  abundance  of  bread,  and  yet  re- 
main hungry  eat  whatever  you  might.  Thousands  in  this  world  are 
precisely  in  that  condition.  They  have  aU  that  heart  could  wish,  if 
their  heart  were  right,  but  it  seems  nothmg  to  them  because  they  have 
envy  in  their  spirits.  Kemember  Haman.  He  is  invited  to  the  banquet 
of  wine,  he  is  a  chief  noble  of  the  empire,  he  has  his  monarch's  favour, 
but  all  that  avails  him  nothing  because  !Mordecai  sits  in  the  gate.  Enxj 
has  cankered  his  soul,  and  if  he  were  able  to  mount  to  the  throne  of 
Ahasucrus  himself  it  would  make  no  difference  to  him ;  he  would  be 
unhappy  there ;  and  all  because  one  poor  Jew  will  not  bow  to  him. 
There  are  persons  going  up  and  down  Cheapside  every  day  who  are 
intolerably  wretched  about  a  something  which  they  would  hardly  like 
to  mention  to  reasonable  men.  A  wretched  trifle  frets  them  like  a 
moth  in  a  garment,  and  all  the  glory  of  their  position  is  eaten  away : 
their  strength  is  hunger-bitten. 

Where  the  canker  does  not  happen  to  be  envy  it  may  come  to  be  a 
passion  akin  to  it,  namely,  revenge.  Alas,  that  we  should  have  to  talk 
of  revenge  as  still  existing  upon  this  earth  after  Christ  has  been  here 
and  taught  us  to  pray,  **  Forgive  us  our  debts  as  we  forgive  our  debtors." 
Yet  there  are  ungodly  men  who  even  think  it  right  to  foster  resent- 
ments. A  word  uncourteously  spoken,  a  deed  unkindly  done,  will  be 
laid  up,  and  an  opportunity  sought  for  retaliation ;  or,  if  not,  a  hope 
will  he  dberished  that  some  blight,  or  blow  from  Ood,  may  fall  upon 
the  offender :  and  if  that  offender  still  bears  himself  aloft,  and  lives 
right  merrily,  and  makes  no  recompense  for  the  wrong  done,  the  ag- 
grieved one  has  eaten  out  his  own  heart  with  chagrin,  and  the  strength 
of  his  wealth  has  been  hunger-bitten. 

Where  this  has  not  been  the  case,  it  has,  perhaps,  more  frequently 
happened  that  persons  have  been  affiicted  by  avarice.  Nothing  more 
tends  to  impoverish  a  man  than  being  rich.  It  is  a  hard  thing  to  find 
a  rich  man  v»ho  enjoys  riches.  A  rich  man  is  a  man  who  has  all  he 
irauts,  and  many  a  man  is  rich  on  a  few  shillings  a  week :  a  poor  man 


70i  METUOPOhlTAN  TABKRNACT«K  PULPIT. 

is  a  man  who  does  not  jjjet  what  ho  wants,  and  people  with  twenty 
thousand  a-year  are  in  that  list.  In  fact,  where  shall  you  find  such 
poverty  as  among  those  poor  rich  men  ?  The  miser  is  often  pictnrt-d  as 
afraid  to  sleep  because  thieves  may  break  in ;  he  rises  at  midnight  to  tell 
over  his  hoarded  treasure,  he  is  afraid  lest  bonds,  securities,  mortgages, 
and  the  like  may,  after  all,  turn  out  to  be  mere  waste  pai)er ;  he  frets 
and  stews  and  mars  his  life  because  he  has  too  great  a  means  of  living 
— such  a  man  may  not  be  very  common,  but.  it  is  an  easy  thing  to  find 
people  who  have  very  much,  and  yet  are  just  as  careful,  just  as  grasping, 
just  as  fretful  after  more,  as  if  they  had  but  newly  started  in  business, 
and  were  almost  penniless — their  strength  is  hunger-bitten.  If  some- 
body had  told  them,  "  You  will  one  day  reach  to  so  many  thousand 
pounds,"  they  would  have  said,  "  Ah,  if  ever  I  get  that  amount  I  shall 
be  perfectly  satisfied."  They  have  saved  that  sum  long  ago,  and  ten 
times  as  much,  and  now  they  say,  **  Ah,  you  don't  know  what  it  is  to 
want  money  till  you  have  a  good  portion  of  it.  Now  wc  have  so  much 
wo  ii.nst  have  more.  We  are  up  to  our  necks  in  the  golden  stream, 
and  we  must  needs  swim  where  the  bottom  cannot  be  touched."  Poor 
fools !  They  have  enough  water  to  float  them,  but  they  must  have 
enough  to  drown  in.  One  stick  is  a  capital  thing  for  a  lame  man,  as  I 
know  right  well,  but  a  thousand  sticks  would  make  a  terrible  load  for 
a  man  to  carry.  When  any  one  has  a  sufficiency  let  him  be  thankful 
for  so  convenient  a  staff,  but  if  he  will  not  use  what  he  has  until  he  has 
accumulated  much  more,  the  comfort  of  his  substance  is  gone,  and  his 
strength  is  hunger-bitten. 

There  are  cases  in  which  the  hunger-bite  does  not  take  a  shape  which 
I  could  well  describe.  Instances  are  met  with  of  persons  wno  ha\i» 
made  their  gold  their  strength,  who  are  altogether  unrestful.  Some 
have  thought  that  their  brain  was  diseased,  but  it  is  likely  that  the 
disease  was  lower  down,  and  in  their  hearts.  We  have  known  wealthy 
men  who  believed  themselves  to  be  poor,  and  were  haunted  with  the 
idea  that  they  should  die  in  the  poor-house,  even  when  they  were  worth 
a  million ;  and  others  who  have  quarrelled  about  the  division  of  a  far- 
thing, when  the  loss  of  ten  thousand  pounds  would  have  been  a  fieabite 
to  them.  In  great  substance  they  have  found  no  substantial  rest. 
They  have  often  wished  they  could  be  as  cheerful  as  their  own  menial 
servants.  As  they  have  lolled  in  their  carriage,  and  looked  at  the  rosy 
cheeks  of  the  urchins  in  the  village,  they  have  coveted  their  health  and 
felt  willing  to  wear  their  rags  if  they  could  possess  their  appetites.  As 
they  have  looked  upon  poor  persons  with  family  loves  and  domestic 
joys,  and  felt  that  their  own  joys  were  few  in  that  direction,  they  have 
greatly  envied  them.  It  is  a  great  mercy  when  the  worldling  is  made 
uneasy  in  this  world ;  it  is  a  ground  for  hope  that  God  means  to  wean 
him  from  his  idols.  But,  alas,  there  are  some  who  do  not  rest  heie,  and 
yet  will  not  rest  hereafter.  They  have  no  rest  in  all  that  God  has 
given  them  under  the  sun,  and  yet  they  will  not  fly  to  him  who  is  the 
soufs  sure  repose. 

I  need  not  dwell  for  another  moment  upon  th^  failure  of  the  strength 
which  is  found  in  riches.  It  is  the  same  with  all  sorts  of  men  who  try 
to  find  comfort  out  of  Christ  and  away  from  God,  their  **  strength  ghaU 
be  hunger-bitten."    What  a  melancholy  instance  of  this  is  Solomon. 


k 


THE  HUNQER-BITB.  705 

He  had  an  opportunity  to  try  everything  in  his  quest  for  the  chief  good, 
and  he  did  test  everything,  so  that  we  need  not  repeat  the  experiment. 
He  was  the  great  alchemist  who  tried  to  turn  all  manner  of  metals  into 
gold,  but  failed  with  them  all.  At  one  time  he  was  building  great 
palaces,  and  when  the  building  fit  was  on  him  he  seemed  happy ;  but 
when  once  the  gorgeous  piles  were  finished  he  said, "  Vanity  of  vanities : 
all  is  vanity."  Then  he  would  take  to  gardening  and  to  the  planting 
of  rare  plants  and  trees,  and  to  the  digging  of  fountains,  but  when  he 
had  done  enough  of  this  he  looked  upon  his  orchard  and  vineyards  and 
again  muttered,  "  Vanity  of  vanities :  all  is  vanity."  Then  he  thought 
he  would  try  laughter  and  madness :  the  comic  side  of  human  life  he 
woald  test,  as  well  as  the  useful ;  so  he  plunged  into  all  manner  of 
pleasures,  and  gathered  to  himself  singing  men  and  singing  women, 
and  all  deli<!hts  of  the  flesh,  but  after  he  had  drank  deep  of  that  cup  he 
said  again,  "Vanity  of  vanities  :  all  is  vanity."  Poor  Solomon!  He 
had  great  strength,  but  his  strength  was  hunger-bitten.  He  looked 
here  and  there,  up  and  down,  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  and 
found  no  bread  for  his  soul ;  he  snatched  at  shadows  and  tried  to  feed 
himself  with  bubbles ;  he  was  devoured  with  hunger  in  the  midst  of 
plenty ;  and  where  the  humble  people  of  Israel  were  blessing  the  God 
who  satisfied  their  mouth  with  good  things  and  renewed  their  youth 
like  the  eagles,  poor  Solomon  was  complaining  that  there  was  nothing 
new  under  the  sun,  and  that  it  was  better  for  a  man  not  to  be  born 
than  to  have  lived  at  all. 

Now  remark  that  if  this  hunger  does  not  come  upon  the  ungodly  man 
during  the  former  part  of  his  life,  it  will  come  to  him  at  the  close  of  it. 
While  we  have  much  to  do  and  our  minds  are  occupied  we  may  be  able 
to  put  off  thought,  but  when,  at  last,  God  sends  to  us  that  messenger 
with  the  bony  hand,  whose  oratory  is  soul  piercing,  the  dulness  of  whose 
eyeless  eye  darts  fire  into  the  soul,  then  will  all  human  strength  be 
hunger-bitten.  When  death  is  left  alone  with  the  man,  then  he  perceives 
that  his  money  bags  contain  nothing  precious,  because  he  must  leave 
them.  How  now  with  his  broad  acres  ?  How  now  with  his  large 
estates?  How  now  with  his  palatial  residence?  How  now  with  all 
that  he  called  dear  ?  How  now  with  his  doctor's  degree  and  his  learn- 
ing ?  How  now  with  his  fame  and  his  honour  ?  How  now  even  with 
his  domestic  comforts  and  the  joys  of  life  ?  Hunger-bitten  are  they 
all.  When  he  comes  to  die  they  cannot  help  him.  The  soul  that  is 
within  him,  which  he  would  not  allow  to  speak,  now  opens  its  hungry 
mouth  and  cries,  '*  Thou  hast  denied  me  bread.  God,  and  God  alone, 
could  fill  me  ;  and  thou  hast  denied  me  God ;  and  now  thou  feelest  the 
hunger  which  has  come  upon  me,  and  thou  must  feel  it,  and  feel  it,  too, 
for  ever."  Alas,  alas,  alas,  for  a  man  to  have  spent  all  his  life  in  earning 
a  disappointment,  labouring  hard  to  lose  his  soul,  sweating  and  strain- 
ing to  lose  the  race,  tugging  and  toiling  to  be  damned ;  for  that  is  the 
case  of  many  a  man,  and  that  is  whei*eunto  the  tide  drifteth  with  all 
mankind  who  seek  for  lasting  good  apart  from  God  and  apart  from  the 
blood  and  righteousness  of  God's  dear  Son.  Of  each  one  of  them  it 
shall  be  said, ''  His  strength  shall  be  hunger-bitten." 

I  have  said  these  things  mournfully  to  my  own  heart ;  but  I  would 
say  to  any  of  you  who  may  not  be  rich,  but  who  are  looking  for  your 


L 


706  HETBOPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT* 

good  in  jonr  own  little  home  and  the  comforts  of  it — any  of  yon  yoong 
men  who  are  seeking  the  great  object  of  life  in  learning,  or  the  like 
— if  you  are  not  living  for  God,  your  strength  will  be  hunger-bittcJL 
If  you  do  not  '^  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteonaneaB,  * 
whatever  you  gain  and  however  satisfied  yon  may  be  for  a  little  whik, 
an  awful  hunger  must  ultimately  come  upon  you,  and  you  wiU  then 
lament  that  you  spent  your  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  and  your 
labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not. 

II.  Briefly,  in  the  second  place,  we  shall  speak  of  our  text  as  indi- 
cating A  KIND  OF  DISCIPLINE  THBOUOH  WHICH  GOD  PUTS  THE  SELF- 
BIGHTE0U6  WHEN  HE  MEANS  TO  SATE  THEM. 

Many  people  are  very  religious,  and  yet  are  not  saved.  They  are 
unsaved  because  they  go  about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness, 
and  have  not  submitted  themselves  to  the  righteousness  which  is  of 
God  in  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  these  persons  may  for  awhile  be  reiy 
well  satisfied  with  their  own  righteousness,  and  if  they  are  not  the 
children  of  God  they  will  be  satisfied  with  it  for  life.  Some  of  tbem 
talk  in  this  way, — ^*'I  don't  know  that  I  ever  wronged  anybody.  I 
have  always  been  honest  and  honourable  in  my  transactions,  and  I  have  ] 
brought  up  my  children  respectably.  I  have  had  a  hard  fight  of  it, 
and  for  all  that  nobody  could  say  that  I  ever  di^n^ced  my  duiracter.*' 
It  is  not  very  long  ago  that  I  was  driven  by  a  cabman,  an  aged  man, 
and  when  I  got  out  of  his  cab  I  referred  to  his  age,  and  he  remarked 
npon  it  himself:  I  said, ''  Well,  I  trust  when  this  life  is  over  you  will 
have  a  portion  in  a  better  world."  "  Yes,  I  think  so,  sir,"  he  said :  **  I 
was  never  drunk,  that  I  know  of,  in  my  life ;  was  always  reckoned  a 
civil  man ;  never  used  bad  language ;  and  I  go  to  church  sometmes." 
He  seemed  to  be  perfectly  satisfied,  and  to  be  quite  astonished  that  I 
did  not  express  my  assurance  of  his  safety.  His  confidence  is  the  com- 
mon reliance  of  all  classes  of  Englishmen,  and  though  they  may  not 
always  put  it  in  that  shape,  yet  that  is  the  notion — that  by  a  sort  of 
goodness,  a  very  poor  and  mangled  goodness,  men  may  after  all  enter 
heaven.  Now,  when  God  means  to  save  a  man  the  hunger  of  the  heart 
comes  in  and  devours  all  his  boasted  excellence.  Why,  a  spiritually 
hungry  soul  would  take  fifly  years  of  self-righteousness  and  swallow 
them  up  like  a  morsel,  and  cry  for  more.  Our  goodness  is  nothing 
compared  with  the  demands  of  the  law  and  the  necessities  of  the  case. 
Our  fine  righteousnesses,  how  they  shrivel  up  like  autumn  leaves  when 
the  Spirit  of  God  acts  as  a  frost  to  them.  Our  virtues  are  as  a  meadow 
in  the  spring  bedecked  with  golden  kingcups,  but  when  the  Spirit  of 
God  bloweth  upon  it  the  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof  fadeth, 
for  all  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of 
grass.  It  is  a  part  of  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  wither  all  the 
goodliness  of  human  nature,  and  to  destroy  all  those  lovely  flowers  of 
natural  virtue  in  which  we  put  such  store,  cutting  them  down  as  with  a 
mower's  scythe.  In  truth,  there  is  none  good,  no,  not  one.  We  arc  all 
shut  up  in  unbelief  and  sin  by  nature.  In  the  best  of  natures  sin 
affects  the  whole  body,  "  the  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart 
faint,"  and  it  is  a  great  blessing  when  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  us  feel  this. 
Painful  is  the  feeling  but  blessed  is  the  result  when,  once  for  all,  our 
strength  is  hunger-bitten. 


THE  HUNGER-BITE.  707 

Ay,  and  there  are  some  who  arc  very  satisfied  because,  in  addition  to 
a  commendable  life,  they  have  performed  certain  ceremonies  to  which 
they  impute  great  sanctity.  There  is  a  theory  abroad  nowadays  which 
some  persons  who  are  not  in  either  the  lunatic  or  the  idiot  asylum 
believe,  namely,  the  theory  that  sacramental  performances  convey  grace. 
It  is  wonderful  how  a  rational  being  can  ever  think  so,  but  tlicre  are 
persons,  who  are  apparently  rational  in  other  things,  who  believe  that 
the  sprinkling  of  drops  of  water  upon  an  infant's  brow  regenerates  it, 
that  the  eating  of  bread  and  the  drinking  of  wine  really  convey  Christ 
to  the  soul,  and  so  on:  that  aqueous  applications  and  matorialistic 
festivities  can  bring  spiritual  good  to  the  heart — a  monstrous  doctrine,' 
Tvorthy  of  the  priests  of  Baal,  but  so  foolish  as  to  make  one  doubt  his 
ears  when  he  hears  it  stated.  Because  they  have  gone  through  these 
operations,  and  have  been  confirmed,  and  I  do  not  know  what  besides, 
many  are  content.  Others  who  happen  to  belong  to  a  dissenting  com- 
munity have  passed  through  the  ordeal  of  joining  the  church,  or  have 
attended  class-meetings,  and  have  subscribed  to  the  various  societies, 
think  that,  therefore,  they  are  saved.  Heirs  of  hell  will  rest  content  with 
snch  outward  things,  but  heirs  of  heaven  never  can.  Their  strength,  if 
they  make  external  religion  their  strength,  will  by-and-by  be  hunger- 
hitten,  and  they  will  cry  out,  **  My  God,  my  soul  panteth  for  thee  as  the 
hart  pants  for  the  water-brooks.  I  cannot  be  satisfied  with  outward 
forms,  I  want  inward  grace,  and  I  cannot  be  content  with  being  told 
that  the  grace  went  with  the  form.  I  want  to  know  the  grace  of  God 
in  truth,  I  long  to  feel  it,  I  pine  to  exhibit  it  in  my  own  life."  To  be 
told  I  was  bom  again  when  I  was  a  babe  will  not  satisfy  me ;  I  want 
to  feel  the  inner  life,  the  new  life  of  God  within  my  spirit.  To  be  told 
that  I  did  eat  Christ  when  I  ate  the  bread  will  not  content  me ;  my 
heart  longs  to  know  that  Christ  is  really  in  me  the  hope  of  glory,  and 
that  I  am  living  upon  him.  If  I  cannot  have  communion  with  God 
and  with  his  dear  Son  for  myself  in  my  very  soul,  I  turn  with  loathing 
from  every  substitute,  ritualistic,  priestly,  or  otherwise.  Beloved,  I 
would  have  you  flee  from  every  sacrament  to  the  Saviour;  I  would 
have  you  fly  away  from  ceremonies  to  the  cross  of  Christ.  There  is 
your  only  hope.  Look  to  him  by  faith :  for  all  the  rest  without  this 
is  but  outward  and  carnal,  and  can  minister  no  good  to  your  spirit. 
May  your  strength  be  hunger-bitten  if  you  are  resting  in  anything 
which  is  external  and  unspiritual. 

Many  a  person  has  known  what  it  is  to  have  this  hunger-bite  go  right 
through  everything  he  rested  in.  I  once  knew  what  it  was  to  get  a  little 
comfort  from  my  prayers  before  I  found  the  Saviour,  but  when  the 
Spirit  of  God  dealt  with  me  I  saw  that  my  prayers  wanted  praying 
over  again.  I  thought  I  had  some  sort  of  repentance,  and  I  began  to 
be  contented  with  it ;  but  when  the  Spirit  of  God  came  I  found  that 
my  repentance  needed  to  be  repented  of.  I  had  felt  some  confidence  in 
my  Bible  readings,  and  hoped  that  my  regular  attendance  upon  public 
worship  would  bring  me  salvation,  but  I  found  that  I  was  after  all 
mocking  the  Word,  for  I  was  reading  it,  but  not  beheving  it ;  hearing 
it,  but  not  accepting  it;  was  increasing  my  knowledge  and  my  res- 
ponsibility, and  yet  was  not  rendering  obedience  to  God.  Dear  soul,  if 
you  arc  resting  anywhere  short  of  Christ,  may  your  strength  be  hunger- 


708  METROPOLITAN  TABEBKACLS  PULPIT. 

bitten.  You  are  at  jour  strongest  when  jon  are  ntter  ureikkness  apart 
from  him.  When  you  rest  in  him  completely,  and  alone,  then  is  salva- 
tion accomplished  in  you,  but  not  till  then.  May  God  in  hk  infinite 
mercy  grant  that  all  your  strength  apart  from  Christ  may  be  hanger- 
bitten,  and  that  speedily. 

III.    Lastly,  and  Tery  earnestly — and  perhaps    this  last  part  may 
have  more  reference  to    most  of  you  than  anything  I  have  aaid — I 
believe  there  are  xaky  of  God's  servants  whose  stbekoth  is 
LAMENTABLY  HUKGER-BITTEN.    In  this  age  we  are  all  busy,  and  through 
being  busy  we  are  apt  to  neglect  the  soul-feeding  ordinances;  I  mean 
the  reading  of  Scripture,  the  hearing  of  the  word,  meditation  npon  it, 
prayer  and  communion  with  God.    Some  of  you  do  not  rise  so  eoon 
as  you  might  in  the  morning,  and  prayer  is  hurried  over ;  and  too  oiben 
at  eventide  you  are  half  asleep  with  the  many  cares  of  the  daj»  and 
prayer  is  offered  in  a  slovenly  way.    Nor  is  this  all,  for  during  the  day 
when,  if  you  were  as  you  should  be,  you  would  be  praying  without 
ceasing,  there  is  this  to  think  of,  and  that,  and  the  other,  and  sach 
a  pressure  of  business  that  ejaculations  are  few.    How  caa  you  praj  ? 
You  did  at  one  time  get  a  text  of  Scripture  in  the  morning  and  chew 
it  all  day,  and  you  used  to  get  much  sweetness  out  of  it,  and  your  soul 
grew ;  but  now,  instead  of  a  text  of  Scripture,  you  have  pressing  engage- 
ments as  soon  as  you  are  out  of  bed.    Yon  would,  now  and  then,  steal 
into  a  mid-day  prayer-meeting,  perhaps,  or  get  two  or  three  minute 
alone,  but  you  have  gradually  droppea  that  habit,  and  you  have  felt 
justified  in  doing  so  for  ^'really,  time  is  so  precions,  and  there  is  so 
much  to  do  in  this  age  of  competition."'    Dear  fnend,  I  am  no  judge 
for  you,  but  let  me  ask  you  whether  yon  are  not  becoming  hunger-bitten 
through  not  feeding  upon  the  word  of  God.    Souls  cannot  be  strong 
without  F^piritnal  meat  any  more  than  bodies  can  be  well  when  meals 
are  neglected.    There  is  a  good  rule  I  have  heard  mothers  say  about 
children  and  chickens — ''  little  and  often  " ;  and  I  think  it  is  true  with 
Christians.    They  want  little  and  often  during  the  day;  not  a  long 
passage  of  Scripture,  perhaps  memory  would  fail,  but  a  short  passage 
now  and  a  short  passage  then,  and  a  little  prayer  here  and  a  little 
prayer  there.    It  is  wonderful  how  souls  grow  in  that  way.    Alas!  I 
fear  all  this  is  neglected,  and  spiritual  strength  is  hunger-bitten.     Let 
us  begin  from  this  time  forward  to  give  attention  to  the  sustenance  of 
our  souls.    Let  us  daily  feed  upon  the  word  of  God,  that  we  may  grow 
thereby ;  so  shall  our  strength  no  more  be  hunger-bitten. 


LETTER  FROM  MR.  SFURGEON. 

DiAtt  Fbiesds,— I  wish  you.  all  a  zncny  Christmas.  May  your  joy  be  joy  in  the  Locd.  I  hATe 
paswd  through  a  furnace  of  pain  and  sorrow,  but  I  hare  reavon  to  beliere  that  my  being'  in  a 
genial  climate  has  greaUy  shortened  the  duration  and  mitigated  the  severity  of  tbs  aiBicCkui. 
Amid  your  ioys  please  pray  for  the  preacher  that  he  may  be  restored,  and  that  eternal  boMttt  to 
himself  and  to  his  readers  may  come  ont  of  these  frequent  trials.  Indeed,  they  are  Tery  gnerooa, 
and  yet  the  sharpest  chastisement  of  a  child  is  better  than  the  brightest  joy  of  a  castaway.  Ther^ 
is  an  end,  and  that  end  gathers  increase  of  sweetne;^*}  from  the  bitterness  of  the  way.  Peace  be  to 
you  all.  Yours  most  heartily,  

Mentone,  Dec.  19, 1S79.  C.  H.  fiPUBOEOX. 


END    OP    VOLUME    XXV. 


DR.  J.  COLLIS  BROWNE'S  CHLORODTRE, 

Y    aEMUINB. 

ihlBC  ilMp.trM  tram  hMduba,  nIM 
tiBiCi  o(  pratr«flt«fl  dl«flBH«  Invlvonti 
loif.joa  will  pnnrld*  raontU  with 
OintK,  Mmin  of  Ih*  OolKft  il 


THE    OKiaiNAXi    AND    ONLY    aEMUINB. 


ADTIOI  TO  nrTALIDS^i-II  TOU 
fnfli  |MlD  iBd  Mua1*b.  tn  mliD 
**  "id  rwutel*  Ch»  sliealiiUiif  aj 

mtj  <llHn«*l  br  D>-  J- 


n1*b.  tn  mliD  and  4>auMi*  tli 


ooLua  BAOir 


&    fnfli  |MlD  iBd  Mual 

»iM(TauHHill»,i»ln.._  

ttM  ■unalloui  naadj  <lliiiin«*(l  Irr  I 

cn:Loiaor)"Z"3sr^ 

todwhWil'»Jmm«alTtlw  Frnh^oB  tab*  Uw  i 


■t  raBsdjr  known  for  OooJAi. 
lljf- ■-■- 

_JU  Ilk*  ft  biKiii  uiii_i 

aKLDKOOnn  aSaeluillT  nitiihorttll  i 
"-— —  '-.UwoulyiMllWln  in 


NiujiJgu, 


_, idlWiaWj. 

■^1*11^,  Hjitarl^  PalplutlDB,  ud  BswBMb 
-    "' <lout,  Ounv,  TnoUiHhat 


Fma  Dr.  B.  J.  BonLna  k  Oo,  HomOHtl*; 

Va  bin  Bida  mt^  nleiuiv*  Dw  of  Ohlorodjaa  In  our  pnctica  UUIr.  and  look  moB  ItUH 

tcalltDl  dimet  Sadtttre  and  And-npHiDOdk.    liatauiin  allij  pain  ■nl  IrrlUitnn  In  vbata  Tsr  onaoi 

-•  • ■- ■-  '-' -~" ■ *~-~1qul*tad*aotabMublabj>anT«tt«r 

Jl  oUmt  a^dMlraa,  Oat  b  ta*H  ■> 


nnloaMloUiaOanafaDlFbTweluuUwlhabid  nortnd  ■  dbpateh  (ran  Hw 
■mm,  .  w-iu  •>  uDilJft,  to  tha  eSMt  chat  CTuiler*  had  baaa  tuIdi  teu^aUy,  aBd\ba(  lb*  OMLT 
raHdr  eraarBM*lc*  n<  GIIL0B01)VIIK.-8*a  /M«C  Deoambw^l,  lUt. 

04inm— nWAU   or    POADT    Jjni    IMITATIDVB.— Oicnoa— Tln-Cbaaaallor  SU  W. 
fai*  Wood  (UUd  tbix  Dr.  J.  CoIUa  Br  .<nu  waa.  undau  'MJI*.  ilia  Innalor  «l  CblomdTiia :    that  lb* 

Sat  tha  ddandan^  FraaBua,  vaa  dalllMnUlT  imtnia,  wtaloh,  b«  i«iT*tla4  to  mj,  bad  baaa  iwgn 
M  Itwa,  lalT  II,  IM4 
Bnid  In  BoUlai  at  !•.  1 M..  k.  td.,  and  la.  M.     Kona  two")*  vlthaat  tha  vonla.  "  Dr.  J .  OOLLH 
BBOWNE'S   CHr^ORODtNC,     as  tha  Ooranaaat  Hunp.     Onrwbatalnc   Ma 
-MMtpaalM  aaA  bottU. 

■OLE  MUinrACTDUlKi 

1.  T.  SftTenpoiti  83,  Gnat  Haw^  Stmt,  Bloanulmrr,   LondoB. 
FRAMPTOK*S    PILL    OF    HEALTH. 


rpHISFAUILY  UE[>IC1.\E  lithemiMt  affectlTs  n 

For  KfiMAI.EHlhfw  1111a arrtmlycxallint.rcmndi 
of  ilcbt.  nrrronn  affirti'ina.  hluli  bar.  plmplna.  and  iiallai 
. ■•  •  1  bj  airl-hRrulau.  at  li.  Ij 


bloom  to  the  «iinpli 


nedr  (or  Indlecitlon,  bUlooi  and  linr 

ihfadichc,  dopreailoTiof  a|i[r1ta,duli»a> 
laiia  or  thr  akin,  and  glrbm  a  bealthf 


BORWICK'S  COLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


bMD  KVkrdad  FOUR  SOLD  MEDALS  tbr  tb  laparlority  otbi  all  othan,     llAkn 

don  BrMd,  Plnm  Fnddinn  ud  »U  Uada  of  Vittrj  light,  *wMt,  uid  dlgnUblr. 

vnrjwiM*  in  Id.,  3d.,  4d„  and  Bd.  pMka^  ud  Bd.,  U.,  b,  8d„  ud  S*.  bntib 


CLARKE'S 


WORLD  FAMED 


Kr;» 


UH  itaa  Mood  rnon  aU  Lmporitli 
■a  attaiar  Foe  Berafala,  Banrrj 
ikin  aad  Bload  IMaaaaaik  llianet 
■-    *  TcatiBMilal*  ba  al 


FEBBTAST  28, 1879. 


itttpit. 

OOMTAIKUa 

M  (.  I. 


r>. 


CONTENTS 

1,456— PEACE:  A  FACT  AND  A  FEELING. 

,  ,_,      (  THE  NUMBERED  PEOPLE. 

l.«T—  j  SEEKEllS  DIRECTKD  AND  ENCOURAGED. 

1,4S8— A   SERMON,  UPON   ONE  NOTHING  BV  ANOTHER 

NOTHING. 
,  „„      (SATAN'S  PUNCTUALITY,  POWER  AND  PURPOSE. 
!';S«~JtHE  DUAL  NATURE  AND  THE  DUEL  WITHIN. 
1,460—    ,j.yj.  yjjj^^T  AND  DRINK  OF  1  HE  NEW  NATURE, 


riaid  SU&farthfiiioord  aivt  Tmioei' t^otUd  be  tmt  befiir*  llu  VUf^ 


XKT' 


500,000    SAMPLB    PACKETS 

'^^  (BMshfliiacteittomakB«Cw)Dl  t 

-"—    CHOCOLATE  ~    "~ 

Wen  Olvan  Awmr  M  tte 

literutioaal   KKUbitiM  tt  IMl, 

And  TbooMnda  an  now  ndng  it,  praaoBBdng  11  to  b«  ■■■ 

eqwUad  tn  vuittf  utd  notUww. 

It  is  BMommendad  by  tbe  FaonJ^,  ^T*'' 

One  Cup  or  Twenty  made  in  One  HlnatB. 

MJLK  oa  SUOAB  HOT  BEQUUtKD. 
Bold  b7  aU  Onom,  Ona  BhilUiv  pec  PmnA. 

By  Her  Majesty'i  Aoyal  Letters  Patat 

GommerGml  Steam  Mills,  Landon. 

LAMPLOUGH'S 

KPrBBVBIOIMa 

.  PYRETIC  SALINE 

I*  found  pw-amlnently  beneficial  In  prersnUng  and  oaring  SKALL  FpX,,br  Porf Wnf. 
InvigoratinB,  and  VitalWng  the  fllood.  AoTperaoo  who  ha«  alreadr  Uib  omplaija 
Bhoatd  t»ke  It,  and  b«  kept  £i  a  oool  and  darlwned  room,  to  preTMt  it*  leaTiv  tnj 

nomSdlnTw«bl«of«ld«»er.    Thl.ou.bi  np.Wd om. or  (wty  tii  two koon.  tta«MB. 

'^ot'ElLIOUS  C0S8T1TUT  lON&TlVinB  rta  to  rtlljtad  nmUoBi,  la^ll««><>°- ai>fBn4*>™ 
•o  (he  Skin. .  t».i»oalW  riiould  be  uik«i  daiy  with  ttadmn»^  in  « lumUaraf  m^ 
quotity  on  lotos  to  bed.  )bj  be  obtelnad  of  Uw  PraprMor. 

H.  LAHPLOOGB.  OonaultiaK  OhftialK.  113,  Holbora,  KOI, 

Bim^A  Door  ftttm  Hmtten  Omnlon.  London.  »t>d  of  all  Mpeeljhto  ChwnieU. 

BI^IR'S    GOUT    PILLS. 

rpHB  GRKAT  KNOLISH  RBMKDY  fOK  «OUT  AND  RUKDMATtSH.— 8ni*e»ft,  m* 


Hlu^Hiv  atljieklaT  u 


1 1  ■.  1 M.  Micl  Si.  Id.  per  bos. 


BORWICK'S  COLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


Hai  I"  an  awwded  FOUR  QOLD  MSDAI£  tar  ita  ntpMioritr  o*ar  aU  ttthan.  MakM 
IMloi.  tw  Braad,  nam  Pnddlnga,  and  aU  klndi  of  Faatoy  light,  nraat,  and  dtgMtiblf. 
Sold    <  ytrywhen  In  Id..  2d..  4d.,  and  Sd.  paoketa,  and  01.  la..  2i,  M.,  aad  0&  bona 

FoMosslng  ftU  ttie  Properties  of  the  Finsat  Arrow-root 

SHOWN   AND   POISON'S   CORN  FLOUS 

Waa  Twenty  Years'  World-wide  Reputation. 
Ersry  Ocnuiie  f aoket  beurs  tbe  be-iimile  nfutuw  sf  the  Xtkan, 


KABCH  31,  M79. 


Prici 


'    I 


BT  C.  H. 


„     ,  ,-,      I  THE  SEVEN  BNEEZES. 

N9. 1,«i—  J  2Y£5  OPENED. __ 

1  i6!— THE  TOKB  BEMOVED  AND  THE  LORD  REVEALED. 

, '  I  THE  EOES  AND  THE  HINDS. 

1,*68—    ^gj.  RISING  SUN. 

!A  BEFREBHING  PROMISE. 
THE  SON  GLORIFIED  BY  THE  FATHEB  AND  THE 
FATHER  GLORIFIED  BY  THE  BON. 
THE  KOYAL  PBEBOGATIVE. 


A*<VKRTIliBHil.NTa 


500.000    SAMPLE    PAGKEI8 

'  (Bwih  nfidtBt  U  BukB  «  Cnp)  of  tUi 

""""    CHOCOLATE  POWDBB 

W«n  Oimt  AwBj  at  tba 

litenatitua  Ixhibitfn  •!  IMS, 

And  Tbouudi  are  now  otlng  it.  pnmotincinB  It  to  b*  » 
eqoBUed  in  fnkUty  and  exaelliaM< 
It  is  Booommended  b7  tba  rftoalty,  Dally,     . 

One  Cup  or  Twenty  made  in  One  Hinvti 

MILK  OX  SUGAR  HOT  KEQUlIiSD. 
Sold  b7  all  Grocen,  Om  Shilling  par  Fmnd. 

By  Her  Hajesty'i  Soyal  Letteri  Patent 

GonmLercial  Steam  Sills,  London. 

LAMPLOUGH*S 

BrFBBVBaciNa 

.  PYRETIC  SALINE 

Ii  found  pr»-em1ncntl7  b«nf  HctBl  io  prtTsnting  and  curing  BHALL  PQZ>  by  PariMw 
InviKoraUns,  and  ViUliuiiR  tlie  lilooil.  An;  penon  wbo  hM  alraMyUiu  oomplilH 
■hmuil  take  it,  and  be  kept  in  a  cool  and  darkened  toon,  to  pforaiit  its  Ie»Tlag  aiq 
trace  on  th«  feature*. 

BIUKKKSS,  UKADACHB,  and  KAU8BA,  u*  Inmwt  «HMliBDwdl>Mt]inllma<bT  taktatahfr 
(•OAnhil  In  >  timUtr  of  »>ld  mlrr.    tlib  ou  t»  nputsd  onoa  or  tvlaa  In  tm  houri.  II  DMdnL 

SKA  VOVAUBM.— It  li  .1  my  nluabla  aiMoiapuiliMat,  wd  dMuM  on  no  acaoual  be  ■■HMf.  B 
iaiUuitlf  altan*  tha  ata  iir  liiiimn  idrknciii. 

Vur  BII.IUl^S  (XU'BTITUTIOXS.  ni* iiif  riH  to  rttlated  aesrrtlaiu.  IndlnatkHi,  and  trapHMi 
OBtbeSklii.BbnL->pi"iiifiilitwuldlMUIi'!niliiil)rvit)itlu>diiinur,  '—-j  lini"rtrnf  irafiir.  inilhtMi* 
qnintilyuK  iioInK  m  bv<L  Mar  baohtaiiiedur  Uiu  fropriator, 

H.  XiAUFIiOUOH.  GonaiilUng  Chamiit.  U9,  Holbom,  KO, 

HiiM.ml  »n.ir  friin  llattoii  n,r.li'.i.  Ix.iiJ'.n.  and  ufall  fwp>c»l-lf  «hf miiM. 

BIAIBS   GOUT   PIUS.      „„„„„„„„,„, 

FOB    OOUT    AND    RHBUMATISK. 

Thi'rKrrnnCntliiu  |>.iln  l«  i|iil^kly  r. ItivrO  mid  mr-^J  in  > tiw ditjrH I>r  thia •■.Ubrati-d  Urdlrlv. 


BORWICK'S   GOLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


Uw  ■■<  en  avanled  FOUR  GOLD  KEUAL8  for  ila  nperiority  over  all  othen.  Mafc^ 
Delicti  oa  Bread,  Flam  Poddingi,  and  all  kinds  of  Putry  light,  iweet,  and  diveitiblr. 
Sold    fTcryirWrein  Id.,  2d.,  4d.,  and  Ad.  packeta,  and  6d..  It.,  2i.  Ad.,  and  Ba.  boiM, 


PoBSQKiitng  alt  iho  Proportiu 


t'  tliQ  Fiuoat  Arrow-root. 


BROWN  AND  POISON'S   CORN  FLOUR 

Has  Twenty  Years'  World-vide  HeputBtion, 
Every  Oeuuine  Packet  bears  the  fac-simile  signatiiren  of  the  Maken, 


AFBIL  30.  M7S. 


BI  (.  I 


li\.    / 


OOTSTTENTS 


I  TWO  S0BT8  OF  HEABER8. 


I  «8— THE  PHILOSOPST  AND  PROPBIBTT  OT  AJCTJOAMT 

PRMSE. 
1,4»-PRA.YEH  PERFUMED  WITH  PRAISE. 
]  MO— A  qUKSTIOS  FOR  HARD-HEARTED  HEARERS. 


lUT  31,  1879. 


r 


i  c 


i 


JUKE  30.  1879. 


&DVKKTISBMPNTS 


500,000    SAMPLE    PAGKEI8 

(£ftcb  •ufficieat  to  make  a  Cap)  of  thii 

CHOCOLATE  POWDER 

Were  QiTen  Away  at  the 

literaatMMl  BiUbitioi  ^f  IMS, 

And  Thouiands  are  now  using  it,  pronouncing  it  to  Iw  Up 
equalled  in  quality  and  ezoellenee. 
It  is  Beoommended  by  tbe  Faoulty,  Daily. 

One  Gap  or  Twenty  made  in  One  HinntaL 

MILK  OR  aUGAS  NOT  REQUIRED. 
Sold  by  all  Orooere,  One  Shilling  per  Poviiid. 

By  Her  Majesty's  Boyal  Letters  Patent 

GomnierGial  Steam  lOlls,  London. 


LAMPLOUGH'S 

EFFERVESCING 

PYRETIC  SALINE 

Is  found  pre-emini'ntly  beneficial  in  preventing  and  curing  SHALL  POZ»  by  PnriMngi 
InvJRorHting,  and  VitaliHing  the  Hlood.  Any  person  who  has  already  this  eomplaini 
should  take  it.  and  be  kept  in  a  oool  and  darkened  room,  to  provent  its  learing  u^ 
tmce  on  the  features. 

SICKNESS.  IlKADACIIE,  and  NAUSEA,  an  In  mort  cmm  Immadltttely  relieved  bjr  Ukinf  s  t» 
■poonful  in  %  tumbler  of  oi>ld  wati-r.    Tnii  c»n  be  repeated  once  ur  twioa  in  two  houni.  if  needful. 

SKA  VOYAGES.— It  U  ■  very  taI liable  eocomiwniment,  end  aheuld  on  no  eeeount  be  onittsd.  II 
insUntly  allave  the  bm  nr  bilious  siokiifHi. 

Fur  H1L10U8  CONSTITVTIUNS.  Kivinft  rike  to  vitiatod  lecivtioni,  Indigeetion.  and  Bni|iliooi 
enthv  SIcin.  a  tca-MpoonfUl  should  Im*  talctin  daily  with  thediirnvr,  m  a  tumbler  of  water,  andthewes 
quantity  on  Roinijp  to  bed.  M^y  be  obtained  of  the  Proprietor. 

H.  X^MFLOUaH.  Consulting  Chfr«aist,  113,  Holbom,  ELO^ 

Si'i'.>tH|  piior  fn>ni  tiatton  Gunitfn.  Ii«indon.  and  of  all  r**»ip«*rtMh|.»  fhemiet-a. 

jQLAIRS    GOUT   PILLS. 


FOR    QOUT   AND 


Tin:  liKKAT  KKMKUY 
RHEUM  ATISK. 


Th«-  cxmiriatin::  pain  i<  quickly  rt-licvcd  and  cured  in  a  ffW  daye  by  thiM  cf|<>br:itfH  M<*dlcinc. 
Ttii-Mc  I'illri  n  quire  no  rchtruini  o\'  diet  liunii;;  tlirir  uho,  and  an*  certain  to  pr*'Vfnt  tht-dier 
att.'irkinsr  any  \-ii:i1  iiari     Sitld  dy  :il'  <'lieniii>ti«,  at  1h  I'd.  and  *«*ii.l<d.  per  box. 


BORWICK'S  COLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


Has  been  awarded  FOUR  GOLD  AIEDALS  for  its  enperiority  over  all  othen.  Hakn 
Delicious  Bread,  Plum  Puddings,  and  all  kinds  of  Pastry  light,  sweet,  and  digestiUCi 
8old  everywhere  in  Id.,  2d.,  4d.,  and  6d.  packets,  and  6d..  Is.,  2s.  Ad.,  and  6a.  boieii 

PoBse»8ing  uli  the  Proportion  ot  tho  Piiiost  Arrow-root. 

BROWN  AND  POLSOFS   CORN  FLOUR 

Has  Twenty  Years'  World-wide  Reputation. 

Every  Oennine  Packet  bears  the  facsimile  signatvlrea  of  tbe  Maken, 


Ui 


Srrrti 


cfo/l^i(Mnx 


IttLT  31.  1879. 


'^/i. 


ADVEBTIfiBMBHTB. 


500,000    SAMPLE    PACKETS 

^^  '  ^^  (Bach  lufflioeni  W  nuke  ■  Cnp)  ol  thla 

~    CHOCOLATE  POWDBK 

Were  QItcd  Awaf  M  the 

lBtcraiti«ul   Eihibltin  vf  INS, 

And  llMnuDdi  UT  nuw  lulnR  It,  proDonndng  It  lo  bt  ■> 

equkUed  in  quality  and  exoellenM. 

It  la  Recommended  by  tbe  I'aoalty,  Dafly. 

One  Gup  or  Twenty  made  in  One  Haatt 

MILK  OK  BDOAB  NOT  RSQUIEMD. 
Bold  bf  all  arouen.  Une  Shilling  per  Pooni. 

By  Her  MajoBty'i  Boyal  Letters  Patent 

Gommerclal  Steam  Mills,  London. 


LAMPLOUGH'S 

BrrBKVEBOiMa 

.  PYRETIC  SALINE 

I*foavdpre-emiiMnllT  Ixmi'flciat  In  iir«T«DUnfcsnri  ouring  SMALL  FOXi  tT  PnribtMb 
^vJRoratlDi,  and  Vital>»>>uc  the  lilood.  Any  pcnon  who  ha*  already  thi*  oomplaiid 
■honld  tadi^ti  and  be  kept  in  a  cool  and  darkened  rotnn,  to  prarent  Ita  leaving  ear 
trMi  on  tbe  festttTiL 

■ICEIBBIi  SEADACIIEi  ud  ffAUBBA,  vn  In  mnx  «uaa  lifltaiiillal*l]i  nHand  t»  Ukli«  >  !■■■ 
«HgBfiillnB(wnbl«r<it«i>Mw*t-r,    T"I.b»u  be  n-[«tM  i.n«uriiHoe1ii  t»o  boon.  If  needfnL 

8RA  TOTAOM^It  h  '  'ntj  n)\ubt»  HCumpuliiHat,  ud  ibeuld  on  »  MOouat  b«  snltud.  D 
iMliailT  ■ilav*  tte  na  er  MBmk  nirknciiii. 

^BlLIOliS  OOWITITVTIONa. iriTliw riw to Tltbtfd «Mrtllnni.  Indliwitton. ana  KrapMow 
eBttw8Hn,«l»«po(iniUl«kuuUI»iakeii.l!iil,vintlitli.'diiiiif.r,  inHnniblerof  »»i«r,  airfUwBMt 
qaantltT on toiag (obed.  II V  b« bhUiiwd  or  the  ProtmalDr, 

B.  L&KPU>OOH.  Consulting  ChhinUt,  113,  Holboni,  B.(I. 

fln-.iTi<)  l^i-wfrm  Hall'-n  tInH-n.  Ijinjon.  »iiil  "f  »llrr«r>i'fl:|i'l»nwmini. 

BZ.AIRS    GOUT    PILLS. 

FOB     QOUT    AND    BHEUH ATISK . 

Till'  •"CvrnrinttK::  |>^iir>  Ih'iiilikly  nlh'vr.l  and^iinil  Hi  a  Uw  ilayrliy  ll>t«  nlcLnitr't  MnKrlnr- 


BORWICK'S  COLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


Bn*  been  awarded  FOUK  UUl  D  HEDAL^  for  lln  iinpanorlty  otbt  all  others  KakM 
Delicioii*  Breait,  Flnm  PniliUngi,  and  all  kind*  oT  Paalry  light,  nroet,  and  dicMIibk 
:Sald   everywhere  In  Id.,  2d.,  M.,  and  Rd.  packota,  and  Ad..  Ii.,  2a.  ftd..  and  6b.  hnm 


SEASONABLE      DELICACY. 

BROWN  &  POISON'S  CORN  FLOUR 

Wltli  stewed  Froit  of  any  Kind, 


*>'^ 


I 


AUaUST  80,  IS79. 


ADTmranooTS. 


500.000    SAMPLE    PACKETS 

*  (Bub  nflolMi  M  mftk*  »  Cn)  rt  ftfa 

CHOCOLATE  POWDEB 

UtcnitiMal  RiUUtiM  tf  IMS, 

And  Tbouuda  ara  nowiulnf  tt,na«mdB|  tt  to  to  ^ 

eqomUed  In  quUtr  M  wotn—M. 

It  la  Beoomnwodad  liy  tba  WeaUTw  T>90r* 

One  Cap  or  Twenty  made  In  One  Kinnts. 

MILK  OR  aUOAX  HOT  BMVnaED. 
Bold  br  til  Qfo«n,  Om  BhUBng  p«  Pgaal. 

By  Her  Hajesty't  Boyal  Letters  Patent 

Gommeroial  Steam  Mills.  London. 

LAMPLOUGH'S 

sprBEvstOMa 

.  PYRETIC  SALINE 

IifovMl  pra-aminaar  bcoafldkl  bpnreDtlDg  Mtd  onrliig  SHALL  PQX|  IV  Pnil^^ 
InTigondDg  Md  Vftallaliw  tha  Wooa.  Adt  poMOO  who  hM  wewy  WW  ooBpUlBl 
dwokl  takalt,  Mid  b«  keptiii  •  «ool  mat,  duuMd  toam,  to  prvnot  to  1m«1bs  aor 


M0KKE88.  BKADAOHl,  m<  ■ADSBA,  m  lo  mo*  »«•  lMi^ydl^M^i»lto»^  to  taWMf  •  •i*- 
■nnwiTiil  III  ■  Tnm'rttT  -|  "'•'  — *"     Thb  o«D  b«  rapsM  oooi  or  liilw  1b  tvo  baan,  II  bhAA. 
'    SKA  TOTAgBB.— Ufa  »"'>«' "I'M*  MwniiiiiMli»Mli«ad»haaldott  —  MiBoQMb«OMlmi    D 
iMtantl*  (llui  tha  m  or  Ultou  ttafcPMi. 

^K^BlOOUB  OOII8TITUTIOMfl.ittTln«Tl»»toTttM«dwy«>OB^Ii«1|.i«tim..rf»M|Miii 
•aUielklB.  ■  t»4p«Hifi)l  ahmU  ba  Mk«i  dulr  <ntta  UwdinDir,  ina  Mablor  of  witar,  KDAttatm 
qiwotltroaiioinsubad.  H^  ba obtalogd of  tb«  Pnpritlar, 

H.  LABCPLOUaH.  Oonmltlng  Ohft^ln,  lU,  HolbonL  KA, 

Baeond  Deof  fKua  HaWenOanlan.  Londinv.»ndof  allraipnyitoClwmWa. 

^LAIR'S   OOUT  PXZXS. 

— -E    OOTTT    AND    K] 

itrkhr  rdlercd'and  eanxl  Id  a  few  dar*  bT  tt 

■Hint  of  dlotdnrlim  lh«lr  iiic.  ud  «i«  mUln  to  prercntUiedi 

Jdbr  ullChcmliU.  u  li.  ltd.uidli,»d.p«-bax. 


BORWICK'S   GOLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


Bm  bMB  ft«M4«d  FODB  GOLD  MKDAIB  fi«  lb  nparlority  om  aQ  othMH  Mafai 
IMMooi  Bnad.  Rom  pDddiii|i,  ud  »ll  Undi  of  nabr  Hsht,  imat,  ud  difMtllie. 
Bold  •TCfjvlun  In  Id.,  3d.,  4d.,  uded.  pukata,  ud  U..  la.,  hi  U»  ud  fl^  bona. 

SEASONABLE     DELICACY. 

BROWN  &  POISON'S  CORN  FLOOR 

Witb  Stewed  Fruit  of  way  Kind.  j 


500,000    SAMPLE    FAGXEI8 


^  (■«*  I - — 

—    CHOCOLATE 

Wen  QlTCB  Anj  U  ^ 

IitenuliMd  bUUtlM  sf  ISM, 

And  ThoQMBdi  ■nnorvwiBg  ft,  proMiBiiidaf  It  ts  to  m- 

«q— Mtd  In  fiBly  lad  moiIIm— 
I    It  It  BdoonHnwiaxt  br  tb*  Twniltr,  IMI7. 

One  Cap  or  Trenty  made  in  One  IGnsU 

MUX  OM  BOQAM  HOT  JUqOISsa 
BoU  b7  an  QnoMi,  Om  ShDUBC  ptr  Povai. 

By  Her  Hi^mIt*!  Royal  Letten  Patent 

GoiQiiLeroial  Steam  lills,  LoadoiL 
LAMPLOUGH'S 

BrrBBTsaoma 

PYRETIC  SALINE 

bfootid  pn'«mhiBna7  bcDBfldftl  In  prorantliiff  andonriac  glULL  POX,  It  PnUrtofr 
iBTlsMattBg,  and  Vnalidni  the  Blood.  Anr  peiaon  wbo  baa  dna^lhto  oonid^ai 
■lumld  Ukslt,  and  ba  kept  m  ■  oool  and  darkened  nam,  to  prefant  tta  laafiag  mg 

B*dl*My  nltoMl  b*  kktaa  *  !■■ 
irio«  In  Mro  Iwai*.  B  aiiMfl 

nil  rn  ■imiiiiiiiaHii  mWiI    n 

_tti  slkn  th(  Ma  or  billodi  •lahnMt. 

ForBlOoua  0ON8TlTtrnONaiiMB(trintoTttlBt«d«a«tlan^1adlBMllan,aadKiVlkni 
antbeakliLits-ipiMnralthoaldbatakuidillf  vlthUMdlimer,la»taBhlar(iCwBU>,ao4thaBaw 
qauiHtjimsoiiwtobed.  Hay  tw obtiibwl of  Uw  PravrMor, 

H.  LABIPLOUaB.  Oonmltlng  OhMilat,  lU,  Halbora,  MO, 

Bjcwid  Daof  from  Hatfam  Qawlttt.  Linden.  miJ  of  «11  rii«et«bl»  Olw^iW. 

'DZ.AZR'S   GOUT   PILU3. 

VOB    GKltTT    Ain}    BHSUMATISX. 
The  tsitrmiUiBs  piln  It  qnlckly  nliBTcd  vid  cared  Id  >  tew  d*;!  bf  Ibli  odebnUd  MedldDe 
TbcH  Pllli  require  DO  restraint  oF  din  dniing  Ifaelr  nge.  ind  ue  certain  U)  preTont  tbe  dlM-iM 
UUcklDguiT  (lUlput.—BuldbjillClinnlaU.  It  U.  ]id.uidi>.M.perbox. 


BORWICK'S   COLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


Haabaan  awarded  FOna  HOLD  MEDAUlbrf  la  anpeiloiltrovar  an  othan.  MakM 
DaUcdoBi  Bread.  Flnm  Poddlnn,  and  aD  Unda  cT  Paatar  11^  (mat  and  dtnatiblc. 
Sold  aveirirtwraiu  Id.,  Sd.,  4d.,anded.  paoketa,anded..  la.,ta.  U..aiidea.bnM, 

SEASONABLE     DELICACY. 

BROWN  &  POISON'S  CORN  FLOUR 

Wltlt  Stewed  Frolt  of  uiy  Kind. 


SM. 


31. 1S79. 


Su.  I.IIH;.— AMONG  UOSS.  . 

1,W7.— SELK-RIGilTEOL'SNESK— A  SMOI'LDERINU   UEAP 
or  RUUBISIl.     , 

1,498 MISTRUST  OF  GOD  DRPLORKD  AND  DENOUNCED. 

],4!19.— THE  TEACHING  OH"  TlIK  FOOT-WASniKO. 
1,500.— NUMIJKR    t/m,  oa    LIKTIXQ    UI*  TUB   BRA/.KX 
SERPENT. 


Fatamotter  Buildinifi 


ADVE3TI8EMENT8. 


500,000    SAMPLE    PACKETS 

^^     ^^  (Bkcb  inOcieBt  f  nkke  •  Cup)  ol  thh 

CHOCOLATE  POWDER 

Wne  atna  Awmf  M  (hs 

litcnifttitul   KxkibititM  tf  1MI| 

And  ThouHiidi  4Te  now  niing  It,  pnnowudng  It  to  ta  ^ 

equalled  in  ^luditr  knd  enellenM. 

It  to  Beoommended  by  tbe  Funiltr.  D^. 

One  Cap  or  Twenty  made  in  One  HmntB. 

MILK  OM  SUGAR  NOT  RKQUIXED. 
Bold  liT  ill  Orooen,  OiM  SbUliDK  p«r  Foani. 

By  Her  MajeBty'i  Boyal  Letters  Patent 

^^^^^      Commercial  Steam  liUs^^idoiL 
LAMPLOUGH'S    EFFERVESCING 

PYRETIC    SALINE 

nmllne  mil  furinc  SKAIib 

'-•■■■■'"  •-'^■- il  and  bo  iifpt  In   .< 
I  *rr  true  go  ll«  3 


ForBILIOUK  C0S8TITUTI0NS,Kiviiiin»«L 

•nth-Skill,  BtHi-fpuonruliiluiuld  bgUk«nd«Lj  with  tludi 
awDtiU  on  RUTUE  to  bod.  Hit  ba  obUlnad  et  the  ' 

B.  LAHPLOUaH.  " 
Second  Dow  fhini  Hat 


-; — _~.,andtlwai 

.  fropnstor, 

laaltlug  Ohomlst.  U3,  HoIboriL  KO, 

larden.  London,  aiidpraTI  n^pof  tthig  Chwnutt, 


B 


LAIR'S    GOUT    PII.LS. 

FOK    aOTTT    AND    RHZUHATISM. 
nc  palii  !■  qnlrklr  rpllpred  und  cuml  In  m  l.'vr  Oa^ii  b>-  IhlK  rclptviloi] 
1:1)  Ji^.-Bold  I'ly  ill  (*inllstill''»i  l«.  itrt.'smi  i'.vd.  'jK-r^tHix"  ^""" 


BORWICK'S   GOLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


<bi  bMB  Bvudsd  FOUR  OOLD  KEDALS  for  lb  mperiority  over  all  otiian.  lUkM 
lUdooa  Bread,  Plnm  Pnddlag*,  and  all  Undi  of  Putry  light,  iweet,  and  dlfteitiUt. 
Id   eveTTwhereln  Id.,  2d.,  M.,  andSd.  packeta,  and  6d..  la.  2a  Ad.,  andSc  itam. 


SEASONABLE      DELICACY. 

BOWN  &  POISON'S  CORN  FLOUR 

■Witt^  -   Tied  rruit  of  any  Kind. 


irOVEHBEB  29,1879. 


1 

■I 

I 

'i 
■A 

a 


Entanl  at  BUUensn'  HUl.  ^B^i 


ADVBBtlSEMfiKlS. 


500,000    SAMPLE    PACKETE 

" (Bvh  lufflcUBt  to  nuks  •  Curt  oi  ^_ 

—"■•    CHOCOLATE  POWDEE 

Wew  Giwa  Aw«y  it  the 

literutitul  BiUUtwM  vf  IMS, 

And  Tboiuudi  an  nov  niing  U,  prommadng  it  to  b*  u- 
eqwJlea  in  qn«Ut7  Md  «w«ilMiw-    ^  „ 
It  i»  BMxmunended  by  tlie  Twsn^,  %^\ 

One  Gup  or  Twenty  made  In  One  luitute. 

MILK  Ok  SUGAR  SOT  SSQUIRXO. 
8tU  br  aU  aroocrt,Oiw  ShilUnc  per  Foaai. 

By  Her  Hajesty'B  Boyal  Letters  Patent 

Gommercial  Steam  Mills,  London, 
LAMPLOUSH'S   EFFERVESCING 

PYRETIC    SALINE 

Ii  found  pn-fmincntlf  beneflciiil 
POJt  fcy  P""f)^nC.   IHTipirat 
-etvni  Trtio  ho.*;  already  Uus  coi 
cogt  Mid  llsikFDCiil  room,  to  ] 


_         SIOKNEBS,  nZ&DACHB,  k 

r  InmiduiuiynUntdbif  ukiDgBKtipoonlul  li 

Wtilm.     Thbou  In  rmr — ' "-'*■■ '"  * 

BKA  TOYAOKa.— II 

„._ JDt  t»  nmitted.   It  iBitantlj  *1l 

Poi-BILIOUeOONflTITUTIONS.nln(u;ra._    ^    ^ 
OD  IbsBkin.  >  H»4poaiifu]  Bbould  be  tekm  duly  iriUi  Uia  dinner,  I 
aniotltjoaipliwlabiHL  lUr  be  oftUfnod  ortha  Proprietor. 

H.  IiADIPLOnaH,  GonsultuiK  Ohenust,  113,  Holbora,  ELO, 

Bemnd  Door  from  Hatton  Oerden.  London,  »nd  of  ail  rfapeeltblBCheaint«. 

BLAIR'S    GOUT    PIItLS. 
.ua.A«.»      uvw,>,      ,>  i^M^uu.         ,j,j^  GREAT  BXUKDT 

FOK    O-OUT    AND    BHBUKATISX. 

•nc  oioraclallnR  pain  1b  quickly  irlieved  ind  cun'd  in  » lew  d«yB  by  Ihlfl  prtotiratMj  Utile 
Ttnne  Pllle  rcqnlre  no  retlralul  of  diet  duriiiR  lUetr  ose.  and  aro  cemtn  to  preTEBl  itw  d 
■ttacklDK  uy  vital  put.-Bold  1>y  ull  UitmlatM,  kt  la.  lid-nud  2a.iKl.pcr  box. 


BORWICK'S  COLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


,  Hai  HMD  AWMded  FODB  OOLD  HEDAIfi  for  Ita  mperiority  om  all  othon.  Usl;  . 
\  Delidaot  BiMd,  Flnm  PoddiuA  uid  kll  Undi  of  Futr;  light,  mat,  mni  digestil' 
'  Sold  everjrwlwra  In  Id.,  2d.,  4d.,  uid  6d.  paofeett,  knd  6d..  1l,  Sl  Sd..  and  Sk  boir- 

For  the  Nursery,  the  Siokrooia,  and  the  Family  Table, 

BROWN  &  POISON'S  CORN  FLOUE 

HAS  BBOOME  A  WOBLD-WIDE  UIICESSAET. 


F«Tt  M6. 


DECEXBEK  SI.  MT9. 


PACKETS 


SOCOOCTsamhS" 

CHOCOLATE  POWDBB 

WmOlmAinrattlw 

UterutlMd  BiUUtiM  tf  IMS, 

And  Tbouukd*  an  bow  nring  U,  prwwnnrtm  It  ta  ta  la- 

•qullad  iB  (nalltr  Md  Modtamw. 

It  is  B«ooinmand«d  by  the  TMmUr,  DaflT* 

One  Cup  or  Twenty  made  in  One  Juante. 

JOLX  OS  BOOAM  SOT  BEQUIMMO. 
8oU  by  aU  Oroom,  Om  BUIUb(  pw  Pond. 

By  Her  Hf^wrt?'!  Koyal  Lettan  Fftt«nt 

GmoffleroiEiI  Steam  Mills,  London. 
LAMPLOUBH'S   EFFERVESCING 

PYRETIC    SALINE 


ForBILIOUl  OOHaTITOTIONS,i(innjjrm»oTWl««I»ot«        .         ,       ,_ 

«oth*Skln,>t«a>«pMiilU«boaldbel«kndiiljirlth(bailiiuur,  infttoBblarofvaMr.udttow 
quntUroofptajriobtd.  l^toobUliMdof  tbaPnpiiMor, 

B.  UtuniOOaH.  Oonvalttas  OlMinlK,  U3,  Holbora,  8.0, 
»«eond  Poor  from  H»»on  0«Tit«n.  Londnn,  M  Jot  »llw|i«8t»MB0hinlM«. 


'Di.Aiit'S  ootrr  PILLS.    , ,  „„._ 

^>                                                                                           THE  ORIAT 
von    aOTTT    AHD    BBXUXATlilf. 
•zcnMUttu  pila  U  qnleklT  nllBTed  ud  evnd  la  a  law  dan  br  thli  odabrmtad 
laPflliraqar 1-.-.  ..  j... -...^— -v ^ ..._ , 


BORWICK'S  COLD  MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


Bm  bam  KwaiiaA  mJS  QOVD  XEDAU  tat  Hi  npnlOTltj  01 

-_..^ — -^__.  « ..    m,uid»UWadiof  PMbyll^t, ^  „_  _. 

.,  Mid  Sd-  pMkata,  and  Sd.,  Is.,  3»  ad.,  and  Ci.  boub 


F6r  the  NofBeiy,  the  Slokroom,  and  the  Family  Table. 

BROWN  &  POISON'S  CORN  FLOUR 

EAS  BECOME  A  WOBLD-VnOE  KECESSAKT. 


ADYERTIBEMXim. 


AU  Pertons  of  Weak  Lungs  and  Delicate  Habits  shonld  read 

UR.  QEO.  THOS.  CONQEEVFS  WOES  017 


rn  VATUBE,  STMPTOKS,  STAGES,  ft  STTCCESSFVL  TBEATKEVT. 

The  JShqwitnot  of  manif  yean  from  eaeee  in  aU  parte  of  the  Kingdom. 
Auo  ooirrAiHXMa  oummi  ox  tbb  renktuaan  op 

Asthma,    Chronic    Bronchitis,    Cough,    &c. 

Post  Free  ibr  6  Stamps,  fttm  the  Anfhor,  GOOMBE  LODOB,  &TS  LA5E,  PECKSiK,  &B. 

TWO   HUNDRED   AND    TEN    EDITIONS   OF   ONE   THOUBAND   EACH 

HAVE   NOW   BEEN   UBIIEDI 

Sg*  NOTIOB.— Times  <br  *Ooatdtatiim  at  Ooombe  Ziodge,  TUESDAT, 
TmfKSDAT  and  SATXntDAY  KOBNINOS  ONZ.T.  Pktiante  from  thi 
oountry  are  xeoommanded  to  ohooae  cme  of  the  two  fbrmer  da^a. 

Hr.  Oongreve  has  vxe  pleaacure  to  annonnoe  that  he  hae  seonxed  the  valuahla 
aMlateaooe  of  his  son-in-law,  Or.  Bxown,  ])C.R.O.S.,  I«.S.A. 

TESTlMOxUlAL  of  BEV.  T.  W.  MEDHIJBnTJHInlsler  of  Lake-road  Chapel, 

LANDPOBT,  POBTSMOirrH. 

'*  In  reply  to  MTeral  oommuaioatioas  from  friends^  I  chaerfully  testify  that  not  only  are  the  testi- 
momaU  i  vrote  in  former  yean  strictly  true  in  erexy  partiottlar,  out  after  tweltre  years'  ezperlenoe,  I 
can,  with  confldenoe.  urgently  reoommend  all  persons  suffering  from  Oonsompticm,  Bronehitis,  fto., 
Ac,  to  lo»e  no  time  m  availing  themselTes  of  Mr.  Gongreve*s  treatment.  /  haee  personal  knowledge  of 
marvelhua  euna  ej^ected  by  iU  use.  Solely  for  the  benefit  of  sufferers  I  now  gladly  write  tins 
additional  testimonial.— (Signed)  T.  W.  HinHunsT,  ftc..  Sept  28, 1878." 

TESTIMONIAL   FIRST  PUBLISHED  (JANUARY,   1880.J 

Case  or  MBS.  €•  BBIDEB,  of  Ooepel  Book  Hlsskm,  Devlxes  Bd.,  SALISBUBT. 

In  AugUAt  of  last  year,  by  the  recommendation  of  a  Christian  lady  (who  has  travelled  all  over 
England,  and  having  derived  great  ^ood  herself,  has  sent  many  patients  to  me,  ai^  whose  name  will  be 
Airnished  if  deidred),  the  Bev,  0.  Bnder  applied  to  me  on  behalf  of  his  wifie.  For  years  she  had  suffered 
with  the  usual  symptoms  of  sevoe  Ohromc  Bronchitis,  and  then  slowlv  progressing  Phthisis  or  Oon- 
sumptabn.  She  derived  wonderAil  benefit  from  my  treatment.  Her  husband  writes  me :  **H»r  ease  ie 
verv  wuurveUouij  indeed  it  appeara  a  mwaele  to  frienda  who  have  known  her  for  the  laat  five  yeara, 
nnd  we  eon  oniv  trace  the  arreeiing  the  diaeau  to  the  timely  nae  of  your  w^eaau.  You  are  at  libwty  to 
make  any  use  of  this.'* 

DR.  J.  COLLIS  BROWRE'S  CULOKODyflE, 

THB    OaiOINAL    AND    ONLY    OENUINB. 

ADTIOK  TO  IKVAIiIDS<-lf  you  wish  to  obteiB  quiet  lefmhing  deep,  free  from  h«sdaahe,  nBoC 
from  pain  and  aasrniih,  to  ealm  snd  aisiiage  the  wesry  adkiags  of  protrsctsd  disease,  invigonle 
the  nervous  medis,  ana  regulate  the  eirculattaig  systems  of  the  body,  you  will  ivovids  yoarsslx  idth 
that  marvellous  remsdy  disoovsred  by  Dr.  J.  COLLIS  BBOWNB,  Member  of  the  OoUogs  of 
phytidans,  London,  to  whiidi  he  gave  Uie  name  of 

And  which  Is  admitted  by  the  Professloii  to  be  the  most  wonderf  s 

and  valuable  resMdy  ever  disoovered. 
is  the  beet  reasedy  known  for  Coughs,  Consumption,  ,Broiidiitls, 

Asthma, 
elteotually  chedks  and  arrests  thoee  too  often  fatal  diseases    Piph- 

theria.  Fever,  Croup,  Ague, 
aete  like  a  charm  in  diairhma,  and  ie  the  only  specifio  In  Choleraaiid 

Dysentery, 
elltetuallyouu  short  all  tttacks  of  Bpllep^,  Hysterls,  Palpltattea, 

andSpssms. 
Is  the  only  palliative  In  Neuralgia,  Bheumatlsm,  Oout,  Omost, 

Tootbaohe.  Meningitis,  fto. 


From  Dr.  B.  J.  Boitltoh  *  Ck>,  Homoaetie: 

We  have  made  pretty  extensive  use  of  Ohlorodyne  in  our  practice  lately,  and  look  upon  it  as  an 

exceDent  direct  Sedative  and  Anti-spasmodic.  It  leems  m  allay  pain  and  irritation  in  whatever  organ, 

■ad  from  whatever  csuae.    It  induces  a  fseling  of  comfort  and  ouietude  not  obtainable  by  any  other 

lemedy,  and  It  seems  to  posesn  this  great  advantage  over  all  other  Sedatives,  that  it  leavee  no 

unpleasant  after-effbets.  ....        .     .     ^.        .  «^        •• 

Barl  Russen  oommunleaUd  to  the  College  of  Physicians  that  he  had  received  a  dispatch  from  H« 
Hajssty's  Consul  at  Manilla,  to  the  effect  that  Cholera  had  been  rsglng  fearftdly,  and  that  the  OKLT 
remedy  of  an^servlce  wss  CHLORODYNIL-See/^a««<,  December  5,1864.  „      „,    w 

OAmCXOV— 3UIWAB1  OF  FIRAOT  AMD  IMITATIOVS.— CAimoii~yioe-Chancellor  Sir  W. 
Psge  Wood  sUted  that  Dr.  J.  Colli!  Br.>wae  was,  undoubtedly,  the  Inventor  of  Chlorodyne :  that  the 
stocy  of  the  defendant.  Freeman,  was  deUbentely  untrue,  which,  he  regretted  to  ssy,  had  been  sworn 

to-  Bee  TVflMt,  July  18, 1864  _  ,^^     .  .^  .     «  «_  •  ,«v •  «• . 

StM  In  Bottles  at  Is.  IW..  to.  ed.,  and  4s.  ed.    None  genuine  without  t!y  words,  "p  J.  OOLLVl 

BBOWNS'S  CHI^KODTNE/*  on  the  Qovsnunent  Stamp.     Overwfaelmbig  Medical  TestlmoBr/ 

aeeompeniei  eaeb  bottle.  ___   

SOLE  MAKUFACTUREBt 

T.  T.  Davenporti  8Si  Great  Bussdl  Street,  BloQiiisbiiry,  London. 


V 


