DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


< 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe27wesl 


THE 


WORKS 


O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 

Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-College , Oxford, 


Volume  XXVI L 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street, 

MDCCLXXIV. 


[ 3 ] 


— — — b 

A N W5I3WE 

V.  0.' 1 

EXTRACT 

OF  THE 

Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley’s 

J O U R N A L, 

From  Augufl:  12,  1738,  to  November  1, 

*739- 


If  this  counfel  or  tins  work  be  of  men , z7  a1///  cozzze 
/<?  nought:  but  if  it  be  of  God , jye  cannot  over- 
throw it ; lef  haply  ye  be  found  to  fght  againjl 
God. 

Afls  v.  38,  39. 

Number  III. 


A 2 


The 


[ 4 ] 


The  P JR.  E F A C E. 


1.  T¥7HEN  at  firft  men  began  to  lay  to  my 
» V charge,  things  which  I knew  not,  I 
often  thought,  “ Had  I but  two  or  three  inti- 
“ mate  friends,  who  knew  what  my  life  and  con- 
“ verfation  were,  they  might  eafily  fpeak  what 
*•  they  had  feen  and  heard,  and  all  fuch  afperfi- 
“ ons  would  fall  to  the  ground.’'  But  I perceived 
my  miftake,  as  foon  as  I had  two  or  three,  who 
were  my  friends  indeed,  not  in  name  only.  For 
a way  was  eafily  found  to  prevent  their  being  of 
any  fuch  ufe  as  I once  imagined  'they  would  be. 
This  was  done  at  a ftroke,  and  that  once  for  all, 
by  giving  them  and  me  a new  name:  a name, 
which  however  infignificant  in  itfelf,vet  had  this 
peculiar  effeft,  utterly  to  difable  me  from  remov- 
ing, whatever  accufation  might  for  the  time  to 
come  becaft:  upon  me,  by  invalidating  all  which 
tliofe  who  knew  me  beff,  were  able  to  fav  in  my 
behalf : nay,  which  any  others  could  fay.  For 
how  notorious  is  it,  that  if  any  marr  dare 
to  open  his  mouth  in  mv  favour,  it  needs 
only  be  replied,  “ I fuppofe  you  are  a Me- 
thod: fl  too,”  and  all  he  has  faid  is  to  pafs  for 


2.  Hence, 


[ 5 ] 

2.  Hence,  on  the  one  hand,  many  who  knew 
what  my  converfation  was,  were  afraid  to  declare 
the  truth,  -leaft  the  fame  reproach  fhould  fall 
upon  them  : and  thofe  few  who  broke  through 
this  fear,  were  foon  di  fabled  from  declaring  it  with 
effeft,  by  being  immediately  ranked  with  him 
they  defended.  What  impartial  man  then  can 
refufe  to  fay,  It  is  permitted  to  thee  to  anfwer  for 
thyfelf?  Only  do  not  add,  but,  “ Thou Jhalt  not 
“ perfuade  me,  though  thou  doji  perfuade  me  : 
“ I am  refolved  to  think  as  I did  before/’  Not  fo, 
if  you  are  a candid  man.  You  have  heard  one 
fide  already.  Hear  the  other.  Weighboth.  Al- 
low for  human  weaknefs.  And  then  judge  as 
you  defire  to  be  judged. 

3.  What  I defign  in  the  following  extract  is, 
openly  to  declare  to  all  mankind,  what  it  is  that 
the  Methodifts  (fo  called)  have  done,  and  are  do- 
ing now:  or  rather,  what  it  is  that  God  hath 
done,  and  is  Hill  doing  in  our  land.  For  it 
is  not  the  work  of  man  which  hath  lately  ap- 
peared. All  who  calmly  obferve  it  mull  fay, 
This  is  the  Lord's  doing , and  it  is  marvellous  in 
our  eyes. 

4.  Such  a work  this  hath  been  in  many 
refpefts,  as  neither  we  nor  our  fathers  had 
known.  Not.  a few  whofe  fins  were  of  the 
moll  flagrant  kind,  drunkards,  fwearers, 
thieves,  whoremongers,  adulterers,  have  been 
brought  from  darknefs  unto  light,  and  from 
the  power  of  Satan  unto  God.  Many  of  thefg 

A 3 were 


C 6 ] 

were  rooted  in  their  wickednefs,  having  long 
gloiied  in  their  fhame,  perhaps  for  a courfe 
of  many  years,  yea  even  to  hoary  hairs.  Many 
had  not  fo  much  as  a notional  faith,  being 
Jews,  Arians,  Deifts  or  Atheifts.  Nor  has 
God  only  made  bare  his  arm  in  thefe  laft  days, 
in  behalf  of  open  Publicans  and  Sinners;  but 
many  of  the  Pharijees  alfo  have  believed  on 
him , of  the  righteous  that  needed  no  re- 
pentance: and  having  received  the  Jentence  oj- 
death  in  themfelves , have  then  heard  the  voice 
that  raifeth  the  dead : have  been  made  par- 
takers of  an  inward,  vital  religion,  even 
righteouf'nejs,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

* 5.  The  manner  wherein  God  hath 
wrought  this  work,  is  as  flrange  as  the 
work  itfelf.  In  any  fouls,  it  has  gene- 
rally, if  not  always,  been  wrought  in  one 
moment.  As  the  lightning  Jhining  from  hea- 
ven, fo  was  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Alan,  either 
to  bring  peace  or  a fword  ; either  to  wound 
or  to  heal,  either  to  convince  of  fin,  or  to  give 
remiilion  of  fins  in  Ins  blood.  And  tbe  other 
circumftances  attending  it  have  been  equally 
remote  from  what  human  wifdom  would  have 
expefted.  So  true  is  that  word,  My  ways  are 
not  as  your  ways,  nor  my  thoughts  as  )our 
thoughts. 

6.  Thefe  extraordinary  circumftances  feem 

to 


C 7-  ] 

ter  have  been  defigned  by  God,  for  the  fur- 
ther rnanifeftation  of  his  work,  to  .canfe 
liis  power  to  be  known,  and  to  awaken  the 
attention  of  a drowfy  world.  And  yet  even 
from  thefe,  fome  have  drawn  their  grand 
obje&ion  againft  the  whole  work.  I'Ve  ne- 
ver Jaw  it,  fay  they,  on  this  fajkion.  There- 
fore, the  work  is  not  of  God.  To  prove, 
which  farther,  they  have  not  only  greatly 
mifreprefented  many  circumftances  that  really 
were,  but  have  added  many  that  were  not, 
often  without  any  regard  either  to  truth 
or  probability.  A bare  recital  of  thofe  fa£ls 
which  were  not  done  in  a corner,  is  the 
bell  anfwer  to  this  fort  of  objeftions.  To 
thofe  which  have  been  judged  to  be  of  more 
weight,  I have  occaftonally  given  a more  par- 
ticular anfwer. 

Yet  I know  even  this  will  by  no  means 
fatisfy  the  far  greater  part  of  thofe  who  are 
now  offended.  And  for  a plain  reafon,  be- 
caufe  they  will  never  read  it:  they  are  re- 
folved  to  hear  one  fide,  and  one  only.  I 
know  alfo,  that  many  who  do  read  it,  will  be 
juft  of  the  fame  mind  they  were  before  ; be- 
caufe  they  have  fixt  their  judgment  already, 
and  do  not  regard  any  thing  which  Jack  a 
fellow  can  fay.  Let  them  fee  to  that.  I have 
done  my  part.  I have  delivered  mine  own 
foul.  Nay,  I know  that  many  will  be  greatlv 
A 4 offended 


C 8 ] 


offended,  at  this  very  account.  It  muff  be  fo 
from  the  very  nature  of  the  things,  which 
are  therein  related.  And  the  bell  appellation 
I expe£t  from  them  is,  that  of  a fool,  a 
madman,  an  enthufiaft.  All  that  in  me  lies 
is,  to  relate  fimple  truth,  in  as  inoffenfive  a 
manner  as  I can.  Let  God  give  it  the  effeft 
which  pleafeth  him,  and  which  is  moll  for  his 
glory  ! 

8.  May  he  who  hath  the  hey  of  the  houje 
of  David,  who  openeth  and  no  man  fhutteth, 
open  a great  and  ejfedual  door  by  whom  it 
pleafeth  him,  for  his  everlafting  gofpel!  May 
he  fend  by  whom  he  will  fend , fo  it  may 
run  and  be  glorified  more  and  more ! May 

he  ride  on,  conquering  and  to  conquer,  un- 

til the  fulnefs  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in  ; 
and  the  earth  be  Jull  of  the  knowledge  of 

the  glory  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover 

the  fea  ! 


I 


JOURNAL 


[ 9 1 


JOURNAL 

From  Aug.  12,  1738,  to  Nov.  1,  1739. 

SATURDAY,  Aug.  12.  About  feven  in  the 
evening  we  came  to  Neu-Kirche,  a town 
about  twenty-four  miles  from  Hernhuth.  Mr. 
Schneider  (the  ininifter  of  it  who  had  defired  us 
to  take  his  houfe  in  our  way)  was  not  at  home  : 
but  we  found  one  Mr.  Manoetius  there,  the 
minifler  of  a neighbouring  town,  who  walked 
with  us  in  the  morning  ten  miles  to  Haufwalde, 
where  he  lived.  He  told  us,  “ That  the  Lu- 
therans as  well  as  the  Papifts,  were  irreconcile- 
able  enemies  to  the  brethren  of  Hernhuth  : that 
the  generality  of  the  Lutheran  clergy,  were  as 
bitter  againft  them ' as  the  Jefuits  themfelves : 
that  none  of  his  neighbours  durft  go  thither 
(unlefs  by  Health)  being  fure  of  fuffering  for  it, 
if  difcovered  ; that  to  prevent  any  of  Hernhuth 
from  coming  to  them,  the  Elebfor  had  forbid, 
under  a fevere  penalty,  any  number  of  perfons, 
exceeding  three,  to  meet  together  on  a religious 
account ; and  that  he  himfelf,  for  having  a little 
fociety  in  his  own  parifnj  had  been  fummoncd 
to  appear  before  the  ConfiRory  at  Drefden.” 
A 5 Yea  t 


[ 10  ] 

Yea  let  the  kings  of  the  earth  fand  up  and  the 
rulers  take  counjel  together  againji  the  Lord  and 
■ againf  his  anointed ! He  that  fittetli  in  heaven fall 
laugh  them  to  fcorn ; the  Lord fall  have  them  in 
derifion. 

We  ieft  Haufwalde  in  the  afternoon,  and 
in  the  evening  came  to  Drefden.  But  the 
officer  at  the  gate  would  not  fuffer  us  to 
come  in  ; fo  that  we  were  obliged  to  go  on 
to  the  next  village.:  which  leaving  early  in  the 
morning,  on  Thurfday  in  the  afternoon  we  came 
to  Leipfig. 

We  were  now  kept  onlv  an  hour  at  the  gate,, 
and  then  conduced  to  Mr.  Arnold's,  who  had 
invited  us  when  we  were  in  the  town  before,  to 
make  his  houfe  our  home.  A few  we  found  here 
too,  who  defire  to  l now  nothing  but  Jejus  Chrijl. 
and  him  crucified.  And  from  them  we  had  let' 
ters  to  Halle,  whither  we  came  on  Friday  i8„ 
But  the  King  of  Pruffia’s  tall  men  (who  kept  the 
gates)  would  not  fuffer  Mr.  Brown  to  come  in. 
Me  they  admitted  (in  honour  of  my  profeffion) 
after  I had  waited  about  two  hours:  and  one 
of  them  went  with  me  to  the  Prince  of  Hefie, 
who  after  a few  queftions,  gave  me  leave  to 
lodge  in  the  city.  Thence  he  fhewed  me  to  Mr. 
Gotfchal.ck’s  lodgings,  to  whom  I had  letters 
from  Leipfig,  He  read  them  and  faid,  My  bro- 
ther, whatyoufnd  here,  you  will  ufe  as  your  own* 
And  if  you  want  any  thing  elfe,  tell  us  and  you  fall 
paye  it. 


I told 


I told  them,  “ My  companion  was  without  the 
gate.”  They  foon  procured  admittance  for  lnm. 
And  we  were  indeed  as  at  home  ; for  I have 
hardly  feen  fuch  little  children  as  thefe,  even  at 
Hernhuth. 

Satur.  jg.  I waited  on  Profeffor  Francke,  who 
behaved  with  the  utmoft  humanity  ; and  after- 
wards on  Profeffor  Knappe,  to  whom  alfo  I am 
indebted  for  his  open,  friendly  behaviour.  Be- 
tween ten  and  eleven  feven  ot  the  brethien 
fet  cut  with  us,  one  of  whom  went  with  us  two 
days  journey.  It  was  the  dulk  of  the  evening 
on  Sunday  20,  when,  wet  and  weary,  we  reached 
Jena. 

Mond.  21.  We  vifited  the  fchools  there  ; the 
rife  of  which  (as  we  were  informed)  was  occa- 
fioned  thus  : 

* About  the  year  1704  Mr.  Stoltins,  a ftudent 
at  Jena,  began  to  fpeak  of faith  in  Clin  ft  ; which 
he  continued  to  do,  till  he  took  his  mafter’s  de- 
gree, and  read  public  lectures.  About  twelve  or 
fifteen  Undents  were  awakened  and  joined  with 
him  in  prayer  and  building  up  one  another,  At 
this  (after  various  calumnies  fprcad  abroad  mad 
divers  perfections  occafioned  thereby)  the  Con- 
fiftory  was  offended,  andiffued  out  a commiffion 
to  examine  him.  In  confequence  of  the  report 
made  to  the  Confiftory  by  thefe  commilfioners, 
he  was  forbid  to  read  any  public  le&ures,  or  to 
hold  any  meetings  with  his  friends.  Not  long 
after  an.  order  was  given,  by  which  he  was  ex- 
A 6 eluded 


[ 12  ] 


eluded  from  the  holy  communion.  He  was  alfo 
to  have  been  expelled  the  univerfity  : but  this 
he  prevented  by  a voluntary  retirement. 

Yet  one  of  the  commiflioners,  who  had  been 
font  by  the  Duke  of  Weymar  (one  of  the  Lords 
of  Jena)  informed  the  Duke,  that  according  to 
his  judgment  Stoltius  was  an  innocent  and  holy 
man.  On  this  the  Duke  fent  for  him  to  Weymar, 
and  fixed  him  in  a living  there.  There  like- 
wife  he  awakened  many,  and  met  with  them  to 
pray  and  read  the  feriptures  together.  But  it 
was  not  long  that  the  city  could  bear  him.  For 
he  boldly  rebuked  all  vice,  and  that  in  all  per- 
fons,  neither  fparingthe  courtiers,  nor  the  Duke 
himfelf.  Confequently,  his  enemies  every 
where  increafed,  and  many  perfecutions  follow- 
ed. In  fine,  he  was  forbid  to  have  any  private 
meetings,  and  was  to  have  been  depoled  from 
the  miniftry  : when  God  calling  him  to  himfelf, 
took  him  away  from  the  evil  to  come. 

Before  Stoltius  left  Jena,  Boddarus  alfo  began 
to  preach  the  real  golpel,  as  cud  Chriflius  foon 
after;  whereby  fome  awakening  continued  till 
the  year  1724.  A few  of  th.e  townfmen  then 
agreed,  to  maintain  a ftudent,  to  be  a fchool- 
mafter  for  fome  poor  children.  They  afterwards 
kept  feveral  fchoolmafters  : But  about  1728,  all 
of  them  going  away,  the  fchool  was  broke  up, 
and  the  children  quite  neglected.  Profefior  Bud- 
daeus  being  informed  of  this,  earnefily  recom- 
mended the  confideration  of  it  to  the  fiudents  in 

his 


C ‘3  ] 

his  houfe  : and  about  ten  of  them,  among  whom 
was  Mr.  Spangenberg,  took  upon  themfelves 
the  care  of  thofe  children.  Their  number  foon 
increafed,  which  gave  great  offence  to  the  other 
fchool -mailers  in  the  town;  and  not  long  after 
to  the  magillrates  of  the  town,  and  to  the  fenate 
of  the  univerfity.  The  offence  foon  fpread  to 
the  pallors,  the  profeffors,  the  confillory,  and 
the  princes  who  are  lords  of  Jena.  But  it  pleaf- 
ed  God  to  move  one  of  them,  the  prince  of 
Eifenacb,  who  had  the  chief  power  there,  to 
flop  the  open  perfecution,  by  forbidding  either 
the  fenate  or  confillory  to  moleft  them.  He 
likewife  wholly  exempted  them  from  the  jurif- 
diflion  of  both,  ordering  that  all  complaints 
again!!  them  for  the  time  to  come  fhould  be 
cognizable  only  by  himfelf.  But  during  the  per- 
fecution, the  number  of  fchools  was  increafed 
from  one  to  three,  (one  in  each  fuburb  of  the 
city)  the  number  of  teachers  to  above  thirty,  and 
of  children  to  above  three  hundred. 

There  are  now  thirty  conllant  teachers,  ten 
in  each  fchool,  and  three  or  four  fupernumerary, 
to  fupply  accidental  defefls.  Four  of  the  maf- 
ters  are  appointed  to  punilh,  who  are  affixt  to 
no  one  fchool.  Each  of  the  fchools  being  divid- 
ed into  two  claffes,  and  taught  five  hours  a day, 
every  one  of  the  thirty  mailers  has  one  hour  in 
a day  to  teach.  All  the  mailers  have  a con- 
ference about  the  fchools  every  Monday.  They 

have 


C 14  ] 


have  a fecond  meeting  on  Thurfday,  chiefly  for 
prayer.  And  a third  every  Saturday. 

Once  in  half  a year  they  meet  to  fill  up  the 
places  ol  thofe  mailers  who  are  gone  away.  And 
the  number  has  never  decreafed  ; frefh  ones  flill 
offering  themfelves,  as  the  former  leave  the  uni- 
verfity. 

The  prefent  method  wherein  they  teach  is 
this. 

There  are  always  two  claffes  in  each  fchool. 
In  the  lower,  children  from  fix  to  ten  or  twelve 
years  old  are  taught  to  read.  They  are  then  re- 
moved to  the  other  clafs,  in  which  are  taught, 
the  holy  fcriptures,  arithmetic,  and  whatever 
elfe  it  may  be  ufeful  for  children  to  learn. 

In  the  morning  from  eight  to  nine  they  are 
all  catechized,  and  inflrufcted  in  the  firil  princi- 
ples of  Chriftianity,  either  from  Luther’s  fmaller 
catechifm,  or  from,  fome  texts  of  holv  fcripture. 

From  nine  to  ten  the  fmaller  children  are 
taught  their  letters  and  fyllables  ; and  the  larger 
read  the  bible.  From  ten  to  eleven  thofe  in  the 
lower  clafs  learn  and  repeat  fome  feleft  verfes 
of  holy  fcripture,  chieflv  relating  to  the  founda- 
tion of  the  faith.  Mean  while  thofe  in  die  upper* 
learn  arithmetic. 

In  the  afternoon  from  one  to  two  all  the  chil- 
dren are  employed  as  from  nine  to  ten  in  the 
morning.  From  two  to  three  the  fmaller  child- 
ren learn  and  repeat  Luther’s  fmaller  catechifm* 
while  the  larger  are  taught  to  write. 

Every 


[ t5 


1 
J 

Every  Sunday  there  is  a public  catechizing- 
on  fome  text  ol  icripture;  at  which  all  perfons 
who  delire  it  may  be  prefent. 

In  the  afternoon  we  left  Jena,  feveral  of  the 
brethren  accompanying  us  out  ol  town.  At 
five  having  juft  palfed  through  Weymar,  we  met 
Mr.  Ingham  going  for  Hernhuth.  We  all  turn- 
ed abide  to- a neighbouring  village,,  where  having 
fpent  a comfortable  evening  together,  in  the 
morning  we  commended  each  other  to  the  grace 
of  God,  and  went  on  our  feveral  ways. 

We  breakfafled  at  Erfurt  with  Mr.  Reinhart* 
fpent  the  evening  with  fome  Brethren  at  Saxe- 
Gotha,  and  by  long  journeys  came  to  Marien- 
born  on  Fiid'ay,  Auguft  zg. 

Monday  28,  I took  my  leave  of  theCountefs. 
(the  Count  being  gone  to  Jena)  and  betting  out. 
early  the  next  morning  came  about  three  in  the 
afternoon  to  Franckfort.  From  Mr.  Bohler’s 
we  went  to  the  fociety,  where  one  of  the  bre- 
thren from  Marienborn  offered  free  redemption 
through  the  blood  of  Chrift  to  fi'xty  or  feverity 
perfons* 

Wednefday  30.  In  the  afternoon  we  came 
to  Mentz,  and  agreed  for  our  paffage  to  Colen 
by  water,  for  a florin  per  head;  which  was  but 
half  what  we  gave  before,  though  (it  feems) 
twice  as  much  as  we  ought  to  have  given. 

Thurfday  31.  We  fpent  half  an  hour  in  the 
great  church,  a huge  heap  of  irregular  building; 
full  of  altars,  adorned  for  loaded  rather)  with 

abundance 


[ 16  ] 

abundance  of  gold  and  filver.  In  going  out,  we 
obferved  a paper  on  the  door,  which  was  of  fo 
extraordinary  a nature,  that  I thought  it  would 
not  be  labour  loft  to  tranfcribe  it.  The  words 
were  as  follow  : 

Vollkommener  ablafs  fur  die  arme feelen  im fegfeur. 

“ Seine pabliche  heiligkeiit,  Clemensder  i2te, 
“ haben  in  diefem  jahr  1738,  den  7 Augufti, 
“ die  pfarr  kirche  des  San£H  Chriftopbori  in 
“ Mentz  gnadigften  privilegirt,  dafs  ein  jeder 
“ priefter,  fo  wohl  fecular  als  regularifchen 
“ Hands,  der  am  after  feelen-tag,  wie  auch  an 
“ einem  jedem  tag  in  derfelben  o£iav  ; fo  dann 
“ am  zwiein  vom  ordinario  tagen  einerjeden 
“ woch  dasjahr  hindurch,  fur  die  feel  eine  chrift- 
“ glaubigen  verftorbenen  an  zum  altar  mefs  le- 
“ fen  wird,  jedefmahl  eine  feel  aus  dem  feg- 
“ feur  erlofen  konne. 

A full  releafe  for  the  poor  fouls  in  purgatory. 

His  papal  holinefs , Clement  the  Xlltk , hath 
this  year  1738,  on  the  fcventli  of  Auguf,  mcf 
gracioufy  pnviledged  the  cathedral  church  of  St. 
Chrifloplier  in  Mentz,  fo  that  every  pnejl , as  well 
fecular  as  regular,  who  will  read  mafsat  an  altar 
for  the  foul  of  a Chrifian  departed,  on  any  holi- 
day, or  on  any  day  within  the  oclavo  thereof,  or  on 
two  extraordinary  days , to  be  appointed  by  the  or- 
dinary, 

s * 


[ *7  ] 

dinary , of  any  week  in  the  year , may  each  time 
deliver  a foul  out  of  the  fi re  of  purgatory. 

Now  I defire  to  know,  whether  any  Romanift 
of  common  fenfe,  can  either  defend  or  approve 
of  this  ? 

At  eight  we  took  boat,  and  on  Saturday,  Sept, 
2 f about  eleven  came  to  Colen  ; which  we  left 
at  one,  and  between  feven  and  eight  reached  a 
village,  an  hour  fhort  of  Neus.  Here  we  over- 
took a large  number  of  Switzers,  men,  women 
and  children,  finging,  dancing  and  making  mer- 
ry, being  all  going  to  make  their fortunes  in  Geor- 
gia. Looking  upon  them  as  delivered  into  my 
hands  by  God,  I plainly  told  them,  what  man- 
ner of  place  it  was.  If  they  now  leap  into  the 
fire  with  open  eyes,  their  blood  is  on  their  own 
head. 

Mond.  4.  Before  noon  we  came  to  Cleve, 
and  to  Nimwegen  in  the  evening.  The  next 
night  we  lay  at  a little  village  near  Tiel ; which 
leaving  early  in  the  morning,  we  walked  by  the 
fide  of  many  pleafant  orchards,  and  in  the  after- 
noon came  to  Yflelflein.  We  flayed  only  one 
night  with  the  brethren,  (in  the  new  houfe,  cal- 
led Herndyke,  an  Englifh  mile  from  the  town) 
and  halting  forward  came  the  next  afternoon  to 
Dr.  Koker’s  at  Rotterdam. 

I cannot  but  acknowledge  the  civility  of  this 
friendly  man,  all  the  time  we  flayed  in  his  houfe. 
In  the  morning,  Frid.  8,  we  went  to  the  Englilh 
epifcopal  church,  which  is  a large,  handfome, 

convenient 


[ i«  1 

convenient  building.  The  minifter  read  prayers 
ferioufly  and  diftinctly,  to  a fmall,  well-behaved 
congregation.  Being  informed  our  fhip  was  to 
fail  the  next  day,  (Saturday)  we  took  leave  of 
our  generous  friend,  and  went  to  an  inn  clofe  to 
the  key,  that  we  might  be  ready  when  called  to 
go  aboard.  Having  waited  till  pad  four  in  the 
afternoon,  we  Hepped  into  the  Jews  fynagogue, 
which  lies  near  the  water-fide.  I do  not  wonder 
that  fo  many  Jews,  (efpecially  thofe  who  have 
any  reflection)  utterly  abjure  all  religion.  My 
fpirit  was  moved  within  me,  at  that  horrid,  fenfe- 
lefs  peagantry,  that  mockery  of  God,  which  they 
called  public  worfhip.  Lord,  do  not  thou  yet 
cajl  off  thy  people!  But  in  Abrahams  feed  let 
than  alfo  be  bleffed ! 

The  fhip  lingering  Hill,  I had  time  to  exhort 
feveral  Englifh,  tvhom  we  met  with  at  our  inn, 
to  purfue  inward  religion  ; the  renewal  of  their 
fouls  in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs.  In  the 
morning  a daughter  of  affliction  came  to  fee  me, 
who  teaches  a fcliool  at  Rotterdam.  She  had 
been  for  fome  time  under  deep  convictions;  but 
could  find  none  to  inftruCt  or  comfort  her.  Af- 
ter much  converfation,  we  joined  in  prayer,  and 
her  fpirit  a little  revived.  Between  nine  and 
ten  we  went  on  board.  In  the  afternoon  I read 
prayers,  and  preached  in  the  great  cabin.  The 
wind  being  contrary,  wre  did  not  get  out  of  the 
river  till  Wednefday ; nor  to  London  till  Satur- 
day night. 


Sunday 


[ 19  3 

Sunday,  Sept.  17.  I began  again  to  declare 
in  my  own  country  the  glad  tidings  of  falvation, 
preaching  three  times,  and  afterwards  expound- 
ing the  holy  fcripiure  to  a large  company  in  the 
Minories.  On  Monday  I rejoiced  to  meet  with 
our  little  fociety,  which  now  confifted  of  32 
perfons.  The  next  day  I went  to  the  condemn- 
ed felons  in  Newgate,  and  offered  them  free  fal- 
vation. In  the  evening  I went  to  a fociety  in 
Bear-yard,  and  preached  repentance  and  remif- 
fion  of  fins.  The  next  evening  I fpoke  the  truth 
in  love  at  a fociety  in  Alderfgate-ftreet.  Some 
contradifted  at  firff;  but  not  long:  fo  that  no- 
thing but  love  appeared  at  our  parting. 

Thurfd.  21.  I went  to  a fociety  in  Gutter- 
lane  ; but  I could  not  declare  the  mighty  works 
of  God  there  ; as  I did  afterwards  at  the  Savoy 
in  all  fimplicity.  And  the  word  did  not  return 
empty. 

Finding  abundance  of  people  greatly  exaf- 
perated  by  grofs  mifreprefentations  of  the  words 
I had  fpoken,  I went  to  as  many  of  them  in  pri- 
vate, as  my  time  would  permit.  God  gave  me 
much  love  towards  them  all.  Some  were  con- 
vinced they  had  been  miftaken.  And  who  know- 
eth  but  God  will  foon  return  to  the  refl,  and 
leave  a bleffing  behind  him  ? 

On  Sat.  23.  I was  enabled  to  fpeak  flroug  words 
both  at  Newgate  and  at  Mr.  E’s  fociety ; and  the 
next  day  at  St.  Anne’s,  and  twice  at  St.  John’s 

Clerkenwetf  t 


[ 20  2 

Clerkenwell ; fo  that  I fear  they  will  bear  me 
there  no  longer. 

Tuef.  2 6.  I declared  the  gofpel  of  peace  to  a 
fmall  company  at  Windfor.  The  next  evening 
Mr.  H.  preached  to  the  focieties  at  Bow  ; but 
not  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jefus.  I was  afraid  left 
the  lame  fhould  be  turned  out  of  the  way  : but  God 
anfwered  the  thoughts  of  my  heart,  and  took 
away  my  fear,  in  a manner  I did  not  expefl, 
even  by  the  words  of  Thomas  Sternhold.  They 
were  thefe  (fung  immediately  after  the  fermon.) 

Thy  mercy  is  above  all  things, 

O God  ; it  doth  excel ; 

In  truft  whereof,  as  in  thy  wings. 

The  fons  of  men  (hall  dwell. 

Within  thy  houfe  they  {hall  be  fed 
With  plenty  at  their  will: 

Of  all  delights  they  {hall  be  fped, 

And  take  thereof  their  fill. 

Becaufe  the  well  of  life  moft  pure 
Doth  ever  flow  from  thee; 

And  in  thy  light  we  are  moft  fure 
Eternal  light  to  fee. 

From  fuch  as  thee  defire  to  know 
Let  not  thy  grace  depart : 

Thy  righteoufnefs  declare  and  Ihew 
To  men  of  upright  heart. 


Sat. 


C 21  J 

Sat.  30.  One  who  had  been  a zealous  oppofer 
of  this  way,  fent  and  defired  to  fpeak  with  me 
immediately.  He  had  all  the  figns  of  fettled  de- 
fpair,  both  in  his  countenance  and  behaviour. 
He  faid,  “ He  had  been  inflaved  to  fin  many 
years,  efpecially  to  drunkennefs ; that  he  had 
long  ufed  all  the  means  of  grace,  had  conftant- 
ly  gone  to  church,  and  facrament,  had  read  the 
fcripture,  and  ufed  much  private  prayer,  and  yet 
was  nothing  profited.’’  I defired  we  might  join 
in  prayer.  After  a fhort  fpace  he  rofe  and  his 
countenance  was  no  longer  fad.  He  faid,  “ Now 
I know,  God  loveth  me,  and  has  forgiven  my 
fins.  And  fin  fliall  not  have  dominion  over  me  : 
for  Chrifi  hath  fet  me  free.”  And  according  to 
his  faith  it  was  unto  him. 

Sund.  Oft  1,  I preached  both  morning  and 
afternoon  at  St.  George’s  in  the  Eaft.  On  the 
following  days  I endeavoured  to  explain  the 
way  of  falvation,  to  many  who  had  mifunder- 
fiood  what  had  been  preached  concerning  it. 

Frid.  6.  I preached  at  St.  Antholin’s  once 
more.  In  the  afternoon  I went  to  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Bedford,  to  tell  him  between  me  and  him  alone, 
of  the  injury  he  had  done  both  to  God  and  his 
brother,  by  preaching  and  printing  that  very 
weak  ferrnon  on  affurance,  which  was  an  igno- 
ratio  elenchi  from  beginning  to  end  ; feeing  the 
affurance  we  preach  is  of  quite  another  kind 
from  that  he  writes  again!!.  We  fpeak  of,  an 

affurance 


r a*  ] 


afiuranee  of  our  prefent  pardon ; not  (as  he  does] 
oj  our  final perfeverance. 

In  the  evening  I began  expounding  at  a little 
fociety  in  Wapping.  On  Sunday  8.  I preached 
at  I he  Savoy  chappel  (I  fuppofe  the  laft  time) 
on  the  parable  (or  hiftory  rather)  of  the  Pharifee 
and  Publican  praying  in  the  temple.  On  Mond. 
9.  I fet  out  for  Oxford.  In  walking  I read  the 
truly  furprizing  narrative,  of  the  converfions 
lately  wrought  in  and  about  the  town  of  North- 
ampton in  New -England.  Surelv  this  is  the 
Lord’s  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes  ? 

An  extraft  from  this  I wrote  to  a friend,  con- 
cerning the  hate  of  thofe  who  are  weak  in  faith. 
His  anfwer,  which  I received  at  Briftol,  on  Sat. 
14,  threw  me  into  great  perplexity,  till  after 
crying  to  God,  I took  up  a bible,  which  opened 
on  thefe  words ; And  Jabez  called  on  the  God  of 
IJraeL  faying , Ok,  that  thou  would  blefs  me  in- 
deed, and  inlarge  my  coaf  ! And  that  thine  hand 
might  be  with  me,  and  that  thou  would/}  keep  me 
from  evil  that  it  may  not  grieve  me ! And  God 
granted  him  that  which  he  requefed. 

This  however,  with  a fentence  in  the  evening 
lefTon,  put  me  upon  conhdering  my  own  Hate 
mere  deeply.  And  what  then  occurred  to  me 
was  as  follows : 

“ Examine  yourfelves,  whether  ye  be  in  the 
faith.”  Now  the  furefl;  teft  whereby  we  can  exa- 
mine ourfelves,  whether  we  be  indeed  in  the 
faith,  is  that  given  by  St.  Paul,  If  any  man  be 

in 


C 23  ] 

in  Chrifl , he  is  a new  creature.  Old  things 
are  pajl  away.  Behold  all  things  are  become 
new. 

Firft,  His  judgments  are  new : bis  judgment 
of  himfelf,  ofhappinefs,  of  holinefs. 

He  judges  himfelf  to  be  altogether  fallen  front 
of  the  glorious  image  of  God.  To  have  no  good 
thing  abiding  in  him;  but  all  that  is  corrupt  artsj 
abominable  : in  a word,  to  be  wholly  earthly, 
fenfual,  and  devilifh  : a motley  mixture  of  beaft 
and  devil. 

Thus,  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Chrift,  I judge 
of  myfelf.  Therefore  I am,  in  this  refpecf,  a new 
creature-. 

Again.  His  judgment  concerning  happinefs  is 
new.  He  would  as  foon  expeft  to  dig  it  out  of 
the  earth,  as  to  find  it  in  riches,  honour,  pleafure, 
(fo  called)  or  indeed  in  the  enjoyment  of  any 
creature  : he  knows  there  can  be  no  happinefs 
on  earth,  but  in  the  enjoyment  of  God,  and 
in  the  foretafte  of  thofe  rivers  oj  pleafure  which 
fow  at  his  right-hand  for  evermore. 

Thus,  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Chrift,  I judge 
of  happinefs.  Therefore  I am,  in  this  refpefi,  a 
new  creature. 

Yet  again,  His  judgment  concerning  holinefs 
is  new.  He  no  longer  judges  it  to  be  an  out- 
ward thing  : to  confift  either,  in  doing  no  harm, 
in  doing  good,  or  in  ufing  the  ordinances  of 
God.  He  fees  it  is,  the  life  of  God  in  the  foul ; 
the  image  of  God  frelh  ftamped  on  the  heart : an 

entire 


[ M ] 


entire  renewal  of  the  mind  in  every  temper 
and  thought,  after  the  likenefs  of  him  that  created 
it. 

Thus,  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Chrift,  I judge 
of  holinefs.  Therefore  I am,  in  this  refpeft,  a 
new  creature. 

Secondly,  His  defigns  are  new.  It  is  the 
-tfefign  of  his  life,  not  to  heap  up  treafures 
upon  earth,  not  to  gain  the  praife  of  men,  not 
to  indulge  the  defires  of  the  flelh,  the  defire 
of  the  eye,  or  the  pride  of  life;  but  to  regain 
the  image  of  God  ; to  have  the  life  of  God  again 
planted  in  his  foul;  and  to  be  renewed  after 
his  likewife,  in  righteoufnefs  and  all  true  holi- 
nefs. 

This,  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Chrift,  is  the  de- 
fign  of  my  life.  Therefore  I am,  in  this  refpett, 
a new  creature. 

Thirdly  his  defires  are  new,  and  indeed  the 
whole  train  of  his  pafiions  and  inclinations. 
They  are  no  longer  fixt  on  earthly  things.  They 
are  now  fet  on  the  things  of  heaven.  His  love, 
andjoy,  and  hope,  his  forrow,  and  fear,  have  all 
refpeft  to  things  above.  They  all  point  heaven- 
ward. Where  his  treafure  is,  there  is  his  heart 
alfo. 

I dare  not  fay  I am  a new  creature  in  this 
refpeft.  For  other  defires  often  arift  in  my 
heart.  But  they  do  not  reign.  I put  them  all 
under  my  feet  through  Chrift  which  ftrengthen- 
eth  me.  Therefore  I believe  he  is  creating  me 

anew 


C 25  ] 


anew  in  this  alfo,  and  that  he  has  begun,  though 
not  finifhed,  Kis  work. 

Fourthly,  His  converfatitm  is  new.  It  is  al- 
ways feafoned  with  fait , and ft  to  minister  grace,  to 
the  hearer s. 

So  is  mine,  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Chrift. 
Therefore,  in  this  refped,  I am  a new  crea- 
ture. 

Fifthly,  His  aflions  are  new.  The  tenor  of 
his  life  fingly  points  at  the  glory  of  God.  All 
his  fubftance  and  time  are  devoted  thereto. 
Whether  he  eats  or  drinks , or  whatever  he  does,  it 
either  fprings  from,  or  leads  to,  the  love  of  God 
and  man. 

Such,  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Chrift,  is  the 
tenor  of  my  life.  Therefore,  in  this  refpeft,  I 
am  a new  creature, 

* But  St.  Paul  tells  us  elfewhere,  that  the  fruit 
oj  the  Spirit  is  love,  peace,  joy,  longfuffering, 
gentlenefs,  meelnefs , temperance.  Now  although, 
by  the  grace  of  God  in  Chrift:,  I find  a meafure 
of  fome  of  thefe  in  myfelf,  viz.  of  peace,  long- 
fuffering, gentlenefs,  meeknefs,  temperance: 
yet  others  I find  not.  I cannot  find  in  myfelf 
the  love  of  God  or  of  Chrift.  Hence  my 
deadnefs  and  wandrings  in  public  prayer. 
Hence  it  is  that  even  in  the  holy  communion, 
I have  frequently  no  more  than  a cold  at- 
tention. 

Vol.  XXVII. 


B 


Again, 


[ 26  ] 


Again,  I have  not  that  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft: 
no  fettled,  lahing  joy.  Nor  have  I fuch  a peace 
as  excludes  the  poffibility  either  of  fear  or  doubt. 
When  holy  men  have  told  me,  “ I had  no 
faith,”  I have  often  doubted,  whether  I had-or 
no.  And  thofe  doubts  have  made  me  very  un* 
eafy,  till  I was  relieved  by  prayer  and  the  holy 
fcriptures. 

Yet  upon  the  whole,  although  I have  not  yet 
that  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoh,  nor  the  full  atTurance 
of  faith,  much  lefs  am  I,  in  the  full  fenfe  of  the 
words,  in  Chrijl  a new  creatine : I neverthelefs 
trull  that  I have  a meafure  of  faith,  and  am  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved : I trull,  the  hand-writing 
that  was  againfi  me  is  blotted  out,  and  that  I am 
reconciled  to  God  through  his  Son.” 

Sund.  15.  I preached  twice  at  the  caflle,  and 
afterwards  expounded  at  three  focieties.  Wed- 
nefday  evening  I came  to  London  again,  and  on 
Friday  met  a fociety  (of  foldiers  chiefly]  at 
Wellminller.  Of1  Su  nday  22,  I preached  at 
Bloomlbury  in  the  morning,  and  at  Shadwell  in 
the  afternoon.  Wednefday  25,  I preached  at 
Bafintrlhaw  church  : on  Friday  morning  at  St 
Antholin’s  : on  Sunday  at  Illington  and  at  Lon- 
don-Wall. 

I11  the  evening  being  troubled  at  what  fotne 
fatd,  of  the  kingdom  of  God  within  us,  and  doubt- 
ful of  my  own  hate,  I called  upon  God,  and  re- 
ceived this  anfwer  from  his  word,  He  him f If 
aljo  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  “ But  fhould 

net 


[ 27  ] 


not  I wait  in  filence  and  retirement  ?”  was  the 
thought  that  immediately  firuck  into  my  mind. 

I opened  my  tedament  again,  on  rliofe  words, 
Seefl  thou  not , how  faith  wrought  together 
with  his  works?  And 'by  works  was  faith  made 
perfeEl. 

Frid.  Nov.  3.  I preached  at  St.  Antliolin’s. 
Sunday  5,  in  the  morning  at  St.  Bctolph’s,  Bi- 
fhopfgate,  in  the  afternoon  at  Illington,  and  in 
the  evening  to  fuch  a congregation  as  I never 
faw  before,  at  St.  Clement’s  in  the  Strand.  As 
this  was  (he  fil'd  time  of  my  preaching  here,  I 
fuppofe  it  is  to  be  the  lab. 

On  Wednefday  my  brother  and  I went,  at 
their  earned  defire,  to  do  the  laid  good  office  to 
the  condemned  malefaftors.  It  was  the  mod 
glorious  indance  I ever  faw,  of  faith  triumphing 
over  fin  and  death.  One  obferving  the  tears 
run  fad  down  the  cheeks  of  one  of  them  in  par- 
ticular, while  his  eyes  were  deadily  fixed  up- 
wards, a few  moments  before  he  died,  afked, 
“ How  do  you  feel  your  heart  now  ?”  He  calmly 
replied,  “ I feel  a peace,  which  I could  not 
“ have  believed  to  be  poffible.  And  I know  it 
“ is  the  peace  of  God,  which  pafleth  all  under- 
“ banding.” 

O 

My  brother  took  that  occafion  of  declaring  the 
gofpel  of  peace,  to  a large  aflembly  of  publicans 
and  linnet's.  0 Lor d God  of  my  fathers  accept 
even  me  among  them,  and  cafl  me  not  out  from 
among  thy  children ! 

B 2 


In 


C *8  ] 

In  the  evening  I proclaimed  mercy  to  my  fel- 
low- finners  at  Bafingfhaw  church  : and  the  next 
morning  at  St.  Antholin’s.  Friday  to,  I fet  out, 
and  Saturday  11,  fpent  the  evening  with  a little 
company  at  Oxford.  I was  grieved  to  find,  pru- 
dence had  made  them  leave  offfinging  pfalms.  I 
fear  it  will  not  flop  here.  * God  deliver  me,  and 
all  that  feek  him  in  fincericy,  from  what  the  world 
calls  Chrijlian  prudence ! 

Sund.  12.  I preached  twice  at  the  caftle. 
In  the  following  week,  I began  more  nar- 
rowly to  inquire  what  the  doflrine  of  the 
church  of  England  is,  concerning  the  much 
controverted  point  of  juflification  by  faith. 
And  the  fum  of  what  I found  in  the  ho- 
milies, 1 extrafted  and  printed  for  the  ufe  of 
others. 

* Sund.  19.  I only  preached  in  the  afternoon 
at  the  caftle.  On  Monday  night  I was  greatly 
troubled  in  dreams,  and  about  .eleven  o’clock 
waked  in  an  unaccountable  confternation,  with- 
out being  able  to  deep  again.  About  that  time 
(as  I found  in  the  morning)  one  who  had  been 
defigned  to  be  my  pupil,  but  was  not,  came  into 
the  Porter’s-lodge,  (where  feveral  perfons  were 
fitting)  with  a piilol  in  his  hand.  He  prefented 
this,  as  in  fport,  firft  at  one  and  then  at  another. 
He  then  attempted  twice  or  thrice  to  fhoot  him- 
felf,  but  it  would  not  gooff.  Upon  his  laying  it 
down,  one  took  it  up,  and  blew  out  the  priming. 
He  was  very  angry,  went  and  got  frefb  prime, 

came 


[ £9  J 


came  in  again,  fat  down,  beat  the  flint  with  his 
key  ; and  about  twelve,  pulling  off  his  hat  and 
wig,  faid,  “ He  would  die  like  a gentleman,”  and 
fhot  himfelf  through  the  head. 

Thurf.  23.  Returning  from  preaching  at  the 
caftle,  I met  once  more  with  my  old  companion 
in  affliftion,  C.D.  who  flayed  with  me  till  Mon- 
day. His  laft  converfation  with  me  was  as  fol- 
lows : 

“ In  this  you  are  better  than  you  was  at 
Savannah.  You  know  that  you  was  then 
quite  wrong.  But  you  are  not  right  yet.'  You 
know  that  you  was  then  blind.  But  you  do  not 
fee  now. 

“ I doubt  not  but  God  will  bring  you  to  the 
right  foundation.  But  I have  no  hope  for 
you,  while  you  are  on  your  prefent  founda- 
tion. It  is  as  different  from  the  true,  as  the.  right 
hand  from  the  left.  You  have  all  to  beein 
anew. 

“ I have  obferved  all  your  words  and  aBions, 
and  I fee  you  are  of  the  fame  fpirit  ftill.  You  have 
a frmplicity : but  it  is  a fimplicity  of  your  own. 

It  is  not  the  fimplicity  of  Chrift.  You  think 
you  do  nottruft  in  your  own  vrorks.  But  you  do 
truft  in  your  own  works.  You  do  not  believe 
in  Chrift. 

“ You  have  a prefent  freedom  from  fin.  But  it 
is  only  a temporary  fufpenfion  of  it,  not  a deli- 
verance from  it.  And  you  have  a peace.  But 
B 3 it  - 


[ 3o  ] 

it  is  not  a true  peace.  If  death  were  to  approach 
you  would  find  all  your  fears  return. 

“ But  1 am  forbid  to  % any  more.  My  heart 
finks  in  me  like  a fione.” 

I was  troubled.  I begged  of  God  an  anfwer  of 
peace,  and  opened  on  thofe  words,  As  many  as 
zvalL  according  to  this  rule,  peace  be  on  them,  and 
vitrcy,  and  upon  the  I /bad  of  God . I was  alk- 
VAf  in  the  evening,  that  God  would  fulfil 
ah  his  promifes  in  my  foul,  when  I opened 
my  tefiament  on  thofe  words.  My  hour  is  not  yet 
com?. 

Sund.  Dec.  3.  I began  reading  prayers  at  Bo- 
cardo  (the  citypnfon)  which  had  been  long  dif- 
continued.  In  the  afternoon  I received  a letter, 
earneftly  defiring  me,  to  publifh  my  account  of 
Georgia  : and  another  as  earneftly  diftuading  me 
from  it,  “ becaufe  it  would  bring  much  trouble 
upon  me.”  I confulted  God  in  his  word  and  re- 
ceived two  anfwers;  the  fir  ft  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11. 
2 — 6-  d he  other,  Thou  therefore  cndurehardjhip, 
as  a good  foldi&r  of  JeJ us  Chrift. 

1 uef.  Dec.  5.  I began  reading  prayers  and 
preaching  in  Glocefter-green  workhoufe,  and  on 
Thurfday  in  that  belonging  to  St.  Thomas’s  pa- 
rifh.  On  both  days  I preached  at  the  caftle.  At 
St.  Thomas’s  was  a young  woman,  raving  mad, 
fereaming  and  tormenting  herfelf  continually.  I 
had  a ftrong  defire  to  fpeak  to  her.  The  moment 
I began  file  was  ftill.  The  tears  ran  down  her 
cheeks  all  the  time  I was  telling  her,  “ Jefus  of 

Nazareth 


[ 3*  3 

Nazareth  is  able  and  willing  to  deliver  you.’'  O 
where  is  faith  upon  earth  ? Why  are  thefe  poor 
wretches  left  under  the  open  bondage  of  Satan  ? 
Jeftts,  Mailer ! Give  thou  medicine  to  heal 
their  ficknefs : and  deliver  thofe  who  are  now 
alfo  vexed  with  unclean  fpirits ! 

About  this  time,  being  defirous  to  know  how 
the  work  of  God  went  on  among  our  brethren 
at  London,  I wrote  to  many  of  them  concerning 
the  hate  oftheir  fouls.  One  or  two  of  their  an- 
fwerslhave  fubjoined. 


My  dear  friend,  whom  I love  in  the  truth. 

I Know  my  Saviour’s  voice,  and  my  heartburns 
with  love  and  defire  to  follow  him  in  the  re- 
generation. I have  no  confidence  in  the  flefh. 

O 

I loath  myfelf  and  love  him  only.  My  dear 
broiher,  my  fpiiit  even  at  this  moment  rejoices 
in  God  my  Saviour,  and  the  love  which  is  fired 
abroad  in  my  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  deflroys 
all  felf-love,  fo  that  I could  lay  down  my  life  for 
my  brethren.  I know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth, 
and  have  confidence  towards  God,  that  through 
his  blood  my  fins  are  forgiven.  He  hath  begot- 
ten me  of  his  own  will,  and  faves  me  from  fin, 
fo  that  it  has  no  dominion  over  me.  His  Spirit 
bears  witnefs  with  my  fpirit,  that  I am  his  child 
by  adoption  and  grace.  And  this  is  not  for 


works  of  righteoufnefs  which  I have  done.  Fori 
am  his  workmanfnip,  created  in  Chrift  Jefus 
unto  good  works  : fo  that  all  boafting  is  exclud- 
ed. It  is  now  about  eighteen  years  fince  Jefus 
took  poftefiion  of  nry  heart.  He  then  opened 
my  eyes  and  faid  unio  me,  Be  of  good  cheer, 
thy  fins  are  forgiven  thee.  * My  dear  friend, 
bear  with  my  relating,  after  what  manner  I was 
born  of  God.  It  was  an  inflantaneous  aft.  My 
whole  heart  was  filled  with  a divine  power, 
drawing  all  the  faculties  of  my  foul  after  Chrift, 
which  continued  three  or  four  nights  and  davs. 
It  was  as  a mighty  rufhing  wind,  coming  into 
the  foul,  enabling  me  from  that  moment  to  be 
more  than  conqueror,  over  thofe  corrupti- 
ons which  before  I was  always  a Have  to. 
Since  that  time,  the  whole  bent  of  my 
will  hath  been  towards  him  day  and  night, 
even  in  my  dreams.  I know  that  I dwell 
in  Chrift,  and  Chrift  in  me;  I am  bone  of 
his  bone,  and  flefh  of  his  flefh.  That  you 
and  all  that  wait  for  his  appearing,  may 
find  the  confolgtion  of  Ifrael,  is  the  earned 
prayer  of 

Your  affeftionate  brother  in  Chrift, 

W.  P. 


[ 33  1 

My  mofi  dear  and  honoured  father  in  Clirijl , 

IN  the  twentieth  year  of  my  age,  1737,  God 
was  pleafed  to  open  my  eyes,  and  to  let  me 
fee  that  I did  not  live  as  became  a child  ol  God. 
I found  my  fins  were  great  (though  I was  what 
they  call  a fober  perfon)  and  that  Crod  kept  an 
account  of  them  all.  However  I thought,  if  I 
repented,  and  led  a good  life,  God  would  accept 
me.  And  fo  I went  on  for  about  half  a year, 
and  had  fometimes  great  joy.  But  lad  winter,  I 
began  to  find,  that  whatever  I did,  was  nothing, 
and  the  enemy  of  fouls  laid  fo  many  things  to  my 
charge,  that  fometimes  I defpaired  of  heaven. 
I continued  in  great  doubts  and  fears  till  April  9, 
when  I went  out  of  town.  Here  for  a time  I 
was  greatly  trar.fported,  in  feeing  the  glorious 
works  of  God  : but  in  about  three  weeks  I was 
violently  affaulted  again.  God  then  offered  a 
Saviour  to  me,  but  my  felf-righteoufnefs  kept  me 
from  laying  hold  on  him. 

On  Whitfunday  I went  to  receive  the  bleiTed 
facraraent,  but  with  a heart  as  hard  as  a ffone. 
Heavy-laden  I was  indeed,  when  God  was 
pleafed  to  let  me  fee  a crucified  Saviour.  I faw 
there  was  a fountain  opened  in  his  fide  for  me 
to  wafli  in  and  be  clean.  But  alas!  1 was  afraid 
to  venture,  fearing  I thould  be  too  prefumptuous. 
And  I know,  I at  that  time  re  limed  the  atonement 
which  I might  then  have  had.  Yet  I received 
B 5 great 


[ 34  3 


great  comfort.  But  in  about  nine  days  time,  my 
joy  went  out,  as  a lamp  does  for  want  of  oil,  and 
I fell  into  my  old  flate.  Yet  I was  not  without 
hope  ; for  ever  after  that  time  I could  not  def- 
pair  of  falvation : I had  fo  clear  a fight  of  die 
fountain  opened  in  the  fide  of  our  Lord.  But 
flill  when  I thought  of  death,  or  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, it  was  a great  tenor  to  me.  And  yet 
I was  afraid  to  venture  to  lay  all  my  fins  upon 
Chrift. 

* This  was  not  all.  But  whenever  I retired  to 
prayer,  I had  a violent  pain  in  my  bead.  This 
only  feized  me  when  I began  to  pray  earneftly, 
or  to  cry  out  aloud  to  Chrift.  But  when  I 
cried  to  him  againfi  this  alfo,  he  gave  me  eafe. 
Well,  I found  God  did  love  me,  and  did  draw 
me  to  Chrift.  I hungered  and  thirfted  after  him  ; 
but  was  ft  ill  afraid  to  go  boldly  to  Chrift,  and  to 
claim  him  as  my  Saviour. 

July  3.  My  dear  filler  came  down  to  fee  me. 
She  had  received  the  atonement  on  St.  Peter’s 
day.  I told  her,  I thought,  Chrift  died  for  me, 
but  as  to  the  afiurahee  lhe  mentioned,  I could 
fay  nothing. 

July  5.  She  went.  That  night  I went  into  the 
garden,  and  confidering  what  file  had  told  me,  I 
law  him  by  faith,  whofe  eyes  are  as  a flame  of 
fire,  him  who  juftifieth  the  ungodly.  I told  him 
I was  ungodly,  and  it  was  ior  me  that  he  died. 
His  blood  did  I plead  with  great  faith,  to  blot  out 
the  hand-writing  that  was  againfi;  me.  I told 
, my 


C 35  ] 

my  Saviour,  that  he  had  promifed  to  give  refl, 
to  all  that  were  heavy-laden.  This  promife  I 
claimed,  and  I faw  him  by  faith,  {land  condemned 
before  God  in  my  {lead.  I faw  the  fountain 
opened  in  his  fide.  I found,  as  I hungered,  he 
fed  me  : as  my  foul  thirfled,  he  gave  me  out  of 
that  fountain  to  drink.  And  fo  flrong  was  my 
faith,  that  if  I had  had  all  the  fins  of  the  world 
laid  upon  me,  I knew  and  was  fure  one  drop  of 
his  blood  was  fufficient  to  atone  for  all.  Well,  I 
clave  unto  him,  and  he  did  wafh  me  in  his  blood. . 
He  hath  prefented  me  to  his  Father  and  my  Fa- 
ther, to  his  God  and  my  God,  a pure,  fpotlefs 
Virgin,  as  if  I had  never  committed  any  fin.  It 
is  on  Jefus  I Hand,  the  Saviour  of  finners.  It 
is  he  that  hath  loved  me,  and  given  himfelf  for 
me.  I cleave  unto  him,  as  my  furety,  and  he  is 
bound  to  pay  God  the  debt.  While  I {land  on 
this  rock,  I am  fure  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail 
again!!  me.  It  is  by  faith  that  I am  juftified,  and 
have  peace  with  God  through  him.  His  blood 
has  made  reconciliation  to  God  for  me.  It  is  by 
faith  I have  received  the  atonement.  It  is  bv  faith 
I have  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Spirit  of  Chrifc 
dwelling  in  me.  And  what  then  fir  ail  feparate 
me  from  the  lave  of  God  which  is. in  Chrift  Te- 
fus  my  Lord  ? 

You  mull  think  what  a tranfport  of  joy  I was. 
then  in,,  when  I that  was  loll  and  undone,  drop, 
p.ng  into  hell,  felt  a Redeemer  come,  who,  is 
mighty  to  fav'e , to  fave  unto  the  utter  moji.  . Yet  I 
did  not  receive  the  witnefs  of  the  Spirit  at  that 
B 6 . time. 


[ 36  ] 

time.  But  in  about  half  an  hour,  the  devil 
came  with  great  power  to  tempt  me.  However 
I minded  him  not,  hut  went  in  and  lay  down 
pretty  much  compofed  in  my  mind.  Ndw  St. 
Haul  fays  after  ye  believed,  ye  were  fealed  with  the 
Spirit  of  promife.  So  it  was  with  me.  After  I 
had  believed  on  him'  that  juflifieth  the  ungodly, 

I received  that  feal  of  the  fpirit,  which  is  the 
earnejl  of  our  inheritance. 

July  6.  In  the  morning,  being  by  tnyfelf,  I 
found  the  work  of  the  fpirit  was  very  powerful 
upon  me  (altho’  you  know  God  does  not  deal 
with  every  foul  in  the  fame  way).  As  my  mother 
bore  me  with  great  pain,  fo  did  I feel  great  pain 
in  my  foul  in  being  born  of  God.  Indeed  I 
thought  the  pains  of  death  were  upon  me,  and 
that  my  foul  was  than  taking  leave  of  the  body. 

I thought  I was  going  to  him  whom  I faw  with 
ftrong  faith  Handing  ready  to  receive  me.  In  this, 
violent  atrony  I continued  about  four  hours; 
and  then  I began  to  feel  th ejpint  oj  God  bearing 
witnejs  with  my  fpirit,  that  I was  horn  oj  God. 
Becaufe  / was  a child  of  God  he  Jent  forth  the 
[pint  of  his  Sen  into  me,  crying  abba.  Father,  lor 
paat  is  the  cry  of  every  new-born  foul.  O mighty, 
powerful,  happy  change  ! I who  had  nothing  but 
devils  ready  to  drag  me  to  hell,  now  found  I had 
angels  to  guard  me  to  my  reconciles  fathei,  and 
mv  judge,  "who  juft  before  flood  ready  to  con- 
demn me,  was  now  become  my  righteoulnefs. 
But  I cannot  exprefs  what  Goanath  done  lormy 

foul. 


[ 37  J 


foul.  No;  this  is  to  be  my  everlafting employ- 
ment when  I have  put  off  this  frail,  fmful  bodv, 
when  I join  with  that  great  multitude  which  no 
man  can  number,  in  finging  praifes  to  the  Lamb 
that  loved  us,  and  gave  himfelf  for  us  ! O how 
powerful  are  the^  workings  of  the  Almighty  in  a 
new-born  foul  ! The  love  of  God  was  fhed  abroad 
in  my  heart,  and  a flame  kindled  there,  fo  that 
my  body  was  alrnoft  torn  afunder.  I loved.  The 
Spirit  cried  flrong  in  my  heart.  I trembled.  I 
fling.  I joined  my  voice  with  thofe  that  excel 
in  ftrength.  My  foul  teas  got  up  into  the  holy 
mount.  I had  no  thoughts  of  coming  down  again 
into  the  body.  I who  not  long  before  had  called 
to  the  rocks  to  fall  on  me  and  the  mountains  to 
cover  me,  could  now  call  for  nothing  elfe  but 
come,  Lord  Jefus  come  quickly.  Then  I could  cry 
out  with  great  boldnefs,  there,  O God,  is  my 
furety  ! There,  O death,  is  thy  plague  ! There, 

0 grave,  is  thy  deflruStion  ! There  O ferpent  is 
the  feed,  that  firali  for  ever  bruife  thy  head.  O 

1 thought  my  head  was  a fountain  of  water!  I 
was  diflolved  in  love.  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  J 
am  his.  He  has  all  charms.  He  has  ravifhed 
my  heart.  He  is  my  comforter,  my  friend,  my  all. 
He  is  now  in  his  garden,  feeding  among  the  lillies. 
0 I am  fick  of  love.  He  is  altogether  lovely,  the 
chief  eft  among  ten  thoufand. 

Sund.  10.  I admimflered  the  Lord’s  Supper  at 
the  Caflle.  At  one  I expounded  at  Mr.  Fox’s 
as  ufual.  The  great  power  of  God  was  with  us, , 

and 


[ 38  ] 


and  one  who  had  been  in  defpair  feveral  years, 
received  a witnefs  that  fhe  was  a child  of  God. 

Mond.  1 1.  hearing  Mr.  Whitefield  was  arrived 
from  Georgia,  I haHened  to  London  ; and  on 
Tuef.  12.  God  gave  us  once  more  to  take  fweet 
counfel  together. 

Frid.  15.  I preached  at  St.  Antholine’s. 

Sat.  16.  One  who  had  examined  himfelfbythe 
refleftions  wrote  Oct  14.  made  the  following 
obfervations  on  the  Hate  of  his  own  foul. 

1.  I judge  thus  of  myfelf.  But  I feel  it  not. 
Therefore  there  is  in  me  Hill,  the  old  heart  of 
Hone. 

2.  I judge  thus  of  happinefs.  But  I Hill  hanker 
after  creature-happinefs.  My  foul  is  almoH 
continually  running  out  after  one  creature  or 
another,  and  imagining  how  happy  fhould  I be  in 
fuch  or  fuch  a condition.  I have  more  pleafure 
in  eating  and  drinking,  and  in  the  company  of 
thofe  I love  than  I have  in  God.  I have  a relifh 
for  earthly  happinefs.  I have  not  a relifh  for. 
Heavenly.  I favour  ( <p^0Ju ) the.  things  of  men , 
not  the  things  of  God.  Therefore  there  is  in  me. 
Hill  the  carnal  heart,  the  <pfr,u.a.  c-af;. 

But  the  eyes  of  my  underHanding  are  not 
yet  fully  opened. 

II..  “ This  is  the  defign  of  ?«ylife.”  But  a thou- 
fand  little  defigns  are  daily  Healing  into  my  foul. 
This  is  my  ultimate,  defign  ; but  intermediate  de- 
figns are  continually  creeping  in  upon  me;  de- 
figns (tho*  often  difguifedj. of  pleafing  myfelf,  of 

doing 

U 


t 39  J 

doing  my  own  will  ; defigns,  wherein  I do  noi  1 
eye  God,  at  leaft,  not  him  fingly. 

Therefore  my  eye  is  not  yet  fingle  ; at  leaft, 
not  always  fo. 

III.  Are  my  defires  new  ? Not  all.  Some 
are  new,  fome  old.  My  defires  are  like  my  de- 
figns.  My  great  defire  is,  To  have  Chrijl  formed 
in  my  heart  by  faith.  But  little  defires  are  daily 
Healing  into  my  foul.  And  fo  my  great  hopes 
and  fears  have  refpedl  to  God.  But  a thoufand 
little  ones  creep  in  between  them. 

Again,  my  defires,  paffions  and  inclinations 
in  general  are  mixt  : having  fomething  of  Chrift 
and  fomehing  of  earth.  I love  you,  for  inliance. 
But  my  love  is  only  partly  fpirhual,  and  partly 
natural.  Something  of  my  own-  cleaves  to  that 
which  is  of  God.  Nor  can  I divide  the  earthly 
part  from  the  heavenly. 

Sund.  17.  I preached  in  the  afternoon  at  Ifling- 
ton  : in  the  evening  at  St.  Swi '.bin’s,  for  the 
laft  time.  Sund.  24.  I preached  at  Great  St. 
Bartholomew’s  in  the  morning,  and  at  Iflington 
in  the  afternoon  ; where  we  had  theblefled  fa- 
crament  every  day  this  week,  and  were  comfort- 
ed on  every  fids. 

Wed.  27.  I preached  at  Bafingfhaw  church ; 
Sund.  31,  to  many  thoufands,  in  St.  George’s, 
Spitalfields.  And  to  a yet  mere  crouded  con- 
gregation at  Whitechappel,  in  the  afternoon,  P 
declared  thofe  glad  tidings  (O  that  they  -would 
know  the  things  which,  make-for  their  peace  !) 

i will 


[ 40  ] 

I will  heal  their  backjliding  : 1 will  love  them 
freely. 

Monday,  January  1,  1739-  Mr.  Hall,  Kinchin, 
Ingham,  Whitefield,  Hutchins,  and  my  brother 
Charles,  were  prefent  at  our  love  feall  in  Fetter- 
lane,  with  about  fixty  of  our  brethren.  About  three 
in  the  morning,  as  we  were  continuing  inflant 
in  prayer,  the  power  of  God  came  mightily 
upon  us,  infomuch  that  many  cried  out  for  ex- 
ceeding joy,  and  many  fell  to  the  ground.  As 
foonas  we  were  recovered  a little  from  that  awe 
and  amazement  at  the  prefence  of  his  Majefty, 
we  broke  out  with  one  voice,  We  praife  thee , 0 
God  ; we  acknowledge  thee  to  be  the  Lord. 

Thurfd.  4.  One  who  had  had  the  form  of  god- 
linefs  many  years,  wrote  the  following  reflec- 
tions. 

“ My  friends  affirm  I am  mad,  bccaufe  I faid 
I was  not  a Chriftian  a year  ago.  I affirm,  I am 
not  a Chriftian  now.  Indeed  what  I might  have 
been  I know  not,  had  I been  faithful  to  the 
grace  then  given,  when  expecting  nothing  lefs, 
I received  fuch  a fenfe  of  the  forgivenefs  of  my 
fins,  as  till  then  I never  knew.  But  that  I am 
not  a Chriftian  at  this  day,  I as  afluredly  know, 
as  that  Jefus  is  the  Chrift. 

“ For  a Chriftian  is  one  who  has  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit  of  Chrift,  which  (to  mention  no  more) 
are  love,  peace,  joy.  But  thefe  I have  not;  I 
have  not  any  love  of  God.  I do  not  love  either 
the  Father  or  the  Son.  Do  you  afk,  How  do  I 

know 


[ 4»  ] 

know  whether  I love  God  ? I anfwer  by  ano- 
ther queflion,  How  do  you  know,  whether  you 
love  me  ? Why,  as  you  know,  whether  you  are 
hot  or  cold.  You  feel  this  moment,  that  you  do 
or  do  not  love  me.  And  I fed  this  moment,  I 
do  not  love  God;  which  therefore  I know,  be- 
caufe  I feel  it.  There  is  no  word  more  proper,, 
more  clear,  or  more  ftrong. 

“ And  I know  it  alfo  bv  St.  John’s  plain  rule, 
Jf  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father 
is  not  in  him.  For  I love  the  w'orld.  I defire 
the  things  of  the  world,  fome  or  other  of 
them,  and  have  done  all  my  life.  I have  always 
placed  fome  part  of  my  happinefs  in  fome  or 
other  of  the  things  that  are  feen.  Particularly  in 
meat  and  drink,  and  in  the  company  of  thofe  I 
loved.  For  many  years  I have  been,  yea  and  ftill 
am,  hankering  after  a happinefs,  in  loving,  and 
being  loved  by  one  or  another.  And  in  thefe  I 
have  from  time  to  time  taken  more  pleafure  than 
in  God. 

“ Again,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft  I have  not, 

I have  now  and  then  fome  ftarts  of  joy  in  God  : 
but  it  is  not  that  joy.  For  it  is  not  abiding. 
Neither  is  it  greater  than  I have  had  on  fome 
worldly  occafions.  So  that  I can  in  no  wife  be 
faid  to  rejoice  evermore ; much  lefs  to  rejoice  zvith 
joy  unfpeak  able  and full  of  glory. 

“ Yet  again  ; I have  not  the  peace  of  God ; that 
peace,  peculiarly  fo  called.  The  peace  I have 
may  be  accounted  for  on  natural  principles.  I 

have 


[ 42  ] 

have  health,  ftrength,  friends,  a competent  for- 
tune,  and  a compofed,  chearful  temper.  Who 
would  not  have  a fort  of  peace  in  fuch  circum- 
flances  ? But  I have  none  which  can  with  any 
propriety  be  called,  a peace  which  paffeth  all  un- 
derflanding. 

From  hence  I conclude  (and  let  all  the  faints 
of  the  world  hear,  that  whereinfoever  they  boaft', 
they  may  be  found  even  as  I)  though  I have 
given,  and  do  give  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor, 
I am  not  a Chriltian.  Though  I have  endured 
liardlhip,  though  I have  in  all  things  denied  my- 
felf  and  taken  up  my  crofs,  I am  not  a Chriltian. 
My  works  are  nothing,  my  bufferings  are  nor- 
thing ; I have  not  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  of  ChrilT. 
Though  I have  conflantly  ufed  all  the  means  of 
grace,  for  twenty  years,  I am  not  a Chi  iflian. 

Wednef.  17.  I was  with  two  perfons,  who  I 
doubt  are  properly  entkufiajls.  For,  firft,  they 
think  to  attain  the  end  without  the  means,  which 
is  enthufiafm,  properly  fo  called.  Again,  they 
think  themfelves  infpired  by  God,  and  are  not. 
But  falfe,  imaginary  infpiration  is  enthufiafm. 
That  theirs  is  only  imaginary  infpiration  appears 
hence,  it  contradifls  the  law,  and  the  teftimony . 

Sund.  21.  We  were  furprized  in  the  even- 
ing, while  I was  expounding  in  the  Minories. 
A well-dreft,  middle-aged  woman,  fuddenly  cried 
out,  as  in  the  agonies  of  death.  She  continued 
lo  to  do  for  feme  time,  with  all  the  figns  of  the 
fharpeft  anguilh  of  fpirit.  When  (he  was  a little 

recovered, 


[ 43  ] 

recovered',  I defired  her  to  call  upon  me  the 
next  day.  She  then  told  me,  that  about  three 
years  before,  fhe  was  under  ftrong  convi&ions 
of  fin,  and  in  fuch  terror  of  mind,  that  fhe  had 
no  comfort  in  any  thing,  nor  any  reft,  day  or 
night : that  fhe  ferit  for  the  minifter  of  her  parifh 
and  told  him  the  diftrefs  fhe  was  in  : upon  which 
he  told  her  hufband  fhe  was  ftark  mad,  andadvif- 
ed  him  to  fend  for  a phvfician  immediately.  A 
phyfician  was  fent  for  accordingly,  who  ordered 
her  to  be  blooded,  bliftered,  and  fo  on.  But  this 
did  not  heal  her  wounded  fpirit.  So  that  Are 
continued  much  as  fhe  was  before  : till  the  laft 
night,  he  wdiofe  word  fhe  at  firft  found,  to  be 
Jhaiper  than  any  tzvo-edgedjword,  gave  her  a faint 
hope,  that  he  would  undertake  her  caufe,  and 
heal  the  foul  which  had  finned  againft  him. 

Thurf.  25.  I baptized  John  Smith,  (late  an 
Anabaptift)  and  four  other  adults  at  Iflington. 
Of  the  adults  I have  known  baptized  lately,  one 
only  was  at  that  time  born  again,  in  the  full  fenfe 
of  the  word,  that  is,  found  a thorough,  inw'ard 
change,  by  the  love  of  God  filling  her  heart. 
Moft  of  them  were  only  born  again  in  a lower 
fenfe,  z.  e.  received  the  remiffion  of  their  fins. 
And  fome  (as  it  has  fince  too  plainly  appeared) 
neither  in  one  fenfe  nor  the  other. 

Sund.  28.  I went  (having  been  long  importun* 
ed  thereto)  about  five  in  the  evening,  with  lour 
or  five  of  my  friends  to  a houfe  where  was  one  of 
thofe  commonly  called  French  prophets.  After 

a time 


[ 44  ] 

a time,  fhe  came  in.  She  feemed  about  four  or 
five  and  twenty,  of  an  agreeable  fpeech  and  be- 
haviour. Site  alked,  Why  we  came  ? I faid, 
“ To  try  the  fpirits,  whether  they  be  of  God.’’ 
Prefently  after  (he  leaned  back  in  her  chair,  and 
feemed  to  have  ftrong  workings  in  her  breaft, 
with  deep  fighings  intermixt.  Her  head,  and 
hands,  and  by  turns,  every  part  of  her  body 
feemed  alfo  to  be  in  a kind  of  convulfive  mo- 
tion. This  continued  about  ten  minutes,  till 
fat  fix)  (he  began  to  fpeak  (though  the  workings, 
fighings  and  contorfions  of  her  body,  were  fo  in- 
termixt with  her  words,  that  fire  feldoru  fpoke 
half  a fentence  together)  with  a clear,  ftrong 
voice,  “ Father,  Thy  will,  thy  will  be  done. 
“ Thus  faith  the  Lord,  if  any  of  you  that  is  a 
“ father,  his  child  afk  bread,  will  he  give  him  a 
ftone  ? If  he  afk  a filh,  will  he  give  him  a 
“ fcorpion  ? Afk  bread  of  me,  my  children,  and 
“ I will  give  you  bread.  I will  not,  will  not  give 
“ you  a fcorpion.  By  this  judge  of  what  ye  fhall 
“ now  hear.” 

She  fpoke  much  (all  as  in  the  perfon  of  God, 
and  moftly  in  fcripture  woids)  of  the  fulfilling  of 
the  prophecies,  the  coming  of  Chrift  now  at 
hand,  and  the  fpreading  ofthegofpel  oyei  all  the 
earth.  Then  fhe  exhorted  us,  not  to  be  in  hafte, 
in  judging  her  fpirit,  to  be  or  not  to  be  of  God  ; 
but  to  wait  upon  God,  and  he  would  teach  us,  if 
we  conferred  not  with  flefh  and  blood.  She  added, 

with 


with  many  inforcements,  That  we  muft  watch 
and  pray,  and  take  up  our  crofs , and  be Jiill  before 
God.” 

Two  or  three  of  our  company  were  much  af= 
fe£ted,  and  believed  fhe  fpoke  by  the  Spirit  of 
God.  But  this  was  in  no  wife  clear  to  me.  The 
motion  might  be  either  hyfterical  or  artificial. 
And  the  fame  words,  any  perfon  of  a good  under- 
ftandingand  well  verfed  in  the  fcriptures  might 
have  fpoken.  But  I let  the  matter  alone  : know- 
ing this,  that  if  it  be  not  of  God , it  will  come  to 
nought. 

Sund.  Feb.  4.  I preached  at  St.  Giles’s  on  Who- 
foever  believeth  on  me,,  out  of  his  belly  Jhall  flow 
rivers  of  living  water.  Flow  was  the  power  of 
Godprefent  with  us ! I am  content  to  preach  here 
no  more. 

Frid.  9.  A note  was  given  me  at  Wapping, 
in  (nearly)  thefe  words  ; 

S I R, 

~\f  OUR  prayers  are  defred  for  a child  that  is 
lunatic/:  and  fore  vexed  day  and  night,  that 
our  Lord  would  be  pleas'd  to  heal  him,  as  he  did 
■thofe  in  the  days  of  his  flefn,  and  that  he.  would  give 
his  parents  faith  and  patience  ’ till  his  time  is 
come. 

Tuefday  13.  I received  the  following  note. 

S I R, 

I Return  you  hearty  thank:  for  your  prayers  on 
Friday  for  my  tortured  fon.  He  grows  xvorfe 

and 


C ] 

and  worfe , I hope,  the  nearer  deliverance , / 
your  prayers  Jlill  to  our  Redeemer , who  will  cure 
him,  or  give  us  patience  to  bear  the  rod,  hoping 
dt  is  dipped  in  the  blood  of  the  lamb. 

Sir  He  is  taken  with  grievous  weeping,  his 
heart  beating,  as  ij  it  would  heat  thro'  his  ribs,  he 
fwells  ready  to  burjl,  fweats  great  drops,  runs 
about  beating  and  tearing  himfelf.  He  bites  and 
pinches  me,  fo  that  I carry  his  marks  always  on  me. 
He  lays  his  hands  on  the  fire,  and  flicks  pins  in  his 
fefh.  Thus  he  has  been  thefe five  years.  He  is  in  his 
wthyear,  a wonder  of  ajjliclion:  I hope,  of  mercy 
alfo ; and  that  I fall  yet  praife  him  who  is  my  Re- 
deemer and  my  God. 

Sat.  17.  A few  of  us  prayed  with  him  ; and 
from  that  time  (as  his  parents  fince  informed  us) 
he  had  more  reft  (altho’  not  a full  deliverance) 
than  he  had  had  for  two  years  before. 

Sund.  18.I  was  defired  to  preach  at  Sir  George 
Wheler’s  Chapel,  in  Spital-Fields,  morning  and 
afternoon.  I did  fo  in  the  morning,  but  was  not 
fuffered  to  conclude  my  fubjeft  (as  I had  defign- 
ed)  in  the  afternoon ; a good  remembrance, 
that  I fhould,  if  poftible,  declare  at  every  time, 
the  whole  counfel  of  God. 

Sund.  25.  I preached  in  the  morning  to  a nu- 
merous congregation,  at  St.  Katherine’s,  near  the 
tower:  at  Iftington  in  the  afternoon.  Manv  here 
were  (as  ufual)  deeply  offended.  But  the  coun- 
fel of  the  Lord  it  (hall  (land. 


Frid. 


[ 47  ] 

Frid.  March  2.  It  was  the  advice  of  all  our  bre- 
thren, that  I fhould  fpend  a-  few  days  at  Oxford, 
whither  I accordingly  went  on  Saturd.  3.  A 
few  names  I found  here  alfo,  who  had  not  denied 
the  faith,  neither  been  aihamed  of  their  Lord,  even 
in  the  midft  of  a perverfe  generation.  And 
every  day  we  were  together,  we  had  convincing 
proof,  fuch  as  it  had  not  before  entered  into  our 
hearts  to  conceive,  that  he  is  able  to fave  unto. the 
utter  mofi  all  that  come  unto  God  thro’’  him. 

* One  of  the  moil  furprizing  inftances  of  his 
power  which  I ever  remember  to  have  feen,  was 
on  the  Tuefday  following  ; when  I vifited  one. 
who  was  above  meafure  inraged  at  this  nezu  way, 
and  zealous  in  oppofing  it.  Finding  argument 
to  be  of  no  other  effeft,  than  to  inflame  her  more 
and  more,  I broke  off  the  difputeand  defired  we 
might  join  in  prayer,  which  fhe  fo  far  confented 
to,  as  to  kneel  down.  In  a few  minutes  flie  fell 
into  an, extreme  agony,  both  of  body  and  foul  ; 
and  foon  after  cried  out  with  the  utmoft  earneft- 
nefs.  “ Now  I know,  I,  am  forgiven  for  Chrifl’s 
fake.’’  Many  other  words  (he  uttered  to  the  fame 
effeft,  witnefling  a hope  full  of  immortality. 
And  from  that  hour,  God  hath  fet  her  face  as  a 
flint  to  declare  the  faith  which  before  fhe  perfe- 
cted. 

Thurf.  8.  I called  upon  her  and  a few  of  her 
neighbours,  who  were  met  together  in  the  evening 
among  whom  I found  a gentleman  of  the  fame 
fpirit  fhe  had  been  of,  earneflly  labouring  to  per- 
vert 


[ 48  ] 


vert  the  troth  of  the  gofpel.  To  prevent  his  go- 
ing on  as  the  lefs  evil  of  the  two,  I entered  di- 
reftly  into  the  controverfy,  touching  both  the 
caufe  and  the  fruits  ofjuftification  : In  the  midlt 
of  the  difpute,  one  who  fat  at  a fmall  diftance, 

felt  as  il  Were  tVie  picieing  of  a.  fword,  and  before 

fhe  could  be  brought  to  another  houfe,  whither  I 
was  going,  could  not  avoid  crying  out  aloud,  even 
in  the  llreet.  But  no  fooner  had  we  made  our 
requell  known  to  God,  than  he  fent  her  help 
from  his  holy  place. 

At  mv  return  from  hence,  I found  Mr.  Kin- 
chin, juft  come  from  Dummer,  who  earnellly  de- 
fired  me,  inltead  of  fetting  out  for  London  the 
next  morning  (as  I defigned)  to  go  to  Dummer 
and  fupply  his  church  on  Sunday.  On  Friday 
morning  I fet  out,  according  to  his  defire,  and  in 
the  evening  came  to  Reading,  where  I found  a 
young  f man  who  h'adin  fome  meafure  known  the 
power  of  the  world  to  come.  I fpent  the  evening 
with  him  and  a few  of  his  ferious  friends ; and  it 
pleafed  God  much  to  ftrengthen  and  comfort 
them. 

Sat.  10.  In  the  afternoon  I came  to  Dummer  ; 
and  on  funday  morning  had  a large  and  attentive 
congregation.  I was  defired  to  expound  in  the 
evening  at  Bafinglloke.  The  next  day  I returned 
to  Reading,  and  thence  on  Tuefday  to  Oxford, 
where  I found  many  more  and  more  rejoicing  in 
God  their  Saviour.  Wcdnefday  tq,  1 had  an  op- 
portunity 


7 Mr.  Cennick. 


[ 49  ] 


portunity  of  preaching  once  again  to  the  poor 
prifoners  in  the  Caftle.  Thurfd.  15.  I fet  out 
early  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  afternoon  came 
to  London. 

During  my  flay  here,  I was  fully  employed  ; 
between  our  own  fociety,  in  Fetter-lane,  and 
many  others,  where  I was  continually  defired  to 
expound  : fo  that  I had  no  thought  of  leaving 
London,  when  I received  (after  feveral  others) 
a letter  from  Mr.  Whitefield,  and  another  from 
Mr.  Seward,  intreating  me  in  the  moll  preffing 
manner,  to  come  to  Briflol  without  delay.  This 
I was  not  at  all  forward  to  do  ; and  perhaps  a 
little  the  lefs  inclined  to  it  (tho:  I truft,  I do  not 
count  my  life  dear  unto  myfelf,  fo  I may  finifh 
my  courfe  with  joy)  becaufe  of  the  remarkable 
fcriptures  which  offered  as  often  as  wre  enquired, 
touching  the  confequence  of  this  removal : pro- 
bably permitted  for  the  trial  of  our  faith,  t Get 
thee  up  into  this  mountain — and  die  in  the  mount, 
whither  thou  goejl  up,  and  be  gathered  unto  thy 
people,  i And  the  children  of  Ifrael  wept for  Mofes 
in  the  plains  of  Moab  thirty  days,  [j  I will  few 
him,  how  great  things  he  mujl  fuffsr  jor  my  name’s 
fake.  § And  devout  men  earned  Stephen  to  his 
burial , and  made  great  lament  at  ion  over  him. 

Wed.  28.  My  journey  was  propofed  to  our 
fociety  in  Fetter-lane.  But  my  brother  Charles 
would  fcarce  bear  the  mention  of  it;  till  appeal- 
Vol.  XXVII.  C ‘ ing 

+ Deut.  xxxii,  49,  50.  J C.  xxxiv.  8.  j[  Acts.  ix.  16. 
t C.  viii,  2. 


[ 50  ] 

ing  to  the  oracles  of  God,  he  received  thofc  words, 
as  fpoken  to  himfelf,  and  anfwered  not  again  : 
Son  of  man , behold  1 Lake  from  thee  the  defire  of 
tlune  e^es  zvith  a flroke  : Yet fialt  thou  not  mourn 
or  weep , neither  fnall  thy  tears  run  down.  Our 
other  brethren  however  continuing  the  difpute, 
without  any  probability  of  their  coming  to  one 
conclufion,  we  at  length  all  agreed,  to  decide  it  by 
lot.  And  by  this  it  was  determined,  “ I fhould 
go.”  Several  afterwards  defiring,  we  might  open 
the  bible,  concerning  the  iffue  of  this,  we  did  fo 
on  the  feveral  portions  of  fcripture,  which  I 
fhall  fet  down,  without  any  reflection  upon  them. 
T Now  there  was  long  war  between  the  houfe  of 
Saul  and  the  houfe  of  David ; but  David  waxed 
fronger  and  Jlronger,  and  the  houfe  of  Saul  waxed 
weaker  and  weaker.  £ When  wicked  men  have 
Jlain  a righteous  peifon  in  his  own  houfe  upon  his 
bed : Shall  I not  now  require  Ins  blood  at  \ our  hards, 
and  take  you  away  from  the  earth  ? ^ And  Ahaz 
ftpt  with  his  fathers,  and  they  buried  him  in  the 
city,  even  in  Jerufalem. 

Perhaps  it  may  be  a faiisfa&ion  to  fome,  if  be- 
fore I enter  upon  this  new  period  of  my  life,  I 
give  the  reafons,  why  I preferred  for  fo  many 
r ears  an  univerfity  life  before  any  other  : then 
efpeciallv,  when  I was  earneflly  prefled  by  my 
father,  to  accept  of  a cure  of  fouls.  I have  here 
therefore  fubjoined  the  lettei  I wrote  feveral  years 
ago  on  that  occafion  ; 

Dear 

+ Sam.  iii.  i.  f 2 Sam.  iv.  n.  § 2 Chron.xxix.  30. 


[ 51  ] 


Dear  Sir , Oxon,  Dec.  10,  1734. 

i.  rT^HE  authority  of  a parent  and  the  call  of 
providence  are  things  of  fo  facred  a na- 
ture, that  a queflion  in  which  thefe  are  any  way 
concerned,  deferves  the  moll  ferious  confidera- 
tion.  I am  therefore  greatly  obliged  to  you,  for  the 
pain?  you  have  taken  to  fet  our  queflion  in  a clear 
light;  which  I now  intend  to  confider  more  at 
large  with  the  utmofl  attention  of  which  I am 
capable.  And  I fhall  the  more  cbearfully  do  it, 
as  being  a [fu red  of  you  joining  with  me  in  im- 
ploring his  guidance,  who  will  not  fuffer  thofe  that 
truft  in  him,  to  feek  death  in  the  error  of  their 
life. 

2. 1 entirely  agree,  That  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  different  degrees  of  promoting  it,  are  to 
be  our  foie  confideration  and  direflion  in  the 
choice  of  any  courfe  of  life:”  and  confequently, 
that  it  muft  wholly  turn  upon  this  fingle  point, 
which  I ought  to  prefer,  a college  life,  or  that  of 
reftor  of  a parifh  ? I do  not  fay,  the  glory  of 
God  is  to  be  my  firfl  or  my  principal  confidera- 
tion : but  my  only  one  ; fince  all  that  are  not  im- 
plied in  this,  are  abfolutely  of  no  weight.  In 
prefence  of  this,  they  all  vanifh  away  : they  are 
lefs  than  the  fmall  duff  of  the  ballance. 

3.  And  indeed,  till  all  other  confiderations 
were  fet  afide,  I could  never  come  to  any  clear 
determination  : till  my  eye  was  fingle,  my 
whole  mind  was  full  of  darknefs.  Whereas  fo 
long  as  it  is  fixt  on  the  glory  of  God,  without  any 
C 2 other 


[ 5^  ] 


©ther  confideration,  I have  no  more  doubt  of  the 
way  wherein  I fhould  go,  than  of  the  fhiningof 
the  mid-day  fun. 

4.  Now  that  life  tends  moll  to  the  glory  of 
God,  wherein  we  moil  promote  holinefs  in 
ourfelves  and  others;  as  being- fully  pe  rfuaded, 
that  thefe  can  never  be  put  afunder.  And  if 
not,  then  whatever  flate  is  belt  on  either  of  thefe 
accounts,  is  fo  on  the  other  likewife.  If  it  be, 
in  the  whole  bell  for  others,  fo  it  is  for  ourfelves: 
if  it  be  bell  for  ourfelves,  it  is  fo  for  them. 

5.  However,  when  two  ways  of  life  are  propofed 
I would  chufe  to  confider  firll,  which  have  I 
reafon  to  believe,  will  be  bell  for  my  ou  n foul  ? 
Will  molt  forward  me  in  holinefs  P By  hoil- 
nefs  meaning,  not  falling  (as  you  feena  to  fup- 
pofe)  or  bodily  aulterities  ; but  the  mind  that 
was  in  Chrift.  A renewal  of  foul  in  the  image  of 
God.  And  I believe  the  hate  wherein  I am,  will 
moll  forward  me  in  this,  becaufe  of  the  pecu- 
liar advantages  I now  enjov. 

6.  The  firll  of  thefe  is  daily  converfe  with  my 
friends.  I know  no  other  place  under  heaven, 
where  I can  have  fome  always  at  hand,  of  the 
fame  judgment,  and  engaged  in  the  fame  hudies  ; 
perfonswlro  are  awakened  into  a full  conviction, 
that  they  have  but  one  work  to  do  upon  earth  ; 
who  fee,  at  a dihance,  what  that  one  work  is, 
even  the  recovery  of  a fingle  eye  and  a clean 
heart  ; who  in  order  to  this,  have  according  to 
their  power,  ablolutely  devoted  themselves  to 

, God, 


C 53  ] 


God.  and  follow  after  their  Lord,  denying  them- 
felves  and  taking  up  their  crofs  daily.  To  have 
even  a fmall  number  of  fuch  friends,  conftantly 
watching  over  my  foul,  and  adminiftring,  as  need 
is,  repl'oof.or  advice  with  all  plainnefs  and  gen- 
tjenefs,  is  a blelTing  I know  not  where  to  find, 
in  any  other  part  of  the  kingdom. 

7.  Another  bleffing  which  I enjoy  here  in  a 
greater  degree  than  I could  expeft  elfewhere  is 
retirement.  I have  not  only  as  much,  but  as 
little  company  as  I pleafe.  Trifling  vifitants  I 
have  none.  No  one  takes  it  into  his  head,  to 
come  within  my  doors,  unlefs  I defire  him,  or 
he  has  bufinefs  with  me.  And  even  then,  as 
foon  as  his  bufinefs  is  done,  he  immediately  goes 
away. 

8.  Both  thefe  blefiings  are  greatly  indeared  to 
me  when  I fpend  but  one  week  put  of  this 
place.  The  far  greateft  part  of  the  converfation 
1 meet  with  abroad,  even  with  the  better  fort  of 
men,  turns  on  points  that  are  quite  wide  of  my 
purpofe,  that  no  way  for, ward,  the  end  of  my  life. 
Now,  if  they  have  time  to  fpare,  I have  not. 
'Tis  abfolutely  needful  for  fuch  a one  as  me,  to 
follow  with  all  poffible  care  and  vigilance  that 
wife  advice  of  Mr.Herbert , 

“ Still  let  thy  mind  be  bent;  ftill  plotting  how, 

>'  And  when,  and  where,  the  bufinefs  may  be 
done,” 

c3 


And 


[ 54  ] 


And  this,  I blefs  God,  I can  in  fome  meafure  do, 
while  I avoid  that  bane  of  all  religion,  the  com- 
pany o { good fort  of  men,  as  they  are  called  ; per- 
fons  who  have  a liking  to,  but  no  fenfe  of  reli- 
gion. But  thefe  infenfibly  undermine  all  my 
refolution,  and  Real  away  what  little  zeal  I have. 
So  that  I never  come  from  among  thefe  faints 
of  the  world  (as  John  Valdeffo  terms  them)  faint, 
diffipated  and  fhorn  of  all  my  lirength,  but  I fav, 
“ God  deliver  me  from  a half  Chriflian.” 

9.  Freedom  from  care  is  yet  another  invalua- 
ble bleffing.  And  where  could  1 enjoy  this  as  I 
do  now  ; I hear  of  fuch  a thing  as  the  cares  of 
the  world;  but  I feel  them  not.  My  income  is 
ready  for  me  on  fo  many  Rated  days  : all  I have 
to  do  is,  to  carry  it  home.  The  giand  article  of 
my  expence  is  food.  And  this  too  is  provided 
without  any  care  of  mine  Thefervants  I employ 
are  always  readv  at  quarter-day  ; fo  I have  no 
trouble  on  their  account.  And  what  I occafion- 
allv  needto  buy,  I can  immediately  have,  without 
any  expence  of  thought.  Heie  therefore  I can 
be  without  taic/ulnefs.  I can  attend  upon  the 
Lord  without  dijlradion.  And  I know  what  a 
help  this  is  to  the  being  holy  both  in  body  and 
/pint. 

10.  To  quicken  me  in  making  a diligent  and 
thankful  ufe  of  thefe  peculiar  advantages,  Ibave 
the  opportunity  of  communicating  weekly,  and 
of  public  prayer  twice  a day.  It  would  be  eafy  to 
mention  many  more,  as  well  as  to  fhew  many 

difadvantages. 


[ £5  ] 


disadvantages,  which  one  of  greater  courage  and 
Skill  rban  me,  could  fcarce  feparate  from  the  way 
of  life  you  fpeak  of.  But  whatever  others  could 
do.  I could  not.  I could  not  hand  my  ground 
one  month,  againft  intemperance  in  deep,  felf- 
indulgence  in  food,  irregularity  in  fludy  : againft 
a general  lukewarmness  in  mv  affeflions,  and 
rerniffnefs  in  my  aftions,  againft  a foftnefs  di- 
r«611y  oppofite  to  the  charadier  of  a good  foldier 
of  Jefus  Chrift.  And  then  when  my  Spirit  was 
thus  diflolved,  I Should  be  an  eafy  prey  to  every 
temptation.  Then  might  the  cares  of  the  world 
and  the  defire  of  other  things,  roll  back  with  a 
full  tide  upon  me  : and  it  would  be  no  wonder, 
if  while  1 preached  to  others,  I inyfelf  fhould  be 
a caft-away.  I cannot  therefore  but  obferve, 
that  the  queftion  does  not  relate  barely  to 
the  degrees  of  holinefs,  but  to  the  very  being 
oj  it: 

Agitur  de  Vita  & Sanguine  Tumi: 

The  point  is,  whether  I flu  all  or  fhall  not  work 
out  my  Salvation?  Whether  I ftiall  Serve  Chrift 
or  Belial  ? 

11.  What  ftill  heightens  my  fear  of  this 
untried  ftate,  is  that  when  I am  once  en- 
tered into  ir,  I am  entered  irrecoverably,  once 
for  all  ; 


Vejiigia  nuUaRetrorfum. 
C 4 


If 


[ 56  ] 

If  I fhould  ever  be  weary  of  the  way  of  life  I 
am  now  in,  I have  frequent  opportunities  of 
quitting  it : but  whatever  difficulties  occur  in 
in  that,  iorefeen  or  unforefeen,  there  is  no  return 
any  more  than  from  the  grave.  When  I have 
once  launched  out  into  the  unknown  fea,  there 
is  no  recovering  my  harbour.  I mull  go  on, 
through  whatever  whirlpools,  or  rocks,  or 
fands,  though  all  the  waves  and  ftorms  go  over 
me. 

12.  Thus  much  as  to  myfelf.  But  I cannot 
deny,  “ That  we  are  not  to  conftder  ourfelves 
“ alone  ; feeing  God  made  us  all  for  a focial  life, 
“ to  which  academical  lludies  are  only  prepara- 
“ tory.”  I allow  too,  “ That  he  will  take  an 
“ exaft  account  of  every  talent  which  he  has 
“ lent  us,  not  to  bury  them,  but  to  employ  every 
“ mite  we  have  received  according  to  his  will, 
“ whofc  ftewards  we  are.”  I own  alfo,  “ That 
“ every  follower  of  Cbrifl,  is,  in  his  proportion, 
“ the  light  of  the  world  : that  whofoever  is  fuch, 
“ can  no  more  be  concealed,  than  the  fun  in  the 
“ midfl  of  heaven  ; that  if  he  is  fet  as  a light  in 
“ a dark  place,  his  ffiining  muff  be  the  more 
“ confpicuous ; that  to  this  very  end  was  his 
“ light  given,  even  to  ffiine  on  all  around  him:” 
and  indeed,  That  “ there  is  only  one  way  to 
“ hide  it,  which  is,  to  put  it  out.”  I am  obliged 
likewife,  unlefs  I will  lie  againft  the  truth,  to 
grant,  “ That  there  is  not  a more  contemptible 
“ animal  upon  earth,  than  one  that  drones  away 

life. 


[ 57  ] ' 

“ life,  without  ever  labouring  to  promote,  either 
« the  glory  of  God,  or  the  good  of  man  ; and 
“ that,  whether  he  be  young  or  old,  learned  or 
“ unlearned,  in  a college  or  out  of  it yet  grant- 
in  or,  “ The  fuperlative  degree  of  contempt  to  be 
“ on  all  accounts  due  to  a college-drone a 
wretch  who  has  received  ten  talents,  and  em- 
ploys none ; that  is  not  only  promifed  a reward 
hereafter,  but  is  alfo  paid  before-hand  for  his 
work,  and  yet  works  not  at  all.  But  allowing 
all  this,  and  whatever  elfe  you  can  fay  (for  I 
own,  you  can  never  fay  enough)  againff  the 
drowzv  ingratitude,  the  lazy  perjury  of  thofe, 
who  are  commonly  called  harmlejs  men , a fair 
proportion  of  whom  I mull,  to  our  fhame,  con- 
fefs,  are  to  be  found  in  colleges  : allowing  this, 
I fay,  I do  not  apprehend,  it  concludes  againft  a 
college  life  in  general.  For  the  abufe  of  it,  does 
not  deftrov  the  ufe.  Though  there  are  fome 
here  who  are  the  mere  lumber  of  the  creation,  it 
does  not  follow,  that  others  may  not  be  of  more 
fervice  to  the  world,  in  this  ftation  than  they 
could  be  in  any  other. 

13.  That  I in  particular,  could,  might  (it 
feems)  be  inferred,  from  what  has  been  {hewn 
already,  viz.  that  I may  myfelfbe  holier  here 
than  anywhere  elfe,  if  I faithfully  ufe  the  blef- 
fings  I enjoy.  But  to  wave  this,  I have  other 
reafons  fo  to  judge  ; and  the  firft  is,  the  plen- 
teoufnefs  of  the  harvelf.  Here  is  indeed  a large 
fcene  of  various  action.  Here  is  room  for  cha- 
C .5  rity 


t ] 

rity  in  all  its  forms:  there  is  fcarce  any  poffible 
way  of  doing  good,  for  which  here  is  not  daily 
occafion.  I can  now  only  touch  on  the  feveral 
heads.  Here  are  poor  families  to  be  relieved. 
Here  are  children  to  be  educated.  Here  are 
workhoufes,  wherein  both  young  and  old  gladly 
receive  the  word  of  exhortation.  Here  are  pri- 
fons,  and  therein  a complication  of  all  human 
wants.  And,  laftly,  here  are  the  fchools  of  the 
prophets.  Of  the-fe  in  particular  we  mull  ob- 
ferve,  that  he  who  gains  one,  does  thereby  do. 
as  much  fervice  to  the  world,  as  he  could  do  in 
a parifli  in  his  whole  life.  For  his  name  is  legion; 
in  him  are  contained  all  ti  ofe  who  fhall  be  con- 
verted to  God  by  him.  He  is  not  a Cngle  drop 
of  the  dew  of  heaven,  but  a river  to  make  glad 
the  city  of  God. 

15.  “ But  Epworth,  you  fay,  is  a larger  fphcre 
“ of  action  than  this.  There  I lhonld  have  the 
“care  of  two  thoufand  fouls/’  Two  thcufand 
fouls  ! 1 fee  not  how  it  is  poflible  for  fuch  one 
as  me,  to  take  care  of  one  hundred.  Becaufe  the 
weight  that  is  now  upon  me  is  almoft  more  than 
I can  bear,  fhall  I increafe  it  tenfold  ? 

imponere  pelia  offam 

Scilicet , a/p,  ojfa  Jrondofum  involucre  olyvipum  ! 

Would  this  be  the  way  to  help  either  myfelf  or 
others  up  to  heaven  ? Nav,  the  mountains  I 

reared 


[ <59  ] 

reared  would  only  crufh  my  foul,  and  fo  make 
me  utterly  ufelefs  to  others. 

15.  I need  but  juft  glance  on  feveral  other  rea- 
Tons,  why  I am  more  likely  to  be  ufeful  here 
than  elfewhere  ; as,  becaufe  I have  the  advice 
of  many  friends  in  any  difficulty,  and  their  en- 
couragement in  any  danger:  becaufe  we  have  the 
eyes  of  multitudes  upon  11s,  who  even  without 
defigning  it,  perform  the  moft  fubftantial  olHce 
of  friendfhip ; apprizing  us,  if  we  have  already 
done  any  thing  wrong,  and  guarding  us  againft 
doing  fo  again  ; laftly,  became  we  have  a con- 
ftant  fund  to  (upply  the  bodily  wants  of  the  poor, 
and  thereby  open  a way  for  their  fouls  to  receive 
inftruftion. 

16.  If  you  fay,  “ The  love  of  the  people  of 
Epworth  to  me,  may  ballance  thefe  advantages  :,r 
l afk,  how  long  will  it  laft  ? Only  till  I come  to 
tell  them  plainly,  that  their  deeds  are  evil ; and 
particularly  to  apply  that  general  fentence,  to  fay 
to  each,  Thou  art  the  man  ! Atas,  fir*  do  not  I 
know,  what  love  they  had  to  you  at  once  ? And 
how  many  of  them  ufed  you  fince  ? Why,  juft 
as  every  one  will  be  ufed,  whofe  bufinefs  it  is,  to  . 
bring  light  to  them  that  love  darknefs. 

17.  Notwithftanding  therefore  their  prefent 
prejudice  in  my  favour,  I cannot  fee  that  I am 
likely  to  do  that  good  either  at  Epworth  or  an'-, 
other  place,  which  I may  hope  to  do  in  Oxford. 
And  yet  one  terrible  objeflion  lies  in  the  way. 
**■  Have  you- found  it  fo  in  fa£l  ? What, have  you 

C 6 s!  dune. 


C 60  ] 

“ done  there  in  fourteen  years  ? Have  not  your 
“ very  attempts  to  do  good  there,  for  want  either 
“ of  a particular  turn  of  mind  for  the  bufinefs 
“ you  engaged  in,  or  of  prudence  to  direft  you 
“ in  the  right  method  of  doing  it,  been  always 
“ unfuccefsful  ? Nay,  and  brought  fuch  contempt 
“ upon  you  as  has  in  fome  meafure  difqualified 
“ you  for  any  future  fuccefs  ? And  are  there  not 
“ men  in  Oxford,  who  are  not  only  better  and 
“ holier  than  you,  but  who  having  preferved 
“ their  reputation,  and  being  univerfally  elteem- 
“ ed,  are  every  way  fitter  to  promote  the  glory 
“ of  God  in  that  place  ?” 

iy.  I am  not  careful  to  anfwer  in  this  matter. 
It  is  not  my  part  to  fay,  whether  God  hath  done 
good  by  my  hands,  whether  I have  a particular 
turn  of  mind  for  this,  or  not  : and  whether 
want  of  fuccefs  (where  our  attempts  did  not  fuc- 
ceed)  was  owing  to  imprudence,  or  to  other 
caufes.  But  the  latter  part  of  the  objeftion, 
'*  That  one  who  is  defpifed  can  do  no  good, 
“ that  without  reputation  a man  cannot  be  ufe- 
“ ful,”  being  the  ftrong-hold  of  all  the  unbelieving, 
the  vain-glorious,  the  cowardly  Chrifiians  fo 
called)  1 will,  by  the  grace  of  God,  fee,  what 
reafon  there  is  for  this,  thus  continually  to  exalt 
kfelfagainft  the  gofpcl  of  Chrifi. 

18.  With  regard  to  contempt  then  funder 
which  word  I include  all  the  paifions  that  border 
upon  it,  as  hate,  envy,  See.  and  all  the  fruits  that 
fpring  from  it,  fuch  as  calumny  and  perfecution 

in 


[ 6i  ] 


in  all  its  forms)  my  firlt  pofition  in  defiance  of 
worldly  wifdom,  is,  Every  true  Chrijhan  is  con- 
temned wherever  he  lives,  by  tlio/e  who  are  not  Jo, 
and  ivho  knov > him  tobefuch,  that  is  in  eflecl  by 
all  with  whom  heconverfes,  fince  it  is  impoffible 
for  light  not  to  fhine.  This  pofition  I prove, 
both  from  the  example  of  our  Lord,  and  his 
exprefs  alfertion.  Firlt,  from  his  example  : If  the 
difciple  is  not  above  his  majler  ; nor  the  fervant 
above  his  Lord,  then  as  our  mailer  was  defpifed 
and  rejeded  of  men,  fo  will  every  one  of  his  true 
difciples.  But  the  difciple  is  not  above  his  m&fer, 
nor  the  fervant  above  his  Lord.  Therefore —the 
confequence  will  not  fail  him  an  hair’s  breath. 
I prove  this  fecondly,  from  his  own  exprefs  af- 
fertion  of  this  confequence.  Ij  they  have  called  the 
majler  oj  the  houfe  Beelzebub,  how  much  more  them 
oj his  houjhold ? Remember  (ye  that  would  fain 
forget  or  evade  this)  the  word  which  I [aid  unto 
you,  the  fervant  is  not  greater  than  the  Lord ; If 
they  have  prefecuted  me,  they  will  alfo  perfecule 
you.  And  as  for  that  vain  hope,  that  this  be- 
longs only  to  the  firft  followers  Chrilt,  hear  ye 
him  ; All  thefe  things  they  will  do  unto  you , be - 
cauje  they  know  not  him  that  J'ent  me.  And  again, 
Becaufe  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  therefore  the 
world  hateth  you.  Both  the  perfons  who  are 
hated,  the  perfons  who  hate  them,  and  the  caufe 
of  their  hating  them,  are  fet  down.  The  hated 
are  all  that  are  not  of  the  world,  that  know  and 
love  God  : the  haters  are  all  that  are  of  the 

world, 


[ 62  ] 

world,  that  know  not,  love  not  God.  The 
caufe  of  their  hatred  is  the  entire,  irreconcileable 
difference  between  their  defigns,  judgments  and 
affections:  becaufe  thefe  know  not  God,  and 
thofe  are  determined  to  know  and  purfue  no- 
thing befide  him.  Thefe  efleem  and  love  the 
world  : and  thofe  count  it  dung  and  drofs,  and 
fingly  defire  the  love  of  Chrift. 

20.  My  next  pofnion  is  this:  till  he  is  thus 
defpifed  no  man  is  in  a Jiate  of Jalvation.  And 
this  is  a plain  confequence  of  the  former  : for 
if  all  that  arc*  not  oj  the  world,  are  therefore  de- 
fpifed by  thofe  that  are,  then  till  a man  is  defpif- 
ed he  is  oj  the  world . that  is,  out  of  a (late  of 
falvation.  Nor  is  it  pofftble  for  all  the  trim- 
mers between  God  and  the  world,  to  elude  the 
confequence,  unlefs  thev  can  prove,  that  a man' 
may  be  of  the  world , and  ret  be  in  a ftate  ol  fal- 
vation. I mull  therefore,  with  or  without  the 
confent  of  thefe,  keep  clofe  to  my  Saviour’s  judg- 
ment, and  maintain,  that  contempt  i3  a part  of 
the  erofs,  which  every  man  bears  who  follows 
him  : that  it  is  the  badge  of  his  difciplefhip, 
the  (lamp  of  his  profeflion,  the  conllant  leal  ot 
his  calling  ; infomuch  that  though  a man  may 
be  defpifed’  without  being  faved,  yet  he  cannot 
be  faved,  without  being  defpifed. 

21.  I (hould  not  fpend  any  more  words  on 
this  great  truth,  but  that  it  is  at  prefent  voted 
out  of  the  world.  I he  mailers  in  Ifrael,  learn- 
ed men,  men  of  renown,  feein  abfolutely  to  have 

forgotten 


[ 68  3 


forgotten  it : nay,  and  cenfure  thofe  who  hare 
not  forgotten  the  words  of  their  Lord,  as  Setters 
forth  of  f range  doElrine.  Yet  they  who  heark~ 
en  to  God  rather  than  man,  muff  lay  down 
one  Orange  pofition  more,  that  the  being  defpifed 
is  abfolutely  neceffaiy  to  our  doing  good  in  the 
world  : if  not  to  onr  doing  Jo  me  good  (for  God 
may  work  by  Judas,)  yet  to  our  doing  Jo  muck 
good  as  we  otherwife  might : feeing  we  muft 
know  God,  if  we  would  fully  teach  others  to 
know  him.  But  if  we  do,  we  muft  be  defpifed 
of  them  that  know  him  not.  Where  then  is  the 
Jcribe  ? Where  is  the  wife ? if 'here  is  the  difputer 
of  this  world?  Where  is  the  replier  again  ft  God 
with  his  fage  maxims,  “ He  that  is  defpifed  can 
“ do  no  good  in  the  world  ? To  be  ufeful,  a man 
u muft  be  efteeroed  : to  advance  the  glory  of 

“ God,  you  muft  have  a fair  reputation.” . 

Saiththe  world  fo  ? Well  ; what  faith  the  fcrip- 
ture  ?.  Why,  that  God  hath  laughed  all.  this 
Heathen  wifdom  to fcorn.  It  faith  that  twelve 
defpifed  followers  of  a defpifed  mafter,  all  of 
whom  were  of  no  reputation,  who  were  efteem- 
ed — as  the  filth  and  offifcouring  of  the  world,  did 
more  good  in  it,  than  all  the  twelve  tribes  o6, 
Ifrael.  It  faith,  that  their  defpifed  mafter,  left 
anexprefs  declaration Vd)  us  and  to  our  children „ 
Bleffiedare  ye  (not  aecurfed  with  the  heavy  curfe 
of  doing  no  good,  of  being  ufclefs  in  the  world) 
when,  men  fall  revile  yon. and  prefecute  you,  and 

faX 


[ 64  J 


fay  all  manner  of  evil  f you  falfelyfor  my  name's 
fake.  Rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad  ; for  great 
is  your  reward  in  heaven. 

22,  Tbefe  are  a part  of  my  reafons  for  cliuf- 
ingto  abide  as  yet  in  the  Ration  wherein  Inow 
am.  As  to  the  flock  committed  to  your  care, 
whom  you  have  many  years  fed  with  the  fincere 
milk  of  the  word,  I truff  in  God,  your  labour 
fhall  not  be  in  vain.  Some  of  them  you  have 
feen  gathered  into  the  garner.  And  for  vour- 
felf,  I doubt  not,  when  your  warfare  is  accomp- 
li/lied, when  you  are  made  perfetl  thro'  fuff trings, 
you  fhall  follow  the  children  whom  God  hath 
given  you,  full  of  years  and  vi£lories.  And  he 
that  took  care  of  thofe  poorfheep  before  you  was 
born,  will  not  forget  them  when  you  are  dead. 

Thurf.  March  29.  I left  London,  and  in  the 
evening  expounded  to  a fmall  company  at  Baftng- 
ftoke.  Sat.  31.  In  the  evening  I reached  Brif- 
tol,  and  met  Mr.  Whitefield  there.  I could 
fcarce  reconcile  mvfelf  at  firft  to  this  jlrange 
way  ofpreaching  in  the  fields,  of  which  hefet  me 
an  example  on  Sunday  ; having  been  all  my  life 
(till  very  lately)  fo  tenacious  of  every  point  re- 
lating to  decency  and  order,  that  I fhould  have 
thought  the  faring  of  fouls  almofl  a fin , if  it  had 
not  been  done  in  a church. 

April  1.  In  the  evening  (Mr.  Whitefield 
being  gone)  I begun  expounding  our  Lord’s 
fermon  on  the  mount  (one  pretty  remarkable 
precedent  of  field -preaching,  though  1 fuppofe 

there 


C 65  ] 


there  were  churches  at  that  time  alfo)  to  a little 
fociety  which  was  accuftomed  to  meet  once  or 
twice  a week  in  Nicholas-flreet. 

Mond.  2.  At  four  in  the  afternoon,  I fub- 
mitted  to  be  more  vile,  and  proclaimed  in  the 
highways  the  glad  tidings  of  falvation,  fpeaking 
from  a little  eminence  in  a ground  adjoining  to 
the  city,  lo  about  three  thoufand  people.  The 
fcripture  on  which  I fpoke  was  this,  (is  it  pof- 
fible  any  one  fhould  be  ignorant,  that  it  is  fulfilled 
in  every  true  minifter  of  Chrilt  ?J  The  Spirit 
oj  the  Lord  is  upon  me%  becaufe  he  hath  anointed 
me  to  preach  the  gofpel  to  the  poor.  He  hath  fent 
me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted ; to  preach  deliver- 
ance to  the  captives,  and  r ecovery  of  fight  to  the 
blind  : To  fet  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruifed,  to 
proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord. 

At  feven  I began  expounding  the  a&s  of  the 
apojlles,  to  a fociety  meeting  in  Baldwin-ftreet  : 
and  the  next  day  the  gofpel  of  St.  John  in  the 
chapel  at  Newgate  ; where  I alfo  daily  read 
the  morning  fervice  of  the  church. 

Wednef.  4.  At  Baptift-Mills,  (a  fort  of  a 
fuburb  or  village  about  half  a mile  from  Briilol) 

I offered  the  grace  of  God  to  about  fifteen  hun- 
dred perfons  from  thefe  words,  I will  heal  their 
backjliding,  Twill  love  them  freely. 

In  the  evening  three  women  agreed  to  meet 
together  weekly,  with  the  fame  intention  as  thofe 
at  London,  viz.  To  confefs  their  faults  one  to 
another , and  pray  one  for  another,  that  they  may 

be 


[ 66  ] 

be  healed.  At  eight,  four  young  men  agreed  to 
meet,  in  purfuance  of  the  fame  defign.  How 
dare  any  man  deny  this  to  be  (as  to  the  fub- 
flance  of  it)  a raeams  of  grace,  ordained  by 
God  ? Unlefs  be  will  affirm  (with  Luther  in  the 
fury  of  his  folifidianifm)  that  St.  James's  epiflle 
is  an  epifle  of  fir  aw  ? 

Thurf.  5.  At  five  in  the  evening  I began  at  a 
fociety  in  Caflle-flreet,  expounding  the  epiftle 
to  the  Romans  ; and  the  next  evening  at  a fociety 
in  Glouceller-Lane,  the  firft  epiflle  of  St.  John. 
On  Saturday  evening  at  Weaver’s-Hall  alfo  I be- 
gun expounding  the  epiflle  to  the  Romans, 
and  declared  that  gofpel  to  all,  which  is  the 
power  oj  God  unto  Jalvation , to  every  one  that  be- 
l level  h. 

Sund.  8.  At  feven  in  the  morning  I preach- 
ed to  about  a thoufand  perfons  at  Briftol,  and 
afterwards  to  about  fifteen  hundred,  on  the  top 
of  Hannam-Mount  in  Kingfwood.  I called  to 
them  in  the  words  of  the  evangelical  prophet. 
Ho!  Emery  one  that  tkir fifth,  come  ye  to  the  wa- 
ters ; come  and  buy  wine  and  milk , without  mo- 
ney, and  without  price.  About  five  thoufand 
were  in  the  afternoon  at  Rofe-Green,  (on  the 
other  fide  of  Kingfwood)  among  whom  I 
flood  and  cried,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  If  any 
man  thirjl,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  chink.  He 
that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  jeripture  hath  find,  out 
oj  his  belly  fha/l flow  rivers  of  living  water. 

Tuef.  10.  I was  defined  to  go  to  Bath  ; where 


[ 67  3 

I offered  to  about  a thoufand  fouls,  the  free  grace 
of  God  to  heal  their  backjlidings,  and  in  the 
morning  to  (I  believe)  more  than  two  thoufand. 
I preached  to  about  the  fame  number,  at  Baptifl- 
Miils  in  the  afternoon  on  Chrijl,  made  of  God 
unto  us,  wifdom,  and  mghteoufnefs  and fan&ifica- 
tion , and  redemption. 

Sat.  14.  I preached  at  the  poor-houfe  ; three 
or  four  hundred  were  within,  and  more  than 
twice  that  number  without  : to  whom  I explain- 
ed thofe  comfortable  words,  When  they  had  no- 
thing to  pay,  he  frankly  forgave  them  loth. 

Sund.  15.I  explained  at  feven  to  5 or  6000 
perfons,  the  iiory  of  the  pharifee  and  the  publi- 
can. About  three  thoufand  were  prefent  at 
Hannam-Mount.  I preached  at  Newgate  after 
dinner  to  a crowded  congregation.  Between 
five  and  fix  ive  went  to  Rofe-Green  : it  rained 
hard  at  Briftol,  but  not  a drop  fell  upon  us,  while 
I declared  to  about  five  thoufand,  Chrijl  our  wif- 
dom, and  right eovfnefs,  and JanElif cation,  and 
redemption.  I concluded  the  day  by  (hewing  at 
the  fociety  in  Baldwin  flreet,  That  his  blood 
clearfdh  us  from  all  fn. 

Tuefd.  17.  At  five  in  the  afternoon,  I was 
at  a little  fociety  in  the  Back- Lane.  The  room 
in  which  vre  were  was  propped  beneath  ; but 
the  weight  of  people  made -the  floor  give  wav, 
fo  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  expounding  the 
poft  which  propped  it,  fell  down  with  a great 
noife.  But  the  floor  funk  no  further,  fo  that 

after 


[ 68  ] 

after  a little  furprize  at  firft,  they  quietly  attended 
to  the  things  that  were  fpoken. 

Thence  I went  to  Baldwin-ftreet,  and  ex- 
pounded as  it  caine  in  courfe,  the  4th  chap,  of 
the  A£ls.  We  then  called  upon  God,  to  con- 
firm his  word.  Immediately  one  that  flood  by 
(to  our  no  fmall  furprize)  cried  cut  aloud,  with 
the  utmoll  vehemence,  even  as  in  the  agonies 
of  death.  But  we  continued  in  prayer,  till  a 
new  fong  zvas  put  in  her  mouth , a thankfgiving 
unto  our  God.  Soon  after,  two  other  per- 
fons  (well  known  in  this  place,  as  labouring  to 
live  in  all  good  confidence  towards  all  men)  were 
feized  with  flrong  pain,  and  conllrained  to  roar 
for  the  difquietnefs  of  their  heart.  But  it  was  not 
long  before  they  likewife  burft  forth  into  praife 
to  God  their  Saviour.  The  lafl  who  called  upon 

God  as  out  of  the  belly  of  hell,  was  I E 

a flranger,  in  Briftol.  And  in  a fhort  fpace  he 
alfo  was  overwhelmed  with  joy  and  love,  know- 
ing that  God  had  healed  his  backflidings.  So 
many  living  witneffes  hath  God  given  that /tzar 
hand  is  Hill  fir  etched  out  to  heal , and  that  fgns  and 
zuonders  are  even  now  wrought , by  his  holy  child 

Jf/us- 

Wendef.  18.  In  the  evening  L a S 

(.late  a quaker,  but  baptized  the  day  before) 

R a M — and  a few  others,  were  admitted 

into  the  fociety.  But  R a M was  fierce- 

ly able,  either  to  fpeak  or  look  up.  The  for - 
rows  of  death  compaffed  her  about,  the  pains  of  hell 
. " ' got 


[ 69  J 

got  hold  upon  her.  We  poured  out  our  complaints 
before  God,  and  (hewed  him  of  her  trouble. 
And  he  foon  (hewed,  he  is  a God  that  hearetk 
prayer,  (he  felt  in  herfelf,  that  being jujlified free- 
ly, Jhe  had  peace  zuitk  God,  thro’  Jef us  Chrijl. 
She  rejoiced  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God , and  the 
love  of  God  was  fed  abroad  in  her  heart. 

April  20.  Being  Good-Friday,  E th  R — n, 

T — — 1 W s,  and  one  or  two  others  firft 

knew  they  had  redemption  in  the  blood  of  Chrijl, 
the  remifjon  of  their  fns. 

Sat.  21.  At  Weaver’s-hall  a young  man  was 
fuddenly  feized  with  a violent  trembling  all  over, 
and  in  a few  minutes,  the  forrows  of  his  heart 
being  enlarged,  funk  down  to  the  ground.  But 
we  ceafed  not  calling  upon  God,  till  he  raifed 
him  up  full  of  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghof. 

On  Eafter-Day,  it  being  a thorough  rain,  I 
could  only  preach  at  Newgate  at  eight  in  the 
morning,  and  two  in  the  afternoon  ; in  a houfe 
near  Hannam-Mount  at  eleven:  and  in  one 
near  Rofe- Green  at  five.  At  the  fociety  in  the 
evening,  many  were  cut  to  the  heart,  and  many 
comforted. 

Mond.  23.  On  a repeated  invitation  I went 
to  Pensfbrd,  about  five  miles  from  Briftol.  I 
fent  to  the  minifter,  to  afk  leave  to  preach  in  the 
church,  but  having  waited  fome  time  and  re- 
ceived no  anfwer,  I called  on  many  of  the  people 
who  were  gathered  together  in  an  open  place. 
If  any  man  thirf,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink. 

At 


[ 70  ] 

At  four  in  the  afternoon  there  were  above  three 
thoufand,  in  a convenient  place  near  Briftol,  to 
whom  I declared,  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now 
is,  when  the  dead  Jhall  hear  the  voice  oj  the  Son  of 
God , and  th-cy  that  hear  jludl  live. 

I preached  at  Bath  to  about  a thoufand  on  Tuef- 
day  morning,  and  at  four  in  the  afternoon  to  the 
poor  colliers,  at  a place  about  the  middle  of 
Kingfwocd,  called  I wo  Mile-lull.  In  the  even- 
ing at  Baldwin-ftreef,  a young  man,  after  a 
fharp  (though,  fhort)  agony,  both  of  body  and 
mind,  found  his  foul  fjlhd  with  peace,  Inouing 
in  whom  he  had  believed. 

Wed.  24.  To  above  two  thoufand  at  Baptift- 
Mills,I  explained  that  glorious  feripture  {describ- 
ing the  flate  of  every  true  believer  in  (Thrift, 
every  one  who  by  faith  is  born  of  God)  Ye  have 
net  received  the f pint  of  bondage  again  unto  fear, 
hut  ye  have  received  the  /pint  oj  adoption,  whereby 
we  cry  Abba,  Father. 

Thurfd.  2j.  While  I was  preaching  at  New- 
gate on  thefe  words,  He  that beheveth  hath  cverlajl - 
ing  life  : I was  infenftblv  led,  without  any  pre- 
vious defign,  to  declare  ftrongly  and  explicitly. 
That  God  willeth  all  men  to  be  thus  faved  ; and  to 
pray  that  “ If  this  were  not  the  truth  of  God,  he 
“ would  not  fuffer  the  blind  to  go  out  of  the 
“ tvay ; but  if  it  were,  he  would  bear  witnefs  to 
“ his  word.”  Immediately  one,  and  another, 
and  another  funk  to  the  earth  : they  dropped  on 
every  fide  as  thunderftruck.  One  of  them  cried 

aloud. 


[ 7l  ] 

aloud.  We  befought  God  In  her  behalf,  and  he 
turned  her  heavinefs  into  joy.  A fecund  being  in 
the  fame  agony,  vve  called  upon  God  for  her 
alfo  ; and  he  fpoke  peace  unto  her  foul.  In  the 
evening  I was  again  preft  in  fpirit  to  declare,  that 
Chrijl  gave  himfelj.  a ranfom  for  all.  And  aim  oft 
before  we  called  upon  him,  to  fet  to  his  feal, 
heanfwered.  One  was  fo  wounded  by  the  fword 
oi  the  fpirit,  that  you  would  have  imagined  (he 
could  not  live  a moment.  But  immediately  his 
abundant  kindnefs  was  (hewed,  and  (he  loudly 
fang  of  his  righteoufnefs. 

Frid.  2 6.  All  Newgate  rang  with  the  cries  of 
tbofe  whom  the  word  of  God  cut  to  the  heart. 
Two  ol  whom  were  in  a moment  filled  with  joy,_ 
to  the  aflonifiiment  of  thofe  that  beheld  them. 

Sund.  28.  I declared  the  free  grace  of  God 
to  about  four  thoufand  people,  from  thofe  words, 
He  that  fj/ared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered,  him 
up  jor  us  all,  hew  Jhall  he  not  with  him  alfo  freely 
give  us  all  things  ? At  that  hour  it  was,  that  one 
who  had  long  continued  in  fin,  from  a defpair 
of  finding  mercy,  received  a full,  clear  fenfe  of 
his  pardoning  love,  and  power  to  fin  no  more. 
I then  went  to  Clifton  (a  mile  from  Bnftol)  at 
the  minifter’s  defire,  who  was  dangeroufly  ill, 
and  thence  returned  to  a little  plain,  near 
Hannam  Mount,  where  about  three  thou- 
lancl  were  prefent.  After  dinner  I urent  to 
Clifton  again.  The  church  was  quite  lull  at 
the  prayers  and  fermon,  as  wras  the  church- 
yard 


[ 72  ] 

yard  at  the  burial  which  followed.  From  Clif- 
ton we  went  to  Rofe-Green,  wThere  were  (by 
computation)  near  feven  thoufand,  and  thence 
to  Gloucefter-Lane  fociety.  After  which  was 
our  firft  Love-feaft  in  Baldwin-ftreet.  O how 
has  God  renewed  my  ftrength  ! Who  ufed  ten 
years  ago  to  be  fo  faint  and  wear)',  with  preach- 
ing twice  in  one  day  ! 

Mond.  29.  We  underftood  that  many  were 
offended  at  the  cries  of  thofe  on  whom  the  power 
of  God  came  : among  whom  was  a phyficiari, 
who  was  much  afraid,  there  might  be  fraud  or 
impofture  in  the  cafe.  To-day  one  whom  he  had 
known  many  years,  was  the  firft  (while  I was 
preaching  in  Newgate)  who  broke  out  into frong 
cries  and  tears.  He  could  hardly  believe  his 
own  eyes  and  ears.  He  went  and  flood  clofe  to 
her,  and  obferved  every  fymptom,  "‘till  great 
drops  of  fweat  ran  down  her  face,  and  all  her 
bones  fhook.  He  then  knew  not  what  to  think, 
being  clearly  convinced,  it  was  not  fraud,  nor  yet 
anv  natural  diforder.  But  when  both  her  foul 
and  body  were  healed  in  a moment,  he  acknow- 
ledged the  finger  of  God. 

Tuef.  May  1.  Many  wexe  offended  again, 
and  indeed,  much  more  than  before.  For  at 
Baldwin-ftreet  my  voice  could  fcarce  be  heard 
amidft  the  groanings  of  fome,  and  the  cries  of 
others  calling  aloud  to  him  that  is  might , to  fave . 
1 defired  all  that  werefincere  of  heart,  to  befeech 
with  me  the  prince  exalted  for  us,  that  he  would 

proclaim 


[ 73  ] 


proclaim  deliverance,  to  the  captives.  And  he  foon 
fhewed  that  he  heard  our  voice.  Many  of  thofe 
who  had  been  long  in  darknefs,  faw  the  dawn  of 
- a great  light : and  ten  perfons  (I  afterwards  found) 
then  began  to  fay  in  faith,  my  Lord  and  my 
God  ! 

A Quaker  who  ftood  by  was  not  a little  dif- 
pleafed  at  the  diffimulation  of  thofe  creatures,  and 
was  biting  his  lips  and  knitting  his  brows,  when 
he  dropped  down  as  thunder-ftruck.  The  agony 
he  was  in,  was  even  terrible  to  behold.  We  be- 
fought  God,  not  to  lay  folly  to  his  charge.  And 
he  foon  lifted  up  his  heart  and  cried  aloud,  “ now 
I know,  thou  art  a prophet  of  the  Lord-” 

Wed.  2.  At  Newgate,  another  mourner  was 
comforted.  I was  defired  to  ftep  thence  to 
a neighbouring  houfe  to  fee  a letter  wrote  againlt 
me,  as  a deceiver  of  the  people,  by  teaching  that 
God  xmlletli  all  men  to  be  faved.  One  who  long 
had  afferted  the  contrary  was  there,  when  a 
young  woman  came  in  (who  could  fay  before, 
“ I know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth”)  all  in  tears 
and  in  deep  anguifh  of  fpirit.  She  faid.  “ She 
had  been  reafoning  with  herfelf,  how  thefe 
things  could  be,  till  fhe  was  perplexed  more  and 
more,  and  fhe  now  found  the  Spirit  of  God  was 
departed  from  her.”  We  began  to  pray,  and 
fhe  cried  out,  “ He  is  come  ! He  is  come  ! I 
again  rejoice  in  God  my  Saviour.”  Juft  as  we 
rofe  from  giving  thanks,  another  perfon  reeled 
four  or  five  fteps,  and  then  dropped  down.  We 

Vol.  XXVII.  D prayed 


[ 74  ] 

prayed  with  her,  and  left  her  ftrongly  convinc- 
ed of  fin,  and  earnefUy  groaning  for  deliverance. 

I did  not  mention  one  J n H n,  a wea- 

ver, who  was  at  Baldwin-ftreet  the  night  before. 
He  was  (I  underftood)  a man  of  a regular  life 
and  converfation,  one  that  conflantly  attended 
the  public  prayers  and  facrament,  and  was  zeal- 
ous for  the  church  and  againft  diflenters  of  every 
denomination.  Being  informed  that  people  fell 
into  Jlrangefits  at  the  Jocieties,  he  came  to  fee  and 
judge  for  himfelf.  But  he  was  lefs  fatisfied  than 
before  ; infomuch  that  he  went  about  to  his  ac- 
quaintance one  after  another,  till  one  in  the 
morning,  and  laboured  above  meafure  to  con- 
vince them  “ It  was  a delufion  of  the  devil.” 
We  were  going  home,  when  one  met  us' in  the 
ftreet  and  informed  us,  “ That  J — n H — was 
fallen  raving  mad.”  It  feems  he  had  fat  down 
to  dinner,  but  had  a mind  firft  to  end  a fermon 
he  had  borrowed  on  “ Salvation  by  faith.”  In 
reading  the  laft  page,  he  changed  colour,  fell  01T 
his  chair,  and  began  fcreaming  terribly  and  beat- 
ing himfelf  againlt  the  ground.  The  neigh- 
bours were  alarmed  and  flocked  together  ro  the 
houfe.  Between  one  and  two  I came  in,  and 
found  him  on-the  floor,  the  room  being  full  of 
people,  whom  his  wife  would  have  kept  with- 
out; but  he  cried  aloud,  “ No;  let  them  all 
come,  let  all  the  world  fee  the  juft  judgment  of 
God.’’  I wo  or  three  men  were  holding  him  as 
well  as  they  could.  He  immediately  fixed  his 

eyes 


[ 75  ] 


eyes  upon  me,  and  ftretching  out  his  hand,  cried, 
Ay,  this  is  he,  who  I faid  was  a deceiver  of 
“ the  people.  But  God  has  overtaken  me.  I 
“ faid  it  was  all  a delufion.  But  this  is  no  de- 
“ lufion.”  He  then  roared  out,  “ O thou  devil  ! 
Thou  curfed  devil!  Yea,  thou  legion  of  devils! 
Thou  canft  not  flay.  Chrift  will  call  thee  out. 

I know  his  work  is  begun.  Tear  me  to  pieces, 
if  thou  wilt ; but  thou  canft  not  hurt  me.”  He 
then  beat  hiinfelf  agaitill  the  ground  again  ; his 
bread  heaving  at  the  fame  time,  as  in  the  pangs 
of  death,  and  great  drops  of  fweat  trickling  down 
his  face.  W e all  betook  ourfelves  to  prayer. 
His  pangs  ceafed,  and  both  his  body  and  foul 
were  fet  at  liberty. 

Thence  Iwent  to  Baptift-Mills,  and  declared 
him  whom  God  hath  exalted  to  be  a prince  and  a 
Saviour,  to  give  repentance  unto  If  ael  and  rcmijjion 

of  fins.  Returning  to  J n H — • — , we  found 

his  voice  was  loft,  and  his  body  weak  as  that  of 
an  infant.  But  his  foul  was  in  peace,  full  of  love, 
and  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God. 

The  women  of  our  fociety  met  at  feven. 
During  our  prayer,  one  of  them  ieil  into  a vio- 
lent agony  ; but  foon  after  began  to  cry  out  with 
confidence,  My  Lord  and  my  God  ! Sat.  5.  I 
preached  at  the  defire  of  an  unknown  cori  efpon- 
dent,  on  thofe  excellent  words,  (if well  underftood 
as  recommending  faith,  refignation,  patience, 
meeknefs)  Be  fill,  and  know  that  I am  God. 

Sund.  6.  I preached  in  the  morning,  to  5 or 
D 2 foot) 


[ 76  ] 


6000  people,  on  Except  ye  be  converted  and  become 
as  little  children , ye  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  (The  fame  words  on  which  I preach- 
ed the  next  day,  and  on  Wednef.  at  Baptift- 
Mills.)  On  Hannam-Mount  I preached  to  about 
three  thoufand,  on  The  Jcripture  hath  concluded 
all  under  fin  : at  two  at  Clifton  church,  on  Chrift: 
our  wifdom,  righteoufnefs , fanElification  and  re- 
demption-, and  about  five,  at  Rofe- Green  on  the 
promife  by  faith  of  Jefus  Chrifl,  which  is  given  to 
them  that  believe. 

Mond.  7.  I was  preparing  tofet  out  for  Pens- 
ford,  having  now  had  leave  to  preach  in  the 
church,  when  I received  the  following  note  : 

Sir,  Our  mimfier,  having  been  informed,  you  are 
befide  your f elf , does  not  care  you  fhould  preach  in 

any  of  his  churches. 1 went  however,  and  on 

Prieft-Down,  about  half  a mile  from  Pensford, 
preached  Chrift  our  wifdom , righteoufnefs,  falsi- 
fication and  redemption. 

Tuef.  8.  I went  to  Bath,  but  was  not  fuffered 
to  be  in  the  meadow  where  I was  before  ; which 
occafioned  the  offer  of  a much  more  convenient 
place  ; where  I preached  Chrift.  to  about  a thou- 
fand fouls. 

Wed.  9.  We  took  poffeflion  of  a piece  of 
ground,  near  St.  James’s  church-yard,  in  the 
Horfe  Fair,  where  it  was  defigned  to  build  a 
room,  large  enough  to  contain  both  the  focieties 
ofNicholas  and  Baldwin  ftreet,  and  fuch  of  their 
acquaintance  as  might  defire  to  be  prefent  with 

them, 


77  ] 


them,  at  fuch  time  as  the  fcripture  was  expound- 
ed. And  on  Sat.  12,  the  firft  ftone  was  laid,  with 
the  voice  of  praife  and  thankfgiving. 

I had  not  at  firft  the  leaft  apprehenfion  or  de- 
fign,  of  being  perfonally  engaged,  either  in  the 
expence  of  this  work,  or  in  the  direftion  of  it  : 
having  appointed  eleven  feoffees,  on  whom  I 
fuppofed  thefe  burthens  would  fall  of  courfe. 
But  I quickly  found  my  miftake  ; firft  with  re- 
gard to  the  expence  : for  the  whole  undertaking 
mull  have  flood  ftill,  had  not  I immediately  taken 
upon  myfelf  the  payment  of  all  the  workmen  ; 
fo  that  before  I knew  where  I was,  I had  con- 
tracted a debt  of  more  than  an  hundred  and  fifty 
pounds.  And  this  I was  to  difcharge  how  I 
could;  the  fubfcriptions  of  both  focieties  not 
amounting  to  one  quarter  of  the  fum,  And  as  to 
the  direftion  of  the  work,  I prefently  received 
letters  from  my  friends  in  London,  Mr.  White- 
field  in  particular,  backed  with  a meffage  by  one 
juft  come  from  thence,  that  neither  he  nor  they 
would  have  any  thing  to  do  with  the  building, 
neither  contribute  any  thing  towards  it,  unlefs  I 
would  inftanhy  difcharge  all  feoffees,  and  do 
every  thing  in  my  own  name.  Many  reafons 
they  gave  for  this  ; but  one  was  enough,  viz. 

“ That  fuch  feoffees  always  would  have  it  in  their 
“power,  to  controul  me,  and  if  I preached  not 
“ as  they  liked,  to  turn  me  out  of  the  room  I 
“ built.”  I accordingly  yielded  to  their  advice, 
and  calling  all  the  feoffees  together,  cancelled 
D 3 fno 


[ 78  ] 

no  man  oppofingj  the  inftrument  made  before, 
and  took  the  whole  management  into  my  own 
hands.  Money,  it  is  true,  I had  not,  nor  any 
human  profpefi;  or  probability  of  procuring  it. 
But  I knew  the  earth  is  the  Lord’s,  and  the ful- 
vejs  thereof,  and  in  his  name  fet  out,  nothing 
doubting. 

In  the  evening,  while  I was  declaring,  that 
Jefus  Chrilf  had  given  himfelf  a ranfomfor  all, 
three  fperfons  almoft  at  once,  funk  down  as 
dead,  having  all  their  fins  fet  in  array  before 
them.  But  in  a Ihort  time  they  were  raifed 
up,  and  knew  that  the  Lamb  of  God  who  takclh 
auay  the fn  of  the  world,  had  taken  away  their 
fins. 

Sund.  13.  I began  expounding  in  the  morn- 
ing, the  xiiith  chapter  of  the  fir fl  epiftle  to  the 
Corinthians.  At  Hannam  I farther  explained, 
the  pi  omile  given  by  faith  ; as  I did  alfo  at  Rofe- 
green.  At  Clilton  it  pleafed  God  to  affift  me 
greatly  in  fpeaking  on  thofe  words,  He  that  drink- 
eth  of  this  water  fiail  t hit  ft  again  : but  whofo 
drinleth  of  the  water  that  I fall  give  him fall  ne- 
ver third : but  the  water  which  1 fall  give  him 
fall  be  in  him  a well  of  water , fpringing  up  into 
everlafing  life. 

My  ordinary'  employment  (in  public)  was  now 
as  follows  : every  morning  I read  prayers  and 
preached  at  Newgate.  Every'  evening  I ex- 
pounded a portion  of  fcripture,  at  one,  or  more 
of  the  focieties.  On  Monday  in  the  afternoon  I 

preached 


[ 79  ] 

preached  abroad  near  Briftol  ; on  Tuefday  at 
Bath  and  Two  Mile-hill  alternately.  OnWed- 
nefday  at  Baptift-mills.  Every  other  Thurfdav 
near  Pensford.  Every  other  Friday  in  another 
part  of  Kingfwood.  On  Saturday  in  the  after- 
noon and  Sunday  morning,  in  the  Bowling- 
green,  (which  lies  near  the  middle  of  the  city.) 
On  Sunday  at  eleven  near  Hannam-mount. 
At  two  at  Clifton,  and  at  five  on  Rofe»green. 
And  hitherto,  as  my  day  is,  Jo  my  frength  hath 
been. 

Tuef.  15.  As  I was  expounding  in  the  Back- 
lane,  on  the  righteoufriefs  of  the  Scribes  and 
Pharifees,  many  who  had  before  been  righteous 
in  their  own  eyes,  abhorred  themfelvesas  in  dull 
and  allies.  But  two,  who  feemed  to  be  more 
deeply  convinced  than  the  reft,  did  not  long 
forrow  as  men  without  hope  ; but  found  in  that 
hour,  that  they  had  an  advocate  with  the  Father , 
Jefus  Chriji  the  righteous  : as  did  three  others  in 
Glocefter-lane  the  evening;  before,  and  three  at 
Baldwin-ftreet  this  evening.  About  ten,  two 
who  after  feeing  a great  light,  had  again  reafoned 
themfelves  into  darknefs,  came  to  11s,  heavy  laden. 
We-cried  to  God,  and  they  were  again filled  with 
peace  and  joy  in  believing. 

Wednef.  16.  While  I was  declaring  at  Bap- 
tift-mills,  He  was  wounded  for  our  tranjgrefions , 
a middle-aged  man  began  violently  beating  his 
breaft,  and  crying  to  him  by  whofe Jlnpes  he  was 
healed.  During  our  prayer,  God  put  a new  fong 
D 4 in 


t s°  ] 


in  his  mouth.  Some  mocked  and  others  owned 
the  hand  of  God.  Particularly  a woman  of  Bap- 
till-mills,  who  was  now  convinced  of  her  own 
want  of  an  advocate  with  God,  and  went  home 
lull  of  anguilh,  but  was  in  a few  hours  filled  with 
joy,  knowing  he  had  blotted  out  all  her  tranfgref 
fiorts 

Thefcripture  which  came  in  turn  at  Newgate 
to  day,  was  the  viith  of  St.  John.  The  words 
which  I chieflv  infilled  on  as  applicable  to 
every  miniller  of  Chrift,  who  in  any  wife  follows 
the  Iteps  of  his  Mailer,  were  thefe,  The  world  can- 
not hate  you  ; but  me  it  hateth,  becaufe  I ieflify  of 
it,  that  its  deeds  are  evil.  There  was  a murmuring 
therefore  concerning  him  among  the  multitude : for 
fome  faid,  he  is  a good  man  ; others  /aid,  Nay , but 
he  deceiveth  the  people.  After  fermon  I was 
informed  the  Iheriffs  had  ordered,  “ I fhotild 
preach  here  for  the  future,  but  once  a week.'' 
Yea,  and  this  is  once  too  often , ij  he  deceiveth  the 
people  : but  if  otherwife,  why  not  once  a day  ? 

Satur.  19.  At  Weaver’s-hall,  a woman  firft, 
and  then  a boy  (about  fourteen  years  of  age) 
was  overwhelmed  with  fin,  and  forrow,  and  fear. 
But  we  cried  to  God,  and  their  fouls  were  deli- 
vered. 

Sund.  20.  Seeing  many  of  the  rich  at  Clifton 
church,  my  heart  was  much  pained  for  them, 
and  I was  earneltly  defirous  that  fome  even  of 

them 


C 8*  3 


them  might  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
But  full  as  I was,  I knew  not  where  to  begin, 
in  warning  them  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come, 
till  my  teflament  opened  on  thofe  words,  I came 
not  to  call  the  righteous , but  /inner s to  repentance  ; 
in  applying  which,  my  foul  was  foinlarged,  that 
methought  I could  have  cried  out,  (in  another 
fenfe  than  poor,  vain  Archimedes)  “ Give  me 
where  to  Hand,  and  I will  {hake  the  earth.”  God’s 
fending  forth  lightning  with  the  rain  did  not 
hinder  about  fifteen  hundred,  from  flaying  at 
Rofe-green.  Our  feripture  was,  It  is  the  glorious 
God  that  maheth  the  thunder.  The  voice  of  the 
Lord  is  mighty  in  operation,  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is 
a glorious  voice.  In  the  evening,  he  fpoke  to 
three  whofe  fouls  were  all  {form  and  temp  eft, 
and  immediately  there  was  a great  calm. 

During  this  whole  time,  I was  almoft  contin- 
ually afked,  either  by  thofe  who  purpofely  came 
to  Briftol,  to  enquire  concerning  this  flrange 
work,  or  by  my  old  or  new  correfpondents  How 
can  thefe  things  be  ? And  innumerable  cautions 
were  given  me  (generally  grounded  on  grofs 
mifreprefentations  of  things)  “ Not  to  regard 
vifions  or  dream  ; or  to  fancy  people  had  re- 
miflion  of  fins,  becaufe  of  their  cries,  or  tears,, 
or  bare  outward  profeflions.”  To  one  who 
had  many  times  wrote  to  me  on  this  head,  the 
fum  of  my  anfwerwas  as  follows  t 


[ 82  ] 

* “ The  queftion  between  us  turns  chiefly,  if 
not  wholly  on  matter  of  fafr.  You  denv,  that 
God  does  now  work  thefe  effects  : at  lead:,  that  he 
works  them  in  this  manner.  I affirm  both  ; 
becaufe  I have  heard  thefe  things  with  my  own 
ears,  and  have  feen  them  with  my  eyes.  I have 
feen  (as  far  as  a thing  of  this  kind  can  be  feen) 
very  many  perfons  changed  in  a moment,  from 
the  fpirit  of  fear,  horror,  defpair,  to  the  fpiritof 
^ove»  joy  and  peace  ; and  from  fintul  defire  till 
then  reigning  over  them,  to  a pure  defire  of  do- 
ing the  will  of  God.  Thefe  are  matters  of  faff, 
whereof  I have  been,  and  almofl  daily  am,  an 
eye  or  ear-witnefs.  What  I have  to  fay,  touch- 
tog  vifions  or  dreams  is  this:  I know  feveral 
perfons  in  whom  this  great  change  was  wrought, 
m a dream,  or  during  a ftrong  reprefentation  to 
the  eye  of  their  mind,  of  Chri  ft  either  on  the  crofs 
01  m glory.  This  is  the  faft  ; let  any  judge  of  it 
as  they  pleafe.  And  that  fuch  a change  was  then 
wrought,  appears  (not  from  their  ffiedding  tears 
only  or  falling  into  fits,  or  crying  out  r thefe  are 
not  the  fruits,  as  you  feem  to  fuppofe,  whereby 
1 judge,  but)  from  the  whole  tenor  of  their  life, 
till  then  many  ways  wicked  ; from  that  time,  holy 
juft  and  good. 

* I will  (hew  you  him  that  was  a lion  till  then 
and  is  now  a lamb  : him  that  was  a drunkard, 
and  is  now  exemplarily  fober  : the  whoremonger 

that 


[ 83  ] 

that  was,  who  now  abhors  the  very  garment  fpot- 
ted  by  the  flefh.  Thefe  are  my  living  arguments 
for  what  I alfert,  viz.  That  God  does  now,  as  afore- 
time, give  remijjionof  fins  and  the  gift  of  the  holy 
Ghojl,  even  to  us  and  to  our  children  : yea  and  that 
always  fuddenly,  as  far  as  1 have  known,  and  of- 
ten in  dreams  or  in  the  vifons  of  God.  If  it  be 
not  fo,  I am  found  a falfe  witnefs  before]  God. 
For  thefe  things  I do,  and  by  his  grace  will, 
tellify.” 

* Perhaps  it  might  be,  becaufe  the  hardnefs  of 
our  hearts,  unready  to  receive  any  thing,  unlefs 
we  fee  it  with  our  eyes  and  hear  it  with  our  ears, 
that  God  in  tender  condefcenfion  to  our  weak- 
nefs,  fuffered  fo  many  outward  figns  at  the  very 
time  when  he  wrought  this  inward  change,  to  be 
continually  feen  and  heard  among  us.  But  al- 
though they  fa  ye  figns  and  wonder  s (forfo  I mull 
term  them)  yet  many  would  not  believe.  They 
could  not  indeed  deny  the  faffs  ; but  they  could 
explain  them  away.  Some  faid,  “ Thefe  were 
“ purely  natural  effefls  : the  people  fainted  away 
“ only  becaufe  of  the  heat  and  clofenefs  of  the 
“ rooms.”'  And  others  were  fure,  “ It  was  all  a 
“ cheat  : they  might  help  it  if  they  would.  Elfe 
“why  were  thefe  things  only  in  their  private 
“ focieties  ? Why  were  they  not  done  in  the 
“ face  of  the  fun?”  To  day,  Monday  21,  our 
Lord  anfwered  for  himfelf.  For  while  I was  in- 
forcing thefe  words,  Be  fill  and  know  that  I am 
God,  he  began  to  make  bare  his  arm,  not  in  a 
D 6 clofe 


C 84  ] 

clofe  room,  neither  in  private,  but  in  the  open, 
air,  and  before  more  than  two  thoufand  wit- 
neffes.  One,  and  another,  and  another  was 
iiruck  to  the  earth  ; exceedingly  trembling  at 
the  prefence  of  his  power.  Others  cried,  with 
a loud  and  bitter  cry,  What  mujl  we  do  to  be 
faved  ? And  in  lefs  than  an  hour,  feven 
perfons,  wholly  unknown  to  me  till  that  time, 
were  rejoicing,  and  finging,  and  with  all  their 
might  giving  thanks  to  the  God  of  their  falva- 
tion. 

In  the  evening  I was  interrupted  at  Nicholas- 
flreet,  almoft  as  foon  as  I had  begun  to  fpeak, 
by  the  cries  of  one  who  was  pricked  at  the  heart. 
and  flrongly  groaned  for  pardon  and  peace.  V et 
I went  on  to  declare  what  God  had  already  done, 
in  proof  of  that  important  truth.  That  he  is  not 
willing  any  jhould perijh , but  that  all  Jhould  come 
to  repentance.  Another  perfon  dropped  down, 
clofe  to  one  who  was  aflrong  afferter  of  the  con- 
trary do£lrine.  * While  he  flood  aftonifhed  at 
the  fight,  a little  boy  near  him  was  feized  in  the 
fame  manner.  A young  man  who  flood  up  be- 
hind, fixed  his  eyes  on  him,  and  funk  down  him- 
felf  as  one  dead  : but  foon  began  to  roar  out  and 
beat  himfelf  againfl  the  ground,  fo  that  fix  men 
could  fcarcely  hold  him.  His  name  was  Thomas 

Maxfield.  Except  J n H n,  I never 

faw  one  fo  torne  of  the  evil  one.  Mean  while 
many  others  began  to  cry  out  to  the  Saviour  of 
all , that  he  would  come  and  help  them,  info- 

much 


[ «5  1 

much  that  all  the  houfe,  (and  indeed  all  the 
ftreet  for  fome  fpace)  was  in  an  uproar.  But  we 
continued  in  prayer;  and  before  ten,  the  greater 
part  found  reft  to  their  fouls. 

I was  called  from  fupper  to  one  who  feeling  in 
herfelffuch  a conviftion  as  fhe  never  had  known 
before,  had  run  out  of  the  fociety  in  all  hafte, 
that Jhe  might  not  expoji  herjelf.  But  the  hand  of 
God  followed  her  ftill,  fo  that  after  going  a few 
fteps,  fhe  was  forced  to  be  carried  home, 
and  when  Ihe  was  there,  grew  worfe  and 
worfe.  She  was  in  a violent  agony  when  we 
came.  We  called  upon  God,  and  her  foul  found 
reft. 

* About  twelve  1 was  greatly  importuned, 
to  go  and  vifit  one  perfon  more.  She  had 
only  one  ftruggle  after  I came,  and  was  then 
filled  with  peace  and  joy.  I think  twenty-nine, 
in  all,  had  their  heavinefs  turned  into  joy,  this 
day. 

Tuef.  22.  I preached  to  about  a thoufand  at 
Bath.  There  were  feveral  fine,  gay  things  among 
them,  to  whom  efpecially  I called,  Awake  thou  that 
JleepeJl,  and  arife  from  the  dead,  and  Chrijl Jhall 
give  thee  light  l 

Sat.  26.  One  came  to  us  in  deep  defpair;  but 
after  an  hour  fpent  in  prayer,  went  away  in. 
peace.  The  next  day,  having  obferved  in  many 
a zeal  which  did  not  fuit  with  the  fweetnefs  and 
gentlenefs  of  love,  I preached  at  Rofe-green  on 
thofe  words,  (to  the  largeft  congregation  I ever 

in  ‘ 


85  1 


had  there,  I believe  upwards  of  ten  thoufand 
fouls)  Ye  know  not  wkai  manner  of  [pint  ye  are  op. 
For  the  Son  o[  Man  is  not  come  to  dejlroy  mens 
lives , but  to  Jave  them . At  the  fociety  in  the 
evening,  eleven  were  deeply  convinced  of  fin, 
and  foon  after  comforted. 

Mond.  28.  I began  preaching  at  Weaver  s- 
hall,  at  eleven  in  the  forenoon  ; where  two 
perfons  were  enabled  to  ctv  out  in  faith, 
My  Lord  and  my  God!  As  were  feven,  during 
the  fermon  in  the  afternoon,  before  feveral 
thoufand  witnefies;  and  ten  in  the  evening 
at  Baldwin-ftreet ; of  whom  two  were  chil- 
dren. 

Tuef.  29.  I was  unknowingly  engaged  in 
converfation,  with  a famous  Infidel,  a con- 
firmer of  the  unfaithful  in  thefe  parts.  He  ap- 
peared a little  furprized,  and  faid,  He  would 
pray  to  God  to  fiew  him  the  true  way  of  worf  tip- 
ping him. 

On  afcenfion-day  in  the  morning,  fome  of  us 
went  to  King’s-Wefton-Hill,  four  or  five  miles 
from  Briftol.  Two  gentlemen  going  by,  fent  up 
to  us  in  fport,  many  perfons  from  the  neigh- 
bouring villages : to  whom  therefore  I took  oc- 
cafion  to  explain  thofe  words,  Thou  art  afcended 
up  on  high , thou  hajl  led  captivity  captive-, 
and  received  gifts  for  men , yea  even  for  the  re- 
bellious, that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among 
them. 

Sund.  June  3.  In  the  morning  to  about  fix 
, thoufand 


[ §7  1 

thoufand  perfons,  in  concluding  the  xiiith- chap- 
iter of  the  firft  epiftle  to  the  Corinthians,  I de- 
fcribed  a truly  charitable  man.  At  Hannam- 
mount  I enforced  thofe  words,  That  every  mouth 
may  bejlopped,  and  all  the  world  become  guilty  be- 
fore God : and  again  in  the  afternoon  at  Rofe- 
green,  to  I believe  eight  or  nine  thoufand.  In 
the  evening  not  being  permitted  to  meet  in 
Baldwin-ftreet,  we  met  in  the  fheli  of  our  new 
fociety-room.  The  fcripture  which  came  in 
courfe  to  be  explained,  was,  Marvel  not,  if  the 
world  hate  you.  We  fung 

Arm  of  the  Lord,  awake,  awake, 

Thine  own  immortal  flrength  put  on  : 

And  God,  even  our  own  God,  gave  us  his 
bUffing. 

Mond.  4.  Many  came  to  me  andearneftly  ad* 
vifed  me,  “ Not  to  preach  abroad  in  the  after- 
“ noon,  becaufe  there  was  a combination  of  fe- 
“ veral  perfons,  who  threatened  terrible  things.” 
This  report  being  fpread  abroad  brought  many 
thither,  of  the  better  fort  of  people  (fo  called)  and 
added,  I believe,  more  than  a thoufand  to  the 
ordinary  congregation.  The  fcripture  to  which, 
not  my  choice,  but  . the  providence  of  God  di* 
re£ted  me  was,  Fear  notthou,for  I am  with  thee  : 
be  not  difmayed,for  lam  thy  God.  I will Jlrengthen 
thee,  yea  I will  help  thee,  yea  I will  uphold  thee 

with 


C 88  ] 

with  the  right  hand  of  my  right eoufnefs.  The 
power  of  God  came  with  his  word  : fo  that 
none  fcoffed,  or  interrupted,  or  opened  his 
mouth. 

Tuef.  5.  There  was  great  expectation  3t  Bath, 
of  what  a noted  man  was  to  do  to  me  there  : 
and  I was  much  intreated,  “ not  to  preach  ; be- 
caufe  no  one  knew  what  might  happen.”  By 
this  report  I alfo  gained  a much  larger  audience, 
among  whom  were  many  of  the  rich  and  great. 
I told  them  plainly,  The  Jcripture  had  concluded 
them  all  under  fin,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor, 
one  with  another.  Many  of  them  feemed  not 
to  be  a little  furprized,  and  were  finking  a-pace 
into  ferioufnefs,  when  their  champion  appeared, 
and  coming  clofeto  me,  afked,  “ By  what  autho- 
rity I did  thefe  things  ?”  I replied,  By  the  au- 
thority of  Jefus  Chrilf,  conveyed  to  me  by  the 
(now)  Archbifhop  of  Canterbury,  when  he  laid 
his  bands  upon  me  and  faid,  “ Take  thou  autho- 
rity to  preach  the  gofpel.”  He  faid,  “ This  is 
contrary  to  a ft  of  parliament.  This  is  a conven- 
ticle.” I anfwered,  “ Sir,  the  conventicles 
mentioned  in  that  aft  (as  the  preamble  fhews)  are 
Jeditious  meetings.  But  this  is  not  fuch.  Here 
is  no  fhadow  of  fedition.  Therefore  it  is  not 
contrary  to  that  aft.”  He  replied,  “ I fay  it  is. 
And  befide,  your  preaching  frightens  people  out 
of  their  wits.”  Sir,  did  you  ever  hear  me  preach  ? 
No.  How  then  can  you  judge  0}  what  you  never 
heard?  Sir,  by  common  report.  Common  re- 
port 


l 


[ 89  ] 

port  is  not  enough.  Give  me  leave,  Sir,  to  ajk,  is  not 
your  name  Nafh  ? My  name  is  Nafh.  Sir,  I dare 
not  judge  of  you  by  common  report . I think  it  not 
enough  to  judge  by.  Here  he  paufed  a-while, 
and  having  recovered  himfelf,  faid,  “ I defire  to 
know,  what  this  people  comes  here  for  ?”  On 
which'  one  replied,  “ Sir,  leave  him  to  me. 
Let  an  old  woman  anfwer  him.”  “ You,  Mr. 
Nafh,  take  care  of  your  body.  We  take  care 
of  our  fouls,  and  for  the  food  of  our  fouls  we 
come  here.”  He  replied  not  a word,  but  walked 
away. 

As  I returned  the  ftreet  was  full  of  people,  hur- 
rying to  and  fro,  and  fpeaking  great  words.  But 
when  any  of  them  afked,  “ Which  is  he  ?”  and  I 
replied,  “ I am  he,”  they  were  immediately  fi- 
lent.  Several  ladies  following  me  into  Mr. 
Merchant’s  houfe,  the  fervant  told  me,  “ There 
were  fome  wanted  to  fpeak  to  me.”  I went  to 
them  and  faid,  “ I believe,  ladies,  the  maid  mif- 
took  : you  only  wanted  to  look  at  me.”  I added, 
“ I do  not  expe£l  that  the  rich  and  great  Ihould 
want  either  to  fpeak  with  me,  or  to  hear  me  ; for 
I fpeak  the  plain  truth;  a thing  you  hear  little 
of,  and  do  not  defire  to  hear.”  A few  more 
words  pall;  between  us,  and  I retired. 

Tuef.  7.  I preached  at  Prieft-Down,  on  What 
mujl  we  do  to  be  faved?  In  the  mid  ft  of  the 
prayer  after  fermon,  two  men,  (hired,  as  we  af- 
terwards unde.’ flood,  for  that  purpofe)  began  fling- 
ing a ballad.  After  a few  mild  words  (for  I flaw 

fome 


C 9°  ] 

fome  that  were  angry)  ufed  without  effeft,  we 
all  began  finging  a pfalm,  which  put  them  utter- 
ly to  filence.  We  then  poured  out  our  fouls  in 
prayer  for  them,  and  they  appeared  altogether 
confounded.  O may  this  be  a day  much  to  be 
remembered  by  them,  for  the  loving-kindnefs  of 
the  Lord  1 

Mond.  ii.  I received  a prefling  letter  from 
London  (as  I had  feveral  others  belore)  to  come 
thither  as  foon  as  pofTible  ; “ Our  brethren  in 
Fetter-lane  being  in  great  confufion,  for  want  ot 
mv  prefence  and  advice.”  I therefore  preach- 
ed in  the  afternoon  on  thefe  words,  I take  you  to 
record  this  day,  that  I am  pure  from  the  blood  of 
all  men  ; for  I have  not  Jhunned  to  declare  unto  you 
all  the  counftl  of  God.  After  fermon,  I commend- 
ed them  to  the  grace  of  God,  in  whom  they  had 
believed.  Surely  God  hath  yet  a work  to  do  in 
this  place.  I have  not  found  fuch  love,  no  not 
in  England;  nor  fo  childlike,  artlefs.  teachable 
a temper,  as  he  hath  given  to  this  people. 

Yet  during  this  whole  time  I had  many 
thoughts,  concerning  the  unufual  manner  of  my 
minifiring  among  them.  But  after  frequently 
laying  it  before  the  Lord,  and  calmly  weighing 
whatever  objeftions  I heard  againft  it,  I could 
not  but  adhere  to  what  I had  fome  time  lince 
wrote  to  a friend,  who  had  ireelv  fpoken  his  fen- 
tunents  concerning  it.  An  extract  of  that  letter  I 
here  fubjoin  ; that  the  matter  may  be  placed  in 
a clear  light. 


Dear. 


[ 91  ] 


Dear  Sir, 

HE  bell  return  I can  make  for  the  kind  free- 


dom you  ufe,  is  to  ufe  the  fame  to  you. 
O may  the  God  whom  we  ferve  fanftifv  it  to  us 
both,  and  teach  us  the  whole  truth  as  it  is  in 


You  fay,  “You  cannot  reconcile  fome  parts 
of  my  behaviour  with  the  character  I have  long 
fupported.”  No,  nor  ever  will.  Therefore  I 
have  difclaimed  that  character  on  every  poffible 
occafion.  I told  all  in  our  fhip,  all  at  Savannah, 
all  at  Frederica,  and  that  over  and  over,  in  ex- 
prefs  terms,  “ I am  not  a Chrillian ; I only  fol- 
low after,  if  haply  I may  attain  it.”  When  they 
urged  my  works  and  felf-denial,  I anfwered  fhort, 
Though  I give  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor , and 
my  body  to  be  burned , I am  nothing . For  I have 
not  charity.  I do  not  love  God  with  all  my  heart. 
If  they  added,  “ Nav,  but  you  could  not  preach 
“ as  you  do,  if  you  was  not  a Chrillian  I again 
confronted  them  with  St.  Paul,  Though  / [peak 
with  the  tongue  of  men  and  angels,  and  have  not 
charity,  I am  nothing.  Moll  earnefllv  therefore, 
both  in  public  and  private  did  I inculcate  this, 
“ Be  not  ye  fhaken  however  I may  fall : for 
“ the  foundation  flandeth  fure.” 

If  you  afk,  “ On  what  principle  then  I alli- 
ed ?”  It  was  this,  “ A defire  to  be  a Chrillian, 
“ and  a conviction  that  whatever  I judge  condu- 
cive thereto,  that  I am  bound  to  do ; where- 
“ ever  I judge  I can  bell  anfwer  this  end,  thither 


Jefus, 


[ 9^  ] 


“ it  is  my  duty  to  go.”  On  this  principle  I fet 
out  for  America  ; on  this,  I vifited  the  Moravian 
church  ; and  on  the  fame,  am  I ready  now  (God 
being  my  helper)  to  go  to  Abyffina  or  China,  or 
whitherfoever  it  fhall  pleafe  God  by  this  convic- 
tion to  call  me. 

As  to  your  advice,  “ That  I ffiould  fettle  in  col- 
lege,” I have  no  bufinefs  there,  having  now  no 
office,  and  no  pupils.  And  whether  the  other 
branch  of  your  propofal  be  expedient  for  me,  viz. 
“ To  accept  of  a cure  of  fouls,”  it  will  be  time 
enough  to  confider,  when  one  is  offered  to  me. 

But  in  the  mean  time,  you  think  “ I ought  to 
“ fit  ftill  ; becaufe  otherwife  I ffiould  invade 
“ another’s  office,  if  I interfered  with  other  peo- 
“ pie’s  bufinefs,  and  intermeddled  with  fouls 
“ that  did  not  belong  to  me.”  You  accordingly 
afk,  “ How  is  it  that  I affemble  Chriftians  who 
“ are  none  of  my  charge,  to  fing  pfalms,  and 
“ pray,  and  hear  the  fcriptures  expounded  : and 
“ think  it  hard  to  juftify  doing  this  in  other  men’s 
“ parifhes.  upon  Catholic  principles  ? 

Permit  me  to  fpeak  plainly.  If  by  Catholic 
principles,  you  mean  any  other  than  Jpiritual> 
they  weigh  nothing  with  me:  I allow  no  other 
rule,  whether  of  faith  or  practice  than  the  holy 
fcriptures.  But  on  fcriptural  principles,  I do 
not  think  it  hard,  to  juftify  whatever  I do.  God, 
in  fcripture  commands  me,  according  to  my 
power,  toinftrufl  the  ignorant,  reform  the  wick- 
ed, confirm  the  virtuous.  Man  forbids  me  to 

do 


C 93  ] 


do  this,  in  another’s  parifh  ; that  is,  in  effeft,  not 
to  do  it  at  all ; feeing  I have  now  no  parifh  of 
my  own,  nor  probably  ever  fhall.  Whom  then 
fhall  I hear  ? God  or  man  ? If  it  be  jujl  to  obey 
man  rather  than  God , judge  you.  A difpenfadon 
of  the  gofpel  is  committed  to  me,  and  woe  is  me  if 
I preach  not  the  gofpel.  But  where  fhall  I preach 
it  upon  the  principles  you  mention  P Why,  not 
in  Europe,  Afia,  Africa,  or  America : not  in 
any  of  the  Chriftian  parts,  at  lead,  of  the  habi- 
table earth.  For  all  thefe  are,  after  a fort,  di- 
vided into  parifhes.  If  it  be  faid,  “ Go  back 
“ then  to  the  Heathens  from  whence  you  came.” 
Nay,  but  neither  could  I now,  (on  your  princi- 
ples) preach  to  them.  For  all  the  Heathens  in 
Georgia  belong  to  the  parilh  either  of  Savannah 
or  Frederica. 

Suffer  me  now,  to  tell  you  my  principles  in  this 
matter.  I look  upon  all  the  world  as  my  parifi-, 
thus  far  I mean,  that  in  whatever  part  ofit  I am, 

I judge  it  meet,  right  and  my  bounden  duty,  To 
declare  unto  all  that  are  willing  to  hear,  the  glad 
tidings  of  falvation.  This  is  the  work  which  I 
know  God  has  called  me  to.  And  fure  I am, 
that  his  bleffing  attends  it.  Great  encouragement 
have  I therefore  to  be  faithful,  in  fulfilling  the 
work  he  hath  given  me  to  do.  His  fervant  I am, 
and  as  fuch  am  employed  according  to  the  plain 
dire&ion  of  his  word,  As  I have  opportunity, 
doing  good  to  all  men.  And  his  providence  clearly 

concurs 


[ 94  ] 

concurs  with  his  word  ; which  has  difengaged 
me  from  all  things  elfe,  that  I might  fingly  attend 
on  this  very  thing,  and  go  about  doing  good. 

If  you  alk,  “ How  can  this  be  ? How  can 
one  do  good,  of  whom  men  fay  all  manner  of 
evil?'  I will  put  you  in  mind,  (though  you  once 
knew  this,  yea,  and  much  eflablifhed  me  in  that 
great  truth)  the  more  evil  men  fay  of  me  for  my 
Lord’s  fake,  the  more  good  will  he  do  by  me. 
That  it  is  for  his  fo.ke , I know  and  he  knoweth, 
and  the  event  agreeth  thereto ; for  he  mightily 
confirms  the  words  I fpeak,  by  the  Holy  Ghoft 
given  unto  tliofe  that  hear  them.  O my  friend, 
my  heart  is  moved  toward  you.  I fear  you  have 
herein  made  fhipwreck  of  the  faith.  I fear,  Sa- 
tan transformed  into  an  angel  of  light,  hath  af- 
faulted  you,  and  prevailed  alfo.  I fear,  that  ofF- 
fpring  of  hell,  zuorldy  or  myftic  prudence,  has 
drawn  you  away  from  the  fimplicity  ofthe  gofpel. 
H ow  elfe  could  you  ever  conceive,  that  the  be- 
ing reviled  and  hated  of  all  men,  fhould  make  us 
lefs  fit  for  our  Mailer’s  fervice  r How'  elfe  could 
you  ever  think,  of  faving  yourjelf  and  them  that 
hear  you,  without  being  the  filth  and  of  scouring 
of  the  zi'orld?  To  this  hour,  is  this  fciipture 
true.  And  I therein  rejoice,  yea  and  will  rejoice. 
Blelfed  be  God,  I enjoy  the  reproach  of  C brill! 
O may  you  alfo  be  vile,  exceeding  vile  for  his 
fake  ! God  forbid  that  you  fhould  ever  he  other 
than  generally  fcandalous.  I had  almolt  faid  uni - 
verfally.  If  any  man  tell  you,  there  is  a new 

1 way 


[ 95  ] 

way  of  following  Chrift,  he  is  a liar  and  the  truth 
is  not  in  him. 

I am,  &c. 

Wed.  13.  In  the  morning  I came  to  London, 
and  after  receiving  the  holy  communion  at  Ifling- 
ton,  I had  once  more  an  opportunity  of  feeing 
my  mother,  whom  I had  not  feen  fince  my  return 
from  Germany. 

I cannot  but  mention  an  odd  circumftance 
here.  I had  read  her  a paper  in  June  lad;  year, 
containing  a fhort  account  of  what  had  palled  in 
my  own  foul,  till  within  a lew  days  of  that  time. 
She  greatly  approved  of  it  and  faid  “ She  heartily 
bleded  God,  who  had  brought  me  to  fo  juft  a 
way  of  thinking.”  While  I was  in  Germany,  a 
copy  of  that  paper  was  fent  (without  my  know- 
ledge) to  one  of  my  relations.  He  fent  an  ac- 
count of  it  to  my  mother;  whom  I now  found 
under  ftrange  fears  concerning  me,  being  con- 
vinced by  “ an  account  taken  from  one  of  my  ozvn 
papers,  that  I had  greatly  erred  from  the  faith.” 

I could  not  conceive,  what  paper  that  (hould  be; 
but  on  enquiry  found,  it  was  the  fame  I had  read 
her  myfelf.— How  hard  is  it  to  forma  true  judg- 
ment of  anv  perfon  or  thing,  from  the  account 
of  a prejudiced  relater ! yea,  though  he  be  ever 
fo  honeft  a man  : for  he  who  gave  this  rela- 
tion, was  one  of  unqueftionable  veracity.  And 
yet  by  his  fincere  account  of  a writing  which  lay 
before  his  eves,  was  the  truth  fo  totally  difguif- 

ed, 


[ 9«  ] 

ed,  that  my  mother  knew  not  the  paper  fhe  had 
heard  from  end  to  end,  nor  I that  I had  myfelf 
wrote. 

At  fix  1 warned  the  women  at  Fetter-lane 
(knowing  how  they  had  been  lately  fhaken) 
not  to  believe  every  /pint,  but  to  try  the  /pints, 
whether  they  be  0/  God.  Our  brethren  met  at 
eight,  when  it  pleafed  God  to  remove  many  mif- 
underftandings  and  offences  that  had  crept  in 
among  them : and  to  reflore  in  good  meafure 
the /pirit  o/love  and  0/ a /ound  mind. 

Thurf.  14.  I went  with  Mr.  Whitefield  to 
Blackheath,  where  were,  I believe,  12  or 
14000  people.  He  a little  furprized  me,  by  de- 
firing me  to  preach  in  his  ftead  ; which  I did 
(though  nature  recoiled)  on  my  favourite  fubjeft, 
Je/us  Chri/,  who  0/ God  is  made  unto  us,  wi/dom, 
righteou/ne/s/anBification  and  redemption. 

I was  greatly  moved  with  compaffion  for  the 
rich  that  were  there,  to  whom  I made  a parti- 
cular application.  Some  of  them  feemed  to  at- 
tend, while  others  drove  away  their  coaches, 
from  fo  uncouth  a preacher. 

Frid.  15.  I had  much  talk  with  one  who 
is  called  a quaker.  But  he  could  not  receive 
my  faying.  I was  too JlnB  for  him,  and  talked  of 
fuch  a perjeBion,  as  he  could  not  think  necef/ary : 
being  perfuaded,  there  was  no  harm  in  coftly  ap- 
parel, provided  it  w^as  plain  and  grave  : nor  in 
putting  fcarlet  or  gold  upon  our  hou/es,  fo  it 
were  not  upon  our  cloaths. 


1 


In 


[ 97  ] 

In  the  evening  I went  to  a fociety  atWapping, 
weary  in  body  and  faint  in  fpirit.  I intended  to 
fpeak  on  Romans  iii.  19.  but  could  not  tell  how 
to  open  my  mouth  : and  all  the  time  we  were 
finging,  my  mind  was  full  of  fome  place,  I know 
not  where,  in  the  epiltle  to  the  Hebrews.  I beg- 
ged God  to  direft,  and  opened  the  book  on 
Heb.  x.  19.  Having  therefore,  brethren,  bold - 
nefs,  to  enter  into  the  holiejl,  by  the  blood  of  Je- 
fus  ; by  a new  and  living  way  which  he  hath  con- 
fecrated  for  us,  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  fay,  his 

fejh. Let  us  draw  near  with  a true  heart,  in 

full  ajfurance  of  faith  : having  our  hearts  fpr  ink- 
led  from  an  evil  confience  and  our  bodies  wafhed 
with  pure  water.  While  I was  earneffly  inviting 
all  finners  to  enter  into  the  holiejl  by  this  new  and 
living  way,  many  of  thofe  that  heard,  began  to 
call  upon  God  with  ftrong  cries  and  tears.  Some 
funk  down  and  there  remained  no  ftrength  in 
them  ; others  exceedingly  trembled  and  quaked ; 
fome  were  torne  with  a kind  of  convulfive  motion 
in  every  part  of  their  bodies,  and  that  fo  violent- 
ly, that  often  four  or  five  perfons  could  not  hold 
one  of  them.  I have  feen  many  hyfterical  and 
many  epileptick  fits  : but  none  of  them  were 
like  thefe,  in  many  refpe&s.  I immediately 
prayed,  “ That  God  would  not  fuffer  thofe  who 
were  weak  to  be  offended.  But  one  woman  was 
offended  greatly  ; being  fure  “ they  might  help  it 
if  they  would,  no  one  fhould  perfuade  her  to  the 
contrary;  and  was  got  three  or  four  yards,  when 
Vol.  XXVII.  £ the 


[ 9«  ] 

■file  aifo  droptdown,  in  as  violent  an  agony  as  the 
reft.  Twenty-fix  of  thofe  who  had  been  thus  af- 
fe&ed,  (moft  of  whom  during  the  prayers  which 
were  made  for  them,  were  in  a moment  filled 
with  peace  and  joy)  promifed  to  call  upon  me 
the  next  day.  But  only  eighteen  came  ; by 
talking  clofely  with  whom  I found  reafon  to  be- 
lieve, that  fome  of  them  had  gone  home  to  their 
houfe  juftified.  The  reft  feemed  to  be  patiently 
waiting  for  it. 

Sat.  16.  We  met  at  Fetter-lane,  to  humble 
ourfelves  before  God,  and  own  he  had  juftlv 
withdrawn  his  Spirit  from  us,  for  our  manifold 
unfaithfulnefs.  We  acknowledged  our  having 
grieved  him  by  our  divifions,  one  faying,  lam  of 
Paul,  another , lam  of  Apollos.  By  our  leaning 
again  to  our  own  works,  and  trufting  in  them, 
inftead  of  Chrift;  by  our  refting  in  thofe  little 
beginnings  of  fanflification,  which  it  had  pleafed 
him  to  work  in  our  fouls ; and  above  all,  by 
blafpheming  his  work  among  us,  imputing  it 
either  to  nature,  to  the  force  of  imagination  and 
animal  fpirits,  or  even  to  the  delufion  of  the 
devil.  In  that  hour,  we  found  God  with  us  as 
atthefirft.  Some  fell  proftrate  upon  the  ground. 
Others  burft  out,  as  with  one  confent,  into 
loud  praife  and  thankfgiving.  And  many  openly 
tefiified,  there  had  been  no  fuch  day  as  this 
fince  January  the  firft  preceding. 

Sund.  17.  I preached  atfeven  in  Upper  Moor- 
fields,  to  (I  believe)  fix  or  feven  thoufand  people 

on 


[ 99  ] 

on,  Ho  ! every  one  that  thirjletk  come  ye  to  the  zca- 

ters:  In  the  afternoon  I faw  poor  R d 

T — n,  who  had  left  our  fociety,  and  the  church. 
We  did  not  difpute,  but  pray;  and  in  a fhort 
fpace  the  fcales  fell  off  from  his  eyes.  He  gladly 
returned  to  the  church,  and  was  in  the  evening, 
re-admitted  into  our  fociety. 

At  five  I preached  on  Kennington-Common, 
to  about  fifteen  thoufand  people,  on  thofe  words, 
Look  unto  him , and  be  ye  faved , all  ye  ends  of  the 
earth. 

Mond.  18.  I left  London  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  the  next  evening  reached  Briftol,  and 
preached  (as  I had  appointed,  if  God  fiiould  per- 
mit) to  a numerous  congregation.  My  text  now 
alfo  was,  Look  unto  him , and  be  faved , all  ye  ends 
of  the  earth.  Howel  Harris  called  upon  me  an 
hour  or  two  after.  He  faid,  “ He  had  been 
“ much  diffuaded  from  either  hearing  or  feeing 
“ me,  by  many  who  faid  all  manner  of  evil  -of 
“ me.  But,  faid  he,  as  foon  as  I heard  you 
“ preach,  I quickly  found  what  fpirit  you  was  of. 
“ And  before  you  had  done,  I was  fo  overpower* 
“ ed  with  joy  and  love,  that  I had  much  ado 
“ to  walk  home.” 

It  is  fcarce  credible,  what  advantage  Satan  had 
gained  during  my  abfence  of  only  eight  days. 
Difputes  had  crept  into  our  little  fociety,  fo  that 
the  love  of  many  was  already  waxed  cold.  I 
fhewed  them  the  Hate  they  were  in  the  next  day 
(both  at  Newgate  and  at  Baptift-Mil’s)  from  thofe 
E 2 words, 


[ loo  ] 

words,  Simon , Simon,  behold  Satan  hath  defir  ed 
to  have  you,  that  he  may  fift  you  as  wheat.  And 
when  we  met  in  the  evening,  inftead  of  reviving 
the  difpute,  we  all  betook  ourfelves  to  prayer. 
Our  Lord  was  with  us.  Ourdivifions  were  heal- 
ed. Mifunderftandings  vanilhed  away.  And  all 
our  hearts  were  fweetly  drawn  together,  and  unit- 
ed as  at  the  firlt. 

Fri  22.  I called  on  one  who  did  run  well,  till 
he  was  hindred  by  fome  of  thofe  called  French 
prophets.  Wo  unto  the  prophets,  faith  the  Lord, 
who  prophefy  in  my  name,  and  I have  not  font 
them.  At  Weaver’s-hall,  I endeavoured  to  point 
them  out,  and  earneflly  exhorted  all  that  follow- 
ed after  holinefs,  to  avoid  as  fire,  all  who  do  not 
fpeak,  according  to  the  law  and  the teflimony . 

in  the  afternoon  I preached  at  the  Fifh- 
Ponds,  but  had  no  life  or  fpirit  in  me  ; and  was 
much  in  doubt,  whether  God  would  not  lay  me 
afide,  and  fend  other  labourers  into  his  harvefl. 
I came  to  the  fociety  full  of  this  thought;  and 
began  in  much  weaknefsto  explain,  Beloved,  be- 
lieve not  every  fpirit,  but  try  the  fpir its,  whether 
they  be  0/  God.  I told  them,  “ They  were  not 
tojudge  of  the  fpirit,  whereby  an',-  one  fpoke, 
either  by  appearances , or  by  common  report,  or 
by  their  own  inward  feelings.  No  nor  by  any 
dreams,  vifions  or  revelations,  fuppofed  to  be 
made  to  their  fouls,  anv  more  than  l>y  theirtears, 
or  any  involuntary  effects  wrought  upon  their 
bodies.1’  I warned  them,  all  thefe  were  in  them- 

felves, 


[ 101  ] 

felves,  of  a doubtful,  difputable  nature  : they 
might  be  from  God  : and  they  might  not ; and 
were  therefore  not  (imply  to  be  relied  on  (any 
more  than  (imply  to  be  condemned)  but  to  be 
tried  by  a farther  rule,  to  be  brought  to  the  on- 
ly certain  teft,  the  law  and  the  teftimony.'’ 
While  1 was  fpeaking,  one  before  me  dropt 
down  as  dead,  and  prefently  a fecond  and  a third. 
Five  others  funk  down  in  half  an  hour,  mod  of 
whom  were  in  violent  agonies.  The  pains  zsoj 
hell  came  about  them  ; the  J'nares  of  death  overtook 
them.  In  their  trouble  we  called  upon  the  Lord, 
and  he  gave  us  an  anfwer  of  peace.  One  indeed 
continued  an  hour  in  ftrong  pain  ; and  one  or 
two  more  for  three  days.  But  the  reft  were 
greatly  comforted  in  that  hour,  and  went  away 
rejoicing  and  prailing  God. 

Sat.  23.  I fpoke  feverallv  with  thofe,  who 
had  been  fo  troubled  the  night  before.  Some  of 
them,  I found  were  only  convinced  of  fin ; 
others  had  indeed  found  reft  to  their  fouls.  This 
evening  another  was  feized  with  ftrong  pangs. 
But  in  a fhort  time  her  foul  was  delivered. 

Sund.  24.  As  I was  riding  to  Rofe- Green,  in 
a frnooth,  plain  part  of  the  road,  my  horfe^fud- 
denly  pitched  upon  his  head,  and  rolled  over  and 
over.  I received  no  other  hurt  than  a little 
bruife  on  one  fide,  which  for  the  prefent  I felt 
not,  but  preached  without  pain  to  6 or  7000 
people  on  that  important  dire&ion,  Whether  ye 
eat  or  drink , or  whatever  you  do,  do  all  to  the 
3 glory 


[ 102  J 

glory  of  God.  In  the  evening  a girl  of  13  or  14, 
and  four  or  five  other  perfons,  fome  of  whom 
had  felt  the  power  of  God  before,  were  deeply 
convinced  of  fin,  and  with  fighs  and  groans 
which  could  not  be  uttered,  called  upon  God 
tor  deliverance. 

Mond.  25.  About  ten  in  the  morning.  J — e 
C — r,  as  Hie  was  fitting  at  work  was  fuddenly 
feized  with  grievous  terrors  of  mind,  attended 
with  flrong  trembling.  Thus  file  continued^  all 
the  afternoon  ; but  at  the  fociety  in  the  evening 
God  turned  her  heavinefs  into  joy.  Five  or  fix 
others  were  alfo  cut  to  the  heart  this  day  : and 
foon  after  found  him  whofe  hands  make  who : 
as  did  one  likewife,  who  had  been  mourning 
many  months,  without  any  to  comfort  her. 

Tuefd.  26.  I preached  near  the  houfe  we  had 
a few  days  before  began  to  build  for  a fchool,  in 
the  middle  of  Kingfwood,  under  a little  fyca- 
more-tree,  during  a violent  dorm  of  rain,  on  thofe 
words,  As  the  rain  cometk  down  from  heaven,  and 
returnelh  not  thither,  but  watereth  the  earth  and 
maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud : — So  Jhall  my  word 
be  that  goetk  out  of  my  mouth  : it  Jhail  not  return 
unto  me  void.  But  it fha/l  accomp/i/h  that  which  I 
pleafe,  and  it  Jhall  profper  in  the  thing  whereto 
1 fent  it. 

Three  perfons  terribly  felt  the  wrath  of  God 
abiding  on  them,  at  the  fociety  this  evening. 
But  upon  prayer  made  in  their  behalf,  he  was 

pleafed 


[ 103  3 

pleafed  foon  to  lift  up  the  light  of  his  counte- 
nance upon  them. 

* Frid  29.  I preached  in  a part  of  Kingfwood, 
where  I never  had  been  before.  The  places  in 
Kitu’fwood  where  I now  ufually  preached  were 
thefe  ; once  a fortnight,  a little  above  Connam, 
a village  on  the  fouth-fide  of  the  wood  ; on 
Sunday  morning,  near  Hannam- Mount : once  a 
fortnight,  at  the  fchool-houfe,  in  the  middle  of 
Kingfwood.  On  Sunday  in  the  evening  at  Rofe- 
Green ; and  once  a fortnight  near  the  Fifh- 
ponds,  on  the  north-fide  of  the  wood. 

Satur.  30.  At  Weaver ’s-Hall,  feven  or  eight 
perfons  were  confirained  to  roar  aloud,  while 
the  fword  of  the  fpirit  was  dividing  a funder  their 
fouls  and fpirits , and  joints  and  marrow.  But  they 
were  all  relieved  upon  prayer,  and  fang  praj'es 
unto  our  God,  and  unto  the  Lamb  that  liveth  for 
ever  and  ever. 

I gave  a particular  account,  from  time  to  time 
.of  the  manner  wherein  God  here  carried  on  his 
work  to  thofe  whom  I believed  to  defire  the  in- 
creafe  of  his  kingdom,  with  whom  I had  any 
opportunity  of  correfponding.  Part  of  the  an» 
fwer,  which  I received  (fome  time  after)  from 
one  of  thefe  I cannot  but  here  fubjoin. 

I Defire  to  blefs  my  Lord,  for  the  good  and  great 
news  your  letter  bears,  about  the  Lord’s  turn- 
ing many  fouls  from  darknefs  to  light,  and fro?n 
the  power  0f  Satan  unto  God-,  and  that  fuch  a 
E 4 great 


C 104  ] 

great  and  effectual  door  is  opened  among  you,  a> 
the  many  adver/anes  cannot  tout.  O may  He 
that  hath  the  key  of  the koufe  of  David,  that  openeth 
and  no  man  Jkutteth , and  Jkutteth  and  no  man 
openeth,  fet  the  door  of  faith  more  and  more  open 
among  you,  till  his  houfe  he  filled  and  till  he 
gather  together  the  outcafis  of  Ifrael.  And  may 
that  prayer  for  the  adverfaries  be  heard,  Fill  their 
faces  with  fiame,  that  they  may  Jlek  thy  name,  0 
Lord. 

* As  to  the  outward  manner  you  fpeak  of, 
wherein  moll  of  them  were  affefled  who  were 
cut  to  the  heart  by  the  fword  of  the  Spiri-,  no 
wonder  that  this  was  at  firft  furpri/ing  to  you, 
fince  they  are  indeed  fo  very  rare,  that  have  been 
intis  piicked  and  wounded.  Yet  fume  of  the 
inllances  you  give,  fee m to  be  exemplified,  in 
the  outward  manner  wherein  Paul  and  the  jailor 
wete  at  firfl  affefled  : as  alfo  Peter’s  hearers.  Afts 
It  1 he  lafl  inllance  you  gave,  oi  fame  flrug- 
gling  as  in  the  agonies  of  death,  and  in  fuch  a 
manner  as  that  four  or  five  flrong  men  can 
hardly  reflrain  a weak  woman  from  hurtinst  her- 
fell  or  others:  this  is  to  me  fomewhat  more  in- 
explicable: if  it  do  not  refemble  the  child  fpoke 
of,  Mark  ix.  26,  and  Luke  ix.  q2.  of  whom  it 
is  laid,  that  while  he  was  yet  a coming,  the  dadl 
threw  him  down  and  tare  him.  Or  what  influ- 
ence fudden  and  fharp  awakenings  may  have  up- 
on the  body  I pretend  not  to  explain.  But  I 
make  no  queltion  Satan,  fo  far  as  he  gets  power, 

may 


[ la5  ] 

may  exert  himfelf  on  fuch  occaficns,  partly  .to 
hinder  the  good  work  in  the  perfons  thus  touch- 
ed with  the  fharp  arrows  of  conviffion,  and 
partly  to  difpaiage  the  work  of  God,  as  if  it 
tended  to  lead  people  to  diftraftion. — However, 
the  merciful  iffue  of  thefe  confli&s  in  the  con- 
verfxon  of  tire  perfons  thus  affefted,  is  the  main 
thing. 

When  they  are  brought  by  the  having  arm  of 
God  to  receive  Chrifl  Jefus,  to  have  joy  and 
peace  in  believing,  and  then  to  walk  in  him, 
and  give  evidence  that  the  work  is  a having 
work  at  length,  whether  more  quickly  or  gra- 
dually accomplifhed,  there  is  great  matter  of 
praife. 

All  the  outward  appearances  of  people’s  be- 
ing affefled  among  us,  may  be  reduced  to  thefe 
two  forts ; one  is,  hearing  with  a clofe,  filent 
attention,  with  gravity  and  greedinefs,  difco- 
vered  by  fixt  looks,  weeping  eyes,  and  forrowful 
or  joyful  countenances:  another  fort,  is  when 
they  lift  up  their  voice  aloud,  home  more  depref- 
fedly,  and  others  more  highly  ; and  at  times,  the 
whole  multitude  in  a flood  of  tears,  all  as  it  were 
crying  out  at  once,  till  their  voice  be  ready  to 
drown  the  mmifter’s,  that  he  can  fcarce  be  heard 
for  the  weeping  noife  that  furrounds  him. — The 
influence  on  fome  of  thefe,  like  a land-flood 
dries  up;  we  hear  of  no  change  wrotio-ht. 
But  on  others,  it  appears  in  the  fruits  of  righ- 
E 5 tcoufnei\ 


conver- 


C 106  ] 

teoufnefs,  and  the  tra£l  of  a holy 
fation. — 

May  the  Lord  {Lengthen  you,  to  go  on  in  his 
work  ! And  in  praying  for  the  coming  of  his 
kingdom  with  you  and  us,  and  I hope  you  fhall 
not  be  forgotten  among  us,  in  our  joint  applica- 
tions to  the  throne  of  grace. 

I am,  reverend,  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  ajfeclionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Chrijl, 

Ralph  Erlkine. 

Sund.  July  1.  I preached  to  about  five  thou- 
fand,  on  the  favourite  advice  of  the  infidel  in 
Ecclefiafles  (fo  ze-aloufly  inforced  by  his  brethren 
now)  Be  not  righteous  overmuch.  At  Hannam 
and  at  Rofe-green,  I explained  the  latter  part  of 
the  viith  of  St.  Luke : that  verfe  efpecially, 
When  they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  j rankly  jorgave 
them  both. 

* A young  woman  funk  down  at  Rofe-green, 
in  a violent  agony  both  of  body  and  mind:  as 
did  five  or  fix  perfons  in  the  evening  at  the  New- 
Room,  at  whofe  cries  many  were  greatly  of- 
fended. The  fame  offence  was  given  in  the 
morning  by  one  at  Weaver ’s-hall,  and  by  eight 
or  nine  others,  at  Glocefter-lane  in  the  evening. 

The  firft  that  was  deeplv  touched  was  L 

W ; whofe  mother  had  been  not  a little 

difpleafed  a day  or  two  before,  when  fhe  was 
told,  how  her  daughter  had  expofed  herfelf  before 

all 


[ *°  7 1 

all  the  congregation  : the  mother  herfelf  was 
the  next,  who  dropped  down,  and  loft  her  fenfes 
in  a moment ; but  went  home  with  her  daughter, 
full  of  joy,  as  did  moft  of  thofe  that  had  been  iu 
pain. 

Soon  after  the  fociety,  I went  to  Mrs.  T — ’s, 
whofe  neareft  relations  were  earneftly  diffuading 
her,  from  being  righteous  overmuch ; and  by  the 
old  motive,  Why  Jhould/i  thou  dejlroy  thyjelf  ? 
She  anfwered  all  they  advanced  with  meeknefs 
and  love,  and  continued  ftedfaft  and  immovea- 
ble. Endure  hardlhip  ftill,  thou  good  foldier  of 
Chrift  ! Perfecuted,  but  not  forfaken : torn  with 
inward,  and  incompaftwith  outward  temptations: 
but  yielding  to  none.  O may  patience  have  its 
perfeft  work ! 

Tuef.  3.  I preached  at  Bath  to  the  moft  at- 
tentive and  ferious  audience  I have  ever  feen 
there.  On  Wednefday  I preached  at  Newgate 
on  thofe  words,  Becaufe  of  the  Pharijees , they 

durjl  not  confefs  him.- For  they  loved  the  praife 

of  men  more  than  the  praife  of  God.  A meffage 
was  delivered  to  me  when  I had  done,  from 
the  fheriffs,  “ That  I rnuft  preach  there  no 
more.” 

Frid.  6.  I preft  a ferious  quaker  to  tell  me. 
Why  he  did  not  come  to  hear  me  as  formerly  ? 
he  faid,  “ Becaufe  he  found  we  were  not  led  by 
the  Spirit ; for  we  fixt  times  of  preaching  before- 
hand ; whereas  we  ought  to  do  nothing  urriefs 
we  were  fenfbly  moved  thereto  by  the  Holy 
E-  6 GhoftT 


[ io8  ] 

Ghoft.”  I a(ked,  “ Whether  we  ought  not  to 
do  what  God  in  fcripture  commands,  when  we 
have  opportunity  ? Whether  the  providence  of 
God  thus  concurring  with  his  word,  were  not  a 
fufficient  reafon  for  our  doing  it,  although  we 
weie  not  at  that  moment  jenjibly  moved  thereto 
by  the  Holy  Ghoft?’’  He  anfwered,  “ It  was 
not  a fufficient  reafon.  This  was  to  regard  the 
letter  that  killeth.  ’ God  grant,  that  I may  fo  re- 
gard it  all  the  days  of  my  life  ! 

In  the  afternoon  I was  with  Mr.  Whitefieid 
juft  come  from  London,  with  whom- 1 went  to 
Baptift-mills,  wdiere  he  preached  concerning  the 
Holy  Ghojl , which  all  who  believe , are  to  receive ; 
not  without  a juft,  though  fevere,  cenfure 
of  thofe,  who  preach  as  if  there  were  no  Holy 
Ghoft. 

Sat.  7.  I had  an  opportunity  to  talk  with  him 
of  thofe  outward  figns,  which  had  fo  often  accom- 
panied the  inward  wrork  of  God.  I found  his 
objections  were  chiefly  grounded  on  grofs  mif- 
reprefeutations  of  matter  of  fa£l.  But  the  next 
day  he  had  an  opportunity  of  informing  himfelf 
better.  For  no  fooner  had  he  begun  (in  the  ap- 
plication of  his  fermon)  to  invite  all  finners,  to 
believe  in  Chrift,  than  four  perfons  funk  down 
clofe  to  him,  almoft  in  the  fame  moment.  One 
of  them  lay  without  either  fenfe  or  motion.  A 
fecond  trembled  exceedingly.  The  third  had 
ftrong  convulfions  all  over  his  body,  but  made 
no  noife,  unlefs  by  groans.  The  fourth,  equally 

convulfed. 


[ 109  3 

convulfed,  called  upon  God,  with  ftrong  cries 
and  tears.  From  this  time  I truft,  we  final!  all 
fuffer  God  to  carry  on  his  own  work  in  the  way 
that  pleafeth  him. 

* Thurf.  13.  I went  to  a gentleman  who  is 
much  troubled  with  what  they  call  lozonefs  of 
fpirits.  Many  fuch  have  I been  with  before ; 
but  in  feveral  of  them,  it  was  no  bodily  diftem- 
per.  They  wanted  fomething,  they  knew  not 
what,  and  were  therefore,  heavy,  uneafv,  and 
diffatisfied  with  every  thing.  The  plain  truth 
is,  they  wanted  God,  they  wanted  Chriff,  they 
wanted  faith.  And  God  convinced  them  of  their 
want,  in  a way  their  phyficians  no  more  nnder- 
ftood  than  themfelves.  Accordingly  nothing 
availed  till  the  Great  Phyfician  came.  For  in 
fpite  of  all  natural  means,  he  who  made  them  for 
himfelf,  would  not  fuffer  them  to  reft,  till  they 
reftedin  him. 

On  Friday  in  the  afternoon  I left  BriftoJ  with 
Mr.  Whitefield,  in  the  midft  of  heavy  rain. 
But  the  clouds  foon  difperfed,  fo  that  we  had  a 
fair,  calm  evening,  and  a fenous  congregation  at 
Thornbury. 

In  the  morning  we  breakfafted  with  a quaker, 
who  had  been  brought  up  in  the  church  of  Eng- 
land  . but  being  under  ftrong  convidhons  of  in- 
ward fin,  and  applying  to  feveral  perfons  for 
advice,  they  all  judged  him  to  be  under  a difor- 
der  of  body,  and  gave  advice  accordingly. 
Some  quakers  with  whom  he  met  about  the  fame 

time* 


[ J 

time,  told  him,  it  was  the  hand  of  God  upon  his. 
foul ; and  advifed  him  to  feek  another  fort  of 
relief  than  thofe  miferable  comforters  had  re- 
commended. Wo  unto  you,  ye  blind  leaders  of 
the  blind!  How  long  will  ye  pervert  the  right 
ways  of  the  Lord  ? Ye  who  tell  the  mourners  in 
Zion,  Much  religion  hath  made  you  mad  ! Ye 
who  fend  them  whom  God  hath  wounded  to  the 
devil  for  cure  ; to  company,  idle  hooks  or  di- 
verfions!  Thusfhall  theyperilh  in  their  iniquity; 
but  their  blood  {hall  God  require  at  your 
hands ! 

We  had  an  attentive  congregation  at  Glocefler 
in  the  evening.  In  the  morning,  Mr.  White- 
field  being  gone  forward,  I preached  to  about  five 
thoufand  there, onChriJl  ourwifdom,  righteoufnefs, 
fanftification  and  redemption.  It  rained  violently 
at  five  in  the  evening  ; notwithftanding  which 
two  or  three  thoufand  people  {fayed,  to  whom  I 
expounded  that  glorious  vifion  of  Ezekiel,  of 
the  refurre£fion  of  the  dry  bones. 

On  Monday  16.  After  preaching  to  two  or 
three  thoufand  on  What  mujl  I do  to  be  faved?  I 
returned  to  Briftol,  and  preached  to  about  three 
thoufand,  on  thofe  words  of  Job,  There  the 
wicked  ceafe Jro/n  troubling  ; there  the  weary  are  at 
ref. 

Tuef.  17.  I rode  to  Bradford,  five  miles  from 
Bath,  whither  I had  been  long  invi  ed  to  come. 

I waited  on  the  minifter,  and  defired  leave  to 
preach  in  his  church.  He  faid,  “ It  was  not 

ufuaL 


[ 3 

ufual  to  preach  on  the  week-days  : but  if  I could 
come  thither  on  a Sunday,  he  fhould  be  glad  of 
my  afftftance.”  Thence  I went  to  a gentleman 
in  the  town,  who  had  been  prefent  when  I 
preached  at  Bath,  and  with  the  ilrongeft  marks 
offincerity  and  affe&ion,  wijhed  me  good  luck  in 
the  name  oj  the  Lord . But  it  was  pad.  1 found 
him  now  quite  cold.  He  began  difputing  on 
feveral  heads,  and  at.  lad  told  me  plainly,  one  of 
our  own  college  had  informed  him,  “ They  al- 
ways took  me  to  be  a little  crack-brained  at  Ox- 
ford.” 

However  fome  perfons  who  were  not  of  his 
mind,  having  pitched  on  a convenient  place 
(called  Bear- field  or  Bury-field)  on  the  top  of  the 
hill  under  which  the  town  lies  u I there  offered 
Chrifl  to  about  a thoufand  people,  for  wifdom, 
righteoufnefs,  fanfiification  and  redemption. 
s Thence  I returned  to  Bath,  and  preached  on 
What  mujl  I do  to  be  Laved?  to  a larger  audience 
than  ever  before.  I was  wondring  the  God  of 
this  world  was  fo  hill : when  at  my  return  from 

the  place  of  preaching,  poor  R d M 1 

told  me,  He  could  not  let  me  preach  any  more  in 
his  ground.  I afked  him,  why  ? He  faid,  “ The 
people  hurt  his  trees,  and  dole  things  out  of  his 
ground.  And  befides  (added  he)  I have  already 
by  letting  thee  be  there , merited  the  difpleafure  oj  my 
neighbours .”  O fear  of  man  ! Who  is  above 
thee,  but  they  who  indeed  wo'jhip  God  in Jpirii 
and  in  truth  ? Not  evert  thofe  who  have  one 

foot 


C 112  7 

foot  in  the  grave  ! Not  even  thofe  who  dwell 
in  rooms  of  cedar;  and  who  have  heaped  up 
gold  as  the  dull,  and  ftlver  as  the  fand  of  the 
fea  ! 

Sat.  ct.  I began  expounding  a fecond  time 
our  Lord's  fermion  on  the  mount.  In  the  morn- 
ing, Sundav  22,  as  I was  explaining  Biffed  are 
the  pure  in fpirit,  to  about  three  thoufand  people, 
we  had  a fair  opportunity  of  {hewing  all  men, 
what  manner  of  fpirit  we  were  of.  For  in  the 
middle  of  the  fermon,  the  prefs-gang  came,  and 
feized  on  one  of  the  hearers  ; (Ye  learned  in  the 
Jaw",  what  becomes  of  magna  ckarta,  and  of  Eng- 
UJh  liberty  and  property?  Are  not  thefe  mere 
founds,  while,  on  anv  pretence,  there  is  fitch  a 
thing  as  a prefs-gang  fuffered  in  the  land  ?) 
All  the  reft  {landing  ftill,  and  none  open- 
ing his  mouth  or  lifting  up  his  hand  to  refill 
them. 

Mond.  23.  To  guard  young  converts  from  fan- 
cying, that  they  lrad  already  attained  or  were  al- 
ready perfeft,  I preached  on  thofe  words,  So  is 
the  kingdom  of  God,  as  when  a man  caftetk  feed 
into  the  ground — And  rifeth  day  and  night,  and 
the  fed  buddetk  forth  and fpringeth  up  he  knozvetk 
not  how — frf  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the full 
corn  in  the  ear . 

On  feveral  evenings  this  week,  and  particu- 
larly on  Friday,  many  were  deeply  convinced ; 
but  none  were  delivered  from  that  painful  con- 
vi£lion,  The  children  came  to  the  birth  ; but  there 

was 


C J13  ] 

was  net  Jlrengtk  to  bring  forth..  I fear  we  have 
grieved  the  Spirit  of  the  jealous  God.  by  quelti- 
oning  his  work  : and  that  therefore  he  is  with- 
drawn from  us  for  a feafon.  But  he  will  return 
and  abundantly  pardon. 

Mond.  go.  Two  more  were  in  flrong  pain, 
both  their  fouls  and  bodies  being  well-nigh  torn 
afunder.  But  though  we  cried  unto  God,  there 
was  no  anfwer,  neither  did  he  as  yet  deliver 
them  at  all. 

One  of  thefe  had  been  remarkably  zealous 
againlt  thofe  that  cried  out  and  made  a noife, 
being  fin  e that  any  of  them  might  help  it  ij  they 
would.  And  the  fame  opinion  fire  was  in  hill, 
till  the  moment  fhe  was  flruck  through  as  with  a 
fword,  and  fell  trembling  to  the  ground.  She 
then  cried  aloud,  though  not  articulately,  her 
words  being  fwallowed  up.  In  this  pain  fire  con- 
tinued twelve  or  fourteen  hours,  and  then  her 
foul  was  fet  at  liberty.  But  her  mailer  (for  fhe 
was  a fervant  till  that  time,  at  a gentleman’s  in 
town)  forbid  her  returning  to  him,  faying,  He 
would  have  none  in  his  houfe  who  had  received  the 
Holy  Ghof. 

Tuef.  31.  I preached  at  Bradford  to  above  two 
thoufand,  many  of  whom  were  of  the  better  rank, 
on  What  mujl  I do  to  be  faved?  They  all  behaved 
with  decency,  and  none  went  away  till  the  fer- 
vice  was  ended.  While  I was  preaching  at 
Bath,  in  my  return,  fome  of  the  audience  did 
not  behave  fo  well;  being,  I fear,  a little  too 

nearly 


[ >14  3 


nearly  concerned,  when  I came  to  the  application 
of  thefe  words,  Not  only  this  our  craft,  is  in  dan- 
ger to  be  Jet  at  nought ; but  alfo  that  the 
temple  of  the  great  goddefs  Diana  fhould  be 
defpifed — whom  all  Afia  and  the  world  worf  lip- 
pet  h. 

Having  a caution  again), 2 religious  delufion , 
put  into  my  hands  about  this  time,  I thought  it 
my  duty  to  write  to  the  author  of  it:  which  I 
accordingly  did,  in  the  following  terms: 


Reverend  Sir , 

i.  '\7'OU  charge  me  (for  I am  called  a Methodi/l, 
and  consequently  included  within  your 
charge)  with  vain  and  confident  koafiings,  rajh , 
uncharitable  cenfures , damning  all  who  do  net  feel 
what  I feel  ; not  allowing  men  to  be  in  a falvable 
fate , uniefs  they  have  experienced Jome  fudden 
operation,  which  may  be  difinguifhed  as  the  hand 
oj  God  upon  them,  overpowering  as  it  were  the  foul; 
with  denying  men  the  ufe  of  God's  creatures , which 
he  hath  appointed  to  be  received  with  thank [giving, 
and  encouraging  abflinence,  prayer  and  other  reli- 
gious exercifes,  to  the  negletl  of  the  duties  of  our 
fation.  O Sir,  can  you  prove  this  charge 
upon  me  ? The  Lord  (hall  judge  in  that  day  ! 

2.  I do  indeed  go  out  into  the  highways  and 
hedges  to  call  poor  Sinners  to  Chrift.  But  not 
in  a tumultuous  manner,  not  to  the  difurbance  of 

the 


[ 115  ] 

the  public  peace,  or  the  prejudice  of  families. 
Neither  herein  do  I break  any  law  which  I know; 
much  lefs  fet  at  nought  all  rule  and  authority. 
Nor  can  I be  faid  to  intrude  into  the  labours  of 
thofe,  who  do  not  labour  at  all ; hut  buffer  thou- 
fands  of  thofe  for  whomChrilt  died,  to  perifh for 
lack  of  knowledge. 

3.  They  perifh  for  want  of  knowing,  that  we  as 
well  as  the  Heathens,  are  alienated from  the  life  of 
God:  that  every  one  of  us  by  the  corruption  of 
our  inraoft  nature,  is  very  far  gone  from  original 
righteoufnefs  ; fo  far,  that  every  perfon  born  into 
the  world,  deferveth  God's  wrath  and  damnation  : 
that  we  have  by  nature  no  power  either  to  help 
ourfelves,  or  even  to  call  upon  God  to  help  us; 
all  our  tempers  and  works,  in  our  natural  flate, 
being  only  evil  continually.  * So  that  our 
coming  to  Chrilt,  as  well  as  theirs,  muf  infer  a 
great  and  mighty  change.  It  muft  infer,  not  only 
an  outward  change,  from  healing,  lying  and  all 
corrupt  communication  ; but  a thorbugh  change 
of  heart,  an  inward  renewal  in  the  fpirit  of  our 
mind.  Accordingly,  the  old  man  implies  infi- 
nitely more  than  outward  evil  converfation,  even 
an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  corrupted  by  pride  and 
a thoufand  deceitful  luffs.  Of  confequence,  the 
new  man  muft  imply  infinitely  more  than  outward 
good  converfation,  even  a good  heart , which  after 
God  is  created  in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs  ; 
a heart  full  of  that  faith,  which  working  by  love, 
produces  all  holinefs  of  converfation. 


4*  The 


[ 1 16  J 


4.  The  change  from  the  former  of  thefe  ftates 
to  the  latter,  is  what  I call  The  New  Birth.  But 
you  fay,  I am  not  content  with  this  plain  and  eafy 
notion  oj  it,  but  fill  myfelf  and  others  with  fantaf- 
tical  conceits  about  it.  Alas,  Sir,  how  can  you 
P*o\e  this  ? And  if  you  cannot  prove  it,  what 
amends  can  you  make,  either  to  God,  or  to  me, 
or  to  the  world,  for  publickly  aliening  a grofs 
falfhood  ? 


S-  Perhaps  you  fav,  You  can  prove  this  of  Mr. 
hirefield.  What  then?  This  is  nothing  to  me. 
I am  not  accountable  for  his  words.  The  journal 
you  quote  I never  faw  tdl  it  was  in  print.  But 
indeed  you  wrong  him  as  much  as  me  : fir fb, 
where  you  reprefent  him  as  judging  the  notions 
oi  the  Quakers  in  general  (concerning  being  led 
by  the  Spirit)  to  be  right  and  good  ; whereas  he 
ipeaks  only  of  thofe particular  men,  with  whom 
he  was  then  converfing.  And  again,  where  you 
fay,  he  fuppofes  a perfon  believing  in  Chnjl, — to 
be  without  any  faving  knowledge  of  him.  He 
fuppofes  no  fuch  thing.  To  believe  in  Chrijl , was 
the  very  thing  he fuppofed  wanting;  as  under- 
flanding  that  term  believing  to  implv,  not  only 
an  alfent  to  the  articles  of  our  creed,  but  alfo  a 
true  trujl  and  confidence  of  the  mercy  of  God 
through  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrijl. 

6.  Now  this  it  is  certain  a man  may  want,  al- 
though he  can  truly  fay,  I am  chef,  lam  fober , 
I am  jujl  in  my  dealings , I help  my  neighbour  and 
ufe  the  ordinances  of  God.  And  however  fuch  a 

man 


[ 1*7  1 

man  may  have  behaved  in  thefe  refpeRs,  he  is  not 
to  think  well  of  his  ewn  Jiate,  till  he  experiences 
fomethivg  within  himfelf  which  he  has  not  yet  ex- 
perienced, but  which  he  may  be  before-hand , of- 
fered he  fiall,  if  the  promifes  of  God  are  true. 
That  fomething  is,  a living  faith  : A fure  truf 
and  confidence  in  God,  that  by  the  merits  of  Chrif 
; his  fins  art  forgiven,  and  he  reconciled  to  the  fa- 
vour of  God.  And  from  this  will  fpring  many 
other  things,  which  till  then  he  experienced  not. 
as,  the  love  of  God  fhed  abroad  in  his  heart, 
the  peace  of  God  which  pafTeth  all  underltand- 
ing,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Gholf,  joy  though  not 
jj  unfelt,  yet  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory. 

17.  Thefe  are  fome  of  thofe  inwardfruits  of  the 
a fpirit,  which  muftbe/r/tf,  wherefoever  they  are  : 
and  without  thefe,  I cannot  learn  from  holy 
writ,  that  any  man  is  born  of  the  fpirit.  I be- 
feech  you,  Sir,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  if 
as  yet  you  know  nothing  offuch  inward  feelings, 
j if  you  do  not  feel  in  yourfelf  thefe  mighty  workings 
I of  the  Spirit  of  Chrif,  at  lead  you  would  not  con- 
tradift  and  blafpheme.  When  the  Holy  Gholt 
1}  hath  fervently  kindled  your  love  towards  God, 
you  will  know  thefe  to  be  very  fenfible  opera- 
tions. As  you  hear  the  wind  and  feel  it  too,  while 
'I  itfrikes  upon  your  bodily  organs,  you  will  know 
you  are  under  the  guidance  of  God’s  Spirit  the 

! fame  way,  namely,  by  feeling  it  in  your foul : by 
the  prefent  peace  and  joy  and  love  which  you 

feel 

| 


[ »8  ] 

feel  within,  as  well  as  by  its  outward  and  more 
difiant  effefts. 

I am,  &c. 

I have  often  wifhed,  that  all  calm  and  impar- 
tial men,  would  confider  what  is  advanced  by 
another  writer,  in  a little  difcourfe  concerning 
enthufiafm  or  religious  delulion,  publifhed  about 
this  time.  His  words  are, 

“ A minijler  of  our  church,  who  may  look  up- 
on it  as  his  duty  to  warn  his  parifhioners , or  an 
author  who  may  think  it  necelfary  to  caution  his 
readers,  again!!  fuch  preachers  or  their  do£bine 
(enthufiaftic  preachers,  I fuppofe,  fuch  as  he 
takes  it  for  granted  the  Methodijl  preachers  are) 
ought  to  be  very  careful  to  a£l  with  a Chrijlian 
fpirit,  and  to  advance  nothing  but  with  temper, 
charity  and  truth. — Perhaps  the  following  rules 
may  be  proper  to  be  obferved  by  them. 

1.  Not  to  blame  perfons  for  doing  that  now, 
which  fcripture  records  holy  men  of  old  to  have 
praflifed,  leafl  had  they  lived  in  thofe  times, 
they  fhould  have  condemned  them  alfo. 

2.  Not  to  cenfure  perfons  in  holy  orders , for 
teaching  the  fame  doftrines  which  are  taught  in 
th efcriptures  and  by  our  church ; leaf!  they  fhould 
ignorantly  cenfure , what  they  profefs  to  defend. 

3.  Not  to  cenfure  any  profeffed  members  of  our 
church,  who  live  good  lives,  for  reforting  to  re- 
ligious cffemblies  in  private  houfes,  to  perform  in 
fociety  acts  of  divine  worfiip ; when  the  fame 

feem  £ 


feems  to  have  been  praftifed  by  the  primitive 
Chriftians ; and  when  alas!  there  are  fo  many 
parilhes,  where  a perfon  pioujly  difpofed,  has  no 
opportunity  of  joining  in  the  public  fervice  of 
our  church,  more  than  one  hour  and  half  in  a 
week. 

4.  Not  to  condemn  thofe  who  are  conftant  at- 
tendants on  the  communion  and  fervice  of  our 
church,  if  they  fometimes  ufe  other  prayers  in 

i private  aflemblies  : fince  the  bef  divines  of  our 
church  have  compofed  and  published  many 
ers,  that  have  not  the  fanftion  of  public  autho- 
rity ; which  implies  a general  confent,  that  our 
church  has  not  made  provifion  for  every  pri- 
vate occafion. 

5.  Not  to  efiablifh  the  power  of  working  mi- 
racles as  the  great  criterion  of  a divine  million  ; 
when  fcripture  teaches  us,  that  the  agreement 
of  doftrines  with  truth  as  taught  in  thofe  fcrip- 
tures,  is  the  only  infallible  rule. 

6.  Not  to  drive  any  away  from  our  church , by 
opprobrioufly  calling  them  diffenters,  or  treating 
them  as  fuch,  fo  long  as  they  keep  to  her  com- 
munion. 

7.  Not  lightly  to  take  up  with filly  fories  that 
may  be  propagated,  to  the  difcredit  of  perfons 
of  a general  good  chara&er. 

“ I do  not  lay  down  (fays  he)  thefe  negative 
rules  fo  much  for  the  fake  of  any  perfons  whom 
the  unobfervance  of  them  would  immediately  in- 
jure, as  of  our  church  and  her  profelfed  defen- 
ders. 


[ 120  ] 

decs.  For  cliurchmen,  however  well-meaning, 
would  lay  themfelves  open  to  cenfure,  and  might 
do  her  irreLrieveable  damage,  by  a behaviour  con- 
trary to  them.” 

Friday,  Atiguft  3.  I met  with  one  who  did 
run  well,  but  Satan  had  hundred  her.  I was  fur- 
prized  at  her  ingenuous  acknowledgment  of  the 
fear  or  man.  0 how  hardly  Jhall  even  they  who 
have  rich  acquaintance  enter  into  the  kingdom  oj 
heaven  ! 

Sttnd.  5.  Six  perfons  at  the  New-Room  were 
deeply  convinced  of  Jin  : three  of  whom  were  a 
little  comforted  by  prayer  ; but  not  yet  convinc- 
ed of  riglileoufnefs. 

Having  frequently  been  invited  to  Wells,  par- 
ticularly by  Mr.  , who  begged  me  to  make 

his  houfe  my  home,  on  Thurfday  the  9th  I went 
thither,  and  wrote  him  wotd  the  night  before  ; 
upon  which  he  prefently  went  to  one  of  his 
friends,  and  deftred  ameilenger  might  be  fent  to 
meet  me  and  beg  me  “ To  turnback,  otherwife 
(faid  he)  we  fhall  lofe  all  our  traded  But  this 
confideration  did  not  weigh  with  him,  fo  that  he 
invited  me  to  his  own  houfe  : and  at  eleven  I 
preached  in  his  ground,  on  Chriji  eur  unfdom, 
Tighteoufnejs,  fsnchfi cation  and  redemption , to 
about  2000  perfons.  Some  of  them  mocked  at 
firft,  whom  I reproved  before  all  ; and  thofe  of 
them  who  flayed  wTere  more  ferious.  Several 
fpoke  to  me  after,  who  u'ere  for  the  prefent 

much 


C 121  ] 

much  affe&ed.  O let  it  not  pafs  away  as  the 
morning  dew ! 

Frid.  10.  I had  the  fatisfa&ion  of  converfing 
with  a Quaker,  and  afterwards  with  an  Anabap- 
tift,  who,  I truft,  have  had  a large  meafure  of 
the  love  of  God  fhed  abroad  in  their  hearts.  O 
may  thofe,  in  every  perfuafion,  who  are  of  this 
fpirit,  increafe  a thoufand-fold,  how  many  fo 
ever  they  be  ! 

Sat.  11.  Iij  the  evening  two  were  feized  with 
Strong  pangs,  as  were  four  the  next  evening,  and 
the  fame  number  at  Glocefter-Lane  on  Mon- 
day, one  of  whom  was  greatly  comforted. 

Tuef.  14.  I preached  at  Bradford  to  about 
three  thoufand,  on  One  thing  is  needful.  Return- 
ing through  Bath,  I preached  to  a fmall  congre- 
gation Suddenly  gathered  together  at  a little  dis- 
tance from  the  town  (not  being  permitted  to  be 

in  R M ’s  ground  any  more)  on  The 

juft  Jhall  live  by  faith.  Three  at  the  New-Room 
this  evening  were  cut  to  the  heart.  But  their 
wound  was  not  as  yet  healed. 

Wednef.  15.  I endeavoured  to  guard  thofe 
who  were  in  their  firlt  love,  from  falling  into 
inordinate  affeftion,  by  explaining  thofe  ftrange 
words  at  Baptift-Mills,  Henceforth  knozo  we  ne 
man  after  the flefh. 

Friday  17.  Many  of  our  fociety  met,  as  we 
had  appointed,  at  one  in  the  afternoon,  and  a- 
greed  “ That  all  the  members  of  our  fociety 
Should  obey  the  church  to  which  we  belong,  by 
Vol.XXVII.  F obferving 


[ 122  ] 

obferving  all  Fridays  in  the y ear , as  days  of  jafl- 
ing  or  ahjlinence”  We  likewife  agreed,  that 
as  many  as  had  opportunity  fhould  then  meet, 
to  fpend  an  hour  together  in  prayer. 

Wedn.  22.  I was  with  many  that  were  in  hea- 
vinefs  : two  of  whom  were  foon  filled  with  peace 
and  joy.  In  the  afternoon  I endeavoured  to 
guard  the  weak  againfl  what  too  often  occafions 
heavinefs,  levity  of  temper  or  behaviour,  from 
I faid  of  laughter,  it  is  mad ; and  of  mirth,  What 
doth  it  ? 

Mond.  27.  For  two  hours  I took  up  my  crofs, 
in  arguing  with  a zealous  man,  and  labouring  to 
convince  him,  “ That  I was  not  an  enemy  to 
“ the  church  of  England.”  He  allowed,  “ I 
“ taught  no  other  doftrines  than  thofe  of  the 
“ church  but  could  not  forgive  my  teaching 
them  out  of  the  church-walls.  He  allowed  too 
(which  none  indeed  can  deny,  who  has  either 
any  regard  to  truth  or  fenfe  of  fhame)  that  “ by 
“ this  teaching  many  fouls  who  till  that  time 
“ were  perifhing  for  jack  of  knowledge,  have 
“ been,  and  are  brought  from  darknefs  to  light 
“ and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God.  ’ 
But  he  added,  “ No  one  can  tell,  what  may  be 
“ hereafter  ; and  therefore  1 fay,_  thefe  things 
“ ought  r.ot  to  be  fuffered.” 

* Indeed  the  report  now  current  in  Briftol 
was,  “ That  I was  a Papfi,  if  not  a fefuit. 
Some  added,  “ That  I was  born  and  bred  at 
“Rome;”  which  many  cordially  believed.  O 

ye 


[ 123  3 


ye  fools,  when  will  ye  underftand,  that  the 
preaching  jujlification  by  faith  alone,  the  allow- 
ing no  meritorious  caufe  of  jollification,  but  the 
death  and  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  and  no  con- 
ditional or  inftrumental  caufe,  but  faith,  is  over- 
turning popery  from  the  foundation  ? When 
will  ye  underftand,  that  the  moft  deftruftive  of 
all  thofe  errors,  which  Rome,  the  mother  of 
abominations  hath  brought  forth  (compared  to 
which  tranfubflantiation  and  a hundred  more, 
are  trifles  light  as  air)  is,  That  wearejufified  by 
works,  (or  to  exprefs  the  fame  thing  a little  more 
decently)  by  faith  and  works.  Now,  do  I preach 
This  ? I did  for  ten  years  ; I was  (fundamental- 
ly) a papift,  and  knew  it  not.  But  I do  now 
teflify  to  all  (and  it  is  the  very  point  for  affert- 
ing  which  I have  to  this  day  been  called  in  quef- 
tion)  that  no  good  works  can  be  done  before 
juflification,  none  which  have  not  in  them  the 
nature  of  fin.” 

* I have  too  often  enquired,  who  are  the  au- 
thors of  this  report  ; and  have  generally  found 
they  were  either  bigotted  diifenters,  or  (I  fpeak 
without  fear  or  favour)  minifters  of  our  own 
church.  I have  alfo  frequently  conlidered, 
what  pofiible  ground  or  motive  they  could  have 
thus  to  fpeak  : feeing  few  men  in  the  world 
, have  had  occafion  fo  clearly  and  openly  to  de- 
■;  dare  their  principles,  as  I have  done,  both  by 
preaching,  printing  and  converfation,  for  fe- 
veral  years  lafl  pad.  And  I can  no  otherwife 
F 2 think. 


[ 124  ] 

think,  than  that  either  they  fpoke  thus  (to  put 
the  moft  favourable  conftrudion  upon  it)  from 
grofs  ignorance : they  knew  not  what  popery 
was ; they  knew  not  what  dodrines  thofe  are 
which  the  Papills  teach  : or  they  wilfully  fpoke 
what  they  knew  to  be  falfe,  probably  thinking 
thereby  to  do  God  fervice.  Now,  take  this  to 
yourfelves,  whofoever  ye  are,  high  or  low,  dif- 
fenters  or  churchmen,  clergy  or  laity,  who  have 
advanced  this  fhamelefs  charge,  and  digefl;  it 
how  you  can. 

But  how  have  ye  not  been  afraid,  if  ye  be* 
lieve  there  is  a God,  and  that  he  knoweth  the 
fecrets  of  your  hearts  (I  fpeak  now  to  you, 
preachers,  more  efpecially,  of  whatever  deno- 
mination) to  declare  fo  grofs,  palpable  a lie, 
in  the  name  of  the  God  of  truth  ? I cite  you 
all,  before  the  judge  of  all  the  earth,  either 
publickly  to  prove  your  charge;  or  by  publick- 
ly  retrading  it,  to  make  the  belt  amends  you 
can,  to  God,  to  me,  and  to  the  world. 

For  the  full  fatisfadion  of  thofe  who  have  been 
abufed  by  thefe  fhameful  men,  and  almoft 
brought  to  believe  a lie,  1 will  here  add  my  fe- 
rious  judgment  concerning  the  church  of  Rome, 
wrote  fome  time  fince  to  a prielt  of  that  com- 
munion. 


S I R, 


[ 125  ] 


SIR, 

I Return  you  thanks  both  for  the  favour  of 
your  letter,  and  for  your  recommending  my 
father's  propofals  to  the  Sorbonne. 

I have  neither  time  nor  inclination  for  con- 
troverfy  with  any  ; but  leaf!  of  all  with  the  Ro- 
manics. And  that,  both  becaufe  I cannot  trufl: 
any  of  their  quotations,  without  confulting  every 
fentence  they  quote  in  the  originals  : and  be* 
caufe  the  originals  themfelves  can  very  hardly  be 
trailed,  in  any  of  the  points  controverted  be- 
tween them  and  us.  I am  no  llranger  to  their 
fkill  in  mending  thofe  authors,  who  did  not  at 
firfl  fpeak  home  to  their  purpofe ; as  alfc  in 
purging  them  from  thofe  paflages,  which  con- 
tradidied  their  emendations.  And  as  they  have 
not  wanted  opportunity  to  do  this,  fo  doubtlefs 
they  have  carefully  ufed  it,  with  regard  to  a 
point  that  fo  nearly  concerned  them,  as  the  fu» 
premacy  of  the  bilhop  of  Rome.  I am  not  there- 
fore furprifed,  if  the  works  of  St.  Cvprian  (as 
they  are  called)  do  flrenuoufly  maintain  it  : but 
I am,  that  they  have  not  been  better  correfled  ; 
for  they  Hill  contain  palfages  that  abfolutely  over- 
throw it.  What  grofs  negligence  was  it,  to  leave 
his  74th  epiltle  (to  Pompeianus)  out  of  the  Index 
Expurgatorius  ? Wherein  Pope  Cyprian  fo  flatly 
charges  Pope  Stephen,  with  pride  and  objiinacy , 
and  with  being  a defender  of  the  caufe  of  Heretics , 
and  that  againji  Chriflians  and  the  very  church  of 
F 3 God? 


[ 126  ] 

God  ? He  that  can  reconcile  this  with  his  be- 
lieving Stephen  die  infallible  head  of  the  church, 
may  reconcile  the  gofpel  with  the  Koran. 

Yet  I can  by  no  means  approve  the  fcurrility 
and  contempt,  with  which  the  Romanills  have 
often  been  treated.  I dare  not  rail  at,  or  de- 
fpife  any  man  : much  lefs  thofe  who  profefs  to 
believe  in  the  fame  mailer.  But  1 pity  them 
much  ; having  the  fame  affurance,  that  Jefus  is 
the  Chrifl,  and  that  no  Romanilt  can  expert  to 
to  be  faved,  according  to  the  terms  of  his  cove- 
nant. For  thus  faith  our  Lord,  Whojoever Jliatl 
break  one  of  the  leaf  of  tliefe  commandments , and 
JhalUeach  men  Jo,  he fhall  be  called  the  leajl  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  And  if  any  man Jhall  add  un- 
to thefe  things,  God  fiall  add  unto  him  the  plagues 
that  are  written  in  this  book.  But  all  Romanills, 

as  fuch,  do  both.  Ergo 

The  minor  I prove,  not  from  Proteflant  authors, 
or  even  from  particular  writers  of  their  own  com- 
munion: but  from  the  public,  authentic  records 
of  the  church  of  Rome.  Such  are  The  canons 
and  decrees  of  the  council  of  Trent.  And  the 
edition  I ufe  was  printed  at  Colen,  and  approv- 
ed by  authority. 

And  firft.  All  Romanills,  as  fuch,  do  break 
and  teach  men  to  break,  one  (and  not  the  leafl) 
of  thofe  commandments ; the  words  of  which, 
concerning  images  are  thefe, 

nib  ntnntiT)  m 


Now 


[ 12/  ] 


Now  niTtit  (as  every  fmatterer  in  Hebrew 
knows)  is  incurvare  Je,  + procumhere,  honoris 
exhibendi  caufa,  (and  is  accordingly  rendered  by 
the  fev'enty  in  this  very  place,  (by  a Greek 
word  of  the  very  fame  import,  wposk»«“»)  but 
the  council  of  Trent,  (and  confequently  all  Ro- 
manifts,  as  fuch,  all  who  allow  the  authority  of 
that  council)  teaches  fefliiou  25.  paragraph  2. 
That  it  is  i Legitimus  imaginum  ufts,- — as  hono - 
rem  exhibere,  procumbendo  corum  eis. 

Secondly,  All  Romanifts,  as  fuch,  do  add  to 
thofe  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of 
life.  For  in  the  bull  of  Pius  IV.  fubjoined  to 
thofe  canons  and  decrees , I find  all  the  additions 
following : 

1.  Seven  Sacraments,  2,  Tranfubftantiation, 
3.  Communion  in  one  kind  only,  4,  Purgatory, 
and  praying  for  the  dead  therein,  5.  Praying  to 
faints,  6.  Veneration  of  reliques,  7.  Worfhip 
of  images,  8.  Indulgences,  9.  The  priority,  and 
univeifalitv,  of  the  Roman  church,  10.  The  fu- 
premacy  of  the  bifhop  of  Rome.  All  thefe 
things  therefore  do  the  Romanifts  add  to  thofe 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  life. 

I am,  — — 

Tuefd.  28.  My  mouth  was  opened,  and  my 
heart  enlarged,  ftrongly  to  declare  to  above  two 
thoufand  people  at  Bradford,  That  the  king- 
F 4 do  m 

+ To  bow  down  before  any  one,  in  token  of  honouring  him. 

+ i.  e.  The  proper  ufe  of  images  is,  to  honour  them,  by  bow* 
ing  down  before  them. 


[ 128  ] 

dom  of  God  (within  us)  is  not  meat  and  drink , 
hut  righteoufnefs  and  peace  and joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghoft.  At  Bath  I once  more  offered  Chrijl  to 
jujlify  the  ungodly.  In  the  evening  I met  my 
brother,  juft  come  from  London.  The  Lord 
hath  indeed  done  great  things  for  us  already. 
Not  unto  us,  hut  unto  thy  name  be  the  praife. 

Wednefday  29.  I rode  with  my  brother  to 
Wells  and  preached  on,  JVhat  mujt  I do  to  be fav~ 
ed  ? In  the  evening  I fummed  up  at  the  New- 
Room,  what  I had  faid  at  many  times,  from  the 
beginning,  of  faith,  holinefs  and  good  works,  as 
the  root,  the  tree  and  the  fruit,  which  God 
hadjoined,  and  man  ought  not  to  put  afunder. 

Friday,  Aug.  31.  I left  Briftol,  and  reached 
London,  about  eight  on  Sunday  morning.  In 
the  afternoon  I heard  a fermon  wherein  it  was 
afferted,  that  our  repentance  was  not  fincere, 
but  feigned  and  hypocritical,  1.  If  we  relapfed 
into  fin,  foon  after  repenting  : efpecially  if  a. 
We  did  not  avoid  all  occafions  of  fin,  or  if  3. 
"We  relapfed  frequently ; and  moft  of  all,  if  4. 
Our  hearts  were  hardened  thereby.  O what  a 
hypocrite  was  I (if  this  be  fo)  for  near  twdce  ten 
years ! But  I know  it  is  not  fo.  I know  every 
one  under  the  law,  is  even  as  I was.  Every  one 
when  he  begins  to  fee  his  fallen  ftate,  and  to  feel 
the  wrath  of  God  abiding  on  him,  relapfes  into 
the  fin  that  moft  eafily  befets  him , foon  after  re- 
penting of  it.  Sometimes  he  avoids,  and  at  many 
other  times  canhot  perfuade  bimfelf  to  avoid  the 

occafions 


[ t29  3 

occa/ions  of  it.  Hence  his  relapfes  are  frequent, 
and  of  confequence  his  heart  is  hardened  more 
and  more.  And  yet  ail  this  time,  he  is  fincerely 
driving  againil  fin.  He  can  fay  unfeignedly, 
without  hypocrify,  the  thing  which  I do,  I approve 
not ; the  evil  which  I would  not,  that  I do.  To  will 
is  even  thenj brefent  with\P\m  ; but  how  to  perform 
that  which  is  good , he  fnds  not.  Nor  can  he, 
with  all  his  fincerity  avoid  any  one  of  thefe  four 
marks  of  hypocrify,  till  being  juflifed  by  faith,  he 
hath  peace  zuith  God,  through  Jefus  Chrifl  our 
Lord. 

This  helplefs  ftate  I took  occafion  to  defcribe 
atKennington,  to  eight  or  ten  thoufand  people, 
from  thofe  words  of  the  pfalmift,  Inmunerable 
troubles  are  come  about  me  ; my  fins  have  taken 
fuch  hold  upon  me,  that  I am  not  able  to  look  up  .*■ 
yea,  they  are  more  in  number  than  the  hairs  of  my 
head , and  my  heart  hath  failed  me. 

Mond.  Sept.  3.  I talked  largely  with  my  mo- 
ther, who  told  me,  that  till  a fliort  time  fince, 
fhe  had  fcarce  heard  fuch  a thing  mentioned,  as 
the  having  forgivenefs  of  fins  now,  or  God’s 
Spirit  bearing  witnefs  with  our  fpirit : much 
lefs  did  fhe  imagine,  that  this  was  the  common 
privilege  of  alL  true  believers.  “ Therefore 
(faid  Ihe)  I never  durft  alk  for  it  myfelf.  But 
two  or  three  weeks  ago,  while  my  fon  Hall  was 
pronouncing  thofe  words,  in  delivering  the  cup 
to  me.  The  blood  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrijl,  which 
was  given  for  thee;  the  words  fimck  through 
*5 


r 130  ] 

my  heart,  and  I knew  God  for  Chri/t’s  fake  had 
forgiven  me  all  my  fins.” 

* I a/ked,  Whether  her  father  (Dr.  Annefley) 
had  not  the  fame  faith  ? And,  whether  /he  had 
not  heard  him  preach  it  to  others  ? Sheanfwered, 
“ He  had  it  himfelf,  and  declared  a little  before 
his  death,  that  for  more  than  forty  years,  he  had 
no  darknefs,  no  fear,  no  doubt  at  all,  of  his  being 
accepted  in  the  Beloved.  But  that  neverthelefs, 
/he  did  not  remember  to  have  heard  him  preach, 
no  not  once,  explicitly  upon  it:  whence  fhe 
fuppofed  he  alfo  looked  upon  it  as  the  peculiar 
ble/fing  of  a few,  not  as  promifed  to  all  the  people 
of  God.” 

Both  at  Mr.  B ’s  at  fix,  and  at  Dowgate- 

hill  at  eight,  were  many  more  than  the  houfes 
could  contain.  Several  perfons  who  were  then- 
convinced  of  fin,  came  to  me  the  next  morning. 
One  came  alfo,  who  had  been  mourning  long, 
and  earneflly  defired  us  to  pray  with  her.  We 
had  fcarce  begun,  when  the  enemy  began  to  tear 
her,  fo  that  /he  fcreamed  out  as  in  the  pangs  of 
death.  But  his  time  was  /hort : for  within  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  fhe  was  full  of  the  peace  that 
pa/feth  all  under/landing. 

I afterwards  called  on  Mrs.  E — r,  with  whom 
was  one  lately  come  from  Bri/toi,  in  deep  an- 
guifh  of  fpirit.  We  cried  to  God,  and  he  foon 
declared  his  falvation,  fo  that  both  their  mouths 
weie  filled  with  hispraife. 

Thence  I went  to  a poor  woman,  who  had 

been 


[ *3*  ] 

been  long  in  defpair.  I was  glad  to  meet  with 

Mrs.  R there  ; the  perfon  mentioned  in 

Mr.  Whitefield’s  journal,  who  after  three  years 
madnefs  (fo  called)  was  fo  deeply  convinced  of 
fin  at  Beach-lane,  and  foon  after  rejoiced  in  God 
her  Saviour. 

Thurf.  6.  I was  fent  for  by  one  who  began  to 
/«/herfelfa  finner.  But  a fine  lady  unexpect- 
edly coming  in,  there  was  fcarce  room  for  me  to 
fpeak.  The  fourth  perfon  in  the  company,  was 
a poor,  unbred  girl;  who  beginning  to  tell  what 
God  had  done  for  her  foul,  the  others  looked  one 
at  another,  as  in  amaze,  but  did  not  open  their 
mouths.  I then  exhorted  them,  not  to  ceafe 
from  crying  to  God,  till  they  too  could  fay,  as 
flte  did,  “ My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I am  his  : I 
am  as  fare  of  it,  as  that  I am  alive.  For  his  Spirit 
beats  witnefs  with  my  fpirit,  that  I am  a child  of 
God.” 

Sund.  9.  I declared  to  about  ten  thoufand  in 
Moorfields,-  what  they  mull  do  to  be  faved.  My 
mother  went  with  us  about  five  to  Kennington, 
where  were  fuppofed  to  be  twenty  thoufand 
people.  I again  infilled  on  that  foundation  of 
all  our  hope,  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jefus,  and  thou 
Jhalt  be  faved.  From  Kennington  I went  to  a 
fociety  at  Lambeth.  The  houfe  being  filled,  the 
reft  flood  in  the  garden.  The  deep  attention 
they  fhewed  gave  me  a good  hope,  that  they  will 
not  all  be  forgetful  hearers. 

F 6 


Theraea  - 


[ *3*  ] 


Thence  I went  to  our  fociety  ac  Fetter-lane, 
and  exhorted  them  to  love  one  another.  The 
want  of  love  was  a general  complaint.  We  laid 
it  open  before  our  Lord.  We  foon  found, 
lie  had  fent  us  an  anfwer  of  peace.  Evil  fur- 
mifings  vanifhed  away.  The  flame  kindled  again 
as  at  the  firfl,  and.  our  hearts  were  knit  toge- 
ther. 

Mond.  10.  I accepted  a prefhng  invitation  to 
go  to  Plaiflow.  At  five  in  the  evening  I ex- 
pounded there,  and  at  eight  again.  But  moll  of 
the  hearers  were  very  quiet  and  unconcerned. 
In  the  morning  therelore  I fpoke  ftronger  words. 
But  it  is  onlv  the  voice  of  the  Sen  of  God, 
which  is  able  to  wake  the  dead. 

Wednef.  12.  In  the  evening  at  Fetter-lane, 
I deferibed  the  life  of  faith,  and  many  who 
had  fancied  themfelves  ftrong  therein,  found 
they  were  no  more  than  new-born  babes. 
At  eight  I exhorted  our  brethren  to  keep 
clofe  to  the  church,  and  to  all  the  ordi- 
nances of  God,  and  to  aim  only  at  living  a 
quiet  and  peaceable,  life,  in  all  godlinejs  and 
honejly. 

Thurf.  13.  A ferious  clergyman  defired  to 
know,  in  what  points  we  differed  from  the  church 
of  England?  I anfwered,  “To  the  heft  of  my 
knowledge,  in  none  : the  doftrines  we  preach, 
are  the  doclrines  of  the  church  of  England  : in- 
deed the  fundamental  doFlrines  of  the  church, 

clearly 


[ *33  ] 

clearly  laid  down,  both  in  her  prayers,,  articles, 
and  homilies.” 

* He  afked,  in  what  points  then  do  you  differ 
from  the  other  clergy  of  the  church  of  England? 
I anfwered,  “ In  none  from  that  part  of  the 
clergy  who  adhere  to  the  doctrines  of  the  church 
but  from  that  part  of  the  clergy  who  diffent  from 
the  church  (though  they  own  it  not)  I differ  in 
the  points  following  r 

Jirfl,  They  fpeak  of  juflification,  either  as  the 
fame  thing  with  fandlification,  or  as  fomething 
confequent  upon  it.  I believe  juflification  to  be 
wholly  diflinct  from  fandlification,  and  neceffa- 
rily  antecedent  to  it. 

Secondly,  They  fpeak  of  our  own  holinefs  or 
good  works,  as  the  caufe  of  our  juflification  ; or, 
that  for  the  fake  of  which,  on  account  of  which 
we  are  juflified  before  God.  I believe,  nei- 
ther  our  own  holinefs  nor  good  works,  are  any 
part  of  the  caufe  of  our  juflification  ; but  that 
the  death  and  righteoufnefs  of  Cbrifl,  are  the- 
whole  and  foie  caufe  of  it ; or,  that for  the fake  of 
which , on  account  of  which , we  are  juflified  before 
God. 

Thirdly,  They  fpeak  of  good  works,  as  a 
condition  of  juflification,  neceffarily  previous  to 
it.  I believe  no  good  work  can  be  previous  to- 
juflification,  nor  confequently  a condition  of  it : 
but  that  we  are  juflified,  (being  till  that  hour  un- 
godly, and  therefore  incapable  of  doing  any  good 
work)  by  faith  alone,  faith  without  works,  faith 

(though 


[ m ] 

(though  producing  all,  yet)  including  no  good 
work. 

Fourthly,  They  fpeak  oifanElif cation  (or  ho- 
linefs)  as  if  it  were  an  outward  thing,  as  if  it  con- 
fided chiefly,  if  not  wholly,  in  thofe  two  points, 
1.  The  doing  no  harm,  2.  The  doing  good  (as  it 
is  called)  i.  e.  The  ufing  the  means  of  grace,  and 
helping  our  neighbour. 

1 believe  it  to  be,  an  inward  thing,  namely, 
The  hfe  of  God  in  the  foul  of  man ; a participation 
of  the  divine  nature  ; the  mind  that  was  in  Chrifl ; 
or,  the  renewal  of  our  heart,  after  the  image  oj  him 
that  created  us. 

Laftly,  They  fpeak  of  the  new  birth,  as  an 
outward  thing,  as  if  it  were  no  more  than  bap- 
tifm  ; or,  at  mofi,  a change  from  outward  wick - 
ednefs  to  outward  goodnefs ; from  a vicious  to 
(what  is  called)  a virtuous  life.  I believe  it  to  be 
an  inward  thing;  a change  from  inward  wicked- 
nefs  to  inward  goodnefs  ; an  entire  change  of 
our  inmoft  nature  from  the  image  of  the  devil, 
(wherein  we  are  born)  to  the  image  of  God  : a 
change  from  the  love  of  the  creature  to  the 
love  of  the  Creator,  from  earthly  and  fenfual, 
to  heavenly  and  holy  affe&ions : in  a word, 
a change  from  the  tempers  of  the  fpirits  of 
darknefs,  to  thofe  of  the  angels  of  God  in  hea- 
ven. 

There  is  therefore  a wide,  effential,  funda- 
mental, irreconcileable  difference  between  us  : fo 
that  if  they  fpeak  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jefus,  I am 

found'. 


r 135  ] 


found  a falfe  witnefs  before  God.  But  if  I teach 
the  way  of  God  in  truth,  they  are  blind  leaders  of 
the  blind. 

Sund.  16.  I preached  at  Moorfields  to  about 
ten  thoufand,  and  at  Kennington- common  to  I 
believe  near  twenty  thoufand,  on  thofe  words  of 
the  calmer  Jews  to  St.  Paul,  We  dejire  to  hear  of 
thee  what  thou  thinkefi ; for  as  concerning  this 
fedl,  we  know  that  every  where  it  is  fpoken  againji. 
At  both  places  I defcribed  the  real  difference  be- 
tween what  is  generally  called  Chriitianity,  and 
the  true  old  Chr ijlianity , which  under  the  new 
name  of  Method ifm  is  now  alfo  every  where  fpoken 
againji. 

Mond.  17.  I preached  again  at  Plaiftow,  on 
BleJJed  are  thofe  that  mourn.  It  pleafed  God  to 
give  us  in  that  hour,  two  living  inftances  of  that 
piercing  fenfe  both  of  the  guilt  and  power  of  fin, 
that  dread  of  the  wrath  of  God,  and  that  full  con- 
viction of  man’s  inability  either  to  remove  the 
power,  or  atone  for  the  guilt  of  fin  (called  by  the 
world  defpair)  in  which  properly  confift  that  po- 
verty of  fpirit  and  mourning  which  are  the  gate 
of  Chrifiian  bleffednefs- 

Tuef.  18.  A young  woman  came  to  us  at  If- 
lington,  in  fuch  an  agony  as  I have  feldom  feen. 
Her  forrow  and  fear  were  too  big  for  utterance ; 
fo,that  after  a few  words,  her  flrength  as  well  as 
her  heart  failing,  fhe  funk  down  to  the  ground. 
Only  her  fighs  and  her  groans  (hewed  (he  was 
yet  alive.  We  cried  unto  God  in  her  behalf 

We 


[ 136  ] 

We  claimed  the  promifes-  made  to  the  weary  and 
heavy-laden  : and  he  did  not  call  out  our  prayer. 
She  faw  her  Saviour,  as  it  were  crucified  before 
her  eyes.  She  laid  hold  on  him  by  faith,  and  her 
fpirit  revived. 

At  Mr.  B ’s  at  fix,  I was  enabled  earneftly 

to  call  all  the  weary  and  heavy-laden:  and  at  Mr. 
C — ’s  at  eight,  when  many  roared  aloud;  fome 
of  whom  utterly  refufed  to  be  comforted,  till 
they  Ihould  feel  their  fouls  at  reft  in  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb,  and  have  his  love  fhed  abroad  in  their 
hearts. 

Thurf.  20,  Mrs.  C being  in  deep  heavi- 

nefs,  had  defired  me  to  meet  her  this  afternoon. 
She  had  long  earneftly  defired  to  receive  the 
holy  communion,  having  an  unaccountably 
flrong  perfuafion,  “ That  God  would  manifeft 
himfelf  to  her  therein,  and  give  reft  to  her  foul.” 
But  her  heavinefs  being  now  greatly  increafed, 
Mr.  D — e gave  her  that  fa'al  advice,  “ Not  to 
communicate  till Jhe  had  living  faith.”  This  flill 
added  to  her  perplexity.  Yet  at  length  fhe  re- 
folved  to  obey  God  rather  than  man.  And  he 
was  made  known  unto  her  in  breaking  oj  bread. 
In  that  moment  fhe  felt  her  load  removed, 
fhe  knew  fhe  was  accepted  in  the  Beloved  ; 
and  all  the  time  I was  expounding  at  Mr. 

B ’s,  was  full  of  that  peace  which  cannot  be 

uttered.. 

•ti-id'  21.  Another  of  Dr.  Monro’s  patients 
came  to  defire  my  advice.  I found  no  reafon  to- 

believe 


[ *37  3 


believe  fhe  had  been  any  othervvife  mad  than 
every  one  is,  who  is  deeply  convinced  of  fin. 
And  I cannot  doubt,  but  if  fhe  will  truft  in  the 
living  God,  he  will  give  medicine  to  heal  her  fick- 
nefs. 

Sund.  23.  I declared  to  about  ten  thoufand  in 
Moorfields,  with  great  enlargement  of  fpirit,  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righte - 
oufnefs  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  GhoJL  At 
Kennington  I enforced  to  about  twenty  thou- 
fand, that  great  truth.  One  thing  is  needful. 
Thence  I went  to  Lambeth  and  fhewed  (to 
the  amazement,  it  feemed,  of  many  who  were 
prefentj  how  he  that  is  born  of  God  doth  not  com- 
mitJin. 

Mond.  24.  I preached  once  more  at  Plaiftow, 
and  took  my  leave  of  the  people  of  that 
place.  In  my  return,  a perfon  galloping 
fwiftly,  rode  full  againlt  me,  and  overthrew 
both  man  and  horfe  : but  without  any  hurt  to 
either.  Glory  be  to  him  who  Javes  both  man  and 
beajl ! 

Tuef.  25.  After  dining  with  one  of  our  bre- 
thren who  was  married  this  day,  I went  (as  ufual) 
to  the  fociety  at  St.  James’s,  weary  and  weak  in 
body.  But  God  ftrengthened  me  for  his  own 

work ; es  he  did  at  fix  at  Mr.  B *s  ; and  at 

eight  in  Winchefter-yard,  where  it  was  believed 
were  prefent  eleven  or  twelve  hundred  perfons; 
to  whom  I declared,  if  they  had  nothing  to  payt 
God  would frankly  forgive  them  all. 


Thurf. 


[ 138  ] 


Thurf.  27.  I went  in  the  afternoon  to  a fociety 
at  Deptford,  and  thence  at  fix  came  to  Turner’s- 
hall ; which  holds  (by  computation)  two  thou- 
fand  perfons.  The  prefs  both  within  and  with- 
out was  very  great.  In  the  beginning  of  the 
expounding,  there  being  a large  vault  beneath, 
the  main  beam  which  fiipported  the  floor  broke. 
The  floor  immediately  funk,  which  occafionecl 
much  noife  and  confufion  among  the  people. 
But,  two  or  three  days  before  a man  had 
filled  the  vault  with  hogfheads  of  tobacco. 
So  that  the  floor,  after  finking  a foot  or  two, 
relied  upon  them,  and  I went  on  without  inter- 
ruption. 

* Frid.  28.  I met  with  a frefh  proof,  that 
whatfoever  )c  ajh , believing,  ye  JJiall  receive.  A 
middle-aged  woman  defired  me  to  return  thanks 
for  her  to  God,  who  as  many  witneffes  then  pre- 
lent  teftified,  was  a day  or  two  before  really  dif- 
trafted,  and  as  fuch  tied  down  in  her  bed. 
But  upon  prayer  made  for  her,  {he  was 
inflantly  relieved,  and  reflored  to  a found 
mind. 

Mond.  Oflober  1.  I rode  to  Oxford ; andL 
found  a few  who  had  not  yet  forfaken  the  aflem- 
bling  themfelves  together  : to  whom  I explained 
that  holinefs  without  which  no  man  Jhall  fee  the 
Lord , 

Tuef.  2.  I went  to  many,  who  once  heard  the 
word  with  joy  ; but  when  the  fun  arofe , the  feed 
withered  away , Yet  fome  flill  defired  to  follow 

their 


C 139  ] 

their  Lord.  But  the  world  flood  fawning  or 
threatning  between  them.  In  the  evening 
I fhewed  them  the  tender  mercies  of  God, 
and  his  readinefs  ft  ill  to  receive  them.  The 
tears  ran  down  many  of  their  cheeks.  O thou 
lover  of  fouls,  feek  and  fave  that  which  is 
loft! 

* Wednef.  3.  I had  a little  leifure  to  take  a 
view'  of  the  lhattered  condition  of  things  here.- 
The  poor  prifoners  both  in  the  caflle  and  in  the 
city  prifon,  had  now  none  that  cared  for  their 
fouls,  none  to  inftruft,  advife,  comfort  and  build 
them  up  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  the  Lord 
Jefus.  None  was  left  to  vifit  the  work-houfes, 
where  alio  we  ufed  to  meet  with  the  moft  mov- 
ing objefts  of  .compaftion.  Our  little  fchool, 
where  about  twenty  poor  children,  at  a time, 
had  been  taught  for  many  years,  was  on  the  point 
of  being  broke  up ; there  being  none  now,  either 
to  fupport,  or  to  attend  it.  And  moft  of 
thofe  in  the  town,  who  were  once  knit  toge- 
ther, and  {Lengthened  one  another’s  hands 
in  God,  were  torn  afunder  and  fcattered 
abroad.  It  is  time  for  th.ee , Lord,  to  lay  to  thy 
hand ! 

At  eleven,  a little  company  of  us  met  to  in- 
treat God,  for  the  remnant  that  was  left . He 
immediately  gave  us  a token  for  good.  One  who 
had  been  long  in  the  gall  of  bitternefs,  full  of 
wrath,  ftrife  and  envy,  particularly  againft  one 
whom  fhe  had  once  tenderly  loved,  rofe  up  and 

fhewed 


[ Ho  ] 

ffiewcd  the  change  God  had  wrought  irr  her 
foul,  by  falfing  upon  her  neck,  and  with  many 
tears  killing  her*  The  fame  fpirit  we  found  re- 
viving in  others  alfo  ; fo  that  we  left  them,  not 
without  hope,  that  the  feed  which  had  been  fown. 
even  here,  Jhall  take  root  downward,  and  bear 
fruit  upwards 

About  fix  in  the  evening  I came  to  Burfordt 
and  at  feven  preached  to,  it  was  judged,  twelve 
or  fifteen  hundred  people,  on  Ckrijl  made  unto  us 
wifdom,  and  nghteou/ne/s,  and  Janclification,  and 
redemption.  Finding  many  approved  of  what  they 
had  heard,  that  they  might  not  rejl  in  that  appro- 
bation, I explained  an  hour  or  two  after  the  ho- 
Linefs  of  a Chriftian : and  in  the  morning  I 
fhewed  the  way  to  this  holinefs,  by  giving  both 
the  falfe  and  the  true  anfwer  to  that  important 
quell  ion,  IV hat  mpjl  I do  to  be  favedf 

About  three  in  the  afternoon,  I came  to  Mr. 
Benjamin  Seward’s,  at  Bengeworth,  near  Eve- 
Iham.  At  five  I expounded  in  his  houfe  (part 
of  the  xiiith  chapter  of  the  firft  of  Corinthians) 
and  at  feven  in  the  fchcol-houfe,  where  I invited 
all  who  had  nothing  to  pay,  to  come  and  ac- 
cept of  free  forgivenefi.  In  the  morning  I 
preached  near  Mr.  Seward’s  houfe,  to  a final! 
ferious  congregation,  on  thofe  words,  I came 
not  to  call  the  righteous^  but  /inner s to  repen- 
tance. 

In  the  evening  I reached  Gtoceller.  Sat.  6. 

At 


t ■<«  3 

At  five  in  the  evening  I explained  to  about  a 
thoufand  people,  the  nature,  the  caufe,  and  the 
condition  or  inftrument  of  juftification,  from 
ihefe  words,  To  him  that  worketh  not,  but  belicveth 
on  him  that  jujlifieth  the  ungodly , his  faith  is 
-counted  to  him  jor  rightecufnefs. 

Sued.  7.  A few,  I trull,  out  of  two  or  three 
thoufand,  were  awakened  by  the  explanation  of 
thofe  words,  God  hath  not  given  unto  you  the  fpi- 
rit  of  bondage  again,  to  fear  : but  he  hath  given 
unto  you  the  fpirit  of  adoption,  whereby  ye  cry , 
Abba,  Father.  About  eleven  I preached  at  Run- 
wick,  feven  miles  from  Glocefler.  The  church 
was  much  crowded,  though  a thoufand  or  up- 
wards, flayed  in  the  church-yard.  In  the  after- 
noon I explained  further  the  fame  words. 
What  muf  I do  to  be  faved?  I believe  fomethou- 
fands  were  then  prefent,  more  than  had  been  in 
the  morning.  O what  a harveft  is  here  ! When 
will  it  pleafe  our  Lord,  to  fend  more  labourers 
into  his  harveft  ? 

* Between  five  and  fix  I called  on  all  who  were 
prefent  (about  three  thoufand)  at  Stanley,  on  a 
little  green  near  thetown,  to  accept  of  Chrift,  as 
their  only  wifdom,  righteoufnefs,  Jantlifi cation  and 
redemption.  I was  {Lengthened  to  fpeak  as  I 
never  did  before,  and  continued  Ipeaking  near 
two  hours:  the  darknefs  of  the  night,  and  a lit- 
tle lightning  not  leflening  the  number,  but  in- 
creafing  the  ferioufnefs  of  the  hearers.  I con- 
cluded the  day  by  expounding  part  of  our 

Lord’s 


£ *42  ] 

Lord’s  fermon  on  the  mount,  to  a fmall,  ferious 
company  at  Ebly. 

Mond.  8.  About  eight  I reached  Hampton- 
Common,  nine  or  ten  miles  from  Glocefter. 
There  were,  it  was  computed,  five  or  fix  thou- 
fand  perfons.  I exhorted  them  all,  to  come  un- 
to God,  as  having  nothing  to  pay.  I could  glad- 
ly have  ftayed  longer  with  this  loving  people: 
but  I was  now  ftraitened  for  time.  After  fer- 
mon I therefore  haftened  away,  and  in  the  even- 
ing came  to  Briftol. 

Tuef.  9.  My  brother  and  I rode  to  Bradford. 
Finding  there  had  been  a general  mifreprefenta- 
tion  of  his  laft  fermon,  as  if  he  had  afierted  re- 
probation therein,  whereby  many  were  greatly 
offended  ; he  was  conftrained  to  explain  himfelf 
on  that  head,  and  to  (hew  in  plain  and  ftrong 
words,  that  God  willeth  all  men  to  be  fave.d.  Some 
were  equally  offended  at  this.  But  whether  men 
will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear ; we  may 
not Jhun  to  declare  unto  them,  all  the  counjcl  of 
God. 

At  our  return  in  the  evening  not  being  per- 
mitted to  meet  at  Weaver’s- Hall,  we  met  in  a 
large  room  on  Temple  backs,  where  (having 
gone  through  the  fermon  on  the  mount  and  the 
epiflles  of  St.  John)  I began  that  of  St  James, 
that  thofe  who  had  already  learned  the  true  na- 
ture of  inward  holinefs,  might  be  more  fully  in- 
ftrufted  in  outward  holinefs,  without  which  a!- 
fo  we  cannot  fee  the  Lord. 


Wcdnef. 


C x43  ] 

Wednef.  lo.  Finding  many  to  be  in  heavi- 
nefs,  whom  I had  left  full  of  peace  and  joy,  I 
exhorted  them  at  Baptift-Mills,  to  look  unto  Jz- 
fiis,  the  author  and  finijher  of  our  jaith.  We 
poured  out  our  complaint  before  him  in  the 
evening,  and  found  that  he  was  again  with  us  of 
a truth.  One  came  to  us  foon  after  I was  gone 
home,  who  was  ftill  in  grievous  darknefs.  But 
we  commended  her  caufe  to  God,  and  he  im- 
mediately re  llored  the  light  of  his  countenance. 

Thurf.  11.  We  were  comforted  by  the  com- 
ing in  of  one,  who  was  a notorious  drunkard 
and  common  fwearer.  But  he  is  wafhed,  and 
old  things  are  palfed  away.  Such  power  belong~ 
eth  unto  God.  In  the  evening  our  Lord  rofe  on 
many  who  were  wounded,  with  healing  in  his 
wings.;  and  others  who  till  the.n  were  carelefs 
and  at  eafe,  felt  the  two-edged  fword  that  cometh 
out  of  his  mouth. 

One  of  thefe  fhewed  the  agony  of  her  foul  by 
crying  aloud  to  God  for  help,  to  the  great  offence 
of  many,  who  eagerly  rebuked  her  that  Jhe Jhould 
hold  her  peace.  She  continued  in  great  torment 
all  night,  finding  no  reft  either  of  foul  or  body. 
But  while  a few  were  praying  for  her  in  the 
morning,  God  delivered  her  out  of  her  diftrefs. 

* Frid.  12.  We  had  frefh  occafion  to  obferve 
the  darknefs  which  was  fallen  on  many  who 
lately  rejoiced  in  God.  But  he  did  not  long 
hide  his  face  from  them.  On  Wednefday  the 
fpirit  of  many  revived  : on  Thurfday  evening 

many 


[ M4  J 

many  more  found  him  in  whom  they  had  believ- 
ed, to  be  a prefent  help  in  tune  of  trouble.  And 
never  do  I remember  the  power  of  God  to  have 
been  more  eminently  prefent  than  this  morning: 
when  a cloud  of  witnefles  declared  his  breaking 
the  gates  of  bra/s,  anil  fruiting  the  bar  s of  iron  in 
funder. 

Yet  I could  not  but  be  under  fome  concern, 
with  regard  to  one  or  two  perfons,  who  were 
tormented  in  an  unaccountable  manner,  and 
feemed  to  be  indeed  lunatic  as  well  as  fore  vexed . 
But  while  I was  mufing,  what  would  be  the  if- 
fue  of  thefe  things,  the  anfwer  I received  from 
the  word  of  God  was,  Glory  to  God  in  the  hrghejl , 
and  on  earth  peace,  good-will -towards  men. 

* Soon  after  I was  fent  for  to  one  of  thofe, 
who  was  fo  flrangely  torn  by  the  devil,  that  I al- 
moll  wondered  her  relations  did  not  fay,  “Much 
religion  hath  made  thee  mad.”  We  prayed 
God  to  bruife  Satan  under  her  feet.  Immedi- 
ately we  had  the  petition  we  afked  of  him.  She 
cried  out  vehemently,  “ He  is  gone, he  is  gone!” 
And  was  filled  with  the  fpirit  of  love  and  of  a 
found  mind.  I have  feen  her  many  times  fince, 
ilrong  in  the  Lord.  When  I afked  abruptly, 
« What  do  you  defire  now?”  She  anfwered. 
“ Heaven.”  I afked,  “ What  is  in  your 
heart  ?”  She  replied,  “ God.”  I afked,  “ But 
how  is  your  heart  when  any  thing  provokes 
you?”  She  faid,  **  By  the  grace  of  God,  lam 
not  provoked  at  any  thing.  All  the  things  of 

this 


[ H5  3 


this  world  pafs  by  me  as  lhadows,”  Ye  have feen 
the  end  of  the  Lord.  Is  he  not  very  pitiful  and 
of  tender  mercy  P 

We  had  a refrefhing  meeting  at  one  with 
many  of  our  fociety ; who  fail  not  to  obferve  as 
health  permits,  the  weekly  fall  of  our  church, 
and  will  do  fo  by  God’s  help,  as  long  as  they 
call  themfelves  members  of  it.  And  would  to 
God,  all  who  contend  for  the  rites  and  ceremo- 
nies of  the  church  (perhaps  with  more  zeal  than 
meeknefs  of  wifdom)  would  firlt  drew  their  own 
regard  for  her  difeipline,  in  this  more  impor- 
tant branch  of  it ! 

At  four  I preached  near  the  Fifh -Ponds  (at  the 
defire  of  one  who  had  Iona  laboured  under  the 

O 

apprehenfion  of  it)  on  the  blafphemy  againft  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  that  is  according  to  the  plain  ferip- 
tural  account,  The  openly  and  malicioufly  offer  tin g. 
that  the  miracles  of  Chrifl  were  wrought  by  the 
\ power  of  the  devil. 

* Sat.  13.  I was  with  one,  who  being  in  deep 
anguifh  ol  fpirit,  had  been  the  day  before  to  ark 
a clergyman’s  advice.  He  told  her,  “ Her  head 
was  out  of  order,  and  file  muft  go  and  take  p'ny- 
fic.'  In  the  evening  we  called  upon  God  for 
medicine,  to  heal  thofe  that  were  broken  in  heart. 
And  five  who  had  long  been  in  the  ihadow  of 
death,  knew  they  were  puffed  from  death  unto  life. 

The  lharp  froft  in  the  mornincr,  Sunday  14. 
i did  not  prevent  about  1500,  from  being  at  Han- 
nam,  to  whom  I called,  in  the  veords  of  ourgra- 

\ ol.  XXVII.  G clous 

" 


[ 146  ] 

clous  Mafter,  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  are  weary 
and  heavy-laden,  and  1 will  give  you  rejl.  In  the 
evening  we  claimed  and  received  the  promife, 
for  feveral  who  were  weary  and  heavy-laden . 

Mond.  15.  Upon  a preffing  invitation,  fome 
time  fince  received,  I fet  out  for  Wales.  About 
lour  in  the  afternoon,  I preached  on  a little 
green,  at  the  foot  of  the  Devauden  (a  high  hill, 
two  or  three  miles  beyond  C hep  flow]  to  three 
or  four  hundred  plain  people,  on  Chrijl  our  wif- 
dom,  righteoujnefs,  fandlifi cation  and  redemption. 
After  fertnon,  one  who  I trull  is  an  old  difciple 
of  Chri ft,  willingly  received  us  into  his  houfe: 
whether  ..many  following,  I fit e wed  them  their 
need  of  a Saviour,  from  thefe  words,  Biffed  are 
the  poor  in  /pint.  In  the  morning  I defcribed 
more  fully  the  way  to  falvation.  Believe  in  the 
Lord  Jefus,  and  thou  Jkalt  be  faved : and  then 
taking  leave  of  my  friendly  holf,  before  two 
came  to  Abergavenny. 

I felt  in  myfelf  a flrong  averfton  to  preaching 

here.  However  I went  to  Mr.  W (the  per- 

fon  in  whofe  ground  Mr.  Whitefield  preached) 
to  defire  the  ufe  of  it.  He  faid,  “ With  all  his 
heart — if  the  minifler  was  not  willing  to  let  me 
have  the  ufe  of  the  church:”  after  whofe  refufal 
(for  I wrote  a line  to  him  immediately)  he  invit- 
ed me  to  his  houfe.  About  a thouland  people 
flood  patiently  (though  the  froft  was  finarp,  it  be- 
ing after  fun-fet)  while  from  Afts  xxviii.  22.  I 
fimplv  defcribed  the  plain,  old  religion  of  the 

church 


C »47  ] 

church  of  England,  which  is  now  almoft  every 
where  fpoken  againft,  under  the  new  name  of 
Methodifm.  An  hour  after  I explained  it  a lit- 
tle more  fully,  in  a neighbouring  houfe,  (hewing 
how  God  hath  exalted  Jefus  to  be  a Prince  and  a 
Saviour , to  give  repentance  and  remijjion  of  fins. 

Wednef.  15.  The  froft  was  {harper  than  be- 
fore. However  five  or  fix  hundred  people  flay- 
ed, while  I explained  the  nature  of  that  falva- 
tion  which  is  through  faith,  yea  faith  alone : 
and  the  na'u  e of  that  living  faith,  through  which 
cometh  this  falvation.  About  noon  1 came  to 
Ufk,  where  I.  preached  to  a fmall  company  of 
poor  people,  on  thofe  words,  The  Son  of  man  is 
come,  to  fave  that  which  is  lojl.  One  grey-head- 
ed man  wept  and  trembled  exceedingly  : and 
another  who  was  there  (I  have  fince  heard)  as 
well  as  two  or  three  who  were  at  the  Devauden, 
are  gone  quite  dijlradled:  that  is,  they  mourn 
and  refufe  to  be  comforted,  till  they  have  redemp- 
tion through  his  blood. 

When  I came  to  Ponty-Pool  in  the  afternoon, 
being  unable  to  procure  any  more  convenient 
place,  I flood  in  the  ftreet,  and  cried  aloud  to 
five  or  fix  hundred  attentive  hearers,  To  believe 
in  the  Lord  Jefus,  that  they  might  be  faved.  In 
the  evening  I fhewed  his  willingnefs  to  fave,  all 
who  defire  to  come  unto  God  through  him. 
Many  were  melted  into  tears.  It  may  be,  that 
fome  will  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience. 

Thurfd.  18.  I endeavoured  to  cut  them  off 
G 2 from 


[ *48  ] 

from  all  falfe  fupports  and  vain  dependencies,  by 
explaining  and  applying  that  fundamental  truth, 
To  him  that  worketh  not , but  believeth  on  him  that 
jujiijidh  the  ungodly , his  jaith  is  counted  to  him 
Jor  righteoufnejs. 

When  we  were  at  the  Devauden  on  Monday, 
a poor  woman  who  lived  fix  miles  off,  came 
thither  in  great  heavinefs.  She  was  deeply  con- 
vinced of  fin,  and  weary  of  it ; but  found  no 
way  to  efcape  from  it.  She  walked  from  thence 
to  Abergavenny  on  Tuefday,  and  on  Wednefday 
from  Abergavenny  to  Ufk.  Thence  in  the  af- 
ternoon file  came  to  Ponty-Pool  ; where  between 
twelve  and  one  in  the  morning,  after  a fharp  con- 
teft  in  her  foul,  our  Lord  got  unto  himfelf  the 
victory  : and  the  love  of  God  was  filed  abroad 
in  her  heart,  teflifying  that  her  fins  were  for- 
given her.  She  went  on  her  way  rejoicing  to 
Cardiff;  whither  I came  in  the  afternoon.  And 
about  five  (the  minifler  notbeing  willing  I fhould 
preach  in  the  church  on  a week-day)  I preached 
in  the  Shire-hall  (a  large  convenient  place)  on 
Believe  and  thou  Jhalt  be  faved.  Several  were 
there  who  laboured  much  to  make  a diflurbance. 
But  our  Lord  fuffered  them  not.  At  feven  I 
explained  to  a much  more  numerous  audience 
the  blefiedaefs  of  mourning  and  poverty  oj  fpirit. 
Deep  attention  fat  on  the  faces  of  the  hearers; 
many  of  whom,  I trull,  have  believed  our  rpjrt. 

Friday  19.  I preached  in  the  morning  at  New- 
port. on  What  mufl  I do  to  be  Javtd?  To  the 

mo  ft 


[ M9  ] 

moll  infenfible,  ill-behaved  people  I have  ever 
feen  in  Wales.  Oneantient  man,  during  a great 
part  of  the  feimon,  curbed  and  fw ore  almoftin- 
celTantly:  and  towards  the  conclufion  took  up 
a great  ftone,  which  he  many  times  attempted  to 

throw.  But  that  he  could  not  do. Such  the 

champions ! Such  the  arms  againft  field-preach- 
ing! 

At  four  I preached  at  the  Shire-hall  of  Cardiff 
again,  where  many  gentry,  I found  were  prefent. 
Such  freedom  of  fpeech  I have  feldom  had,  as 
was  given  me  in  explaining  thofe  words.  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink , but  rig'hte- 
oufntfs  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Gliojl.  At 
fix(almoft  the  whole  town  (I  was  informed)  came 
together,  to  whom  I explained  the  fix  lafl  beati- 
tudes, but  my  heart  was  fo  inlarged,  I knew  not 
how  to  give  over,  fo  that  we  continued  three 
hours.  O may  the  feed  they  have  received,  have 
its  fruit  unto  holinefs,  and  in  the  end,  everlaft- 
ing  life  ! 

Sat.  20.  I returned  to  Briflol.  I have  feen  no 
part  of  England  fo  pleafant  for  fixly  or  feventv 
miles  together,  as  thofe  parts  of  Wales  I have 
been  in.  And  mod  of  the  inhabitants  are  in- 
deed ripe  for  the  gofpel.  I mean  (if  the  expref- 
fion  appear  ftrange)  they  are  earnefly  defirous  of 
being  inltrufted  in  it : and  as  utterly  ignorant  of 
it  they  are,  as  any  Creek  or  Cherikee  Indians. 
I do  not  mean  they  are  ignorant  of  the  name  of 
Chrift.  Many  of  them  can.  fay  both  the  Lord’s 
G g prayer 


[ *5°  ] 

prayer  and  the  belief.  Nay  and  fome,  all  the 
the  catechifm  : but  take  them  out  of  the  road  of 
what  they  have  learned  by  rote,  and  they  know 
no  more  (nine  in  ten  of  thofe  with  whom  I con- 
verfed)  either  of  gofpel  falvation,  or  of  that  faith, 
whereby  alone  we  can  be  fayed,  than  Chicali  or 
Tomo  Chachi.  Now',  wdtat  fpirit  is  he  of,  who 
had  rather  thefe  poor  creatures  fhould  pet  ifh  for 
lack  of  knowledge,  than  that  they  fhould  be  fav- 
ed,  even  by  the  exhortations  of  Howell  Harris, 
or  an  itinerant  preacher  ? 

Finding  a flacknefs  creeping  in  among  them 
who  had  begun  to  run  well,  on  Sunday  21, 
both  in  the  morning  and  afternoon,  I inforced 
thofe  words,  As  ye  have  received  the  Lord  Jefus 
Chrijl,  fo  walk  ye  in  him , In  the  evening  I en- 
deavoured to  quicken  them  farther,  by  defer  ib- 
ing  pure  and  undefiled  religion  : and  the  next  day, 
to  incourage  them  in  purfutng  it,  by  inforcing 
thofe  words  of  our  bleffed  Matter,  la  the  world 
ye  Jhall  have  tribulation  ; but  be  of  good  cheer  : 1 
have  overcome  the  world. 

Tuef.  23.  In  riding  to  Bradford,  I read  over 
Mr.  Law’s  book  on  the  new-birth:  plrilofophi- 
cal,  fpeculalive,  precarious;  Behmemfh,  \ord 
and  vain ! 

O what  a fall  is  there  1 

At  eleven  I preached  at  Bearfield  to  about  three 

thoufand, 


C 151  ] 

fhoufand,  on  the  fpirit  of  nature,  of  bondage, 
and  of  adoption. 

* Returning  in  the  evening,  I was  exceeding- 
ly preft  to  go  back  to  a young  woman  in  Kingf- 
wood,  (T  he  fa£l  I nakedly  relate,  and  leave 
every  man  to  his  own  judgment  of  it.)  1 went. 
She  was  nineteen  or  twenty  years  old,  but  (it 
feems)  could  not  write  or  read.  I found  her  on 
the  bed.  two  or  three  perfons  holding  her.  It 
was  a terrible  fight.  Anguifh,  horror  and  de- 
fpair,  above  all  defcription,  appeared  in  her 
pale  face.  The  thoufand  diftortions  of  her 
whole  body  (hewed,  how  the  dogs  of  hell  were 
gnawing  her  heart.  The  fhrieks  intermixed 
were-  fcarce  to  be  endured.  But  her  liony  eves 
could  not  weep.  She  fcreamed  out,  as  foon  as 
words  could  find  their  way,  “ I am  damned, 
damned  ; loft  for  ever.  Six  days  ago  you  might 
have  helped  me.  But  it  is  paft.  I am  the  de- 
vil’s now.  I have  given  myfelt  to  him.  His  X 
am.  Him  I mull  ferve.  With  him  I mull  go 
to  hell.  I will  be  his.  I will  ferve  him.  Izutlf 
go  with  him  to  hell.  I cannot  be  faved.  I will 
notbefaved.  I mull,  l will,  I will  be  damned.” 
She  then  began  praying  to  the  devil.  We  began 

“ Arm  of  the  Lord,  awake,  awake  1 

She  immediately  funk  down  as  afleep  ; but  as 
foon  as  we  left  off,  broke  cut  again,  with  unex- 
prelfible  vehemence, 

G 4 


“ Stony 


[ J52  ] 

“ Stony  hearts,  break ! I am  a warning  to 
You.  Break,  break,  poor,  ftony  hearts ! Will 
you  not  break  ? What  can  be  done  more  for 
ftony  hearts  ? I am  damned,  that  you  may  be 
faved.  Now  break,  now  break  poor  ftony 
hearts  ! You  need  not  be  damned,  though  I 
muft.”  She  then  fixed  her  eyes  on  the  corner 
of  the  eieling  and  faid,  “ There  he  is,  ay,  there 
he  is,  Come,  good  devil,  come.  Take  me  away. 
You  faid,  you  would  dalh  my  brains  out, 
Come,  do  it  quickly.  I am  your’s.  I will be 
vour’s.  Come  juft  now.  Take  me  away.”  We 
jnterrputed  her  by  calling  again  upon  God  : on 
which  Ihe  funk  down  as  before  : and  another 
young  woman  began  to  roar  out  as  loud  as  Ihe 
had  done.  My  brother  now  came  in,  it  being 
about  nine  o’clock.  We  continued  in  prayer 
till  pafl  eleven  ; when  God  in  a moment  fpoke 
peace  into  the  foul,  firft  of  the  firft  tormented, 
•and  then  of  the  other.  And  they  both  joined 
in  finging  praife  to  him,  who  had  ftilled  the  ene- 
my and  the  avenger. 

Wed.  24.  I preached  at  Baptift-Mills  on 
thofe  words  of  St.  Paul,  fpeaking  in  the  perfon 
of  one  under  the  law  (that  is,  ftill  carnal , andfold 
under  fin,  though  groaning  for  deliverance)  I 
know  that  in  me  dwelleth  no  good  thing.  A poor 
woman  told  me  afterwards,  l does  hope  as  my 
hujhand  wont  hinder  me  anymore.  For  I minded 
he  did Jhiver  every  bone  of  him,  and  the  tears  ran 
down  his  cheeks  like  the  rain.  I warned  our  little 

fociety 


[ m 1 


fociety  in  the  evening,  To  beware  of  levity, 
flacknefs  in  good  works,  and  defpifing  little 
things ; which  had  caufed  many  to  fall  again 
into  bondage. 

Thuf.  25.  I was  fent  for  to  one  in  Briftol, 
who  was  taken  ill  the  evening  before.  (This 
faft  too  I will  fimply  relate,  fo  far  as  I was  an 
ear,  or  eye-witnefs  of  it.)  She  lay  on  the  ground 
furioufly  gnafhing  her  teeth,  and  after  a while 
roared  aloud.  It  was  not  eafy  for  three  or  four 
perfons  to  hold  her,  efpecially  when  the  name 
of  Jefus  was  named.  We  prayed  ; the  violence 
ofher  fymptoms  ceafed,  though  without  a com- 
pleat  deliverance. 

In  the  evening,  being  fent  for  to  her  again,  I 
was  unwilling,  indeed  afraid  to  go  : thinking  it 
would  not  avail,  unlefs  fome  who  were  flrong 
in  faith,  were  to  wreftle  with  God  for  her.  I 
opened  my  teftament  on  thofe  words,  I was 
afraid , and  wait  and  lud  thy  talent  in  the  earth. 

I Hood  reproved  and  went  immediately.  She 
began  fcreaming  before  I came  into  the  room 
then  broke  out  into  a horrid  laughter,  mixt  with 
blafphemv,  grievous  to  hear.  One  who  from 
many  circumftances  apprehended  a preter- 
natural agent  to  be  concerned  in  this,  afk- 
ing,  “ How  didft  thou  dare  to  enter  into 
a ChriOian  Was  anfwered,  “She  is  not' 
a Chriftian.  She  is  mine.”  Q.  “ Doft  thou 
not  tremble  at  the  name  of  Jefus?’’  No 
words  followed,  but  fhe  fhrunk  back  and  trembled 
G .5  ex.~ 


C *54  ] 


exceedingly.  0.  “ Art  thou  not  increafing  thy 
own  damnation  ?’’  It  was  faintly  anfwered,  “ Ay, 
ay which  was  followed  by  frefii  curGng  and 
blafpheming. 

My  brother  coming  in,  (he  cried  out,  “ Preach- 
er ! Field-preacher!  I don’t  love  field-preaching.” 
This  was  repeated  two  hours  together,  with 
fpitting  and  all  the  expreflions  of  ltrong  aver- 
fion. 

We  left  her  at  twelve,  but  called  again  about 
noon,  on  Friday  2 7.  And  now  it  was  that  God 
{hewed,  he  heareth  the  prayer.  All  her  pangs 
ceafed  in  a moment.  She  w'as  {filled  with  peace, 
and  knew  that  the  fon  of  wickednefs  was  de- 
parted from  her. 

* Saturday  28.  I was  fent  for  to  Kingf- 
wood  again,  to  one  of  thofe  who  had  been 
fo  ill  before.  A violent  rain  began  juft  as 
1 fet  out,  fo  that  I was  thoroughly  wet  in 
a few  minutes.  Jult  at  that  time,  the  woman 
(then  three  miles  offj  cried  out,  “ Yonder 
comes  Wefley,  galloping  as  faff  as  he  can.” 
When  I was  come,  1 was  quite  cold  and  dead, 
and  fitter  for  ileep  than  prayer.  She  burfl  out 
in^o  a horrid  laughter  and  faid,  “ No  power,  no 
power;  no  faith,  no  faith.  She  is  mine.  Her 
foul  is  mine.  I have  her  and  will  not  let 
her  go.’’ 

We  begged  of  God  to  increafe  our  faith. 
Mean  while  her  pangs  increafed  more  and  more  ; 

k> 


[ 1 55  ] 

fo  that  one  would  have  imagined,  by  the  violence 
of  the  throes,  her  body  muft  have  been  (hattered 
to  pieces.  One  who  was  clearly  convinced  this  was 
no  natural  diforder,  faid,  “ I think,  Satan  is  let 
loofe.  I fear,  he  will  not  flop  here.”  And 
added,  “ I command  thee,  in  th#  name  of  the 
Lord  Jefus,  to  tell  if  thou  haft  commiflion  to 
torment  any  other  foul  ?”  It  was  immedi- 
ately anfwered,  “ I have.  L v C r, 

and  S h J s.”  (Two  who  lived  at 

fome  diftance,  and  were  then  in  perfect 
health.) 

We  betook  ourfelves  to  prayer  again,  and 
ceafed  not,  till  fhe  began,  about  fix  o'clock, 
with  a clear  voice,  and  compofed,  chearful 
look, 

“ Praife  God  from  whom  all  bleffings  flow  !” 

Sund.  28.  I preached  once  more  at  Bradford 
at  one  in  the  afternoon.  The  violent  rains  did 
not  hinder  more,  I believe,  than  ten  thoufand, 
from  earneftly  attending  to  what  I fpoke  on 
thofe  folemn  words,  I take  you  to  record  this  day , 
that  I am  pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men.  For  I 
have  notfhunned  to  declare  unto  you  all  the  counfel 
of  God. 

Returning  in  the  evening,  I called  at  Mrs. 

J ’s  in  Kingfwood.  S’ y J— — s and 

L Y C— — r were  there.  It  was  fcarce  a 

quarter  of  an  hour,  before  L— y C— r fell 
G 6 into 


[ *56  j 

into  a ftrange  agony,  and  prefently  after,  S— y 

J s.  The  violent  convulfions  all  over  rheir 

bodies,  were  fuch  as  words  cannot  defcribe. 
Their  cries  and  groans  were  too  horrid  to  be 
borne  : till  one  of  them  in  a tone  not  to  be  ex- 
preffed,  faid,  rt  Where  is  your  faith  now  ? 
Come,  go  to  prayers.  I will  pray  with  you. 
Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven .”  We  took 
the  advice,  from  whomfoever  it  came,  and 
poured  out  our  fouls  before  God,  till 

L y C r’s  agonies  fo  increafed,  that 

it  feemed  fire  was  in  the  pangs  of  death. 
But  in  a moment  God  fpoke  ; fhe  knew 
his  voice,  and  both  her  body  and  foul  were 
healed. 

We  continued  in  prayer  till  near  one,  tvhen 

S J ’s  voice  was  alfo  changed,  and  fhe 

"began  flrongly  to  call  upon  God.  This  fhe  did 
for  the  greateft  part  of  the  night.  In  the 
morning  we  renewed  our  prayers,  while  fhe 
was  crying  continually,  “ I burn,  I burn  ; 
O what  Shall  I do  ? I have  a fire  within 
me.  I cannot  bear  it.  Lord  Jefus  ! Help  ! ’ 
Amen,  Lord  Jefus  ! When  thy  lime  is  come. 

Wednef.  31.  I Strongly  inforced  on  thofe  who 
imagine  they  believe,  and  do  not,  As  the  body  with- 
out the fpirit  is  dead, fo  faith  uiihout  works  is  dead 
alfo.  The  power  of  God  was  in  an  unufual  man- 
ner prefent  at  the  meeting  of  the  bands  in  the 
evening.  Six  or  feven  were  deeply  con- 
vinced 


[ *57  ] 


vinced  of  their  unfaithful nefs  to  God,  and 
two  filled  again  with  his  love.  But  poor  Mary 

W remained  as  one  without  hope.  Her 

foul  refufed  comfort.  She  could  neither 

pray  herfelf,  nor  bear  to  hear  us.  At  laft 
fhe  cried  out,  Give  me  the  book  and  I 
will  fing.  She  began  giving  out  line  by  line 
(but  with  fuch  an  accent  as  art  could  never 
reach.) 

“ Why  do  thefe  cares  my  foul  divide, 

If  thou  indeed  haft  fet  me  free  ? 

Why  am  I thus,  if  God  hath  died, 

If  God  hath  died  to  purchafe  me  ? 

Around  me  clouds  of  darknefs  roll; 

In  deepeft  night  I ftill  walk  on  : 

Heavily  moves  my  damned  foul 

Here  we  were  obliged  to  interrupt  her : we 
again  betook  ourfelves  to  prayer,  and  her  heart 
was  eafed,  though  not  fet  at  liberty. 

Thurf.  Nov.  1.  I fet  out  and  the  next  evening 
came  to  Reading,  where  a little  company  of  us 
met  in  the  evening,  at  which  the  zealous  mob 
was  fo  enraged,  they  were  ready  to  tear  the 
houfe  down.  Therefore  I hope  God  has  a 
work  to  do  in  this  place.  In  thy  time- let  it.be 
fulfilled ! 

* About  this  time  I received  a letter  from  th,e 
author  of  thofe  reflexions  which  I men- 
tioned 


C ‘58  ] 


tioned  July  31.  An  extrafl  of  which  I have 


Reverend  Sir , 

S I wrote  the-  rules  and  coif  derations,  [in 


No.  2,5.  of  Country  Common-Senfe ] with  an 
eye  to  Mr.  Whitefield,  yourfelf  and  your  oppo- 
fers,  from  a fincere  defire  to  do  fome  fervice  to 
Chriftianity  according  to  the  imperJcR  notions  I 
had  at  that  time  of  the  real  merits  of  the  caufe  : 

1 at  the  fame  time,  refolved,  to  take  any  oppor- 
tunity that  fhould  offer  for  my  better  infor- 
mation. 

On  this  principle  it  was,  that  I made  one  of 
your  audience,  Off.  23,  at  Bradford.  And  be- 
caufe  I thought  I could  form  the  beft  judgment 
of  you  and  your  doftrines  from  your  fermon,  I 
refolved  to  hear  that  firft  : which  was  the  reafon, 
that  although  by  accident,  I was  at  the  fame 
houfe,  and  walked  two  miles  with  you,  to  the 
place  you  preached  at,  I fpoke  little  or  nothing 
to  you.  I mufl  confefs,  Sir,  that  the  difeourfe  you 
made  that  day,  wherein  you  preft  )our  hearers 
in  the  clofefl.  manner,  and  w’ith  the  authority  of 
a true  minifter  of  the  gofpel,  not  to  flop  at  faith 
only,  but  to  add  to  it  all  virtues , and  to  fhew 
forth  their  faith , by  every  kind  of  good  works, 
convinced  me  of  the  great  wrong  done  you  by  a 
public  report,  common  in  people’s  mouth,  that 


fubjoined. 


you 


C *59  3 


you  preach  faith  without  works.  For,  that  is  the 
only  ground  of  prejudice  which  any  trueChriftian 
can  have:  and  is  the  fenfe  in  which  your  adver- 
faries  would  take  your  words,  when  theycenfure 
them.  For  that  we  are jujlified  by  faith  only, 
is  the  do&rine  of  Jefus  Chrift,  the  doftrine  of 
his  apoftles  and  the  dofhine  of  the  church  of 
England.  I am  alhamed,  that  after  having  lived 
twenty-nine  years,  fince  my  baptifm  into  this  faith. 

. 1 fhonld  {'peak  of  it  in  the  lame,  un- 

faithful, I may  fay,  falfe  manner  I have  done 
ih  the  paper  above-mentioned ! What  meer 
darkmfs  is  man,  when  truth  hideth  her  face  from 
him ! 

Man  is  by  nature  a firmer , the  child  of  the  de- 
vil, under  God’s  wrath , in  a hate  of  damnation . 
The  Son  of  God  took  pity  on  this  our  mifery: 
he  made  himfelf  man , he  made  himfelf  Jin  for  us; 
that  is,  he  hath  borne  the  punifhment  of  our  fin, 
the  chaftifement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and 
by  his  ftripes  we  are  healed.  To  receive  this 
boundlefs  mercy,  this  ineftimable  benefit,  we 
mull  have  faith  in  our  Benefaftor,  and  through 
him  in  God. — But  then,  true  faith  is  not  alifelefs 
principle,  as  vour  adverfaries  feem  to  underftand 
it.  They  and  you  mean  quite  another  thing  by 
faith.  They  mean,  A bare  believing,  that  Jefus 
is  the  Chrift.  You  mean  a living,  growing,  puri- 
fying principle,  which  is  the  root  both  of  inward 
and  outward  holinefs ; both  of  purity  and  good 

works  £ 


[ i6o  ] 

works : without  which  no  man  can  have  faith,  at 
lead  no  other  than  a dead  faith. 

This,  Sir,  you  explained  in  your  fermon  at 
Bradford,  Sund.  Off.  28,  to  near  ten  thoufand 
people,  who  all  flood  to  hear  you,  wilh  awful 
filence  and  great  attention.  I have  fince  reflect- 
ed, how  much  good  the  clergy  might  do, 
if  inflead  of  Jhunning , they  would  come  to 
hear  and  converfe  with  you ; and  in  their 
churches  and  parifhes,  would  farther  in- 

force  thofe  catholic  doBrines  which  you 

preach : and  which  I am  glad  to  fee  have 

fuch  a furpri^ing  good  ejfeB,  on  great  numbers 
of  fouls. 

I think  indeed,  too  many  clergymen  are  cul- 
pable, in  that  they  do  not  inform  themfelves 
better,  of  Mr.  Whitefi'eld,  yourfelf  and  your 
doflrines,  from  your  own  mouths  : I am  per- 
fuaded  if  they  did  this  with  a Chriftian  fpirft,  the 
differences  between  you  would  foon  beat  an  end. 
Nay,  I think,  thofe  whofe Jlocks  refort  fo  much 
to  hear  you,  ought  to  do  it,  out  of  their  pajlorai 
duty  to  them  : that  if  you  preach  good  doBrine , 
they  may  edify  them,  on  the  impreflions  fo  vifi- 
bly  made  by  your  fermons,  or  if  evil,  they  may 
reclaim  them  from  error. 

I fhall  conclude  this  letter  with  putting  you  in 
mind,  in  all  your  fermons,  writings  and  praflice, 
nakedly  to  follow  the  naked  Jefus : I mean,  to 
preach  the  pure  doBrine  of  the  gofpel  without 

refpetl 


[ 1*»  ] 

re fp eft  of  perfons  or  things.  Many  preachers, 
many  reformers,  many  mijfwnaries , have  fallen 
by  not  obferving  this;  by  not  having  con- 
tinually in  mind,  Whoever  Jhall  break  the 
leajl  of  thefe  comruandmcrts,  and  teach  men fo, 
he  Jhatt  be  called  the  leaf  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 


AN 


[ x62  ] 


A N 

E X 

TRACT 

OF  THE 

Rev. 

Mr.  John  Wesley’s. 

J o 

U R N A L. 

From  November  1,  1739,  to  September  3, 
*74 

When  I hod  waited  (for  they  fpake  not , but  food 
fill  and  anfwered  no  more)  I /aid,  I will  anfwer 
alfo  my  part,  I alfo  will Jhew  my  opinion.  Let 
me  not,  I pray  you,  accept  any  man  3 perfony 
neither  let  me  give  jlattering  titles  unto  man.  For 
1 know  not  to  give  faltering  titles,  in  fo  doing 
my  Maker  would  foon  take  me  away. 

Job  xxxii.  ver.  16,  17,  21,  22. 

Number  IV. 

T O 


[ *63  2 


TO  THE 

MORAVIAN  CHURCH,  f 

More  efpecially  that  part  of  it  now  or  lately 
rehding  in  England. 

l.  T Am  conflrained  at  length  to  /peak  my  pre-. 

fent  fentiments  concerning  you,  according 
thebe/1  light  I have.  And  this,  not  only  upon 
my  own  account,  that  if  I judge  amifs,  I may  re- 
ceive better  information  ; but  for  the  fake  of  all 
thofe  who  either  love  or  feek  the  Lord  Jefus  in 
fincerity.  Many  of  thefe  have  been  utterly  at  a 
lofs  how  to  judge  : and  the  more  fo,  becaufe  they 
could  not  but  obferve  (as  I have  often  done  with 
forrow  of  heart)  that  fcarce  any  have  wrote  con- 
cerning you,  (unlefs  fuch  as  were  extravagant  in 
your  commendation)  who  were  not  evidently 
prejudiced  again/!  you.  Hence  they  either 
fpoke  falfly,  laying  to  your  charge  things  which 
you  knew  not:  or  at  lea/!,  unkindly , putting  the 
worft  conflruftion  on  things  of  a doubtful  nature, 
and  fetting  what,  perhaps,  was  not  /tridlly  right, 
in,  the  very  wor/t  light  it  would  bear.  Whereas 

(in 

I So  called  by  theinfclves,  though-improperly. 


[ i64  3 

(in  my  apprehenfion)  none  is  capable  of 
judging  right,  or  aflifting  others  to  judge 
right  concerning  you,  unlefs  he  can  fpeak  of 
you  as  he  does  of  the  friend,  who  is  as  his  own 
foul. 

2.  Yet  it  is  not  wholly  for  their  fake,  but  for 
your  own  alfo  that  I now  write.  It  may  be,  the 
Father  of  lights,  the  giver  of  every  good  gift,  may 
even  by  a mean  inftrument  fpeak  to  your  hearts. 
My  continual  defire  and  prayer  to  God  is,  that 
you  may  clearly  fee  what  is  that  good  and  perfect 
will  of  the  Lord  ; and  fully  difcern,  how  to  fe- 
parate  that  which  is  precious  among  you  from 
the  vile. 

*3.1  have  delayed  thus  long,  becaufe  I loved 
you,  and  was  therefore  unwilling  to  grieve  you 
in  anything:  and  likewife  becaufe  I was  afraid 
of  creating  another  obllacle  to  that  union,  which* 
(if  I know  my  own  heart  in  any  degree)  I defire 
above  all  things  under  heaven.  But  I dare  no 
longer  delay,  leaft  my  filence  fhould  be  a fnare 
to  any  others  of  the  children  of  God  ; and  left 
you  yourfelves  fhould  be  more  confirmed  in  what 
I cannot  reconcile  to  the  law  and  the  tefiimony. 
This  would  ftrengthen  the  bar  which  I long  to 
remove.  And  were  that  once  taken  out  of  the 
way,  I fhould  rejoice  to  be  a door-keeper  in  the 
houfe  of  God,  a hewer  of  wood  or  drawer  of 
water  among  you.  Surely  I would  follow  you  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth,  or  remain  with  you  in  the 
uttermoft  parts  of  the  fea. 


4.  What 


C i65  3 


4.  What  unites  ray  heart  to  you  is,  the  excel- 
lency (in  many  refpe&s)  of  the  doflrine  taught 
among  you : your  laying  the  true  foundation, 
God  was  in  Chrijt,  reconciling  the  world  to  him - 

felf,  your  declaring  the  free  grace  of  God, 
the  caufe,  and  faith,  the  condition  of  julti- 
fication  : your  bearing  witnefs  to  thofe  great 
fruits  of  faith,  righteoufnejs,  and  peace,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghojl ; and  that  fure  mark  there- 
of, He  that  is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit 
/»• 

5.  I magnify  the  grace  of  God  which  is  in 
: many  among  you,  enabling  you  to  love  him 

who  hath  firlt  loved  us ; teaching  you,  in 

Swhatfoever  ftate  you  are,  therewith  to  be 
content : caufing  you  to  trample  under  foot 
the  lull  of  the  flelh,  the  lull  of  the  eye,  and 
the  pride  of  life : and  above  all,  giving  you  to 
love  one  another,  in  a manner  the  world  know- 
eth  not  of. 

6.  I praife  God,  that  he  hath  delivered  and 
yet  doth  deliver  you,  from  thofe  outward  fins 
that  overfpread  the  face  of  the  earth.  No  curfing, 
no  light  or  falfe  fir  earing,  no  profaning  the  name 
of  God  is  heard  among  you  : no  robbery  or  theft, 
no  gluttony,  or  dmnkennefs,  no  whoredom  or 
adultery,  no  quarrelling  or  brawling  (thofe  ican- 
dals  of  the  Chrillian  name)  are  found  within  your 
gates  : no  diverfions  but  Inch  as  become  faints, 
as  may  be  tiled  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jefus. 

You 


[ *66  ] 

You  regard  not  outward  adorning,  but  rather  de- 
fire the  ornament  of  a ferious,  meek  and  quiet 
fpirit.  You  are  not  flothfu]  in  bufinefs,  but  la- 
bouT  to  eat  your  own  bread  ; and  wifely  manage 
the  mammon  of  unrighteoufnefs,  that  ye  may 
have  to  give  to  others  alfo,  to  feed  the  hungry, 
and  cover  the  naked  with  a garment. 

7.  I love  and  elteem  you  for  your  excellent 
difciphne,  fcarce  inferior  to  that  of  the  apoftolic 
a<m  : for  your  due  fubordination  of  officers, 
•every  one  knowing  and  keeping  his  properrank  ; 
for  vour  exabt  divifion  of  the  people  under  your 
charge,  fo  that  each  may  be  fed  with  food  conve- 
nient for  them  ; for  your  cate  that  all  who  are 
employed  in  the  fervice  of  the  church  fhould 
frequently  and  freely  confer  together  ; and,  in 
confequence  thereof,  your  exact  and  feafonable 
knowledge  of  the  hate  of  every  member,  and 
your  ready  dihiibution  either  of  fpiritual  or  tem- 
poral relief,  as  ever)'  man  hath  need. 

8.  Perhaps  then  fome  of  you  will  fay,  “ If  you 
allow  all  this,  what  mere  can  you  defire?”  The 
following  ext  raft  will  anfwer  you  at  large, 
wherein  I have  firft  given  a naked  relation 
(among  other  things)  of  many  fa&s  and  conver- 
fations  that  pall  between  us,  in  the  fame  order 
of  time  as  they  occurred  ; and  then  fummed  up, 
what  I cannot  approve  of  yet,  that  it  may  be 
tried  by  the  word  of  God. 

* This  I have  endeavoured  to  do  with  a tender 
hand ; relating  no  more  than  I believed  ab- 

folutely 


C l67  ] 

folutely  needful ; carefully  avoiding  all  tart  and 
unkind  expreffions,  all  that  I could  forefee  would 
be  difobliging  to  you,  or  any  farther  offenfive 
than  was  implied,  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
thing:  labouring  every  where  to  Ipeak  con- 
fiffently  with  that  deep  fenfe,  which  is  fettled  in 
my  heart,  that  you  are  (though  I cannot  callyou 
Rabbj,  infallible)  yet  far,  far  better  and  wifer 
than  me. 

10.  And  if  any  of  you  will  fmite  me  friendly, 
and  reprove  me,  if  you  will  fhew  me  wherein  I 
have  erred,  either  in  the  matter  or  manner  of 
the  following  relation,  or  any  part  thereof; 
I will,  by  the  grace  of  God,  confefs  it  before 
angels  and  men,  in  whatsoever  way  you  fhall 
require. 

Mean  while  do  not  ceafe  to  pray  for, 

Your  weak, 

Bui  jlili  ajftclionaie  brother , 

London,  JOHN  WESLEY, 

June  24,  1 744. 


JOURNAL, 


[ i68  ] 


JOURNAL 

From  Nov.  i,  17395  to  Sept.  3,  1741. 

Thursday,  November  1,  1739. 

T Left  Briftol,  and  on  Saturday  came  to  Lon- 
A don.  The  find  perfon  I met  with  there,  was 
one  whom  I Ind  left  ftrong  in  faith,  and  zealous 
of  good  works.  But  £he  now  told  me,  “ Mr, 
Molther  had  fully  convinced  her,  Jlie  never  had 
any  faith  at  all ; and  had  advifed  her,  tilljhe  re- 
ceivedfaith , to  be  ftill,  ceafingfrom  outward  works : 
which  file  had  accordingly  done,  and  did  not 
doubt,  but  in  a fhort  time  file  fiiould  find  the  ad- 
vantage of  it.” 

In  the  evening  Mr.  Bray  alfo  was  highly  com- 
mending, “ The  being  flill  before  the  Lord.  He 
likewife  fpoke  largely  of  the  great  danger  thai 
attended  the.  doing  of  outward  works , and  of 
the  folly  of  people  that  keep  running  about  to 
church  andfacrament , a f I ( Paid  he)  did  till  very 
lately.” 

Sund.  4.  Our  fociety  met  at  feven  in  the 
morning,  and  continued  jilenl  till  eight.  One 

then 


[ i6-g  ] 


then  fpoke  of  looking  unto  Jefus , and  exhorted 
us  all,  “ To  lie  jlill  in  his  hand.” 

In  the  evening  I met  the  women  of  our  fociety 
at  Fetter-lane:  where  fome  of  our  brethren 
ftrongly  intimated,  that  none  cf  them  had  any 
true  faith;  and  then  averted  in  plain  terms,  1. 
That  till  they  had  true faith,  they  ought  to  be  Hill, 
that  is,  (as  they  explained  themfelves)  to  abjlaiu 
from  the  means  of  grace,  as  they  are  called ; the 
Lord’s-Supper,  in  particular  2.  “ That  the 
ordinances  are  not  means  of  grace,  there  being  ns 
other  means  than  Chrift. 

Wedn.  7.  Being  greatly  defirous  to  underftand 
the  ground  of  this  matter,  I had  a long  confe- 
rence with  Mr.  Spangenberg.  I agreed  with  all 
he  faid  of  the  power  of  faith.  I agreed,  that 
whofoever  is  by  faith  born  of  God  doth  not  com- 
mit Jin.  But  I could  not  agree,  either,  “ That 
none  has  any  faith,  fo  long  as  he  is  liable  to  any 
doubt  or  jear  : or,  that  till  ive  have  it,  we  ought  to 
abfain  from  the  Lords  Supper,  or  the  other 
ordinances  of  God. 

At  eight  our  fociety  met  at  Fetter-lane.  We 
fat  an  hour  without  fpeakmg.  1 he  reft  of  the 
time  was  fpent  in  difpute;  one  having  pro- 
pofed  a queftion  concerning  the  Lord’s  Supper; 
which  many  warmly  affirmed,  None  ought 
to  receive,  till  he  had  the  full  afjurance  of 
faith. 

I obferved  every  day  more  and  more,  the  ad- 
vantage Satan  had  gained  over- us.  Many  of 
Vo°L  XXVII.  H thofe 


[ A7<> 


1 

J 


thofe  who  once  knew  in  whom  they  had  believed, 
were  thrown  into  idle  reafonings.  and  thereby 
filled  with  doubts  and  fears,  irom  which  they 
now  found  no  way  to  efcape.  Many  were  in- 
duced to  deny  the  gift  of  God,  and  affirm,  they 
never  had  any  faith  at  all ; efpecially  thofe  who 
had  fallen  again  into  fin,  and  of  confequence, 
into  darknefs.  And  almoftall  thefe  had  left  off  the 
means  of  grace,  faying,  “ They  muff  now  ceafe 
from  their  own  works : they  inuft  now  trujl  in 
Chrijl  alone:  they  were  poor finners,  and  had  no- 
thing to  do  but  to  lie  at  his  feet .” 

Till  Saturday  the  10th,  I think  I did  not  meet 
with  one  woman  of  the  fociety,  who  had  not 
been  upon  the  point  of  calling  away  her  confi- 
dence in  God.  I then  indeed  found  one,  who, 
when  many  (according  to  their  cuflom)  laboured 
to  perfuade  her  fhe  had  no  faith,  replied  with  a 
fpirit  they  were  not  able  to  refill,  “ I know,  that 
the  life  which  I now  live,  I live  by  faith  in  the 
Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himfelf  for 
me.  And  he  has  never  left  me  one  moment, 
fince  the  hour  he  was  made  known  to  me,  in  the 
breaking  of  bread.’’ 

What  is  to  be  inferred  from  this  undeniable 
matter  of  fatl,  One  that  had  not  faith,  received  it 
in  the  Lord’s  fupper  ? Why,  1.  That  there  are 
means  of  grace,  i.  e.  outward  ordinances,  whereby 
the  inward  grace  of  God  is  ordinarily  conveyed 
to  man  ; whereby  the  faith  that  brings  falvation 
is  conveyed  to  them  who  before  had  it  not ; 

2.  That 


[ J 

2.  That  one  oj  thefe  means  is  the  Lord’s 
J, upper  ; and  g.  That  he  who  has  not  this  faith , 
ought  to  wait  for  it,  in  the  ufe  hotli  of  this , 
and  of  the  other  means  tohich  God  hath  or- 
dained. 

* Frid.  9.  I fhewed  how  we  are  to  examine 
•ourfelves,  whether  we  be  in  the  faith  : and  after- 
wards recommended  to  all,  though  efpecially  to 
them  that  believed,  true  ftillnefs,  that  is, 
a patient  waiting  upon  God,  by  lowlinefs, 
meeknefs,  and  refgnation,  in  all  the  ways 
of  his  holy  law,  and  the  works  of  his  command- 
ments. 

All  this  week  I endeavoured  alfo  by  pri- 
vate converfation,  to  comfort  the  feeble-minded, 
and  to  bring  back  the  lame  which  had  been 
turned  out  of  the  way,  if  haply  it  might  be 
healed. 

Mond.  12.  I left  London,  and  in  the  evening 
expounded  at  Wycombe,  the  ffory  of  the  Pha- 
rifee  and  the  Publican.  The  next  morning,  a 
-young  gentleman  overtook  me  on  the  road,  and 
after  a while  afked  me,  “ If  I had  feen  Mr. 
Whitefield’s  journals  ?”  I told  him,  “ I had.” 
“ And  what  do  you  think  of  them,”  faid  he. 
“ Don’t  you  think  they  are  d — n’d  cant,  entnu- 
fiafm  from  end  to  end  ? I think  fo.”  I afked 
him,  “ Why  do  you  think  fo  ?”  He  replied, 
“ Why  he  talks  fo  much  about  joy  and  fluff,  and 
inward  feelings.  As  I hope  to  be  faved,  I cannot 
tell  what  to  make  of  it?”  I afked,  “ Did  you 
H 2 ever 


[ *7®  ] 

ever  feel  the  love  of  God  in  your  heart  ? If  not, 
how  fhould  you  tell  what  to  make  of  it  ? What- 
ever is  fpoke  of  the  religion  of  the  heart,  and  of 
the  inward  workings  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
mujl  appear  enthufiafm  to  thofe  who  have  not 
felt  them : that  is,  if  they  take  upon  them  to 
judge  of  the  things,  which  they  own  they  know 
not. 

At  four  in  the  afternoon  I came  to  Oxford, 
and  to  a fmall  company  in  the  evening,  explained 
the  nature  and  extent  of  that  falvation,  where- 
with by  grace  we  are  faved  through  faith.  The 
next  evening  I Ihewed,  what  it  is  to  believe  ; as 
well  as  more  largely,  what  are  the  fruits  of  true 
believing,  from  thofe  words  of  the  apoflle,  This 
is  the  victory  that  over cometh  the  world,  even  our 
faith. 

Thurf,  15.  My  brother  and  I fet  out  for 
Tiverton.  About  eleven  I preached  at  Bur- 
ford.  On  Saturday  evening  I explained  at 
Briflol,  the  nature  and  extent  o i Chrijtian  Per- 
f Elion  : and  at  nine  in  the  morning  preached 
at  . Bath,  on,  I know  that  in  me  dwelleth  no  good 
thing. 

In  the  afternoon  I exhorted  four  or  five 
thoufand  people  at  Briflol,  neither  to  neglect  nor 
ref  in  the  meansof  grace.  In  the  evening  I en- 
deavoured to  l ft  up  the  hands  that  hung  down , 
by  declaring.  He  will  not  break  the  bruijed  reed, 
nor  quench  the fmoahingflax. 

Mond.  19.  I earileflly  exhorted  thofe  who 

had 


[ *73  ] 

had  believed,  “To  beware  of  two  oppofite  ex- 
tremes : the  one,  the  thinking  while  they  were 
in  light  and  joy,  that  thework  was  ended , when  it 
was  but  juft  begun  ; the  other,  the  thinking  when 
they  were  in  heavinefs,  that  it  was  not  begun , 
becaufe  they  found  it  was  not  ended.” 

At  eight  I exhorted  the  fociety,  to  wait  upon 
God  in  all  his  ordinance's,  and  in  fo  doing  to  be 
Jiill,  and  fuffer  God  to  carry  on  his  whole  work 
in  their  fouls.  In  that  hour  he  was  pleafed  to 
rellore  his  light  to  many  that  fat  in  darknefs  : 
two  of  whom  till  then  thought,  he  had  quite 
cajl  out  their  prayer,  and  turned  his  mercy  from 
them. 

Tuef.  20.  We  fetout,  and  on  Weinefday  21, 
in  the  afternoon  came  to  Tiverton.  My  poor 
filler  was  borrowing  ahnoft  as  one  without  hope. 
Yet  we  could  not  but  rejoice,  at  hearing,  from 
one  who  had  attended  my  brother  in  all  his 
weaknefs,  that  feveral  days  before  he  went  hence, 
God  had  given  him  a calm  and  full  aflurance  ol 
his  interelf  in  Chrilh  O may  every  one  who  op- 
poles  it,  be  thus  convinced,  that  this  doftrine  is 
of  God ! 

Sat.  24.  We  accepted  an  invitation  to  Exeter, 
from  one  who  came  thence  to  coinfort  my  filler 
in  her  affiiflion.  And  on  Sunday  25.  (Mr.  D. 
having  defired  the  pulpit,  which  was  readily 
granted  both  for  the  morning  and  afternoon)  I 
preached  at  St.  Mary’s,  on  The  kingdom  oj  God 
Ii  g is 


C 174  ] 

is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteoufnefs  and  peace, 

and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghojl.  Dr.  W told  me 

after  fermon,  “ Sir,  you  muft  not  preach  in  the 
afternoon.”  “ Not,  faid  he,  that  you  preach  any 
falfe  doftrine.  I allow,  all  that  you  have  faid  is 
true.  And  it  is  the  do&rine  of  the  church  of 
England.  But  it  is  not  guarded.  It  is  danger- 
ous. It  may  lead  people  into  enthujiafm  or  def- 
pair 

* I did  not  readily  fee,  where  the  ftrefs  of  this 
objection  (fo  frequently  flatted)  lay.  But  upon 
a little  reflection,  I faw  it  plain.  The  real  flate  of 
the  cafe  is  this.  Religion  is  commonly  thought- 
to  confift  of  three  things,  harmleffnefs,  ufmg  the 
means  of  grace,  and  doing  good  (as  it  is  called) 
that  is,  helping  our  neighbours,  chiefly  by  giving 
alms.  Accordingly,  by  a religious  man  is  com- 
monly meant,  one  that  is  honefl,  juft  and  fair  in 
iiis  dealings  ; that  is  conflantly  at  church  and  fa- 
crament ; and  that  gives  much  alms,  or  (as  it  is 
v.fually  termed)  does  much  good. 

* Now  in  explaining  thofe  words  of  the  apof- 
tle,  The  kingdom  of  God,  (or  true  religion,  the 
confequence  of  God’s  dwelling  and  reigning  in  the 
foul)  is  not  meat  and  drink  ; I was  neceflarily 
led  to  fhew,  that  religion  does  not  properly  confifl, 
in  any  or  all  of  tliefe  three  things  : but  that  a 
man  might  both  be  harmlefs,  ufe  the  means  of 
grace,  and  do  much  good,  and  yet  have  no  true 
religion  at  all.  And  fure  it  is,  had  God  then 
impreft  this  great  truth  on  any  who  before  was 

ignorant 

O 


[ l75  ] 


ignorant  of  it,  that  impreflion  would  have  occa- 
honed  fuch  heavinefs  in  his  foul,  as  the  world 
always  terms  dejpair. 

* Again,  in  explaining  thofe  words.  The  king- 
dom oj  God  (or  true  religion)  is  righteoujnej's  and 
peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghojl : I infilled,  that 
every  follower  of  Chrifl,  ought  to  expefl  and 
pray  for,  that  peace  oj  God  which  pajjeth  all  under- 

Jlanding,  that  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  oj  God, 
which  is  even  now  unfpeakable  and  full  oj  glory  • 
and  above  all  (as  being  the  very  life  and  foul  of 
religion,  without  which  it  is  all  dead  lhow)  The 
love  oj  God , jied  abroad  in  his  heart,  by  the  Holy 
Ghojl  given  unto  him.  But  all  this  is  “ enthufiafm 
from  end  to  end,”  to  thofe  who  have  the  form  of 
godlinefs,  but  not  the  power. 

* I know  indeed  there  is  a way  of  explaining 
thefe  texts,  fo  that  they  fhall  mean  juft  nothing: 
fo  that  they  fhall  exprefs  far  lefs  of  inward  reli- 
gion, than  the  writings  of  Plato  or  Hierocles. 
And  whoever  guards  them  thus  (but  God 
forbid  I fhould  do  it)  will  undoubtedly  avoid 
all  danger,  of  either  driving  people  into 
this  defpair,  or  leading  them  into  this  enthu- 
fiafm. 

Tuef.  27.  I writ  Mr.  D.  (according  to  his  re- 
quell)  a fhort  account  of  what  had  been  done  in 
Kingfwood,  and  of  our  prefent  undertaking 
there.  The  account  was  as  follows  : 

“ Few  perfons  have  lived  long  in  the  weft  of 
England,  who  have  not  heard  of  the  colliers  of 
H 4 Kingfwood, 


[ 176  ] 

Kingfwood,  a people  famous  from  the  beginning 
hitherto,  for  neither  fearing  God  nor  regarding 
man  : fo  ignorant  of  the  things  of  God,  that  they 
feemed  but  one  remove  from  the  beads  that 
perilh  ; and  therefore  utterly  without  delire  of 
inflruflion,  as  well  as  without  the  means  of  it.'’ 

“ Many  lad  winter  ufed  tauntingly  te  fay  of 
Mr.  Whitefield,  “ If  he  will  convert  Heathens, 
why  does  not  he  go  to  the  colliers  of  Kingf- 
wood ?”  In  fpring  he  did  fo.  And  as  there 
were  thoufands  who  refoned  to  no  place  of 
public  worlhip,  he  went  after  them  into  their 
own  wilder  nefs , to Jeek  and  fave  that  which  was 
loft.  When  he  was  called  away,  others  went 
into  the  highways  and  hedges,  to  earn  pel  them  to 
come  in.  And,  bv  the  grace  of  God,  their  la- 
bour was  not  in  vain.  The  feene  it  already 
changed.  Kingfwood  does  not  now,  as  a year 
ago,  refound  with  curfing  and  blafpherny.  It  is 
no  more  filled  with  drunkennefs  and  unclean- 
nefs,  and  the  idle  diverfions  that  naturally  lead 
thereto.  It  is  no  longer  full  of  wars  and  fight- 
ings, of  clamour  and  bitternefs,  of  wrath  and  en- 
vyings.  Peace  and  love  are  there.  Great  num- 
bers of  the  people  are  inild,  gentle,  and  eafy  to 
be  intreated.  They  do  not  cry,  neither  Jirwe, 
and  hardly  is  their  voice  heard  in  the  ftreets  : or 
indeed  in  their  own  wood  ; unlefs  when  they 
are  at  their  ufual  evening  diverfion,  finging 
praife  unto  God  their  Saviour.” 

“ That  their  children  too  might  know  the 

things 


[ *77  3 

things  which  make  for  their  peace,  it  was  fome 
time  fince  propofed  to  build  a houfe  in  Kingf- 
wocd;  and  after  many  forefeen  and  unforefeen 
difficulties,  in  June  laft  the  foundation  was  laid. 
The  ground  made  choice  of  was,  in  the  middle 
of  the  wood,  between  the  London  and  Bath 
roads,  not  far  from  that  called  Two-Mile  Hill,, 
about  three  meafured  miles  from  BriftoL” 

“ Here  a large  room  was  begun  for  the  fchool, 
having  four  fmalJ  rooms  at  either  end,  for  the 
fchool-mafters,  (and  perhaps,  if  it  fhould  pleafe 
God,  fome  poor  children)  to  lodge  in.  Two 
perfons  are  ready  to  teach,  fo-  foon  as  the  houfe 
is  fit  to  receive  them,  the  fhell  of  which  is  near- 
ly finifhed ; fo  that  it  is  hoped  the  whole  will  be 
compleated  in  fpring,  or  early  in  the  fummer.” 
“ It  is  true,  although  the  mailers  require  no 
pay,  yet  this  undertaking  is  attended  with  great 
expence.  But  let  him  that  jzzdtlh  the  young 
ravens  fee  to  that.  He  hath  the  hearts  of  all 
men  in  his  hand.  If  he  put  it  into  your  heart, 
or  into  that  of  any  of  your  friends,  to  affift  in 
bringing  this  his  work  to  perfection,  in  this  world 
look  for  no  recompence  ; but  it  (hall  be  remem- 
bred  in  that  day,  when  our  Lord  {hall  fay,  Inas- 
much as  ye  did  it  unto  the  leajl  of  thefe  my  breth- 
ren, ye  did  it  unto  we." 

Wednefday,  Nov.  28.  We  left  Tiverton,  and 
the  next  day  reached Briftol.  On  Friday  many, 
of  us  joined  in  prayer,  for  one  that  was  grievouf- 
ly  torraented.  She  raged  more  and  more  for 
Hi.  gt  about. 


[ *78  ] 

about  two  hours,  and  then  our  Lord  gave  her 
reft. 

Five  were  in  the  fame  agony  in  the  evening. 

I ordered  them  to  be  removed  to  the  door,  that 
their  cries  might  neither  drown  my  voice,  nor 
interrupt  the  attention  of  the  congregation.  But 
after  fermon,  they  were  brought;  into  the  room 
again,  where  a few  of  us  continued  in  prayer  to 
God  (being  determined  not  to  go  till  we  had  an 
anfw’er  of  peace)  till  nine  the  next  morning.  Be- 
fore that  time,  three  of  them  fang  praifeto  God. 
And  the  others  were  eafed,  though  not  fet  at 
liberty. 

Tuefday,  Dec.  4.  I was  violently  attacked  by 
fome,  w'ho  w'ere  exceeding  angry  at  thofe  who 
cried  out  fo , being  fure  (they  faid)  “ It  was  all  a 
cheat,  and  that  any  one  might  help  crying  out, 
if  he  u’ouid.”  J.  Bl.  uTas  one  of  thofe  wdio  were 
Jure  of  this.  About  eight,  the  next  morning, 
while  he  u'as  alone  in  his  chamber,  at  private 
prayer,  fo  horrible  a dread  overwhelmed  him, 
that  he  began  crying  out  with  all  his  might.  All 
the  family  was  alarmed.  Several  of  them  came 
running  up  into  his  chamber;  but  he  cried  out 
fo  much  the  more,  till  his  breath  was  utterly 
fpent.  God  then  rebuked  the  adverfarv  ; and 
he  is  now  lefs  wife  in  his  own  conceit. 

' Thurfday  6.  I left  Briftol  and  (after  preaching 
at  Malmfbury  and  Burford  in  the  way)  on  Sat.  8. 
came  into  my  old  room  at  Oxford,  from  which  I 
went  to  Georgia.  Here  muftng  on  the  things 

that 


[ m ] 

that  were  pafl,  and  reflefling,  how  many  that 
came  after  me  were  preferred  before  me,  I 
opened  my  teflament  on  thofe  words  (O  may  I 
never  let  them  Hip)  What  Jhall  we  fay  then  ? That 
the  Gentiles  which  followed  not  after  righteoufnefs 
have  attained  to  righteoufnefs.  But  IJrael  which 
followed  after  the  law  of  righteoufnefs , have  not  at- 
tained to  the  law  of  righteoufnefs. 

Wherefore  ? Becaufe  they  fought  it  not  by  faith , 
but,  as  it  were,  by  the  works  of  the  law . 

Sunday  9.  I expounded  in  the  evening  to  a 
fmail,  but  deeply  ferious  company,  There  is  one 
Mediator  between  God  and  man,  even  the  man, 
Thrift  Jefus-,  and  exhorted  them  earneftly,  to  go 
ffraight  to  him,  with  all  their  miferies,  follies, 
and  fins. 

Tuefday  11.  I vifited  Mrs.  Plat,  one  who 
having  long  fought  death  in  the  error  of  her  life, 
was  brought  back  to  the  great  Shepherd  of  her 
foul,  the  firft  time  my  brother  preached  faith  in 
Oxford.  In  the  midfl  of  ficknefs  and  pain,  and 
the  deepeft  want,  fire  was  calmly  rejoicing  in 
God.  By  this  faith  may  I be  thus  faved  ! So  as 
in  the  midfl  of  heavinefs,  through  manifold  temp- 
tations, without  raiment  or  food,  or  health,  or 
friends,  to  rejoice  with  joy  unfpeakablc. 

Thurfday  13.  I had  fome  hours  conversation 
with  a ferious  man,  who  offered  many  confidera- 
tions  to  fhew,  “ That  there  are  no  unholy  men 
on  eartli ; and  that  there  are  no  holy . men  ; 
but  that,  in  reality,  all  men  are  alike,  there  be-' 
mg  no  inward  difference  between  them.” 

H 6 


1 was  • 


[ i8o  ] 


I was  at  firft  in  doubt,  what  could  lead  a man 
©flearning  and  fenfe,  into  fo  wanderful  an  opi- 
nion. But  that  doubt  was  foon  cleared.  He 
had  narrowly  obferved,  tliofe  whom  the  world 
calls  good  men,  and  could  not  but  difcern,  that 
the  difference  between  them  and  others  were 
merely  external;  their  tempers,  their  defires, 
their  fpringsof actions  were  the  fame.  He  clear- 
ly faw,  although  one  man  was  a thief,  a common 
iwearer,  a drunkard*  and  another  not ; although 
this  woman  was  a liar,  a profhtute,  a fabbath- 
breaker,  and  the.  other  clear  of  thefe  things  : yet 
they  were  both  lovers  of  pleafure,  lovers  of 
praife,  lovers  of  the  prefent  world.  He  faw  feif- 
will  was  the  foie  fpring  of  aftion  in  both,  though 
exerting  itfelf  in  different  ways  : and  that  the 
love  of  God  no  more  filled  and  ruled  the  heart 
of  the  one , than  of  the  other . Hence  therefore- 
he  inferred  well,  “If  thefe  perfons  are  holy, 
there  are  none  unholy  upon  earth  : feeing  thieves 
and  proflitutes  have  as  good  a heart,  as  thefe 
faints  of  the  world”  And  whereas  fome  of  thefe 
faid,  “ Nay,  but  we  have  faith  ; we  believe  in 
and  rely  on  Chrift:"  it  was. eafily  replied,  yea, 
and  fach  a faith  in  Chrilf ,fuch  a reliance  on  him, 
to  fave  them  in  their  fins,  have  nine  in  ten  of  all 
the  robbers  and  murderers,  of  whom  ve  vour- 
felves  fay,  “ Awray  with  them  from  the  earth." 

In  the  afternoon  I was  informed,  how  many 
wife  and  learned  men  (who  cannot,  in  terms, 
deny  it,  becaufe  our  articles  and  homilies  are  not 

vet 


[ J 


yet  repealed)  explain  jollification  by  faith.  They 
fay,  1.  Jufhf cation  is  twofold ; thefirjl , in  this 
life,  the  fecond,  at  the  Iafl  day.  2.  Both  theft 
are  by  faith  alone,  that  is,  by  objc&ive  faith,  or 
by  the  merits  of  Chrift,  which  are  the  objeft  of 
our  faith.  And  this,  they  fay,  is  all  that-  Su 
Paul  and  the  church  mean  by,  We  are ju fifed 
by  faith  only.  But  they  add,  3.  We  are  not 
juftified  by  Jit  fetd  we  faith  alone , that  is,  by  the 
faith  which  is  in  us.  But  works  alio  mud  be 
added  to  this,  faith,  as  a joint  condition  both  of 
the  jirji  and  fecond  jujlif cation. 

The  fenfe  of  which  hard  words  is  plainly  this, 
“ God  accepts  ns  both  here  and  hereafter,  only 
for  the  fake  of  what  Chrift  has  done  and  buffer- 
ed for  us.  This  alone  is  the  caufe  of  our  j unifi- 
cation. But  the  condition  thereof  is,  not  faith 
alone , but  faith  and  works  together. 

In  flat  oppofition- to  this,  I cannot  bat  mam- 
tain  (at  lead,  till  I have  a clearer  light)  1.  That 
the  jujlif  cation  which  is  fpoken  of  by  St.  Paul 
to  the  Romans,  and  in  our  articles  is  not  twofold . 
It  is  one,  and  no  more.  It  is  the  prefent  remif- 
fion  of  our  fins,  or  our  firft  acceptance  with  God. 
2,  It  is  true,  that  the  merits  of  Chrid;  are  the  foie 
iaiife  of  this  our  judification.  But  it  is  not  true, 
that  this  is  all  which  St.  Paul  and  our  church- 
mean,  by  oar  being  juftined  by  faith  only  : nei- 
ther is  it  true,  that  either  St.  Paul  or  the  church, 
mean  by  faith,  the  merits  of  Chrift.  But  3.  By 
our  being  juftified  by  faith  only,  both  St.  Paul 

and. 


[ 182  ] 

and  the  church  mean,  that  the  condition  of  our 
juflification,  is  jaith  alone,  and  not  good  works : 
inafmuch  as  “ all  works  done  before juftification, 
have  in  them  the  nature  of  fin.”  Lafily,  That 
faith  which  is  the  foie  condition  of  jufiificaiion. 
is  the  faith  which  is  in  us,  by  the  grace  of  God. 

It  is  “ a fure  truft  which  a man  hath,  that  Chrilt 
hath  loved  him  and  died  for  him. 

During  my  fhort  flay  here,  I received  feveral 
unplea fing  accounts  of  the  ftate  of  things  in 
London;  apart  of  which  I have  fubjoined. 

“ Many  of  our  fillers  are  fhaken  : J y 

C : fays,  that  file  never  had  faith.  Betty 

and  Either  H , are  grievoufly  torn  by  rea- 

fonings  ; the  former  I am  told,  is  going  to 

Germany.- On  Wednefday  night  there  are 

but  few  come  to  Fetter-Lane  till  near  nine 
o’clock.  And  then  after  the  names  are  called 
over,  they  prefently  depart.  It  appears  plain, 
our  brethren  here  have  neither  wifdom  enough 
to  guide,  nor  prudence  enough  to  let  it  alone.” 

“ Mr.  B n expounds  much,  and  fpeaks 

fo  flightingly  of  the  means  of  grace,  that  many 
are  much  grieved  to  hear  him  : but  others  are 
greatly  delighted  with  him.  Ten  or  fourteen  of 
them  meet  at  our  brother  Clark’s  with  Mr. 
Molther,  and  feern  to  confult  about  things,  as 
if  they  were  the  whole  body.  Thefe  make  a 
mere  jell  of  going  to  church,  or  to  the  facvament. 
They  have  much  confounded  fome  of  our  filters, 

and 


[ l83  ] 


and  many  of  our  brothers  are  much  griev- 
ed,”— 

In  another  letter,  which  I received  a few  days 
after  this,  were  thefe  words  : 


Dec.  14,  1739. 

“ This  day  I was  told,  by  one  that  does  not 
belong  to  the  bands,  that  the  fociety  would  be 
divided. — I believe  brother  Hutton,  Clark, 
Edmonds  and  Bray  are  determined  to  go  on, 
according  to  Mr.  Molther’s  direftions,  and  to 
raife  a church,  as  they  term  it,  and  I fuppofe 
above  half  our  brethren  are  on  their  fide.  But 
they  are  fo  very  confufed,  they  don’t  knowhow 
to  go  on  ; yet  are  unwilling  to  be  taught,  except 
by  the  Moravians.” 

“We  long  to  fee  yrnu  ; nay  even  thofe 
would  be  glad  to  fee  you,  who  will  not  be  direfl- 
ed  by  you.  I believe  indeed,  things  would  be 
much  better,  if  you  would  come  to  town.” 

Wedn.  19.  I accordingly  came  to  London, 
though  with  a heavy  heart.  Here  I found 
every  day  the  dreadful  effects  of  our  brethren’s 
reafonings  and  difputing  with  each  other. 
Scarce  one  in  ten  retained  his  firft  love.  : and 
mod  of  the  reft  were  in  the  utmoft  confufion, 
biting  and  devouring  one  another.  I pray  God, 
ye  be  not  confumed  one  of  another. 

Monday  24.  After  fpending  part  of  the 
night  at  Fetter- Lane,  I went  to  a fmaller  com- 
pany, where  alfo  we  exhorted  one  another  with 

hymns 


L i84  ] 


hymns  and  fpiritual  fongs,  and  poured  out  our 
hearts  to  God  in  prayer.  Toward  morning,  one 
of  them  was  overwhelmed  with  jov  and  love, 
and  could  not  help  lhewing  it  by  drong  cries 
and  tears.  At  this  another  was  much  difpleaf* 
ed,  laying,  “ It  was  only  nature,  imagination, 
and  animal  fpirits.  ’ O thou  jealous  God,  lay 
not  this  fin  to  her  charge  ! And  let  us  not  be  wife 
above  what  is  written  ! 

Sunday  go.  One  came  to  me,  bv  whom  I ufed 
to  profit  much.  But  her  converfaiicn  was  now7 
too  high  for  me.  It  was  far  above,  out  of  my 
fight.  My  foul  is  lick  of  this  fublime  divinity  ' 
Let  me  think  and  fpeak  as  a litile  child  ! Let  my 
religion  be  plain,  artlefs,  fimple  ! Meeknefs,  tem- 
perance, patience,  faith  and  love,  be  thefe  my 
highefl  gifts:  and  let  the  highell  words  wherein 
I teach  them,  be  thofe  Hearn  from  the  book  of 
God! 

Monday  31.  I had  a long  and  particular  con- 
vention with  Mr.  Molther  himfelf.  I weighed 
all  his  words  with  the  utmoft  care,  defircd  him 
to  explain  what  I did  not  underhand ; afked  him 
again  and  again,  Do  I not  midake  wh3t  you 
fay?  Is  this  your  meaning,  or  is  it  not?  So  that 
1 think,  if  God  has  given  me  any  meafure  of  tm- 
derdanding,  I could  not  midake  him  much. 

As  foon  as  I came  home,  I befought  God  to 
aflid  me,  and  not  fuffer  the  blind  to  go  out  of  the 
may.  I then  wrote  down  what  1 conceived  to 

be 


C 1*5  ] 

be  the  difference  between  us,  in  the  following 
words : 

As  to  faith,  you  believe, 

x.  There  are  no  degrees  of  faith , and  that  no 
naan  has  any  degree  of  it,  before  all  things  in  him 
are  become  new,  before  he  has  the  full  affur- 
ance  of  faith,  the  abiding  witnefs  of  the  fpirit, 
or  tire  clear  perception,  that  Chrift  dwelleth  in 
him. 

2.  Accordingly  you  believe,  there  is  no  juflify - 
ing  faith,  or  hate  of  juflification,  fhort  of  this. 

3.  Therefore  you  believe,  our  brother  Hutton 
Edmonds,  and  others,  had  no  j ujiif yin g faith,  be- 
fore they  faw  you. 

4.  And,  in  general,  that  that  gift  of  God, 
■which  many  received  fince  Peter  Bolder  came 
into  England,  viz.  “ A fure  confidence  of  the 
love  of  God  to  them,”  zoas  not juftifying  faith.. 

5.  And,  that  the  joy  and  love  attending  it,  were 
from  animal  fpirits,  from  nature  or  imagination  ; 
not  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghcjl,  and  the  real  love  of 
God,  (hed  abroad  in  their  hearts. 

Whereas  I believe, 

1.  There  are  degrees  in  faith,  and  that  a man 
may  have  fome  degree  of  it,  before  all  things  in 
him  are  become  new,  before  he  has  the  full  af* 
furanceof  faith,  the  abiding  witnefs  of  the  fpirit, 
or  the  clear  perception  that  Chrift  dwelleth  in. 
him. 

2.  Accordingly,  I believe,  there  is  a degree  of 
jufifywg faith  (and  confequently  a hate  of juili- 

fication) 


[ 186  ] 

fication)  fhort  of,  and  commonly  antecedent  t®, 
this. 

3.  And  I believe  our  brother  Hutton,  with 
many  others,  had  jufifying  faith , long  before 
they  law  you. 

4.  And,  in  general,  that  the  gift  of  God, 
which  many  received  fince  Peter  Bohler  came 
into  England,  viz.  “ A fure  confidence  of  the 
love  of  God  to  them,"  was  ju-Jlfying  faith. 

5.  And  that  the  joy  and  love  attending  it,  were 
not  from  animal fpirits,  from  nature  or  imagina- 
tion ; but  a meafure  of  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoji, 
and  olthe  love  of  God  fhed  abroad  in  their  hearts. 

As  to  the  way  to  faith , you  believe, 

That  the  way  to  attain  it  is,  to  wait  for  Chrift, 
and  be  fill,  i.  e. 

Not  to  ufe  (what  we  term)  the  means  of  grace  : 

Not  to  go  to  church  ; 

Not  to  commuicate  ; 

Not  to  faff ; 

Not  to  ufe  fo  much  private  prayer ; 

Not  to  read  the  fcripture  ; 

(Becaufe  you  believe,  thefe  are  not  means 
of  grace,  i.  e.  do  not  ordinarily  convey  God’s 
grace  to  unbelievers  ; and, 

That  it  is  impofiible  for  a man  to  vfe  them, 
without  trufing  in  them.) 

Not  to  do  temporal  good  ; 

Nor  to  attempt  doing  fpiritual  good  : 

* Becaufe  you  believe,  no  fruit  of  the  fpirit  is 
given,  bythofe  who  have  it  not  themfelves. 

* And, 


[ »87  ] 

* And,  that  thofe  who  have  not  faith  are  ut- 
terly blind,  and  therefore  unable  to  guide  other 
fouls. 

Whereas  I believe, 

The  way  to  attain  it  is,  to  wait  for  Chrift  and 
be  Jlill, 

In  ufing  all  the  means  of  grace. 

Therefore  I believe  it  right,  for  him  who 
knows  he  has  not  faith,  [i.  e.  that  conquering 
faith,) 

To  go  to  church  ; 

To  communicate ; 

To  fall ; 

To  ufe  as  much  private  prayer  as  he  can,  and 

To  read  the  feripture  : 

(Becaufe  I believe,  thefe  are  means  of  grace, 
i.  e.  do  ordinarily  convey  God’s  grace  to  unbe- 
lievers : and 

That  it  is  poffible,  for  a man  to  ufe  them, 
without  trufing  in  them.) 

To  do  all  the  temporal  good  he  can  ; 

And  to  endeavour  after  doing  fpiri  tual  good  : 

Becaufe  I know,  many  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are 
given,  by  thofe  who  have  them  not  themfelves. 

* And  that  thofe  who  have  not  faith,  or  but 
in  the  lowed;  degree,  may  have  more  light  from 
God,  more  wifdom  for  the  guiding  of  other 
fouls,  than  many  that  are  ftrong  in  faith. 

As  to  the  manner  of  propagating  the  faith,  you 
believe  (as  I have  alfo  heard  others  affirm) 

That  we  may,  on  fome  accounts  ufe  guile  : 

By 

if ; 


C 188  ] 


By  faying  what  we  know  will  deceive  the  hear- 
ers, or  lead  them  to  think  the  thing  which  is 
not. 

By  defcribing  things  a little  beyond  the  truth,  in 
order  to  their  coming  up  to  it. 

By  fpeaking,  as  ij  we  meant,  what  we  do  not. 
But  I believe. 

That  we  may  not  ufe  guile,  on  any  account 
whatfoever  : 

That  we  may  not  on  any  account  fay,  what  we 
know  will,  and  dtfign  Should,  deceive  the  hearers : 
That  we  may  not  defcribe  things  one  jot  be- 
yond the  truth,  whether  they  come  up  to  it,  or  no : 
and, 

That  we  may  not  fpeak,  on  any  pretence,  as 
if  we  meant,  what  indeed  we  do  not : 

Ladly,  As  to  the  fruits  of  your  thus  propa- 
gating the  faith  in  England,  you  believe, 

Much  good  has  been  done  by  it : 

Many,  unfettled  from  a falfe  foundation  ; 
Many  brought  into  true Jhllnefs,  in  order  to 
their  coming  to  the  true  foundation: 

Some  grounded  thereon  : who  were  wrong 
before,  but  are  right  now. 

On  the  contrary,  I believe,  that  very  little 
good,  but  much  hurt  has  been  done  by  it. 

Many,  who  were  beginning  to  build  hoiinefs 
and  good  works,  on  the  true  foundation  ol  faith 
in  Jefus,  being  now  whclh  unfettled  and  loll  in 
vain  reafonings  and  doubtful  disputations: 

Many  others  being  brought  into  a falfe  un- 

fcriptural 


[ ] 


fcriptnral  flillnefs  ; fo  that  they  are  not  likely  to 
come  to  any  true  foundation  ; 

And  many  being  grounded  on  a faith  which  is 
without  works  ; fo  that  they  who  were  right  be- 
fore, are  wrong  now. 

Tuefday,  Jan.  1,  1740.  I endeavoured  to  ex- 
plain to  our  brethren,  the  true,  Chriftian,  fcrip- 
tural Jh/lnc/s,  by  largely  unfolding  thole  folemn 
words,  Be  jhll , and  know  that  I am  God.  Wed- 
nefday  2.  I earneltly  befought  them  all,  To 
Jland  in  the  old  paths ; and  no  longer  to  fubvert 
one  another’s  fouls,  by  idle  concroverfies  and 
firife  of  words.  They  all  leemed  convinced. 
We  then  cried  to  God,  to  heal  all  our  backflid- 
ings.  And  he  lent  forth  luch  a fpirit  ol  peace 
and  love,  as  we  had  not  known  for  many  months 
before. 

Thurf.  3.  I left  London,  and  the  next  even- 
ing came  to  Oxford  : where  I fpent  the  two  iol- 
lowing  days,  in  looking  over  the  letters  which  I 
had  received  for  the  fixteen  or  eighteen  years 
laft  paft.  How  few  traces  of  inward  religion  are 
here  ! I found  but  one  among  all  my  correfpon- 
dents,  who  declared,  (what  I well  remember,  at 
■that  time  I knew  not  how  to  underhand)  that 
“ God  had  fhed  abroad  his  love  in  his  heart, 
and  given  him  the  peace  that  palfeth  all  under- 
ftanding.”  But,  who  believed  his  report  ? 
Should  I conceal  a fad  truth  ? Or  declare  it, 
„for  the  profit  of  others  ? He  was  expelled  out  of 
his  fociety,  as  a madman,  and  being  difowned 

by 


[ *9°  ] 

by  his  friends,  and  defpifed  and  forfaken  of  all 
men,  lived  obfcure  and  unknown  for  a few 
months,  and  then  went  to  him  whom  his  foul 
loved. 

Mond.  7.  I left  Oxford.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  at  Burford;  the  next  evening  at 
Malmfbury  : and  on  Wed.  9.  1 once  more  de- 
ferred the  exceeding  great  and  precious  pro- 
mifes  at  Briftol. 

Sat.  12.  I explained  the  former  part  of  Heb. 
vi.  and  many  were  renewed,  again  to  repentance . 
Sund.  13,  while  the  facrament  was  adminiftring 
at  the  houfe  of  a perfon  that  was  fick  in  Kingf- 
wood,  a woman,  who  had  been  before  much 
tempted  of  the  devil,  funk  down  as  dead.  One 
could  not  perceive  by  any  motion  of  her  breaft, 
that  Hie  breathed,  and  her  pulfe  was  hardly 
difcernable.  A Orange  fort  of  diflimulation  this! 
I would  wifh  thofe  who  think  it  fo,  only  to  flop 
their  own  breath  and  pulfe  one  hour;  and  I will 
then  fubferibe  to  their  opinion. 

Mond.  14.  I began  expounding  the  feriptures 
in  order,  at  the  New-Room  at  fix  in  the  morn- 
ing; by  which  means  many  more  attend  the 
college  pravers,  (which  immediately  follow;  than 
ever  before.  In  the  afternoon  I preached  at 
Downing,  four  miles  from  Briltol,  on  God  hath 
given  unto  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his 
Son:  and  on  Tuef.  15.  at  Sifon,  five,  miles  from 
Briftol,  on  the  blood  which  c/eanftth  us  from  alt 
Jin.  After  preaching  1 vifited  a young  man, 

dan- 


[ 19‘  3 


dangeroufly  ill,  who  a day  or  two  after  cried  out 
aloud,  “ Lord  Jefus,  thou  knowelt  that  I love 
thee!  And  I have  thee,  and  will  never  let  thee 
go  and  died  immediately. 

Thurf.  17.  I preached  at  Kendalfhire,  'fix 
miles  from  Briftol,  on  Whofoever  is  born  of  God 
doth  not  commit  fin.  Sunday  20.  My  heart  was 
enlarged  at  Kingfwood,  in  declaring,  Ye  are 
faved  through  faith.  And  the  woman  who  had 
been  fo  torn  of  the  devil  laft  week,  was  now 
made  partaker  of  this  falvation ; being  above 
meafure  filled  with  the  love  of  God,  and  with  all 
peace  andjoy  in  believing. 

Mond.  21.  I preached  at  Hannam,  four  miles 
from  Briftol.  In  the  evening  I made  a collec- 
tion, in  our  congregation,  for  the  relief  of  the 
poor,  without  Lawford’s-gate  : who  having  no 
work  (becaufe  of  the  fevere  froft)  and  no  afiif- 
tance  from  the  parifh  wherein  they  lived,  were 
reduced  to  the  laft  extremity.  I made  another 
colletiion  on  Thurfday,  and  a third  on  Sunday; 
by  which  we  were  enabled  to  feed  a hundred, 
fometimes  a hundred  and  fifty  a day  of  thofe 
whom  we  found  to  need  it  mol 

Tuef.  22.  I preached  at  Bridge-gate,  fix  miles 
from  Briftol:  Thurf.  24,  at  Wefterleigb,  eight 
miles  from  thence.  In  the  evening,  at  the  New- 
Room,  I expounded  Exod.  xiv.  And  we  found 
that  God’s  arm  is  not  fhortned,  and  rejoiced  be- 
fore him  with  reverence.  I was  a little  furprized 
in  going  out  of  the  room,  at  one  who  catched 

hold 


[ 192  ] 


hold  of  me,  and  faid  abruptly,  “ I mull  fpeak 
with  you,  and  will.  I have  finned  againft  light 
and  againft  love.  I have  ftnned  beyond  forgive- 
nefs.  I have  been  curfing  you  in  my  heart,  and 
blalpheming  God  ever  fince  I came  here.  I am 
damn  d.  I know  it.  I feel  it.  I aw  in  hell.  I have 
hell  in  my  heart/’  I defired  two  or  three,  who 
had  confidence  in  God,  to  join  in  crying  to  him 
on  her  behalf.  Immediately  that  horrid  dread 
was  taken  away,  and  Ihe  began  to  fee  fome 
dawnings  of  hope. 

Frid.  2,5.  Another  was  with  me,  who  after 
having  tailed  the  heavenly  gilt,  was  fallen  into 
the  depth  of  defpair.  But  it  was  not  long  before 
God  heard  the  prayer,  and  reftored  to  her  the 
light  of  his  countenance. 

* One  came  to  me  in  the  eveningto  know,  “ If 
a man  could  not  be  faved  without  the  faith  of  af- 
furance  ?”  I anfwered,  1.  I cannot  approve  of 
your  terms  ; becaufe  they  are  not  fcriptural.  I 
lind  no  fuch  plirafe  as  either,  “ J'aith  of  affu- 
ranee”  or  “ J'aith  of  adherence ” in  the  bible. 
Btfide,  you  fpeak  as  if  there  were  two  faiths  in 
one  Lord.  Whereas  St.  Paul  tells  us,  there  is 
hut  one  faith  in  one  Lord.  2.  By  i e are  faved, 
by  faith , I underftand,  ye  are  faved  from  your  in- 
ward and  outward  fins.  3.  I never  yet  knew 
one  foul  thus  faved,  without  what  you  call,  The 
faith  of  ofjurance  : I mean,  a fure  confidence, 
that  by  the  merits  of  Chnft,  he  Was  reconciled  to 
the  favour  of  God. 

Sat. 


C *93  ] 

Sat.  26.  I was  ftrongly  convinced,  that  if  we 
afked  of  God,  he  would  give  light  to  all  thofe 
that  were  in  darknefs.  About  noon  we  had  a 
proof  of  it:  one  that  was  weary  and  heavy-laden, 
upon  prayer  made  for  her,  foon  finding  reft  to 
her  foul.  In  the  afternoon  we  had  a fecond 
proof;  another  mourner  being  fpeedily  com- 
forted. M y D n was  a third, 

who  about  five  o’clock  began  again  to  rejoice 

in  God  her  Saviour  : as  did  M — — y H y 

about  the  fame  hour,  after  a long  night  of  doubts 
and  fears. 

Thurfday  31.  I went  to  one  in  Kingfwood, 
who  was  dangeroufly  ill,  as  was  fuppofed,  paft 
recovery.  But  fhe  was  ftrong  in  the  Lord,  long- 
ing to  be  diftolved  and  to  be  with  Chrift.  Some 
of  her  words  were  ; “ I was  long  ftriving  to 
come  to  my  Saviour,  and  I then  thought  he  was 
afar  off.  But  now  I know,  he  was  nigh  me  all 
that  time:  I know  his  arms  were  round  me. 
For  his  arms  are  like  the  rain-bow.  They  go 
round  heaven  and  earth.” 

I had  now  determined,  if  it  fhould  pleafe 
God,  to  fpend  fome  time  in  Briftol.  But  quite 
-contrary  to  my  expectation,  I was  called  away, 
in  a manner  I could  not  refill.  A young  man, 
who  had  no  thoughts  of  religion,  had  come  to 
Briftol  a few  months  before.  One  of  his  ac- 
quaintance brought  him  to  me.  He  approved  of 
what  he  heard,  and  for  a while  behaved  well. 
But  foon  after,  his  ferioufnefs  wore  off.  He 

Vol.  XXVII.  I returned 


[ m ] 

returned  to  London,  and  fell  in  with  his  old  ac- 
quaintance. By  fome  of  thefe  he  was  indue  ed 
to  commit  a robbery  on  the  highway  ; for  which 
he  was  apprehended,  tried  and  condemned. 
He  had  now  a flrong  defire  to  fpeak  with  me  ; 
and  fome  of  his  words  (In  a letter  to  his 
friend)  were  ; “ I adjure  him,  by  the  living 
God,  that  he  come  and  fee  me,  before  I go 
hence.” 

Friday,  Feb.  l.  I fet  out,  and  on  Sunday  3. 
declared  the  grace  of  God  at  Newbury,  from 
thofe  words  of  the  prophet,  I will  heal  their 
bachjliding,  / will  love  them  freely.  And  tho’ 
the  church  was  full  of  (chiefly)  genteel,  well- 
drefi  people,  they  behaved  as  if  they  knew 
God  was  there. 

Monday  4.  I came  to  Reading  and  met  with 
a few  hungering  and  thirfling  after  riglveouf- 
nefs.  A few  more  I found  at  Windfor  in  the 
evening.  The  next  afternoon  I reached  Lon- 
don. 

Wednefdav  6.  I went  to  the  poor,  young 

man,  who  lav  under  fentence  of  death.  Of  a 

♦ 

truth  God  has  begun  a good  work  in  his  foul. 

0 may  it  be  brought  to  perfection. 

I think  it  was  the  next  time  I was  there, 
that  the  ordinary  of  Newgate  came  to  me,  and 
with  much  vehemence  told  me,  “ He  was  forty 

1 firould  turn  difiTenter  from  the  church  of  Eng- 
land.” I told  him,  “ If  it  was  fo,  I did  not  know 
it At  which  he  feemed  a little  furprized  ; 

and 


r *95  ] 

and  offered  at  fomet'ning  by  way  of  proof,  but- 
which  needed  not  a reply. 

* Our  20th  article  defines  a true  church, 
“ a congregation  of  faithful  people,  wherein 
the  true  word  of  God  is  preached  and  the  facra- 
ments  duly  adminifired.”  According  to  this 
account,  the  church  of  England  is,  That  body 
of  faithful  people  (or  holy  believers)  in  England 
among  whom  the  pure  word  of  God  is  preach- 
ed, and  the  facraments  duly  adminifired.  Who 
then  are  the  word  diffenters  from  this  church  ? 
l.  Unholy  men  of  all  kinds,  fwearers,  fabbath- 
breakers,  drunkards,  fighters,  whore-mongers, 
liars,  revilers,  evil-fpeakers  ; the  pafhonate,  the 
gay,  the  lovers  of  monev,  the  lovers  of  drefs,  or  of 
praife,  the  lovers  of  pleafure  more  than  lovers  of 
God  : all  thefe  are  diffenters  of  the  higheft  fort, 
continually  firiking  at  the  root  of  the  church  ; 
and  themfelves  belonging  in  truth  to  no  church, 
but  to  the  fynagogue  of  Satan.  2.  Men  un- 
found in  the  faith;  thofe  who  deny  the  fcriptures 
of  truth  ; thofe  who  deny  the  Lord  that  bought 
them  ; thofe  who  deny  juftification  by  faith 
alone,  or  the  prefent  falvation  which  is  by 
faith  ; thefe  alfo  are  diffenters  of  a very  high 
kind  : for  they  likewife  ftrike  at  the  foundation, 
and  were  their  principles  univerfally  to  obtain, 
there  could  be  no  true  church  upon  earth  ; lafily 
Thofe  who  unduly  adminifter  the  facraments  ; 
who  (to  infiance  but  in  one  point)  adminifter 
the  Lord’s  fupper  to  fuch  as  have  neither  the 
I 2 power, 


[ ig6  ] 


power,  nor  the  form  of  godlinefs.  Thefe  too 
are  grofs  dilfenters,  from  the  church  of  England, 
and  Ihould  not  calf  the  firfHfone  at  others. 

Tuefday  12.  The  young  man,  who  was  to  die 
the  next  day,  gave  me  a paper,  part  of  which 
was  follows  : 

“ As  I am  to  anfwer  to  the  God  ofjuftice 
and  truth,  before  whom  I am  to  appear  naked 
to-morrow, 

“ I came  to  Briftol  with  a defign  to  go  abroad, 
either  as  a furgeon,  or  in  any  other  capacity  that 
was  fuiting.  It  was  there  I unfortunately  faw 
Mr.  Ramfey.  He  told  me,  after  one  or  two  in- 
terviews, that  he  was  in  the  fervice  of  Mr. 
John  Wefley;  and  that  he  would  introduce  me 
to  him,  which  he  did.  I cannot  but  fay,  I was 
always  fond  of  the  dofirine  that  I heard  from 
him  ; however  unhappily  I confented  with  Mr. 
Ramfey,  and  I believe  between  us  we  might  take 
more  than  thirty  pounds  out  of  the  money  col- 
lefled  for  building  the  fchool  in  Kingfwood. 

“ I acknowledge  the  julficeof  God  in  over- 
taking me  for  my  facrilege,  in  taking  that 
money  which  was  devoted  to  God.  But  he,  I 
truft,  has  foigiven  me  this  and  all  my  fins,  walh- 
ing  them  away  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 

Feb.  12,  Gwillam  Sntowde. 

x 739-40. 

I knew  not  in  the  morning,  whether  to  re- 
joice or  grieve,  when  they  informed  me,  “ he 

was 


t 1 97  ] 

was  reprieved  for  fix  weeks  and  afterwards, 
“ That  he  was  ordered  for  transportation.” 
But  known  unto  God  are  all  his  works  ! 

Wedn.  20.  I explained  at  Deptford  the  na- 
ture of  Chriflian  faith  and  falvation.  Many  Teem- 
ed to  receive  the  word  with  joy.  Others  com- 
plained. Thou  bringefl  jlrange  things  to  our  ears  ; 
though  Some  of  them  had  not  patience  to  hear, 
what  this  new  doftrine  was. 

Thurf.  2i.  I had  a long  conference  with  thofe 
whom  I efleem  very  highly  in  love.  But  I could 
not  yet  underhand  them  on  one  point,  “ Chris- 
tian opennefs  and  plainnefs  of  Speech.”  They 
pleaded  for  Such  a refervednefs  and  clofenefs  of 
converfation,  as  I could  in  no  wife  reconcile 
with  St.  Paul’s  direction,  By  manifejlation  ojthe 
truth  to  commend  oui  [elves  to  every  man  s conJci~ 
ence  in  the  fight  oj  God.  Yet  I Scarce  knew  what 
to  think,  confidering  they  had  the  practice  of 
their  whole  church  on  their  fide  : till  I opened 
my  teflament  on  thefe  words,  What  is  that  to 
thee?  FoUoxv  tkou  me. 

Tuef.  26.  Complaint  was  made  again  (as  in- 
deed had  been  done  before,  and  that  not  once 
or  twice  only)  that  many  of  our  brethern,  not 
content  with  leaving  off  the  ordinances  of  God 
themfelves,  were  continually  troubling  thofe  that 
did  not,  and  difputing  with  them,  whether  they 
ivould  or  no.  The  fame  complaint  was  made  the 
next  night  alfo,  at  the  meeting  of  the  Society. 

1 then  plainly  fet  before  them  the  things  they 

J 3 had 


[ i98  ] 

bad  done,  expoflulated  the  cafe  with  them, 
and  earneflly  befonght  them,  “ not  to  trouble 
or  perplex  the  minds  of  their  brethren  any 
more ; but  at  leaf!  to  excuft  thofe,  who  flill 
waited  for  God,  in  the  ways  of  his  own  appoint- 
ment.” 

Sat.  March  1.  Many  that  were  in  heavinefs 
being  met  together,  we  cried  to  God  to  comfort 
their  fouls.  One  of  thefe  foon  found,  that  God 
heareth  the  prayer.  She  had  before  been  under 
the  phyfician’s  hands;  her  relations  taking  it 
for  granted  fhe  was  btfuirherfif  But  the  great 
phyficain  alone  knew  how  to  heal  her  ftcknefs- 
Mond.  3.  I rode  by  Windfor  to  Reading, 
where  I had  left  two  or  three,  full  of  peace  and 
love.  But  I now  found  fume  from  London 
had  been  here,  grievoufly  troubling  thefe  fouls 
alfo  ; labouring  to  perfuade  them,  1.  That  they 
had  no  faith  at  all,  becaufethey  fometimesfelt 
doubt  or  fear.  And  2.  That  they  ought  to  be 
fill ; not  to  go  to  church,  not  to  communicate, 
not  lo  fearch  the  fcriptures  : “ Becaufe  (fay 
they)  you  cannot  do  any  of  thefe  things,  with- 
out milling  in  them.” 

After  confirming  their  fouls,  weleft  Reading, 
and  on  Wednef.  5.  came  to  Briltol.  It  was 
eafy  to  obferve  here,  in  how  different  a manner 
God  works  now,  from  what  he  did  lad  fpring. 
He  then  poured  along,  like  a rapid  flood,  ovet- 
whelming  all  before  him.  M hereas  now 

“ He 


[ l99  ] 

“ He  deigns  his  influence  to  infufe 
Secret,  refrejhing  as  the fdent  dews.” 

Conviflions  fink  deeper  and  deeper.  Love  and 
joy  are  more  calm,  even  and  Heady.  And  God 
in  many  is  laying  the  axe  to  the  root  of  the  tree, 
who  can  have  no  red  in  their  fpirit*,  till  they 
are  fully  renewed  in  the  image  of  God,  in  right- 
eoufnefs  and  true  holinefs. 

Wednef.  12.  I found  a little  time  (having  been 
much  importuned]  to  fpend  with  the  foldier  in 
Bridewell,  who  was  under  fentence  of  death. 
1 his  I continued  to  do  once  a day  ; whereby 
there  was  alfo  an  opportunitv,  of  declaring  the 
gofpel  of  peace  to  feveral  defolate  ones,  that 
were  confined  in  the  fame  place. 

Tuef.  25.  The  morning  expofition  began  at 
five,  as  I hope  it  will  always  for  the  time  to  come. 
'Tliurf.  27.  I had  an  interview  with  Jofepli 
Chandler,  a young  Quaker,  who  had  fometimes 
{poke  in  their  meeting  with  whom  I had  never 
exchanged  a word  before,  as  indeed  I knew  him 
not  either  by  face  or  name.  But  fome  had  been 
at  the  pains  of  carrying  him,  as  from  me,  a 
formal  challenge  todifpute:  and  had  afterwards 
told  him,  “ That  I had  declared  in  the  open  fo- 
•ciety,  I challenged  Jofeph  Chandler  to  difpute. 
And  he  promifed  to  come  : but  broke  his  word.” 
Jofeph  immediately Tent,  to  know  from  my  own 
mouth,  if  thefe  things  were  fo  ? If  thole  who 
probably  count  themfelves  better  Chrihians,  had 
I 4 but 


[ 200  ] 

but  done  like  this  honeft  Quaker,  how  many 
idle  tales,  which  they  now  potently  believe, 
would  like  this,  have  vanifhed  into  air  ? 

Sat.  29.  I fpent  another  hour  with  one  I had 
twice  converfed  with  before  : and  with  much 
the  fame  effett.  He  afked,  “ Wherein  the  doc- 
trine I preached  differed  from  the  doftrine 
preached  by  other  minillers  of  the  church  ? I 
told  him,  “ I hope,  not  at  all  from  that  which  is 
preached  by  many  other  minifters.  But  from 
that  which  is  preached  by  force,  it  differs  thus ; I 
preach  the  do&rine  of  the  church,  and  they  do 
not.’’  After  he  had  long  and  zea'oufly  laboured 
to  prove,  that  “ all  minifters  preached  as  I did, 
and  there  was  no  difference  of  doctrine  at  all 
1 was  obliged  to  leave  him  abruptly  ; and  fhouid 
indeed  have  feared,  that  my  time  had  been  fpent 
to  fmall  purpofe,  but  for  one  piece  of  hiftor/ 
which  I then  learned,  viz.  “ I hat  Ire  had  gone 
to  the  bilhop,  before  his  lordfhip  left  Briilol, 
and  informed  him,  that  I faid  in  the  public  con- 
gregation, “ I had  had  a conference  with  the 
bifhop  and  twelve  clergymen,  and  had  put  them 
all  to  filence/’  Was  his  lerdfhip  to  informed  ? 
And  could  he  believe  even  this.’  O Jofeph 
Chandler,  Jofeph  Chandler  1 

I think  it  was  about  this  time,  that  the  foldief 
was  executed.  For  fome  time  I had  vifired  him 
every  day.  But  when  the  love  of  God  uas Jhed 
abroad  in  his  heart,  I told  him,  “ Do  not  expeft 
to  fee  me  any  more.  He  who  has  now  begun  a 

£00d 

9 


r 201  ] 


good  work  in  your  foul,  will,  I doubt  not,  pre- 
ferve  you  to  the  end.  But  I believe  Satan  will 
feparate  us  for  a feafon.”  Accordingly,  the  next 
day  I was  informed,  that  the  commanding-of- 
ficer had  given  ftricl  orders,  “ Neither  Mr.  Wef- 
ley,  nor  any  of  his  people  fliould  be  admitted. 
Bor  they  were  all  Alhiejis .”  But  did  that  man  die 
like  an  Atliieft  ? Let  my  laft  end  be  like  his! 

Tuefd.  April  1.  While  I was  expounding  the 
former  part  of  the  23d  chapter  of  the  A£ls,  (how 
wonderfully  fuited  to  the  occafton,  though  not 
by  my  choicej  the  floods  began  to  lift  up  their 
voice.  Some  or  other  of  the  children  of  Belial 
had  laboured  to  difturb  us  feveral  nights  before. 
But  now  it  Teemed  as  if  all  the  hofls  of  the  aliens 
were  come  together  with  one  confent.  Not  only 
the  court  and  the  alleys,  but  all  the  flreet,  up- 
wards and  downwards  was  filled  with  people, 
{homing,  curbing  and  fwearing,  and  ready  to 
fwallow  the  ground  with  fiercenefs  and  rage. 
The  mayor  feat  order,  that  they  fhould  difperfe. 
But  they  fet  him  at  nought.  The  chief  conlfa- 
ble  came  next  in  perfon,  who  was  till  then  fuf- 
ficiently  prejudiced  againft  us.  But  they  infult- 
ed  him  alfo  in  fo  grofs  a manner,  as  I believe 
fully  opened  his  eyes.  At  length  the  mayor  font 
feveral  of  his  officers,  who  took  the  ringleaders 
into  cullody,  and  did  not  go  till  all  the  rell  were 
difperfed.  Surely  he  hath  been  to  us  the  minify 
ter  of  God  for  good, 

Wednefd.  a..  The  rioters  were  brought,  -to 

1-5 


[ 202  'J 

the  court,  the  quarter-feffions  being  held  that 
day.  They  began  to  excufe  themfelves,  by  fay- 
ing many  things  of  me.  But  the  mayor  cut  them 
all  fhort,  faying,  “ What  Mr.  Wefiey  is,  is  no- 
thing to  you.  • I will  keep  the  peace  ; I will  have 
no  rioting  in  this  city.” 

Calling  at  Newgate  in  the  afternoon,  I was  in- 
formed, “ That  the  poor  wretches  under  fen- 
tence  of  death,  were  earneftly  defirous  to  fpeak 
with  me  ; but  that  it  could  not  be  : Alderman 
Beecher  having  juft  then  fent  an  exprefs  order, 
that  they  fhould  not.”  I cite  Alderman  Beecher, 
to  anfwer  for  thefe  fouls,  at  the  judgment-feat 
of  Chrift. 

Thurf.  3.  I went  into  the  room,  weak  and 
faint.  The  fcripture  that  came  in  courfe  was, 
A \ftcr  the  way  that  you  call  herefy , fo  zvorjhip  I the 
God  of  my  fathers.  I know  not,  whether  God 
hath  been  fo  with  us,  from  the  beginning  hither- 
to. He  proclaimed  as  it  were  a general  deli- 
verance to  the  captives.  The  chains  fell  off : 
they  arofe  and  followed  him.  The  cries  of  de- 
fire, joy  and  love  were  on  every  fide.  Fear, 
forrow,  and  doubt  fled  away.  Verily,  thou  haft 
fent  a gracious  ram  upon  thine  inheritance , and 
refrefhed  it  when  it  was  weary. 

On  Good-Friday  I was  much  comforted  by 
Mr.  T — ’s  fermon  at  All-Saints,  which  svas  ac- 
cording to  the  truth  of  the  gofpel : as  well  as  by 
the  arTe&ionate  ferioufnefs  wherewith  he  deli- 
vered the  holy  bread  to  a vary  large  congrega- 
tion* 


[ 203  ] 

tion.  May  the  good  Lord  fill  him  with  all  the 
life  oflove,  and  with  all  fpiritual  bleffings  in  CIniJi 
Jefus. 

At  five,  preaching  on  John  xix.  34.  A foldier 
pierced  his  fide , and  there  came  forth  blood  and 
water ; I was  enabled  to  fpeak  flrong  words,  both' 
concerning  the  atoning  blood,  an,d  the  living, 
fanflifying  water.  Many  were  deeply  convinc- 
ed of  their  want  of  both  ; and  others  filled  with 
ftrong  confolation. 

Mond.  7,  At  the  preffing  inftance  of  Howel 
Harris,  I again  fet  out  for  Wales.  In  the  even- 
ing I preached  repentance  and  remijfion  off  ns,  at 
Lanvachas,  three  miles  from  the  New-paffage. 
Tuef.  8.  I preached  at  Ponty-Pool,  on  By  grace 
ye  are  faved  through  faith  : and  in  the  evening 
at  Lanhithel,  three  miles  from  thence,,  on  I know 
that  in  me  dwelleth  no  good  thing . 

Wedn.  9.  After  reading  prayers  in  Lanhithel 
church,  I preached  on  thofe  words,  I will  heal 
their  backfiding,  I will  love  them  freely.  In  the 
afternoon  Howel  Harris  told  me,  how  earneftly 
many  had  laboured  to  prejudice  him  againft  me  ; 
efpecially  thofe  who  had  gleaned  up  all  the  idle 
Itories  at  Briftol,  and  retailed  them  in  their  own 
country.  And  yet  thefe  are  good  Chriftians  ! 
Thefe  whifperers,  tale-bearers,  back-biters,  evil- 
fpeakers  1 Juft  fuch  Chriftians  as  murderers  or 
adulterers.  Except  ye  repent  ye  fiall  likewife per  'flu 

In.  the  evening  I expounded  at  Cardiff,  the 
ftory  of  the  pharifee  and  publican.  The  next. 

I £ day. 


[ 2°4  3 

day.  Thurf.  10,  after  preaching  thrice,  i rode  to 
Watford,  five  miles  from  Cardiff,  where  a few 
of  us  joined  together  in. prayer,  and  in  provoking 
one  another  to  love  and  to  good  works. 

Frid.  ri.  I preached,  in  Lantarnum.  church, 
on,  By  grace  ye  are  faved  through  faith.  In  the 
afternoon  I preached  at  Penreul  near  Ponty- 
pool.  A few  were  cut  to  the  heart,  particularly 

Mrs.  A d,  who  had  fome  time  before  given 

me  up  for  a Papifl,  Mr.  E s,  the  curate, 

having  averred  me  to  be  fucb,  upon  his  perfonal 
knowledge,  at  her  houfe  in  Ponty-pool.  I after- 
wards called,  0 ye  dry  bones,  hear  the  word  of  the 
Lord.  And  there  was  a fhakins  indeed.  Three 
or  four  came  tome,  in  fuch  mourning  as  I had 
hardly  feen  ; as  did  a poor  drunkard  between 
eleven  and  twelve,  who  was  convinced  by  the 
word  fpoken  on  Tuefdav. 

Sat.  12.  After  preaching  at  Lavas  eh  as  in  the 
way,  in  the  afternoon  I came  to  Briflol,  ami 

heard  the  melancholy-  news,  that one  of 

the  chief  of  thofe  who  came  to  make  the  diflur- 
bance  on  the  firfl  i nil  ant,  had  hanged  himfelf. 
He  was  cut  down,  it  feems,  alive,  but  died  in  lefs 
than  an  hour:  a fecond  of  them  had  been  for 
fome  days  in  ftrong  pain,  and  had  many  times 
fent,  to  defire  our  prayers.  A third  came  to  me 
himfelf,  and  confeffed,  “ he  was  hired  that  night, 
and  made  drunk  on  purpofe : but  when  he 
came  to  the  door,  he  knew  net  what  was 

the 


L 20,5  j 

the  matter,  he  could  not  fur,  nor  open  ms, 
mouth.” 

Mond.  14.  I was  explaining  the  liberty  we 
have,  to  enter  into  the  holiejl  by  the  blood  oj  JeJus 
when  one  cried  out,  as  in  an  agony,  “Thou  ait  a. 
hypocrite,  a devil,  an  enemy  to  the  church. 
This  is  falfe  doflrine.  It  is  not  the  dock  in  e of  the- 
church..  It  is  damnable  dodtnne.  It  is  the 
doftrine  of  devils.”  1 did  not  perceive  that 
any  were  hurt  thereby  : but  rather  (Lengthened, 
by  having  fuch  an  opportunity  of  confirming 
their  love  toward  him,  and  returning  good  for 
evil. 

Tuef.  15.  I received  the  following  note  : 

Sir,. 

“ This  is  to  let  you  underhand,  that  the  man 
which  made  the  noife  laft  night,  is  named  John 
Beon.  Tie  now  goes  by  the  name  of  John- 
Darfy.  He  is  a Romiflt  prieft.  We  have 
people  enough  here  in  Brihol  that  know 
him.” 

Sat.  19.  I received  a letter  from  Mr.  Simp* 
fon,  and  another  from.  Mr.  William  Oxlee,  in- 
forming me,  that  our  poor  brethren  in  Fetter-lane 
were  again  in  great  confufion  ; and  earneftly 
defiring,  that  if  it  were  pofiible,  I.  would  come 
to  London  without  delay. 

Mond.  21.  I fet  out,  and  the  next  evening 
reached  London,  Wednef.  £3.  I went  to  Mr* 
Simpfon.  He  told  me,  “ All  the  confufion  was 
owing  to  my  brother,  who  would  preach  up  the 

©rdi= 


[ 206  ] 


ordinances : whereas  believers,  faid  he,  are  not 
fubjeEl  to  ordinances : and  unbelievers  have  no- 
thing to  do  with  them.  They  ought  to  be  Jlill ; 
otherwife  they  will  be  unbelievers  all  the  days  of 
(heir  life.” 

After  a fruitlefs  difpute  of  about  two  hours,  I 
returned  home  with  a heavy  heart.  Mr,  Mol- 
ther  was  taken  ill  this  day.  I believe  it  was  the 
hand  of  God  that  was  upon  him.  In  the  even- 
ing cur  fociety  met ; but  cold,  weary,  heartlefs, 
dead.  I found  nothing  of  brotherly  love  among 
them  now,  but  a harfh,  dry,  heavy,  ffupid  fpirit. 
For  two  hours,  they  looked  one  at  another,  when 
they  looked  up  at  all,  as  if  one  half  of  them  was 
afraid  of  the  other;  yea,  as  if  a voice  were 
founding  in  their  ears,  Take  ye  heed  every  one  of 
his  neighbour  : truf  ye  not  in  any  brother.  For 
every  brother  will  utterly  fupplani , and  every 
neighbour  will  walk  with f under s. 

I think,  not  fo  few  as  thirty  perfons  fpoke  to 
me  in  thefe  two  days,  who  had  been  llrongly  fo- 
licited,  1.  To  deny  what  God  had  done  for  their 
fouls,  to  own  they  never  had  living  faith  : 2.  To 
be  fill,  till  they  had  it,  to  leave  off  all  the  means 
of  grace  ; not  to  go  to  church,  not  to  communi- 
cate, not  to  fearch  the  fcripture,  not  to  ufe  pri- 
vate prayer ; at  leaf!,  not  fo  much,. or  not  vocally ^ 
®r  not  at  any  fated  times . 

Frid  2 5.  My  brother  and  I went  to  Mr.  Mol- 
ther  again,  and  fpent  two  hours  in  converfation 

with 


[ 207  ] 

with  him.  He  now  alfo  explicitly  affirmed,  i. 
That  there  are  no  degrees  in  faith;  that  none  has 
any  faith  who  has  ever  any  doubt  or  fear,  and 
that  none  is  juftified  till  he  has  a clean  heart, 
with  the  perpetual  indwelling  of  Chrill,  and  of 
the  Holy  Gholl  : and  2.  That  every  one  who 
has  not  this,  ought,  till  he  has  it,  to  b e/Iill that 
is,  as  he  explained  it,  not  to  ufe  the  ordinances, 
or  means  oj  grace , fo  called.  He  alfo  exprefty 
afferted,  1.  That  to  thofe  who  have  a clean  heart 
the  ordinances  are  not  matter  of  duty.  Thev  are 
not  commanded  to  ufe  them  : they  zxzjree-,  they 
may  ufe  them,  or  they  may  not:  2.  That  thofe 
who  have  not  a clean  heart,  ought  not  to  ufe 
them,  (particularly  not  to  communicate ;)  be- 
caufe  God  neither  commands  nor  de/igns  they 
fhould,  (commanding  them  to  none,  defigninp 
them  only  for  believers)  and  beeaufe  they  are 
not  means  of  grace  ; there  being  no  fuch,  thing  as 
means  of  grace,  but  Chrift  only.” 

Ten  or  twelve  perfons  fpoke  to  me  this  day 
alfo,  and  many  more  the  day  following,  who  had 
been  greatly  troubled  by  this  new  gofpel,  and 
thrown  into  the  utmolt  heavinefs  : and  indeed 
wherever  I went,  I found  more  and  more  proofs 
of  the  grievous  confufion  it  had  occafioned : 
many  coming  to  me  day  by  day,  who  were  once 
full  of  peace  and  love,  but  were  now  again 
plunged  into  doubts  and  fears,  and  driven  even 
to  their  wit’s  end, 

* I was  now  utterly  at  a lofs  what  courfe  ta 

take,. 


[ 2o8  ] 


take,  finding  no  reft  for  tHe  foie  of  my  foot. 
Thefe  vain  j anglings  purfued  me  wherever  I 
went,  and  were  always  founding  in  my  ears.. 
Wednef.  30.  I went  to  my  friend  (that  was  !) 
Mr.  St , at  Iflington.  But  he  alfo  imme- 

diately entered  upon  the  fubject,.  telling  me, 
“ Now  he  was  fully  affured,  that  no  one  has  any 
degree  of  faith,  till  he  is  perfecl  asGodis  per  feel” 

I afked,  “,Have  you  then  no  degree  of  faith?” 
He  faid, 11  No;  for  1 have  not  a clean  heart.’’  I 
turned  and  aiked  his  fervant,  “ Ellher,  have  you 
a clean  heart?”  She  faid,  “No;  my  heart  is 
defperately  wicked.  But  I have  no  doubt  or  fear. 
I know  my  Saviour  loves  me.  And  I love 
him.  I feel  it  every  moment.”  I then  plainly 
told  her  maRer,  “ Here  is  an  end  of  your  reafonr 
ing.  This  is  the  flate,  the  exigence  of  which  yott 
deny.” 

Thence  I went  to  the  little  focietv  here, 
which  had  flood  untainted  from  the  beginning. 
But  the  plague  was  now  fpread  to  them  alfo. 
One  of  them  who  had  been  long  full  of  joy  in 
believing,  now  denied  fhe  had  any  faith  at  all, 
and  faid^  ‘‘Till  die  had,  fhe  would,  coramuni, 
cate  no  more.”  Another,  who  faid.  She  had 
the  faith  that  overcometh  the  world,”  added, 
“She  had  not  communicated  for  feme  weeks, 
and  it  was  all  one  to  her  whether  fhe  did 
or  no ; for  a believer  was  not  Jubjed  to  ordi- 
nances.” . 

In  the  evening,  one  of  the  hid  things  i a.te 

at 


[ 209  ] 

at  Fetter-lane,  was,  the  queflion  eonceming  the 
ordinances.  But  I intreated,  we  might  not  be 
always  difputing  ; but  rather  give  ourfelves  unto 
prayer. 

I endeavoured  al!  this  time,  both  by  explain- 
ing in  public  thofe  icriptures  which  had  been 
milunderitood,  and  by  private  converfation,  to 
brills  back  thofe  who  had  been  led  out  of  the 

O 

way  ; and  having  now  delivered  my  own  foul, 
on  Friday,  May  2,  I left  London  ; and  lying  at 
fiungerford  that  night,  the  next  evening  came 
to  Brill ol. 

Sunday  4.  I preached  in  the  morning 
at  the  fchool,  and  in  the  afternoon  at  Rofe- 
green,  on,  I determined  not  to  know  any 
thing  among  you , fave  Jefus  Chrifl , and  him 
crucified. 

Mond.  5,  I expounded  ihofe  words,  I write 
unto  you,  little  children,  becaufe  your  fins  are  for- 
given you:  and  defcribed  the  Hate  of  thofe  who 
have  forgivenefs  of  fins,  but  have  not  yet  a clean 
heart. 

Wednef.  7.  I prayed  with  a poor  helplefs 
finner,  who  had  been  all  his  life-time  Jubjecl  to 
bondage.  But  our  Lord  now  proclaimed  de- 
liverance to  the  captive,  and  he  rejoiced  with 
joy  unfpeakable.  All  the  next  day  his  mouth 
was  filled  with  praife,  and  on  Friday  he  fell 
afleep. 

Thurf.  S.  I was  greatly  reftelhed  by  conver- 
fing  withfeveral,  who  were  indeed  as  little  chil- 
dren, 


[ 210  ] 

dren,  not  artful,  not  wife  in  their  own  eyes,  fcot 

doting  on  controvtrjy  and  Jlrije  of  words,  but 
truly  determined  to  knew  nothing  Jave Jefus  Chrfi, 
and  him  crucified. 

fri.  9.  I was  a little  furptized  at  feme,  who 
w-ere  buffeted  of  Satan  in  an  tinufua!  manner,  by 
fech  a fpirit  of  laughter  as  they  could  in  no  wife 
refill,  though  it  was  pain  and  grief  unto  'hem.  I 
could  fcarce  have  believed  the  account  they 
gave  me,  had  I not  known  the  fame  thing  ten  or 
eleven  t ears  ago.  Part  of  Sunday  my  brother 
and  I then  ufed  to  fpend  in  walking  in  the  mea- 
dows and  Tinging  pfalms.  But  one  day,  juft  as 
we  weie  beginning  to  ftng,  he  burft  out  into  a 
loud  laughter.  I afkedhim,  “ If  he  was  diftraft- 
ed  ?”  And  began  to  be  very'  angry,  and  presently 
after  to  laugh  as  loud  as  he.  Nor  could  we  pofli- 
bly  refrain,  though  we  were  ready  to  tear  our- 
felves  in  pieces,  but  we  were  forced  to  go  home 
without  finging  another  line. 

Tuef.  13.  In  the  evening  I went  to  Upton,  a 
little  town  five  or  fix  miles  from  Briftol,  and  of- 
fered to  all  thofe  who  had  ears  to  hear,  Repen- 
tance and  r errdff  on  cf  fins.  The  devil  knew  his 
kingdom  (hook,  and  therefore  ftirred  up  bis  fer- 
vants  to  ring  bells,  and  make  all  the  noife  they 
could.  But  my  voice  prevailed,  fo  that  moft  of 
thofe  that  were  prefent  heard  the  word  which  is 
able  fo  j nve  their  fouls. 

Wedn.  14.  I vifited  one  of  our  colliers,  who 
was  ill  of  the  fmall-pox.  His  foul  was  full  of 

peace, 


C 3 

peace,  and  a day  or  two  after,  returned  to'  God 
that  gave  it. 

Sat.  17.  I found  more  and  more  undeniable 
proofs,  that  the  Chriilian  Hate  is  a continual  war- 
fare, and  that  we  have  need  every  moment  to 
watch  and  pray , left  we  enter  into  temptation. 
Outward  trials  indeed  were  now  removed,  and 
peace  was  in  all  our  borders . But  fo  much  the 
more  did  inward  trials  abound;  and  if  one  mem- 
ber fufftred,  all  the  members  J offered  with  it.  So 
flrange  a fympathy  did  I never  obferve 
before  : whatever  confiderable  temptation  fell 
on  any  one,  unaccouirably  fpreading  itfelf  to 
the  reft,  fo  that  exceeding  few  were  able  to  ef- 
cape  it. 

Sund.  18.  I endeavoured  to  explain  thofe  im- 
portant words  of  St.  Peter,  Beloved,  think  it  not 
ftrange  concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try 
you,  as  if  fome  j' range  thing  happened  unto  you. 
Mil  cEi*  feo"v£  T)J  "{v  vySv  ns v^uicru  nsfft  nsu^aefov  v/xi* 

jmply  : literally,  Marvel  not  at  the  burning  in  you 
''which  is  for  your  trial. 

Wec’.n.  ai.  In  the  evening  fuch  a fpirit  of 
laughter  was  among  us,  that  many  were  much 
offended.  But  the  attention  of  all  was  fixed  on 

poor  L a S , whom  we  all  knew  to  be 

no  dilfembler.  One  fo  violently  and  varioufly 
torn  of  the  evil  one  did  1 never  fee  before. 
Sometimes  fhe  laughed  till  almofi  firangled  ; 
then  broke  out  into  curling  and  blafpheming  ; 
then  ftamped  and  lhuggled  with  incredible 

ftrengthj 


C 212  3 

ftrength,  fo  that  four  or  five  could  fcarce  hold 
her:  then  cried  out,  “ O eternity,  eternity! 
O that  I had  no  foul ! O that  I had  never 
been  born  !”  At  laft  file  faintly  called  on  ChriH 
to  help  her.  And  the  violence  of  her  pangs 
ceafed. 

Moft  of  our  brethren  and  fillers  were  now 
fully  convinced,  that  thofe  who  were  under  this 
firange  temptation  could  not  help  it.  Only 

E th  B— — and  Anne  H n were  of 

another  mind;  being  Hill  fure,  “ anyone  might 
help  laughing  if  fhe  would.”  This  they  declared 
to  many  on  Thurfday  ; but  on  Friday  23,  God 
fuffered  Satan  to  teach  them  better.  Both  of 
them  were  fuddenly  feized  in  the  fame  manner 
as  the  reft,  and  laughed  whether  they  would  or 
no,  almoll  without  ceafing.  Thus  they  conti- 
nued for  two  days,  a fpe&acle  to  all ; and  were 
then,  upon  prayer  made  for  them,  delivered  in  a 
moment. 

Mond.  26.  S a Ha g,  after  Ore  had 

calmly  rejoiced  feveral  days,  in  the  midftof  vio- 
lent pain,  found  at  once  a return  of  eafe,  and 
health,  and  ftrength  ; and  arofe  and  went  to  her 
common  bufinefs. 

Sund.  June  1.  I explained  the  rejl  which  re - 
inaineth  jor  the  people  cj  God,  in  the  morning  at 
Kingfwood-fchool,  and  in  the  evening  at  Rofe- 
green,  to  fix  or  feven  thoufand  people.  I after- 
wards exhorted  our  fociety,  (the  time  being  come 
that  I was  to  leave  them  for  a feafon)  to  pray  al- 
ways, 


[ 213  J 

ways,  that  they  might  not  faint  in  their  minds, 
though  they  were  wye  filing  not  with  JleJh  and 
blood , but  with  principalities  and  powers,  and f pi- 
ritual  wickednejs  in  high  places. 

Mond.  2.  I left  Briftol,  and  rode  by  Avon 
and  Malmfbury  (where  I preached  in  the  even- 
ing) to  Oxford.  Two  or  three  even  here  had 
not  yet  been  perfuaded  to  call  away  their 
confidence:  one  of  whom  was  ftill  full  of  her 
firfl;  love,  which  fhe  he  had  received  at  the 
Lord’s  table. 

Thurf.  g.  I came  to  London  ; where  finding 
a general  temptation  prevail,  of  leaving  off  good 
works,  in  order  to  an  increafe  of  faith.  I began 
on  Friday  6,  to  expound  the  epiflle  of  St.  James, 
the  great  antedote  agamft  this  poifon.  I then 

went  to  Mr.  S once  again,  to  trv  if  we 

could  yet  come  to  any  agreement : but  O,  what 
an  interview  was  there ! He  ferioufiy  told  me, 
“ He  was  going  to  fell  his  living  ; only  the  pur- 
chafer  did  not  feem  quite  willing  to  come  up  to 
his  price."  He  would  fain  have  proved  to  me 
the  lawfulnefs  of  doing  this ; and  in  order  thereto 
he  averred  roundly,  l.  That  no  honeft  man  can 
officiate  as  a minifter  in  the  church  of  England. 

O 

2. That  no  man  can  with  a good  confidence  join 
in  the  prayers  of  the  church,  becaufe  (laid  he) 
they  are  all  full  of  horrid  lies. 

Monday  9.  A woman  came  to  me  from  Dept- 
ford, “ fent  (as  fhe  faid)  from  God.”  I gave  her 

the 


[ 2 H ] 

the  hearing:  and  (he  fpoke great  words  and  true. 
But  I remembered,  Judge  nothing  bejore  the  time . 

Wednef.  it.  I went  with  Mr.  Ingham  to  11- 
lington,  purpofely  to  talk  with  Mr.  Molther. 
But  they  faid,  he  was  fo  ill,  he  could  riot  be 
fpoken  to.  In  the  evening  I went  to  Fetter-lane, 
and  plainly  told  our  poor,  confided,  lhattered 
fociety,  wherein  they  had  erred  from  the  faith. 
It  was  as  I feared.  They  could  not  receive  my 
faying.  However  I am  clear  from  the  blood  of 
thefe  men. 

Frid.  i 3.  A great  part  of  our  focietv  joined 
with  us  in  prayer,  and  kept,  I truft,  an  accept- 
able laffunto the  Loid. 

Wedn.  18.  My  brother  fet  out  for  Briflol. 
Atfixl  preached  in  Marybone- Fields  ; (much 
againlt  my  will,  but  I believed  it  was  the  will 
of  God)  repentance  and  re  mi  [non  of  fins.  All 
were  quiet  and  the  far  greater  part  of  the  hear- 
ers, feemed  deeply  attentive.  Thence  I went 
to  our  own  fociety  of  Fetter-lane  : before 
whom  Mr.  Ingham  (being  to  leave  London  on 
the  morrow)  bore  a noble  teftimony,  for  the 
ordinances  of  God,  and  the  reality  of  zoeah  faith. 
But  the  fhort  anfwer  was,  “ You  are  blind,  and 
fpeak  of  the  things  you  know  not.” 

Thurf.  19.  We  difcovered  another  fnare  of  the 
devil.  The  woman  of  Deptford  had  fpoke  plain 
to  Mr.  Humphreys  ordering  him,  “ Not  to 
preach,  to  leave  off  doing  good,  and  in  a word, 
ter  be  fill”  We  talked  largely  with  her,  and 

(he 


[ 215  ] 


ftie  was  humbled  in  the  duff,  under  a deep  fenfe 
of  the  advantage  Satan  had  gained  over  her. 

In  the  evening,  Mr.  Acourt  complained,  that 
Mr.  Nowers  had  hindered  his  going  into  our 
fociety.  Mr.  Nowers  anfwered,  It  was  by  Mr. 

C.  Welley’s  order.  “ What.  (laid  Mr.  A ) 

do  you  refufe  admitting  a perfon  into  your 
fociety,  only  becaufe  he  differs  from  you 
in  oppinion  ?’’  I anfwered,  “ No.  But  what 
opinion  do  you  mean  ?”  He  faid,  “ that  of 
election.  I hold  a certain  number  is  elected 
from  eterni?y.  And  thefe  muff  and  lhall  be 
faved.  And  the  reff  of  mankind,  muff  and  lhall 
be  damned.  And  many  of  your  fociety  hold  the 
fame.”  I replied,  “ I never  alked,  whether 
they  hold  it  or  no.  Only  let  them  not  trouble 
others  by  difputing  about  it/’  He  faid,  “ Nay, 
but  I will  difpute  about  it.”  What,  wherever  you 
come?  “ Yes,  wherever  I come.”  Why  then 
would  you  come  among  us  ? Who  you  know  are  of 
another  mind  ? “ Becaufe  you  are  all  wrong,  and 
I am  refolved  to  fet  you  all  right.”  I fear  your 
coming  with  this  view , would  neither  profit  you 
nor  us.  He  concluded,  “ Then  I will  go  and 
tell  all  the  world,  that  you  and  your  brother  are 
falfe  prophets.  And  I tell  you,  in  one  fortnight, 
you  will  all  be  in  confufion  ” 

Frid.  20.  I mentioned  this  to  our  fociety,  and 
without  entring  into  the  controverfy,  befought 
all  of  them  who  were  weak  in  the  faith,  not  to 
receive  one  another  to  doubtjul  difputations ; but 

limply 


C 216  3 


{imply  to  follow  after  holinefs,  and  the  things 
that  make  for  peace. 

Sunday  22.  Finding  there  was  no  time  to  de- 
lay without  utterly  deftrdying  the  caufe  of  God, 

I began  to  execute  what  I had  long  defigned,  to 
flrike  at  the  root  of  the  grand  delufion.  Accord- 
ingly, from  thefe  words  of  Jeremiah,  Stand  ye 
in  the  way,  ajk  for  the  old  paths,  I took  occafion 
to  give  a plain  account,  both  of  the  work  which 
God  had  begun  among  us,  and  of  the  manner 
wherein  the  enemy  had  fown  his  tares  among  the 
good  feed,  to  this  effeft: 

“ After  we  had  wandred  many  years  in  the 
new  path,  of falvalion  by  faith  and  works  ; about 
two  years  ago  it  pleafed  God  to  (liew  us  the 
old  way,  of  falvation  by  faith  only.  And  many 
foontafled  of  this  falvation,  being  juJUfwd  freelv, 
having  peace  with  God,  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  . ' 
glory  oj  God,  and  having  his  love  [bed  abroad  in 
their  hearts.  Thefe  now  ran  the  wav  of  his  com- 
mandments : they  performed  all  their  duty  to  God 
and  man.  They  walked  in  all  the  ordinances  of 
the  Lord;  and  through  thefe  means  which  he 
had  appointed  for  that  end,  received  daily  grace 
to  help  in  time  of  need,  and  went  on  from  faith 
to  faith:’ ■ \ 

“ But  eight  or  nine  months  ago,  certain  men 
arofe,  fpeaking  contrary  to  the  doftrines  we  had 
received.  They  affirmed,  “ That  we  were  all  in 
a wrong  way  hill!  That  we  had  no  faith  at  all  ; 
that  faith  admits  of  no  degrees,  and  confequently 

weak 


[ 217  ] 

weak  faith  is  no  faith  ; that  none  is  jultified  till 
he  has  a clean  heart,  and  is  incapable  of  any 
doubt  or  fear.” 

They  affirmed  alfo,  “ That  there  is  no  com- 
mandment in  the  New  Tellament,  but  to  believe  : 
that  no  other  duty  lies  upon  us;  and  that  when 
a man  does  believe,  he  is  not  bound  or  obliged  to 
do  any  thing  which  is  commanded  there:  in 
particular,  that  he  is  not  fubjeB  to  ordinances , 
that  is,  (as  they  explained  it)  is  not  bound  or 
obliged , to  pray,  to  communicate,  to  read  or  hear 
the  feriptures  ; but  may  or  may  not  ufe  any  of 
thefe  tilings  (being  in  no  bondage)  according  as 
he  finds  his  heart  free  to  it.” 

They  farther  affirmed,  “ That  a believer  can- 
not ufe  any  of  thefe  as  a means  of  grace ; that  in* 
deed  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  any  means  of 
grace , this  expreffion  having  no  foundation  in 
feripture  ; and  that  an  unbeliever,  or  one  who 
has  not  a clean  heart,  ought  not  to  ufe  them  at 
all  ; ought  not  to  pray,  or  fearch  the  feriptures, 
or  communicate,  but  to  be  fill , i.  e.  leave  off 
thefe  works  of  the  law.  And  then  he  will  furely 
receive  faith,  which  till  he  is  fill,  he  cannot 
have.” 

All  thefeaffertionsl  propofe  to  confider.  The 
firft  was,  that  weak  faith  is  no  faith. 

By  weak  faith  I underftand,  1.  That  which  is 
mixt  with  fear,  particularly  of  not  enduring  to 
the  end.  2.  That  which  is  mixt  with  doubt, 
whether  we  have  not  deceived  ourfelves,  and 
Vol.  XXVII.  K whether 


[ »i8  ] 

whether  our  fins  he  indeed  forgiven  ? 3.  That 
which  has  not  yet  purified  the  heart  fully,  not 
from  all  its  idols.  And  thus  weak  I find  the 
faith  of  almoft  all  believers  to  be,  within  a fhort 
time  after  they  have  fir  ft  peace  with  God. 

Yet  that  weak  faith  is  faith  appears,  1.  From 
St.  Paul,  Him  that  is  weak  in  the  faith , receive. 
2.  From  St.John,  fpeaking  of  believers  who 
were  little  children,  as  well  as  of  young  men  and 
fathers.  3.  From  our  Lord’s  own  words,  Why 
are  ye  fearful , 0 )e  of  little  faith  : 0 thou  of  little 
faith , wherefore  diclf  thou  doubt 1 have  pray- 

ed for  thee  ( Peter  j that  thy  faith  fail  thee  not. 
Therefore  he  then  had  faith.  Yet  fo  weak  was 
that  faith , that  not  only  doubt  and fear , but  grofs 
fin  in  the  fame  night  prevailed  over  him. 

Neverthelefs  he  was  clean,  by  the  word  Chrifl 
had  fpoken  to  him,  i e.  jujlifed,  though  it  is 
plain,  he  had  not  a clean  heart. 

Therefore,  there  are  degrees  in  faith : and 
weak  faith  may  yet  be  true  faith. 

Monday  23.  I confidered  the  fecond  affertion, 
that  there  is  but  one  commandment  in  the  New 
Teflament,  viz.  To  believe ; that  no  other  duty 
lies  upon  us,  and  that  a believer  is  not  obliged  to 
do  anything  as  commanded. 

How  grofs,  palpable  a contradiction  is  this,  to 
the  whole  tenor  of  the  New  Teflament!  Every 
part  ot  which  is  full  of  commandments,  from  St. 
Matthew  to  the  Revela' ions!  But  it  is  enough 
to  obferve,  1.  That  this  bold  affirmation  is  fhame- 

lefsly 


[ 219  3 

lefsly  contrary  to  our  Lord’s  own  words,  Who- 
foever Jhall  break  one  of  the  leajl  of  thefe  command- 
ments, Jhall  be  called  the  leajl  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  : for  nothing  can  be  more  evident,  than 
that  he  here  fpeaks  of  more  than  one , of fever al 
commandments,  which  every  foul,  believer  or  not, 
is  obliged  to  keep  as  commanded.  2.  That  this 
whole  fcheme  is  overturned  from  top  to  bottom, 
by  that  other  fentence  of  our  Lord,  When  ye  have 
done  all  that  is  commanded  you,  fay , — We  have 
done  no  more  than  it  was  our  duty  to  do.  3.  That 
although  to  do  what  God  commands  is  a believ- 
er’s privilege,  that  does  not  affedl  the  queliion. 
He  does  it  neverthelefs,  as  his bounden  duty,  and 
as  a command  oj  God.  4.  That  this  is  the  fureft 
evidence  of  his  believing,  according  to  our 
Lord’s  own  words,  IJ ye  love  me,  (which  cannot 
be  unlefs  ye  believe)  keep  my  commandments.  5. 
That  to  defire  to  do  what  God  commands,  but 
not  as  a command,  is  to  affedt  not  freedom,  but 
independency.  Such  independency  as  St.  Paul 
had  not ; for  though  the  Son  had  made  him  free, 
yet  was  he  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under 
the  law  to  Chrijl  : fuch  as  the  holy  angels  have 
not  ; for  they  fulfil  his  commandments , and 
hearken  to  the  voice  of  his  words  : yea,  fuch  as 
Chrilt  himfelf  had  not ; for  as  the  Father  had 
given  him  commandment,  fo  he fipake. 

Tuefday  24.  The  fubftance  of  my  exposition 
in  the  morning  on,  Why  yet  are  ye fubjetl  to  or- 
dinances ? Was, 

K 2 


From 


[ 220  ] 

From  hence  it  has  been  inferred,  “ That  Chrif- 
tians  are  not  fubjeft  to  the  ordinances  of  Chrift:” 
that  believers  need  not,  and  unbelievers  may  not 
ufe  them  ; that  thefe  are  not  obliged  and  thofe  are 
not  permitted  fo  to  do  : that  thefe  do  not  Jin, 
when  they  abftain  from  them  : but  thofe  do Jin, 
when  they  do  not  abftain. 

But  with  how  little  reafon  this  has  been  infer- 
red, will  fufficiently  appear  to  all  who  confider, 

1.  That  the  ordinances  here  fpoken  of  by  St. 
Paul  are  evidently  JewiJh  ordinances,  fuch  as 
touch  not , tajle  not,  handle  not,  and  thofe  men- 
tioned a few  verfes  before,  concerning  meats  and 
drinks,  and  new  moons , and  fabbaths.  2.  That 
confequently  this  has  no  reference  to  the  ordi - 
nances  of  Chnjl,  fuch  as  prayer,  communicating, 
and  fearching  the  fcriptuies.  3.  That  Chrift 
himfelf  fpake,  that  men  ought  alo  ays  to  pray  ; 
and  commands,  not  to  JorJake  the  ajfembling  our- 
Jelves  together  ; to Jearch  the  Jcriptures,  and  to  eat 
bread  and  drink  wine,  in  remembrance  oj  him; 
4.  That  the  commands  of  Chrift  oblige  all  who  are 
called  by  his  name,  whether  (in  ftriftnefs)  be- 
lievers or  unbelievers  ; feeing  whofoever  break- 
etli  the  leaf  of  thefe  commandments , Jhall  be  called 
leajl  in  the  ki  ngdom  of  heaven. 

In  the  evening  I preached  on,  Cafl  net  away 
your  confidence  which  hath  great  recompence  of  re- 
ward. 

“ Ye  who  have  known  and  felt  your  fins  for- 
given, call  not  away  your  confidence,  1.  Tho’ 

your 


[ 221  ] 


your  joy  fhould  die  away,  your  love  wax  cold, 
and  your  peace  itfelf  be  roughly  affaulted : 
Though,  2.  You  fhould  find  doubt  or  fear,  or 
flrong  and  uninterrupted  temptation  : yea,  tho’ 
3.  You  fhould  find  a body  of  fin  ft  ill  in  you,  and 
thrufiing  fore  at  you  that  you  might  fail. 

The  firft  cafe  may  be  only  a fulfilling  of  your 
Lord’s  words.  Yet  a little  while  and  ye  Jhall  not  fee 
me.  But  he  will  come  unto  you  again,  and  your 
hearts  Jhall  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no  man  taketk 
from  you. 

Your  being  in  flrong  temptation,  yea,  though 
it  fhould  rife  fo  high,  as  to  throw  you  into  an 
agony,  or  to  make  you  fear  that  God  had  forgot- 
ten you,  is  no  more  a proof  that  you  are  not  a 
believer  ; than  our  Lord’s  agony,  and  his  crying, 
My  God,  my  God,  why  hajl  thou  jorfaken  me  ? 
Was  a proof  that  he  was  not  the  Son  of  God. 

Your  finding  fin  remaining  in  you  ft i 1 1 , is  no 
proof  that  you  are  not  a believer.  Sin  does  re- 
main in  one  that  is  jultified,  though  it  has  not 
dominion  over  him.  For  he  has  not  a clean  heart 
at  firft,  neither  are  all  things  as  yet  become  new. 
But  fear  not,  though  you  have  an  evil  heart. 
Yet  a little  while  and  you  fhall  be  endued  with 
power  from  on  high,  whereby  you  mav  purify 
your/elves,  even  as  he  is  pure,  and  be  holy,  as  he 
which  hath  called  you  is  holy. 

Wedn.  25.  From  thofe  words,  All  fcripture 
is  given  by  infpiration  of  God,  I took  occanon  to 
K 3 fpeak 


[ 222  J 


fpeakof  the  ordinances  of  God , as  they  are  means 
of  grace. 

Altho’  this  exprefhon  of  our  church  means  of 
grace , be  not  found  in  fcripture,  yet  if  the  fenfe 
of  it,  undeniably  is,  to  cavil  at  the  term,  is  a 
mere  frife  of  words. 

But  the  fenfe  of  it  is  undeniably  found  in 
fcripture.  For  God  hath  in  fcripture  ordained 
prayer,  reading  or  hearing,  and  the  receiving 
the  Lord’s  /upper,  as  the  ordinary  means  of  con- 
veying his  grace  to  man.  And  firft,  prayer. 
For  thus  faith  the  Lord,  AJk  and  it  j halt  be  given 
you , If  any  man  lack  unfdom,  let  him  afk  oj  God. 
Here  God  plainly  ordains  prayer,  as  the  mea  is 
of  receiving  whatfoever  grace  we  want : parti- 
cularly, that  wifdom  from  above,  which  is  the 
chief  fruit  of  the  grace  of  God. 

Here  like  wife  God  commands  all  to  pray,  who 
deftre  to  receive  any  grace  from  him.  Here  is 
no  reftriffion  as  to  believers  or  unbelievers  ; but 
Jeafl  of  all,  as  to  unbelievers  : for  fuch  doubtlefs 
were  mofl  of  thofe,  to  whom  he  faid,  and 
it fhall  be  given  you. 

We  know  indeed,  that  the  prayer  of  an  un- 
believer is  full  of  fin.  Yet  let  him  remember 
that  which  is  written  of  one  who  could  not  then 
believe,  for  he  had  not  fo  much  as  heard  the 
gofpel,  Cornelius,  thy  prayers  and  thine  alms,  are 
come  lip  for  a memorial  before  God. 

Thurf.  26.  I fhewed  concerning  the  holy 
fcriptures,  1.  That  to  fearch  (i.  e.  read  and  hear 

them 


[ 223  ] 


them)  is  a command  of  God.  2.  That  this  com- 
?nand  is  given  to  all , believers  or  unbelievers . 3*, 
That  this  is  commanded  or  ordained,  as  a means 
of  grace,  a means  of  conveying  the  gr  ace  of 
God  to  all,  whether  unbelievers  (fuch  as  thofe  to 
whom  he  firfl  gave  this  command,  and  thofe  to 
whom  faith  cometh  by  hearing)  or  believers,  who 
by  experience  know,  that  all  feripture  is  profit- 
able, or  a means  to  this  end,  that  the  man  of 
God  may  be  perfeLl,  throughly  furnifhed  to  all 
good  works. 

Friday  27.  I preached  on,  Do  this  in  remem- 
brance of  me. 

In  the  ancient  church,  every  one  who  was 
baptized,  communicated  daily.  So  in  the  Adds 
we  read,  They  all  continued  daily  in  the  breaking 
oj  bread,  and  in  pr  ayer. 

But  in  latter  times,  many  have  affirmed,  that 
the  Lord's  /upper  is  not  a convening , but  a con- 
firming ordinance. 

And  among  us  it  has  been  diligently  taught, 
that  none  but  thofe  who  are  converted,  who 
have  received  the  Holy  G-hoft,  who  are  believers 
in  the  full  fenfe,  ought  to  communicate. 

But  experince  Drews  the  grofs  falfhood  of 
that  affertion,  that  the  Lord's J 'upper  is  not  a con- 
verting ordinance.  Ye  are  the  witneffes.  For 
many  now  prefent  know,  the  very  beginning 
of  your  converfion  to  God,  (perhaps,  in  fome  the 
firfl  deep  conviLlion)  was  wrought  at  the  Lord's 
K 4 /upper. 


[ 224  ] 

/upper.  Now  one  fingle  inftance  of  this  kind, 
overthrows  the  whole  afTertion. 

The  falfhood  of  the  other  affertion  appears, 
both  from  fcripture-precept  and  example.  Our 
Lord  commanded  thofe  very  men  who  were 
then  unconverted,  who  had  not  vet  received  the. 
Holy  Ghojl  who  (in  the  full  fenfe  of  the  word) 
were  not  believers,  to  do  this  in  remembrance  of 
him.  Here  the  precept  is  clear.  And  to  tliefe 
he  delivered  the  elements  with  his  own  hands. 
Here  is  example,  equally  indifputable. 

Sat.  28.  I fhewed  at  large,  1.  That  the  Lord’s 
J upper  was  ordained  by  God,  to  be  a means  of 
conveying  to  men,  either  preventing,  or  jfli/ying 
orfanfli/ying  grace,  according  to  their  feveral 
neceflities.  2.  That  the  perfons  for  whom  it 
was  ordained,  are  all  thofe  who  know'  and  feel 
that  they  want  the  grace  of  G<  d,  either  to  re- 
frain them  from  fin,  or  to  Jhew  their fi ns  forgiven, 
or  to  renew  their  fouls  in  the  image  of  God.  3. 
That  inafmuch  as  we  come  to  his  table,  not  to 
give  him  anv  thing,  but  to  rectne  whatsoever  he 
feesbeft  for  us,  there  is  no  previous  preparation 
indifpenfably  necefiary  ; but  a defne  to  receive 
whatfoever  he  pleafes  to  give.  And  4.  That 
no  fitnefs  is  required  at  the  time  of  communicat- 
ing, but  a fenfe  oj  our  fate,  of  our  utter  finfal- 
nefs  and  helplelfnefs  : every  one  who  knows 
he  is  ftfor  hell,  being  juft  ft  to  come  to  Chi  if , in 
this  as  well  as  all  other  ways  of  his  appoint- 
ment. 


L 225  ] 

Sunday  2 9.  I preached  in  the  morning  at 
Moorfields,  and  in  the  evening  at  Kennington, 
on  Titus  iii.  8.  and  endeavoured  at  both  places, 
to  explain  and  enforce  the  apoftle’s  direftion, 
that  thofe  who  have  believed , be  careful  to  main- 
tain good  works.  The  works  I particularly  men- 
tioned were,  praying,  communicating,  fearch- 
ing  the  fcriptures  ; feeding  the  hungry,  cloath- 
ing  the  naked  ; shifting  the  ftranger,  and  vifit- 
ing  or  relieving  thofe  that  are  fick  or  in  prifon. 
Several  of  our  brethren  of  Fetter-lane,  being  met 
in  the  evening,  Mr.  Simpfon  told  them,  I had 
been  preaching  up  the  works  of  the  law,  which 

(added  Mr.  V ) we  believers  are  no  ?nore  bound 

to  obey,  than  the  fibjetls  of  the  king  of  England  are 
bound  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  king  of  France. 

Wedn.  July  2.  I went  to  the  fociety.  But  I 
found  their  hearts  were  quite  eftranged.  Frid. 
4.  I met  a little  handful  of  them,  who  ftill  ftand 
in  the  old  paths.  But  how  long  they  may  ftand, 
God  knoweth,  the  reft  being  continually  pref- 
ftng  upon  them.  Wedn.  9.  I came  to  an  expla- 
nation once  more,  with  them  all  together  : but 
with  no  effeft  at  all.  Tuefday  15.  We  had  yet 
another  conference  at  large.  But  in  vain  ; for 
all  continued  in  their  Own  opinions. 

Wedn.  1 6.  One  defiled  me  to  look  into  an 
old  book,  and  give  her  my  judgment  of  it  : par- 
ticularly of  what  was  added  at  the  latter  end. 
This, 'I  found  was.  The  myfic  divinity  of  Dionyjius , 
and  feveral  extra&s  nearly  allied  thereto,  full  of 
K 5 the 


[ 226  ] 


the  fame  “ fuper-effential  darknefs.”  I borrow- 
ed the  book,  and  going  in  the  evening  to  Fetter- 
lane,  read  one  of  thofe  extracts,  to  this  effeft  : 

“ The  fcriptures  are  good.  Prayer  is  good. 
Communicating  is  good.  Relieving  our  neigh- 
bour is  good.  But  to  one  who  is  not  born  of  God, 
none  of  thefe  is  good,  but  all  very'  evil.  For  him 
to  read  the  fcriptures,  or  to  pray,  or  to  communi- 
cate, or  to  do  any  outward  work  is  deadly  poi- 
fon.  Firft,  let  him  be  born  of  God.  Till  then  let 
him  not  do  any  of  thefe  things.  For  if  he  does, 
he  defhoys  himfelf.’’ 

After  reading  this  twice  or  thrice  over,  as  di- 
flinftly  as  I could,  I afked,  “ My  brethren  is 
this  rigjht,  or  is  it  wrong  ?”  Mr.  Bell  anfwered 
immediately,  “It  is  right:  it  is  all  right.  It  is 
the  truth,  to  this  we  mud  all  come,  or  we  never 
can  come  to  Chrift.”  Mr.  Bray  faid,  “ I believe 
our  brother  Bell  did  not  hear  what  you  read,  or 
did  not  rightly  underftand.  But  Mr.  Bell  repli- 
ed fiiort,  “ Yes,  I heard  every  word  ; and  I un- 
derftand it  well.  I fay,  it  is  the  truth:  it  is  the 
very  truth:  it  is  the  inward  truth. 

Many  then  laboured  to  prove,  “ That  my  bro- 
ther and  I laid  too  much  Jlre/s  upon  the  ordi- 
nances. To  put  this  matter  beyond  difpute,  “ I 
(faid  Mr.  Bowes)  ufed  the  ordinances  twenty 
years  : yet  I found  not  Chrift.  But  I left  them 
off  only  for  a few  weeks,  and  I found  him  then. 
And  I am  now  as  clofe  united  to  him  as  my  arm 
is  to  my  body.” 


One 


[ 227  ] 


One  alked,  “ Whether  they  would  differ  Mr. 
Wefley  to  preach  at  Fetter-lane  ?”  After  a fhort 
debate,  it  was  anfwered,  “ No.  This  place  is 
taken  for  the  Germans.”  Some  alked,  “ Whether 
the  Germans  had  converted  any  foul  in  England? 
Whether  they  had  not  done  as  much  hurt,  in- 
ftead  of  good,  railing  a divifion  of  which  we 
could  fee  no  end  ? And  whether  God  did  not 
many  times  ufe  Mr.  Wefley  for  the  healing  our 
elivifions,  when  we  were  all  in  confufion  ?”  Se- 
veral roundly  replied,  “ Confufion  ! What  do 
you  mean  ? We  were  never  in  any  confufion  at 
all.”  I faid,  “ Brother  Edmonds,  you  ought  not 
to  fay  fo  : becaufe  I have  your  letters  now  in  my 
hands.”  Mr.  Edmonds  replied,  “ That  is  not  the 
fil'd;  time  1 have  put  darknefs  for  light,  and  light 
for  darknefs.” 

We  continued  in  ufelefs  debate  till  about  ele- 
ven. I then  gave  them  up  to  God. 

Friday  18.  A few  of  us  joined  with  my 
mother  in  the  gi  eat  facrifice  of  thankfgiving  ; 
and  then  confulted.  how  to  proceed  with  regard 
to  our  poor  brethren  of  Fetter-lane  : we  ail 
faw  the  thing  was  now  come  to  a crifis, 
and  were  therefore  unanimoufly  agreed  what 
to  do. 

Sund.  20.  At  Mr.  Seward’s  earned  requed,  I 
preached  once  more  in  Moorfields,  on  the  work 
ojjaith,  and  the  patience  oj  hope , and  the  labour  of 
love.  A zealous  manwasfokind,as  to  free  us  from 
mod  of  the  noify,  carelefs  hearers,  (or  fpecfators 
K 6 rather) 


[ 228  J 


rather)  by  reading  meanwhile,  at  a fmall  aif- 
tance,  a chapter  in  the  Whole  Duty  of  Man.  I 
wifli  neither  he  nor  they  may  ever  read  a worfe 
book — though  I can  tell  them  of  a better,  the 
bible. 

In  the  evening,  I went  to  Mr.  Seward' 
to  the  love-feaft  in  Fetter-lane : at  the  con- 
clufion  of  which,  having  faid  nothing  till  then, 

I read  a paper,  the  fubffance  whereof  was  as 
follows : 

* “ About  nine  months  ago,  certain  of  you 
began  to  Ipeak,  contrary  to  the  doctrine  we  had 
till  then  received  ; the  fum  of  what  vou  afferted 

J 

is  this : 

1.  That  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  weak 
faith  : that  there  is  no  juftifying  faith,  where 
there  is  ever  any  doubt  or  fear,  or  where  there 
is  not,  in  the  full  fenfe,  a new,  a clean 
heart. 

2.  That  a man  ought  not  to  ufe  thofe  ordi- 
nances of  God,  which  our  church  terms  means  of 
grace,  before  he  has  fuch  a faith  as  excludes  all 
doubt  and  fear,  and  implies  a new,  a clean 
heart. 

You  have  often  affirmed,  That  to  fearcli  Oct 
fcriptures,  to  pray,  or  to  communicate,  before  we. 
have  this  faith,  is  to  feek  falvation  by  work J ; and 
that  till  thefe  works  are  laid  afide,  no  man  can 
receive  faith. 

I believe  thefe  affections  to  be  flatly  contrary 


[ 229  } 

to  the  word  of  God.  I have  warned  you  her  eof 
again  and  again,  and  befought  you  to  turn  back 
to  the  law  and  the  teftimony.  I have  borne 
with  you  long,  hoping  you  would  turn.  But 
as  I find  you  more  and  more  confirmed  in 
the  error  of  your  ways,  nothing  now  re- 
mains, but  that  I fhould  give  you  up  to 
God.  You  that  are  of  the  fame  judgment,  fol- 
low me.” 

I then,  without  faying  any  thing  more, 
withdrew,  as  did  eighteen  or  nineteen  of  the 
fociety. 

Tuef.  22.  Mr.  Chapman  juft  come  from  Ger- 
many, gave  me  a letter  from  one  of  our  (once) 
brethren  there  : wherein,  after  denying  the  gift 
of  God,  which  he  recieved  in  England,  he  ad- 
vifed  my  brother  and  me,  no  longer  to  take,  upon 
us  to  teach  and  inJlruB  poor  fouls  ; but  to  deliver 
them  up  to  the  care  of  tkeMoravians,  who  alone  were 
able  to  inflruB  them.  “You  (faid  he)  only inflruft 
them  in  fuch  errors,  that  they  willbedamned  at 
lafl,”  and  added,  “ St.  Peter  juftly  deferibes  you, 
who  have  eyes  full  of  adultery . and  cannot  ceafe 
from  fin  ; and  take  upon  you  to  guide  unfta* 
ble  fouls,  and  lead  them  in  the  way  of  damna- 
tion.” 

* Wednef.  23.  Our  little  company  met  at  the 
Eoundery,  inftead  ofFetter-lane.  About  twenty- 
five  of  our  brethren  God  hath  given  us  already, 
all  of  whom  think  and  fpeak  the  fame  thing ; 
ieven  or  eight  and  forty  tikewife,  of  the  fifty 

women. 


[ 23°  ] 

women  that  were  in  band,  defired  to  call  in  their 
lot  with  us. 

Frid.  Aug.  1.  I defcribed  that  reft,  which  re- 
maineth  for  the  people  oj  God.  Sund.  3.  At  St. 
Luke’s,  our  parifh  church,  was  fitch  a fight,  as  I 
believe,  was  never  feen  there  before:  feveral 
hundred  communicants,  from  whofe  very  faces 
one  might  judge,  that  they  indeed  fought  him 
that  was  crucified. 

Mond.  4r  I dined  with  one,  who  told  me  in 
all  fimplicity,  “ Sir,  I thought  lall  week,  there 
could  be  no  fuch  refi  as  you  defcribed  ; none  in 
this  world,  wherein  we  fhould  be  fo  free,  as  not 
to  defire  eafe  in  pain.  Rut  God  has  taught  me 
better.  For  on  Friday  and  Saturday,  when  I was 
in  the  ftrongeft  pain,  I never  once  had  one  mo- 
ment’s defire  ol  eafe  ; but  only,  that  the  will  of 
God  might  be  done.” 

In  the  evening  many  were  gathered  together 
at  Long-lane,  on  purpofe  to  make  a difturbance, 
having  procured  a woman  to  begin,  well  known 
in  thofe  parts,  as  neither  fearing  God  nor  regard- 
ing man.  The  inllant  file  broke  out,  I turned 
full  upon  her,  and  declared  the  love  our  Lord 
had  for  her  foul.  We  then  prayed,  that  he 
would  confirm  the  word  of  his  grace.  She  was 
fi  ruck  to  the  heart,  and  Ihame  covered  her  face. 
From  her  I turned  to  the  rell,  who  melted 
away  like  water,  and  were  as  men  that  had 
no  firengh.  But  furely  fome  of  them  (hall 

find. 


[ 23*  ] 

find,  who  is  their  rock  and  their  ftrong  falva- 
tion. 

Sat.  9.  Inftead  of  the  letters  I had  lately  re- 
ceived, I read  a few  of  thofe  formerly  received 
from  our  poor  brethren,  who  have  fince  then  de- 
nied the  w'ork  of  God,  and  vilely  calf  away  their 
fhield.  O who  fhall  Hand,  when  ihe  jealous  God 
fhall  vifit  for  thefe  things  ? 

Sund.  10.  From  Gal.  vi.  3.  I earneftly  warned 
all  who  had  tailed  the  grace  of  God,  1.  Not  to 
think  they  wrere  juflified,  before  they  had  a clear 
aflurance,  that  God  had  forgiven  their  fins, 
bringing  with  it  a calm  peace,  the  love  of  God, 
and  dominion  over  all  fin.  2.  Not  to  think 
themfelves  any  thing,  after  they  had  this,  but 
to  prefs  forward  for  the  prize  of  their  high  call- 
ing, even  a clean  heart,  throughly  renewed  after 
the  image  of  God,  in  rigliteoufnefs  and  true 
holinefs. 

Mond.  11.  Forty  or  fifty  of  thofe  who  were 
feeking  falvation,  defined  leave  to  fipend  the 
night  together,  at  the  fociety-room,  in  pray  el- 
and giving  thanks.  Before  ten  I left  them  and 
lay  down.  But  I could  have  no  quiet  reft,  being 
quite  uneafy  in  my  fleep,  as  I found  others  were 
too,  that  wrere  afieep  in  other  parts  of  the  houfe. 
Between  two  and  three  in  the  morning  I was 
waked,  and  defined  to  come  down  Hairs.  I im- 
mediately  heard  fiuch  a confufed  noifie,  as  if  a 
number  of  men  wrnre  all  putting  to  the  fword. 
It  increafed  when  I came  into  the  room  and  be- 
gan 


[ 2e2  ] 

gan  to  pray.  One  whom  I particularly  ohferved 

to  be  roaring  aloud  for  pain,  was  J W , 

who  had  been  always  till  then  very  fure,  that 
“ none  cried  out  but  hypocrites  fo  had  Mrs. 
S — —ms  alfo.  But  fhe  too  now  cried  to  God 
with  a loud  and  bitter  cry.  It  was  not  long, 
before  God  heard  from  his  holy  place.  Hefpake, 
and  all  our  fouls  were  comforted.  He  bruifed 
Satan  under  our  feet,  and  forrow  and  fighing  fled 
away. 

Sat.  1 6.  I called  on  one,  tvho  being  at  Long- 
lane,  on  Monday  the  4th  inflant,  was  exceeding 
angry  at  thofe  that  “ pretended  to  be  in  fits,” 
particularly  at  one  who  dropped  down  juft  by 
her.  She  was  juft  going  “ to  kick  her  out  of 
the  way,”  when  fhe  dropped  down  herfelf,  and 
continued  in  violent  agonies  for  an  hour.  Be- 
ing afraid,  when  file  came  to  herfelf,  that  her 
mother  would  judge  of  her,  as  fhe  herfelf  had 
done  of  others,  fhe  refolved  to  hide  it  from  her. 
But  the  moment  fire  came  into  the  houfe  fhe 
dropped  down,  in  as  violent  an  agony  as  before. 
I left  her  weary  and  heavy  laden,  under  a deep 
fenfe  of  the  juft  judgment  of  God. 

* Sund.  17.  I inforced  that  necefTary  caution. 
Let  him  that  jiandeth  take  heed  !eji  he  fall.  Let 
Lim  that  is  full  ofjoy  and  love,  take  heed  left  he 
fall  into  pride:  he  that  is  in  calm  peace,  left  he 
fall  into  defire ; and  he  that  is  in  heavinefs  through 
manifold  temptations,  left  he  fall  into  anger  or 

WlpCltltlACi'k. 

I after- 


[ 233  ] 

I afterwards  heard  a fermon,  fetting  forth  the 
duty  of  getting  a good  ejiate,  and  keeping  a good 
reputation.  Is  it  poffible  to  deny,  (fuppofing  the 
bible  true]  tiiat  fuch  a preacher  is  a blind  leader 
ej  the  blind  ? 

Tuef.  19.  I was  defired  to  go  and  pray  with 
one,  who  had  fent  for  me  feveral  times  before, 
lying  in  the  New-prifon,  under  fentence  of  death, 
which  was  to  be  executed  in  a few  days.  I 
went;  hut  the  goaler  faid,  “ Mr.  Wilfon  the 
curate  oftheparifh,  had  ordered  I fhould  not  fee 
him.” 

Wedncf.  20.  I offered  remiffion  of  fins,  to  a 
fmall  ferious  congregation  near  Deptford. 
Toward  the  end  a company  of  per  fobs  came 
in,  died  in  lia'oits  fit  for  their  work,  and  la- 
boured greatly  either  to  provoke,  or  divert  the 
attention  of  the  hearers.  But  no  man  anfwering 
them  a word,  they  were  foon  weary  and  went 
away. 

Thurf.  21.  I was  deeply  confidering  thofe 
points,  wherein  our  German  brethren  affirm  we- 
err  from  the  faith,  and  refteQing  how  much 
holier  fome  of  them  were  than  me,  or  any  people 
I had  yet  known.  But  I was  cut  ffiort  in  the 
midft  by  thofe  words  of  St.  Paul,  1 Tim.  v.  21. 
I charge  tlice  bejoie  God,  and  the  Lordjefus  Chrij}, 
and  the  elecl  angels , that  thou  obfeive  thefe  things , 
without  preferring  one  before  another,  doing  no - 
thing  by  partiality . 

Frid.  22.  I was  defired  to  pray  with  an  old, 

hardened 


C 234  ] 

hardened  Tinner,  fuppofed  to  be  at  the  point  of 
death.  He  knew  not  me,  nor  ever  had  heard 
me  preach.  I tpoke  much,  but  he  opened  not 
his  mouth.  But  no  { .oner  d'd  I name,  “ the 
Saviour  of  Tinners,”  than  he  built  out,  “ The 
Saviour  oj  finners  indeed  ! I know  it.  For  he  has 
faved  ms . He  told  roe  To,  on  Sunday  mor  ting. 
And  he  Taid,  I fhould  not  die  vet,  till  I had  i.enid 
his  children  preach  his  gofpel,  and  had  told  rny 
old  companions  in  Tin,  that  he  is  ready  10  fave 
them  too.” 

* Sat.  23.  A gentlewoman,  (one  Mr«.  C ) 

defired  to  Tpeak  with  me,  and  re'amd  a firange 
fiory.  On  Sat.  the  16th  inflant  (as Hie  informed 
me)  one  Mrs.  G.  of  Northampton,  deeply  con- 
vinced of  Tin,  and  the;efore  an  abomip.  nion  to 
her  hufband,  was  by  him  put  into  Bedlam.  On 
Tuefday,  fhe  flipped  out  of  the  gafe,  with  fome 
other  company  : and  after  a while,  not  knowing 
whither  to  go,  fatdown  atMrs.  C.’s  door.  Mrs.  C. 
knowing  nothing  of  her,  advifed  her  the  next  day 
logo  to  Bedlam  again : and  went  with  her,  where 
fhe  was  then  chained  down,  and  treated  in  the 
ufual  manner.  This  is  the  juflice  of  men  ! A 
poor  highwayman  is  hanged : and  Mr.  G. 
efleemed  a very  honeft  man ! 

Thurf.  28.  I defired  one  who  had  feen  afflic- 
tion herfelf,  to  go  and  vifit  Mrs.  G.  in  Bedlam, 
where  it  pleafed  God  greatly  to  knit  their  hearts 
together,  and  with  his  comforts  to  refrefh  their 
fouls. 


Difputes 


[ 235  ] 


Difputes  being  now  at  an  end,  and  all  things 
quiet  and  calm,  on  Mond.  Sept.  1.  I left  Lon- 
don, and  the  next  evening  found  my  brother  at 
Briftol,  fwiftly  recovering  from  his  fever.  At 
feven,  it  pleafed  God  to  apply  thole  words  to 
the  hearts  ol  many  bacf  Aiders,  How  Jhall  I give 
thee  up  Ephraim  ? How  Jhall  1 deliver  thee 
Ifrael  ? How  jhall  1 make  thee  as  Admah  ? Iiow 
Jhall  1 fet  thee  as  Zeboim  ? Mine  heart  is  turned 
within  me:  my  repentmgs  are  kindled  together, 
Hof.  xi.  8. 

Wednef.  3.  I met  with  one  who  having  been 
lifted  up  with  the  abundance  of  joy  which  God 
had  given  her,  had  fallen  into  fuch  blafphemies 
and  vain  imaginations,  as  are  not  common  to 
men.  In  ihe  al  ernoon  I found  another  inftance, 
neaily,  I fear,  of  the  fame  kind  : one  who  after 
much  of  the  love  of  God  fhed  abroad  in  her 
heart,  was  become  wife,  far  above  what  is  writ- 
ten, and  fet  her  private  revelations  (To  called]  on 
the  felf  fame  foot  with  the  written  word.  * She 
zealoufly  maintained,  1.  “ That  Chrift  had  died 
for  angels  as  well  as  men  : 2.  That  none  of  the 
angels  kept  their  firft  eftate,  but  all  finned,  lefs 
or  more  : 3.  That  by  the  death  of  Chrift  three 
things  were  effected:  one  part  of  the  fallen  fpirits 
were  eleded , and  immediately  confirmed  in  holi- 
nefs  and  happinefs,  who  are  now  the  holy  an- 
gels: another  part  of  them,  having  more  deeply 
finned,  were  reprobated,  who  are  now  devils : 

and 


r *s«  ] 

and  the  third  part,  allowed  a farther  trial,  and  itr 
order  thereto,  font  down  from  heaven,  and  im- 
prifoned  in  bodies  of  flefh  and  blood,  who  are 
now  human  fouls.”  In  the  evening  I earneftly 
befought  them  all,  to  keep  clear  of  vain  fpecula- 
tions,  and  feek  only  for  the  plain,  practical  truth , 
which  is  after  godlinefs. 

Thurf.  4.  A remarkable  caufe  was  tried.  Some 
time  fince,  feveral  men  made  a great  diftur- 
bance,  during  the  evening  fermon  here,  behav- 
ing rudely  to  the  women,  and  linking  the  men 
who  fpake  not  to  them.  A conftable  Handing  by 
pulled  out  his  Half,  and  commanded  them- to 
keep  the  peace.  Upon  this  one  of  them  fwore 
he  would  be  revenged  : and  going  immediately 
to  ajuflice,  made  oath,  that  he  (the  conllable) 
had  picked  his  pocket,  who  was  accordingly 
bound  over  to  the  next  fellions.  At  thefe,  not 
only  the  fame  man,  but  two  of  his  companions, 
fworethe  fame  thing.  But  there  being  eighteen 
or  twenty  witneffes  on  the  other  fide,  the  jury 
eafily  faw  through  the  whole  proceeding,  and 
without  going  out  at  all,  or  any  demur,  brought 
in  the  prifoner,  net  guilty. 

Frid.  5.  Our  Lord  brought  home  many  of  his 
banifhed  ones.  In  the  evening  we  cried  mightily 
unto  him,  that  brotherly  love  might  continue 
and  increafe.  And  it  was  accoiding  to  our 
faith. 

Saturday  6.  I met  the  bands  in  Kingfwood, 
' and. 


t *3  7 ] 

and  warned  them  with  all  authority,  “ To 
-beware  of  being  wife  above  that  is  written, 
-and  to  defire  to  know  nothing  but  Chrift  cruci- 
fied.” 

Mond.  8.  We  fet  out  early  in  the  morning, 
and  the  next  evening  came  to  London-  Wedn. 
to.  I vifited  one  that  was  in  violent  pain,  and 
confirmed  away  with  pining  ficknefs  : but  in 
■every  thing  giving  thanks,  and  greatly  rejoicing 
in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  From  her  we  went 
to  another,  dangeroufly  ill  -of  the  fmall-pox, 
but  defiring  neither  life  nor  eafe,  but  only 
the  holy  will  of  God.  If  thefe  are  unbelievers, 
(as  fome  of  the  Jhlt  brellntn  have  lately  told 
them)  I am  content  to  be  an  unbeliever  all  my 
<kys. 

Thurf.  11.  I vifited  a poor 'woman,  who  lying 
■ill,  between  her  two  fick  children,  without  either 
phyfic  or  food  convenient  lor  her,  was  mightily 
praifxng  God  her  Saviour;  and  tefiifying  as  of- 
ten as  fhe  could  fpeak,  her  defire  to  be  dilfolved 
and  to  be  with  Chrift. 

* Sunday  14.  As  I returned  home  in  the  even- 
ing, I had  no  fooner  ftept  out  of  the  coach,  than 
the  mob,  who  were  gathered  in  great  numbers 
about  my  door,  quite  clofed  me  in.  I rejoiced, 
and  blefted  God,  knowing  this  was  the  time  I 
had  long  been  looking  for:  and  immediately 
fpake  to  thofe  that  were  next  me,  of  righteouj C 
ne/s  and  judg7nent  to  come.  At  firft  not  many 
heard,  the  noife  round  about  us  being  exceeding 

great 


[ 23§  ] 

great.  But  the  filence  fpread  farther  and  farther* 
till  I had  a quiet,  attentive  congregation.  And 
when  I left  them,  they  all  fhewed  much  love, 
and  difmilfed  me  with  many  bleffings. 

Tuef.  16.  Many  more,  who  came  in  among 
us  as  lions,  in  afhort  fpace  became  as  lambs ; the 
tears  trickling  apace  down  their  cheeks,  who  at 
firft  moft  loudly  contradi&ed  and  blafphemed. 
I wonder  the  devil  has  not  wifdom  enough  to 
difcern,  that  he  is  deftroying  his  own  kingdom. 
I believe  he  has  never  yet,  any  one  time,  caufed 
this  open  oppofition  to  the  truth  of  God, 
without  lofing  one,  or  more,  of  his  fervants, 
who  were  found  of  God,  while  they  fought  him 
not. 

* Wednef.  17.  A poor  woman  gave  me  an 
account,  of  what  I think  ought  never  to  be  for- 
gotten. “ It  was  four  years  (Ihe  faid)  fince  her 
fon,  Peter  Shaw,  then  nineteen  or  twenty  years 

old,  by  hearing  a fe.mon  of  Mr.  Wh i ’s,  fell 

into  great  uneafmefs.  She  thought  he  wras  ill, 
and  would  have  fent  for  a ph\  ficia  ; but  he 

faid,  “ No,  no.  Send  lor  Mr.  Wh . He 

was  fent  for  and  came,  and  afer  afking  a few 
queflions,  told  her,  “ The  boy  is  mad.  Get  a 

coach  and  carry  him  to  Dr.  M . Ufe  my 

name.  I have  fent  feveral  fuch  to  him.”  Ac- 
cordingly fhe  got  a coach,  and  went  with  him 

immediately  to  Dr.  M s houfe.  When  ihe 

Doftor  came  in,  the  young  man  rofe  and  faid, 

“ Sir,  Mr.  Wh has  fent  me  to  you/’  The 

doffor 


[ 239  ] 

doftor  afked,  “ Is  Mr.  Wh— — your  rainifter  ?” 
And  bid  him  put  out  his  tongue.  Then,  with- 
out alking  any  queftions,  he  told  his  mother, 

“ Chufe  your  apothecary,  and  I will  prefcribe.” 
According  to  his  prefcriptions,  they  the  next  day 
blooded  him  largely,  confined  him  to  a dark 
room,  and  put  a firong  bliiler  on  each  of  his 
arms,  with  another  over  all  his  head.  But  Hill 
he  was  as  mad  as  before,  praying  or  finging,  or 
giving  thanks  continually  : of  which  having  la- 
boured to  cure  him  for  fix  weeks  in  vain,  tho’ 
he  was  now  fo  weak  he  could  not  ftand  alone, 
his  mother  difmified  the  doftor  and  apothecary, 
and  let  him  be  bejide  himfelf  'm  peace. 

Thurf.  j8.  The  prince  of  the  air  made  an- 
other attempt,  in  defence  of  his  tottering  king- 
dom. A great  number  of  men  having  got  into  the 
middle  of  the  Foundery  began  to  fpeak  big, 
dwelling  words  : fo  that  my  voice  could  hardly 
be  heard,  while  I was  reading  the  11th  chapter 
of  the  A£ls.  But  immediately  after,  the  ham- 
mer of  the  word  brake  the  rocks  in  pieces  : all 
quietly  heard  the  glad  tidings  of  falvation,  and 
dome,  I trull,  not  in  vain. 

Mond.  22.  Wanting  a little  time  for  retire- 
ment, which  it  was  alrnoft  impoffible  for  me  to 
have  in  London,  I went  to  Mr.  Piers’s,  at  Bexley : 
where  in  the  mornings  and  evenings,  I expound- 
ed the  fermon  on  the  mount  ; and  had  leifure 
during  the  reft  of  the  dav,  forlbufinefs  of  other 
kinds.  On  Sat.  27.  I returned. 


Sund. 


[ 24°  ] 

Sund  28.  I began  expounding  the  fame 
icripture  at  London.  In  the  afternoon  I defcrib- 
ed  to  a numerous  congregation  at  Kennington, 
The  lift  of  God  in  thefoul  One  perfon  who  flood 
on  the  mount  made  a little  noife  at  firft.  But  a 
gentleman  (whom  I knew  not)  walked  up  to  him 
and  without  faying  one  word,  mildly  took  him 
by  the  hand,  and  led  him  down.  From  that  time 
he  was  quiet  till  he  went  away. 

When  I came  home,  I found  an  innumerable 
mob  round  the  door,  who  opened  all  their 
throats  the  moment  they  faw  me.  I defired  my 
friends,  to  go  into  the  houfe,  and  then  walking 
into-the  midfl  of  the  people,  proclaimed  the  name 
of  the  Lord , gracious  and  merciful,  and  repenting 
him  oj the  evil.  They  flood  Raring  one  at  ano- 
ther. I told  them,  they  could  not  flee  from  the 
face  of  this  great  God:  and  therefore  befought 
them,  that  we  might  all  join  together,  in  crying 
to  him  for  mercy.  To  this  they  readily  agreed  : 
1 then  commended  them  to  his  grace,  and  went 
undiRurbed  to  the  little  company  within. 

* Tuef.  30.  As  I was  expounding  the  12th  of 
the  A£ls,  a young  man,  with  forne  others,  rufh- 
ed  in,  curfmg  and  fwearing  vehemently,  and  fo 
diflurbed  all  near  him,  that  after  a time  they  put 
him  out,.  I obferved  it,  and  called,  to  let  him 
■come  in,  that  our  Lord  might  bid  his  chains  fall 
off.  As  foon  as  the  fermon  was  over,  he  came 
and  declared  before  us  all,  “ That  he  was  a 
finuggler,  then  going  on  that  work,  as  his  dif- 


[ 24*  ] 

guile,  and  the  great  bag  he  had  with  him  {hew- 
ed. But  he  {aid,  “ He  mull  never  do  this  more. 
For  he  was  now  refolved,  to  have  the  Lord  for 
his  God.’’ 

Sund.  5.  I explained  the  difference  between 
being  called  a Chriftian,  and  being  Jo.  And  God 
over-ruled  the  madnefs  of  the  people  , fo  that 
after  I had  fpoke  a few  words,  they  were  quiet 
and  attentive  to  the  end. 

Mond.  6.  While  I was  preaching  at  Iflington, 
,and  rebuking  fharply,  thofe  that  had  made  {hip- 
wreck  of  the  faith,  a woman  dropped  down,  (truck 
as  was  fuppofed  with  death,  having  the  ufe  of  all 
her  limbs  quite  taken  from  her.  But  the  knew 
the  next  day,  fhe  {hould  not  die,  but  live,  and 
declare  the  loving-kindnefs  of  the  Lord. 

Tuefd.  14.  I met  with  a perfon  who  was  to  be 
pitied  indeed.  He  was  once  a zealous  papilt, 
but  being  convinced  he  was  wrong,  cad  off  Po- 
pery and  Chriftianity  together.  He  told  me  at 
once,  “ Sir,  I fcorn  to  deceive  you,  or  any  man 
living.  Don’t  tell  me  of  your  bible.  I value 
it  not.  I do  not  believe  a word  of  it.”  I alked. 
“ Do  you  believe  there  is  a God  ? And  what  do 
you  believe  concerning  him  ? He  replied,  “ I 
know  there  is  a God.  And  I believe  him  to  be 
the  foul  of  all,  the  Amnia  Aland’  ; if  he  be  not 
rather,  as  1 fometivnes  think  is  more  probable, 
the  To  n S,y,  the  whole  compages  of  body  and 
fpirit,  every  where  diffufed.  But  farther  than 
this,  I know  not.  All  is  dark  ; my  thought  is 
Vol.  XXVII.  L loft. 


[ 242  ] 

loft.  Whence  I come,  I know  not : nor  what 
or  why  I am  ; nor  whither  I am  going.  But  this 
I know,  I am  unhappy.  I am  wear)'  of  life.  I 
wifh  it  were  at  an  end.”  I told  him,  “ I would 
pray  to  the  God  in  whom  I believed,  to  fhew 
him  more  light  before  he  went  hence;  and  to 
convince  him,  how  much  advantage  every  way 
a believer  in  Chrifl  had  over  an  infidel. 

Sunday  19.  I found  one  who  was  a frefh  in- 
flance  of  that  ftrange  truth,  the Je.rva.nts  of  God 
[offer  nothing.  His  body  was  well  nigh  torn  a- 
f under  with  pain.  But  God  made  all  his  bed  in 
his  fjcknefs.  So  that  he  was  continually  giving 
thanks  to  God,  and  making  his  boaft  of  his 
praife. 

At  five,  I befought  all  that  were  prefent,  to 
be  follower  $ of  God,  as  dear  children,  and  to  walk 
in  love  as  Chrifl  alfo  loved  us,  and  gave  himfelf 
Jor  us.  Many  who  were  gathered  together  for 
that  purpofe,  endeavoured  bv  fhouting  to  drown 
my  voice.  But  I turned  upon  them  immediate- 
ly, and  offered  them  deliverance  from -their  hard 
mafler.  The  word  funk  deep  into  them,  and 
they  opened  not  their  mouth.  Satan,  thy  king- 
dom hath  buffered  lofs.  Thou  fool  ! How  long 
wilt  thou  contend  with  him  that  is  mightier  than 
thou  ? 

Mond.  20.  I began  declaring  that  gojpel  of 
Chrifl , which  is  the  power  of  God  unto  falvation , 
in  the  midfl  of  the  publicans  and  finners,  at 
Short's  gardens,  Drury-Lane. 


Wedn. 


[ 243  ] 

’Wedn.  22.  I fpent  an  hour  with  Mr.  St — . 
O what  TTiSavoAoyia  (perfuafivenefs  of  fpeech)  is 
here!  Surely,  all  the  deceivablenefs  of 'unright- 
eoufnefs-  Who  can  efcape,  except  God  be 
with  him. 

Thurf.  23.  I was  informed  of  an  awful  provi- 
dence. A poor  wretch,  who  was  here  lalt  week, 
curbing,  and  blafpheming,  and  labouring  with  all 
his  might,  to  hinder  the  word  of  God,  had  after- 
wards boailed  to  many,  that  " he  would  come 
again  on  Sunday,  ana  no  man  fhould  flop  his 
mouth  then.”  But  on  Friday  God  laid  his  hand 
upon  him,  and  on  Sunday  he  was  buried. 

Yet  on  Sunday  the  26th,  while  I was  inforc- 
ing that  great  queflion,  with  an  eye  to  the  fpi- 
ritual  refurre&ion,  Why  Jhould  it  be  thought  a 
thing  incredible  with  you,  that  God  Jhould  raife  the 
dead?  The  many-headed  bead  began  to  roar 
again.  I again  proclaimed  deliverance  to  the 
captives.  And  their  deep  attention  Ihewed,  that 
the  word  fent  to  them,  did  not  return  empty. 

Mond.  27.  The  furprizing  news  of  poor  Mr. 
S — d’s  death  was  confirmed.  Surely  God  will 
maintain  his  own  caufe.  Righteous  art  thou, 
G Lord  ! 

Sat.  Nov.  1.  While  I was  preaching  at  Long- 
Lane,  the  ftorm  was  fo  exceeding  high,  that  the 
houfe  we  were  in,  fhook  continually.  But  fo 
much  the  more  did  many  rejoice  in  him,  whom 
the  winds  and  the  feas  obey,  finding  they  were 
L 2 ready 


[ 244  ] 

-ready  to  obey  his  call,  if  he  fhould  then  require 
their  fouls  of  them. 

Mond.  3.  We  diftributed,  as  every  one  had 
need,  among  the  numerous  poor  of  our  fociety, 
the  cloaths  of  feveral  kinds,  which  many  who 
could  fpare  them,  had  brought  for  that  purpofe. 

Monday  xo.  Early  in  the  morning  I fet  out, 
and  the  next  evening  came  to  Briftol. 

I found  my  brother,  (to  fupply  whofe  abfence 
I came)  had  been  in  Wales  for  fome  days.  The 
next  morning  I enquired  particularly  into  the 
Hate  of  the  little  flock.  In  the  afternoon  we  met 
together,  to  pour  out  our  fouls  before  God,  and 
befeech  him  to  bring  back  into  the  way,  thofe 
who  had  erred  from  his  commandments. 

I fpent  the  reft  of  the  week  in  fpeaking  with 
as  many  as  I could,  either  comforting  the  feeble- 
minded, or  confirming  the  wavering,  or  endea- 
vouring to  find  and  fave  that  which  was  loft. 

Sunday  16.  After  communicating  at  St.  James’s 
our  parilh  church,  with  a numerous  congrega- 
tion, I vifited  feveral  of  the  fick.  Moftofthem 
were  ill  of  the  fpotted  fever  : which,  they  in- 
formed me,  had  been  extremely  mortal,  few 
perfons  recovering  from  it.  But  God  had  faid, 
Hitherto Jhalt  thou  come . I believe,  there  was 
not  one  with  whom  we  were,  but  recovered. 

* Mondav,  Tuefday  and  Wednefday,  I vifit- 
ed many  more,  partly  of  thofe  that  were  fick  or 
weak,  partly  of  the  lame  that  had  been  tnrned 
out  of  the  way  ; having  no  confidence  in  God, 

that 


[ *45  J 

that  he  would  yet  return  unto  every  one  of  thefe 
and  leave  ablefhng  behind  hum 

ThuiTday  20.  My  brother  returned  from 
Wales.  So,  early  on  Friday  21,  I left  Buffo!, 
and  on  Sat.  in  the  afternoon,  came  fafe  to  Lon- 
don. 

Tuefdav  25.  After  feveral  methods  propofed 
for  employing  thofe  who  were  out  ofbufinefs, 
we  determined  to  make  a trial  of  one,  which  fe- 
veral of  our  brethren  recommended  to  us.  Our 
aim  was,  with  as  little  expence  as  poflible,  to 
keep  them  at  once  from  want  and  from  idlenefs; 
in  order  to  which  we  took  twelve  of  the  poorefi, 
and  a teacher,  into  the  fociety  room,  where  they 
were  employed  for  four  months,  till  fpring  came 
on,  in  carding  and  fpinning  of  cotton.  And  the 
defign  anfwered  : they  were  employed,  and 
maintained,  with  very  little  more  than  the  pro- 
duce of  their  own  labour. 

Friday  28.  A gentleman  came  to  me  full  of 
goodwill,  to  exhort  me,  “ not  to  leave  the  church  : 
or  (which  was  the  fame  thing,  in  his  account)  to 
ufe  extemporary  prayer,  which  (faid  hej  I will 
prove  to  a demondration  to  be  no  prayer  at  all. 
For  you  cannot  do  two  things  at  once.  But 
thinking  how  to  pray,  and  praving  are  two 
things.  Ergo , you  cannot  both  think  and  pray 
at  once.”  Now,  may  it  not  be  proved  by  the 
felf-f3ine  demonflration,  that  praying  by  a form 
is  no  prayer  at  all  ? e.g.  “You  cannot  do  two 
things  at  once.  But  reading  and  praying  are  two 
L 3 things. 


[ 246  } 

things.  Ergo  you  cannot  both  read  anrl  pray  at 
once.”  Q.  E.  D. 

In  ihe  afternoon,  I was  with  one  of  our  fif- 
ters,  who  for  two  days  was  believed  to  be  in  the 
agonies  of  death,  being  then  in  travail  with  her 
fir fl  child.  “ But  the  pain,  (he  declared,  was  as 
nothing  to  her;  her  foul  being  filled  all  that  time, 
with  jov  unfpeakable.” 

Monday,  Dec.  1.  Finding  manv  of  our  breth- 
ren  and  filters  offended  at  each  other,  I appoint- 
ed the  feveral  accufers  to  come  and  fpeak  face 
to  face  with  the  accufed.  Some  of  them  came  al- 
moft  every  day  this  week.  And  molt  of  the  of- 
fences vanifhed  away.  Where  any  doubt  re- 
mained. I could  only  advife  them  each  to  look  to 
his  own  heart ; and  to  fufpend  their  judgments  of 
each  other,  rill  God  (hould  bring  to  light  the 
hidden  things  of  darknefs. 

Frid.  12.  Having  received  many  nnpleafing 
accounts  concerning  our  little  focietv  in  Kingf- 
wood,  I left  London,  and  after  fome  difficulty 
and  danger,  by  reafon  of  much  ice  in  the  road, 
on  Saturday  evening  came  to  my  brother  at  Brif- 
tol,  who  confirmed  to  me  what  I did  not  defirc 
to  hear. 

Sunday  14.  I went  to  Kingfwood,  intending, 
if  it  fhould  pleafe  God,  to  fpend  fome  time  there, 
if  haply  I might  be  an  inlfrument  in  his  hand,  of 
repairing  the  breaches  which  had  been  made  : 
that  we  might  again,  with  one  heart  and  one 
moutlFgloi  ify  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jefus  (Thrift. 

Monday 


[ 247  ] 

Monday  15.  I began  expounding,  both  in  the 
morning  and  evening,  our  Lord’s  fermon 

O O’ 

upon  the  mount.  In  the  day-time  1 laboured 
to  heal  the  jealouftes  and  mifunderftandings 
which  had'arifen,  warning  every  man,  and  ex- 
horting every  man,  “ See  that  ye  fall  not  out  by 
the  way.” 

Tuefday  16.  In  the  afternoon  I preached  on 
Let  patience  have  her  perfetl  work.  The  next 
evening  Mr.  Cennick  came  back  from  a 
little  journey  into  Wiltfhire.  I was  greatly 
furprized,  when  I went  to  receive  him,  as 
ufual,  with  open  arms,  to  obferve  him  quite  cold, 
fo  that  a Rranger  would  have  judged,  he  had 
fcarce  ever  feen  me  before.  However,  for  the 
prefentlfaid  nothing,  but  did  him  honour  before 
the  people. 

Frid.  19.  I prefled  him  to  explain  his  beha- 
viour. He  told  me  many  Rories  which  he  had 
heard  of  me.  Yet  it  feemed  to  me,  fomething 
was  Rill  behind.  So  I defined  we  might  meet 
again  in  the  morning. 

Sat.  20.  A few  ol  us  had  a long  conference  to- 
gether. Mr.  C now  told  me  plainly,  “He 

could  not  agree  with  me,  becaufe  I did  not  preach 
the  truth,  in  particular,  with  regard  to  election.” 
We  then  entered  a little  into  the  controverfy ; 
but  without  efFedl. 

Sund.  21.  In  the  morning  I inferred  thofe 
words,  Beloved , if  God  fo  loved  us,  we  ought  to 
love  one  another . Three  of  our  fillers  I faw  in 
T 4 the 


r *48  ] 

the  afternoon,  all  fuppofed  to  be  near  death,  and 
calmly  rejoicing  in  hope  of  fpeedily  going  to  him 
whom  their  fouls  lpved. 

At  the  love-Tead  which  we  had  in  the  even- 
ing at  Bridol,  feventy  or  eighty  of  our  brethren 
and  fillers  from  Kingfwood  were  prefent,  not- 
withdanding  the  heavy  fnow.  We  all  walked 
back  together,  through  the  mod  violent  dorm  of 
licet  and  fnow  which  I ever  remember ; the 
fnow  alfo  lying  above  knee  deep  in  many 
places.  But  our  hearts  were  warmed,  fo  that  we 
went  on  rejoicing  and  praifmg  God  for  the  con- 
folation. 

Wednef.  24.  My  brother  fet  out  for  London, 
rhurf.  25.  I met  with  fuch  a cafe,  as  1 do  not 
remember  either  to  have  known  or  heard  of  be- 
fore. L a Sm afier  many  vears  mourn- 

ing, was  filled  with  peace  and  joy  in  believing. 
In  the  midd  of  this,  without  any  difcernable 
caufe,  fuch  a cloud  fuddenly  overwhelmed  her, 
that  die  could  not  believe  her  fins  were  ever  for- 
given her  at  all;  nor  that  there  was  any  fuch  thing 
as  forgivenefs  of  fins.  She  could  not  believe, 
that  the  fcriptures  were  true,  nor  that  there  was 
any  heaven  or  hell,  or  angel,  or  fpirit,  or  any 
God.  One  more  I have  fince  found  in  the 
fame  date.  Sofure  it  is,  that  all  faith  is  the  gift 
of  God;  which  the  moment  he  withdraws, 
the  evil  heart  of  unbelief  will  poifon  the  whole 
foul. 


Frid. 


[ 249  3 


Frid.  26.  I returned  early  in  the  morning  to 
Kingfwood,  in  order  to  preach  at  the  ufual 
hour.  But  my  congregation  was  gone  to  hear 

Mr.  C , fo  that  (except  a few  from  Briftol)  I 

had  not  above  two  or  three  men,  and  as  many 
women,  the  fame  number  I had  had  once  or 
twice  before. 

* In  the  evening  I read  (nearly)  through  a 
treadle  of  Dr.  John  Edwards,  on  the  deficiency 
of  human  knowledge  and  learning.  Surely,  never 
man  wrote  like  this  man  ! At  lead,  none  of  all 
whom  I have  feen,  I have  not  feen  fo  haughty, 
overbearing,  pedantick  a writer  ! Stiff  and  tri- 
fling in  the  fame  breath  : pofitive  and  opiniated 
to  the  laft  degree,  and  of  courfe  treating  others 
with  no  more  good-manners  than  juftice.  But 
above  all,  four,  ill-natured,  morofe  without  a pa- 
rallel, which  indeed  is  his  diflinguifhing  charac- 
ter. Be  is  opinion  right  or  wrong,  if  Dr.  Ed- 
wards’s temper  were  the  Chriftian  temper,  I 
would  abjure  Chriflianity  for  ever. 

Thurf.  30.  I was  fent  for  by  one,  who  had 
been  a zealous  oppofer  of  this  way.  But  the 
lover  of  fouls  now  opened  her  eyes,  and  cut 
her  off  from  trufting  in  the  multitude  of  her 
good  works:  fo  that  finding  no  other  hope  left, 
fhe  fled,  poor  and  naked  to  the  blood  of  the 
covenant,  and  a few  days  after,  gladly  gave  up 
her  foul,  into  the  hands  of  her  faithful  Re- 
deemer. 

Ik  5. 


At 


[ 2,5°  ] 

At  fix,  the  body  of  Alice  Philips  being 
brought  into  the  room,  I explained,  To-day 
Jlialt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradife-  This  was 
fhe  whom  her  mailer  turned  away  the  laft 
year,  “for  receiving  the  Ho/y  ChoJT'  And  fhe 
had  then  fcarce  where  to  lay  her  head.  But  fhe 
hath  now  an  houfe  of  God,  eternal  in  the  hea- 
vens. 

Wednef.  31.  Many  from  Brillol  came  over  to 
us,  and  our  love  was  greatly  confirmed  toward 
each  other.  At  half  an  hour  after  eight,  the 
houfe  was  filled  from  end  to  end,  where  we  con- 
cluded the  year,  wrefiling  with  God  in  prayer, 
and  praifing  him  for  the  wonderful  work  wrhich 
he  had  already  wrought  upon  earth. 

Jan.  1,  1741.  I explained,  “ If  any  man  be  in 
Chrijl , he  is  a new  creature .”  But  many  of  our 
brethren,  I found,  had  no  ears  to  hear ; having 
difputed  away  both  their  faith  and  love.  In  the 
evening,  out  of  the  fulnefs  that  was  given  me,  I 
expounded  thofe  words  of  St.  Paul,  (indeed  of 
every  true  believer]  To  me  to  live  is  Chrijl,  and  to 
die  is  gain. 

Sat.  3>  The  bodies  of  Anne  Cole  and  Eliza- 
beth Davis  were  buried.  I preached  before  the 
burial,  on  Blejfed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the 
Lord.  Even  fo  faith  the  Spirit.  For  they  reft 
from  their  labours,and  their  works  do  follow  them. 
Sometime  after  Elizabeth  Davis  was  fpeechlefs, 
being  defired  to  hold  up  her  hand,  if  fhe  knew 

fhe 


[ 25l  ] 


fhe  was  going  to  God,  fhe  looked  up  and  imme- 
diately held  up  both  her  hands.  On  Wednefday 
I had  afked  Anne  Cole,  whether  fhe  chofe  to 
live  or  die  ? She  Card,  “ I do  not  chnfe  either,  I 
chafe  nothing,  I am  in  my  Saviour’s  hands,  and  I 
have  no  will  but  his.  Yet  I know,  he  will  reftore 
me  foon.”  And  fo  he  did,  in  a few  hours,  to  the 
paradife  of  God. 

Sund.  4.  I {hewed  the  abfolute  neceffity  of 
forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind , whether 
works,  bufferings  or  gifts,  if  we  would  prefs  to- 
ward the  mark  of  the  prize  of  our  high-calling. 
In  the  evening,  all  the  bands  being  prefent,  both 
ofBriflol  and  Kingfwood,  I fimply  related  what 
God  had  done  by  me,  for  them  of  Kingfwood  in 
particular  : and  what  return  many  of  them  had 
made,  for  feveral  months  laft  paft,  by  their  con- 
tinual difputes,  divifions  and  offences,  caufing 
me  to  go  heavilvall  the  day  long. 

Wednef.  7.  I found  another  believer,  pati- 
ently waiting  for  the  falvation  of  God,  defiring 
neither  health,  nor  eafe,  nor  life,  nor  death,  but 
only  that  his  will  fhould  be  done. 

Sund.  11.  I met  with  a furprizing  inflance  of 
the  power  of  the  devil.  While  we  were  at  the 
room,  Mrs.  J — s,  fitting  at  home,  took  the  bible 
to  read.  But  on  a fudden  threw  it  away,  faying, 
%t  I am  good  enough.  I will  never  read  or  pray 
more.”  She  was  in  the  fame  mind  when  I came ; 
often  repeating,  “ I ufed  to  think,  I was  full  of 
fin,  and  thatvI  finned  in  every  thing  I did.  But 
* L 6 now 


C 252  ] 

now  I know  better.  I am  a good  Chriftian.  I 
never  did  any  harm  in  my  life.  I don’t  defire  to 
be  any  better  than  I am.”  She  fpoke  many 
things  to  the  fame  effedf,  plainly  fhewing,  that 
the  fpirit  of  pride,  and  of  lies,  had  the  full  do- 
minion over  her.  Mond.  12.  I alked,  “ Do  you 
defire  to  be  healed  ?”  She  faid,  “/  am  whole.” 
But  do  you  dtfue  to  be  faved  ? She  replied,  I am 
faved.  I ail  nothing.  I am  happy.”  Yetitwas 
eafy  to  difcern,  fhe  was  in  the  molt  violent 
agony,  both  of  body  and  mind ; fweating 
exceedingly,  notwithflanding  the  fevere  frofl, 
and  not  continuing  in  the  fame  pollute  a 
moment.  Upon  our  beginning  to  pray,  file 
raged  beyond  meaftire,  but  foon  funk  down  as 
dead.  In  a few  minutes  Hie  revived,  and 
joined  in  prayer.  We  left  her,  for  the  prefent, 
in  peace. 

Mond.  12.  In  the  evening  our  fouls  were  fo 
filled  with  the  fpirit  of  prayer  and  thank fgiving, 
that  I could  fcarce  tell  how  to  expound,  till  I 
found  where  it  is  written,  My  fongjhall  be  always 
of  the  loving-kindnefs  of  the  Lord.  IVith  my  mouth 
will  I ever  be  fiezvvig  thy  truth,  from  one  genera- 
tion to  another. 

All  this  day  Mrs.  J s was  in  a violent 

agony,  till  flarting  up  in  the  evening,  fhe  faid, 
“ Now  they  have  done.  They  have  juft  done. 

C — prayed,  and  Humphreys  preached. 

(And  indeed  fo  they  did.)  And  they  are  coming 
hither  as  fall  as  they  can.”  Quickly  after  they 

came 


[ 2 <53  3 


came  in.  She  immediately  cried  out,  “ Why, 
what  do  you  come  for  ! You  can’t  pray.  You 
know  you  can’t.”  And  they  could  not  open  their 
mouths  ; fo  that  after  a fhort  time,  they  were 
conftrained  to  leave,  her  as  fhe  was. 

Many  came  to  fee  her  onTuefday  ; to  every 
one  of  whom  fhe  fpoke,  concerning  either  their 
aftual  or  their  heart-fins,  and  that  fo  clofely  that 
feveral  of  them  went  away  in  more  hafie  than 

they  came.  In  the  afternoon  Mr.  J fent  to 

Kingfwood  for  me.  She  told  him,  “ Mr. 
Wefley  won't  come  to  night.  He  will  come  in 
the  morning.  But  God  has  begun,  and  he  will 
end  the  work  by  himfelf.  Beiore  fix  in  the 
morning  I fh all  be  well.”  And  about  a quarter 
before  fix  the  next  morning,  alter  lying  quiet 
a-while,  fhe  broke  out,  “ Peace  be  unto  thee 
(her  hufband.)  Peace  be  unto  this  houfe. 
The  peace  of  God  is  come  to  my  foul.  I 
know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth.”  And  for 
feveral  days  her  mouth  was  filled  with  his 
praife,  and  her  talk  was  wholly  of  his  wondrous 
works. 

Thurf.  15.  I went  to  one  of  our  brothers, 
who  being  (as  was  fuppofed)  ftruck  with 
death,  was  rejoicing  with  joy  unfpeakable. 
His  mouth  overflowed  with  praife,  and  his  eyes 
with  tears,  in  hope  of  going  foon  to  him  he 
loved. 

Mond.  18.  I found,  from  feveral  accounts, 
it  wa.s  abfolutely  neceffary  for  me  to  be  at 

London* 


[ a54'  ] 


London.  I therefore  defired  the  fociety  to 
meet  in  the  evening,  and  having  fettled  things 
in  the  beft  manner  I could,  on  Tuefday  fet  out, 
and  on  Wednefday  evening  met  our  brethren  at 
the  Foundery. 

Thurf.  22.  I began  expounding  where  my 
brother  had  left  off,  viz.  at  the  4th  chapter 
of  the  firft  epillle  of  St.  John.  He  had  not 
preached  the  morning  before  ; nor  intended  to 
do  it  any  more.  The  Philijlines  are  upon  thee , 
Sampfon.  But  the  Lord  is  not  departed  jrom 
thee.  He  fh all  flrengthen  thee  yet  again,  and 
thou  fh  alt  be  avengea  of  them,  for  the  lojs  oj  thy 
eyes. 

Sund.  25..  I inforced  that  great  command.  As 
u e have  oppor  tunity  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men  : 
and  in  the  evening,  thofe  folemn  words,  Take 
heed,  brethren , that  there  be  not  in  any  of  you,  an 
evil  heart  of  unbelief,,  in  departing  from  the  living 
(sod. 

Wednef.  28.  Our  old  friends,  Mr.  Gambold 
and  Mr.  Hall,  came  to  fee  my  brother  and  me. 
The  converfation  turned  wholly  on  f lent 
prayer  and  quiet  waiting  for  God,  which  they 
faid,  was  the  only  pojfiblt  way  to  attain  living, 
foving  faith. 

Sirenum  Cantus,  & Circes  pocula  nofli  ? 

Was  there  ever  fo  pleafing  a fcfieme  ? But 

where 


[ H5  1 

where  is  it  written  ? Not  in  any  oi"  thofe  books 
which  I account  the  oracles  of  God.  I allow, 
if  there  is  a better  way  to  God  than  the  fcrip- 
tural  way,  this  is  it.  But  the  prejudice  of  edu- 
cation fo  hangs  upon  me,  that  I cannot  think 
there  is.  I mud  therefore  dill  wait  in  the  bible- 
way,  from  which  this  differs  as  light  from  dark- 
nefs. 

Sund.  Feb.  l.  A private  letter,  wrote  to  me 
by  Mr.  Whitefield,  having  been  printed  without 
either  his  leave  or  mine,  great  numbers  of  co- 
pies were  given  to  our  people,  both  at  the  door 
and  in  the  Foundery  itfe'f.  Flaving  procured 
one  of  them,  I related  (after  preaching)  the  naked 
faft  to  the  congregation,  and  told  them,  “ I will 
do  juft  what  I believe  Mr.  Whitefield  would, 
were  he  here  himfelf.”  Upon  which  I tore  it 
in  pieces  before  them  all.  Every  one  who  had 
received  it  did  the  fame.  So  that  in  two  mi- 
nutes there  was  not  a whole  copy  left.  Ah 
poor  Ahithophel ! 

Ibi  omnis  Ejfufus  labor  ! 

Wednef.  4.  Being  the  general  Jaft-day,  I 
preached  in  the  morning  on  thofe  words,  Shall  I 
net  vijii  for  the/e  things,  faith  the  Lord  ? Shall  not 
my  foul  be  avenged  on  fuch  a nation  as  this  ? 
Coming  from  the  fervice  at  St.  Luke’s,  I found 
our  houfe  fo  crouded,  that  the  people  were 

ready 


C 256  ] 

ready  to  tread  one  upon  another.  I had  not  de« 
figned  to  preach  ; but  feeing  fuch  a congrega- 
tion, I could  not  think  it  right  to  fend  them 
empty  away  : and  therefore  expounded  the  pa- 
rable of  the  barren  fig-tree.  O that  it  may  at 
length  bear  fruit ! 

From  hence  I went  to  Deptford,  w'here  many 
poor  wretches  were  got  together,  utterly  void 
both  of  common  fenfe  and  common  decency. 
They  cried  aloud,  as  if  juft  come  from  among  the 
tombs.  But  they  could  not  prevail  againft  the 
holy  one  of  Gcd.  Many  of  them  were  altogether 
confounded,  and  I truft  will  come  again  with  a 
better  mind. 

Tuef.  10.  (Being  Shrove-Tuefday)  before  I 
began  to  preach,  many  men  of  the  bafer  fort, 
having  mixt  thentfelves  with  the  women,  be- 
haved fo  indecently,  as  occafioned  much  diflur- 
bance.  A confiable  commanded  them,  “ to  keep 
the  peace.”  In  anfwer  to  which  they  knocked 
him  down.  Some  wrho  were  near  feized  on 
two  of  them,  and  by  (hutting  the  doors, 
prevented  any  farther  conteft.  Thofe  two 
were  afterwards  carried  before  a magiftrate  ; but 
on  their  promife  of  better  behaviour  were  dif- 
charged. 

Thurf.  12.  My  brother  returned  from  Oxford, 
and  preached  on,  the  true  way  oj  waiting  for 
God:  thereby  difpelling  at  once  the  fears  of 
fome,  and  the  vain  hopes  of  others  : who  had 
confidently  affirmed,  “ That  Mr.  Charles  Wefley 

was 


C 257  ] 

was Jlill  already,  and  would  come  to  London  n© 
more.” 

Mond.  1 6.  While  I was  preaching  in  Long- 
lane,  the  holt  of  the  aliens  gathered  together. 
And  one  large  ffone  (many  of  which  they  threw) 
went  juft  over  my  fhoulder.  But  no  one  was 
hurt  in  any  degree.  For  thy  kingdom  ruleth  over 
all. 

All  things  now  being  fettled  according  to  my 
wilh,  on  I uefday  17,  1 left  London.  In  the  af- 
ternoon I reached  Oxford,  and  leaving  my  horfe 
there,  fet  out  on  foot  for  Stanton-Harcourt.  The 
night  overtook  me  in  about  an  hour,  accompa- 
nied with  heavy  rain.  Being  wet  and  weary,  and 
not  well  knowing  my  way,  I could  not  help  fay- 
ing in  my  heart,  (though  alhamed  of  my  want  of 
refignation  to  God’s  will)  O that  thou  wouldft 
Jlay  the  bottles  of  heaven  ! Or  at  iealt  give  me 
light,  or  an  honed  guide,  or  foine  help  in  the 
manner  thouknoweft!  Prefently  the  rain  ceafed: 
the  moon  broke  out,  and  a friendly  man  over- 
took me,  who  fet  me  upon  his  own  horfe,  and 
walked  by  my  fide,  till  we  came  to  Mr.  Gam- 
bold’s  door. 

Wednef.  t8.  I walked  on  to  Burford  : on 
Thurfday  to  Mamfbury,  and  the  next  day  to 
Briftol.  Sat.  21.  I enquired  as  fully  as  I could, 
concerning  the  divifions  and  offences,  which, 
notwithfianding  the  earned  cautions  I had  given, 
began  afrefli  to  breakout  in  Kingfwood.  In  the 
afternoon  I met  a few  of  the  bands  there ; but  it 


was 


[ I 


was  a cold,  uncomfortable  meeting.  Sund.  22.-T 
endeavoured  to  fhew  them  the  ground  of  many 
of  their  miflakes,  from  thofe  words.  Ye  need,  not 
that  any  man  teach  you,  but  as  that  fame  anointing 
teacheth  you:  a text  which  had  been  frequently 
brought  in  fupport  of  the  ranked  enthufiafm. 
Mr.  Cennick,  and  fifteen  or  twenty  others,  came 
up  to  me  after  ferrnon.  I told  them,  “ They  had- 
not  done  right,  in  fpeaking  againfl  me  behind 

my  back.”  Mr.  C , Ann  A . and 

Thomas  Bifficks,  as  the  mouth  of  the  reft 
replied,  “ They  had  faid  no  more  of  ina 
behind  my  back,  than  they  would  fay  to  my 
face  ; which  was,  that  I did  preach  up  mans 
faithfulnefs,  and  not  the  faithfulnefs  of  God.  ’ 

In  the  evening  was  our  love-feaft  in  Briftol: 
in  the  conclufion  of  which,  there  being  mention 
made,  that  many  of  our  brethren  at  Kingfwood 
had  formed  tliemfelves  into  a feparate  fociety  ; I 
related  to  them  at  large  the  effefts  of  the  repara- 
tions which  had  been  made  from  time  to  time  in 
London  : and  likewife  the  occafion  of  this,  viz. 

Mr.  C ’s  preaching  other  doctrine  than 

that  they  had  before  received.  The  natural  con~ 
fequence  was,  that  when  my  brother  and  I 
preached  the  fame  which  we  had  done  from  the 
beginning,  many  cenfured  and  fpoke  againft 
us  both  ; whence  arofe  endlefs  ftrife  and  confu- 
fion. 

T B replied,  “ Why,  we  preached 

falfe  doftrine;  we  preached,  that  there  is  righ- 

teoufnefs 


[ 2<59  ] 

eoufnefs  in  man.'1  I faid,  “ So  there  is,  after  the 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  is  imputed  to  him  through 
faith.  But  who  told  you,  that  what  we  preach- 
ed was  falfe  doftrine  ? Whom  would  you  have 

believed  this  from,  but  Mr.  C ? Mr.  C — - 

anfwered,  “ You  do  preach  righteoufnefs  in  man. 
I did  fay  this.  And  I fay  it  Hill.  However,  we 
are  willing  to  join  with  you.  But  we  will  alfo 
meet,  apart  from  vou.  For  we  meet  to  confirm 
one  another  in  thofe  truths,  which  you  fpeak 
again  ft.” 

I replied,  “ You  fhould  have  told  me  this  be- 
fore, and  not  have  fupplanted  me  in  my  own. 
houfe,  flealing  the  hearts  of  the  people,  and  by 
private  accufations-,  feparating  very  friends.  He 
faid,  ,l  I have  never  privately  accufed  you.’’ 
I faid,  “ My  brethren  judge  and  read  as  fol- 
lows : 

Jan.  17,  1741. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  GkorceWhitefxbcd. 
My  dear  brother , 

“ That  you  might  come  quickly,  I have  writ- 
ten a fecond  time. 

“ I fit  folitary,  like  Eli,  waiting  what  will  be- 
come of  the  arf . And  while  I wait  and  fear  the 
carrying  of  it  awray  from  among  my  people,  my 
trouble  increafes  daily.  How  glorious  did  the 
gofpcl  feem  once  to  flouriih  in  Kingfwood  ! — 
I fpake  ol  the  everlafiing  love  of  Chi  iff  with 

fweet 


[ 26o  3 


tweet  power -But  now  brother  Charles  is 

fuffered  to  open  his  mouth  againft  this  truth, 
while  the  frighted  flreep  gaze  and  fir,  as  if  no 
fhepherd  was  among  them. — It  is  juft  as  though 
Satan  was  now  making  war  with  the  faints,  in  a 
more  than  common  way.  O pray  for  the  dif- 
treffed  lambs  yet  left  in  this  place,  that  they  faint 
not.  Surely  they  would,  if  preaching  would  do 
it.  For  they  have  nothing  whereon  to  reft  (who 
now  attend  on  the  fermons)  but  their  own  faith- 
iulnefs. — 

“ With  univerfal  redemption,  brother  Charles 
pleafes  the  world — Brother  John  follows  him  in 
every  thing.  I believe  no  atbeift  can  more 
preach  againll  predeftination  that  they.  And  all 
who  believe  election,  are  counted  enemies  to 
God,  and  called  fo. 

“ Fly,  dear  brother.  I am  as  alone. — I am  in 
the  midfl  of  theplague. — If  God  give  thee  leave, 
make  hade.” 

Mr.  C flood  up  and  faid,  “ That  letter  is 

mine.  I fent  it  to  Mr.  Whitefield.  And  I do 
not  retraff  any  thing  in  it,  nor  blame  myfelf  for 
fending  it.” 

Perceiving  fome  of  our  brethren  began  to  fpeak 
with  warmth,  I defired  he  would  meet  me  at 
Kingfwood  on  Saturday,  where  each  of  us  could 
fpeak  more  freely,  and  that  all  things  might  deep 
till  then, 

Tuef.  24.  The  bands  meeting  at  Briftol,  I 
read  over  the  names  ol  the  united  fociety,  being 

determined 


[ ] 

determined  that  no  diforderly  walker  {hould  re- 
main therein.  Accordingly,  I took  an  account 
of  every  perfon,  1.  To  whom  any  reafonable 
objection  was  made.  2.  Who  was  not  known 
to  and  recommended  by  fome,  on  whofe  vera- 
city I could  depend.  To  thofe  who  were  fuffi- 
ciently  recommended,  tickets  were  given  on 
the  following  days.  Molt  of  the  reft  1 had  face 
to  face  with  their  accufersj  and  fuch  as  either 
appeared  to  be  innocent,  or  confelt  their  faults 
and  promifed  better  behaviour,  were  then  receiv- 
ed into  the  fociety.  The  others  were  put  upon 
trial  again,  unlefs  they  voluntarily  expelled  them- 
felves.  About  forty  were  by  this  means  fepa- 
rated  from  us ; I trull,  or.’ly  for  a feafon. 

Sat.  28.  I met  the  King&ood  bands  again, 
and  heard  all  who  delired  it,  at  large  : after 
which  I read  the  folfowing  paper  : 

“ By  many  witnelfes  it  appears,  that  feveral 
members  of  the  band  fociety  in  Kingfwood,  have 
made  it  their  common  praftice,  to  feoff  at  the 
preaching  of  Mr.  John  and  Charles  Wefley ; 
that  they  have  cenfured  and  fpoken  evil  of  them 
behind  their  backs,  at  the  very  time  they  pro- 
feffed  love  and  elteem  to  their  faces  : that  they 
have  ftudioully  endeavoured  to  prejudice  other 
members  of  that  fociety  againlt  them  ; and  in 
order  thereto,  have  belied  and  flandered  them  in 
divers  inltances. 

“ Therefore,  not  for  their  opinions,  nor  for 
any  of  them  (whether  they  be  right  or  wrong) 

but 


[ 262  ] 

but  for  the  caufes  above-mentioned,  viz.  For 
their  fcoffing  at  the  word  and  miniflers  of  God, 
for  their  ta!e-bearing,  backbiting  and  evil-fpeak- 
ing,  for  their  diffembling,  h ing  and  flandering. 

“ I John  Wefley,  by  the  confent  and  appro- 
bation of  the  fociety  in  Kingfwood,  do  declare 
the  perfons  above-mentioned,  to  be  no  longer 
members  thereof.  Neither  will  they  be  fo  ac- 
counted until  thev  fhall  openly  confefs  their  fault, 
and  thereby  do  what  in  them  lies,  to  remove  the 
fcandal  they  have  given.1’ 

At  this  they  feemed  a little  (hocked  at  firft  ; 

but  Mr.  C , T B , and  A A — , 

foon  recovered,  and  faid,  “They  /tat/beard  both 
my  brother  and  me,  many  times  preach  popery. 
However,  they  would  join  with  us  if  we  would. 
Bat  that  they  would  not  own  they  had  done  any 
thing  amifs.” 

I defined  them,  to  confider  of  it  yet  again, 
and  give  us  their  anfwer  the  next  evening. 

The  next  evening,  March  1,  they  gave  the 
fame  anfwer  as  before.  However,  I could  not 
tell  how  to  part : but  exhorted  them  to  wait  yet 
a little  longer,  and  wreflle  with  God,  that  they 
might  know  his  will  concerning  them. 

Frid.  6.  Being  (fill  fearful  of  doing  any  thing 
rafh’y,  or  contrary  to  the  great  law  of  love,  I con- 
fulted  again  with  many  ol  our  brethren,  concern- 
ing the  farther  heps  1 fhould  take.  In  confe- 
quence  of  which,  on  Sat  7,  all  who  could  of 
the  fociety  being  met  together,  I told  them, 

“ Open 


f 263  ] 

* °P  en  dealing  was  bell ; and  I would  therefore 
tell  them  plainly,  what  I thought  (Petting  all  opi- 
nions afide)  had  been  wrong  in  many  of  them, 
viz. 

1.  “ Their  defpifing  the  miniflers  of  God  and 
flight  flag  his  ordinances,  2.  Their  not  fpeaking 
or  praying  when  met  together,  till  they  were  fen- 
fibly  moved  thereto,  and  3.  Their  dividing  them- 
felves  from  their  brethren,  and  forming  a fepa- 
rate  fociety ; 

“ That  we  could  not  approve  of  delaying  this 
matter,  becaufe  the  confufion  that  was  already, 
increafed  daily  ; 

“ That,  upon  the  whole,  we  believed  the  only 
way  to  put  a flop  to  thefe  growing  evils,  was  for 
every  one  now  to  take  his  choice,  and  quit  one 
fociety,  or  the  other.” 

T B — replied,  “ It  is  our  hold- 

ing election,  is  the  true  caufe  of  your  feparat- 
ing  from  us.”  Ianfwered,  “ You  know  in  your 
own  confcience  it  is  not.  There  are  feveral 
predelhnarians  in  our  focieti-es  both  at  London 
and  Briflol  : nor  did  I ever  yet  put  any  one  out 
of  either,  becaufe  he  held  that  opinion.” 

He  faid,  “ Well,  we  will  break  up  our  focie- 
ty, on  condition  you  will  receive  and  employ 
Mr.  C as  you  did  before.” 

I replied,  “ Ms  bro  her  has  wronged  me  much. 
Bui  he  doth  not  fav,  “ I repent.” 

Mr.  C— — - — faid,  *♦  Unleis  in  not  fpeaking 

iq. 


[ 2g4  ] 

in  your  defence,  I do  not  know  that  1 have 
wronged  you  at  all.’4 

I rejoined,  “ It  feems  then  nothing  remains, 
but  for  each  to  chufe  which  fociety  hepleafes.” 

“ Then  after  a fhort  time  fpent  in  prayer, 

Mr.  C went  out,  end  about  half  of  tlrofe 

who  were  prefent,  with  him. 

Sund.  8.  After  preaching  at  Briflol,  on  the 
abufe  and  the  right  ufe  of  the  Lord’s  fupper ; I 
earneflly  befought  them  at  Kingfwood,  to  beware 
of  offending  in  tongue , either  againft  jullice,  mer- 
cy or  truth.  Alter  fermon,  the  remains  of  our 
fociety  met,  and  found  we  had  great  reafon  to 
blefs  God,  for  that  after  fifty- two  were  with- 
drawn, we  had  Hill  upwards  of  ninety  left.  O 
may  thefe,  at  lead,  hold  the  unity  of  the  fpirit, 
in  the  bond  of  peace  ! 

* I will  fhut  up  this  melancholy  fubjefl  with 
part  of  a letter  wrote  by  my  brother  about  this 
time. 

“ If  you  think  proper,  you  may  fhew  brother 
C— — what  follows.”  ( A7.  B.  1 did  not  think 
it  proper  then.) 

“ My  deareff  brother  JohnC , in  much 

love,  and  tendernefs  I fpeak.  You  came  to 
Kingfwood,  upon  my  brother’s  fending  for  you. 
You  ferved  under  him  in  the  gofpelas  a fon.  I 
need  not  fay  how  well  he  loved  you.  You  ufed 
the  authority  he  gave  you,  to  overthrow  his  doc- 
trine. You  every  where  contraditled  it.’  (Whe- 
ther true  or  falfe  is  not  the  queftion.)  But  you 

ought 


C 265  ] 


eught  nrft  to  have  fairly  told  him,  “ I preach  con- 
trary to  you.  Are  you  willing,  nowithftanding, 
that  I fhould  continue  in  your  houfe,  gain- faying 
you  ? If  you  are  not,  I have  no  place  in  thefe  re- 
gions. You  have  a right  to  this  open  dealing. 
I now  give  you  fair  warning.  Shall  I flay  here 
oppofing  you,  or  fhall  I depart  ?” 

“ My  brother,  have  you  dealt  thus  honeflly 
and  openly  with  him  ? No.  But  you  have  flolen 
away  the  people’s  heart  from  him.  And  when 
fome  of  them  bajely  treated  their  bed  friend , God 
only  excepted,  how  patiently  did  you  take  it  P 
When  did  you  ever  vindicate  us,  as  we  have  you  ? 
Why  did  you  not  plainly  tell  them,  “ You  are 
eternally  indebted  to  thefe  men.  Think  not  that 
I will  flay  among  you,  to  head  a party  againft 

my  deareft  friend and  brother,  as  he  buffers 

me  to  call  him,  having  humbled  himfelfformy 
fake,  and  given  me  (no  bilhop,  prieft  or  deacon) 
the  right  hand  of  fellowfhip.  If  I hear  that  one 
word  more  is  fpoken  againft  him,  I will  leave 
you  that  moment,  and  never  fee  your  face 
more.” 

This  had  been  juft  and  honeh,  and  not  more 
than  we  have  deferved  at  your  hands.  I fay  we  ; 
for  God  is  my  witnefs,  how  condefcendingly 
loving  I have  been  toward  you.  Yet  did  you  fo 
forget  vourfelf,  as  both  openly  and  privately  to 
contradict  my  doctrine,  while  in  the  meantime 
I was  as  a deal  man  that  heard  nor,  neither an- 
fwered  a word,  either  in  private  or  publick. 

Vol.  XXVII.  M 


Ah 


[ 2 66  ] 

Ah  my  brother  ! I am  didreffed  for  you.  I 
would  — But  you  will  not  receive  my  faying. 
Therefore  I can  only  commit  you  to  him  who 
hath  commanded  us  to  forgive  one  another,  even 
as  God,  for  Chrift’s  fake  hath  forgiven  us.” 

Sund.  15.  I preached  twice  at  Kingfwood,  and 
twice  at  Bridol,  on  thoTe  words  of  a troubled  foul, 
0 that  I had  wings  like  a dove,  for  then  would  l 
fee  away  and  be  at  ref. 

One  of  the  notes  I received  to-day  was  as 
follows.  “ A perfon  whom  God  has  vilited  with 
a fever,  and  has  wonderfully  preferved  feven  days 
in  a hay-mow,  without  any  fudenance  but  now 
and  then  a little  water  out  of  a ditch,  defires  to 
return  God  thanks.  The  perfon  is  prefent  and 
ready  to  declare,  what  God  has  done  both  for  his 
body  and  foul.  For  the  three  firft  days  of  his 
illnefshe  felt  nothing  but  the  terrors  of  the  Lord 
greatly  fearing  lefi  he  fhould  drop  into  hell; 
’till  after  long  and  earned  prayer,  he  felt  himlelf 
given  up  to  the  will  of  God,  and  equally  con- 
tent to  live  or  die.  Then  he  fell  into  a refrefh- 
ing  Humber,  and  awaked  lull  of  peace  and  the 
love  of  God.” 

Tuefil.  17.  From  thefe  words,  Shall  not  the 
judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right,  I preached  a fer- 
mon  (which  I have  not  done  before  in  Kingfwood 
fehool  fince  it  was  built)  direftlv  on  predeflination. 
On  Wednefday  (and  fo  every  Wednefday  and 
Thurfdav)  I faw  the  fick  in  Bridal  : many  of 
whom  I found  were  bleding  God  foe  his  feafon- 

able 


[ 267  3 

able  vifitation.  In  the  evening  I put  thofe -of 
the  women  who  were  grown  flack,  into  dtftinft 
bands  by  themfelves  : and  fharply  reproved 
many,  for  their  unfaithfulnefs  to  the  grace  of 
God  : who  bore  witnefs  to  his  word  by  pouring 
upon  us  all  the  fpiritofmourningandfupplication. 

Thurf.  19.  I vifited  many  of  the  Tick,  and 
among  the  reft,  J W who  was  in  griev- 

ous pain  both  of  body  and  mind.  Afteralhort 
time  fpent  in  prayer,  we  left  her.  But  her  pain 
was  gone  : her  foul  being  in  full  peace,  and  her 
body  alfo  fo  ftrengthened,  that  {he  immediately 
rofe,  and  the  next  day  went  abroad. 

Saturday  21.  I explained  in  the  evening,  the 
33d  chapter  of  Ezekiel:  in  applying  which  I 
was  fuddenly  feized  with  fuch  a pain  in  my  fide 
that  I could  not  fpeak.  I knew  my  remedy,  and 
immediately  kneeled  down.  In  a moment  the 
pain  was  gone  : and  the  voice  of  the  Lord  cried 
aloud  to  the  ftnners,  Why  will  ye  die,  0 houfe  of 
IJrael ! 

Monday  23.  I vifited  the  fick  in  Kingfwood  : 
one  of  whom  furprized  me  much.  Her  huf- 
band  died  of  the  fever  fome  days  before.  She 
was  feized  immediately  afer  his  death;  then  her 
eldeft  daughter  ; then  another  and  another  of  her 
children,  fix  of  whom  were  now  fick  round 
about  her,  without  either  phyfick,  money,  food, 
or  any  vifible  means  of  procuring  it.  Who  but 
a Chriftian  can  at  fuch  a time  fay  from  the 
heart,  “ Bujfed  be  the  name  oj  the  Lord  ? 1 

M 2 Finding 

Q 


[ 268  ] 

Finding  all  things  now,  both  at  Kingfwood 
and  Briftol,  far  more  fettled  than  I expe&ed,  I 
complied  with  my  brother’s  requell,  and  fetting 
out  on  Wednefd.  25.  the  next  day  came  to 
London. 

Saturd.  21.  Having  heard  much  of  Mr. 
Whitefield’s  unkind  behaviour,  fince  his  return 
from  Georgia,  1 went  to  him  to  hear  him  fpeak 
for  himfelf,  that  I might  know  how  to  judge. 
I much  approved  of  his  plainnefs  of  fpeech.  He 
told  me,  “ he  and  Ipreached  two  different  gofpels, 
and  therefore  he  not  only  would  not  join  with, 
or  give  me  the  right  hand  of  fellowfhip,  but  was 
refolved  publickly  to  preach  againfl  me  and  my 
brother,  wherefoever  he  preached  at  all.”  Mr. 
Hall  (who  went  with  me)  put  him  in  mind,  of 
the  promife  he  had  made  but  a few  davs 
before,  That  “ whatever  his  private  opinion  was. 
he  would  never  publickly  preach  againfl  us.” 
He  faid,  “ That  promife  was  only  an  effe£t  of 
human  weaknefs,  and  he  was  now  of  another 
mind.” 

Monday  30.  1 fixed  an  hour  every  day,  for 
fpeaking  with  each  of  the  bands,  that  no  difor- 
derly  walker  might  remain  among  'hem,  nor  an.- 
ofa  carelefs  or  contentious  fpirit.  And  the  hours 
from  ten  to  two,  on  every  day,  but  Saturday,  I 
fet  apart  for  fpeaking  with  any  who  fhould  defire 
it. 

Wedn.  . 


[ *69  ] 


Wedn.  April  1.  At  his  earnelt  and  repeated 
requelt,  I went  to  fee  one  under  fentence  of  death 
in  the  new  prifon.  But  the  keeper  told  me, 
“ Mr.  Wilfon  (the  curate  of  the  paiifh)  had 
given  charge  I fhould  not  fpeak  with  him..”  I 
am  clear  from  the  blood  of  this  man.  Let 
Mr.  Wilfotn  anfwer  for  it  to  God. 

Sat.  4.  I believed  both  love  and  juflice  re- 
quired that  I (hould  fpeak  my  fentiments  freely 

to  Mr.  Wh , concerning  the  letter  he  had 

publifhed,  faid  to  be  in  anfwe.r  to  my fermon  on 
F,  • ee-grace . The  fum  of  what  I obferved  to  him 
was  this,  1.  That  it  was  quite  imprudent  to 
publifh  it  at  all,  as  being  only  the  putting  of 
weapons  into  their  hands,  who  loved  neither  the 
one  nor  the  other.  2.  That  if  he  was  conllrained 
to  bear  his  tejlimony  (as  he  termed  it)  againft  the 
error  I was  in,  he  might  have  done  it  by  publifh- 
ing  a treatife  on  this  head,  without  ever  calling 
my  name  in  queftion  : 3.  That  what  he  had 
publifhed  was  a mere  burlefque  upon  an  anfwer, 
leaving  four  of  my  eight  arguments  untouched, 
and  handling  the  other  four  in  fo  gentle  a man- 
ner, as  ii  he  was  afraid  they  would  burn  his  fin- 
gers : however,  that  4.  He  had  faid  enough,  of 
what  was  wholly  foreign  to  the  queflion,  to  make 
an  open  (and  probably,  irreparable)  breach,  be- 
tween him  and  me:  feeing  for  a treacherous 
wound,  and  for  the  bewraying  of  fecrets,  every 
friend  will  depart, 

M 3 


Mond. 


[ 27°  ] 

Mond.  6.  I had  a long  converfation  with  Pe- 
ter Bohler.  I marvel  how  I refrain  from  joining 
thefe  men.  I fcarce  ever  fee  any  of  them  but 
my  heart  burns  within  me.  I long  to  be  with 
them.  And  yet  I am  kept  from  them. 

Tuefday  7.  I dined  with  one  who  had  been  a 
profeft  atheift,  for  upwards  of  twenty  years.  But 
coming  fome  months  fince  to  make  fport  with 
the  word  of  God,  it  cut  him  to  the  heart.  And 
he  could  have  no  reft  day  nor  night,  till  the 
God  whom  he  had  denied  fpoke  peace  to  his 
foul. 

In  the  evening,  having  defired  all  the  bands 
to  meet,  I read  over  the  names  of  the  united  fo- 
ciety  ; and  marked  thofe  who  were  of  a doubt- 
ful character,  that  full  enquiry  might  be  made 
concerning  them.  On  Thurfday,  at  the  meet- 
ing of  that  fociety  I read  over  the  names  of  thefe, 
and  defired  to  fpeak  with  each  of  them  the  next 
day,  as  foon  as  they  had  opportunity.  Many 
of  them  afterwards  gave  fufhcient  proof,  that 
they  were  feeking  Chrift  in  ftncerity.  The  reft 
I determined  to  keep  on  trial,  till  the  doubts 
concerning  them  were  removed. 

Tuefday  14.  I was  much  concerned  for  one 
of  our  fillers,  who  having  been  but  a few  times 
with  th ejfi/l  brethren,  was  on  a hidden  fo  much 
wifer  than  her  teachers,  that  I could  neither  un- 
derhand her,  nor  fhe  me.  Nor  could  I help  be- 
ing a little  furprized  at  the  profound  indifference 
Gie  fhewed,  who  a few  days  before  would  have 


[ 27*  ] 

plucked  out  her  eyes,  hud  it  been  pojfille,  and  given 
them  to  me. 

Wedn.  ig.  1 explained  at  Greyhotind-lane, 
the  latter  part  of  the  4th  chapter  to  the  Ephefians. 
I was  fo  weak  in  body,  that  I could  hardly  hand  ; 
but  my  fpirit  was  much  ftrengthened. 

I found  myfelf  growing  fenfibly  weaker  all 
Thurfday.  So  that  on  Friday  17.  I could  fcarce 
get  out  of  bed,  and  almofl  as  foon  as  I was  up, 
was  conftrained  to  lie  down  again.  Neverthe- 
lefs  I made  fhift  to  drag  myfelf  on,  in  the  even- 
ing, to  Short's-Gardens.  Having  not  without 
difficulty,  got  up  the  flairs,  I read  thofe  words, 
(though  fcarce  intelligibly,  for  my  voice  too  was 
almofl  gone)  Whom  he  did ' jortknow,  he  did  alfo 
predeflinate.  In  a moment  both  my  voice  and 
flrength  returned.  And  from  that  time  for  fome 
weeks  I found  fuch  bodily  flrength,  as  I had  ne- 
ver done  before,  flnce  my  landing  in  America. 

Monday  20.  Being  greatly  concerned  for  thofe 
who  were  toll  about  with  divers  winds  of  doc- 
trine, many  of  whom  we  e again  intangled  'in 
fin,  and  carried  away  captive  by  Satan  at  his 
will : I belougbt  God,  to  fhew  me,  where  this 
would  end,  and  opened  my  bible  on  thefe 
words,  And  there  was  nothing  lacking  to  them, 
neither  fmall  nor  great,  neither  Jons  nor  daugh- 
ters, neither Jp oil  nor  any  thing  that  they  had 
taken  to  them.  David  recovered  all. 

Tuefday  21.  I wrote  to  my  brother,  then  at 
Briftol,  in  the  following  words : 

M 4 


As 


[ 272  ] 

“ As  yet  I dare  in  no  wife  join  with  the  Mo- 
ravians : 1.  Becaufe  their  general  fcheme  is  my- 
Jhcal,  not  friptural,  refined  in  every  pf  int  a- 
bove  what  is  written,  injrrieafuiably  beyond  the 
plain  gofpel.  2.  Becanfe  there  is  darknefs  and 
clofenefs  in  all  their  beliaviour,  and  gu  le  in  al- 
moft  all  their  words ; 3.  Becaufe  they  not  only 
do  not  prathfe,  but  utterly  defpife  and  decry 
felf-denia!  and  the  daily  crofs  : 4.  Becaufe  they 
conform  to  the  world,  in  wearing  gold,  and  gav 
or  coftlv  apparel.  5.  Becaufe  they  are  by  no 
means  zealous  of  good  works,  or  at  leaf!  only  to 
their  own  people  : for  thefe  reafons  (chiefly)  I 
will  rather,  God  being  my  helper,  Hand  quite 
alone  than  join  with  them  : I mean,  till  I have 
full  affurance,  that  they  are  better  acquainted 
with  the  truth  as  it  is  Jefus 

Friday,  May  1.  I was  with  one  who  told  me. 
She  had  been  hitherto  taught  of  man  ; but  now 
file  was  taught  cf  God  only.”  She  added, 
“ That  God  had  told  her,  not  to  partake  of  the 
Lord's  [upper  any  more ; fince  file  led  upon 
Chrific  continually.”  O who  is  fecare  from  Sa- 
tan transforming  himfelf  into  an  angel  of  lighi ! 

In  the  evening  I went  to  a little  love-ieafl: 
which  Peter  Bolder  made  for  thofe  ten,  who 
ioined  together  on  this  day  three  years,  to  con- 
jfs  our  faults  one  to  another.  Seven  of  us  were 
prefent;  one  being  fick,  and  two  unwilling  to 
come.  Surely  the  time  will  return,  when  there 
{hall  be  again, 


“ Union 


[ 273  3 

“ Union  of  mind,  as  in  us  all  one  foul  !’5 

Sat.  2.  I had  a converfation  of  feveral  hours 
with  P.  Bolder  and  Mr.  Spangenberg.  Our  fub- 
je£t  was,  a new  creature  : Mr.  Spangenberg’s  ac- 
count of  which  was  this  : 

“ The  moment  we  are  judified,  a new  crea- 
ture, is  put  into  us.  This  is  otherwife  termed, 
the  new  man, 

“ But  notwithftanding,  the  old  creature  or  the 
old  man,  remains  in  us  till  the  day  of  our  death. 

“ And  in  this  old  man  there  remains  an  old 
heart,  corrupt  and  abominable.  For  inward  cor- 
ruption remains  in  the  foul,  as  long  as  the  foul 
remains  in  the  body.” 

“ But  the  heart  which  is  in  the  new  man  is 
clean.  And  the  new  man  is  ftronger  than  the 
old ; fo  that  though  corruption  continually  Jlrives,. 
yet  while  we  look  to  Chrift,  it  cannot  prevail. 

I allied  him,  “ Is  there  dill  an  old  man  in 
you  ?”  He  faid,  li  Yes,  and  will  be  as  long  as  I 
live.”  I faid,  “ Is  there  then  corruption  in 
your  heart  ?”  He  replied,  “ In  the  heart  of  my 
old  man  there  is  : but  not  in  the  heart  of  my 
new  man.”  I alked,  “ Does  the  experience  of 
your  brethren  agree  with  your’s  ?’1  He  anfwer- 
ed,  “ 1 know  what  I have  now  fpoken  is  the  ex- 
perience of  all  the  brethren  and  fillers- through- 
out; our  church.” 

A- few  of  our  brethren  and  fillers  fitting-  by, 
then  fpoke.  what  they  experienced*  He  told 
AI  ,5  them*. 


C 274  3 

them,  (with  great  emotion,  his  hand  trembling 
much)  “You  all  deceive  your  own  fouls.  There 
is  no  higher  Hate  than  that  I have  defcribed. 
You  are  in  a very  dangerous  error.  You  know 
not  your  own  hearts.  You  fancy  your  corrupt 
tions  are  taken  away,  whereas  they  are  only  co- 
vered. Inward  corruption  never  can  be  taken 
away,  till  our  bodies  are  in  the  dull.” 

Was  there  inward  corruption  in  our  Lord  ? 
Or,  cannot  the  fervant  be  as  his  mailer  ? 

Sund.  3.  I gave  the  Icriptural  accouut  of  one 
who  is  in  Chrift  a new  creature,  from  whom  old 
things  are  pajjed  away,  and  in  whom  all  things 
are  become  new.  In  the  afternoon,  I explained 
at  Marybone-Fields,  to  a vail  multitude  of  peo- 
ple, He  hath  Jhewed  thee,  0 man,  what  is  good. 
And  what  doth  the  Lot d require  oj  thee,  but  to  do 
jujlly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with 
thy  God ? The  devil’s  children  fought  valiantly 
for  their  mailer,  that  his  kingdom  Ihou'd  not  be 
deflroyrd.  And  many  Hones  fell  on  my  right 
hand  and  on  mv  left.  But  when  I began  to  exa- 
mine them  clofely,  what  reward  the\  were  to 
have  for  their  labour  ? They  vam.hed  aw'ay 
like  ftnoke. 

Wednef.  6.  Was  a day  on  which  we  agreed 
to  meet  for  prayer  and  humbling  our  fouls  beh  re 
God,  if  haply  he  might  fhew  us  his  will  con- 
cerning our  re-union  with  our  brethren  of  Fet- 
ter-Lane. And  to  this  intent  all  the  men  and 
women  bands  met,  at  one  in  the  afternoon. 

No* 


[ 275  ] 

Nor  did  our  Lord  caft  out  our  prayer,  Or  leave 
him  felf  without  witnefs  among  us.  But  it  was 
clear  to  all,  even  thofe  who  were  before  the  moft 
eagerly  defirous  of  it,  that  the  time  was  not 
come.  l.  Becaufe  they  had  not  given  up  their 
moft  efientially  erroneous  doftxines  ; and  2.  Be- 
caufe many  of  us  had  found  fo  much  guile  in 
their  words,  that  we  could  fcarce  tell,  what  they 
reaJly  held,  and  what  not  ? 

Thurf.  7.  I reminded  the  united  fociety , that 
many  of  our  brethren  and  fifters,  had  not  need- 
ful food ; many  were  deftitute  of  convenient 
cloathing;  many  were  out  of  bufinefs,  and  that 
without  their  own  fault ; and  many  fick  and  rea- 
dy to  perifli  : that  I had  done  what  in  me  lay  to 
feed  the  hungry,  to  cloath  the  naked,  to  em- 
ploy the  poor,  and  to  vifit  the  fick  : but  was 
not  alone  fufficient  for  thefe  things  ; and  there- 
fore defired  all  whofe  hearts  were  as  my  heart, 
t.  To  bring  what  cloaths  each  could  fpare,  to 
Be  diftributed  among  thofe  that  wanted  moft. 

2.  To  give  weekly  a penny,  or  what  they  could 
afford,  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  and  fick  : 

“ My  defign  (I  told  them)  is  to  employ  for  the 
prefent  all  the  women  who  ate  out  of  bufinefs, 
and  defire  it,  in  knitting.” 

“ To  thefe  we  will  firft  give  the  common 
price  for  what  work  they  do,  and  then  add,  ac- 
cording as  they  need. 

“ Twelve  perfons  are  appointed  to  infpeft 
M 6 thefe, 


C 276  ] 

thefe,  and  to  vifit  and  provide  things  needful 
for  the  lick. 

“Each  of  thefe  is  to  vifit  all  the  Tick  within 
their  diflriEt,  every  other  day  : and  to  meet  on 
Tuefday  evening,  to  give  an  account  of  what 
they  have  done,  and  confult  what  can  be  done 
farther.” 

This  week  the  Lord  of  the  harvefl.  beqan  to 
put  in  his  fickle  among  us.  On  Tuefday  our 
brother  Price,  our  filler  Bowes  on  Wednefday, 
to-day  our  filler  Hawthorn  died.  They  all  went 
in  full  and  certain  hope  to  him  whom  their  foul 
loved. 

Frid.  8.  I found  myfelf  much  out  of  order. 
However  I made  Ihift  to  preach  in  the  evening. 
But  on  Saturday  my  bodily  llrength  quite  fail- 
ed, fo  that  for  feveral  hours  I con'd  fcarce  lift 
up  my  head.  Sund.  10.  I was  obliged  to  lie 
down  moll  part  of  (he  day,  being  eafv  only  i*i 
that  pollure.  Yet  in  the  evening  my  weaknefs 
was  fufpended,  while  I was  calling  fmners  to 
repentance.  But  at  our  love-feafl  which  fol- 
lowed, belide  the  pain  in  my  back  and  head, 
and  the  fever  which  Hill  continued  upon- me, 
juft  as  I began-to  pray,  I was  feized  with  fuch  a 
cough,  that  I could  hardly  fpeak.  At  the  fame 
time  came  llrongly  into  my  mind,  Thefe  figns 
Jhall follow  them  . that  believe. — I called  on  Jeftis 
aloud,  to  increafe  my  faith,  and  to  confirm  the 
word  of  his  grace.  While  I was  fpeaking,  my 
pain  vanilhed  away.  The  fever  left  me.  My 

bodily 


[ 277  ] 

bodily  ftrength  returned.  And  for  many  week 
I felt  neither  weaknefs  nor  pain.  Unto  tlise,  0 
Lord , do  1 give  thanks. 

Thurf.  14.  Hearing  that  one  was  in  a high  fe- 
ver, of  whom  I had  for  fotne  time  flood  in  doubt,. 
I went  to  her,  and  afked,  “How  fhe  did?” 
She  replied,  “ I am  very  ill  —but  I am  very  well. 
O I am  happy,  happy,  happy  ; for  my  fpirit 
continually  rejoices  in  God  my  Saviour.  All 
the  angels  in  heaven  rejoice  in  my  Saviour. 
And  I rejoice  with  them,  for  l am  united  to  Jefus.” 
She  added,  “ How  the  angels  rejoice  over  an. 
heir  of  falvation  ! How  they  now  rejoice  over 
me!  And  I am  partaker  of  their  joy.  O my  Sa- 
viour, how  happy  am  I in  thee  !” 

Frid.  15.  I called  again.  She  was  faying  as  I. 
came  in,  “ My  beloved  is  mine.  And  he  hath 
cleanfed  me  from  all  fm.  O how  far  is  the  hea- 
ven above  the  earth  ! So  far  hath  he  fet  my  fins 
from  me.  O how  did  he  rejoice,  when  he  was 
heard  in  that  he  feared  ? He  zua r heard,  and  he 
gained  a poffibility  of  falvation  for  me  and  all 
mankind.  It  is  finifhed.  His  grace  is  free  for 
all.  I am  a witnefs,  I was  the  chief  of  Tinners, 
a backfliding  Tinner,  a Tinner  again!!  light  and 
love.  But  1 am  walked.  I am  cleanfed.” 

I afked,  “ Do  you  expefl  to  die  now  ?”  She 
faid,  “ It  is  not  (hewn  me  that  I fhall.  But  life 
or  death,  is  all  one  to  me.  I fhall  not  change 
my  company.  Yet  I (hall  more  abundantly  re- 
joice, when  we  Hand  before  the  Lord  ; you 

and 


[ *78  3 

and  I,  and  all  the  other  children  which  he  hath 
given  you.” 

In  the  evening  I called  upon  her  again,  and 
found  her  weaker,  and  her  fpeech  much  altered. 
I alked  her,  “ Do  you  now  believe  ? Do  not 
you  find  your  foul  in  temptation  ? Sheanfwered, 
fmiling  and  looking  up,  “ There  is  the  Lamb. 
And  where  he  is,  what  is  temptation  ? I have  no 
darknefs,  no  cloud.  The  enemy  may  come. 
But  he  hath  no  part  in  me.”  I faid,  “ But  does 
not  your  ficknefs  hinder  you  ?”  She  replied, 
“ Nothing  hinders  me.  It  is  the  Spirit 
of  my  Father  that  wo  keth  in  me.  And  no- 
thing hinders  that  Spirit.  My  body  indeed  is 
weak  and  in  pain.  But  my  foul  is  all  joy  and 
praiie.” 

Saturday  16.  I mentioned  this  to  Peter  Bohler. 
But  he  told  me,  11  There  is  no  fuch  ftate  on 
earth.  Sin  will  and  mu  ft  always  remain  in  the 
foul.  The  old  man  will  remain  till  death.  The 
old  nature  is  like  an  old  tooth.  You  may  break 
off  one  bit,  and  another  and  another.  But  you 
can  never  get  it  all  away.  The  Hump  of  it  will 
flay  as  long  as  you  live;  and  fometimes  will 
ache  too.”  - 

Mond.  18.  At  the  preffing  inllance  of  my 
brother  I leit  London,  and  the  next  evening  met 
him  at  Briftoh  I was  a little  furprized  when  I 
came  into  the  room,  juft  after  he  had  ended  his 
fermon.  Some  wept  aloud.  Some  clapped  their 
hands;  fome  fhouted,  and  the  reft  fang  praife; 

with 


[ 279  3 

with  whom  (having  foon  recovered  themfelves 
the  whole  congregation  joined.  So  (I  trull)  if 
ever  God  were  pleafed,  that  we  Ihould  fuffer  for 
the  truth’s  fake,  all  other  founds  would  foon  be 
fwallowed  up,  in  the  voice  of  praife  and  thankf- 
giving. 

Wednefday  20.  I fpent  moll  of  the  morn- 
ing in  fpeaking  with  the  new  members  of 
the  fociety.  In  the  afternoon  I faw  the  Tick  ; 
but  not  one  in  lear,  neither  repining  againll 
God. 

Thurf.  21.  In  the  evening  I publilhed  the 
great  decree  of  God,  eternal,  unchangeable,  (fo 
miferably  mifunderdood  and  mifreprefented  by 
vain  men  that  would  be  wife)  He  that  bdieveth 
Jhall  be  Javed  j he  that  believeth  not  Jhall  be. 
damned. 

Sat.  23.  At  a meeting  of  the  Rewards  of  the 
fociety  (who  receive  and  expend  what  is  contri- 
buted weekly)  it  was  found  needful  to  retrench 
the  expences,  the  contributions  not  anfwering 
thereto.  And  it  was  accordingly  agreed,  to  dif- 
charge  two  of  the  fchool-maflers  at  BriRol;  the 
prefent  fund  being  barely  fufficient,  to  keep  two 
mailers  and  a millrefs  here,  and  one  mailer  and 
a millrefs  at  Kingfwood. 

Mond  25.  Having  fettled  all  the  bufinefs  on 
which  I came,  I fet  out  early,  and  onTuefday 
tailed  at  Windlor.  I found  here  alfo  a few,  who 
have  peace  with  God,  and  are  full  of  love  both 
to  him  and  to  one  another.  In  the  evening  I 

preached 


[-  *8o  ] 

preached  at  the  Founder)',  on  Stand  [till  and  ftt 
the J'alvaticn  oj  the  Lord. 

Frid.  29.  I fpent  an  hour  with  poor  Mr. 

M e.  His  ufual  frown  was  vanifhed  away. 

His  look  was  clear,  open  and  compofed.  He 
liftned  to  the  word  of  reconciliation  with  all  pof- 
fible  marks  ol  deep  attention,  though  he  was  too 
weak  to  fpeak.  Before  I went,  we  commended 
him  to  the  grace  of  God,  in  confidence  that  our 
prayer  was  heard  : to  whom  at  two  in  the  morn- 
ing he  refigned  his  fpirit,  without  any  figh  or 
groan. 

Tuef.  June  2.  I fpoke  plainly  to  Mr.  Piers, 
who  told  me  he  had  been  much  fhaken  bv  the 
[ill  brethren.  But  the  fnare  is  broken  : I left  him 
rejoicing  in  hope,  and  praifir.g  God  for  the  cort- 
folation. 

Tlmrfday  4.  I exhorted  a crowded  congre- 
gation, Lfot  to  receive  the  grace  of  God  in 
vain.  The  fame  exhortation  I inforced  on 
the  fociety  (about  nine  hundred  perfons :)  and 
by  their  fruits  it  doth  appear  that  they- begin  to 
love  one  another,  not  in  word  only,  but  in  deed 
and  in  truth. 

Frid.  5.  Hearing  that  a deaf  and  dumb  man 
near  Marienborn,  had  procured  a remarkable 
letter  to  be  wrote  into  England,  I afked  James 
Hutton,  ifhe  knew  ofthatlettei  ? And  what  the 
purport  of  it  was  ? He  anfwered,  “ Yes:  he  had 
Tead  the  letter : but  had  quite  forgot  what  it  was 

ubout”  I then  afked  Mr.  V -,  who  replied, 

« The 


C 281  ] 

4t  The  letter  was  fhort  ;.  but  he  did  not  remember 
the  purport  of  it.” 

Sund.  7.  I preached  in  Charles’-fquare,  on 
The  hour  is  come,  and  now  is,  when  the  dead  [hall 
hear  the  voice  oj  the  Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear 
Jhall  live.  A violent  ftorm  began  about  the 
middle  of  the  fermon.  But  thefe  things 
move  not  thofe  who  feek  the  Lord.  So 
much  the  more  was  his  power  prefent  to  heal ; 
infomuch  that  many  of  our  hearts  danced,  for 
joy,  praifing  the  glorious  God  that  maldh  the 
thunder. 

Monday  8.  I fet  out  from  E.ifield'-Chace 
for  Leiceflerfhire.  In  the  evening  we  came 
to  Northampton  : and  the  next  afternoon  to  Mr. 
Ellis’s  at  Markfield,  five  or  fix  miles  beyond  Lei- 
cefter. 

* For  thefe  two  days,  I had  made  an  experi- 
ment, which  I had  been  fo  often  and  earneftly 
prefi  to  do  : “ Speaking  to.  none  concerning  the 
things  of  God,  unlefs  my  heart  was  free  to  it.” 
And  what  was  the  event  ? Why,  1.  That  I fpoke 
to  none  at  all  for  fourfcore  miles  together:  no-, 
not  even  to  him  that  travelled  with  me  in  the 
chaife,  unlefs  a few  words  at  ftrft  felting  out : 
2.  That  I had  no  crofs  either  to  bear  or  to  take 
up,  and  commonly  in  an  hour  or  two  fell  fall 
afieep : g.  That  I had  much  refpeft  (hewn 
me,  wherever  I came,  every  one  behaving  to 
me,  as  to  a civil,  good-natured  gentleman.  O 
how  pleafmg  is  all  this  to  flelh  and  blood  ! Need 

ye 


[ 282  1 


ye  compafs  fea  and  land,  to  make  profelytes  to 

this ! 

Wednef.  to.  I preached  in  the  morning,  on. 
The  inward  kingdom  of  God.  And  many,  I truft, 
found,  they  were  Heathens  in  heart,  and  Chrif- 
tians  in  name  only. 

In  the  afternoon  we  came  to  J C n’s, 

about  ten  miles  beyond  Markfield,  a plain,  open- 
hearted  man,  defirous  to  know  and  do  the  will 
of  God.  I was  a little  furprized  at  what  he  laid. 
“ A few  months  fiace  there  was  a great  awaken- 
ing all  round  us.  But  fmce  Mr.  S came, 

three  parts  in  four  are  fallen  as  fad  afleep  as 
ever.”  I fpoke  to  him,  of  drawing  people  from 
the  church,  and  adviftng  them  to  leave  off  prayer. 
He  faid,  “ There  was  no  church  of  England  left; 
and  that  there  was  no  fcripture  for  family-prayer, 
nor  for  praying  in  private  at  any  other  particular 
times  ; which  a believer  need  not  do.  ’ I afked, 
“ What  our  Saviour  then  meant  by  faying, 
Enter  into  thy  clojet  and  pray ?'  He  faid, 
“ O ! that  means,  enter  into  the  clofet  of  your 
heart.” 

Between  five  and  fix  we  came  to  Ogbrook, 

where  Mr.  S n then  was.  I afked  Mr. 

Greaves,  what  dodtrine  he  taught  here  ? He  faid, 
“ The  fum  of  all  is  this,  “ If  you  will  believe,  be 
fill.  Do  not  pretend  to  do  good  (which  you  can’t 
do,  till  you  believe)  and  leave  off  what  you  call 
the  means  of  grace,  fuch  as  prayer  and  running  to 
church  and  facrament.” 


About 


t 2g3  3 


About  eight  Mr.  Greaves  offering  me  the 
ufe  of  his  church;  I explained  the  true  gofpel- 
flillnefs  ; and  in  the  morning,  Thurf.  li,  to  a 
large  congregation.  By  grace  ye  are  faved  through 
faith. 

* In  the  afternoon  we  went  on  to  Notting- 
ham, where  Mr.  Howe  received  us  gladly.  At 
eight  the  fociety  met,  as  ufual.  I could  not  but 
obferve,  1.  That  the  room  was  not  half  full, 
which  ufed  till  very  lately  to  he  crowded  within 
and  without.  2.  That  not  one  perfon  who  came 
in,  ufed  any  prayer  at  all;  but  every  one  imme- 
diately fat  down,  and  began  either  tallying  to  his 
neighbour,  or  looking  about  to  fee  who  was 
there.  3.  That  when  I began  to  pray,  there  ap- 
peared a general  furpnze,  none  once  offering  to 
kneel  down,  and  thofe  who  flood,  chufing  the 
moll  eafy  indolent  poflure  which  they  con- 
veniently could.  I afterward  looked  for  one 
of  our  hynjn  books  upon  the  defk  (which  I knew 
Mr.  Howe  had  brought  from  London)  but  both 
that  and  the  bible  were  vanilhed  away.  And  in 
the  room  lay,  the  Moravian  hymns  and  the 
Count’s  fermons. 

I expounded  (but  with  a heavy  heart)  Believe 
in  the  Lord  JeJ'us , and  thou  Jlialt  be  Javed ; and 
the  next  morning  de.fcribed  (if  haply  fome  of  the 
fecure  ones  might  awake  from  the  deep  of  death) 
the  fruits  of  true  faith,  righteoufnefs , and  peace , 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoji. 

In  the  evening  we  came  to  Markfield  again, 

where 


C 2g4  ] 

where  the  church  was  quite  full,  while.  I 

explained,  All  we  like  Jheep  have  gone  ajiray, 
and  God  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of 
us  alt. 

Sat.  13.  In  the  morning  I preached  on  thofe 
words,  To  him  that  wot kelh  not,  but  btli-velk  on 
him  that  ju/hfeth  the  ungodly , his  faith  is  counted 
to  him  for  nghteou/nefs.  We  then  fet  out 
for  Melbourn,  where  finding  the  houfe  too 
fmall  to  contain  thofe  who  were  come  together, 
I flood  under  a large  tree  and  declared  him 
whom  Gcd  hath  exalted  to  be  a Prince  and  a. 
Saiiour,  to  give  repentance  unto  Ifrael,  and  reinif- 
fon  of  fins* 

Thence  I went  to  Hemmington  ; where  alfo 
the  houfe  not  being  large  enough  to  contain  the 
people,  they  flood  about  the  door  and  at  both  the 
windows,  while  I {hewed,  What  we  mull  do  to  be 
faved. 

One  of  our  company  feemed  a little  offended 
when  I had  done,  at  “ a vile  fellow,  notorious 
all  over  the  country,  for  curfing,  f *.  earing  and 
drunkennefs,  though  he  was  now  grey-headed, 
being  near  fourfcore  years  of  age."  He  came  to 
me,  and  catching  me  hold  by  the  hands,  faid, 
“ Whether  thou  art  a good,  or  a bad  man,  I 
know  not.  But  I know  the  words  thou  fpeakefl 
are  good.  I never  heard  the  like  in  all  my  liie. 
O that  God  would  fet  them  home  upon  my  poor 

foul  l" 


[ 285  ] 

foul !”  He  then  burft  into  tears,  fo  that  he  could 
fpeak  no  more. 

Sund.  14.  I rode  to  Nottingham  again,  and  at 
eight  preached  at  the  market-place,  to  an  im- 
menfe  multitude  of  people,  on  The  dead fhall  hear 
the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear 
fmll  live.  I faw  only  one  or  two  who  behaved 
lightly,  whom  I immediately  fpoke  to,  and 
they  hood  reproved.  Yet  foon  after,  a man 
behind  me  began  a loud  to  contradift  and  blaf- 
pheme.  But  upon  my  turning  to  him,  he  ftep’d 
behind  a pillar,  and  in  a lew  minutes  difap- 
peared. 

In  the  afternoon  we  returned  to  Markfield. 
The  church  was  fo  exceffive  hot,  being  crowded 
in  every  corner,  that  I could  not  without  diffi- 
culty read  the  evening  fervice.  Being  after- 
wards informed,  that  abundance  of  people  were 
hill  without,  who  could  not  poffibly  get  into  the 
church,  I went  out  to  them,  and  explained 
that  great  promife  of  our  Lord,  / will  heal 
their  bacjjfli  dings?  I will  love  them  freely.  In 
the  evening  I expounded  in  the  church,  on 
her  who  loved  much,  btcaufe  Jke  had  much  for - 
given. 

* Mond.  15.  I fet  out  for  London;  and  read 
over  in  the  way,  that  celebrated  book,  Martin 
Luther’s  Comment  on  the  Epiftle  to  the  Galati- 
ans. I was  u terly  afhamed.  How  have  I eheemed 
this  book,  only  becaufe  I heard  it  To  commended 

by 


[ 286  ] 

by  others ! Or,  at  heft,  becaufe  I had  read  fome 
excellent  fentences,  occafionally  quoted  from  it? 
But  what  fhall  I fay,  now  I judge  for  myfelf  ? 

Now  I fee  with  my  own  eyes  ? Why,  not  only, 
that  the  author  makes  nothing  out,  clears  up  not 
one  confiderable  difficulty  ; that  he  is  quite  ffial- 
iuw  in  his  remarks  on  many  palfages,  and  muddy 
and  confufed  almod  on  all : but  that  he  is  deeply 
tinctured  with  myfticijm  throughout,  and  hence 
often  dangeroufiy  wrong.  To  indance  only  in 
one  or  two  points.  How  does  he  (aimed  in  the 
words  of  Tauler)  decry  reafron , right  or  wrong,  as 
an  irreroncileable  enemy  to  the  gofpel  ofChrid? 
Whereas,  what  is  reajon  (the  faculty  fo  called] 
hut  the  power  of  apprehending,  judging  and  dif- 
courfmg  ? Which  power  is  no  more  to  be  con- 
demned in  the  grofs,  than  feeing,  hearing  or 
feeling.  Again,  how  blafphemoufly  does  he 
ipeak  of  good  works  and  of  the  law  of  God  ? 
Condantly  coupling  the  law'  with  fin,  death,  hell 
or  the  devil ! And  teaching,  that  Chrift  delivers 
us  from  them  all  alike.  Whereas  it  can  no  more 
be  proved  by  feripture,  that  Chrift  delivers  us 
from  the  law  of  God , than  that  he  delivers  us  from 
holinefs  or  from,  heaven.  Here  ^1  apprehend] 
is  the  real  fpring  of  the  grand  error  of  the 
Moravians.  They  follow  Luther,  for  better 
for  worfe.  Hence  their,  “ No  works,  no 
law,  no  commandments.1’  But  who  art  thou 
that  fpcaktjl  evil  of  the  law,  and  judge  ft  the 
law  ? 


Tuef. 


C *87  ] 

Tuel.  16.  In  the  evening  I came  to  London, 
and  preached  on  thofe  words.  (Gal.  v.  6.)  in 
Chrijl  Jefus  neither  circumci/ion  availeth  anything , 
-nor  ancirciuncifion,  but  faith  which  workdh  by 
love..  After  reading  Luthers  miferable  comment 
upon  the  text,  1 thought  it  my  bounden  duty 
openly  to  warn  the  congregation  againfl  that 
dangerous  treatife,  and  .to  retraft  whatever  re- 
commendation I might  ignorantly  have  given 
of  it. 

Wedn.  17.  I fet  out,  and  rode  flowly  toward 
Oxford.  But  before  I came  to  Wycombe  my 
horfe  tired.  There  I hired  another,  which  tir- 
ed alfo  before  I came  to  Tetfwortb.  1 hired  a 
third  here,  aud  reached  Oxford  in  the  evening. 

Thurf.  18.  1 enquired  concerning  the  exer- 
cifes  previous  to  the  degree  of  latchelor  in  divi- 
nity, and  advifed  with  Mr.  Gambold  concerning 
the  fubjeft  of  my  fermon  before  the  univerfity. 
But  he  feemed  to  think  it  of  no  moment : “ For 
(faid  he]  all  here  are  fo  prejudiced,  that  they 
will  mind  nothing  you  fay.”  I know  not  that. 
However  I am  to  deliver  my  own  foul,  whether 
they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  forbear. 

I found  a great  change  among  the  poor  peo- 
ple here.  Out  of  twenty-five  or  thirty  weekly 
communicants,  only  two  were  left.  Not  one 
continued  to  attend  the  daily  prayers  of  the 
chuich.  And  thole  few  that  were  once  united 
together,  were  now  torn  afunder  and  fcattered 
abroad. 


Mond. 


[ 283  ] 

Mond.  22.  The  words  on  which  my  hook 
opened  at  the  focicty  in  the  evening,  were  thefe  : 
Ye  have  forfaktn  my  ordinances,  and  have  not  kept 
them.  Return  unto  me,  and  L will  return  unto 

you, faith  the  Lord  of  hofs. Your  words  have 

been  flout  againft  me,  faith  the  Lord,  But  ye  fay, 
wherein  have  we  fpoken  againjl  thee  ? Ye  have  faid. 
It  is  vain,  that  we  worfup  God  ? And  what  pro- 
fit is  if,  that  we  keep  his  ordinances  ? Mai.  iii. 

Wednef.  24.  I read  over,  and  partly  tranf- 
cribed,  biffiop  Bull’s  Harmonia  Apojlolica.  The 
politics  with  which  he  fets  out  is  this,  ‘*  That 
all  good  works,  and  not  faith  alone,  are  the  ne- 
ceffarily  previous  condition  of  jufiif cation,”  or 
the  forgivenefs  of  our  fins.  But  in  the  middle 
of  the  treatife  he  afferts,  “ That  faith  alone  is  the 
condition  of  jujlficalion  “ For  faith,  fays  he, 
referred  to  jollification,  means  all  inward  and 
outward  good  works.1’  In  the  latter  end  he  af- 
firms, “That  there  are  tiro  jufifi. cations : and 
that  only  inward  good  works,  neceffarilv  precede 
the  former,  but  both  inward  and  outward,  the 
latter .” 

Sat.  27.  1 rode  to  London,  and  inforced  in  the 
evening,  that  foletnn  declaration  of  the  great 
apoitle,  Do  we  then  make  void  the  (aw  through 
faith  ? God  forbid.  Yea  roe  ejlab  ifh  the  law. 

Sund.  28.  I fhewea  in  the  morning  at  large, 
Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty  ; 
libertyFroin  fin  ; ‘liberty  to  be,  to  do,  and  to  fuf- 
fer,  according  to  the  written  word.  At  five  I 

preached 


[ 289  ] 

preached  at  Charles’s-fquare,  to  the  largeft  con- 
gregation, that,  I believe,  was  ever  feen  there, 
on  Almojl  thou  perfwadefi  me  to  be  a Chrijlian. 
As  foon  as  I had  done,  I quite  loft  my  voice. 
But  it  was  immediately  reftored,  when  I came 
to  our  little  flock,  with  the  bleffing  of  the  gof- 
pel  of  peace  : and  I fpent  an  hour  and  half  in 
exhortation  and  prayer,  without  any  hoarfenefs, 
faintnefs  or  wearinefs. 

Mond.  29.  I preached  in  the  morning  on,  Ye 
are  faved  through  faith.  In  the  afternoon  I ex- 
pounded at  Windfor,  the  ftory  of  the  pharifee 
and  publican.  I fpent  the  evening  at  Wycombe, 
and  the  next  morning,  Tuef.  30,  returned  to 
Oxford. 

Thurfd.  July  2.  I met  Mr.  Gambold  again  ; 
who  honeftly  told  me,  “ He  was  ajhamed  of  my 
company,  and  therefore  muft  be  excufed  from 
going  to  the  fociety  with  me.”  This  is  plain 
dealing  at  leaft  ! 

Sat.  4.  I had  much  talk  with  Mr.  V— — , 
who  allowed,  1.  That  there  are  many  (not  one 
only)  commands  of  God,  both  to  believers  and 
unbelievers  : and,  2.  That  the  Lord' s -flip per  t 
the  fcripture,  and  both  public  and  private  prayer, 
are  God’s  ordinary  means  of  conveying  grace  to 
man.  But  what  will  this  private  confeffion  a- 
vail,  fo  long  as  the  quite  contrary  is  ftill  de- 
clared in  t’nofe  fixtcen  difcourjts , publifhed  to  all 
the  world,  and  never  yet  either  correfled  or  re- 
tracted ? 

Vol.  XXVII. 


N 


Mond. 


[ 29°  J 

Mond.  6.  Looking  for  a book  in  our  college 
library,  I took  down,  by  miftake,  the  works  of 
Epifcopius ; which  opening  on  an  account  of  the 
Synod  of  Dort,  I believed  it  might  be  ufeful  to 
read  it  through.  But  what  a fcene  is  here  dif- 
clofed?  What  a pity  it  is,  that  the  holy  Synod 
of  Trent,  and  that  of  Dort  aid  not  fit  at  the  fame 
time  ! Nearly  allied  as  they  were,  not  only  as  to 
the  purity  of  doBrine,  which  each  of  them  efla- 
blilhed,  but  alfo  as  to  the fpirit  wherewith  they 
a£led  ! If  the  latter  did  not  exceed. 

* Tfiur.g.  Being  in  the  Bodleian  library,  I light 
on  Mr.  Calvin’s  account  of  the  cafe  ofMiclrael 
Servetus ; feveral  of  whofe  letters  he  occafional- 
lyinferts:  wherein  Servetus  often  declares  in 
terms,  “ I believe  the  Father  is  God,  the  Son  is 
God,  and  the  Holy  Ghoff  is  God.”  Mr.  Cal- 
vin, however,  paints  him  fucli  a monfter,  as 
never  was,  an  Arian,  a blafphemer,  and  what 
not?  Befides,  ftrewing  over  him  his  flowers  of 
deg,  devil , fzvine,  and  fo  on : which  are  the  ufual 
appellations  he  gives  to  his  opponents.  But 
Hill  he  utterly  denies  his  being  the  caufe  of  Ser- 
vetus’s  death.  “ No,  fays  he  : I only  advifed 
“ our  magifl  rates,  as  having  a right  to  reflrain 
“ heretics  by  the  fword,  to  feize  upon  and  try 
“ that  arch-heretic.  But  after  he  was  condemn- 
ed, Ifaid  not  one  word  about  his  execution  l ’ 

Friday  10.  I rode  to  London,  and  preached  at 
Short’s  Gardens,  on  The  name  of  Jefus  C ijl  of 
Nazareth.  Sundav  12.  While  I was  (hewing 

4 O 

at 


[ 2-91  ] 

tat  Charles’s  Square,  what  it  is,  To  do  jujlly , is 
love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  our  God,  a 
great  fhout  began.  Many  of  the  rabble  had 
brought  an  ox,  which  they  were  vehemently  la- 
bouring to  drive  in  among  the  people.  But  their 
labour  was  in  vain  , for  in  fpite  of  them  all,  he 
ran  round  and  round,  one  way  and  the  other, 
and  at  length  broke  through  the  midfl  of  them 
clear  away,  leaving  us  calmly  rejoicing  and  praif- 
ing  God. 

Monday  13.  I returned  to  Oxford,  and  on 
Wednefday  rode  to  Bridol.  My  brother,  I 
found,  was,  already  gone  to  Wales.  So  that  I 
camejull  in  feafon  ; and  that  indeed,  on  ano- 
ther account  alfo  ; for  a fpirit  of  enthufiafm 
was  breaking  in  upon  many,  who  charged  their 
own  imaginations  on  the  will  of  God,  and  that 
not  written,  but  imprejl  on  their  hearts.  If  thefe 
imprejjions  be  received  as  the  rule  of  afilion,  in- 
flead  of  the  written  word,  I know  nothing  fo 
wicked  or  abfurd,  but  we  may  fall  into,  and  that 
without  remedy. 

Friday  i j.  I he  fchool  at  Kingfwood  was 
throughly  filled  between  eight  and  nine  in  the 
evening.  I fire  wed  them  from  the  example  of 
the  Corinthians,  what  need  we  have  to  bear  one 
with  another,  feeing  we  are  not  to  expeti  many 
father s in  thrift,  no,  nor  young  men  among  us, 
as  yet.  We  then  pouted  out  our  fouls  in  prayer 
and  pratfe,  and  our  Lord  did  not  hide  his  face 
from  us. 

N 2 


Sundav 


[ 292  ] 

Sunday  19.  After  preaching  twice  at  Briftol, 
and  twice  at  Kingfwood,  I earneftly  exhorted 
the  fociety,  to  continue  in  the  faith,  enduring 
hardjhip,  as  good foldiers  of  Jefus  Chrift.  On 
Monday  (ray  brother  being  now  returned  from 
Wales)  I rode  back  to  Oxford. 

Wedn.  22.  At  the  repeated  inftance  of  fome 
that  were  there,  I went  over  to  Abingdon.  1 
preached  on,  What  mufl  I do  to  be  faved  ? Both 
the  yard  and  houfe  were  full.  But  fo  flupid, 
fenfelefs  a people,  both  in  a fpiritual  and  na- 
tural fenfe,  I fcarce  ever  faw  before.  Yet 
God  is  able,  of  thefe  Jiones,  to  raife  up  children 
to  Abraham. 

Friday  24.  Several  of  our  friends  from  Lon- 
don, and  fome  from  Kingfwood  and  Briftol  came 
to  Oxford.  Alas ! How  long  (hall  they  come 
from  the  Eajl.  and  from  the  IVeJl , and  fit  dozen  in 
the  kingdom  of  God,  while  the  children  of  the 
kingdom  will  not  come  in,  but  remain  in  utter 
darknefs. 

Saturday,  July  25.  It  being  my  turn  (which 
comes,  about  once  in  three  years)  I preached  at 
St.  Mary’s  before  the  univerfity.  The  harveft 
truly  is  plenteous.  So  numerous  a congregation 
(from  whatever  motives  they  came)  I have  fel- 
dom  feen  at  Oxford.  My  text  was,  the  confef- 
fion  of  poor  Agrippa,  Almojl  thou  perfvadejl 
me  to  be  a Chrifhan.  I have  caf  my  biead  upon 
the  waters.  Let  me  find  it  again  after  many 
days  ! 


In 


C 293  ] 

In  the  afternoon  I fet  out  (having  no  time  to 
fpare)  and  on  Sunday  26,  preached  at  the  toun- 
dery  on  the  Liberty  we  have  to  enter  into  the  ho~ 
lief  by  the  blood  oj  Jefus. 

Monday  2 7.  Finding  notice  had  been  given, 
that  I would  preach  in  the  evening  at  Hackney, 
I went  thither  and  openly  declared  thofe  glad 
tidings,  By  grace  ye  are  faved  through  faith. 
Many,  we  heard,  had  threatened  terrible  things. 
But  no  man  opened  his  mouth.  Perceive  ye 
not  yet,  that  greater  is  he  that  is  in  us,  than  he 
that  is  in  the  world.  ? 

Tuef.  28.  I vifited  one  that  was  going  heavi- 
ly and  in  fear  through  the  valley  of  the  fhadow 
of  death.  But  God  heard  the  prayer,  and  foon 
lifted  up  the  light  of  his  countenance  upon  her. 
So  that  fhe  immediately  broke  out  into  thankf- 
giving,  and  the  next  day  quietly  fell  afleep. 

Frid.31.  Hearing  that  one  of  our  filters  (Jane 
Muncy)  was  ill,  I went  to  fee  her.  She  was 
one  of  the  fir  ft  women-bands  at  Fetter-lane:  and 
when  the  controverfy  concerning  the  means  of 
grace  began,  flood  in  the  gap,  and  contended 
earnefilyfor  the  ordinances  once  delivered  to  the 
faints.  When  foon  after  it  was  ordered,  “ That 
the  unmarried  men  and  women  Ihould  have  no 
converfation  with  each  other,1’  fhe  again  with- 
ftood  to  the  face  thofe  who  were  teaching  for 
dodlrines  the  commandments  of  men.  Nor  could 
all  the  fophiftry  of  thofe  who  are,  without  con- 
troverfy, of  all  men  living  the  wifeft  in  their 
N 3 generation. 


[ 294  ] 

generation,  induce  her  either  to  deny  the  faith 
fhe  had  received,  or  to  ufe  lefs  plainnefs  of 
fpeech,  or  to  belefs  zealous  in  recommending,  and 
careful  in  prafliifing  good  works.  Infomuch  that 
many  times,  when  fire  had  been  employed  in  the 
labour  of  love  till  eight  or  nine  in  the  evening, 
flte  then  fat  down  and  wrought  w ith  her  hands 
till  twelve  or  one  in  the  morning  : not  that  (he 
wanted  any  thing  herfelf,  but  that  fhe  mi  ght 
have  to  give  to  others  for  neceflary  ufes. 

* From  the  time-  that  fhe  was  made  leader  of 
one  or  two  bands,  (he  was  more  eminently  a pat- 
tern to  the  flock:  in  felf-denial  of  every  kind, 
in  opennefs  ofbehaviour.  in  fimplicity  and  god- 
ly fin cerity,  in  fhed faft  faith,  in  conflant  attend- 
ance on  all  the  public  and  all  the  private  ordi- 
nances of  God.  And  as  fhe  had  laboured  more 
than  they  all,  fo  God  now  called  her  forth  to 
fuller.  She  was-  feized  at  firfl  with  a violent  fe- 
ver, in  the  beginning  of  which  they  removed  her 
to  another  lioufe.  Here  fhe  had  work  to  do 
which  fire  knew  not  ol.  The  matter  of  the 
houfe  was  one  who  cared  for  none  of  tliefe 
things.  But  he  obferved  her,  and  was  convinc- 
ed. So  that  he  then  began  to  underttand  and 
lay  to  heart,  the  things  that  bring  a man  peace 
at  the  laft. 

* In  a few  days  the  fever  abated,  or  fettled, 
as  it  feemed,  into  an  inward  impofthum  : fo  that 
fire  could  not  breathe  without  violent  pain, 
which  increafed  day  and  night.  When  I came 

in 


[ 295  ] 

in,  file  ftretched  out  licr  hand  and  faid,  “ Art 
thou  come,  thou  Hefted  of  the  Lord  ? Praifed 
be  the  name  of  my  Lord  for  this.”  I afked, 
“ Do  you  faint,  now  you  are  chaftened  of  him  ?” 
She  faid,  “ O no,  no,  no-  I faint  not.  I mur- 
mur not.  I rejoice  evermore.”  I faid,  “ But 
can  you  in  every  thing  give  thanks  ?”  She  re- 
plied, “ Yes,  I do,  I do.”  I faid,  “ God  will 
make  all  your  bed  in  your  ficknefs.”  She  cried 
out,  “ He  does,  he  does.  I have  nothing  to  de- 
fire. He  is  ever  with  me,  and  I have  nothing 
to  do  but  to  praife  him.” 

* In  the  fame  hate  of  mind,  though  weaker 
and  weaker  in  body,  fhe  continued  tillTuefday 
following  : when  feveral  of  thofe  who  had  been 
in  her  band  being  prefent,  lire  fixed  her  eyes 
upon  them,  and  fell  into  a kind  of  agonizing 
prayer,  “ That  God  would  keep  them  from  the 
evil  one.”  But  in  the  afternoon  when  I came, 
file  was  quite  calm  again,  and  all  her  words  were 
prayer  and  praife-  The  fame  fpirit  file  breath- 
ed, when  Mr.  Maxfield  called  the  next  day. 

And  foon  after  he  went,  file  fiept  in  peace. 

A mother  in  Ifrael  haft  thou  been,  and  thy  zvorhs 
Jhall praife  thee  in  the  gates  ! 

Sat.  Aug.  1.  I had  a long  converfation  with 
Mr.  Ingham.  We  both  agreed,  1.  That  none 
fliall  finally  be  faved,  who  have  not,  as  they  had 
opportunity,  done  all  good  works  ; and  2.  That  if 
a juftified  perfon  does  not  do  good,  as  he  has  op- 
portunity, he  will  lofethe  grace  he  has  received, 
N 4 and 


[ 296  ] 

and  if  he  repent  not  and  do  the  former  works,  will 
perifh  eternally.  But  with  regard  to  the  unjufti- 
fied,  (if  I underhand  him)  we  wholly  difagreed. 
He  believed,  it  is  not  the  will  of  God,  that 
they  fhould  wait  for  faith  in  doing  good.  I be- 
lieve, this  is  the  will  of  God,  and  that  they  will 
never  find  him,  unlefs  they  feek  him  in  this 
way. 

Sunday  2.  I went,  after  having  been  long  im- 
portuned by  Dr.  Deleznot,  to  the  chappel,  in 
Great Hermitage-flreet,  Wapping.  Mr.  Meriton, 
(a  clergyman  from  the  Me  of  Man)  read  prayers.. 
I then  preached  on  thefe  words  in  the  former 
leffon,  Seejl  thou  how  Ahab  humbleth  himfelf  ? Be- 
caufe  he  hath  humbled  himftf,  I will  not  bring  this 
evil  in  his  days  : and  took  occafton  thence  to  ex- 
hort all  unbelievers,  to  ufe  the  grace  God  had 
already  given  them,  and  in  keeping  his  law,  ac- 
cording to  the  power  they  now  had,  to  wait  for 
the  faith  of  the  gofpel. 

Frid.  7.  The  body  of  our  fifter  Muncy  being 
brought  to  Short’s-Gardens,  I preached  on  thofe 
words,  JVrite ! From  henceforth  blejjed  are  the  dead 
which  die  in  the  Lord.  Even  Jo,  faith  the:  Spirit ; 
for  they  ref  from  their  labours  ; and  their  works 
do  follow  them.  From  thence  we  went  with  it  to 
the  grave,  in  St.  Giles’s  church-yard,  where  I 
performed  the  laft  office,  in  the  prefence  offuch 
an  innumerable  multitude  of  people  as  I never 
faw  gathered  together  before.  O what  a fight  it 
will  be  when  God  faith  to  the  grave,  “ Give  back!  1 

And 


[ 297  ] 

And  all  the  dead,  final!  and  great,  fhall  Hand  be- 
fore him  ! 

Wednef.  12.  I vifited  one  whom  God  is  pu- 
rifying in  the  fire,  in  anfwer  to  the  prayers  of 
his  wife,  whom  he  was  juft  going  to  beat  (which 
he  frequently  did)  when  God  fmote  him  in  a mo- 
ment, fo  that  his  hand  dropped,  and  he  fell 
down  upon  the  ground,  having  no  more  ftrength 
than  a new-born  child.  He  has  been  confined  to 
his  bed  ever  fince ; but  rejoices  in  hope  of  the 
glory  of  God. 

Frid.  14.  Calling  on  a perfon  near  Grofvenor- 
fquare,  I found  there  was  but  too  much  reafon 
here,  for  crying  out  of  the  increafe  of  Popery, 
many  converts  to  it  being  continually  made,  by 
the  gentleman  who  preaches  in  Swallow-ftreet, 
three  days  in  every  week.  Now,  why  do  not  the 
champions,  who  are  continually  crying  out, 

“ Popery,  Popery,”  in  Moorfields,  come  hither, 
that  they  may  not  always  be  fighting,  as  one  that 
beatetk  the  air?  Plainly,  becaufe  they  have  no 
mind  to  fight  at  all ; but  to  {hew  their  valour 
without  an  opponent.  And  they  well  know,  they 
may  defy  Popery  at  the  Foundery,  without  any 
danger  of  contradiction. 

O 

Wednef.  19.  The  fcripture  which  came  in 
turn  to  be  expounded,  was  the  9th  chapter  to  the 
Romans.  I was  then  conftrained  to  fpeak  an 
hour  longer  than  ufual,  and  am  perfuaded  moft, 
if  not  all  who  were  prefent,  ,.faw  that  this  chapter. 

N-  5 } Hass 


[ *98  ] 


has  no  more  to  do  with  perfonal,  irrefpe&ive 
predeftination,  than  the  gth  of  Genefis. 

Thurf.  20.  A clergyman  having  fent  me  word, 
that  if  I would  preach  in  the  evening  on  the  text 
he  named,  he  would  come  to  hear  me,  I preached 
on  that  text,  Matt.  vii.  26.  And  flrongly  enforced 
the  caution  of  our  Lord,  to  beware  of  falfe pro- 
phets, i.  e.  all  preachers,  who  do  not  fpeak  as 
the  oracles  of  God. 

Tuef.  2^.  I explained  at  Chelfea,  the  nature 
and  neceffitv  of  the  new  birth.  One  (who,  I af- 
terwards heard,  was  a diffenting  teacher)  afked 
me  when  1 had  done,  Quid  eji  tibi  romen  ? And 
on  my  not  anfwering,  turned  in  triumph  to  his 
companions,  and  Laid,  “Ay,  I told  you,  he  did 
not  underhand  Latin!” 

Wednef.  26.  I was  informed  of  a remarkable 
converfation,  at  which  one  of  our  fibers  was 
prefent  a day  or  two  before  : wherein  a gentle- 
man was  affuring  his  friends,  “ That  he  hirafelf 
was  in  Charles’s- fquare,  when  a perfon  told  Mr. 
Wefiey  to  his  lace,  that  he  (Mr.  Wefley)  had 
paid  twenty  pounds  already,  on  being  convitted 
for  felling  Geneva,  and  that  he  now  kept  two 
Popifh  priefis  in  his  houfe.”  This  gave  occafion 
to  another  to  mention  what  he  had  himfelf  heard, 
at  an  eminent  diffenting  teacher’s,  viz.  “ That  it 
was  beyond  difpnte,  Mr.  Weffey  had  large  re- 
mittances from  Spain,  in  order  to  make  a party 
among  the  poor  : and  that  as  foon  as  the  Spani- 
ards 


[ 299  ] 

ards  landed,  he  was  to  join  them  with  twenty 
thoufand  men.” 

Mond.  31.  I began  my  courfe  of  preaching  on 
the  common-prayer.  Tuef.  Sept.  1.  I read  over 
Mr.  Whitefield’s  account  of  God’s  dealings  with 
his  foul.  Great  part  of  this  I know  to  be  true.  0 
let  not  mercy  and  truth  forfake  thee  l Bind  them, 
about  thy  neck ! Write  them  upon  the  table  of  thy 
heart! 

Thurfday  3.  James  Hutton  having  fent  me. 
word,  that  Count  Zinzendorf  would  meet  me  at 
three  in  the  afternoon,  I went  at  that  time  to 
Gray’s  Inn  Walks.  The  moft  material  part  of 
our  converfation,  (which  I dare  not  conceal)  was 
as  follows : 

Z.  Cur  Religionem  tuam  mutafti  ? 

W.  Nefcio  me  Religionem  meam  mutafie. 
Cur  id  fends  ? Ouis  hoc  tibi  retulit  ? 

Z.  Plane  tu.  Id  ex  epiftola  tua  ad  nos  video, 
Ibi,  Religione,  quam  apud  nos  profeffus  es,  re- 
lidla,  novam  profiteris. 

W.  Qui  fic?  Non  intelligo. 

Z.  Imo,  iflic  dicis,  vere  Chriflianos  non  elfe 
miferos  peccatores.  FalfilTimum.  * Optimi  ho- 
minum  ad  mortem  ufquer  miferabiliffimi  funt 
peccatores.  Siqui  aliud  dicunt,  vel  penitus 
impoftores  funt,  vel  Diabolice  fedufti,  Noftros 
fratres  meliora  docentes  impugnafti.  Et  pacem 
volendbus,  earn  denegalli, 

N5 


W,  Non-- 


[ 3°°  ] 


W.  Nondum  intelligo  quid  velis. 

Z.  Ego,  cum  ex  Georgia  ad  me  fcripfifti,  te 
dilexi  plurimum.  Turn  corde  fimplicemte  agnovi. 
Iterum  fcripfifti.  Agnovi  corde  fimplicem,  fed 
turbatis  ideis.  Ad  nos  venifti.  Ideae  tuae  turn 
magis  turbatae  erant  & confufse.  In  Angliam  re- 
diifti.  Aliquandiu  poft,  audivi  fraftres  noftros 
tecum  pugnare.  Spangenbergium  mifi  ad  pacem 
inter  vos  conciliandam.  Scripfit  mihi,  Fratres 
tibi  injuriam  intulilfe.  Refcripfi,  ne  pergerent, 
fed  & veniam  a te  peterent.  Spangenberg  fcripfit 
iterum,  eospetiifle  : fed  te,  gloriari  de  iis,  pacem 
nolle.  Jam  adveniens,  idem  audio. 

* W.  Res  in  eo  cardine  minime  vertitur.  Fra- 
tres tui  (verum  hoc)  me  male  tra&arunt.  Poftea 
veniam  petierunt.  Refpondi,  id  fupervacaneum  ; 
me  nunquam  iis,  fuccenfuiffe : fed  vereri,  1.  Ne 
falfa  docerent,  2.  Ne  prave  viverent. 

Ida  unica,  eft,  & fuit,  inter  nos  quaeftio. 

Z.  Apertius  loquaris. 

W.  Veritus  fum,ne  falfa  docerent,  1.  De  fine 
fidei  nollrae  (in  hac  vita)  fcil.  Chriftiana  perfec- 
tione,  2.  De  Mediis  gratiae,  fie  ab  Ecclefia  noftra 
didtis.. 

* Z.  Nullam  inhterentem  Perfeflionem  in  hac 
vita  agnofco.  Eft  hie  Error  Errorum.  Eum  per 
totum  orbem  igne  & gladio  perfequor,  conculco, 
ad  internecionem  do.  Chriftus  eft  fola  Perfe&io 
noftra.  Qui  Perfeftionem  inhaerentem  fequitur, 
Chriftum  denegat. 


W.  Ego- 


[ 30i  3 

W.  Ego  vero  credo,  Spiritum  Chrifti  operari 
Perfedlionem  in  vere  Chriftianis. 

Z.  Nullimode.  Omnis  noftra  Perfedlio  eft  in 
Chrifto.  Omnis  Chriftiana  Perfedlio  eft,  Fides  in 
fanguine  Chrifti.  Eft  tota  Chriftiana  Perfedlio, 
imputata,''  non  inhaerens.  Perfedli  fumus  in 
Chrifto,  in  nobifmet  nunquam  perfedli. 

W.  Pugnamus,  opinor,  de  verbis.  Nonne  om- 
nis vere  credens  Sandlus  eft  ? 

Z.  Maxime.  Sed  Sandlus  in  Chrifto,  non 
in  fe. 

W.  Sed,  nonne  fandle  vivit  ? 

Z.  Imo,  fandle  in  omnibus  vivit. 

W.  Nonne,  & Cor  fandlum  habet  P 

Z.  Certiffime. 

W.  Nonne,  ex  confequenti,  fandlus  efl 

in  fe? 

Z.  Non,  non.  In  Chrifto  tantum:  Non 

fandlus  in  fe.  Nullam  omnino  habet  Sandlitatem 
in  fe. 

W.  Nonne  habet  in  corde  fuo  amorem  Dei  & 
Proximi,  quin  &totam  Imaginem  Dei  ? 

Z.  Habet.  Sed  haec  hint  Sandlitas  legalis, 
non  Evangelica.  Sandlitas  Evangelica  eft 
Fides. 

* W.  Omnino  lis  eft  de  verbis.  Concedis, 
credentis  Cortotum  effe  fandlum  &vitam  totamt 
Eum  amare  Deum  toto  corde,  eique  fervire  totis 
veribus.  Nihil  ultra  peto.  Nil  aliud  volo  per 
Perfedlio  vel  Sandlitas  Chriftiana. 

Z.  Sed  haec  non  eft  Sandlilas  ejus.  Non  magis 

fandlus 


I 3?2  3 

ianctus  eft,  ft  magis  amat,  neque  minus  fanQus,  ft 
minus  amat. 

W.  Quid?  Nonne  credens,  dum  crefcit  in 
amore,  crefcit  pariterin  Sanftitate  ? 

* Z.  Nequaquam.  Eo  momento  quo  juftifi- 
catur,  fanftificatur  penitus.  Exin,  neque  magis 
fanftus  eft,  neque  minus  fandlus,  ad  moitem 
ufque. 

W.  Nonne  igitur  Pater  in  Chrifto  fan&ior  eft: 
Infante  recens  nato  ! 

Z.  Non.  Sancfificatio  totalis  ac  Juftificatio  in 
eodem  funt  inftanti ; & neutra  recipit  magis  aut 
minus. 

W.  Nonne  vero  credens  crefcit  indies  amore 
Dei  ? Num  perfedlus  eft  amore  fimulac  juftift- 
catur  ? 

Z.  Eft.  Non  unquam  crefcit  in  amore  Dei. 
Totaliter  amat  eo  momento,  ficut  totaliter  fanc- 
tificatur. 

W.  Quid  itaque  vult  Apoftolus  Paulus,  pen 
Renovamur  de  die  in  diem? 

Z.  Dicam.  Plumbum  ft  in  aurum  mutetur,  eft- 
aurum  primo  die  & fe.cunda  & tertio.  Et  fie  re- 
novatur  de  die  in  diem.  Sed  nunquam  eft  magis 
aurum,  quam  primo  die. 

W.  Putavi,  Crefcendum  effe  in  Gratia ! 

* Z.  Certe.  Sed  non  in  Sanftitate.  Simulac 
juftificatur  quis,  Pater,  Filius  & Spiritus  fanftus 
habitant  in  ipfius  Corde.  Et  cor  ejus  eo  momento 
aeque  purum  eft  ac  unquam  erit.  Infans  in  Chri- 
fto 


[ 3°3’  I 

fto  tam  purus  corde  eft  quam  Pater  in  Chrifto;- 
Nulla  eft  difcrepantia. 

W.  Nonne  juftificati  erant  Apoftoli  ante 
Chrifti  mortem  ? 

Z.  Erant. 

W.  Nonne  vero  fan&iores  erant  poft  diem 
Pentecoftes,  quam  ante  Chrifti  mortem  ? 

Z.  Neutiquam. 

W.  Nonne  eo  dieimpleti  funt  fpiritu  fantfto?' 
Z.  Sunt.  Sed  iftud  donum  fpiritus,  Sanfhitatem 
ipforumnon  refpexit.  Fuit  donum  Ivliraculorura 
tantum. 

W.  Fortafte  te  non  capio.  Nonne  nos-  ipfos 
abnegantes,  magis  magifque  mundo  morimur,  ac 
Deo  vivimus  ? 

* Z.  Abnegationem  omnem  refpuimus,  eon- 
culcamus.  Facimus  credentesomne  quod  volumus 
& nihil  ultra.  Mortificationem  omnem  ridemus. 
Nulla  Purificatio  praecedit  Perfeftum  amorem. 
W.  Quae  dixifti,  Deo  adjuvante,  perpendam. 


The  Letters  referred  to  by  the  Count  was 
written  Auguft  8,  preceding.  It  was  as  follows, 
excepting  two  or  three  paragraphs,  which  I have 
omitted  as  lefs  material. 


John 


[ 3°4  ] 


John  Wesley,  a Prefhyter  of  tlic  church  cj 
God  in  England,  to  the  church  of  God  at  Hern- 
hut  h in  Upper-Lufatia. 

i.  TT  may  feem  ftrange,  that  fuch  an  one  as  I 
-1-  am  fhould  take  upon  me  to  write  to  you. 
You,  I believe  to  be  dear  children  of  God,  through 
faith  which  is  in  Jefus.  Me  you  believe  fas  fome 
of  you  have  declared]  to  be  a child  of  the  devil , a 
fervant  of  corruption.  Yet  whatfoever  I am,  or 
whatfoever  you  are,  I befeech  you  to  weigh  the 
following  words  : if  haply  God,  who  fendeth  by 
whom  he  will  fend,  may  gi  veyou  light  thereby; 
although  the  mijl  of  darknefs  (as  one  of 
you  affirms)  fhould  be  referved  for  me  for 
ever. 

2.  My  defign  is,  freely  and  plainly  to  fpeak 
whatfoever  I have  feen  or  heard  among  you,  in 
any  part  of  your  church,  which  feems  not  agree- 
able to  the  gofpel  of  Chrifh  And  my  hope  is, 
that  the  God  whom  you  ferve,  will  give  you 
throughly  to  weigh  what  is  fpoken  ; and  if  in 
any  thing  ye  have  been  other  wife  minded  than  the 
truth  is,  will  reveal  even  this  unto  you. 

g,.And  firft,  with  regard  to  Chriftian  falvation, 

even 


[ 3®5  ] 


even  the  prefent  falvation  which  is  through  faiths 
I have  heard  fome  of  you  affirm,  1.  That  it  does 
not  imply  the  proper  taking  away  our  fins,  the 
cleanfing  our  fouls from  all  fin,  but  only  the  tear- 
ing the  fyfem  of  fin  in  pieces.  2.  That  it  does 
not  imply  liberty  from  finful  thoughts. 

4.  I have  heard  fome  of  you  affirm,  on  the 
other  hand,  1.  That  it  does  imply  liberty  from  the 
commandments  of  God,  fo  that  one  who  is  faved 
through  faith,  is  not  obliged  or  hound  to  obey 
them,  does  not  do  any  thing  as  a commandment, 
or  as  a duty.  To  fupport  which  they  have  affirm- 
ed,  that  there  is  t no  command  in  the  new  tefla- 
ment  but  to  believe : that  there  is  no  duiy  re- 
quired therein,  but  that  of  believing,  and  that  to 
a believer  there  is  no  commandment  at  all.  2. 
That  it  does  imply  liberty  to  conform  to  the 
world,  j;  by  talking  on  ufelefs,  if  not  trifling  fub- 

jefts, 

+ In  the  anfwer  to  this  letter,  which  I received  fome  weeks 
after,  this  is  explained  as  follows:  “ All  things  which  area 
commandment  to  the  natural  man,  are  a promife  to  all  that 
have  been  juftified. — The  thing  itfelf  is  not  loft,  but  the 
notion,  which  people  are  wont  to  have  of  commandments , 
duties,  See. 

I reply,  1,  If  this  be  all  you  mean,  why  do  you  notfay  fo, 
explicitly  to  all  men  ? 2.  Whether  this  be  all,  let  any 
reafonable  man  judge,  when  he  has  read  what  is  here  fub- 
joined. 

J The  brethren  anfwer  to  this,  “ We  believe  it  much  better 
to  difeourfe  out  of  the  news-papers,  than  to  chatter  about  holy 
things  to  no  purpofe.”  Perhaps  fo.  But  what  is  this  to  the 
point  ? I believe  both  the  one  and  the  other  to  be  ufelefs,  and 
therefore  an  abomination  to  the  Lord, 


[ 3°6  J 

je£fs,  by  joining  in  wordly  diverfions  in  order  tc 
do  good,  by  § putting  on  of  gold  and  coftly  ap- 
parel, or  by  continuing  in  thofe  profeflions,  the 
gain  of  which  depends  on  miniO.ring  hereto.  3. 
That  it  does  imply  liberty  to  avoid  perfecution, 
by  \ not  reproving  even  thofe  who  fin  in  your 
fight  : by  not  letting  your  light  fhine  before  thofe 
men,  who  love  darknefs  rather  than  light : by 
not  ufing  plainnefs  of  fpeech,  and  a frank,  upon 
carriage  to  all  men.  Nay,  bv  a clofe,  dark,  re- 
ferved  conversation  and  behaviour,  efpecially 

toward 

This  objedlion  then  {lands  in  full  force,  the  fact  alledged  being 
rather  defended  than  denied. 

The  joining  in  worldly  diverfions  in  order  to  do  good,  (ano- 
ther charge  which  cannot  be  denied)  I think  would  admit  of  the 
fame  defence,  viz.  That  “ that  there  are  other  things  as  bad.” 

§ We  wear  (fay  the  brethren)  neither  gold  nor  filver.”  lou 
forget.  I have  feen  it  with  my  eyes.  But  we  judge  no  body 
that  does.”  How!  Then  you  mud  judge  both  St.  Peter  and  Paul 
falfe  witncfles  before  God.  “ And  becaufe  thofe  profeflions 
that  miniiler  thereto  [to  fin,  to  what  God  has  flatly  forbidden! 
relate  to  trade,  and  trade  is  a thing  relating  to  the  magiftrate,  we 
therefore  let  all  thefe  things  alone,  entirely  fufpcnd:ng -our  judg- 
ment concerning  them.” 

What  miferable  work  is  here!  Becaufc  trade  relates  to  the  ma> 
gillrate,  am  I not  to  confider,  whether  my  trade  be  innocent  or 
finful  ? Then,  the  keeper  of  a Venetian  brothel  is  clear.  The 
magiftrate  {hall  anfwer  for  him  to  God  ! 

£ Thisfaft  alfo  you  grant,  and  defend  thus.  “ The  power 
of  reproving  relates  either  to  outward  things,  or  to  the  heart.  No 
body  has  any  right  to  the  former,  but  the  magiftrate.  (Alas! 
alas  ! what  cafuiftrv  is  this  ?)  “ And  if  one  will  fpeak  to  the  heart, 
he  mull,  be  firft  fure  that  the  Saviour  has  already  got  hold  of  it. 
What  then  muft  become  of  all  other  men  ? O how  pleafing  is  all 
this  to  flefh  and  blood  ! v 


[ 3°7  ] 

toward  Grangers.  And  in  many  of  you  I have 
more  than  once  found  (what  you  called,  being 
wife  as  ferpents J much  fubtlety,  much  evafion 
and  difguife,  much  guile  and  diffimulation.  You 
appeared  to  be  what  you  were  not,  or  not  to  be 
what  you  were.  You  fo  lludied  “ to  become  all 
things  to  all  men,  ” as  to  take  the  colour  and 
fhape  of  any  that  were  near  yc-u.  So  that  your 
pradtice  was  indeed  no  proof  of  your  judgment ; 
but  only  an  indication  of  your  defign,  Nuili  Lx- 
dere  os;  and  of  your  conformity  to  that  (not 
fcriptural)  maxim,  Sinere  Mundum  vadere  nt 
vult  : nam  vult  vadere,. 

5.  Secondly,  with  regard  to  that  faith  through- 
which  we  are  faved,  I have  heard  many  of  you 
fay,  “ A man  may  have  juflifying  faith  and  not 
know  it/’  Others  of  you,  who  are  now  in  Eng- 
land, particularly  Mr.  Molther)  I have  heard 
affirmt,  that  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  weakfaitli ; 
that  there  are  no  degrees  in  faith  ; that  there  is  no 

juflifying  faith,  where  there  is  ever  any  doubt; 
that  there  is  no  juflifying  faith,  without  the  ple- 
rophory  of  faith,  the  clear,  abiding  witnefs  of  the 
fpirit : that  there  is  no  juflifying  faith,  where 
there  is  not,  in  the  full,  proper  fenfe,  a new  or. 
clean  heart  : and,  that  thofe  who  have  not 
thefe  two  gifts,  are  only'-  awakened  not  juflified. 

6.  Thirdly,  As  to  the  way'  to  faith,  here  are 
many  among  us,  whom  your  brethren  have  ad- 

vifed 

+ In  the  preface  to  the  fecond  Journal,  the  Moravian  church.  23 
cleared  from  this  miftake. 


C 308  ] 

vifed  (what  it  is  not  to  he  fuppofed  they  would 
as  yet  fpeak  to  me,  or  in  their  public  preach- 
ing) | not  to  ufe  thofe  ordinances  which  our  church 
terms  means  of  grace  till  the-  have  fitch  a faith, 
as  implies  a clean  heart,  and  excludes  all  poffi- 
bility  of  doubting.  They  have  advifed  them, 
till  then  not  to  fearch  the  fcriptnr es , not  to  pray, 
not  to  communicate  : and  have  often  affirmed,  that 
to  do  thefe  things,  is  feeking  falvation  by  works  ; 
and  that  ’till  thefe  works  are  laid  afide,  no  man 
can  receive  faith  ; for  “ No  man  (fay  they)  can 
do  thefe  things,  without  fruiting  in  them.  If  he 
does  not  trull  in  them,  why  dues  he  do 
them  ?” 

7.  To  thofe  who  anfwered,  It  is  our  duty  to 
ufe  the  ordinances  of  God  ; they  replied,  There 
are  no  ordinances  of  Chrift,  the  ufe  of  which  is 
now  bound  upon  Chriflians  as  a duty,  or  which 
we  are  commanded  to  ufe.  As  to  thofe  you 
mention  in  particular,  {viz.  prayer,  communicat- 
ing and  fearching  the  fcripture  :)  If  a man  have 
faith,  he  need  not  ; if  he  have  not,  he  mujl  not 
ufe  them.  A believer  mav  ufe  them,  though  not 
as  enjoined ; but  an  unbeliever  as  before  defin- 
ed) may  not .” 

B.  To 

l The  fubftance  of  the  anfwer  to  this  and  the  following  para- 
graphs is,  1.  That  none  ought  to  communicate  till  he  has  faith, 
i.  e.  a fure  truft  in  the  mercy  of  God  through  Chrift.  This  is 
granting  the  charge.  2.  That  “ If  the  Methodifts  hold,  this  fa- 
crament  is  a means  of  getting  faith,  they  mufl  aft  according  to 
their  perfuafion.”  We  do  hold  it,  and  know  it  to  be  fo,  to  many 
»s  thofe  who  are  previoudy  convinced  of  fin, 


C 3°9  ] 

$.  To  thofe  who  anfwered, “ I hope  God  will 
thro’  thefe  means  convey  his  grace  to  my  foul 
•they  replied.  There  is  no  fuch  thing  as  means  of 
grace  ; Chrift  has  not  ordained  any  fuch  in  his 
church.  But  if  there  were,  they  are  nothing  to 
you  : for  you  are  dead.  You  have  no  faith. 
And  you  cannot  work,  while  you  are  dead . 
Therefore  let  thefe  things  alone,  till  you  have 
faith.” 

9.  And  fomeofour  Englilh  brethren,  who  are 
joined  with  yours,  have  faid  openly,  “ You  will 
never  have  faith  till  you  leave  running  about  to 
church  and  facrament,  and  focieties.”  Another 
of  them  has  faid  (in  his  public  expounding) 
“ As  many  go  to  hell  by  praying  as  by  thieving.” 
Another,  “ I knew  one,  who  leaning  over  the 
back  of  a chair,  received  a great  gift.  But  he 
tnuft  kneel  down  to  give  God  thanks,  fo  he  loft 
it  immediately.  And  I know  not  whether  he 
will  ever  have  it  again.”  And  yet  another,  “ you 
have  loft  vour  firft  joy.  Therefore  you  pray. 
That  is, the  devil.  You  read  the  bible.  That  is 
the  devil.  You  communicate.  That  is  the 
devil.” 

10.  Let  not  anv  of  you,  my  brethren,  fay  we  are 
not  chargeable  with  what  they  fpeak.  Indeed  you 
are.  For  you  can  hinder  it,  if  you  will.  There- 
fore, if  you  do  not,  it  imift  be  charged  upon 
you.  If  you  do  not  ufe  the  power  which  is  in 
your  hands,  and  thereby  prevent  their  fpeak ing 
thus,  you  do,  in  efTeft  fpeak  thus  yourfelves. 

You 


r 

L 


310  3 


You  make  their  words  your  own  ; and  are  ac- 
cordingly chargeable  with  every  ill  confequence 
which  may  flow  therefrom. 

12.  Fourthly  with  regard  to  your  church  +, 
you  greatly,  yea  above  meafure,  exalt  vourfelves 
and  defpife  others. 

I have  fcarce  heard  one  Moravian  broiher  in 
my  life,  own  his  church  to  be  wrong  in  any  thing. 

I have  fcarce  heard  any  of  you  (I  think  not 
one  in  England)  own  himfclf  to  be  wrong  in  any 
thing. 

Many  of  you  I have  heard  fpeak  of  your 
church,  as  if  it  were  infallible ; or,  fo  led  by 
the  Spirit,  that  it  was  not  poffible  for  it  to  err  in 
any  thing. 

Some  of  you  have  fet  it  up  (as  indeed  you 
ought  to  do,  if  it  be  infallible)  as  the  judge  of 
all  the  earth,  of  all  perfons  (as  well  as  doFtrines) 

therein  : 

+ “ A religion  you  fay)  and  a churcli  are  not  all  one.  A re- 
ligion is  an  afTembly  wherein  the  holy  fcriptures  are  taught  after  a 
prefcribed  rule.”  This  is  too  narrow  a definition.  For  there  are 
many  Pagan  (as  well  as  a Mahometan)  religions.  Rather,  a re- 
ligion is,  a method  of  worfhipping  God,  whether  in  a right  or  a 
wrong  manner. 

“ The  Lord  has  fuch  a peculiar  hand  in  the  feveral  conftitutions 
of  religion,  that  one  ought  to  relpeft  every  one  of  them.”  I can- 
not pollibly  : I cannot  refpecl,  either  the  Jew  ifn  (as  it  is  now;  or 
theRomifh  religion.  You  add. 

A church  (I  w ill  not  examine,  whether  there  are  any  in  this 
prefent  age,  or  whether  there  is  no  other  befide  ours)  is,  a congre- 
gation of  Tinners  who  have  obtained  forgiveners  of  ims. That 

fuch  a congregation  fhouldbe  in  an  error,  cannot  ea'.ily  happen.” 

I find  no  reafon  therefore  to  ret  raft  any  thing  which  is  advanc- 
ed on  this  or  any  of  the  following  heads. 


[ 3«  ] 


.therein  : and  you  have  accordinglypal!  fentence 
upon  them  at  once,  by  their  agreement  or  difa- 
greement  with  your  church. 

Some  of  you  have  faid,  that  .there  is  10  true 
.church  on  earth  but  yours ; yea,  that  ther>  are 
no  true. Chrijhans  out.  of  it..  And  your  own  nem- 
.bers  you  require  to  have  implicit  faith  in  herde- 
cifions,  and  to  pay  implicit  obedience  to  her 
redlions. 

12.  Fifthly,  You  receive  not  the  antient , bu 
the  modem  myfics.,  as  the  belt  interpreters  oj 
feripture  : and  in  conformity  to  thefe,  you  mix 
much  of  man’s  wifdom  with  the  wifdom  oi 
God:  you  greatly  refine  the  plain  religion  taught 
by  the  letter  of  holy  writ,  and  philofophize  on 
almofl:  every  part  of  it,  to  accommodate  it  to  the 
myftic  theory.  Hence  you  talk  much,  in  a man- 
ner wholly  unfupported  by  feripture,  agaimlwtta;- 
ing  nature  with  grace , againfl  imagination , and 
concerning  the  animal J 'pints,  mimicking  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghofl.  Hence  your  brethren 
zealoufly  caution  us  againfl.  animal  joy,  again!! 
natural  love  of  one  another,  and  again!!  felfifh 
love  of  God,  again!!  which  (or  any  of  them) 
there  is  no  one  caution  in  all  the  bible.  And 
they  have,  in  truth,  greatly  leffened,  and  had 
weli  nigh  deftroyed  brotherly  love  from  among 
us. 

33.  In  conformity  to  the  myfics,  you  like- 
wife  greatly  check  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft,  by 
fuch  cautions  againfr  f.nfdok  comforts,  as  have  no 

tittle 


[ 312  3 


tittle  of  foripture  to  fupport  them.  Hence  alfo 
your  brethren  here  damp  the  zeal  of  babes  in 
Chrift,  talking  much  of  falfe  zeal,  forbidding 
them  -O  declare  what  God  hath  done  for  their 
fouls  even  when  their  hearts  burn  within  them 
to  ieclare  it,  and  comparing  thofe  to  uncorked 
belles , who  fimply  and  artlefly  fpeak,  of  the 
jaility  which  God  giveth. 

14.  Hence,  Laftly,  it  is,  that  you  undervalue 
good  works,  (efpecially  works  of  outward  mercy) 
never  publickly  infilling  on  the  necellity  of  them, 
nor  declaring  their  weight  and  excellency.  Hence, 
when  fome  of  your  brethren  have  fpoken  of  them, 
they  put  them  on  a wrong  foot,  viz.  “ If  you find 
yourfelf  moved , if  your  heart  is  free  to  it,  then 
reprove,  exhort,  relieve.”  By  this  means  you 
wholly  avoid  the  taking  up  your  crofs,  in  order 
to  do  good  ; and  alfo  fubllitute  an  uncertain,  pre- 
carious inward  motion,  in  the  place  of  the  plain 
written  word.  Nay  one  of  your  members  has 
laid  of  good  works  in  general  (whether  works  of 
piety  or  of  charity)  “ A believer  is  no  more  oblig- 
ed to  do  tliefe  w7orks  of  the  law,  than  a fubjedl 
of  the  king  of  England  is  obliged  to  obey  the 
laws  ol  the  king  of  France.” 

15.  My  brethren,  whether  ye  will  hear,  or 
whether  ye  will  forbear,  I have  now  delivered 
my  own  foul.  And  this  I have  chofen  to  do  in 
an  artlefs  manner,  that  if  in  any  thing  Ihould 
come  home  to  your  hearts,  the  effedl  might  evi- 
dently 


[ 3*3  ] 


dently  flow  not  from  the  wifdom  of  man,  but 
from  the  power  of  God. 

Aug.  8,  1740. 

Thus  have  I declared,  and  in  the  plaineft  man- 
ner I can,  the  real  controverfy  between  us  and 
the  Moravian  brethren : an  unpleafing  tafk, 
which  I have  delayed,  at  leaft,  as  long  as  I 
could  with  a clear  confcience.  But  I am 
conftrained  at  length  nakedly  to  fpeak  the  thing 
as  it  is,  that  I may  not  hinder  the  work  ot 
God. 

I am  very  fenfible  of  the  objection  which  has 
fo  often  been  made,  viz.  “ You  are  inconflftent 
with  yourfelf.  You  did  tenderly  love,  highly 
efteem  and  zealoufly  recommend  thefe  very  men. 
And  now  you  do  not  love  or  efteem  them  at  all. 
You  not  only  do  not  recommend  them,  but  are 
bitter  againft  them  : nay,  and  rail  at  them,  be- 
fore all  the  world.” 

This  is  partly  true,  and  partly  falfe.  That  the 
whole  cafe  may  be  better  underftood.  it  will  be 
needful  to  give  a fhort  account  of  what  has  oc- 
curred between  us  from  the  beginning. 

My  firft  acquaintance  with  the  Moravian  bre- 
thren began  in  my  voyage  to  Georgia.  Being 
then  with  many  of  them  in  the  fame  fhip,  I nar- 
rowly obferved  their  whole  behaviour.  And  I 
greatly  approved  of  all  I faw.  Therefore  I un- 
bofomed  myfelf  to  them  without  referve. 

Vo  l.  XXVII.  O From 


[ 314  ] 


From  Feb.  14,  1735,  to  Dec.  2,  1737,  being 
with  them  (except  when  I went  to  Frederica  or 
Carolina)  twice  or  thrice  every  day,  I loved  and 
efteemed  them  more  and  more.  Yet  a few  things 
I could  not  approve  of.  Thefe  I mentioned  to 
them  from  time  to  time,  and  then  commended 
the  caufe  to  God. 

In  February  following  I met  with  Peter  Boh- 
ler.  My  heart  clave  to  him  as  foon  as  he  fpoke. 
And  the  more  we  converfed,  fo  much  the  more 
did  I efteem  both  him  and  all  the  Moravian 
church.  So  that  I had  no  reft  in  my  fpirit  till  I 
executed  the  defign,  which  I had  formed  long 
before : till,  after  a fhort  flay  in  Holland,  I haf- 
tened  forward,  firft  to  Marienborn,  and  then  to 
Hernhuth. 

In  September,  1738,  foon  after  my  return 
to  England,  I began  the  following  letter  to  the 
Moravian  church.  But  being  fearful  of  trufting 
my  own  judgment,  I determined  to  wait  yet  a 
little  longer,  and  fo  laid  it  by  unfiniftied. 

My  dear  brethren , 

I Cannot  but  rejoice  in  your  ftedfaft  faith,  in 
*vour  love  to  our  blefted  Redeemer,  your 
deadnefs  to  the  world  ; your  meeknefs,  tempe- 
rance, chaftity,  and  love  of  one  another.  I 
greatly  approve  of  your  conferences  and  bands  ; 
of  your  method  of  inftrufting  children  ; and  in 

general, 


[ 3 *5  ] 

general,  of  your  great  care  of  the  fouls  commit- 
ted to  your  charge. 

But  of  fome  other  things  I Hand  in  doubt, 
which  I will  mention  in  love  and  meeknefs. 
And  I wilh  that,  in  order  to  remove  thofe 
doubts,  you  would  on  each  of  thofe  heads,  firft, 
plainly  anfwer,  whether  the  fa £1  be  as  I fuppofe, 
and  if  fo,  fecondly,  Confider  whether  it  be 
right. 

Do  you  not  wholly  negleft  joint  falling? 

Is  not  the  Count  all  in  all  ? Are  not  the  reft 
mere  fhadows  ? Calling  him  Rabbi?  Almoft  im- 
plicitly both  believing  and  obeying  him  ? 

Is  there  not  fomething  of  levity  in  your 
behaviour?  Are  you,  in  general,  ferious 
enough  ? 

Are  you  zealous  and  watchful  to  redeem  time? 
Do  you  not  fomctimes  fall  into  trifling  conver- 
fation  ? 

Do  you  not  magnify  your  own  church  too 
much  ? 

Do  you  believe  any  who  are  not  of  it,  to  be  in 
gofpel  liberty  ? 

Are  you  not  ftraitened  in  your  love  ? Do  you 
love  your  enemies  and  wicked  men  as  your- 
felves  ? 

Do  you  not  mix  human  wifdom  with  divine  ? 
Joining  worldly  prudence  to  heavenly  ? 

Do  you  not  ufe  cunning,  guile,  or  diffimula- 
tion  in  many  cafes  ? 

O 2 


Are 


[ 3^6  ] 

Are  you  not  of  a clofe,  dark,  referved  temper 
and  behaviour  ? 

Is  not  the  fpirit  of  fecrefy  the  fpirit  of  your 
community  ? 

Have  you  that  childlike  opennefs,  franknefs, 
andplainnefs  of  fpeech,  fo  manifeft  to  all  in  the 
apohles  and  firft  Chriftians  ?” 

It  may  eafily  be  feen,  that  my  objections  then, 
were  nearly  the  fame  as  now.  Yet  I cannot  fay 
my  afTeftion  was  lelfened  at  all,  till  after  Sep- 
tember, 1739,  when  certain  men  among  us  be- 
gan to  trouble  their  brethren,  and  fubvert  their 
fouls.  However,  I cleared  the  Moravians 
frill,  and  laid  the  ■whole  blame  on  our  Englilh 
brethren. 

But  from  November  the  firlf,  I could  not  but 
fee  (unwilling  as  I was  to  fee  them)  more  and 
more  things  which  I could  in  no  wife  reconcile 
with  the  gofpel  of  Chrift.  And  thefe  I have 
fet  down  with  all  fimplicity,  as  they  oc- 
curred in  order  of  time  : believing  myfelf  indif- 
penfably  obliged  fo  to  do,  both  in  duty  to  God 
and  man. 

Yet  do  I this  becaufe  I love  them  not?  God 
knoweth  ; yea  and  in  part  I efteem  them  ftill : 
becaufe  I verily  believe,  they  have  a fincere  de- 
lire to  ferve  God  ; becaufe  many  of  them  have 
tailed  of  his  love,  and  fome  retain  it  in  fimpli- 
city ; becaufe  they  love  one  another ; becaufe 
they  have  fo  much  of  the  truth  of  the  gofpel,  and 

fo  far  abllain  from  outward  fin ; and  laftly,  be- 
caufe 


[ 3*7  ] 

caufe  their  difcipline  is,  in  moll  refpefls,  fo  truly 
excellent. 

“ But  why  then  are  you  bitter  againft  them  ?” 
I do  not  know  that  I am.  Let  the  impartial 
reader  judge.  And  if  any  bitter  word  has  ef- 
caped  my  notice,  I here  utterly  retrafl  it.  “ But 
do  not  you  rail  at  them  ?”  I hope  not.  God 
forbid  that  I fhould  rail  at  a Turk,  Infidel  or 
Heretic.  To  one  who  advanced  the  molt  dan- 
gerous errors,  I durft  fay  no  more  than,  the  Lord 
rebuke  thee ! But  I would  point  out  what  thofe 
errors  were  : and,  I trull,  in  the  fpirit  of  meek- 
nefs. 

In  this  fpirit,  my  brethren,  I have  read  and 
endeavoured  to  confider,  all  the  books  you  have 
publifhed  in  England,  that  I might  inform  my- 
felf,  whether  on  farther  confideration,  you  had 
retrafted  the  errors  which  were  advanced  be- 
fore. But  it  does  by  no  means  appear  that  you 
have  retrafled  anv  of  them  : for  waving  the  odd 
and  affefted  phrafes  therein,  the  weak,  mean, 
filly,  childilh  exprelfions  ; the  crude,  confufed 
and  indigelted  notions,  the  whims,  unfup ported 
either  by  fcripture  or  found  reafon  : yea,  waving 
thofe  affertions,  which,  though. contrary  to  fcrip- 
ture and  matter  of  fa£l,  are  however  of  no  impor- 
tance : thofe  three  grand  errors  run  through  al- 
moft  all  thofe  books,  viz.  Uhiverfal  Salvation, 
Antinomianifm , and  a kind  of  new-reformed- 
Quietifm » 

■Da 


3a.  Can 


[ &i8  ] 


x.  Can  univcrfal  falvation  be  more  explicitly 
aliened,  than  it  is  in  thefe  words : 

“ By  this  his  name,  all  can  and  Jhall  obtain 
life  and  falvation.”  Sixteen  dijcourfes , p.  go.  This 
mnjl  include  all  men,  at  leaf!  ; and  may  include 
all  devils  too. 

Again,  “ The  name  of  the  wicked  will 
not  be  fo  much  as  mentioned  on  the  great 
day.”  Seven  dijcourfes,  p.  22.  And  if  they  are 
not  fo  much  as  mentioned,  they  cannot  be  con- 
demned. 

2.  How  can  + antinomianifm , i.  e.  making  void 
the  law  through  faith,  be  more  exprelly  taught 
than  it  is  in  thefe  words. 

“ To  believe  certainly,  that  Chrift  fullered 
death  for  us — This  is  the  true  means  to  be  faved 
at  once 

“ We  want  no  more.  For  the  hiftory  of 
Jefus,  coming  into  the  world,  is  the  power  of 
God  unto  falvation  to  every  one  that  be* 
lieveth : the  bare  hiflorical  knowledge  of 
this.”  Sixteen  Difc.  p.  57. 

“ T here  is  but  one  duty,  which  is  that  o[  believ- 
ing." ibid.  p.  193. 

“ From  any  demand  of  the  law,  no  man 
is  obliged  now,  to  go  one  ftep,  to  give 
aWay  one  farthing,  to  eat  or  omit  one  morfelf' 

Seven  Difc.  p.  11. 

“ What 

+ N.  E.  I [peak  of  ar.tinom.Wl  doftrine,  abftraftcd  from  prac- 
tice good  or  bad. 


[ 3*9  ] 


“ What  did  our  Lord  do  with  the  law  ? He 
abolifhedit.”  ibid.  p.  gg. 

“ Here  one  may  think,  this  is  a fine  fort 
of  Chriftianity,  where  nothing  good  is  com- 
manded, and  nothing  bad  is  forbid.  But  thus  it 
is.”  ibid.  p.  g^ 

“ So  one  ought  to  fpeak  now.  All  com- 
mands and  prohibitions  are  unfit  for  our  times.” 

ibid. 

g.  Is  not  the  very  effence  of  quietifm  (though 
in  a new  fhape)  contained  in  thefe  words : 

“ The  whole  matter  lies  in  this,  that  we 
fhould Jujftr  ourjelves  to  be  relieved .” 

Sixteen  DiJ]  p. 

“ One  muff  do  nothing,  but  quietly  attend  the 
voice  of  the  Lord.”  ibid.  p.  2 g. 

14  To  tell  men  who  have  not  experienced  the 
power  of  grace,  what  they  fhould  do,  and  how 
they  ought  to  behave,  is  as  if  you  fhould  fend  a 
lame  man  upon  an  errand.”  ibid.  p.  70. 

“ The  beginning  is  not  to  be  made  with 
doing  what  our  Saviour  has  commanded. 
For  whofoever  will  begin  with  doing,  when 
he  is  dead,  he  can.  do  nothing  at  all  : but 
whatever  he  doth  in  his  own  adroit y,  is 
but  a cobweb,  i.  e.  good  for  nothing.” 

ibid.  p.  72,  81. 

“ As  foon  as  we  remain  pqjjive  before  him  as 
the  wood  which  a table  is  to  be  made  from,  then 
fometlhng  comes  of  us,”  Seven  DiJ. ip.  22, 

O my 


[ 32°  ] 


O my  brethren,  let  me  conjure  you  yet  again, 
in  the  name  of  our  common  Lord,  if  there  be 
any  confolation  of  love , if  any  bowels  and  mercies , 
remove  the  fly  out  of  the  pot  of  ointment , feparate 
the  previous  from  the  vile ! Review,  I befeech 
you,  your  whole  work,  and  fee  if  Satan  hath 
gained  no  advantage  over  you.  Very  excellent 
things  have  been  Jpohen  of  thee , 0 thou  city  of 
God.  But  may  not  he  which  hath  the  Jharp 
fword  with  two  edges  fay,  Yet  I have  a 
few  things  againjl  thee?  O that  ye  would 
repent  of  thefe,  that  ye  might  be  a glorious 
churchy  not  having  fpot  or  wrinkle  or  any  fuck 
thing  ! 

Three  things  above  all,  permit  me,  even  me, 
to  prefs  upon  you,  with  all  the  earneilnefs  of 
love.  Firft,  with  regard  to  your  doctrine,  that 
ye  purge  out  from  among  you,  the  leaven  of 
antinomiamfm,  wherewith  you  are  fo  deeply  in- 
fefled,  and  no  longer  make  void  the  law  through 
faith  : Secondly,  With  regard  to  your  difcipline, 
that  ye  call  no  man  Rabbi,  Mafer,  Lord  of  your 
faith  upon  earth.  Subordination,  I know,  is 
needful,  and  I can  {hew  you  fuch  a fubordina- 
tion,  as  in  fa£t  anfwers  all  Chriflian  purpofes ; 
and  is  yet  as  widely  diftant  from  that  among 
you,  as  the  heavens  are  from  the  earth.  Thirdly, 
with  regard  to  your  pra&ice,  that  ye  renounce 
all  craft,  cunning,  fubtlety,  diffimulation  ; wif 
dom.  falfelv  fo  called  : that  ye  put  away  all  dif- 

guife. 


C 32*  ] 


guife,  all  guile  out  of  your  mouth  : that  in  all 

Jimplicity  and  godly  Sincerity , ye  have  your  conver- 
sation in  this  world : that  ye  ufe  great  plainnefs 
of  fpeech  to  all,  whatever  ye  fuffer  thereby; 
feeking  only,  by  manifeflation  of  the  truth , to 
commend  yourfelves  to  every  mams  confcience  in 
the  fight  of  God. 


'The  End  of  the  Twenty-Seventh  Volume » 


v-  V 


- 


THE 


CONTENTS 

Of  the  Twenty-Seventh  Volume. 


Page 

An  extraB  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefiey’j 
journal,  from  Aug.  12,  1738,  to  Nov.  1, 

1739*  — — 3 

An  extraB  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’i' 
journal,  from  Nov.  1,  1739,  to  Sept.  3, 

1741.  — — 162 


' 


* 


> 1 / > 


• { C T 


i*  ■’ 


] -T  f ■ •' 

• • / ' ' : • **  ) 


■ 

1 S(  - i ' . ■ , ■ v, 

£ — — • 

v.-  • ■ v 


ERRATA,  Vol.  XXVII 


Pap  e 

Line 

Page  Line, 

5 

3 

r Itfl-,  ami  in  100 

in 

2 3 

r Merchant 

(places 

1 2 3 

21 

dele  too 

6 

16 

r work  in  many 

124 

23 

r Shainelefs 

(fouls 

— 

*7 

dele  in  any  fouls 

127 

9 

r uf us 

16 

6 

.r  heiiigkf// 

— 

10 

r corona 

r- 

penult,  r o£tavt> 

141 

1 1 

r -rue  cry 

1 8 

13 

r pag<w*try 

14S 

J7 

r dewing 

24 

*4 

r ]ik enefs 

*54 

J3 

r yzfled 

26 

17 

r Caftle 

171 

23 

dele  Mr. 

3° 

20 

dele  1 1 

180 

8 

r adtion 

44 

16 

r of  any 

196 

6 

r was  as 

S2 

Jj 

infer t I fay,  of 

204 

l9 

r La«i;achas 

ourfelves  & others 

211 

21 

r yivo/jt. im 

S*  *5 

r .Pelfo 

213 

10 

dele  he 

59 

22 

dele  at 

218  penult.  Revelation 

— 

23 

r how  have 

228 

6 

r went  with- 

61 

7 

r and_/iw« 

244 

ult. 

r having  a 

65  19 

r .^poftles 

248 

19 

r difcern/ble 

73 

13 

r his  1 >o:ce 

249 

l9 

r £is 

77 

antepen.  r I bad 

234 

18 

r left 

79  penult f r we  are 

299 

r To  fpare  1 

83 

1 1 

r becaufe  of 

dead,  I do  . 

88 

13 

dele  not 

tranflate 

92 

4 

r A by  din /a 

306 

9 

r open  the 

t£r 

?4 

r fcriptural 

93 

1 

dele  not 

r- 


F 


' 


Date  Due 

Demco  293-5 

