School of Theology at Claremont


TIT


1001 1320612


AAG
CUA AG
Re


BAe
PV ITI,
EAGLE AEA EAS
re eo ii ry


ee,
Veep
PISTOLS,
VILE LT OE





The Library


of the
School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711














THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


MINOR PROPHETS


THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS


In Twenty-One Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


‘2 a ae


g A HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


MINOR PROPHETS


BY THE
REV. JAMES WOLFENDALE





PUNK  & WAGNALE LS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


on


HOSEA.


Srtroduction and DBreface,


The Prophet. Hosea = salvation, deliverance, from the same root as Joshua and
Jesus ; the son of Beeri, a native of Israel, whose sins and fates he chiefly records.
The name in marked contrast to his mission—announcement of ruin; yet in
harmony with his vocation and the object of his book—to proclaim deliverance
after judgment. Nothing known concerning the circumstances of his life. His
character and disposition gathered from his prophecy.

The Age. More or less contemporary with Isaiah, Amos, Jonah, Joel, and
Nahum. Probably entered upon his work in the last year of Jeroboam, and
ended it at the beginning of Hezekiah’s reign, i. e., about 60 years, from 784—722
B.o. ‘The shortest duration must have been some 65 years” [Pusey]. Others
givea much longer period. This is the darkest period in the history of Israel. The
obligations of the law were relaxed and the claims of religion disregarded. Baal
was a rival to Jehovah, and in the dark recesses of groves were practised the cruel
rites of idolatry. The land was distracted by domestic broils and foreign inva-
sion. Might was marshalled against right. Princes and priests were accused of
bribery and impiety. Murder and bloodshed were steps to the throne; stream
met stream and deluged the land like a flood. ‘ Remonstrance was useless ; the
knowledge of God was wilfully rejected ; the people hated rebuke ; the more they
were called the more they refused ; they forbade their prophets to prophesy ; and
their false prophets hated God greatly. All attempts to heal this disease only
showed its incurableness ’ [Pusey]. Foreign nations are unheeded. Lycurgus the
famous legislator, and Hesiod the Greed poet, lived during his ministry, but the
prophet was intensely concerned with his own people. The threatened invasion
came, and he saw the murder of the tribes and the ravages of the enemy. In-
vitations and warnings are replete with tenderness and woe. All is shrouded in
darkness and gloom. Visions send forth Ughtning and thunder; but the sun
breaks forth at last, and rainbow colours expand until encircled with brilliancy
and hope. God in wrath remembers mercy.

The Book written by the author whose name it bears—the first of the twelve

v2


8 INTRODUCTION AND 1REPACE,


minor prophets, probably so placed on account of length, and resemblance to the
greater prophets in earnest tone and vivid representation. ts Contents, Externally
set forth national apostasy, prevailing corruption and judgments from God on ac
count of that apostasy. Severe threatenings are mixed with gracious promises. Israel
chastised would return in penitence to God; the kingdom wuld be restored and the
people united under one head. Internally truths are-presented, in form and lan-
guage peculiar. Israel is viewed in the light of Jehovah’s love. This love is often
wounded and chastises ; is ever active and unchangeable, calls and heals. Its Style
is bold, often abrupt, and for the most part mere hints. There are changes in
figure, anomalies in gender, number, and person. We have fragments, a general
summary, and fourteen short chapters include all that is left of. perhaps the longest
ministry in Old Testament record. ‘‘ Each verse forms a whole for itself, like one
heavy toll in a funeral knell. The prophet has not been careful about order and
symmetry, so that each sentence went home to the soul” [Pusey]. Messianic
references, not very numerous, lie in allusions, and may be gathered from New Testa-
ment citations. Jts Analysis rather difficult—the following may help the student.
First Period or Division, before the fall of Jehu’s house, chaps. i. ii. and iii. Israel’s
sin and rejection, chap. i.; Israel’s chastisement and conversion, chap. ii. ; Israel’s
deeper guilt, prolonged punishment, and final restoration, chap. ili, Second Period or
Division, after the fall of Jehu’s house. I. The Threatenings against the idolatrous
people, chap. iv. ; against conniving priests, chaps. v. and vi. ; against the royal
court for unholy alliance, chap. vii.; judgment ending in Assyrian bondage,
chaps. viii—x. II. The Promises. God will have mercy, chap. xi.; complaint
resumed, chap. xii. ; Israel’s deeper fall, chap. xiii. ; Israel’s conversion and richer
blessings, chap. xiv. Keil’s division has much to recommend it. Each of the two
main sections, chaps. iiiii., iv.—xiv., is divided into three smaller ones, (i. 2—
ii. 3), (ii. 4—25), (iii.), (ivi. 3), (vi. 4—xi. 11), (xii. 11—xiv.). In the Criticism
we seek to bring out the meaning of the text, in the Homiletics to frame and
apply that meaning for improvement in pulpit ministrations and the practical pas
anits of life


CHAP. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA.





CHAPTER L


Critica Norrs.—2. By] Lit. in Hosea, the preposition expresses close relationship with
another; cf. Num. xii. 6, 8; Heb. ii. 1. First é us and then through us is the Divine order ; per-
sonal enlightenment and then public service. Wife of where, | A vision, some; externally acted, others;
taken in a real sense by most interpreters. The plural indicates not merely incidental, but con-
tinual and manifold acts [Pusey]. Take] i. e. marry one whose livelihood is gained by prostitution,
and whose whole element is whoredom. Cf. men of blood, Ps. v.7; man of sorrows, Is. liii. 3.
This is a symbol of Israel in its state of idolatry. Land] Israel, indirectly Judah, wife and children,
equally grieved the husband and father, Ezek. xvi. 8, 15. Committed] is whoring, whoring away,
from Jehovah, lit. from after Jehovah ; the composite preposition denoting more than absence from
God, signifies opposed to walking with him ; the breaking of the marriage vow, cut off from loving re-
lationship (Ps. lxxiii. 27). 3. Gom.] The name of a nation (Gen. x. 2, 3); symbolically G, == completion ;
i.e. completely given up to whoredom. Dib. ]= daughter of grape-cakes, .ndicating pleasure and sensu-
ality. “ The sweetness of sins is the parent of destruction’’ [Pusey]. 4. Jez.]=I will sow, scatter or
disperse, like a seedsman, which happened by the Assyrians (2 Kings xvii. 5, 6). Avenge] Heb, visit.
Jehu commanded to destroy the house of Ahab, externally obeyed, and rewarded in measure. He
acted not from principle, or as he pretended out of zeal, but to serve his own political ends (2 Kings
ix. 10, 86; x. 16), ‘‘Andso the blood which was shed according to the righteous judgment of
God, became sin to him who shed it, in order to fulfil, not the will of God, but his own” [Pusey].
Jez. symbol of past sins, intermediate punishment and final overthrow. 5. Bow] Might, military
prowess (Gen, xlix. 24; Jer. xlix. 35). 6. Daughter] A symbol of a degenerate race, some; of the
totality of men and women of the nation, others; seems to intensify Lo-ruh.] = not pitied, lit. I
will not add any more to. The original expresses tender yearning towards one (Rom. ix. 25;
1 Pet. ii. 10); but God would not continue to show compassion as he had done; Divine mercy ex-
hausted and Israel was left in a defenceless state. I will utterly] Lit. taking away, I will take
away everything they have. Marg. another sense, to take away, i. e. to forgive sin. ‘s. The Lord
their God] More emphatic than “through me” (Gen. xix. 24), Judah worshipped God; Israel
turned to idols. One a witness for God, the other apostates from God. Judah saved in marked
contrast to Israel punished. 9. Lo-am.] = not ny people; the covenant relation dissolved. Son
may typify the revival of strength in the reign of Jeroboam II., but prosperity brought no revival
of piety. They were not God’s people. Not be your God] Lit. [ will not be to you or for you;
“for you by providence, to you by love” [Pusey]. Deprivation of all that God can be to them.
When God ceases to belong to men, to compassionate them, rejection follows. 11. Gathered
together] in one body. One head] Zerubbabel typically, Christ really (Jer. iii. 18; Ezek. xxxiv.
23, Go up] from Babylon, from whence God restoyed the two tribes; typ. = deliverance from sin
and moral dignity; go up from sinfu. -.fe, join the Christian Church and march to the land of pro-
mise. Great, &c.] Not as ver. 4. God will increase in mercy, not scatter in displeasure. Where
Israel was overthrown, victory shall be achieved. Instead of no mercy and not ail peeks we have
mercy and my people, Great and glorious the day when the fortunes of Israel shall be reversed and
the fulness o the Gentiles come in.


HOMILETICS.
Tue First Communications.—Verse 1.


I. The chosen servant. 1. His human descent. ‘Son of B.” The Jews say
that the prophet whose father is named was the son of a prophet. Nothing
recorded of Ber. Hosea dignified and distinguished not by noble birth nor
worldly grandeur. Rank and riches are not moral worth. Life outlined by noble
deeds ; greatness acquired by religious service. Character in its noblest embodi-
ments, exhibits the highest qualities, commands the greatest influence and admira-
tion. Apostles of great thoughts and rulers of the human mind have sprung
from no exclusive rank in life, but have been called from schools of the prophets
and workshops of the poor. 2. His spiritual training. God spoke in Hosea ;
gave him knowledge and experience first, then commissioned him to teach others.
Personal dedication before public duty; fellowship in private before reward in
public. We must speak what we know; be blessed ourselves before we can bless
others. Thisis a law of Christian economy. We can only teach others as we are
taught ourselves. Our influence upon others must be measured by the Divine
gifts within us. The best proof of Christianity is the energy with which we can
Christianize. God bestows blessings not to nurse in our bosoms but to radiate in
beneficent influence to others. “I will bless thee and make thy name great, and
thou shalt be a blessing.” 3. His outward call. Probably when a young man,


4 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. L





and hence the length of his ministry. Samuel and Timothy given to God when
young. Jeremiah consecrated from the womb. An honour and privilege to serve
Godin youth. Energy and enthusiasm are necessary as well as talent and experience.
“‘T remember thee, the kindness of thy youth.” II. The Divine message.
1. Its nature. A “word,” the expression of the mind and purpose of God. The
power of a word to influence character and change the destinies of life. Words
of monarchs have decided the fate of empires. The word of God, judgment or
mercy, the message of life or death to a people. ‘‘To the one we are the savour
of death unto death, and to the other of life unto life.” 2. Its origin. “The
word of the Lord.” Not by man nor from man, not self-originated ; it was first
God’s and then became the prophet’s. ‘‘ For the prophecy came not in old time
by the will of man.” Men not left to their own devices and must not declare their
own opinions. God finds the message and speaks with Divine certainty and
authority. All teaching deserving the name comes to us not as the product of
human thought but of the Holy Spirit. “Preach the preaching I bid thee.”
The Bible is pre-eminently the prophetic word. “Ye do well that ye take heed
to it.” 3. Its mediwm. Through Hosea. God’s message through men and to
men. Man in his moral nature is renewed, elevated, and qualified to teach and
bless a fallen people. This displays Divine wisdom and love, creates sympathy
for our fellow-creatures, humanizes the Bible, and renders the gospel more charming
and attractive. III. The dark days. 1. Days of prevalent idolatry. “The
land hath committed whoredoms.” Idolatry was made the national religion.
The worship of Baal was a rival to the worship of God. Calf-worship led to sin,
licentiousness and sensuality. The first in rank were first in excess. Sad when
men of high position fall into vice! Now, even, men profess to own God, talk of
“nature” and “natural laws,” yet forget God, or “change their glory (i.e. their
God) into the similitude” of an ox, a man, a hero, or an abstract principle.
2. Days of political anarchy. Kings came to the throne by the murder of their
predecessors and were in turn murdered by their successors. Military despotism
disturbed the peace, and horrible slaughter stained the people of the land.
3. Days of threatened judgment. Hosea sent to urge to repentance, for captivity
was imminent, certain, and irreversible ; but God was forsaken, the nation was
insensible of its moral and political decay, and judgments lost their terror. In
spite of warning after warning the people sought to prop themselves up by alliance
with Egypt and Assyria. When a nation is rotten at the core no outward power
or splendour can prevent its decay. It carries within it the seeds of death.
The sky grew darker and darker; the thunder at last resounded; calamities
could not be averted ; then judgments fell upon them without mercy in dispersion
and destruction. 4. Days of little success. Israel was not converted but taken
into captivity, yet Hosea laboured on year after year, through good and evil report
(Amos vii. 10,12), No abatement of his earnestness and efforts. He was faithful
to his trust and to his God. It is often the lot of God’s servants to labour long
and see little fruit. Isaiah cried, “I have laboured in vain, I have spent my
strength for nought, and in vain.” We must be content to toil on and deliver
our message to the greatest sinners in the darkest days, and feel like the prophet
named, ‘“‘surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


In the days of, ver. 1.—Hosea’s min-
istry. 1. A type of God’s long-suffering
and mercy ; waiting long, sending pro-
phets, and offering grace to a sinful
people, until beyond the reach of
mercy. 2. A type of service fixed in


time and sphere, in chequered scenes
and great discouragements. God gives
to every servant his special place and
peculiar gifts. In hope and humble con-
lidence he must labour on.

The days of Jeroboam II., days of


CHAP. I.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. §





prosperity and political pre-eminence.
He reigned 41 years; recovered lost cities
(2 Kings xiv. 28; Amos i. 3, 5); was
victorious in war (2 Kings xiii. 4; xiv.
26); and enjoyed the teacning of Hosea,
Joel (iii. 16), Amos (i. 1), and Jonah
‘2 Kings xiv. 25). But idolatry was
mixed with the worship of Jehovah ;
drunkenness and oppression prevailed in
the country, and the prophets predicted
its downfall. 1. Temporal prosperity is
no guarantee for public moraliiy. The
kingdom, amid splendour and popul-
arity, rotten at the core, decaying in
vigour, and under the judgment of God.
2. Temporal prosperity is no security
against public calamity. “Temporal
prosperity is no proof either of stability
or of the favour of God. Where the
law of God is observed, there, even
amid the pressure of outward calamity,
is the assurance of ultimate prosperity.
Where God is disobeyed, there is the
pledge of coming destruction. The
seasons when men feel most secure
against future chastisements, are often
the preludes of the most signal revolu-
tions” [Pusey].

Kings rise and empires fall, but
God’s purpose is the same; carried on
through all times and by all agencies.





Kings die and are buried in the dust;
prophets live in all ages and rewarded
in eternity. ‘“‘ Monarchs have their times
and their turns, their rise and their
ruin” [Trapp].

Men pass away — notwithstanding
wealth and talent. Nations pass away—
notwithstanding political power and
military glory. God is eternal and
carries on his work.

The perpetuity of truth. Although
these kings successively appeared and
passed away, the ministry of Hosea
kept on. 1. The “ Word of the Lord”
is adapted to all generations. It is
congruous with all mtellects, it chimes
in with all hearts, it provides for the
common wants of all. 2. The “ Word
of the Lord” is necessary for all gener-
ations. All men in all ages and lands
want it, it is as indispensable to their
happiness as air is to their life. Gener-
ations may appear in the distant future,
who may not require our forms of
government, our social institutions, our
artistic devices, our mechanical inven-
tions, and who may despise our liter-
ary productions, but no generation will
ever appear who will not require the
“Word of the Lord” [Homilist].


HOMILETICS.
THe Sympotio MarriaGe.—Verse 2.


Whether this be regarded as a real and external transaction, or a spiritua
scenery, or allegorical description, all agree in taking it as a type of God’s dealings
with unfaithful Israel. Divine truth was to be acted, embodied in sensible signs
and prophetic life. Hosea commanded to marry a prostitute and beget children,
whose names, called by God himself, were to set forth the evils of departure from
him. I. A type of Israel’s fallen condition. It was the chosen people, specially
created and brought into covenant relation toGod. This relation, often represented
under the figure of marriage, they vowed to keep. But the contract was broken,
they had fallen away from God, and gone a whoring after other gods. Idolatry
was not accidental, but prevalent ; the whole land was polluted, and the sin national.
The idolatry of foreign nations was regarded as an abomination, but the sin of
Israel a more glaring enormity and greater moral guiit. Three things are con-
demned in Scripture as idolatry. 1. The worshipping of a false god; 2. the
worshipping of the true God through an image; 3. the indulgence of those
passions which draw the soul from God. Israel were guilty of the first in bowing
the knee to Baal, and of the second in setting up the golden calves. Men now
often guilty of the third. Lust, covetousness, and pleasure allure their hearts,
and they set up gold, honour, popular applause, and worlily distinction, and cry,
“These be thy gods.” II. A type 0 God's love to sinners. 1. Love w the
tnfaithful. Israel had fallen, but God loved her with a tender love, and sought


6 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. 1.


to restore her to himself. Many have made a profession, Christians have left their
first love, broken their engagement with God, and fallen into disgrace. Love is
wounded, and deeply wounded, at such treatment, but it remains love, cannot
suffer apostasy from him, and seeks to restore and save. ‘ Thou hast left thy first
love. Remember, therefore, from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do the
first works.” 2. Love to the unworthy. We shrink from the unchaste and con-
demn the outcast, but they are not beyond hope. The drunkard, the thief, and
the idolater are renewed and restored to God, formed into a church, and sanctified
for his service. ‘“ Love,” it has been said, ‘descends more abundantly than it
ascends. The love of parents for their children has always been far more powerful
than that of children for their parents; and who among the sons of men ever
loved God with a thousandth part of the love which God has manifested to us?”
III. A type of moral life unstained by surrounding evils. The prophet was
holy, separated from sinners, and dared not associate with adulterers. 1. In the
family was a “wife of whoredoms” and “children of whoredoms.” 2. In the
land corruption and abominations were prevalent. What a trial of patience !
What a test of character this would be! Christians are often so placed, but must
be “the salt of the earth,” preserve from corruption, and incite men to live godly
in dangers by which they are surrounded. Even in Sardis were a few who had
not defiled their garments. “To keep himself unspotted from the world.” IV.
A type of parental sin portrayed in children’s character. Parents leave behin«
them legacies of guilt and shame ; contaminate their offspring by their influence
and example. Children inherit the lands and the lusts of their ancestors, and
are often cursed with the consequences of parental folly. Drunkenness, de-
bauchery, and adultery entail on human life their ruinous and loathsome effects.
Men transmit to remote posterity guilt and misery, and God visits “the iniquity
of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generction.” This
should excite pity for children and caution in parents for their solemn charge and
responsibility.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Go, take, ver. 3.—1. A people sunk way on their children. Sin is con-


into sin and idolatry need desperate
and extraordinary efforts to save them.
2. Men employed in saving them must
deny themselves, and adopt the means
God directs. Hosea takes a strange
wife. Ezekiel loses his own, xxiv. 16,
17. Our will must be merged into
God’s. “This figure was proposed to
the people that they might perceive in
the looking-glass of this allegory, jirst,
their duty towards God ; second, their
disloyalty ; thirdly, their penalty for the
same” [Trapp].

Idolatry is spiritual whoredom. It
defiles the soul, God’s bridal-bed. It
breaks the marriage-knot, and discoven-
ants. It enrageth God, who in this case
will take no ransom. It subjecteth men
to the deepest displeasure of God, it
besots them and unmans them [Trapp].

Children of whoredom. The sins of
parents also descend in a mysterious


tagious, and unless the entail is cut off
by grace, hereditary [Pusey].

Depart from God.—I. God is the
great end of life. Man restless and in-
sufficient without God. Natural bodies
seek a natural resting-place; sensitive
creatures seek good adapted to their
rank and being: so the soul longs for
God. Echoes of God resound through
its depths, and it is made to turn in-
stinctively towards Himself. Some have
found and walk with God, like Enoch ;
some walk near to him and others are
far from him. ‘“‘ Without God in the
world.” God should be the supreme
object of life and affection. This pur-
suit should be earnest and continued.
‘* My soul followeth hard after (is glued)
to thee.” The renewed soul is acquaint-
ed with God, and follows him with in-
tensity of feeling aud desire. When the
Christian has lost God, he never rests


TAAP. I.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


7


ne


satisfied until he has found him again.
When he has found and enjoys him he
longs to enjoy him more, And though
he can never attain to God in perfec-
tion, yet he follows on, first, as a
necessary discipline, and then as a
necessary preparation for the future.
** Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord.”

II. Departure from God is idolatry.
Sin hinders and indisposes in the pur-
suit after God. It is a violation of his
law and rejection of his love and
authority. It renounces all subjection
to him, and casts him off entirely. This
is to prefer the creature to the Creator,
in whom all joys and blessings consist.
if we seek anything out of God, we turn
from following him, and take something
else to be our god. This is to make an
idol, and prefer emptiness and vanity.
An idol is nothing. Men have many
idols. When they do not worship God,
they worship themselves, their fellow-
creatures, their works, and their sub-
stance. It is not necessary that each
one should sing a psalm and offer a
prayer to deify self. The outward life
is a psalm, and the inward life a prayer.
Man cannot dethrone God in heart and


life without putting an idol in his place,
“ Little children, keep yourselves from
idols.”

IIT, This departure invowves others in
its consequences. Every individual is a
centre of moral influence. Every word
and deed sends forth more than electric
fluid. He may choose what he will do,
but having done, he cannot stay the
consequences of the act. Kings and
priests, ministers and parents, influence
others for good or evil, produce effects
which do not terminate on themselves,
but extend to society, and are transmit-
ted to posterity as mighty, indestructible
forces of existence. ‘‘ When one mem:
ber suffers, all suffer with it.” By
neglect of duty, wrong example, and
leading others into sin we injure our
fellow-creatures, and leave an active
influence, which does not cease when we
repent or die. Wealth, language, and
customs influence the health and morals
of society. And as the seed sown will
produce the harvest, so licentiousness
and idolatry sow their fruits in families,
churches, nations, and fill “the earth
with violence.” “The land hath com-
mitted great whoredom.”


HOMILETICS.
Tue THREE JupDGMENTS.— Verses 3—9.


The names of the three children given by God himself were te be significant.
The life of the prophet was to be a living sermon before the people. His
marriage preached God’s mercy, and bis children God’s judgment. If they
refused his words, they should see his actions. In the first name we have a
warning of terrible judgment, in the second its connection with the Divine nature,
in the third the result. Destruction, cessation of mercy, and rejection, would be
dreadful to any nation, but to Israel they involved the loss of special privileges
and distinctions, their social, political, and theocratical position.


JEZREEL; OR Divine RetrisuTion.—Verees 3—5.


I, The destruction of the Royal Family. “Upon the house of Jehu.” J.
anointed at God’s command to execute judgment upon the house of Ahab (2
Kings ix. 6, 7) ; was rewarded in measure for his conduct, yet served his own
ends, and in executing judgment upon others, brought it upon himself and
family. God loves justice, and will punish those who administer it from wrong
motives and feelings. Kings and men in authority must not fall short of duty,
nor exceed it in any respect. ‘So awful a thing it is to be the instrument of
God in punishing or reproving others if we do not by his grace keep our own
hearts and hands pure from sin” [Pusey], that we may be rejected ourselves.
The slaughter of the Gibeonites by Saul, the conduct of Amalek towards


8 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. fcHaP. t


Iscael, seemed to be forgotten, but punishment came at last. Jehu’s house is
visited, his progeny extinguished in the fourth generation for his offences. If we
judge others we should not do the same things ourselves. II. The destruction
of the Regal Sovereignty. ‘And will cause to cease the kingdom of the
house of Israel.” The strength of the kingdom was paralyzed after the
destruction of the house of Jehu. Of five kings that followed Zechariah,
only one died a natural death, the others were murdered and dethroned.
The kingdom was distracted and broken, and in about 50 years completely
destroyed by the captivity of the ten tribes. Kingdoms are built up, extended,
and established by God; but the immorality of the rulers and the idolatry of
the people will sow the seeds of decay and death. When God has numbered
their days, no power, no splendour can hold them up. Foreign invasion and civil
revolution may overturn. That kingdom is the strongest, the most splendid and
secure, which makes God its sovereign. The skill of parliaments, the valour of
soldiers, and the power of wealth are no security against the Judgment of God.
“ Put them in fear, O Lord; that the nations may know themselves to be but
men.” JII. The destruction of Military Prowess. ‘I will break the bow of
Israel.” The bow was the special pride of Jehu (2 Kings ix. 24) ; the military
strength upon which Israel relied, and for which it was famous (Jer. xlix. 35).
1. This strength shall be broken. When God blows with the blast of his anger,
individual health, family prosperity, and national glory fade like a flower. The
strength of body, the vigour of mind, and the power of numbers are weak before
him. God can humble the pride of men and nations, and take from them
whatever they make their strength and defence. 2. This strength shall be irre-
parably broken. All power and projects defeated. When God breaks none can
piece; when man pieces God can break. ‘The shield, the sword, and the
battle,” weapons offensive and defensive, God can dash in pieces. In the spiritual
conflicts of this and every age, no weapon formed against his people and his
purpose shall prosper. IV. The destruction of National Prestige. “In the
valley of Jezreel.” This valley was the very centre and security of the king-
dom, their Marathon and their Waterloo. It was the scene of their exploits and
skill ; the place of Ahab’s wickedness and Jehu’s zeal. Here God had executed
judgments against the enemies, and delivered his people from danger. In this
very spot in which the nation’s history was localized the nation’s glory should
fade away, and the nation’s guilt be punished. Places of carnal security often
exposed to shame and destruction. ‘‘ Thus it is ever; when retribution comes it
seems to despise the very things in which its victim gloried. A noble lineage,
great wealth, patrimonial possessions, elevated positions, brilliant genius, and
distinguished abilities ; these are the modern Jezreels of sinners. In these they
boast. But what are these? God, when he comes to judgment, will strike them
in those very places, he will break their bow in the valley of Jezreel” [The
Homilist).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Jehu’s conduct. 1. Service insincere. the sight of God. His piety gave way


God’s will done half way, not fully.
He killed the priests, but clave to the
calves. 2. Service from wrong motives.
He acted not, as he pretended, out of
zeal for God, but served his own poli-
tical ends, and did God’s will from
selfish and base motives. 3. Service
divested of real virtue. It had no prin-
ciple in it, and of was no true worth in


to policy, and policy stained his piety.
“ By the ends, and not by the works
done, are virtues distinguished from
vices. Two things make a good Chris-
tian, and declare him so—good actions
and good aims, And although a good
aim doth not make a bad action good
(as in Uzziah), yet a bad aim makes a
good action bad, as here in Jehu”


CHa>. 1.





[Trapp}. 4. Service involving his house
and kingdom in ruin. ‘The massacre
therefore,” says Calvin, “was a crime
so far as Jehu was concerned, but with
God it was a righteous vengeance.”
Even if he did not make God’s com-
mand a mere pretext, yet his conduct
was an act of blood-guiltiness which
called for vengeance upon posterity.
Things done by God’s desire or com-
mand may become crimes in the per-
former, if ne acts from evil and selfish
designs, ana not from love to God.
Religion must never be a cloak for the
lusts of an evil and ambitious heart.
Retribution will swiftly follow. “Be
sure your sins will find you out.”

Jehu’s character. J. was one of those
quick, ambitious men, whom God raises
up to change the fate of empires and
execute judgment upon the earth. His
zeal was great so long as it squared with
his own interests, but cooled wonder-
fully when directed against them. He
was not a great or good man, but an
agent for the accomplishment of great
purposes. In his sudden elevation to
the throne; in the ruthlessness with
which he carried out his purposes ; in
the union of profound dissimulation
with fanatic zeal, he is not without his
likeness in modern times.

Jehu’s punishment. “I will visit,”
&e. 1. God’s government. God su-
preme, exalted above the heavens, and
ruleth over the kings and nations of
the earth. 2. God's purpose. “I will
visit.” This purpose not capricious and
arbitrary ; in harmony with fixed prin-
ciples, and regards moral conduct and
desert. 3. God’s providence. “I will
visit.” The providence fulfils the pur-
pose of God in the events of history
and by the agencies of men. (1.) It is
active, ‘I will visit.” “My Father


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 9
a ee


worketh.” “* All things work together.”
(2.) It is just as well as benevolent.
4. God’s power. “I will avenge.”
God omnipotent can easily destroy or
punish. God’s providence and _pre-
sence are sensibly felt among men.
Hence the ruin of the wicked certain,
irresistible, terrible, and complete.

The destruction of the kingdom. 1.
God is the Creator and Destroyer of
nations. Men build often upon weak
foundations, with unsuitable materials,
and for base designs. “ Except the
Lord build,” &c. 2. When God deter-
mines to destroy nations no power can
avail against him. “I will break the
bow.” No bow can abide in strength
without him. Seeming prosperity or
outward grandeur of no account with
him. 3. The destruction of nations
is not always by outward force. God
has many ways, and can work without
means. Loss in battle, invaded borders,
and mercantile panics may be recovered.
But vital corruption and decay of reli-
gion reach the very heart of a nation.
Nothing can preserve a people wholly
given to whoredom and idolatry. 4. De-
struction of national existence. “If all
the historians who recorded the ultimate
extinction of nations were inspired of
God to give the true reasons of their
fall, we should often meet this testi-
mony: “Perished of national pride,
producing contempt of God and of
fundamental morality !”’ [Cowles].

Yet a little while. Space for repent-
ance in human life and national afflic-
tion. Men perish not without warning.
Judgment lingers long, but falls heavily
at last. God’s measurement of time
disregarded and sinned away can never
be given again. ‘I gave her space to
repent of her fornication.”


HOMILETICS.


Jup@mMEent AND Mercy.— Verses 6, 7.


The second judgment, the punishment foretold in the name of tne daughter, is


greater than that of the first.


God would scatter, now Israel will be unpitied.


By reference to the opposite lot of Judah, all false hope in God’s mercy is taken
away. Those who forsake God, forsake their own mercy, and may reckon upon


nothing but judgment.


1d HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. | CHAP. I.


I. Judgment without Mercy. Israel owed its preservation and prosperity amid
anarchy and prevailing idolatry entirely to God’s mercy. God long-suffering, but
sinners may exhaust his patience. 1. Mercy may be withheld from men. When
former mercies are received with ingratitude, or abused, God will add no more

Ps. lix. 5). Goodness and mercy should lead to repentance, but if despised, mer
will treasure up wrath for themselves against the day ot wrath (Rom. ii. 4, 5).
Day by day, hour by hour, individuals may be heaping up this awful treasure.
The cup may soon be filled, God's forbearance withheld, and judgment without
mercy. 2. Mercy withheld from men will lead to utter ruin. “I will utterly
take them away.” The ten tribes never returned (except very few) from captivity.
Judgment fell upon the Churches in Asia Minor, and now they are warnings to
others. The long-suffering of God waited in vain in the days of Noah; the flood
came and destroyed an ungodly world. Because sentence is not suddenly executed,
men plunge into deep sin, ripen themselves for greater judgment, which comes in
ten-fold vengeance and utterly takes them away. 3. Mercy withheld from us and
given to others is a sad ingredient in the cup of sorrow. This life is often
embittered by opposite lots. The sobriety of one condemns the drunkenness of
another. The spendthrift sees in the happiness and prosperity of his neighbour
what he might have been himself. There is a necessary and natural connection
between conduct and reward here. So in the future; condition will result from
character ; the fruit will grow from the tree. “Say to the righteous, it shall be
well with him. Woe unto the wicked ! it shall be ill with him” (Is. iii. 10, 11).
One thing is set against another to teach men righteousness. II. Mercy in the
midst of Judgment. “I will have mercy upon the house of Judah.” Mercy was
wonderfully shown to Judah in her danger from Assyrians, in deliverance from
Babylon, in her beaten and plundered condition at the present by Israel (2 Kings
xiv. 12). This a type of God’s dealings now. None deserve mercy, all are alike
guilty. 1. Mere; Divine in its source. Israel had no mercy upon Judah ; men
have no mercy upon one another, but God shows mercy. “J will have mercy.”
2. Mercy sovereign in its objects. Upon Judah, not Israel. God has mercy upon
whom he will have mercy (Rom. ix. 15). Often sinners beyond all others, liars,
thieves, and drunkards are chosen. Paul, Bunyan, and Newton become patterns
of mercy unto others. In this there is no unrighteousness in God, nor injury to
man. 3. Mercy without human merit. Man clings to means, and wants to be
saved by works. Not by works of the law, lest man should boast, but entirely
of grace, through faith. Human efforts, instrumentalities of men, the power of
intellect, and the energy of will avail nothing. Not by bow nor by sword, not by
horses and chariots, on which nations rely in battle. God needs no creature
helps ; exalted in power, he will magnify his grace. It is salvation complete,
without sorrow, humiliation, and bloodshed. ‘“ By the Lord their God,” whom
they worshipped when Israel committed whoredom.


This passage leads us to contemplate God’s mercy. Mercy is a modification of goodness. God
is good to all, but is only merciful to the suffering sinner. Mercy not only implies suffering, bus
suffering arising from sin. If suffering were a necessity springing out of the constitution of ‘Blate
its removal or mitigation would be an act of justice rather than mercy. Earth is a sphere where
God shows his mercy, for here is suffering springing from sin. Here we have—

I. Mercy withheld from some. “For I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel,”
&c. When mercy has been abused the time comes when it is withheld, and the subjects are left
abandoned of God. - When mercy is withheld from nations they perish, from churches they decay,
from families they sink to corruption, from individuals they are lost. “ My spirit shall not always
strive with men.” II. Mercy bestowed upon others. “TI will have mercy upon the house of
Judah.” This mercy was signally shown to Judah, when in one night one hundred and eighty-five
thousand warriors were slain. Looking at the words in their spiritual application they suggest two
remarks in relation to man’s deliverance. First, J¢ 1s of mercy. The deliverance of man from the
guilt, the power, and consequence of sin, is entirely of God’s mercy, free, sovereign, boundless
mercy. Secondly, Man’s deliverance is: By moral means. ‘ Will not save them ‘by bow,” &e.
No material force can deliver the soul from its spiritual difficulties and perils. Moral means alone


CHae. I.]








can effect the object.
sion: Use mercy rightly while you have it.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 1)





“ Not by might, nor by rey but by my spirit, saith the Lord.” Conetu-
ts


grand design is to produce reformation o1


character, and meetness for the high service and lofty fellowship with the great God, here and


yonder, now and tor ever [Zhe Homilist].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7. Mercy «upon the house of
Judah. When Divine justice is glorified
in some, yet there are others in whom
free grace is glorified. And though
some through unbelief are broken off,
yet God will have a Church in this
world till the end of time. It aggra-
vates the rejection of Israel that God
will have mercy on Judah, and not on
them, and magnifies God’s mercy to
Judah, that though they also have done
wickedly, yet God did not reject them
as he rejected Israel [Matt. Henry].

The Lord their God. The antithesis
is not merely to the false gods of the
heathen, but to the conduct of Israel
who cast otf Jehovah. Hence God
-withheld mercy from Israel, but gave
it to Judah, who owned him as theirs,
and whom they outwardly worshipped
in pursuance of the covenant with
them. Notice the benefits of national
worship. Even outward forms of wor-
ship and Sabbath observance remind
us of the reality, tend to ameliorate the
prejudices and intone the spirit of
society. Men are in danger of sinking


into animal life by the pressure of
labour and materialism. Neglect of
national worship would break down
moral barriers, and flood the land with
amusements and wickedness. The
human race feel the necessity of a purer
and better life. Hence whatever inter-
feres with Sabbath observances, what-
ever hinders the worship of God and
the moral culture of men, should be
avoided. Without national worship—
1. Many would observe no worship at
all. 2. Men would have no opportuni-
ties for moral and religious instruction
at all. 3. Generous feelings would not
be cherished, the mutual equality of
men in the sight of God would be for-
gotten, the highest ranks would not be
inspired with humility and condescen-
sion, nor the lowest with feelings of
gratitude and love. 4. The people
would have no regard for God ; event-
ually cast off all fear and restraint ; and
judgment without mercy would strip us
of our national prestige and position.
When utterly taken away no bow could
defend us, and no battle save us.


HOMILETICS.
A Cast orr PxorLe.—Verses 8, 9.


The third judgment is the most severe of all. Lo-ammi, not my people.
God ceases to compassionate the rebellious tribes, the state of rejection ensues,


and they are no longer “ my people,” Jehovah will not belong to them. “TI will
not be your God.” Notice the gradual steps to this result.
1. Fellowship with God is interrupted. God was the God of


Israel, but they did not own him as such—did not worship him, but
committed whoredom. The service of Jehovah was irksome. Idolatry weaned
their hearts from him, and they neglected religious privileges and despised re-
ligious teaching. Neglect of public worship and private devotion, contempt
for the ordinances of the gospel, any wilful interruptions of communion with
God, are signs of declension and steps to utter abandonment of God. II.
‘ The Covenant relation is dissolved. Israel would not have God, and God
would have nothing to do with them ; would not be to them what he had been,
and what they vainly expected he would be. They deprived themselves of his
love and mercy, of his providence and protection. Many despise God and
contemn his laws. They despise the authority of the Father, the death of the
Son, and the influence of the Spirit. They disregard every office they sustain,


12 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. {cHar. L








and dishonour every relation they bear to us. They break from their allegiance,
and live alienated from God by wicked works. They are ‘without God in
the world.” To be without food and shelter is sad enough ; to be without friends
and supporters is sadder still; but to be without God, the sublimest being, the
greatest. good, is the real and awful condition of those whom God disowns.
III. Utter rejection results. ‘Not my people.” Forget God, and you will
depart from him. Cast off God, and he will forsake you for ever (2 Chron. xv. 2).
When God deserts in providence, and withholds his grace in Christ, men are


doomed to be cut off from hope here, and eternal life hereafter.


“T will not be


your God,” describe their dreadful condition ; 1. Disowned, 2. Disinherited, and


3. Cursed.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Not be your God. 1. In the exigen-
cies of life; to supply your need. 2.
In the providences of life; to guide
your steps. 3. In the end of life; at
the solemn hour of death. Continuance
in sin after once smiting will bring
greater judgment upon nations, churches,
and individuals. No limits must be
set to God’s mercy, yet it often happens
when God contends with nations that
they prove so obstinate in sin, so incess-
ant in departing from God, that nothing
but rejection ends it fora time. ‘The
same is seen in individuals. God often
first chastens them lightly, then more
heavilv, and brings them down in their
imiyuities; but if they still harden
themselves, he withdraws both his chas-
tisements and his grace, so that the sinner
even prospers in this world, but, re-
maining finally impenitent, is cast off for
ever ” © Pusey].

The Three Judgments.
warnings to the impenitent. 2. Three
opportunities of repentance. 3. Three
degrees of chastisement—or, The Judg-


1. Three


ments of God. 1, Gradual in their
manifestation. 2. Intenser in their
degree. 3. Corrective in their design.
4, Suspended in their operations. 5.
Certain in their event. 6. Destructive
in their consequence.

A cast-of people. 1. Not a privi-
leged people, do not belong to ‘the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the covenants of promise.” 2. Not
a pitied people, destitute of mercy and
grace to help, exposed to wrath, and in
danger of perishing. 3. Not a people
at all, lacking everything which makes
a people, spiritually dead. God’s people
the only real people, the only persons
worthy to be called a people.

Ver. 4—10 may be taken as A graphic
picture of family life. 1. The mother’s
life a life of apostasy from God. 2.
The father’s life a life of service for
God. 3. The children’s lives lives of
judgments from God. What a differ-
ence in the moral character, spiritual
condition, and future destiny in the
same family.


HOMILETICS.
Tas Goop True comine.— Verses 10, 11; ch. iL 1.
Though excluded from the love of God, Israel was not always to be so. The hand


which wounds will heal, and mercy rejoiceth against judgment.


The spiritual


Israel, the Gentiles as well as Jews, shall be restored to God and become numerous


as the sand (Gen. xxxii. 12; Rom. ix. 25, 26).


Light springs out of darkness,


and life out of death. Promise of blessings follows threat of punishments, and a
glorious future opens out to the penitent believer.


I. Israel shall be increased in number.
the source of all increase in families, churches, and nations.
circumstances, do not account for increase.


1. This increase from God. God
Health, favourable
Modern calculations must not be


applied. God who multiplied Irvael in Egypt by special miracle increases the


CHAP. 1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 13








number of his people. ‘TI will increase them with men like a flock.” 2.
This inerease is innumerable “as the sand of the sea.” It is a law of nature, e
rule of providence, to promote growth from small beginnings. The oak fron
an acorn. A Syrian ready to perish became a great and populous nation, Deut,
xxvl. 5. God’s people, few in number at present, shall be increased to “a
multitude which no man can number.” “A little one shall become a thousand,
and a small one a strong nation ; I the Lord will hasten it in his time.” 3. This
imerease notwithstanding persecution and sorrow. God’s people often severely
persecuted and oppressed ; their number diminished ; but God replaces things
temporal by things spiritual, outward gifts by inward graces, and restores four-
fold what he takes away. The Church can never be crushed by force. Omni-
potence defends her, and the purpose of God will never be frustrated. “Israel
shall be as the sand,” “it shall come to pass.” II. Israel shall be restored to
spiritual dignity. 1. They shall be restored to right relation to God. “ The sons
of the living God.” This the goal of their Divine calling, but from this relation
they had fallen. The external relation only a faint emblem of the spiritual.
Not merely a people, but the people, the subjects, the sons of the living
God. God owns his people, they are reconciled to him, and possess the
spirit of adoption, whereby they say, Abba, Father. This is their unspeakable joy
now, but is only a foretaste of what they shall be (1 John iii. 2). 2. This restor-
ation tis by a method least expected. “In the place where it was said, Ye are not
my people,” &c. Mercy when judgment is expected, love beyond description
and degree. Love without a parallel and example. Love to the sinful, restoration
to the fallen. The place of rejection, the place of redemption ; in the place where
there was nothing good and encouraging, there shall be a change for the better—a
people shall be formed, increase given, and a nation gathered together under the
benediction and protection of God. III. Israel shall be united under one
government. “The children of Israel shall be gathered together and appoint
themselves one head.” 1. United under one head. This head not the pope, nor
Zerubbabel as chief, nor Joshua as priest. Christ, the head of the Church, shall
be the head of every man. He, “the one King, shall be the King to them all”
(Ezek. xxxiv. 23). Men may gather together into societies and creeds, but no
true unity, no real allegiance, except in Christ. He gathers together by his word
and love the children of God which are scattered abroad (John xi. 52). 2. United
hy Divine influence. “They shall be gathered.” God only knows where, and
how, to find his people. He follows them in their wanderings, restores them
when fallen, and leads them into green pastures, and beside the still waters.
_ Men are drawn to Christ, disposed to join together, and made willing in the day
wf his power. 3. United by voluntary consent. We have first the act of God,
without whom we can do nothing, and then follows their own act. “They
appoint themselves one head.” No outward force can constrain. If we do not
act willingly, there can be no friendship and loyalty. God’s service is a choice, a
free service, ‘“ Choose you this day.” ‘“ Will ye be my disciples?” 4. United in
true love. ‘The children of Judah and the children of Israel,” who lived apart
and at enmity. In the gospel only we have a basis for a common brotherhood
and fraternity ; in Christ only have we bonds to cement and preserve it. In him
Jew and Gentile, bond and free, live at peace; “no more two nations, neither
shall they be divided into two kingdoms.” “In those days the house of Judah
shall walk with the house of Israel” (Jer. iii. 18), ‘Ephraim shall not envy
Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim” (Is. xi. 12, 13). 5. United in great
joy. Taking ver. 1 in chap. ii. in connection with these, we have a declaration of
joy. Those who called the children of the pyophet not my people, and unfavoured,
are now to call them the opposite names, the son to his brethren, the daughter to
her sisters: or the people who have obtained mercy are summoned to salute one
another with the new name and new digr“ty. Those who have obtained mercy


14 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [CHAP. 1


may rejoice, and rejo'ce in God. This privilege is insured to them. They must
cherish mutual love among themselves, encourage one another in trouble, and
rejoice together in hope. God’s blessings must be commended to others. God's
family is the only happy family. They “sing unto him a new song.” 6. United
in great glory. “They shall come up out of the land.” They shall be delivered
from captivity, and led into the land of promise; rise up and march forth to
victory, and be re-instated in splendour and power. Egypt is a type of heathen
lands into which Israel is driven; Canaan a type of the land of the Lord; the
guidance of Israel through the wilderness, and their deliverance from captivity, a
figurative representation of re-union with God, and restoration to full enjoyment
of salvation. ‘Great shall be the day of Jezreel.” This grand picture has not
yet been realized ; but under the leadership of the Messiah the destiny of the
human race shall be accomplished. ‘This seed is now sown,” says Matt. Henry, “in
the earth and buried in the clods, but great shall be its day when the harvest


comes.”


Look joyfully, pray continually, and labour earnestly for that day when


God shail sow and give the full increase of the Redeemer’s work (John xii. 24).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 10. Places of sorrow, places of
joy. Where the fathers are cast off for
unbelief, the children shall there be
restored in mercy—places of death, places
of resurrection.

The living God. “The world has
abounded with dead gods; there is but
one living God. He is the living one. He
is life, the primal fount of all existence.
Christ calls him the living Father.
As the living Father sent me, I live in
the Father, so he that eateth with me
shall live by me” [Dr Thomas]. If we
expect God to be a living God to us, it
becomes us not to have dead hearts in
his service. If God be active for our
good, let us be active for his honour
[Burroughs].

Sons of the living God. 1. A
unique relation. 2. A distinguished
privilege. 3. A blessed prospect.

One Head, ver. 11. Saints are said
to appoint Christ their head, and indeed
to set the crown upon his head (Cant.
iii, 11), when they choose him and em-
brace him for their sovereign, when with


ILLUSTRATIONS


Our Age and Work, ver.1. Every
great man is the son of his age, but not
its pupil [Guesses at Truth]. The
dream, the common mistake, of the
present day, is the belief that a man
cannot be useful and noble without
great endowments and a grand sphere.


highest estimations, most vigorous affec-
tions, and utmost endeavours of un-
feigned obedience, they set him up in
their hearts, and serve him in their
lives | Zrapp].

The Headship of Christ is: 1. The
fulfilment of ancient prophecy. 2. The
bond of connection with God. 3. The
unity of all ranks. 4. The centre and
support of all virtues. He is King of
the Jews, Head of the human race, and
Lord of all creation. When mankind
depart from God, they lose the bond of
unity and of peace. They are divided
then into parties, which contend with
and exterminate each other. But when
these have again united themselves with
the Lord, the unity of the members is
restored. Therefore there is liberty,
equality, and fraternity only in the
Lord [Lange].

Great days of the Church. The
Sabbath—the resurrection of Christ—
the day of Pentecost—the day of re-
vivals, and the gathering together of all
nations.


TO CHAPTER I.


If we had great opportunities, and great
duties, we could do something in life,
and make a mark after death. The
littleness of our trust is often an excuse
for its neglect, like the servant with one
pound who hid his Lord’s money. But
with moderate powers, in a small sphere,


CHAP. T.,


FOMILETIC COUMENTARY -


HOSEA. 15





sve may be faithful to duty, and secure
vur reward. We must live and act in
the present ; realize what God has given
us to do to-day, and do not look beyond
it. “ David after he had served his own
weneration, by the will of God, fell on
‘leep.”

Mother's conduct. “TI am a mis-
.ionary in my nursery,” once observed
ws Christian mother. “Six pair of little
eyes are daily watching mamma’s looks,
:md listening to her words, and I wish
ny children never to see in me that
vhich they may not imitate.” “The

nother lives again,” says Smiles, “in
vier children. They unconsciously
xnould themselves after her manner,
ster speech, her conduct, and her method
of life. Her habits become theirs, and
her character is visibly repeated in
them.”

Retribution, ver. 4,5. That God is
revealed in nature as a God of retribu-
tion, the writings of the heathen
abundantly show. The attribute of
retributive justice they made a separate
deity, whose conclusions and awards
would be full and perfect only in the
future world. They gathered this, jirst,
from the admonitions of conscience
within them ; second, from those judg-
ments of God, from time to time falling
upon mortals, so extreme and awful,
that even the most darkened minds
were compelled to interpret them as
God’s testimony, both of his wrath
against sin, and his determination to
punish it. But by far the most re-
markable of these judgments are related
in the Scriptures ; and the sacred writer
adds to the enumeration of them, that
they happened as examples, and are to
be regarded as proving this great truth,
that God is reserving the unjust to the
day of judgment to be punished. God’s
judgments awaken men’s conscience and
set it powerfully at work. They reveal
a God who can and will punish sin
[Cheever].

Judgment and Mercy, ver. 6—9.
The changes of providence are not the
tricks of fortune. Empires rise and fall
at God’s bidding. A dungeon here, and
there a throne, his will assigns. Assyria


yields to Babylon, and Babylon to the


Medes. Kings are but puppets in his
hand ; they serve his purpose when they
rise and when they fall. A certain
author [Timbs] has issued a work called
“ Historic Ninepins,” a fit name of scorn
for all the great ones of the earth. God
only is: all power belongs to him; all
else is shadow, coming and going, un-
substantial, misty, dream-like [Spur-
geon).
Here he exalts neglected worms
To sceptres and a crown ;


Anon the following, page he turns
And treads the monarch down.


Mercy. In the reign of the first Napo-
leon, there was an insurrection at Paris,
One of the ring-leaders was brought
before the Emperor; and as this was his
second offence against the government, he
wassentenced to be transported. The day
after the trial, it was told Napoleon
that the child of the convicted man was
waiting to see him. “ Bring her in,”
said Napoleon ; and a tearful, trembling
little girl, on being led in, cast herself
at his feet and implored him to have
mercy on her father. ‘‘ My child,” said
the emperor, touched by her distress,
“‘this is the second time your father has
been guilty of treason; I cannot save
him.” “Oh, sir!” said the kneeling
child, “it is not justice we want, but
mercy and pardon.” Napoleon, much
moved, raised the girl to her feet, and
said, “ For your sake I will release your
father.” We deserve judgment, but
our great want from the Lord our God
is mercy. “I will have mercy” [ Ameri-
can Paper).

Free as the sun that shineth, and
gilds the mountain’s brow, and makes
glad the valleys, without fee or reward,
so free is the mercy of God to every
needy sinner. Free as the air which
belts the earth, and penetrates the
peasant’s cottage, as well as the royal
palace, without purchase or premium,
so free is the mercy of God in Christ.


_It tarrieth not for thee; it cometh to


thee as thou art. It waylayeth thee in
love: it meeteth thee in tenderness
[Spurgeon].

Forsaken, ver. 8, 9. To be forsaken
of God implies utter loneliness, utter
helplessness, utter friendlessness, utter


16 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


hopelessness,
[Spurgeon].

Future increase, ver. 10, 11.  Pro-
phecy predicts a bright and blessed
future. Everything in the conditions of
the human mind and of universal society
indicates a coming change, a glorious
transformation. The nations are looking
and yearning for their redemption. The
world must be subject to Christ. Every
knee must bow to him, and every
tongue confess thas he is Lord. His


and unutterable agony





(cpap. IX.


—


name is the only perfect symbol of
freedom and life. Under his love and
reign every fetter of mind shall be
broken; the heart shall be purified,
social happiness will be diffused, order
and harmony will be restored, and the
whole race be again bound in one grand
unity. Heaven will be reflected on
earth, and earth will be wedded to
heaven. God shall descend and dwell
with men, and men shall become the
sons, and rise into the life of God.


@





CHAPTER II.


CrivicaL Nores.—2, Plead] Jehovah makes the demand, urges individual Israelites to reason
with the mother, i. e. the nation viewed as one. ‘The children were seduced, in danger of punish-
ment, and as penitents must protest against her conduct. Wife] Forfeited all claims to my protection.
Sight] Lit. from her face, the seat of modesty and shame (Jer. ili, 8; vi. 15). “ The eyes are windows
through which death, i. e. lawless desire, enters into the soul, and takes it captive” [Pusey]. 8. Strip}
Nudity, the ancient punishment of an adulteress (Ezek. xvi. 37). Set] Lit. fix her as a gazing-stock,
in a state of helplessness and misery. Wilderness] Reduced to want; an outward type of inward
distress (Jer. ii, 6). 4, Children] inherit the nature, and exposed to the judgment, of their mother.
Many imagine because free from the guilt and stain of sin they will not share its punishment. 5,
Done shamefully] Heb. to practise shame (2 Sam, xix. 5). “She made shameful everything
which she could make shameful—her acts, her children, and herself’’ [Pusey]. The reproach of the
mother should rouse the sons from spiritual apathy. Lovers] Idols and idolatrous nations whose
alliance they courted, and to whom they ascribed the gifts of life, bread and water (Jer. xliv. 17); a
picture of life estranged from God. 6, Hedge and make] Build @ wail, a double enclosure of
stones and thorns. In the Kast cattle are fenced with thorns and closes. God with determined pur-
pose will interpose between Israel and her idols. Behold, I will hedge] Exile and distress,
and the inability of her gods to help, would prove the folly of her conduct (Job xix. 18; Lam. iii.
7—9). 7. Follow after and seek] In eager pursuit and diligent search. ‘“ They express together a
pursuit, whose minuteness is net hindered by its vehemence, nor its extent and wideness by its
exactness. She shall seek far and wide, ménutely and carefully, everywhere and in all things, and
shall fail in all” (Pasey]. Not find] deliverance from calamity. 8. Not know] Wilful ignorance
aud ingratitude, for she was taught by the law and the providence of God. Prepared] Made and
mended images of Baal, and devoted them to the support and extension of idolatry, 9. Return] As
if absent from men when they abuse his gifts: turn from love 40 displeasure, trom bestowing
bounties to withholding them. Recover] Because ““Z’’ emphatic, the give: not acknowledged.
Nakedness} The result of gifts withheld. Take away] by dearth and unfruitful seasons, vermin,
judgments, &c. 10. Discover her lewdness] Lit. uncover her shame. Sin decked out in gaudy
colours, and covered with showy masks, shall be stripped and exposed to public shame. None can
avert the threatened punishment. 11, Feast days] and festivals retained in worship should cease
because abused. 12, Vines and fig-trees] Esteemed rewards, wages of prostitution (Deut. xxiii.
19; Isa. xxiii. 17); the choicest produce of earth, denoting sustenance and prosperity, would be
destroyed by Assyria (ch. ix. 4,5). 14, Therefore] Nevertheless a promise of conversion (ver. 14—17) ;
and assurance of renewed covenant (ver. 18—23). Misery draws mercy. Allure] in a friendly sense ;
decoy My words, persuade by love. God outbids the idols and displays his attractive grace. Wilder-
ness | ‘he way from.Egypt to Canaan a type of temporal want and distress, needful discipline, and
miraculous deliverance. Solitude leads to enjoyment and fellowship with God. Speak comfortably |
Lit. to her heart in friendly feeling; to mitigate her grief and heal her wounds, 15. Achor] Where
Achan troubled Israel (Josh, vii. 11—16); the borders of Canaan and the place of cleansing and
success. A door of hope] Hope dawned in despair, and sorrow turned into joy. Sing] When
God speaks comfortably the Church responds gratefully, like Israel at the Red Sea (Ex. xv.; cf.


CHAP. I1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 17





times; the re-established Jews at friends with the heathen nations. Bow] War extinguisied,
and its instruments destroyed (Ps. xlvi. 9; J!zck. xxxix. 9, 10). 19. Betroth] Make a new
covenant with Jew and Gentile; three times repeated. God not only forgives, but espouses
afresh and for ever. In right] Injustice to himself and his law; by purifying from sin (Is. i,
27). In judgment] Vindicating his cause, and showing right from wrong. 20, In faithfulness]
(Ps. exi. 9; John xili. 1.) Shalt know] experimentally and be saved; the consequence of the union,
not mere acknowledgment of God, but a taste of his love. 21. I will hear] The heavens pray to
God, to give to earth its fertility ; tne earth and all creatures desire to satisfy the wants of God’s
people ; God is no longer scattering, but providing and planting. 22 Jez. —| theseed of God. 23.
Will sow] A promise antithetic to the threat (Deut. xxviii. 23; Lev. xxvi. 19); expressive of pro-
digious converts and innumerable blessings on the earth (Rom. xi. 12—15). The children now
change names to show mercy and prove restoration. ‘¢ And with tenderness I will cherish her that
had been Lo-Ruhamah (the not-beloved), and I will say to ZLo-Ammi (to the no-people-oi-mine),
Ammi (my own people) art thou ; and he shall say, My God” [ Horsley].

This chapter is an enlargement and application of the first, the symbol of the one is expounded by
the other. The sinful conduct of the nation is condemned, punishment is threatened, but salvation
is proclaimed in promise of restitution and the blessings of peace and subsistence. The remnant
among Israel, for whose sake God preserved a corrupt people, must prove living witnesses for him,
testify to his goodness and grace, and urge others to turn to Jehovah. The penitent must plead
with the impenitent, the converted with the unconverted, and the children with the parents.


HOMILETICS.


Finiau Expostuiation.— Verses 1—5.


The mother is the representative of the nation, of the ungodly in all nations and
families. The sons must plead with them. They are involved in judgments, left
orphans, and without protection, by the conduct of their mother.

I. Charge her with dissolution of the Marriage Contract. ‘She is not my
wife.” A spiritual union was formed between God and his people, under terms of
great endearment and oneness. But she was no longer united to God by faith and
love, and God would own her no longer. Churches and individuals who give them-
selves to God must not decline in love. This will forfeit the honour, the protection
of God, and his covenant relation ; provoke him to anger, and lead to divorcement.
How touching is the rebuke uttered by the complaint, Thou no longer lovest me!
_ “She is not my wife, I am not her husband!” The history of the Church is a sad
commentary upon these words. The Church at Ephesus was not wanting in purity
of doctrine, nor in severity of discipline. The Lord disclosed the heart and pub-
lished the fault. “Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast
left thy first love.” II. Urge her to put away Sin. The idolatry is described as
whoredom and adultery ; a breach of fidelity which Israel owed to God ; an act of
apostasy from God; more culpable than heathenish idolatry and superstitions. 1.
A public sin. Israel, like a barefaced harlot, displayed her sins in pvblic before
men. Publicity tempts the weak, taints the innocent, and leads to ruin. Wicked-
ness like this is the most dissolute, and its woe will be the most intense. Some sin
secretly, but others proclaim their sin to the world—they glory in their shame. 2.
A shameful sin. The face and the breasts are those parts of the body which dis-
play want of chastity, and depict boldness and shamelessness. Many neither shame
nor blush at their vice. Boldness without confession of wrong, wickedness done
with desire of recognition, impudence in sin, will lead to hardness of heart. Those
who will not blush will soon be unable to blush. ‘‘ Were they ashamed when they
had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could
they blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall.” ITI. Warn her of
Danger. Sin always involves risk, and brings its consequences upon ourselves and
others. Every one is in duty bound, in his house, among his friends and relations,
and in his country, to labour for the happiness and good of all, to check the wicked-
ness and ward off the dangers by which he is surrounded. 1. She will expose
herself. “ Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was born,” &c.
(a) Fospose herself to nakedness and helplessness. Israe) taken when weak and

2


18 _ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [ CHAP, IL


few in number ; trained, fed, and clothed by God like a little child ; married to God,
and adorned as a bride; should now be stripped, deprived of every ornament, as an
adulterous wife ; of all temporal and spiritual blessings as a people ; and left naked
and helpless, a gazing-stock to others. When God ceases to care and provide fora
people, withholds the gifts of nature and of grace, they will become defiled by sin,
cast out and loathsome. Like Adam and Eve, they will lose their innocence, and
learn their nakedness. Divine judgments strip men of natural defence, family
honour, and leave them “naked unto their shame amongst their enemies”
(Ex. xxii. 25). (b) Expose herself to want and distress. ‘“ Make her as a wilder-
ness, and set her like a dry land.” Incursions and hostilities of the enemy could
lay her waste as a wilderness ; or put her in great straits and distress, as in the
desert when they came out of Egypt. Idolatry desolates the land and brings the
devouring sword. She would be like a dry land, destitute of food and the main-
tenance of life. Well-watered gardens become deserts through sin. The outward
is a type of the inward. ‘Mind hath its deserts no less than Region,” says
Bacon. “Everything that I love,” said Napoleon, “everything that belongs to
me, is stricken, Heaven and mankind unite to afflict me.” The soul of the
sinner is desolate and unfruitful in the ways and works of God; devoid of God’s
presence and blessing; unrelieved by green pastures and living rills. “Your
house is left unto you desolate,” are words which describe the doom of all with-
out Christ. Hungry and thirsty, they are not satisfied, but perish like a traveller
in want. ‘Slay her with thirst.” 2. She would endanger her children. “I
will not have mercy «pon her children”—children of whoredom inheriting the
nature and suffering from the conduct of their mother. There is no security in
sin. The rising generation do not escape. Parents entail a curse upon their
offspring, and individuals are involved in national calamities. As good is dif-
fused on every hand, so evil has its consequences ; consequences which have their
influences, results themselves pregnant with other results, in endless succession.
Our endeavour should be to guard ourselves from the evil of others, and guard
against detriment from our own acts. ‘This man perished not alone in his
iniquity.” IV. Reprove her for Folly. She had acted shamefully in word and
deed, towards herself and her children. The course of sin is a course of shame.
The sinner forgets his best friend, and forsakes his own mercy. ‘‘ What fruit had
ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed?” The conduct of Israel was
an affront to God and a reproach to man. To fall down to any image, ancient or
modern, is to turn our glory intoshame. This was—l. An ungrateful sin. God
set before them his law and judgments, promised blessings for obedience, and had
given them the necessities and the luxuries of life; “more than corn, wine, and
oil” (Ps. iv. 7) ; but they claimed these gifts as their own; “my bread and my
water ;” or ascribed them to the lovers they followed. Men care for the things of
time and sense, lands, houses, and life, and forget the claims, the prior right of
God. These things are only lent us, must not be held upon wrong tenure and made
our gods, “Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness.” 2. An ag-
gravated sin. Amid Divine chastisement Israel encouraged herself in idolatry.
She called the objects of her choice “lovers,” and drew others to follow her in pur-
suit. She waits not for invitation and allurement, but eager and unbidden, contrary
to natural feeling and covenant pledge, she cries, ‘I will go.” She was obstinate
in pursuit, and avowed her determination. Abuse is added to ingratitude ; God is
forsaken for the pleasures of life, and men attribute present happiness and pros-
perity to sin, rather than to his goodness and fort arance. Take heed lest ye be
fattened and fitted for slaughter. Aggravated sin ripens for judgment. He that
despises God’s reproof “shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.”
3. A delusive sin. Idols do not give the necessities and enjoyments of life. God
alone can fill men’s “ hearts with food and gladness” (Acts xiv. 17). The heathens
had a goddess of corn and gods of wine from whom they expected these gifts ; sq


CHAP, II.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 19





men now make their gods, and fancy that these gods will help them. They delude
themselves by error and folly ; make things outside of God their lovers ; and deify
their talents or the laws of nature. We belong to God, and all things are at his
disposal. If we do not trust in him, we “ observe lying vanities.” Man must have
a god, and if he will not love and serve the true and living God, he makes a fool
of himself, and pays homage to a lie and a delusion. ‘“ As they did not like to re-
tain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1 may be taken as (in last
chapter), 1. A declaration of joy.


shame and danger. 3. Leaves them
helpless and distressed. The sinner is


Wrath passed away and mercy re-
membered. 2. A declaration of Chris-
tian eaperience. (a) To encourage others,
(}) Lo glorify God. God’s grace is magni-
tied ; God’s word is proved to be faith-
ful; God’s name made known, and others
are induced to repent and trust in him.
“Say ye to your brethren, Ammi.” 3.
An exhortation to the converted to plead
with the unconverted. The few faithful
in faithless Israel must plead with others.
Those who know God must expostulate
with those who do not know him;
children with parents; relatives with
relatives. (a) This a natural order.
We naturally feel for friends and rela-
tives. We may not forget others, but
we begin at home. Andrew was ac-
quainted with Jesus and related to Peter.
“He first findeth his own _ brother
Simon.” Paul could wish himself ac-
cursed for his kindred in the flesh (Rom.
ix. 3). (b) This a Divine order, “Go
home to thy friends, and tell them how
great things the Lord hath done for
thee” (Mark v.19). “ Let them (chil-
dren) learn first to show piety at home”
(1 Tim. v. 4). (c) This the most suc-
cessful order. We havegreater sympathy
for friends, more love to our own, than
others. They are more likely to be
influenced and persuaded by us than
others. “Plead with your mother,
plead” earnestly, faithfully, and continu-


cat
er. 3. The folly of sn. 1. It strips
men of blessings. 2. Exposes them to


naked ; bereft of grace, love, and protec-
tion ; and exposed to famine and peril.
A Christian Church which throws off
the ornaments of Divine grace and
Divine ordinances will be stripped of
outward privileges—spiritual gifts de-
spised will lead to withdrawal of tem-
poral gifts.?

Ver. 4. Mercy withheld from children,
churches, or nations, is a sad addition to
their trouble. There is nothing to moder-
ate, prevent, or remove their sorrow.

Ver. 5. “J will go.” The infatu-
ation of the sinner, who hardens, em-
boldens himself in sin, and rushes, heed-
less of warnings and judgments, to shame
and destruction. Steps inapostasy from
God. 1. Renouncing obedience. 2.
Loving idols. 3. Ascribing God’s gifts
to idols. 4, Justifying this course from
benefits reveived. “ We too have our
idols, which our natural hearts madly
run after, turning away from God.
Whatever we make our chief good, out-
side of God, is an idol. How apt, more-
over, we are to take God’s gifts, our
food, clothing, comforts, and luxuries,
as if they were our own by some peculiar
right; calling them ‘my bread, my
water, my wool, my flax,’ and to attri-
bute our possession of them to our gold,
our industry, and our talents, making
these our gods” [ Fausset’s Com.|. God
is the real giver of all temporal and
spiritual blessings. If, therefore, thou
hast any want, seek its supply from
God [Lange].?


1 “Sin is a wasting plague to souls, countries, and enjoyments, for so is imported in the words,


~ and ‘make her asa wilderness,’ ”? &c, [Hutcheson].


2 “ As it is a great sin to depart from God and his true worship, so especially is it a shameful way
of departing from him when men’s ends are so low and base that they will follow any way of religion


for interest and advantage, and account the thriving way best.


Israel thought she throve best in


«1d because of her idolatry, ‘they give me my bread,’ ’ &c. [Hutcheson].


20 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. Ib





HOMILETICS.


Toe UnsvucorssruL Pursuit.— Verses 6, 7.


Though Israel is dishonoured and fallen, she is not left to herself. God’s mercy
yearns over and seeks to check her in sin and recall her to himself. God even now
has not written a bill of divorcement, nor cast away the people whom he did fore-
know. Through eighteen hundred years they have been wandering without a
dwelling-place and a temple; but the day will come, when she will “no more be
termed Forsaken,” nor “the land be termed Desolate; but she will be called
Hephzi-bah and the land Beulah.” Men are prone to wander. They are disap-
pointed in their wanderings, and God rouses, instructs, and restores his backsliding

eople.
Z r A pursuit after wrong objects. Man is a creature of strong affections. His
feelings cling round the objects of his choice like ivy round a tree. Through sin
these affections are misplaced. He loves the things which he should hate, and
hates the things which he should love; forsakes the true God, and pursues lovers
ef his own. He must love, he will worship, something ; “that I may win” is the
desire of every soul. Wealth, honour, position, and learning are eagerly sought,
loved for their own sake and for the sake of what they are thought to give. Thus
men are seeking happiness where it cannot be found ; committing two evils, forsak-
ing the fountain of living waters, and hewing out cisterns for themselves, broken
cisterns which will hold no water. ‘ Who will show us any good?” is the cry of
the many. “ Lord, lift thou upon us the light of thy countenance,” is the prayer of
the few. II. A pursuit with intense anxiety. Man’s spiritual desires are in-
satiable, yet ever seek gratification. They forbid him to rest, and compel him to
seek supply. Inward sense of want, incapacity for alliance with sin, and instinctive
longing for God, the “ first good, first perfect, and first fair”—of whom all created
beauty and good are mere shadows—make men restless and discontented. But in-
stead of lifting the soul to God, they look to the creature for satisfaction ; “ seek”
and “follow after” in eager pursuit of what they love ; labour harder in sin, and
seeking pleasure, than in serving God. They weary themselves in pursuit, rendered
more eager by thorn-hedges and hindrances. Vexation and disappointment excite
to desperate tenacity ; affliction and remorse are often no check to the sinner ;
fuel is added to the fire, and with renewed ardour onward he goes to ruin and
despair. “I will go after my lovers.” The impenitent struggle on after that
which God is taking from them, and will not give up, until the pursuit is found
hopeless and exhaustive, and God in preserving mercy brings him back. “Turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?” III.
A pursuit under Divine restraint. God governs the world, and seeks the good
of his creatures. The way of transgressors is rendered hard “through much tribu-
lation.” Itis a warfare against conscience, reason, and revelation. In consciousness
of guilt we may discern our relationship to God. The trouble and anguish of
spirit springing from this consciousness, “the inward unrest which sometimes
seizes the slave of sin are proofs that he has not quite broken away from God.”
God works within by his Spirit and without by his providences. Hedges and walls
are fixed up to restrain men in sin. 1. The restraints of God’s providence are
various tn their nature. God sought to cut off Israel from idolatry by solitude and
affliction. Like athorn-hedge, afiliction is painful. ‘ No chastening for the present
seemeth to be joyous, but grievous.” Conscience, the Divine officer, warns and
checks the sinner. Disappointments in pursuits, pains attending pleasures, Divine
judgments, and special manifestations, turn men from their purpose. Saul was
overcome by light from heaven; Balaam was met by an angel, and David by
Abigail (1 Sam. xxv. 32). 2. The restraints of God’s providence are merciful in
their design, “ that she shall not find her paths.” (a) Giver to withdraw men from


CHAP. 1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 21


sinful pursuits. ‘She shall not overtake them; and she shall seek them, but shall
not find them.” () Given to restore men to God. ‘Then shall she say, I will go
and return.” Strong barriers and painful providences are not sufficient. If God
did not mercifully interfere we should all go astray. Let us repent of sin, be
thankful for correction, and admire the wondrous grace of God. “ Before I was
afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word.” IV. A pursuit ending
in failure. “She shall not overtake” what she follows; “she shall not find”
what she seeks. Failure and disappointment after all her eagerness and eftort !
Egypt and Assyria were trusted in vain. Worldly alliances were of no service ;
did not give the anticipated deliverance. Idols were impotent; foreign nations
were a broken reed, a source of sorrow and bitterness of spirit. Israel was obliged
to confess, “it was better with me than now.” The sinner gains nothing, but loses
everything, by forsaking God. He pursues phantoms of bliss. The pursuit will dis-
gust, and end in failure. ‘‘ Why did the cannon-balls spare me to die in this manner?
I am no longer the Great Napoleon. How fallen and disappointed I am!” cried
Napoleon in his latter e7.d. Nothing can take the place of God—nothing can satisfy
but bread. A sinful  e can never give peace of conscience and peace with God.
The beast may be satisfied with what it finds on earth, for its nature aspires no
higher ; but man is linked to God, longs for him, and cannot be contented without
him. Though the heart once alienated from him turns further away, and moves
not towards him until renewed, yet even in its wandering it retains its nature and
necessities. God is its centre, and it is restless and void till it meets with him
again. Men go here and there, do this and that, in quest of good, as moments
dictate and circumstances call forth, but all in vain. They faint in mind and fail
in hope. God never created man to find rest and happiness in utter rejection of
himself. “Thou madest us for thyself, and our heart is restless until it repose in
thee” [Augustine]. ‘‘ Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread?
and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat
ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.”


Tue Backsiiper’s Way HEDGED up.—Verses 5—7.


Consider the text, and seek to arouse and restore backsliders, who have left their
first love, and may have forsaken the Church of God, given up their profession
and all attendance upon Divine worship.

I. While sinful men are in prosperity they pervert the mercies of God
to their own injury, making them instruments of sin and weapons of war-
fare against God. While Israel enjoyed abundance of temporal comforts
they ascribed all these blessings to false gods. Prosperous sinners make three
great mistakes. At the outset they give their temporal mercies the first place
in their hearts, Business prospers, but they consider not their soul. They
say, “We must live,” but they forget that they must die. Such folly most
shameful, base ingratitude, in one who has known, or professed to have known,
better. One error leads to another, and hence such people hold their temporal
things upon a wrong tenure. Observe how many times the word “my” is found
in the text. “Give me my bread,” &c. They were not hers, but God’s, whe
expressly claims them, and threatens to take them all away (verse 9). The back-
slider once professed himself to be God’s servant; nothing is his now-—houses,
lands, profits, and children, only lent for a season. He is but God’s under-bailiff,
possesses only as tenant-at-will, or as a borrower, holding a loan. Then, further,
backsliders are apt to ascribe their prosperity and their mercies to their sins. I
have even heard one say, “ Ever since I gave up a profession of religion I have
made more headway in business than I did before.” Some apostates have boasted,
‘Since I broke through puritanical restraint, and went out into worldly company,
I have been better in spirits, and better in purse than ever J was before.” Thus


82 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. (cnap. Ii





they ascribe the mercies which God has given them to their sins, and wickedly
bow down to their lusts, as Israel did before the golden calf, and cry, ‘‘ These be
thy gods, O Israel!” These things are given to try you, to see how far you will
go, and to what extravagances of ingratitude you will descend. II.-Turn from
the gloomy side, and observe that the Lord interposes adversity in order to
bring back his wandering children. Consider the hindrances which a God of
love puts in the way. You see an unexpected hindrance, for it is placed right in
the man’s way. ‘TI will hedge up thy way ”—it was his way, his habit ; he had
fallen into it, and he meant to keep on; but suddenly he met with an unlooked-
for obstacle. This hedge is placed in your way in different shapes. Business
grows slack ; bad debts multiply ; bankruptcy stares you in the face; and where
you had enough to lavish on pleasure you have not enough to supply your need.
You thought you would live a millionnaire ; more likely now to die a pauper. Or
sudden sickness falls upon a strong healthy person. Possibly the hedge is of other
thorns. The first-born son, the expected heir, the joy of the father’s beart, fails
like a withered flower ; his wife is cut off as a lily snapped from its staik. These
are walls across the way of those whom God ordains to bless. Observe, it has a
very disappointing impediment. The prosperous sinner is stopped when securely
pursuing his way. ‘“‘ Why,” says the man, “if it had not been for that I should
have made a fortune.” “ Why did death come just when my fair girl looked so
lovely, and when my dear boy had grown so engaging? Ah! this is trouble
indeed. ‘To meet with misfortune just when I built that new house, and held my
head so high, and expected to see my daughters so respectably married ; this is
very disappointing.” The man kicks, and though once professed to be a child of
God, he is ready to curse God and die. If he knew the Divine nature, he would
thank God for his troubles on bended knees. What painful hindrances our
heavenly Father often uses. He hedges the sinner’s path, not with rhododendrons
and azaleas, not with roses and laurels, but with thorns—prickly thorns, which
curse the soil and tear the flesh, are God’s instruments of restraint. Furthermore,
the fence is effectual; if the thorn hedge will not suffice, it is written, “I will
make a wall.” Some are so desperate in sin that they break through ordinary
restraints ; then a wall shall be tried, through which there is no breaking, over
which there is no climbing. III. You would think that the sinner would now
stop, but instead of that, according to the text, even though God walls up the
way of sin, men will try to follow it, but this resolve shall be in vain. He is
desperately set on destruction, as though it were to be desired. What a creature is
man, though he knows that sin will be his ruin, yet he hugs it as though it were
his chief mercy ; heaps to himself destruction as though it were gold. If the
righteous were half as intent in seeking after goodness as the wicked are in hunting
sin, how much more active would they be. ‘Truly this love is so strange, that if
we did not see it in ourselves we should wonder at it. It is én you, Christians, as
in the worst of men, and but for Divine mercy you would have plunged on from
bad to worse. IV. Consider that the backslider’s failure is followed by a
blessed result. Observe, here is repentance attended with sorrow. The poor
creature deeply feels to the very soul the wretchedness of her condition. It is an
active repentance. It is not merely “I will return,” but, “I will go and return.”
There is much earnestness in a sinner seeking Christ ; but more, if possible, in a
backslider returning from the error of his ways; for he has not only the guilt of
sin to mourn over, but the double guilt of having despised the Saviour, of having
known the way of righteousness and turned from it. Zhe confession which this
poor soul makes of folly is one which is sustained by the best of reasons. “Then
was it better with me than now.” LBackslider, what have you gained? Have you
gained anything more comfortable than the light of your Father's face? Before,
you had the privilege of going to the throne of grace, you could tell your wants.
before Cod, and spread your sorrows there ; but now you have no throne of grace


CHAP. 11.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY . HOSEA. » $8





to go to. Then you had God’s promises to fall back upon. Once you had com-
munion with Christ. What can the world afford you comparable to this? There
1s no room to entertain a comparison for a moment. Lastly, this repentance was
acceptable. It is not often that a husband is willing to take back his wife when
she has so grossly sinned, as the metaphor here implies; yet God is willing to
receive the sinner, though his sin is even more aggravated. “Return unto me, for
I am married unto thee.” V. Observe that there is an awful contrast to all
this. Some prosper until, like a wide-spread tree, they are cut down and cast into
the fire. There are backeliders who, never having had the root of the matter in
them, go back unto their own ways and continue there for ever. Never trifle with
backsliding. Chosen vesscls, notwithstanding their backslidings, are brought back ;
but, ah! remember that nine out of ten of those who backslide never were God’s
people. You must be born again, and only the man who continues to the end
shall be saved. VI. We conclude with this—is not this subject a very solemn
warning to the people of God? If one man falls, another may. If one professor
turns out to be a hypocrite, another may. There must be the continual keeping
and anointing of the Holy Spirit. No man backslides at once. Do not forsake
the assembling of yourselves together. Wake up your coldness in private prayer.
If love to Christ has grown cold, pray to the Master to inflame your heart again.
Let us trust the Saviour. There is the sinner’s hope; there is the saint’s strength
[Spurgeon].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 6. Subject:—Divine Restraints.
I. These restraints are manifold. “I


difficulty. Bless thyself! Thou hast
cause to how] and wring thy hands, thou


will hedge up thy way with thorns, and
make a wall.” The first metaphor is
from a husbandman who plants a prickly
hedge to prevent cattle from breaking
away. The other from architecture. If
thorns are insufficient, high and mass-
ive walls must be built. 1. There is
the restraint of affliction. When the
wicked purpose some great crime, aftlic-
tion comes, breaks their plans, and
strikes them down. 2. There is the
restraint of public sentiment. Public
opinion, as it gets enlightened and strong,
is a tremendous check to the wicked.
The most daring cower before the public
voice. 3. There is the restraint of con-
sctence. Conscience is a Divine officer
holding the sinner.

IJ. These restraints are necessary. It
is necessary that God should plant
thorny hedges and build massive walls
around the sinner. 1. It is neces-
sary for the sinner himself. Were it
not for these he would go galloping to
perdition. “O, unhappy men,” says
Luther, “when God leaves them to
themselves, and does not resist them in
their lusts. You bless yourseives many
times that in the way of sin you find no


hast the curse of God on thee. A dread-
ful curse to make pleasant the way of
sin.” 2. It is necessary for the
world. What would become of the
world if the wicked were not reined in?
Were it not for restraints the Cesars, the
Alexanders, and the Napoleons would
soon turn it into a Pandemonium.
3. It is necessary for the Church.
Had wicked men their full fling, how
long would the Church last? The flames
of martyrdom would soon blaze to heaven
and consume Zion to ashes. Thank God
for thorny hedges and massive walls,
for all the restraints he puts on sinful
men [The Homilist}.

The Danger of outward Prosperity—
sufferings a specific against apostasy.

Divine Chastisements. 1, Love, their
source. 2. Sorrow, their means. 3.
Good, theirend. “Crosses and obstacles
in an evil course are a great blessing,
and are so to be accounted. . They are
God’s hedges, to keep us from trans-
gressing, to restrain us from wandering
out of the green pastures, to withdraw
man from his purpose (Job xxxiii. 17), to
make the way of sin difficult, that we
may not go on in it, and to keep us


24 e





from it whether we will or not. We
have reason to bless God both for re-
straining grace and for restraining pro-
vidences” [ Matt. Henry].

Ver. 7. The Course of Sin. 1. A
course of labour — unrequited toil—
vexation of spirit and bitter bondage.
Sinners labour harder than saints, and
receive nothing but exhaustion and
fatigue. 2. A course of failure. Loss
of health and peace—all loss and no
gain. 3. The service of God the only
true gain. “It was better with me.”
Godliness is profitable to all things—
body and soul, this world and the next.
Sin suicidal. God’s service real ad-
vantage. Those who embrace God, would
take him up as the best of choices, and
his way as the shortest cut to do well
and to be well: they are sensible of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA


(char. 1.


their own disadvantage in forsaking
him: for so much is imported as the
reason for her return, “for then was it
better with me than now” [ Hutcheson].

I will go and return. 1. The
sinner’s wandering. 2. The sinner’s
penitence. 3. The sinner’s return to God.
“By this text we may gather what true
repentance is: namely, when a sinner
not only confesseth himself guilty and
worthy of punishment, but truly dis-
pleaseth himself and seriously returns
to God. Here we have two essential
parts of true repentance—-namely, con-
trition and conversion ; or humiliation
and reformation. The former is calléd
in Scripture repentance for sin, the latter
repentance from sin: and the one with-
out the other is to no purpose or profit”
[Trapp].


HOMILETICS.
Gop DisHonovrEeD 1n His Girts to Mun.—Verees 8, 9.


Israel is still accused and threatened. God will disgust the idolatrous nation, put
to shame its delusive fancy that all prosperity came from idols, and bring it to an
acknowledgment of dependence upon him. In gross and affected ignorance she
fathered all gifts upon her gods,

Here we have—I. The Gifts of Life bestowed in abuncance. Israel was
greatly blessed with “corn, and wine, and oil,” the fruits of the land.
These productions were the foundation of the nation’s wealth and prosperity,
and the means by which “silver and gold” were multiplied. Money was
superabundant in Solomon’s reign. “The king made silver to be in Jerusalem
as stones” (1 Kings x. 27). Wool and flax for clothing and ornament. God be-
stows necessities and luxuries upon men; honour and position, leaders and genius,
upon nations. The earth yields its increase, and corn and wine, bread and water,
are spread before us in the wilderness. The sun sheds forth its light and heat,
flowers send forth fragrance, and herbs grow for man and beast. All our possessions
and enjoyments come from him. Amid ingratitude, atheism, and vice, life springs
up ever new, food is given as plentifully to sustain it, and joy and blessings are
poured over all existence. God “is kind unto the unthankful and the evil.” He
makes the sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and
on the unjust. II. The Gifts of Life received with ingratitude. ‘She did not
know.” She would not know. It was not a mere weakness or infirmity, but
wilful ignorance. God had taught her by Moses and the prophets. In their feasts
and offerings of first-fruits, in their eventful history and the wonders of providence,
the goodness of God was impressed upon their minds. But when the heart is not
touched, the memory will fail. The ingratitude of man to man is base. Pitt was
soured in temper by the ingratitude which he experienced. ‘All the ; eers whom
he had made deserted him,” says a writer, “and half of those whom he had served
returned his kindness by going over to his enemies.” Divine favours are frozen by
human ingratitude and turned intoa cause of rebellion. There was no excuse for Israel,
and none for men now. 1. Ignorant of the Divine source from whence they come.
“Tgavehercorn.” “God is the giver of every gcod and perfect gift.” “A man car


cuar. 1.| HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 25





receive nothing except it be given him from heaven.” But men do not acknowledge
God ; attribute their comforts to secondary causes, their own skill, their fellow-men, or
“good luck.” The ox knows its owner, and the ass his master’s crib, and both are
grateful for help: but intelligent beings receive gifts from God, and hoard up for
posterity ; forget their relation, and pay no dues to their benefactor; but live in
known sin and wilful disregard of his love. What tables are spread for us without
grace before meat or gratitude after. 2. Ignorant of the benevolent purpose for
which they are sent. Grass for cattle, corn and wine to gladden human hearts,
flax and wool to clothe and beautify human bodies, and all things richly to enjoy.
God has never left “ himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.” But
we claim his bounties as our own, forget the end for which they are bestowed, and
under a formal and false religion, employ them for selfish and unworthy ends.
“ Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering ; not
knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?” III. The Gifts
of Life basely abused. Israel first made golden calves, then mended or made
images of Baal with the gold and silver which God had given them. God’s gifts
were turned into human idols, worshipped by men’s own hands, and turned into
food for sinful lusts. In modern idolatry God’s blessings are abused and employed
to maintain and spread the worship of Baal and Bacchus. Gold and silver, houses
and land, children and earthly comforts, take the place of God; all are taken as our
special right, attributed to our intellect and industry, and employed in the service
of idolatry. In providence God is displaced by fortune or fate ; in business talent
and tact is all; in pursuit of pleasure and gain, the heart and understanding, the
soul and body, are wholly devoted to unworthy objects. ‘‘ Covetousness is idolatry.”
Men are “lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God.” Christians are cautioned
against “the worship of angels,” and of some it is said “ their god is their belly.”
Self-will, excessive thirst of aggrandizement, love of applause, undue veneration
of creatures, greedy indulgence in lust and animal appetite, and inordinate attach-
ments of every kind, are dishonouring to God and injurious to man, prove a
tendency to depart from God, and display the actual and continual forgetting of
God’s claims, who says to each individual person, “I am the Lord thy God.”
“Thou shalt have no other god before me.” IV. The Gifts of Life justly withheld.
“Therefore will I return and take away my corn.” These things were God’s, not
theirs—they were only stewards in trust. He reserves all power to himself, and
retains supreme authority over men. If they do not give him his due, unjustly
withhold their gratitude and homage, then he will claim his own and take from
them what he bestowed for their welfare. God is the sole proprietor, has incontest-
able right, and to him -we must give an account. 1. Gifts abused will be taken
away from men. Ingratitude and sinful appropriation will rob us of enjoyments
and necessities of life. Idleness and neglect will forfeit all reward.. Take from him
that which he hath (Luke viii. 18; xix. 24, 26). Keeping, hiding our talents, and
non-employment of our time will bring—(a) Divine denunciation, (6) Divine de.
privation, and (c) Divine displeasure. 2. Gifts abused will be taken avay from men
unexpectedly. ‘In the time thereof,” and “in the season thereof.” Just when
they expect them and when men think they are sure of them. God will blast the
harvest when it is ready for reaping. The meat shall be taken from their mouths
(Joel i. 16); drunkards will awake and weep (ver. 5, 11); and husbandmen howl.
In the fulness of sufficiency men are put into straits (Job xx. 22, 23); and when
they are just about to realize their hopes they will be disappointed. Unseasonable
weather, wicked men, and mysterious providences snatch away abused mercies.
This punishment is more signal and severe than gradual decay or long-looked for
visitation. It is not the work of chance, but a solemn, significant judgment ot Gad
which leaves the sinner in want and distress, in shame and utter destitution.


36 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


(CHAP. It


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 8. Ignorance of God. 1. Nega-
tive, inexcusable. 2. Affected, sinful.
3. Wilful, hopeless. “ There remaineth
no sacrifice if we sin wilfully,” &c.

Ingratitude. 1. Its source, wilful
ignorance. 2. Its fruit, (a) forgetful-
ness of Divine benefits, (b) worship of
idols — coarse and refined. 3. Its
punishment, withdrawal of all gifts, re-
sulting in poverty and distress. “Were
men but sensible of what God doth for
them every day and hour, they could
not in equity and common ingenuity
serve him as they do. He preserveth
and provideth for us all; lays us down
and takes us up, commanding the best
of creatures to cater for us (Hos. ii. 21),
and to bring us in the best of best for
our subsistence (Ps. viii.). Every good
gift and perfect, temporal, spiritual, and
eternal, cometh from the Father of
lights (Jas. i. 17), as naturally and as
constantly as light doth from the sun,
or water from the sea. Let us therefore


imitate those lights of heaven and rivers
of earth, do all the good we can with
those good things, corn, wine, silver and
gold, &c., which God hath given us, and
then reflect back towards and return ali
the glory and praise unto the sun of our
righteousness and the sea of our salva-
tion. Let us ever send back (as the
beams of the moon and stars return to
the face of the sun, which gave them
their beauty) to God’s own glorious self
the honour of all his gifts, by a fruitful
imprevement of them and fresh songs
of praise” [Trapp]. God manifests great
kindness, whereof little notice is taken,
and wherein his hand is not seen nor
acknowledged | Hutcheson}.

When men will not know God as the
giver of all their temporal blessings, they
shall be compelled to know him as the
withholder of them [Fausset]. Those
who abusz the mercies God gives them
to his dishonour, cannot expect to enjoy
them long [Matt. Henry].


HOMILETICS.
THE Exposure oF Fouty.—Verse 10.


Warning follows warning, but amid judgment and corruption Israel forgets God
and gives up herself to mirth and idolatry. Pleasures allure men astray. But sin
and mirth will be separated, and those who refuse Divine mercy will feel Divine
justice.

Notice:—I. Folly decked in gaudy colours. ‘“ Lewdness” means folly;
for sin is real folly, as holiness is essential wisdom. Foolishness is the natural
tendency, the mighty propensity to evil; bound up in the heart, incorporated in the
thoughts, and manifest in the life of the sinner. But the folly of sin is often veiled
in darkness, decked in ornament and trickery, to attract and deceive. It dazzles
by its glitter and ensnares by its mask. The outside is attractive, but the inside is
deceptive. There is no substance, no enjoyment in sin; all is shadow and empti-
ness. Men think themselves wise in their folly, and are praised for their worldly
policy (Ps. xlix. 18). They call themselves happy, when applauded by others and
blessed with temporal prosperity. But fame and success, wealth and worldly pos-
sessions, are impotent in the tomb. The dying worldling “shall carry nothing
away: his glory shall not descend after him.” The pleasures of sin and the pride
of life are only rainbow colours to the bubble, giving it tint, but no substance and
reality. There is no utility, no rest, no gain in sin. it is not a casual step from
the path of wisdom, but the regular and usual course of folly. Essential folly,
folly in the grain, folly in its nature, folly in its dress, and folly in its end.
“Nought but itself could be its parallel.” It has the fascination and the fangs of |
a serpent. “It biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.” It deceives and
destroys. In whatever guise folly presents itself, gross and repellent, subtle and
seductive, it must be shunned. “ Abstain from all appearance of evil,” or as some,
“from everything that not only is evil, but that looks like evil.” II. Folly ex-


CHaP. Il.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.





posed to public shame. “ Now will I discover her lewdness in the sight of her
lovers.” Darkness and secresy are no hiding-place to God. His eyes penetrate
every place, and his hand can reach every person. Secret sins shall be discovered
and their perpetrators exposed. The mask shall be torn away, and sin in its nature
and consequences shall appear offensive, lewd, “exceeding sinful.” Men may deny the
fact and excuse the fault of sin; may cover crime with lies, and self-righteousness
with professional virtues; but a God of truth will bring “to light the hidden
things of darkness.” Virtues are hidden and oppressed ; wickedness rules; and every
day cries out for redress and retribution. Evil-doers shun the light and love dark-
ness. They never will, never did, appreciate the light of holiness and rectitude. It
reveals their folly and kindles remorse in their bosom. As foul birds of night, they
hide themselves from its beams. The wicked cover their sins from themselves and
others. They banish serious thoughts from their minds, stifle convictions, and put
on a cheerful appearance. But “he that covereth his sins shall not prosper.” An
offended God, who summoned Adam from his hiding-place, will call and condemn
the sinner. In public, “<n the sight of her lovers,” before men on earth and angels
in eternity, they will be put to shame and confusion of face. The darkest deeds
are ‘‘set in the light of God’s countenance,” and will “ be proclaimed upon the
house-tops.” “There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of
iniquity may hide themselves.” III. Folly bereft of every defence. ‘‘ None shall
deliver her out of mine hand.” When God begins to work, who shall let or hinder
himt Men say, “It was an oversight,” “I could not help it,” therefore forget it.
They plead ignorance, custom, temptation, infirmity, necessity, and fatalism even, to
excuse or palliate their guilt. This will never succeed. It was hopeless for Israel
to trust to their idols and alliances. The strongest army, the most popular idol, are
nothing before God. “ All nations before him are as nothing ; and they are counted
to him less than nothing and vanity.” The allurements of vice will deceive. Re
liance on temporal prosperity, outward formality, and religious ceremony will be in
vain. It is only faith in Christ, not confidence in men, that can deliver us, The
wicked ‘“‘strengtheneth himself in his wickedness ” (Ps. lii. 7); but he can neither
outwit nor overcome his Judge. Given to wickedness, the sinner and the false pro-
fessor shall find that “zone shall deliver.” “The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness” (Prov. xiv. 32); “neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given
to it” (ce. viii. 8).


Mirta TURNED into Movurnine.— Verse 11.


Israel had forsaken the temple of God, and worshipped idols under the form of a
talf—had changed some festivals, and kept up all in outward form. The monthly
and yearly feasts were celebrated with mirth. God had commanded them to rejoice
in their feasts (Deut. xvi. 14); but their hymns and instrumental music, their
priests and sacrifices, were licentiousness and falsehood, luxury and excess of every
description and degree. Their joy must cease and their mirth would be turned into
mourning. — ‘

I. Mirth connected with wickedness. 1. I¢ is a most prevalent connection.
“The notes of jollity and fun are heard everywhere through society. At
theatres, taverns, divans, and social festivities, it flares and rattles. ‘The drunkard
has his mirth, the liar his mirth, the debaucher his mirth, the blasphemer his
mirth, the sabbath-breaker his mirth. The union of sin and mirth is, alas, very
vommon, “ We meet it everywhere; in the dance and in the song, in the joke and
in the gibe” [Dr Thomas]. 2. It is a most unreasonable connection. Wickedness
and mirth, how incongruous! “ Sorrow is better than laughter” to the wicked.
“For by the sa‘ness of the countenance the heart is made better.” The condition
and prospects of a sinner should make him weep rather than rejoice. Sin can never
give true happiness The world can never be our home, and the heart cannot rest


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSA. (CHAP. &





‘ there. Its resources are poor ; its pleasures are not solid; and when its “ joys are
all packed up and gone,” then will be the days of mourning. Even in laughter the
heart is sorrowful ; and the end of that mirth is heaviness. II. Mirth connected
with false religion. If sin and mirth are unreasonable, how much more mirth and
idolatry! Israel turned “her feast days, her new moons, and her sabbaths” into
days of making merry. On the Sabbath they should have owned God as their
Creator; on other festive days they should have thanked him for the gifts of Nature
and the wonders of Providence. But the worship of God was blended with the
service of idols; and feigned joy under the form of true joy. As Israel of old
“made a calf in Horeb,” the place of solemnities and law: so men now worship
“ craven images;” cling to forms of their own device; and change true joy into
false mirth. Joy becomes a feast ; but the revelry that marked heathen festivals
can never become the house of God. Communion with God can never be enjoyed
through consecrated symbols. “ Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as
it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.” III.
Mirth twned into mourning. Their songs were to cease, and their music and,
dancing turned into weeping and wailing. “I will turn your feasts into mourning,
and all your songs into lamentation” (Amos viii. 10). The mirthful songs of sin-
ners suddenly change into shrieks of agony and death. Many a sigh is heard amid
loudest laughter. The smiles of mirth are counterfeits to hide hearts of woe.
Belshazzar’s impious feast to a thousand lords ended by his own destruction and
that of his empire. ‘Be merry and wise.” ‘Fly the pleasure which bites to-mor-
row.” Mirth pursued, possessed, and enjoyed without God is vanity (Ecc. vii. 6).
1. It is of short duration. It is but “the crackling of thorns under a pot,” a blaze
for a moment, an excitement which cannot last. 2. It is certain in its termin-
ation. I “will cause her mirth to cease.” It may be attractive in its appearance,
supported by its resources, and spread by its devotees; but the solemn warning is
read, “Woe unto you that laugh now; for ye shall mourn and weep.”


PROSPERITY TURNED INTO ApvErsity.— Verses 12, 13.


Festive rejoicing was to end. Israel loved new moons and sabbath days not for
the sake of religious worship, but for sinful pleasures and delight. The vine and
fig-tree, the choicest productions of the land, and the source of great wealth and
sustenance, were to be taken away. Orchards, gardens, and vineyards were to be
negiected, deprived of defences, and exposed to wild beasts.

I. Prosperity in rich abundance. God is the Giver. There is no moment
in all history, in all departments of life, in which he is not giving with
a liberal and powerful hand. He is the author of abundance everywhere—
abundant light, abundant rain, and abundant joys. Israel had a land flowing
with milk and honey. The necessities and luxuries of life are given to
men in abundance. Giving doth not impoverish him, nor withholding make
him rich. But even to those who abuse his gifts, to the wicked and unthank-
ful, God bestows prosperity. The ungodly prosper on earth. They are suc-
cessful in business, Their bread seems to be gained without care, and their
wines without stint. They are often in great power, ruling with the might of
Crsar and the wealth of Croesus. “ Spreading themselves like a green bay tree,”
they are rooted in the world, add house to house, and field to field, rise higher and
higher in splendour and pride. “They are notin trouble as other men; neither are
they plagued like other men.” They escape many anxious cares and killing toil.
(rod’s people smart under the rod while the wicked escape. But to the eye of faith
and in the sanctuary of God these perplexities are unriddled. “Fret not thyself
because of evil-doers, neither be thou envious at the prosperity of the wicked.” II.
Prosperity greatly abused. 1. Ascribed to wrong sources. A man can receive
rothing except it be given him from heaven; but he looks to sinful and secondary


OHAP. II.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 39


rn


causes, and boasts as if he had received nothing. Israel thought all their prosperity
was bestowed by their idols. “These are my rewards that my lovers have given
me.” Men look to their neighbours, or thank their stars, for their good fortune.
_ They attribute success in business to their diligence and talent ; believe themselves
to be the architects of their own fortunes; and cry in the spirit of Nebuchadnezzar,
“Ts not this great Babylon that I have built,” &. 2. Leading to sinful practices,
“ Wherein she burned incense to them, and she decked herself with her earrings
and her jewels,” Like harlots, the Israelites adorned themselves to attract admirers |
and like heathens, they burned incense to idol gods, One sin leads to another
Prosperity begets pride, and pride begets ingratitude. Then when God is deserted, hix
power, goodness, and love are attributed to another; sacrifices are offered and
incense burned to unworthy deities. Ancient and modern idolatry have filled the
world with corrupt practices and tendencies. Impurity, unchastity of every descrip
tion, is most deteriorating. In dishonouring God, men have “dishonoured thei>
own bodies” (Rom. i. 24). Moral corruption is followed by physical debasement.
The grossness of Pagan idolatry is only equalled by the degrading immoralitier
which it fostered and consecrated. Gluttony, drunkenness, and every “ sin without
the body,” only injures, does not alienate the body from God: “ but he that com-
mitteth fornication sinneth against his own body,” commits sacrilege, and makes it
like a harlot’s body (1 Cor. vi. 18, 19). III. Prosperity visited by Divine
judgment. “I will destroy her vines and her fig-trees.” What God gives he can
easily take away—turn our joy into mourning—our prosperity into adversity. 1.
Temporal judgment. Before, God had threatened only to take away the fruits in
their season; now he will take away not only fruit, but the trees that bare it.
Present enjoyments and future prospects can be cut off; beauty, wealth, and honour
wither like a flower; famine and sword can turn our vineyards into a desert. “He
smote their vines also and their fig-trees; and brake the trees of their coast.” 2,
Spiritual judgment, “I will visit upon her the days of Baalim.” Take one step
to idolatry, we may be given up to more. God may seem to wink for a time, but
a continual course of impenitence will be visited with severe punishment. Change
Jehovah for Baal, you change prosperity for adversity, honour for shame, real en-
joyment for sensual pleasure. God’s presence is seen and God’s voice is heard in
all the vicissitudes of men. "Woe to men when their table becomes a snare, “and
_ that which should have been for their welfare a trap,” a retribution for their
departure from God, and their inhumanity to themselves (Ps, lxix. 22).


Restoration to Gop.— Verses 14—16.


“ Therefore,” a treatment not as we should expect, not after the manner of men,
but according to Divine mercy. This is not an inference from the 13th verse, but
from the whole section. Because Israel had been punished severely for sin and for-
getfulness of God ; because reduced to distress and longing to return to God—I will
go and return, ver. 7—“ therefore” God allures and restores the sinner to himself.

I. The nature of restoration to God. 1. From bondage to liberty. Israel
in Egypt, under severe, helpless, degrading servitude, a type of the sinner under
the dominion, authority, and consequence of sin. Heavy tribute, cruel task-
masters, unrequited toil, render life bitter and distressing. Sin makes the sinner
serve with rigour and sigh for freedom. Israel redeemed and led into the wilder-
ness a type of separation from sin and restoration to God. An entire separation
to devote oneself to God (Ex. v. 3). 2. From darkness to light. Egypt not only
a place of bondage, but of darkness. Sin is moral darkness. The valley of Achor
is a place of Divine chastisement and suffering. Sin brings trouble, penitence
bursts the clouds and brings hope. Put away the accursed thing: God will show
mercy. The sinnerwhen restored is turned from the darkness of ignorance and doubt,
fear and despair, to the light of truth and joy, from the power of Satan unto God


30 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSLA. ([CHar. in


(Acts xxvi. 18). II. The method of restoration to God. 1. By Divine uttrae-
tion from without. God seeks to counteract the effects of sin by showing its
exceeding sinfulness ; to allure to virtue by displaying its beauty ; to persuad> men
by the preaching of the gospel. God in Christ is placable. Hard thoughts of God
are sinful. Truth is beautiful, and the promises are encouraging. ‘Though deep
and fixed dislike be rooted in the heart, yet “ God is love.” ‘This is the special
revelation, the grand fact of the gospel. It is the expression of God’s love to me—
“He hath loved me.” This Divine truth imparts new ideas to the mind, and stays
the progress of the sinner, like that of Saul in his departure from God. 2. By
Divine operation within, “ Aud speak comfortably unto her.” The truth of
God alone is not sufficient. The Spirit must enlighten the mind and work in the
heart. The ear may be touched, but the soul not comforted. When truth is near
it does not attract, nor kindle sympathy in the heart. Men know the truth, but
do not practise it. God, Christ, and moral virtue do not attract. The Spirit
renews the disposition and begets love; makes us willing, and draws us with the
cords of a man and bands of love. God speaks friendly, and draws effectualiy
when he writes ‘this laws in our hearts (2 Cor. iii. 10). III. The results of
restoration te God. God does not speak in vain. As in the first creation he spake
and it was done, so in the second his will is obeyed. “1 will draw all men unto
me.” 1. Response for reluctance. The sinner is unwilling to return ; the penitent
fears and hesitates ; but when God said, “Seek ye my face,” my heart said unto
thee, “Thy face, Lord, will I seek.” Where other voices fail God’s voice is
effectual, There is a true response, a prompt and ready response. The inmost
soul is moved, and, like the echo among the Alps, repeats the notes of Divine music.
There is no delay nor denial, for this savours of distrust, and displeases God.
There is full and complete, hearty and sincere return. The resolution is no sooner
made, “TI will go,” than carried out. The heart is in tune with God, and sings for
joy, like Israel in her days of youth and deliverance. Israel at the Red Sea was a
young and joyful nation, redeemed from bondage and ready to sacrifice. “I will
sing unto the Lord” (Ex. xv.). Man never rises to his dignity until he realizes his
relation to God. Then he utters emotions in songs of praise, and music becomes
the handmaid of memory and the instrument of praise. 2. Riches for poverty. “1
will give her vineyards from thence.” The wilderness had no supply of bread and
water, no fertile plains and fruitful fields. It yielded nothing, yet Israel lacked
nothing. Water gushed out from the rock, and manna fell from the clouds. The
sinner is in a dry and thirsty land where no water is; barren and unfruitful in
heart and life ; poor in spirit and prospect, in a wretched and forlorn condition ,
“wretched and miserable, and poor, and biind, and naked.” But when restored to
God, he is rich in experience and life, spiritual joy and hope, rich in faith and rich
in God. 3. Sonship for slavery. “Thou shalt call me Ishi, and shalt call me no
more Baali.” Baal indicated lordship, and was a name given to idols. God would
disown the title, lest his people should be reminded of their former condition—
preferred the tender name of love to prove closer relationship. ‘Thy Maker
(thy Baal) is thy husband.” God would have Israel forsake everything which
kept up the reputation and put them in mind of idolatry. He was married again
to them. The Church calls him by right names when in true relation. The sinner
when restored’to Divine favour, the son when introduced into the family of God,
is not under the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of adoption by which
he cries, Abba, Father. God is not cold towards us; be not lukewarm towards
him. “Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 14. “I will allure her,” §c. They are innumerable, yet so frequently
The attractions of Divine love. 1. overlooked. 2. They are powerful, yet


CHAP. I1.]








so frequently resisted. 3. Rich in bless-
ing, yet so frequently unemployed.
“Christ works upon his people fortiter,
but yet suaviter ; powerfully, but yet
sweetly ; he inclineth their hearts to
his testimonies, and not to covetousness
(Ps. cxix. 36), and brings them to the
obedience of faith. If he do seduce
them it is for no hurt, it is but to speak
a word in private to them, as one friend
may with another; it is but to give
them his loves, as he speaks in the
Canticles ; to show them his glory, as
_he did Moses; to spread before them
his beauty, and so to catch them by
guile as St Paul did the Corinthians
(2 Epist. xii. 16); to steal away their
hearts before they are aware, according
to that, Cant. vi. 12, that they thence-
forth may be an Aminadab, a willing
people, a free-hearted people (Ps. cx. 3),
waiting for the law (Isa. xhi. 4), and
walking by the rule (Gal. vi. 16)”
[Trapp].

The valley of Achor. 1, An asser-
tion of God’s rights. 2. A warning to
sinners (cf. Jos, vil. 25, 26).

A door of Hope. 1. Trouble turned
into joy. 2. Judgment turned into
mercy. 3. Despair turned into hope.

Up out of the land of Egypt. Moral
life an elevation in character, purpose,
and pursuit; an advancement towards
God and heaven. ‘Such as are con-
verted to Christ, should resolve on a
journey and progress, as having more
before them of duty and exercise and
enjoyments ; for after she is ‘allured,’
Israel is to remove and come to a wilder-
ness, whether we understand it of the
progress of the godly toward heaven, or
toward wonted enjoyments” | Hutcheson. |

Vineyards from thence. Observe the
Author of these favours, J will do it.
Every good gift is from God; and his
people acknowledge that all they enjoy
is not only from his agency, but from his
grace. Observe also the richness of the
supplies. I will give her, not her corn,
which is for necessity, but grapes, which
are for delight. Yea, it is not a vine
but a vineyard ; yea, vineyards! As it
he could not do too much for them, he
engages to give ; concerned not only for
their safety, but welfare; not only for


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 3}





their relief, but enjoyment; not only
for their tasting consolation, but being
filled with joy and peace in believing,
Observe also the strangeness of the way
in which these indulgences are to be
communicated. Whence are these sup-
plies to come? From a_ wilderness.
Loneliness and mazes, danger and
beasts of prey, sand, and briers, and
thorns only in a wilderness. ‘“ He only
doeth wondrous things;” turns the
shadow of death into morning, makes
rivers in high places and streams in the
desert. He makes the wilderness to
rejoice and blossom as the rose, and
gives us vineyards from thence.

Earth is a wilderness. It was not
designed to be such, but sin entered
into the world, cursed the ground, and
the Fall left it such. Such it would be
now but for Divine grace. Men of the
world are discontented and miserable ,
to the Christian the curse is turned
into a blessing. He has before him a
land of promise, a thousand succours
and delights, and in Divine ordinances
he has comforts, vineyards from thence.
Solitude is a wilderness. There is
much to be done, gained, and enjoyed
alone. There we gain our best know-
ledge and richest experience ; enjoy the
freedom of prayer and intercourse with
God. Outward trouble is a wilderness.
Many afraid to be brought into it, but
God has given them vineyards from
thence. What proofs of God’s presence
in trouble! What discoveries and sup-
ports! As the sufferings of Christ have
abounded, so the consolations have also
abounded by Christ. The state of mind
produced by conviction of sin. A
wounded spirit, who can bear? Who
does not remember the surprise, the (on-
fusion of mind, the terror, the anguish,
and self-despair he once felt? and who
can forget the feelings induced by a
discovery of the cross and the joy of
God’s salvation? Many are afraid when
their friends tremble at God’s word and
are broken in heart. Christians hail it
as a token for good, and know that he
gave them their vineyards from thence.
The same may be said oz self-abasement,
and istress of soul, which a heliever
may feel, when he sees his unworthi-


82 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


{cHaP. 1.





ness, depravity, and guilt. The experi-
ence is lamentable, but will not hurt
him. He giveth grace unto the humble.
The valley of the shadow of death is
the last wilderness. There is much to
render it awful and uninviting, but
when entered the gloom flies away.
The place has been made glad for those
subject to its bondage and fear. They
have had a peaceful and delightful
entrance into the joy of their Lord.
And what vineyards does he give thein
from thence! [Jay].

Ver. 15. A revived Church. 1. The
frequent condition of the Church. In
the land of Egypt; in bondage to sin,
to sense, and to materialism. 2. The


speak comfortably—and give her vine-
yards.” 3. The results of revival.
“Youth,” and renewed vigour. “ Sing,”
joy, and rejoicing. God’s presence re-
stored his ancient people from literal
captivity, and his spiritual seed from
sorrow and distress. ‘“God’s dealings
with his people will furnish them with joy
and refreshment; ‘she shall sing.’ Not
only should they rejoice when all things
are performed according to promise, but
when the Lord gives any pledge of his
love, or begun evidences of it, they
ought to cherish it by joy and praise,
though full fruition be wanting: for
even ‘there’ on the border of her
wilderness, in the valley of Achor”


means of revival “I will allure— [Hutcheson].


HOMILETICS.
Tae Goop Time Comine.—Verses 17—20.


When the cry of trouble is turned into the song of joy, and nations cease to
worship idols and serve the true God, then God restores them to his favour, and
renews to them his covenant. Idolatry shall cease, and perfect peace—peace with
God, peace among men, and peace with the beasts of the field—shall follow. God
predicts a memorable time to be enjoyed by men.

I. Abolition of idolatry. ‘In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, I will cut off
tne names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered.”
God abhors idolatry, and warns his people against its evils (Ex. xxiii. 13; Deut.
xii. 3), God’s name must be remembered, and his worship be upheld by his word
and grace. People must not devote themselves to any false god. The non-existence
of other gods must be recognized—they are nonentities. ‘Thou shalt have no
other gods.” The Church shall be purified from error and false worship. Heathen
nations shall abandon their gods many and lords many—shall negtwct their offer-
ings, and close their pagodas and temples. At the present time, at home and abroad,
the signs arv cheering; but “in that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and
his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles
and to the bats.” 1. This abolition is by Divine agency. “I will take away the
names of Baalim.” Atheism, Polytheism, and superstitions of every kind can only
be abolished by Divine power. Education, civilization, and commerce cannot renew
ihe heart and reform the habits of people. Our hearts are sinful, prejudices and
heathen customs are deeply rooted, and the Gospel alone can renew and deliver.
2. This abolition is seen in the purity of language. The names shall be taken “out
of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their name.” The names
detested and disowned shall be disused. There must be no mixture in life or lip of
idolatry and true religion, God’s name must not be desecrated and Baal’s name be
reverenced. “Call me no more Baali.” God’s grace in the heart purifies the lan-
guage of the lip. “1 will turn to the people a pure language.” Tue liar speaks the
truth, the swearer forsakes his oaths, and the penitent separates himself from every

Ilution of word and deed. A Christian spirit governs the tongue, selects the

oliest themes in conversation, and clothes the fittest words with impressive forms,
“‘ No corrupt speech” proceeds out of the mouth of a true believer. His converse-
tion is neither corrupt nor insipid, but hallowed with pungency to excite interest ;


CHAP. 11.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEHA. 33





and preserved with flavour to influence for good. A man’s tongue is an index to
his life ; a test of his godliness. ‘‘ The mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom. ”’
II. Cessation of war. ‘‘ I will break the bow and the sword, and the battle out
of the earth.’’ Warriors and warlike statesmen have been too long the idols and
too much the gods of mankind. Alexander and Napoleon have been extolled : but
military fame is delusive and false ; war is inhuman and criminal. Science and
philosophy, legislation and commercial treaties, may mitigate, but cannot prevent
or abolish it. Nations often defy these, and armies are not checked by paper or
parchment. This is to act like the Xerxes of morality, and throw our idle chains
into the tempestuous ocean of strife. Morality and religion forbid war. Christianity,
in its principles and obligations, produces peace. Christ the Prince of Peace shall
break the bow and the sword; establish the government of peace and good will
towards men—spiritual foes are already despoiled of their power to hurt and destroy.
The goodness of the cause is certain, though its success for a time be doubtful. God
has spoken the word, and it shall come to pass. ‘‘ They shall beat their swords into
ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.” In this belief the Christian
may rejoice. Many are asking, “ Shall the sword devour for ever?” and others,
whatever be their differences in opinion, cry in practice, “I am for peace.” III.
_ Security from wild beasts. “In that day will I make a covenant for them with
the beasts of the field.” When man was subject and loyal to his Maker, all creatures
were subject to him. When he rebelled, the harmony of creation was broken, and
peace with inferior creatures destroyed. Man is still lord of creation ; but nature
is an unwilling servant, and must be restrained and subjugated by force. Man’s
fear over beasts of the earth has gradually diminished, and the enmity between the
tame and wild, between the friendly innocence and the hostile dread of the species
has gradually increased. This lost dominion will be regained in Christ. Though
no longer ruling by the sympathy of a spiritual power, yet he is legally authorized
to exercise forcible dominion over three classes most injurious to him (Gen. ix. 2).
Though nothing in the sight of the starry universe, and “a little lower than the
angels,” yet all things will be put under his feet. In the mean time God protects
the dwellings and the fields of man. Savage beasts are under his control, linked
into Divine covenant, and made man’s servants. Prowling creatures of the field,
ravenous fowls of the air, and creeping scorpions of the earth, are prevented from
touching men. “Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder,” not accidentally,
but intentionally, in power and conquest. “I have an impression,” says Dr Thomas,
“that were man to possess and manifest the moral majesty of goodness, the wildest
and most savage creatures would stand in awe of him.” God shall replace the
sceptre in man’s hand. The promise to Israel was, ‘I will cause the evil beast to
cease out of the land ”—the promise to us is, ‘ The beasts of the field shall be at
peace with thee.” IV. Perfect peace and tranquillity. “And will make them
to lie safely.” Man is not secure, is not at peace with all creation, yet. Beasts may
devour and war destroy him. Dangers threaten, above, below, and all around him.
God only can protect him and make him dwellsecurely. But outward peace can
neither give nor destroy inward confidence and rest. God keeps from fear and
alarms by night and by day, and makes us “‘ take our rest in safety’’ (Job xi. 18).
Short-lived is the rest, insecure is the safety, of the wicked ; but the righteous ‘‘ lie
down safely,’’ in confidence and calm repose. He is fearless and courageous, for
only ‘‘ perfect love casteth out fear.” He is often at peace with his neighbours, and
always at peace with his conscience and God. As a loving parent puts to rest and
watches over her darling babe, so God sends to sleep and keeps in rest his own
children. This rest is only a foretaste of everlasting rest, unfading peace in Christ.
Tenures differ, but nothing can equal the safety which the believer has in his
covenant God. By special promise his security is fixed, and by special presence
his safety is secured. What would some men give for a good night’s rest !_ They


8


34 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. PCHAP, IB.


are tossed about by troublous thoughts, waking at every stir, and unsettled in every
place. “ When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down,
aud thy sleep shall be sweet.” V. Covenant blessings renewed. “ And I will
betroth thee unto me for ever.” God promises to restore Israel and treat her as a
spotless virgin. Ina threefold repetition he declares his love to the unfaithful and
unworthy. He forgets the past, forgives sin, and espouses afresh, and that for ever.
There is no divurce for adultery. He only is unchangeable, and his mercy, grace,
and goodness abound to the chief of sinners. It is mercy to bring back, but love
beyond degree to betroth and endow with bridal gifts. Notice—l. The method
of the engagement. “God betroths his Church to himself in righteousness and judg-
ment, not by doing her justice, and faithfully fulfilling the obligations which he
undertock at the conclusion of the covenant, but by purifying her, through the
medium of just judgment, from all the uncleanness and ungodliness that adhere to
her still (Is. i. 27), that he may wipe out everything that can injure the covenant
on the part of the Church. But with the existing sinfulness of human nature,
justice and judgment will not suffice to secure the lasting continuance of the
covenant; and therefore God also promises to show mercy and compassion. But
even the love and compassion of God have their limits ; the Lord still further adds,
“in faithfulness or constancy,” and thereby gives the promise that he will no more
withdraw his mercy from her” [Kei]. The covenant is founded upon a firm
basis — “in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving-kindness, and in
mercies.” In the faithfulness of God the pledge is sure; God will keep his covenant
for ever (Ps. cxi. 9). 2. The result of the engagement. “Thou shalt know the
Lord.” The complaint was that Israel did not know God, nor recognize his pro-
vidence in the blessings of life (ver. 8). The consequence of this union would bea
real and experimental knowledge of God; not intellectually merely, but living,
personal relation to him. Many acknowledge God, but do not know him. True
knowledge includes love and life. ‘ And this is life eternal, that they might know
thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.” When restored
to God, we know him not merely as God, as revealed in his word, but what he is
to us, as our God in Christ. We discover more of his grace and love, enjoy more
of his favour, and we love God because he first loved us.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 17. That which is very inno-
cent in itself should, when it has been
abused in idolatry, be abolished, and the
very use of it taken away, that nothing
may be done to keep idols in remem-
brance, much less to keep them in reput-
ation.

To remember with delight sins past is
to re-commit them; and herein the
deceitful heart is with all care to be
looked unto, that when we call to mind
former evil practices, though with an
intent to be humbled for them, we be
not insnared and drawn to commit them
afresh by being tickled in the thought
of them [Zrapp].

Ver. 18. The blessings of God do not
correspond only, they go beyond the
punishment. The protection is com-
plete. Every kind of animal, beast,


bird, and reptile is named, Together
the words express that God would with-
hold the power from all enemies, visible
or invisible; worldly or spiritual. Each
also may denote some separate form of
the enemy [Pusey].

God foretells much more the great-
ness of what he would do for man, than
the little which man receives. The
gospel brings peace within, and since
wars and fightings come from evil pas-
sions and lust, it brings peace as far as
it prevails without also; peace, as the
borders of the Church (Ps. exlvii. 14);
peace in the world, so far as it is won
to Christ by the Church; peace to the
soul of the believer, so far as he loves
God and obeys the gospel [Pusey].

Ver. 19, 20. In the covenant of
grace, there is God’s part and there is


CHAP. I. ]








our part. But God undertakes for the
latter as well as the former—engages to
do all that is necessary for his people
_ and imthem. Here is the nature of the
- connection he will establish with them.
“JT will betroth thee unto me.” And
the manner of it. In righteousness, &e.
1. In righteousness. He is holy in all
his ways, and righteous in all his works
The soul that sinneth shall die. Right-
eousness, then, seems to require the
punishmentof the sinner. Theawakened
soul wants to see how God can be just
and the justifier. He has provided for
this in the gospel. Though sin is
pardoned, yet it is condemned. The
transgressor escapes, but the curse falls
upon another. The law is magnified and
honoured in Christ. In the destruction
of sinners justice would have been dis-
played passively, but now actively—
would have been hated, but now loved
by them. For righteousness means not
only the way in which the guilty are
made just, but the depraved holy. This
is from the same gracious agency, and
equally necessary with the former; for
God could not admit men into com-
munion with himself in a state of sin.
“Tflow can two walk together except they
be agreed?” 2. In judgment. The
heathens placed Mercury, the god of
wisdom, by the side of Venus, the god-
dess of marriage ; and for good reason,
for there is nothing in which judgment
is so needful. Hence the wretched con-
sequences of hasty matches. But God
knows what he does and why he does
it—has reasons which justify the measure
of his infinite understanding, and salva-
tion is called his counsel. This is true
in contriving, procuring, and applying
it. The place, time, and manner of
conversion known to him. We know
but little now, yet there are openings
which carry the mind in contemplation
and surprise, and which assure us more
remains for our discovery and rapture in
the worla of light. This applies also to
God’s people as well as to God himself.
In their choice of him and love to him
wisdom isseen. The world may censure,
but they can give a reason of the hope
within them. The spiritual judgeth all
things, thoug! he himself is judged of





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 35


ee,


noman. 3. In loving-kindness. With-
out this persons had better never come
together — it is daily and mutually
needed. The law of kindness should
rule in looks, words, and actions. This
seldom wanting in the female, often in
the male side. Hence men commanded
to love their wives. God says to his
Church, “ You shall find me full of
tendernessand compassion,” &c. Strange
to apply the exercise of this quality to
them as well as to him, yet he has
sanctioned it. ‘‘I remember thee, the
kindness of thy youth,” &. He takes
at their hand everything they do for
him ; their disposition makes them
afraid to grieve his Holy Spirit, and
anxious to walk “worthy of him unto
all pleasing.” 4. In mercies. This is
distinguishable from the former. That
was the effect, this shows the cause, and
mentioned in addition to loving-kind-
ness, to remind us that all we possess,
or expect, springs from the free, unde-
served grace of God, and to meet dis-
couragement from a sense of unworthi-
ness and ill-deservings. God will not
cast away his people, but have mercy
upon them according to the multitude
of his tender mercies. The more cheer-
ful and vigorous will they be, the more
they remember this truth. Fruits that
grow in the sun are richer and riper
than those which grow in the shade.
The best frame we can be in is to be
upheld by a free spirit, and act under a
full sense of our Divine privileges. Let
us therefore sing of God’s mercy for
ever, and if he seems to have forgotten
to be gracious, plead and say, “ Where
is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sound-
ing of thy bowels, and of thy mercies
toward me?” Here again is imported,
not only that we receive, but exercise
mercy, not towards him personally, but
towards his creatures that need it.
What is done to them he considers as
done to himself. What so just and
proper as that they who are forgiven
should forgive? And they which live
by mercy should be merciful? [Jay].

I will betroth thee unto me for ever.
Christians are not only pardoned, but
employed in God’s service—not only
reconciled, but admitted into friendship


56 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.





and intimacy. Yea, they are not only
friends and favourites, but his bride.
Observe the permanency of the relation.
““Permanency adds bliss to bliss.”
Every enjoyment and possession is im-
paired in value without it. The more
important any acquisition, the more
necessary to our happiness, the more
alive we are to keep it; the more averse
to its absence, the more painful the loss.
Yet whatever we are attached to here,
we set our hearts on that which is not.
Jews are said always to throw a glass
on the ground in their nuptial ceremony,
to indicate that the union formed was
brittle as glass. The apostle reminds
us that time is short, and that they who
have wives will be as though they had
none. We take each other “ till death
do us part ”—the relation ¢s terminated
by the death of ether. But Christians
can never be in a widowed state—never
lose their defence, glory, and joy.
Nothing is precarious in the transactions
of God with his people. “I know that
whatsoever God doeth it shall be for


(CHAP. IL








ever,” &c. How delightful in a world
of changes to know that he changeth
not, and therefore we shall not be con-
sumed. Many a persuasion fails, fo-
the confidence may be strong and the
foundation weak. But here the full
assurance of faith can never do justice
to the certainty of the event. “I am
persuaded that neither death nor life,”
&e. [Jay].

The Harmony of the Divine Attri-
butes in Salvation. Mercy founded on
righteousness, and truth vindicating
mercy. Justice honoured in mercy.
Loving-kindness which is faithful.
“ Eternal love and immutable faithful-
ness are the body-guards of Jesus’
throne, and they are both the providers
and the preservers of all those who in
him are made kings and priests unto
God. We cannot keep ourselves, and
nothing short of Divine mercy and truth
can do it; but these both can and will,
nor shall the least of God’s people be
suffered to perish” [Spurgeon].


HOMILETICS.
Tue Universe GOVERNED IN THE INTERESTS oF Humanity.— Verses 21—23.


In these verses we have an unbroken chain of causation. The prophet repre-
sents God as listening to the prayer of the heavens, to allow them to give fertility
to the earth. The heavens fulfil the desire of the earth, and the earth yields its
increase to the nation ; all things in heaven and earth depend upon God, “so that
without his bidding not a drop of rain falls from heaven,” says Calvin, “and the
earth produces no germ, and consequently all nature would be barren, unless he
gave it fertility by his blessing.”

I. All things are subordinate to God. 1. God is the Creator of all things.
All things were made by him at first. He only has absolute being and original
essence. Creation is derived from him, The Great First Cause. “In the beginning
God created the heaven and the earth.” By this simple expression Atheism, Polythe-
ism, Pantheism, and Materialism are denied, and that philosophy which sees nothing
apart and distinct from matter is reproved. We have no chance work, no “ theory of
development” here. Matter is not eternal. The world had a birthday. In the
beginning God; God before primordial matter; God before its arrangement into
shape and order; God first, and last, and everywhere; God before all things ;
God the cause of all things, and God the meaning of all things. 2. God is the
Conserver of all, things. That which was dependent at first cannot afterwards
become independent. It requires the same hand to sustain as to create a thing.
God did not create the world like a carpenter builds a house, to stand still. Having
its very being from him, that being cannot be, or continue to be, without him.
“ By him all things consist,” or stand together. God is “the Conservation and
Correlation of forces.” Not an atam is permitted to fall out of existence. Things
way travel far, and take different shapes; but nothing is destroyed. The tiniest
dew-drop is long-lived as the mighty ocean, and the feeblest nebule indestructible az


CHAP. II.] HOMILLTIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 37





en eel


the everlasting hills. As in matter, so in mind and morals. “I know whatsoever
God doeth, it shall be for ever. Nothing can be put to it, nor anything taken trou.
it.” 3. God is the Governor of all things. Creation carries with it the idea of
contro] and superintendence. We are under law, mild, gracious, paternal law.
But laws of themselves are impotent without the law-giver. Second causes depend
upon the First Cause, and cannot put forth any causation without God. God works,
and is ever active in his dominions. We are not the inhabitants of a fatherless
world, nor is the earth a little province in a forsaken universe. God directs and
controls all forces, all agencies, and all events, for the accomplishment of his design.
There are no localities with God. He is everywhere present, and ruleth over all.
In effecting his great designs he is independent also of every other creature, and
renders the purpose and plans of every other power subordinate and auxiliary to
his own. Here one sovereign forms an alliance with others for mutual interests
and protection, If one were to oppose another the opposition might endanger all
states under the alliance. But were all kings and kingdoms of the universe to
unite against him, they could not succeed. His throne is above the heavens, above
the accidents and contingences of earth. The frame of nature might be unhinged,
and the universe fall into commotion, but he reigns undisturbed, God over all, and
blessed for evermore. II. All things co-operate, or work together. God hears
the heavens; they hear the earth; and “the earth shall hear the corn, and the
wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.” Here we have the connection and
concatenation of all things. “God is not the author of confusion.” Providence,
therefore, which is God’s will in action, is consistent with itself. It is the glory of
creation that it everywhere “ marches in time, moving to the music of law.” Here
is the true “‘ music of the spheres.” .A consummate harmony of relationships so dom-
inates over the whole, that we have never an organic demand without the means of
satisfying it, that amid innumerable changes and intermediate ends we find designs
of final results. The world is not a machine, and the action of God interference ;
things are not like particles of dust driven in a whirlwind: but “all things work
together,” work in harmony, subserve the ends for which they were made, and
never cease to conform to God’s will, and be a reflex of his wisdom and goodness.
The principle of mediation is seen everywhere in God’s government. “TI will hear
the heavens.” Heaven intercedes for earth, and the earth for men upon it. In
the common intercourse and concerns of life, one man is blessed through another
and for the sake of another. Our material and spiritual gifts come through the
medium and mediation of another. But this regular system of established agency
connects the result with the sovereign will of God. The first power is a link
placed at the foot of the eternal throne. “I will act upon the heavens, the powers
of nature above us; they shall act upon the earth, the powers and sources of
vegetation beneath us; the earth shall act upon the corn, and the wine, and the
oil ; the results of their combined and mysterious influence. ‘Thus the chain is
complete and unbroken.


Where one step broken, the great scale’s destroyed :
From nature’s chain whatever link you strike,
Tenth, or ten thousandth, breaks the chain alike.


III. All things are governed in the interests of the Christian Church.
“They shall hear Jezreel.” Jez. means the seed of God, the nation pardoned and
restored to God All things not only work together, but good is the result, and
this good is “to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his
purpose” (Rom. viii. 28). The universe in all its operations and departments
contributes to the interests of God’s people. Events do not happen in human
society and the Christian Church as if left to the mere causalities of nature, and
were not under Divine control. Human happiness is promoted and human wante
supplied, and men in Christ are the objects of God’s eternal purpose. 1. Human


38 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA, [ CHAP. I.


wants are satisfied. Corn, wine, and oil are given to Jezreel. Chastisements are
removed, Divine favour is restored, and men are daily loaded with benefits and
blessings. The gifts of nature are emblems of the gifts of grace. Constant bread,
common mercies, and spiritual joys are bestowed with a liberal hand. “Thou
openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.” 2. There is
spiritual increase in the Church. ‘I will sow her unto me in the earth.” Per-
secution and affliction did not diminish Israel. “The blood of the martyrs is the
seed of the Church.” God restored her, and in her dispersion she was the means
of scattering the knowledge of God and the seeds of Divine truth. Gentiles were
converted to God, and the earth will yet be the scene of an increase richer than any
yet enjoyed. ‘The fields are already white unto harvest. 3. There is restoration to
friendship with God. Mercy for those that were unpitied, that had not obtained
mercy, and those that were not God’s people were to become his people. God
would anew declare them his people, and they would affectionately respond to the


call. Jew and Gentile, bond and free, Barbarian and Scythian, will be one in


“hrist.
the Lord hath blessed.”


“ All that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed which


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 21, 22. All nature is closed
and would refuse her office to those
who rebel against her God, so when he
hath withdrawn his curse, and is recon-
ciled to man, all shall combine together
for man’s good, and by a kind of har-
mony all parts thereof join their minis-
tries for the service of those who are at
amity with him. And, as an image of
tove, all, from the lowest to the highest,
are bound together, each depending on
the ministry of that beyond it, and the
highest on God. At each link the
chain might have been broken; but
God, who knit their services together,
and had before withheld the rain, and
made the earth barren, and laid waste
the trees, now made each to supply the
other, and led the thoughts of man
through the course of causes and effects
up to himself, who ever causes all which
come to pass [Pusey].

Learn—1. The unworthiness of man,
A dependent, sinful creature. 2. The
dignity of man. All creatures employed
to help him.

1, The abundance of God’s gifts—


+


“corn, wine, and oil.” 2. The good-
ness of God in supplying them—“TI
will hear.” 3. The medium through
which they come—“ heaven and earth.”
4, The certainty of their bestowment—
“Tt shall come to pass.”

Ver. 23. “I will sow her.” The
Church the channel of blessings to the
world, The Church can only bless the
world as she is blessed herself.

A beautiful earth. 1. The residence
of the Church of God—*“TI will sow
her unto me in the earth.” 2. The
theatre of the mercy of God—*TI will
have mercy upon her that had not ob-
tained mercy.” 3. The scene of obedi-
ence and love to God—*“ Thou art my
people... Thou art my God.”

God’s mercy. 1. The sum of human
wants—“not obtained mercy,” “not
my people.” 2. The source from which
it comes—free grace. “I will have
mercy.” 3. The result of its bestow-
ment— Thou art my people.” 4. The
evidence of its possession—“ Thou art
my God.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER II.


Ver. 1-—5. Mothers and children.
When a mother once asked a clergyman
when she should begin the education of
her child, then four years old, he replied,
“ Madam, if you have not begun already,


you have lost those four years. From
the first smile that gleams upon an in.
fant’s cheek your opportunity begins.”
The mother lives again in her children,
They unconsciously mould themselvyea


CaP. II.)





after her manner, her speech, her con-
duct, and her method of life. Her
habits vecome theirs, and her character
is visibly repeated in them” [Smiles].
Children may be strangled, but deeds
never: they have an indestructible life,
both in and out of our consciousness
[George Eliot].

Ver. 6, 7. Affliction. The hedge
stops or givesa turn. God, in pursuance
of his covenant, and with a gracious
tnaeaning to a revolting people, hedges
them up by affliction to stop them from
undoing. It is a mercy to be kept out
of the- pond, though it be by a thorn
hedge, sharpest troubles. This stop the
Lord doth often give, though not al-
ways to sinners; he sometimes lets
them run on to fill up their measure of
sin and to receive their full measure of
punishment. MReproof for sin is a great
favour. Though God is angry for what
we have done, yet it is a mercy that he
will not let us do more, and so make
ourselves vile and miserable [Cary/].

Ver. 8, 9. Ingratitude. When I
consider how the goodness of God is
abused and perverted by the greatest
pait of mankind, I cannot but be of his
mind that said, “The greatest miracle
in the world is God’s patience and
bounty to an ungrateful man.” Oh!
what would God not do for his crea-
tures, if thankful, that thus heaps the
coals of his mercies upon the heads of
his enemies? But think not, sinners,
that you shall escape thus. God’s mill
goes slow, but it grinds small; the more
admirable his patience and bounty now
is, the more dreadful and insupportable
will that fury be which ariseth out of
his abused goodness [Gurnall].

Ver. 10, 11. Mirth. Mirth is a vain
and unprofitable passion, not fit for a
wise man’s entertainment [ Bp. Hall].

_ Often when in the full enjoyment of
all that this world could bestow, my
conscience told me, that in the true
sense of the word I was not a Christian.
I laughed. I sang. I was apparently
gay and happy. But the thought would
steal across me,—what madness is all
this! to continue easy in a state, in
which a sudden call out of the world
would consign me to everlasting misery,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. sy





and that when eternal happiness is
within my grasp [Wilberforce]. Mirth
at a funeral is scarce more indecent er
unnatural than a perpetual flight of
gaiety and burst of exultation in a
world like this; a world which may
seem a paradise to fools, but is an hos-
pital with the wise [Dr Young].

Forgetfulness of God, ver. 13. Suen
is the character of all engrossing passion,
such is the source of sin to which the
soul gives way, in avarice, ambition,
worldliness, sensual sin, godless science.
The soul at last does not rebel against
God; it forgets him. It is taken up
with other things, with itself, with the
subjects of its thoughts, the objects of
its affections, and it has no time for
God, because it has no love for him
[Pusey].

The gradations of sin. 1, Neglecting
God. Neglect of his word, house, and
service, 2. Forgetting God. Forgetting
his love, goodness, and claims. 3.
Departing from God. Departing into
danger, error, and punishment.

Forgetfulness of God—a sign of care-
lessness—a mark of ingratitude and
contempt—-springs from unbelief and
disobedience to God’s command (Deut.
iv. 9; viii. 14).

Idolatry in the Church—the top-
stone, the height of all crime—hated by
God, and pursued by the sinner. Pro-
fessed believers are too slow after God,
but sinners hasten after their lovers.
Let their zeal rebuke our tardiness ;
their punishment turn our steps to God
and duty

The two masters, 1. Jehovah for-
gotten, Baal loved and worshipped. 2.
The sacred days of Jehovah turned into
festive days of Baal. 3. The gifts of
Jehovah devoted to the service and sup-
port of Baal. “No man can serve two
masters,” &c. Which are you serving 1
“Choose you this day,” &c.

Ver. 18. Covenant with beasts. To
men who dwell in God the most evil
forces become harmless; they wear a
charmed life, and defy the deadliest ills.
Their feet come into contact with the
worst of foes; even Satan himself nib-
bles at their heei, but in Christ Jesus
they have the assured hope of bruising


40 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA.


Satan under their feet shortly. The
people of God are the real “‘ George and
the Dragon,” the true lion-kings and
serpent-tamers. Their dominion over
the powers of darkness makes them cry,
“ Tord, even the devils are subject unto
us through thy word” [Spurgeon].

Ver, 21, 22. Providence is God in
motion; God teaching by facts, and
God fulfilling, explaining, enforcing his
own word. Providence is God render-
ing natural events subservient to spirit-
ual purposes; rousing our attention
when we are careless; reminding us of
our obligations when we are ungrateful ;
recalling our confidence when we depart
from him by dependence upon his crea-
tures. Whoso is wise, and will observe
these things, even they shall understand
the loving-kindness of the Lord [The
Pathway].

Ver. 23. My God. All in this life


(CHAP. Ill.


that is truly good is included in this,
my God! if said not from habit, but
with a full title to its use. This isa
word of faith, by which we place our
whole reliance upon the almighty, true,
and compassionate God ; it is a word of
hope, by which we provide ourselves
with all good perpetually in God, who
isa Rock of Eternity ; a word of love
and fellowship, by which we delight
ourselves in the goodness of God, and
give ourselves wholly up to him [ Rieger. ]
“This God is our God.” Is it so? Then
infinite riches, infinite beauty, infinite
excellence is ours. Is it sot Then all he
has is ours; his infinite resources are
ours; his providence, his Son, his Spirit,
his heaven, are ours (1 Cor. iii, 23). If
the character of God be paternal, then
your character should be jilial, and the
leading features of that are dependence
and love,





CHAPTER IIL


CriticaL Notes.—1.] The sigmficant pair is introduced again with a fresh application, Ina
second symbolic marriage, the faithful, chastening love of God is set forth to adulterous Israel.
Love] Not take, as ch.i. 2, Woman] Many think another person, not his former wife; others, that
she was his former wife, but unfaithful and living with another man, an adulteress, This love
greater, higher than the former. One proved disturbed relation, and the other restoration to God.
Friend] Heb. neighbour, and husband (Jer. iti. 20; Cant. v, 17); the prophet himself intended.
Accord] Hos. must frame his life to represent the ingratitude of men and the wonderful love of God.
Who look] Lit. they are looking; a continuous act and a contemporary circumstance. God was loy-
ing them while they were looking to idols. Flagons of wine] Lit. of grapes, used in idolatry (Jer.
vii. 18; xliv. 19); or drunkenness and vice sanctioned by it—a figurative representation of service,
which appeals to sense, gratifies carnal desire and sensual indulgence (ef. Job xx. 12). 2. Bought
her] with money and grain, Money half the price of a common slave tS xxxi, 32); the grain of
the coarsest kind, not wheat, but dariey, the food of animals, and the offering of one accused of
idolatry, an expression of worthlessness and degradation. 8. Abide for me) Lit. “many days wilt
thou sit for me,” in a state of solitude and widowhood, debarred from intercourse with any man, and
detained until restored to God himself (Deut. xxi. 13). Now God will have no more conjugal inter-
course with Israel than any other people. He will cut off idolatry and suspend his relation to them
for an indefinite time. 4, Without a king] Without civil polity. Sac.} Without national worship
and religion, Image] Lit. monument, cousecrated to Baal (Ex, xxiii. 24); pillars forbidden to be
reared (Lev. xxvi. 1; Deut. xvi. 22); widely spread in Israel (2 Kings iti, 2; xvii. 10) and in
Judah (1 Kings xiv. 23; 2 Chron, xvi. 2). Ephod] Shoulder-dress of the high priest, to which the
Urim and Thummim were attached, and the medium of revelation between God and his people.
Teraphim] Penates worshipped as the givers of earthly prosperity and revealers of future events.
This threat fulfilled in the ten tribes, in Assyrian captivity, and in the presenttime they are without
monarchy, priesthood, and the worship of Jehovah. Judah after her captivity had a government,
but not an independent king; she rejected Christ, and then she was doomed to the judgment ot God,
and efforts to restore her have yet failed. 5. Seek] ileb. a diligent, intensive search, a religious
search used in regard to God [Pusey]. David their king] #.e. the Seed, the Son of D., the Messiah


onaP. ul.) HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ::: HOSEA. 43








(Ezek. xxx17 23, Amos ix. 11). Fear the Lord) Lit. “will tremble towards Jehovah and towards
bis goodness; stronger than seeking one upon whom they depend. Tremble with distress and
anguish, consv.ous of guilt and unwortbiness, and utterly unable to help themselves. Goodness] In
_ gifts of whick they bac been deprived. This fulfilled in the gathering round David's greater Son,
end in the universal conversion of Israel to God.


HOMILETICS.
Tae Wonprovs Lovz.—Verses 1—5


In this chapter God’s grace is marvellously set forth to his ancient people.
Though fallen and unfaithful, the prophet is commanded to love. ‘“ Go yet,” give
them line upon line, precept upon precept, sign after sign, and act after act, to
remind them of this truth. Not only must the disposition exist to love, but an
attestation of it. Hosea must again represent the conduct of God in displaying his
love and urging to penitence. Men are repeatedly urged to believe the gospel and
welcome the Saviour. God multiplies mercies when judgments are richly deserved.
The grand truth of these verses is the lesson which Jobn taught so affectionately
afterwards, ‘ God is love.”

I. Love in its highest form. Israel had fallen into idolatry, and was guilty of
adultery. Lust and sensuality were mixed with illicit worship. - God, their chief
good, was forsaken and lovers trusted. 1. Love to the guilty sinner. Men have
gone astray from God, and live having no hope, and without God in the world.
Alienated from God by wicked works, they do not seek nor serve God. God is
not in all their thoughts. They are given to pleasure, gratification, and shame.
Some men are not even moral. They are corrupted by their worldly, selfish prin-
ciples. Loving sin, and rendering homage to improper, unholy objects, they have
become like the gods they worship. Man is lost, spintually lost, lost to God and
to his highest interests—unholy in character, helpless in condition, and unlike God
in everything. ‘‘ There is none righteous, no, not one: there is none that under-
standeth, there is none that seeketh after God. They are all gone (aside) out of the
way,” apostatized from God, from his laws, and from principles of truth and right;
‘they are together become (filthy) unprofitable,” in their conduct and practice.
They are depraved in heart and defiled in life (Ps. xiv. 2, 3; cf. Rom. iii 12, 13).
Yet man thus lost and depraved is the object of Christ’s care. God loves us, even
in our weakness and worldliness, in our “crimes and carnality.” ‘The Son of
Man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.” Christ seeks to bring us
back to God, to deliver us from our sins, to correct the sinful and selfish principles
of our nature, and to make us sons of God. The most distant and degraded, the
most wretched and licentious, all who are conscious of their lost and ruined con-
dition, may come to God. Poor Joseph, with a parcel of yarn hanging over his
shoulders, heard the message of joy from the text: ‘‘ This is a faithful,” &. John
Newton in preaching to the prisoners at Newgate wept, and they wept with him,
as he enlarged on “ this faithful saying.” ‘ This is a faithful saying, and worthy
of all acceptation, that Christ came into the world to save sinners.” — 2. Love to the
unfaithful professor. - God’s love is not simply to the wretched and perishing. To
love the distressed is comparatively easy; but to love the unfaithful and the
adulteress, those who add guilt to upwortbiness, idolatry to apostasy, and provo-
cation to ingratitude, is more than humanity can do. Men respect the just and
love the good ; but God commendeth his love toward us, in that while we were
yet sinners. We may even love when immorality is allied to woe, and hatred to
personal offensiveness ; but love in its purest, freest form, love in God, passes over
demerit and offence, withstands provocation and insult, and blesses those that
curse. The unworthy servant is sent. away from our employ. The unfaithful
friend is forsaken and condemned. But what shall we say of unfaithful Israel 9
What shall be done to those who havo loved and forsaken their love, sworn alle-
giance, yet broken off and are guilty of fornication? ‘Go yet, love s women”


42 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [CHAP. 1m


most guilty and most unworthy; love with a definite and Divine love, “ according
to the love of the Lord toward the children of Israel ;” a love without a parallel
and beyond expression. ‘I know that the mercy of God is infinite,” said a brother
of Whitfield, the great preacher, to Lady Huntingdon; “ but, my lady, there is nv
mercy for me, a backslider, a wretch, entirely lost.” “I am glad to hear it, Mr
Whitfield,” said she. “1am glad that you are a lost man.” “ What! glad that
I am a lost man, my lady!” “ Yes, truly glad; for Jesus came into the world to
save the lost.” He blessed God for his love, and the same evening died in peace.
God still yearns over those who have fallen a second time. The backslider and
unfaithful professor may yet return. God remembers his covenant and will ever
fulfil his word. ‘ Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord; and I will not
cause mine anger to fall upon you ; for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will
not keep mine anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast
transgressed against the Lord thy God.” II. Love in its active operation. All
feeling, all emotion in the heart demands and seeks an outward expression. Feel-
ing will not slumber in the soul any more than ignited gunpowder will smoulder
away without explosion. Man is not a mere block, to move and be moved by at-
traction and force. Nor is he a mere physical structure ; but a being of sympathy
and emotion. Love is one of the strongest passions, and on whatever object it is
fixed, will lead to intense energy and activity. There may be pity without help ;
benevolence which merely wishes good to be done. We may feel for the sufferer
and not interpose ; retain our sentiment and say, ‘“‘ Be ye warmed, be ye clothed,”
without giving “the things needful for the body.” Love is deeds, not desires, nor
words. Its objects are out of itself, and according to its strength and opportunity
it reaches others. ‘‘ God so loved the world,” that “he gave” something, he did
something. “In this was manifested the love of God toward us.” ‘ Hereby per-
ceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us.” Measure the love
by the gift and the deed. Things may represent feeling and value, desire and
delight, but persons are the greatest sacrifice. In giving a person, God gave the
greatest of all persons—“ his only begotten Son.” Christ shed his precious blood to
redeem men from sin and death. Damon had great affection for his friend Pythias.
When Shelley gave Leigh Hunt a thousand pounds to liberate him, the act was a
proof of no common friendship, and showed that he valued his friend more than
his gold. God’s love excels all other, seeks to restore the fallen and most degraded
to himself. He is not satisfied with anything less than complete restoration, com-
plete salvation. The prophet bought the “‘woman beloved,” redeemed her from
slavery and idolatry, and eventually took her to himself. Life must be supported,
a bridal gift bestowed, and she must be re-instated in his heart and home. “ If
the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving
of them be but life from the dead?” III. Love in its necessary discipline.
According to Scripture, all suffering under God’s administration has a moral end,
and must not be viewed by itself, without any reference to results. In some cases.
it is judicial, penal, and exemplary in solemn terms. But in its bearing upon God’s
people, it is corrective, given for a gracious purpose and a blessed experience, pro-
gressive sanctification and final perfection. “ God chastens us not for his pleasure,
but for our profit, that. we might be partakers of his holiness.” This design should
help us to bear it even most frequent and severe. ‘“ My son, thank God for
me,” said Dr Armold on his death-bed. ‘Thank God, Tom, for giving me this
pain. I have suffered so little pain in my life, that I feel it is very good for me
now God has given it me, and I do so thank him for it.” That man should be
capable of Divine holiness and fellowship with God, proves the capacity of his
mental and the dignity of his moral nature. Affliction is chosen as a suitable and
sovereign remedy to cure our evils. We are estranged from God and given to the
creature. Our attachments to wealth, power, and ambition, to pleasure and
aansual indulgen:e. are not easily broken, God’s method of weaning from the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LiOSEA. 43








world, and breaking up unhallowed and degrading attachment to sin, is by remov-
ing the object from us, visiting us with sickness, or.smiting witha curse, what we
love instead of him. Israel, like a captive woman remaining in the house, separated
_ from her master, bewailing her captivity, was to sit for many days in solitary
discipline (Deut. xxi. 13; Ex. xxiv. 14; Jer. iii. 2); weaned or free from idolatry,
yet not immediately received into friendship and favour with God. They were also
to abide many days without prince or priest, temple or sacrifice. Hence—l. Love
disciplines by solitude. “Thou shalt abide (remain quiet) for me many days.”
God often withdraws us from scenes of pleasure and*mirth, deprives us of friends
and means of grace, and confines us to beds of sickness and solitude. Sequestered
from the excitements of lifs, cut off from the objects of our love, we should “be
still and know that I am God.” Murmur not, nor complain; but submit ix
patience and hope. “So will I also be for thee.” Our deepest experience, ow
spiritual discipline, must be in solitude. We must suffer alone, and get wisdom
alone. We must learn the evil of our ways and God’s displeasure against sin, not
in the friction of society, but in the lonely chamber and the closet. This is the ex-
perience of all good men. Our affections are kindled, our resolutions fortified, and
our hearts prepared, in solitude. Christ began public life with forty days in the
wilderness, was made perfect through suffering, and had to tread the wine-press
alone. Solitude and suffering alone are means of education ; designed by God
to chasten and refine, to awaken, convert, and restore the sinner and the backslider
to himself. Afflictions are not messengers of his avenging wrath, but tokens of
parental love ; and in sending them he acts not as an angry judge, but a kind and
_ forgiving father; correcting in love, and designing to bring forth “the peaceable
fruit of righteousness in them which are exercised thereby.” 2. Love disciplines
by deprivation. First, By depriving of the supports of life. “Without a king
and without a prince.” A king was Israel’s special choice, and a king was Israel’s
support. The court of Solomon was the glory of Israel, and Solomon’s son was
the favourite king. Kings and princes were commanders and leaders of the people.
When these were slain, when civil governments were overturned, they were left
without support and defence. God not only gives, but takes away. Kings, princes,
magistrates, and judges, are ordained of God, and are often taken away by his
providence for the sins of the people. Individuals are often bereft of bread,
friendship, and support, and families of honour and prosperity, that they may
know that Jehovah alone can deliver and save. Second, By depriving of the en-
joyments of life. ‘“ And without sacrifice, and without an image, and without an
ephod.” Sacrifice was the distinctive feature in the Jewish religion. To take
away sacrifice was to rob them of their prestige and religion, their enjoyments and
freedom. They had no legal priesthood, no liberty of public worship, and no
oracle to guide them in duty and distress. To be deprived of religious teachers
and. religious ordinances is sad indeed. But comforts die, riches fly away, friends
forsake us, and our enjoyments often decay. Our lovers disappoint us, and we
are compelled to “ return and seek the Lord our God,” who afflicts in mercy and
draws in love. IV. Love in its blessed results. After a time of Divine chastise-
ment and discipline, Israe] will “turn and seek Jehovah their God, and David
their king, and will go trembling to Jehovah and to his goodness.” Jehovah
will be found of them that seek him with solicitude. He is our only hope and
dependence. If we abandon idols and turn to him, we shall again taste his good-
ness and rejoice in the light of his countenance. 1. Love draws the penitent.
Wher the sinner discovers his folly, and repents of his sin; when he feels his
helplessness, and cries for mercy ; he needs some encouragement and hope. The
Bible reveals a God of love. God in Christ upholds the law in love, atones
for sin, and loves the sinner. Mercy invites, and the weary and heavy laden come
and find rest in Jesus. Hope beams upon the soul. The love of God warms and
breaks up the heart, like the spring breaking up frozen waters. This love reaches


64 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (cuar, im





and draws the contrite sinner, and he resolves. to return to his home and his rest.
‘“T have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving-kindness have
I drawn thee.” 2. Love turns the backslider. Protessing Christians are often
unfaithful to their vows and their God. ‘They fall into error and backslide from
God. “Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer.” “My people are bent to
backslide from me.” But God still watches over them, seeks to chastise and cor-
rect them, and restore them to his favour. Peter denied his Master, but was over-
come by the look of love, and went out and wept bitterly. He felt his guilt and
was despairing of mercy, but the message of joy encouraged him—“ Go and tell
Peter.” The description of the world without God, is the personal experience, the
humble confession, of God’s people—“ All we, like sheep, have gone astray.” They
are led away by open sins or “secret faults ;” by sense, fancy, or appetite ; and
are found in crooked paths of sin and shame. Strange tendency to wander from
@ God go good, and privileges so great! What can induce men to turn their backs
upon their best friend, and sin against the most precious love that was ever known?
‘There is no enjoyment in distance from God. The child of God cannot be happy
separated from God, and will not entirely lose remembrance of forsaken blessing.
God seeks his own. Christ, the good shepherd, goes after that which is lost, until
he finds and restores it. “I have gone astray like a lost sheep: seek thy servant ;
for I do not forget thy commandment.” 3. Love begets loyalty. Israel shall not
only seek the Lord their God, but “ David their king.” A prince shall rule over
them again, and they shall be a loving, loyal people. Love subdues the haughtiest,
brings back the most distant, and wins all favours. ‘Love overcomes apathy and
antipathy. Severity creates hatred ; mercy, love, kindness; “a kiss for a blow”
will ever be found the best antidote. to crime. Enmity to God is the nature, the
very essence, of the carnal mind. Destroy its enmity, and you destroy its life and
power. God destroys by his: love, disarms all opposition, and begets love in return.
“ Truth is light, but love is life.” ‘Love is power.” Knowledge does not impart
power to obey. Nothing but love,.an appreciation of the Divine character and
goodness, can beget true loyalty in the heart. We -have the manifestation and
method of love in the gospel. New life is quickened within us, and God speaks
with power to our hearts. New affections expel meaner ones; moral activity is
guided by faith. Welove.and labour most-earnestly for God, who has blessed us,
“We love him because he first loved us.” .


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Truly the prophet in two respects has
set forth great things. For, in the first
place, he could not describe sin as being
more dreadful than he here pictures it
in the sin of the adulteress. And, again,
he extols highly the love of God by this
image, when he says that he is animated
by love toward the adulteress [ Luther].

Looking unto other gods. " Placing
our affections and confidence in other
things—preference for the creature in-
stead of the Creator, who is infinite in
goodness and resources,

Flagons of wine. 1. Atype of sin—
sweet, sensual, and unwholesome food.
2. An image of idol worship—fleshly in
its nature, poor in its consequences.


“The solemn and strict. religion .of


Jebovah is plain but wholesome food ;
whereas idolatry is relaxing food, which
is only sought after by epicures and
men of depraved tastes” [Hengsten-
berg]. Compare Job xx. 12, where
sin is figuratively described as food
which is sweet as new honey in the
mouth, but turns into gall in the belly.

Ver. 4. In this condition Jews have
ever sinceremained: free from idolatry,
and in a state of waiting for God, yet
looking in vain for a Messiah, since they
had not and would not receive him who
came unto them; praying to God, yet
without sacrifice for sin; not owned by
God, yet kept distinct and apart by hie


providence, for a future yet to be re-


yealed. God has been towards thems,


OHAP. IIT.}





He has preserved them from mingling
with idolaters and Mohammedans. Op-
pression has not extinguished them,
favour has not bribed them. He has
kept them from abandoning their
mangled worship, or the Scriptures
which they understand not, and whose
true meaning they believe not; they
have fed on the raisin-husks of a barren
ritual and unspiritual legalism, since
the Holy Spirit they have grieved
away. Yet they exist still, a monu-
ment to us of God’s abiding wrath on
sin, as Lot’s wife was to them, encrusted,
stiff, lifeless, only that we know that





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 45


the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear shall live
[Pusey]. 1. Cutting short of outward
mercies, should cut off from sin and
humble us that we may be ripe for
mercy; and whatever our frame and
carriage may be, yet by affliction God
will cut short occasions of sin, as the
adulteress is shut up and dieted, is
secluded from her lovers. 2. The Lord
may intend much good to them whom
he brings into contempt, and to a low
condition ; for he sequesters and shuts
up Israel with an eye to marry her
[ Hutcheson}.


HOMILETICS.
“FEAR THE LorD AND His Goopnsss.”


This is the drift of the discourse, the right and proper result of the goodness
of God upon our hearts. I address myself first of all to God’s people; secondly, to
such as are yet unreconciled to him.

i. First, to God’s people. You have received of this goodness two ways; the
first and the higher is his spiritual goodness; the second form is the providential
bounty of God toward you. First survey the spiritual goodness of God to you.
It was no small goodness to choose you at first—no slight goodness which ordained
a covenant on your behalf with Christ Jesus, and which fulfilled that covenant.
Think of God’s goodness to you when unconverted: what long-suffering ! what
tenderness! You have been filled with joy and peace in believing ; led first into
one truth and then other, and God has outdone all you asked or thought. All this
should constrain you to fear the Lord. First, there should bea fear of admiration.
Saints who have tasted the Lord’s goodness should fear him with worshipful fear
of adoration. The goodness of God to us should suggest aspiration. The great-
ness of it should suggest to us great service; the continuance of it should move us
to persevere in honouring him; the disinterestedness of the love of God should
make us ready for any self-denials; and above all, the singularity and speciality of
his goodness should determine us to be singular and remarkable in our consecration
to him. We should also fear the Lord aud his goodness in the sense of affection.
We must fear him with humiliation. The goodness of God ought to make us fear
him with a sacred anaiety, an anxiety of a double character. Am I really his? or
if I be his, and have such goodness bestowed upon me, am I rendering to him what
he may expect? We should fear the Lord, lastly, with the fear of resignation. Now
for the goudness of God in providential matters. Fear God much more than ever
before, Jest these temporals should become your god. Fear God, lest you should un-
dervalue your responsibilities, Fear God and his goodness, lest he turn his hand
and make you poor. You should fear the Lord now, especially while you have
your children about you, and you are in health, because you will have to leave all
these things very soon. Fear God and his goodness, because he is better than all
his gifts of providence. II. A few solemn words to such as are not God’s people,
but enemies to God, careless and yet prosperous. You have provoked God, and
if justice had been done, where would you have been? Will you not fear and
serve him owt of gratitude? Do you not feel ashamed that so good a God should
be so ill repaid? Ought you not also to fear God out of hope? If he has dealt
so mercifully with you in temporals, have you not every reason to expect that he
will do as well for you in spirituals? Should you not fear the Lord aud bis good:


46 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. [ CHAE. IV


ness out of great admiration ? for how well, how kindly, how strangely well has he
dealt with you! Lastly, let me say you may well fear God out of apprehension
concerning his goodness, for the goodness which he now renders to you will pass
away ere long. There is trouble for you in store except you turn and repent ; first
one rod—sickness to the child; then others—such as loss in business, sickness to
yourself, death to your wife, &c. Woe to that man whom neither goodness nor
severity can move; whom neither loving-kindness can draw, nor justice drive.
For such there remaineth nothing but cast away for ever, from God whom he
would not love, from Christ whom he would not accept, from mercy which he
despised, from love which he rejected [Spurgeon].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER III.


Affliction a discipline. This sorrow old fable tells us of the sun and the


comes not from the ground, nor yet
affliction from the dust. It has been
beautifully said, that sorrow is the river
of God’s love flowing through shaded
scenery. In all sorrow there is a limit
—namely, that fixed by considerations
for our own good. God is encompassing
eur path with thorns, lest we should
wander into regions that chill or scorch
us to the death. By some high method
he overrules our narrow wishes and
petty aims, and subordinates them to
his own vast and beneficent designs.
Misfortunes have been angels’ visits un-
awares. Amid the changes and the
chances of this mortal life let us walk
humbly with God and fix our hearts and
hopes in him,

The power of love. Is there not an
invincible power in tenderness? The


wind which strove to see which could
first remove the traveller’s cloak. The
wind blustered, but the traveller only
wrapped his cloak more tightly about
him, but when the sun shone warm and
soft upon his head, the traveller speedily
cast off his cloak. If God had dealt
roughly with you, I should not have
wondered if you had said—“I will not
serve him ;” but after his being so kind
with you, off with that cloak of in-
difference and be his servant. Will not
the warmth of God’s love thaw your
soul? The chilling frost of threatenings
might have hardened you into a rock of
ice, but this sunshine of prosperity and
love which the Lord has given you,
will it not melt you, will it not bring
you to Jesus? [Spurgeon].





CHAPTER IV.


CriticaL Nores.—1. Controv.]= a legal action (cf. Mic. vi. 2; Joel iii. 2), or ground of
complaint with the ten tribes (ver. 15). Truth] ¢. ¢. truthfulness in word or deed, no conscience
nor uprightness (Prov. iii. 3; Jer. iii. 4). Mercy] Affection, tenderness, and love; no compassion
to the needy. Truth and love cannot be separated. “Truth cannot be sustained without mercy ;
and mercy without truth makes men negligent ; so that the one ought to be mingled with the other.”
No know.] which produces love and fear; wilfully ignorant; hence injustice the upper hand. 2,
Swearing] a breach of the second, stealing of the eighth commandment. In Heb. these nouns of
action give emphasis and picture the scene, nothing but evil, and that continually. Break] out
like waters beyond all bounds and restraint (2 Sam. v.20). Blood] Lit. bloods, shed with violence,
Toucheth] “ Murder was so common, that no space was left between its acts’’ [Henderson]. 8.
Mourn] by drought (1 Kings xviii. 17, 18). Asa consequence vegetation scorched, animal life wastes
away, and pools dry, the greatest calamity that could happen in the East. 4. Strive] Lit. only
man, let him not strive, and let not man reprove. God had taken the matter in his own hands,
reproof would only aggravate their guilt, man must not interfere, Some give, let none reprove one
another; each must look to his own sins. Priest] The judge and tribunal to decide law-suits
(Deut. xvii. 12, 13), to dispute with whom was the highest contumacy. 6.) People and prophet
would fall by night and day without intermission. Mother] The whole nation destroyed. 6. Know.]
Lit. the knowledge of God (ver. 1). which is life to the soul. Reject] Utterly reject thee fom being


CHAP. 3v.] LOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSRA.





a priestly nation (Ex. xix. 6); deprived of priestly rank, and made like heathens, God repays in
kind ; despise the truth, this will suppress it. 7%. Increased] in number and wealth. Shame] #. ¢.
dishonoured by the loss of all. Some, in proportion as priests were elevated in power and dignity
above the people, they surpassed them in sin. 8. They] The priests made gain on the sins of the
perl’, lived upon them. Set their heart] Lusted after, strongly desired, instead of checking iniquity.

hey encouraged idolatry for selfish ends. 9. Punish] Visit upon them. Reward] Make to return
upon them their doings; rank and wealth will not preserve them from sharing the fate of the nation.
Presumptuous sins return to their own bosom (Prov. i. 31). 10. Enough] Not be satisfied. Left off]
keeping, observing Jehovah (Zech. xi, 11). All other means of increase failed. Polygamy against
the law, and will bring the curse of God. 12. My people] Their wood, give keenness to the re-
proach. God’s people seek to be instructed by a staff, depend on wooden idols constantly and entirely!
From under] his authority and subjection. 18. Tops] Thought to be near God and heaven (Deut.
xii. 2). Shadow] screening from the heat of the sun, and filling the mind with certain awe. God
delivers up to vile affections as a punishment for idolatry (Rom. i. 26). 14.] God turns from the
reckless nation as unworthy of being mentioned, and speaks in the third person. They] Husbands
and fathers go aside to be alone with harlots. Sacrifice] Come to the altar with them instead of
their own wives, “the climax of shameless licentiousness.” The young cannot be blamed, for the older
are much worse. Ver, 15—19 a warning to Judah not to partake of Israel’s guilt. 15. Come not]
by pilgrimages to places of idolatrous worship. Swear not] in temples of idols. “The confession
of Jehovah 1s hypocrisy in the mouth of an idolater ; pretended piety, which is more dangerous than
open ungodliness, because it lulls the conscience to sleep” [Keel]. 16. Backsliding heifer] Stub-
born and refractory (Jer. vii. 24). Asa lamb] Free play. If Israel would not submit to the yoke,
they might go where they liked, become prey of wolves in the field, be given up to exile and disper-
sion. 17. Joined] Closely and voluntarily bound, and cannot give them up (cf, Num. xxv. 3;
1 Cor, vi. 16, 17). Alone] Lit. give him rest from all further expostulation, which he will not hear
[Pusey]. Give him up as incorrigible [Boothr.]. Have nothing to do with him. He is bent
on his ruin, let him suffer the consequences (Jer. vii. 16); punishment cannot long be delayed. 18.
Sour] A metaphor for degeneracy in principle (Is. i. 22) ; turned, as we say of milk. They had lost
all their life and taste of goodness [Pusey]. Rulers] Lit. shields, protectors, and supporters of
the state. Love] Avarice and luxury. No remedy against corruption when rulers are bribed. 19.
Bound her up] A tempest will suddenly and violently seize them, wrap them up, and carry them
away (Ps, xvili, 11; civ. 3; Is. lvii. 13). Ashamed] of idols and disappointed in hope. Disap
pointment is certain to those who seek out of God what can only be found in him.


HOMILETICS
Gop’s Controversy witH a Guitty Propur.—-Verses 1—5.


The prophet now begins to speak more plainly. Israel was bound to God by
legal covenant. God only wishes justice to be done, and will not subject them to
disadvantages. But they have infringed upon his rights, neglected their obliga-
tions, and forgotten their relation to him. Hence the suit-at-law. The land,
swept of fidelity, goodness, and love, is brought to shame and desolation.

I. The nation summoned into court. “Hear the word of the Lord, ye cnil-
dren of Israel.” The whole people, with prophets and priests, are called to the
judgment-seat of God to make their defence or hear their indictment. Men are
inattentive and negligent. They disregard the word of God, and forget things
which make for their peace. If Demosthenes had need to reprove the Athenian
senate for inattention to his speech on important affairs, how much greater
reproof do the careless and indifferent require now. It is sad to be given up to a
spirit of slumber, to have eyes and not see, ears and not hear. None so deaf as
those who will not hear. God speaks loudly and continually in his providence
and word—“ once, yea, twice, yet man perceiveth it not.” In creation wisdom,
power, and goodness are manifest ; in works of judgment and mercy God’s voice
is heard; by his prophets and his Son God expostulates, but men neglect the
warnings. This needful admonition suggests a sad condition. One would think
that every one would gather round the feet of Jesus, and, like Samuel, cry, “ Speak,
Lord, for thy servant heareth!” But sinners are—l. Ignorant; 2. Careless; 3.
Obdurate. God’s cause will be pleaded by the words of his mouth, and the
wonders of his providence. He speaks with authority, demands fair hearing, and
gives fair warning. ‘He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” II. The nation
accused of guilt. The indictment of Israel is given negatively and positively.
We have the absence of virtue and the presence of evil, There ast bs one or the


a8 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [ CHAP. IV





other. The human mind does not like a vacuum. Dethrone good, you set up
evil. A mind unoccupied and a life of sin are the impersonations of wretchedness.
Some object must engage attention. The heart must have something really good,
or thought to be good, to lay hold of. Wrest it away from one thing, without
the substitution of another, you leave a void as painful as hunger. It may be dis-
possessed of one thing, but it cannot be desolated of all. If grace does not abound
in thought and conduet, sin will much more abound. In Israel there was—l. A
declension of religion. “There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in
the land”... (a) “No truth.” Truth is the bond of union and the basis of
human happiness. ‘ Without this virtue,” says Jeremy Collier, “there is no reliance
upon language, no confidence in friendship, and no security in promises and oaths.”
Neither talent nor genius can be trusted unless based on truthfulness. This is
the foundation of personal excellence and human character; this is the health and
ornament of the nation ; loyal adherence to truth is the secret of a nation’s power
and a nation’s glory. When there is no truth, but falsehood ; when men’s acts are at
variance with their words; then there is no respect, nor honesty, nor security.
What a sad state of society! We depart from truth when we state as true what
we do not know to be true, when we intentionally produce a false impression,
when we deceive and designedly mislead. Often painful wrongs are inflicted by
covert innuendos and malignant insinuations. Half a fact is a whole falsehood, and
he who colours truth by false methods of telling it is a liar. “Of all duties,” says
a writer, “the love of truth, with faith and constancy in it, ranks first and highest.
Truth is God. To love God and to love truth are one and the same.” (6)
“ Nor mercy.” Mercy is pity or compassion which one man shows toward another
in misery ; clemency towards our neighbours (Prov. xx. 28; Luke x. 37). “‘ Let
not mercy and truth forsake thee; bind them about thy neck ; write them upon
the table of thine heart.” Mercy and truth are the glorious perfections of God
always in harmony and action. We rest upon them for salvation, and should copy
them in life. The want of one neutralizes the effect of the other. A man may be
truthful, and yet not merciful. Just in his dealings to others, yet “as hard as
flint.” Mercy has been urged upon man from the very beginning to counteract
his selfishness and cruelty. “It becomes the throned monarch better than his crown,”
and ‘“‘earthly power doth then show likest God’s when mercy seasons justice.”
Kindness evokes kindness, and our own happiness is increased by our benevolence.
“ Kind words cost little.” Friendly conduct may meet with ungrateful return ;
but absence of gratitude on the part of the receiver cannot destroy the pleasure of
the giver. ‘‘ Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.” (c) “ Nor
knowledge of God.” ‘There was no sense of honesty and obligation, no justice nor
humanity. Truth and benevolence had been disregarded. The fragmentary man
was seen in disordered society and ignorance of God in a land specially his own,
and which should have presented his glory and preserved his name. The know-
ledge of God is a necessity of our moral nature, and lies at the foundation of all
morality and religion. Man can have no obligation to mere laws of nature, and
fee] no sense of responsibility to an impersonal being. God has revealed himself
in his works and word. We are related to him as intelligent and moral beings.
We owe duty to ourselves and our fellow-men because God wills and commands it.
But God is not recognized, and then forgotten in motive and duty. God is not
seen through his works, and in Israel and England we have a succession of human
beings instructed in the laws and duties of society, with the character and even the
existence of the law-giver omitted. We have the means of knowing and worship-
ping God, but no true, practical knowledge of God. The supreme influence of God
is lost in the family and in the land, in custom and law, hence a spirit of subor-
dination and licentiousness. We have sound creeds but ungodly lives ; theoretic,
but little practical knowledge of God. If men “hold the truth in unrighteousness,”
eheck the development of it in their lives, and reject the knowledge of God; they


CHAP. Iv.]} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 49


—_—_—_———


begin the downward course to idolatry and grossest sin. The history of the
heathen world and the results of the French Revolution prove this knowledge to
be the safeguard of the people, to be necossary (1) to preserve mental vigour.
If the knowledge of God is not thought werth keeping in the mind, then the mind
itself will become worthless and degenerate, “a reprobate mind” (Rom. i. 28). (2)
to preserve true morality. Progressive vice, penal sufiering, and fearful lusts are
the certain results of rejecting the knowledge of God. “If there be not a God,
we must invent one,” cried one of the leading spirits of France. ‘ Some have not
the knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame.” 2. A corrupt morality.
“ Swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,” were
common practices. These, and nothing but these, were seen all around. Religion
and morality are bound together. Without the one there can be no true existence
of the other. Ignorance of God is a source of wrong practice, a source of all evils.
Where there is no love and truth, no regard to God, there will be vices contrary
to these virtues. When the soul or the land is empty of good, it will be full of
evil. Evils of every description abounded in Israel. Society was penetrated
with vice and profligacy. Perjury and falsehood corrupted the morals and manners
of the people. Religion and virtue were swamped. Family and home were alike
tainted. Domestic purity, religious sanctity, no longer restrained and bound society
together. The laws by which God had fenced the estate, the life, and character of
men were broken; violence and bloodshed knew no bounds, carried everything
before them, and like a flood swept the nation to ruin. III. The nation punished.
“Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein shall
languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven ; yea, the fishes
of the sea also shall be taken away,” &c. Genera] depravity produces general
punishment. God in judgment sent a universal drought, such as that which pre-
vailed in the reign of Ahab. Vegetation was to suffer, animal life decay, and sea
and land groaned beneath the visitation. If man will not love God, neither shall
God’s creatures help man. For man’s interests and theirs are bound together in
the wondrous providence of God. 1. Man’s sins affect inanimate creation. Man
was not made for the earth, but the earth was made for man. By successive steps
and gradual events the earth was prepared and fitted to be his residence. For him
power had stilled the conflict of chaos and restored “the reign of law.” For his
sake goodness had beautified the earth and clothed it with vegetation. In wisdom
the various animals were subject to his control, and he had dominion over all the
earth. Man had to replenish, subdue, and govern the earth (Gen. i. 28). (a) Man
ws related to material creation by his physical nature. His name (Adam), man, is
formed from the (adamah) material of which his body is composed. He is related
to the physical laws of the universe as a physical being, and is amenable to gravita-
tion, mechanical force, and chemical action. As an organized being he is subject
to organic laws. Every great characteristic by which vegetable life is distinguished
from inorganic matter and animal life, is found in him. He also possesses animal
instincts like the inferior creatures. Thus man’s constitution in its threefold cha-
racter, of physical, organic, and sentient, “took up the strain of creation which
had preeeded his coming, in praise of the power, and wisdom, and goodness of
God.” (b) Man has brought a curse upon material creation by his first sin. The
earth is not like the garden of Eden in which he was placed at first ; ‘cursed is
the ground for thy sake.” It does not yield its produce with its original ease and
abundance. We have disorder and decay, malformation and barrenness. ‘Thorns
and thistles shall it bring forth,” with all our toil and daily labour. When man
fell from his original position with God, the earth lost its fruitfulness and dignity,
and now “the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain” under its bondage
end corruption, and is waiting for its freedom and greater blessing (Rom. viii. 20
—22). (c) Man injures material creation by his immoral conduct. Material forces
are largely at his command. He zan change and create; beautify and adorn:


50 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [CHaP, IV





impair and destroy. Solomon saw the field of the slothful “all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was
broken down” (Prov. xxiv. 30, 31). A life of mere animal sensual indulgence,
manual or mental sloth will bring to poverty. Idleness and neglect will bring
drought and failure of crops (Hag. i. 2—11). Vice, idolatry, and licentiousness
will spread their effects and spoil the face of nature. Creation is in sympathy
with man, responds to his moral life, and is blessed or wasted by his moral conduct.
In peace and plenty, under the benediction and providence of God, the valleys
shout and sing for joy. In famine and war, under the curse and sin of man, “ the
land shall mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein shall languish.” “How
long shall the land mourn and the herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein?” (Jer. xii. 4; Ps. evil. 34). 2. Man’s sins affect the
animal creation. We should regard the animal world with due feeling. Life in
its lowest form is the gift of God. We should not abuse any creature which God
pronounced good and intended for our welfare. The inferior creatures have been
useful to man and subservient to his interests in many ways. (a) They have been
a source of sustenance. (b) A source of commerce. (c) The means of training his
powers of body and mind, But they have been punished for man’s idolatry. Their
growth and continuance have been hindered by man’s sin. As necessities of life
they have been cut off, and as objects of adoration they have been smitten with the
plague. “He turned their waters into blood and slew their fish” (Ps. cv. 29).
Internal blessing and outward prosperity shall go hand in hand when man is
restored to right relation with God. Then shall the original promise be fulfilled,
and God will give peace in the land ; rid it of evil beasts: and its inhabitants
shall lie down, and nothing shall disturb their rest (Lev. xxvi. 6). IV. The
nation punished without mercy. They had rejected God, and God would leave
them to their fate. They had despised the priests, and he would slay their
prophets. By degrees they had hardened themselves and grown stubborn in sin,
and thus ripened themselves for destruction. When the Lord has a controversy
with a people and they will not hear, it is useless to strive with them. They whe
resist the Spirit and the ministers of God, resist God himself. “ He that despiseth
you despiseth me.” Their state is most desperate and deplorable. 1. Punishment
without intermission. ‘‘ Therefore shalt thou fall in the day, and the prophet also
shall fall with thee in the night.” There would be no time free from destruction,
night and day calamities should never cease. Darkness would be no protection,
and day would be no security. Terror by night found them helpless and
exposed. Arrows from cunning foes and with deadly aims flew by day. Pestilence,
shrouded in mystery, marched on unseen, to infect the home and alarm the city.
Destruction wasted at noon-day, and there was no shield nor buckler, This re-
minds us of the Great Plague of London, when evil befell the city, and its inhabit-
ants were stricken with death. 2 Punishment without exemption. People and
prophets fell together. God’s judgments are impartial. Rank and title, wealth
and worldly distinctions, are of no avail. ‘Label men how you please,” says
Herbert Spencer, “with titles of ‘upper,’ and ‘middle,’ and ‘lower,’ you cannot
prevent them from being units of the same society, acted upon by the same spirit
of the age, moulded after the same type of character. The mechanical law, that
action and reaction ars equal, has its moral analogue. The deed of one man to
another tends to produce a like effect upon both, be the deed good or bad. In
whatever rank you see corruption, be assured it equally pervades all ranks; be
assured it is the symptom of a bad social diathesis. Whilst the virus of depravity
exists in one part of the body-politic, no other part can remain healthy.” Man’s
evil character and influence blend and bind him up with others. Not a particle is
lost, but the whole is taken up and produces its results in the general community.
Collectively and individually the destruction of all is declared. Root and branch
si-e were to be cut off. Asa nation they could not escape. ‘TI will destroy thy


CHAP. Iv. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 5








mother,” and as individuals they could not flatter themselves with hope. “ Thow
shalt fall.” 3. Punishment without human sympathy. “Let no man strive nor
reprove another.” Man is forbidden to interfere or aid. God will implead them,
and none can contradict or evade his judgments. We know not how to judge.
We condemn and acquit without cause. We are ignorant and helpless ourselves.
“None can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him.”
All are alike guilty, condemned and exposed to death. Christ alone can deliver
us. Tho redemption of the soul is precious, but human efforts, gold and silver, and
a world of rubies, could not purchase it. Riches cannot ward off judgment, nor
tears avail with God. The Scripture hath concluded, shut up as in a prison, all in
unbelief, not that God might condemn, but that he might have mercy upon all
men (Gal. iii. 22). 4. Punishment without Divine help. Criminals are sometimes
recommended to mercy and delivered from punishment; but Israel was stubborn
and incorrigible, and God forbids any to remonstrate or reprove. | Christian reproof
and expostulation bring sinners to repentance and are of immense service in setting
them right. It is one of the duties of friendship. “Faithful are the wounds of a
friend.” But when men hate reproof and defy the judgments of God, then they
are let alone to reap their folly. Their doom is certain: “Thou shalt fall,” and “T
will destroy.” “ He that is filthy, let him be filthy still.” “The fruit of sin in
time,” says Chalmers, “ when arrived at full and finished maturity, is just the fruit
of sin through eternity. It is merely the sinner reaping what he has sown, It
makes no violent or desultory step, from sin in time to hell in eternity. The one
emerges from the other, as does the fruit from the flower. It is simply that the
sinner be filled with his own ways, and that he eat the fruit of his own devices.”


A TERRIBLE DEpPRIvATION.— Verses 3—5,


The words ead us to consider a lamentable deprivation—a deprivation that
comes upon the people in consequence of their heinous iniquities. Two remarks
are suggested concerning this deprivation.

I. It is a deprivation both of material and spiritual good. First: Of
material good. (1) A deprivation of health. “Every one that dwelleth therein
shall languish.” The physical frame loses its wonted elasticity and vigour, and
succumbs to decay and depression. ‘ Languish,” like a dying man on his couch.
Sin is inimical to the bodily health and vigour of men and nations ; it insidiously
saps the constitution. (2) A deprivation of the means of subsistence. “The beasts
of the field and the fowls of heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be
‘taken away.” Literally this refers to one of those droughts that occasionally occur
in the East, and is ever one of the greatest calamities. What a dependent creature
man is! The beasts of the field, the fowls of heaven, and the fish of the sea can
do better without him, but he cannot do without them. How soon the Eternal
can destroy those means of his subsistence! One hot blast of pestilential air could
do the whole, It is a deprivation, secondly: Of spiritual good, “Let no man
strive nor reprove another ; for thy people are as they that strive with the priest.”
The meaning seems to be that their presumptuous guilt was as great as that of one
who refused to obey the priest when giving judgment in the name of Jehovah, and
who, according to law, for that cause was to be put to death (Deut. xvii. 12). One
of the greatest spiritual blessings of mankind is the strife and reproof of godly
men, The expostulations and admonitions of Christly friends, parents, teachers,
what on earth is more valuable, is so essential as these? Yet these are to be taken
away. ‘Let no man strive nor reprove another.” The time comes with the sinner
when God says, “ My spirit shall no more strive with thee; Ephraim is joined to
idols, let him alone.” Men have become so dog-like in nature that holy things are
not to be presented to them ; so swinish, that you are to cast before them no more

rls (Matt. vii. 6). II. It is a deprivation leading to a terrible doom. First:
The destruction of priest: .and people, ‘“Theretore shalt thou fall in the day, and


»


52 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


(cHar. Iv








the prophet also shall fall with thee in the night.” The meaning is that no time,
night or day, shall be free from slaughter, both of the people and the priests. This
was literally true of the ten tribes at this time. And it is true in a more general
and universal sense. God’s law is, that ‘evil shall slay the wicked ;” and it is
always slaying them, whether they be priests or people—the laity or the clergy.
If they are not true to God, day and night they are being slain. Secondly: The
destruction of the social state, ‘ And I will destroy thy mother.” Who was the
mother? The Israelitish state. And it was destroyed. England is our mother,
and our mother will be destroyed unless we banish sin from our midst [The
Homilist].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


An expostulating God, ver.1. “Hear another. 3. Opposite to the five sins


ye the word of the Lord, ye children of
Israel,” &. 1. It ts a marvellous con-
froversy. God might forsake, but he
strives with men. Princes might hold
a controversy with princes, and nations
with nations, but for God to plead with
his creatures is wondrous love. 2. It
1s a just controversy. There is abundant
reason for it. We have broken his
rovenant, reproached his name, and
oeen ungrateful for his favours. The
demands of moral government, the
interests of the universe, require some
vectification, some settlement of matters.
3. It is @ continual controversy. God is
speaking now day by day by his word
apd servants, carrying on the contro-
versy yet with the most guilty and re-
bellious, seeking to convince them of
sin, and leave them without excuse.
4. It is a hopeless controversy. The
sinner has no excuse, no argument or
right on his side. He has sinned against
light and truth, the voice of conscience
and the warnings of providence. ‘ Let
them bring forth their witnesses,” as 1
do mine, “that they may be justified”
in their works and ways. ‘“‘ Or let them
hear and say it is truth ;” let them hear
the arguments on my side, and say, after
due consideration, if truth is not with
me, and that I am perfectly reasonable
in my requirements. The sinner is
“ speechless” now and will have no plea
at the judgmert day. The potsherd of
the earth may strive with the potsherds,
but man is unequal in strife with God.
“Woe unto him that striveth with his
Maker !”

Truth and mercy.
cnowledyse of God.


1. Rooted in the
2. Related one to


mentioned in verse 2, swearing, lying,
killing, stealing, and  incontineney.
“Truth and love are mutually condi-
tions, the one of the other. ‘Truth
cannot be sustained without mercy ; and
mercy without truth makes men negli-
gent; so that the one ought to be
mingled with the other’ [Jerome]. They
both have their roots in the knowledge
of God, of which they are the fruiv (Jer.
xxii. 16 ; Isa. xi. 9); for the knowledge
of God is not merely ‘an acquaintance
with his nature and will’ [Hitzig], but
knowledge of the love, faithfulness, and
compassion of God, resting upon the
experience of the heart. Such know-
ledge not only produces fear of God, but
also love and truthfulness towards
brethren (cf. Eph. iv. 32; Col. iii. 12).
Where this is wanting injustice gains
the upper hand” [ Ke7d].

Speculative and practical knowledge
are bound up together through the one-
ness of the relation of the soul to God,
whether in its thoughts of him or acts
tcwards him. Wrong practice corrupts
belief, and misbelief corzpts practice
[ Pusey].

Priest-strivers. 1. Strife against the
means of knowledge. Priests were re-
positories of knowledge, the oracles and
guides of the people (Mal. ii. 7). 2.
Strife against Divine authority. All
difficult cases were taken to the priests
(Deut. xvii. 8—12), who yronounced
judgment, and those who refused the
sentence were put to death. They re-
presented God’s authority, and spoke in
God’s name. 3. Strife against spiritual
interests. (a) Even here they, priest:
atrivers. are often left alone. Let not


CHAP. IV.]}





man strive with those who strive with
God ; reproof will only irritate and not
correct them. (6) Hereafter they suffer
the consequence of their evil ways.
“To strive then with the priest was the
highest contumacy, and such was their
whole life and conduct. It was the
character of the whole kingdom of
Tsrael. For they had thrown off the
authority of the family of Aaron which
God had appointed. Their political
existence was based upon the rejection
of that authority. The national character
influences the individual. When the
whole policy is formed on disobedience
and revolt, individuals will not tolerate


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 58


priest, so would, and did, they reject
the prophets. St Stephen gives it asa
characteristic of the Jews, “ Ye stiff-
necked and uncircumcised in heart and
ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost ;
as your fathers did, so do ye” [ Pusey.

Ver. 5. When false prophets flatter
and soothe the people in sin, when sin-
ners rebel agairst Divine authority and
reject Divine teaching, they hasten on
their ruin. No degree of prosperity, no
human aid, and no mere Church or
State can save them from sudden, unex-
pected, and fearful fall, ‘hou shalt
fall in the day, and I will destroy thy
mother.”


interference. As they had rejected the
HOMILETICS.


IGNORANCE OF Gop: A WarNING TO THE ProPLE.—Verse 6.


The prophet had complained that there was no knowledge of God in the land.
This was a serious offence in a land of privileges and religious teachers, and an
error fatal to the people. All were ignorant. The people and the priests were all
to blame. In spite of warning and judgment, by the destruction of one dynasty
tfter another, they would not desist from the sin of Jeroboam. God therefore
would deprive the nation of its priestly honour, strip it of its priestly rank, and
make it like a heathen nation. The words contain a warning to people and

riests.
: I. Ignorance of God is inexcusable. Israel had abundant means and oppor-
tunities of knowing God. “For did Israel not know?” and “ have they not
ueard #’?(Rom. x. 18, 19). The sound of the gospel was heard, and was sent
forth like the voice of nature in all the land. The conversion of the Gentiles and
the universality of Christianity were predicted ; they had the oracles of God, and
were highly exalted above other people. They had no excuse therefore fer their
unbelief. They possessed the law of God, but neglected to look into it, and for-
sook it. In this Israel are like many now, who, in the midst of religious ordinances,
in a land of Bibles and Christian Sabbaths, disregard, neglect their salvation, and
live in total ignorance of God. There is » natural distaste for spiritual things, in-
attention to religious duties, and an absorption in things of this world, which beget
indifference and lead to unbelief. There are persons who are moral but not devout,
honest but not prayerful, benevolent but not converted, amiable but not decided,
nominal Christians who are not real Christians. Those who forget God are more
numerous than the profligate and profane. Ignorance of God seems a small sin,
but ignorance is allied with wickedness. To forget God is to exclude the essential
parts of religion. It implies that his goodness, holiness, and claims are of no
value to us ; it is to exclude God from our thoughts and give him no place in our
heart and conduct. Hence to be ignorant of God is not to love and fear him ; not
to live in subjection to his law, nor to aim at his glory as the chief end of life.
Yet this is the real, the sad state of thousands in Christian England! II Ig-
norance of God is wilful. ‘Thou hast rejected knowledge.” To forget s an
act of negligence; to reject is a calm, deliberate sin, a positive refusal of God’s
kind offers. Not the mere absence of knowledge, a deprivation cf it; but a denial
of it, an affe.ted ignorance. They hated the light and loved the darkness. There
is no guilt in rejecting some things, but to refuse the offers of mercy and despise


F4 TOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA, (cHaP. IV





the revelations of God’s love in his Son, is to sin away all mercy. “For if we sip
wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no
more sacrifice for sin.” Deliberately and knowingly to forsake God and the services
of the sanctuary, is to make common cause with ungodly men and anti-christian
synagogues. ‘l'o suppress by an act of self-will your better knowledge and con-
viction, is to reserve yourself for future punishment and rejection. If the apostate
under the Old Testament was punished with severe penalty, how much greater the
punishment of the sinner against greater privileges and fuller light! ‘ Behold, J
will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have
not hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it.” III. Ignorance of
God is destructive. A man may be ignorant of mathematics, astronomy, and
geology, without suffering much ; but to be ignorant of God, the chief and highest
good, is to rob ourselves of happiness and expose ourselves to death. ‘‘ My people
are destroyed for lack of knowledge.” 1. Ignorance perpetuates folly. Ignorant
men fall into temptations, seek sensual gratifications, and live in error. Knowledge
is valuable for its own sake, and when rightly used, preserves from many “foolish
lusts.” “Be assured,” says Dr Chalmers, “it is not because the people know
much, that they ever become the willing subjects of any factious or unprincipled
demagogue. It is just because they know too little. It is just because ignorance
is the field on which the quackery of a political impostor ever reaps its most
abundant harvest.” 2. Ignorance destroys present enjoyment. The animal has all
the instincts necessary to make it happy; but man’s true enjoyment is in the
knowledge and love of God. Human beings to fulfil their vocations must have
knowledge. We are dependent for happiness upon knowledge. Every evil that
curses mankind is connected with ignorance. Hence knowledge is light. Ignorance
is a blind guide, and its results are often more fearful than the cause itself. Ex-
clude knowledge from the mind, you turn it into a world of darkness, and rob it ot
its native element. Thus driven from light, no brilliant genius, no flashes of
fancy, can enlighten it. These will scathe like the lightning, rather than bless
and cheer, and leave the gloom more horrible. Knowledge is life and health.
* That the soul be without knowledge, it is not good.” The words of God are the
health and life of the soul. ‘‘ They are life unto those that find them, and health
to all their flesh.” Wisdom is the indispensable condition of physical and spiritual
health. It promotes temperance, and gives self-restraint. It teaches submission tu
the Divine will, and leads to the emancipation of our noblest powers and capacities.
It secures the fullest and freest development of body and mind in personal life and
activity for God. Ignorance is sickness, decay, and death. Knowledge unites to
God, but ignorance cuts off from God. ‘ My people are cut off for lack of know-
ledge” Cut off from the source of life and enjoyment, like a branch lopped off
from the tree. Man cannot bear fruit of himself, hence he will perish if not united
to God in knowledge and faith. 3. Ignorance destroys future happiness. Eternal
life is suspended in knowledge, for men “perish for lack of knowledge.” On the
dther hand, ‘This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ
whom thou hast sent.” Knowledge of all kinds is the proper wealth of our rational
nature: but to captivate us with the knowledge of God, it is set forth as the only
wealth worth possessing—the only science which conducts to life. And this life
not mere unending existence, but growing knowledge and conformity to Christ.
Religion on earth consists in the knowledge of God, and blessedness in heaven con-
sists in the vision of God. Well may we pray with Professor Hall, “O Lord,
remove our ignorance, that we may know thee; our idleness, that we may seek
thee ; our unbelief, that we may find and enjoy thee.”


IGNORANCE oF Gop: A WARNING TO THE Prixsts.


I. Priests blamed tor the ignorance of the pesple. They were appointed te
teach and warn the people; but were unfaithful to their trust, and suffered. tne


CHAP. IV. |} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 55





nation to sin, 1. They neglected study. “Thou hast rejected knowledge.” They had
the means, but did not improve them. They had the law, but did not read it. The
preacher should be wise and teach the people knowledge (Ecce. xii. 9); should study to
make provision for their wants (Matt. xiii. 52) ; and make full proof of his ministry.
But an idle, ignorant minister, is a diserace to the community, and a curse to the
Church. 2. They lived inconsistent lives. They professed to belong to God, but
worshipped the calves of Jeroboam. Through poverty, fear, or shame, they with-
held, suppressed the truth, and connived at the nation’s sin. They shared in the
rejection of God’s truth, and brought themselves under God’s curse. “TI will also
reject thee.” II. Priests punished for the ignorance of the people. It was their
duty to remove it, but they encouraged it to answer their own selfish ends. Hence
they were guilty, partook of the sins of the people, and were deprived of their honour.
1. They were cast out of office themselves. ‘Thou shalt be no priest to me.” Sad
fall! God will not retain idle and ungodly men in office. Those that have no
love for Christ and immortal souls, will have no love for their work, and display no
activity in it. “ Consider this,” says Bishop Taylor, ‘which is a great truth—
that every degree of love to the world is so much taken from the love of God.”


“Take heed unto thyself,” lest thou miscarry and become a castaway. 2. They
deprived their posterity of honour, ‘TI will also forget thy children.” What will


the rising generation be without the means of knowing and loving God? What
will the nation become when its “ candlestick is removed out of its place”? It ig
sad to be forgotten of God. The sun does not shine on more wretched creatures,
than on the awful masses of our fellow-creatures growing up in ignorance and
estrangement from God. ‘‘ Where there is no vision, the people perish.” God only
knows how far the ministers of his word are the cause of this destruction. “ When
I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor
speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked
man shall die in his iniquity ; but his blood will I require at thine hand” (Ezek.
iii 18; cf. Ps. li. 14; Acts xx. 26).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Rejecting knowledge. Proves—1l. A
wrong spirit: (a) hating to be taught,
(0) despising the teacher, (c) resolved to
sin, 2. A mournful indication: (a)


selves, as to their own lives, as to their
own shame even, still long that their
children should not be as themselves.
God tries to touch their hearts where they


pride, (b) contempt of God, (c) indiffer-
ence to truth, 3. A fatal result: (a)
deadness of conscience, (b) unbelief of
heart, (c) utter rejection of God.
Forgetting God. 1. The course, for-
getting his love and goodness, word and
power, justice and grace. 2. The re-
sult: (a) awful, (b) unexpected, (c) uni-
versal, (d) inevitable. ‘‘ Ignorance is so
far from being the mother of devotion,
that it is the mother of destruction ;
lack of knowledge is ruining to any
person or people [ Matt. Henry].”
Parents who are careless as to them-


are least steeled against him. He says
not I will forget thee, but I will forget
those nearest thy heart, thy children
[Pusey].

It is the righteous judgment o1 God
upon negligent parents and unfaithful
ministers, to requite their children, for
their treatment to his. “I will also
forget thy children.” Parents cannot
do wrong without injuring their child-
ren. Ministers cannot neglect their duty
without robbing their people. The ini-
quities of the fathers and teachers shall
be visited on their children.


HOMILETICS.


Tas Dancer oF WorLDLY Prosperity.—Verses 7—9.


The increase may refer to number, or wealth, power, and dignity. Israel had
grown into a strone and powerful nation. but increase of greatness was attended


56 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. IV


with increase of sin. Its prosperity was attributed to idols (ii. 7), thought to be
the fruit of their worship, and strengthened them in their delusion. (God would
therefore turn their glory into shame and make them a warning to others.

I. In worldly prosperity men forget God. The standard of revolt was erected
in the first sin. The history of man since has been an endeavour to build an
empire, governed by laws and replenished with resources, independent of God.
Having by apostasy cut himself off from the true God, he has joined himself to
idols, or in his own sufficiency deified himself and made himself his own first and
last, all in all. 1. God is not recognized. The gifts are received with ingratitude
or attributed to human skill and effort. God is shut out entirely from men’s
thoughts and business. When men do not fear, they sink into utter forgetfulness
of God, into practical atheism. ‘‘ Because they have left off to take to the Lord,”
ver. 10. 2. God is forsaken. ‘As they were increased so they sinned against
me.” It is easy to forsake God when once he is forgotten. Worldlings make their
prosperity minister to their pride and ingratitude. Increase of wealth occasions
increase of pmp ‘“ Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked, then he forsook God which
made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation.” An abundant popula-
tion begets haughty self-reliance, and tempts nations to war. Riches and wealth
are not evil in themselves. Nor is the mere possession of them wrong. In almost
every stage of civilization they procure the necessities and conveniences of
life, and may be made the means of doing good. But to desire them for their own
sake, to put them in the place of the highest good, and to let them beget a rapacious
worldly spirit, is to abuse them and sin against God. “A man’s life consisteth not
in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.” II. In worldly prosperity
men become covetous. ‘They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their
heart on their iniquity.” The priests made a gain of the sins of the people. They
encouraged idolatry, which involved desertion of God, and connived at sinful
enstoms, The more the people sinned, the more sin-offerings were presented.
Their fees and support were derived from the calf worship. They set their heart,
i.e. their longing desire, upon their iniquity, had an interest in its growth, and did
all in their power to uphold and increase it. 1. False religionists feed upon sin.
Religious teachers are most assuming in their authority and dictatorial in their con-
duct. They feed upon the ignorance and are worshipped by the superstitions of
the people. Servility and flattery exalt them and puff them up with pride A
train of followers, a multitude of dependants, look up to them when they go out and
when they come in. “ Self, is Dives in the mansion, clothed in purple, and faring
sumptuously every day—the cause of Christ, is Lazarus lying at his gate, and fed
only with the crumbs which fall from his table.” Religious professors are satisfied
with forms and ceremonies, anxious for the reputation without performing the
duties of Christians, and feed upon merit, not upon Christ. They turn religion inte
traffic, and “suppose that gain is godliness.” 2. Covetous men feed upon sin
Every passion seeks to justify itself, but covetousness is defended and espoused by
all the passions. Covetousness was manifest in the first transgression, and has
maintained a fatal ascendency ever since. It turned the nations of old into rapacity,
arrogance, and pride, which braved the very throne of God. Alas! it changes the
priests and ministers of God into mercenary hirelings, “The heads of Zion judge
for reward, and the prophets therefore divine for money.” All covet-us men seek
to feed, to support themselves, by fraud and deceit; by worldly lusts and pleasure ;
by idolatry and selfishness. ‘The covetous man lives as if the world was made
altogether for him,” says South, “and not he for the world; to take in everything
and part with nothing.” Worldly men have perverted spiritual appetites, relish
only inferior and sinful pursuits, and feed upon ashes (Is. xl. 20). III. In worldly
prosperity men are ruined. “I will punish them for their ways.” “Therefore
will I change their glory into sname.” Sin brings its own punishment. The very
objects which excite it form a rod for its chastisament. God is perpetually remind


cHaP, Iv.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. HOSEA. 57


—=


ing men that pursuit of worldly good is attended with great anxiety and exhaust
ing toil—that its possession is often a mortification and its loss an anguish—that it
is dangerous and destructive, leading men “into temptation and a snare, and piere-
ing them through with many sorrows.” 1. Ruin instead of glory. I will change
their glory into shame. God overrules the purposes and pursuits of men. They
reap what they do not sow, and are rewarded with the opposite of what they anti-
cipate. God can strip worldly prosperity of all its glory, turn the ornaments of
character, and the acquisitions of fortune, into a curse instead of a blessing. 2.
Glory the means of ruin. Beauty is often the cause of pride. Pride and a haughty
spirit come before a fall, Ambition, power, and population drive nations to war
and destruction. ‘‘ Ambition overleaps itself, and falls on the contrary side.”
Amaziah would take no warning, lost his own wealth, and wasted the treasures in
God’s temple, and the walls of Jerusalem were broken down, and the city exposed
to shame and contempt (2 Kings xiv. 10). 3. Ruin upon all the people. “ Like
people, like priest.” Priest and people were alike in sin and must suffer in punish-
ment. ‘As witi. #e people, so with the priest” (Is. xxiv. 2). Prosperity would
not exempt the cvs, nor sanctity secure the other. None would escape, all must
be carried away into disgrace and death. The people shelter themselves under the
example of the priest: and the priest excuses himself by the power of number, the
weakness of our nature, and the strength of temptation; but God “ will punish them
for their ways.” The wicked may prosper and rule for a while; but God will visit
them. They act foolishly by turning God’s mercies to their own destruction, and
because they prosper confirm themselves in their folly. Their fame will become
infamous, their disgrace conspicuous, and their “shame will be their promotion”
(Prov. iii. 35). “ The prosperity of fools shall destroy them.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


A just retribution: if we turn God’s
glory into shame by idolatry (Ps. evi.
20 Jer. ii..2; Rom. i. 233 Phil. ‘ii.
19); God w'!l take away glory and give
ns car shame. ‘Such is the course of
sin aii chastisement. God bestows on
man gifts, which may be to him matter
of praise and glory, if only ordered
aright to their highest and only true
end, the glory of God; man perverts
them to vain glory and thereby to sin ;
God turns the gifts, so abused, to shame”
[ Pusey].

In our own days Christian ministers
and Christian laymen, from fear of man
and love of popularity, shrink from
denouncing the fashionable sins and
follies of all classes, the spurious liberal-
ism in religion, the equivocal amuse-
wsents, luxury, absence of modesty in


apparel, and covetousness, so prevalent.
Ministers conniving at the corrupt ways
of the people, and the people screening
their sin behind the worldliness of
ministers, are both alike in guilt, and
shall therefore be also alike in punish-
ment. God will make their sin their
punishment; their own presumptuous
doings shall be their reward [| Fawsset].

Like priests like people. 1. Like in
moral character—good or bad. 2. Like
in moral conduct-—consistent or incon-
sistent. 3. Like in moral destiny—
saved or lost. “Let your life bea coza-
mentary on your sermons” [Lamont].
“ The life of a pious clergyman is visible
rhetoric ” [Hooker].


“« When nations are to perish in their sins,
Tis in the Church the leprosy begins.”’
[ Cowper.)


HOMILETICS.


Sinrut [npuLeences.— Verses 10-—14.


God will visit the priests ror them presumptuous sins. Those who eat up greedily


the sin of the people shall receive neither enjoyment nor sustenance.
Sensual indulgence can rever satisfy the cravings of


desire is its own ‘wrmentor.


[Insatiable


58 HOMIL&TIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. (cHaP. Iv





the soul. “Ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with
drink.”

I. Sensual indulgences do not satisfy our wants. “For they shall eat and
not have enough.” The food of the priests did not nourish their bodies, nor satisfy
their greedy appetites. Sinful desires are never satisfied. The more they are
eratified the more intensely do they crave, and cry, like the horse-leech, “Give, give.”
Every indulgence creates the appetite. Men seek happiness in created good, and
are wretched because they do not find it. God made man upright, with a healthy
spiritual appetite, that sought its support and fruition in him. But deceived by
sin, man sought out many inventions, prepared many idols, and substituted many
pleasures for God, which cannot appease his hunger. The debaucheries of drunken-
ness, gluttony, and lust, are husks only fit for swine. The cares and toils of sin,
the pursuit of wealth and honour, of fame and fashion, indicate the disease, but
give no satisfaction to the soul. Even amid the surfeits of earth’s richest feasts
men cry, “ Who will show us any good?” Charles the Fifth, after a life spent in
military pursuits and the active, energetic prosecution of ambitious designs, resigned
his crown sated with its enjoyment. The poet Campbell, who sung in early youth
“The Pleasures of Hope,” in the evening of life said to a circle of friends, “ As
for fame, it is a bubble that must soon burst. Earned for others, shared with
others, it was sweet; but, at my age, to my own solitary experience, it is bitter.
Left in my chamber alone with myself, is it wonderful nry philosophy at times
takes fright ; that I rush into company ; resort to that which blunts but heals no
pang; and then, sick of the world, and dissatisfied with myself, shrink back into
solitude?” They spend their lives and waste their substance in that which disap-
points ; “‘ confessing all the time,” says a writer, “that they fail even when in
form they succeed, and showing by their symptoms of disappointment and dissatisfac-
tion that their objects, whether gained or lost, have no relation to their wants.”
Nothing can satisfy the immortal soul that is not adapted to its nature and consti-
tution. The enjoyment must be lasting and real, but the pleasures of sin are
short-lived and only “ fora season.” They gratify and excite, but never satisfy the
mind. Our thirst dries up all earthly things, and our hunger craves for fuller joys
than sensual indulgences. We must go out of ourselves, beyond the things of sense,
and feed on God, the only good. II. Sensual indulgences are pursued by un-
lawful means. ‘They shall commit whoredom and shall not increase.” 1. They
are increased by sinful methods. Whoredom was not the way to increase their
offspring. Children are a heritage from God. Polygamy is against the law of God
and the welfare of humanity. The fruit of illicit intercourse God will turn to
decay. Those who seek to increase in their families, to prosper in their business,
and secure worldly wealth, by unlawful means, fight against God. Dishonest ways
can never prosper. Nothing can succeed without Ged. He can desert the means
or curse the issue. ‘Treasures of wickedness profit nothing (Prov. x. 2), ill-
gotten gains are a dangerous and uncertain possession (xiii. 11; xxi. 6); and the
wages of unrighteousness will be the reward of those who follow ways of covetous-
ness and sin.” 2. They are sought in forgetfulness of God. “ They have left off to
take heed to the Lord.” Once they regarded God’s authority and law, but now
they take no heed at all. God is neither acknowledged in worship nor discerned
in providence. , They live in total forgetfulness and disregard. Mvn should “ take
heed,” look to God, “as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their masters,”
for support, direction, and duty. But when the eye is fixed on lower objects, anc
the heart centred on sinful pursuits, God is forgotten and forsaken. The lawless
and hopeless ways of men spring from disregard to God and neglect of his word.
When the eye ceases to watch God, they fall into error, wander amid the pomps,
and vanities, and lusts of the world. “Show me what thou truly lovest,” says
Fichte, “show me what thou seekest and strivest for with thy whole heart, when
thou hopest to attain to true enjoyment, and thou hast hereby shown me thy life


cmaP. Iv.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. By





What thou lovest is that thou livest. This very love is thy life, thy root, the
seal, the central point of thy being.” III. Sensual indulgences injure the
spiritual nature. They w:re so attached to whoredom and wine that they seemed
to have lost all sense of moral duty and religious obligation, and given themselves
up to “work all manner of sin even with greediness.” 1. Sensual indulgences
darken the understanding. They “take away the heart” from God their Bene
factor. Sinful passions brutalize men, and “a brutish man knoweth not.”
The unbelieving heart does not know nor understand God and his word. Men
may parade their intellect, and boast of their gifts, but estrangement from God
degrades their condition, and sinks them in the rank of being. If we have no
sanctified principle within us, we look at God’s works, interpret God’s ways, and
receive God’s blessing, just like the beasts of the field. We extract no useful and
spiritual thoughts from them. We are content with the natural use, nay, we
degrade the natural use of things. Vain imaginations darken the foolish heart
(Rom. i. 22). When the light and life of God have departed from the soul, when
the wicked have cast out the knowledge of God, God will give ‘them over to a
reprobate mind ;” a mind void of judgment and perception, weakened in power to
apprehend and approve of the truth and goodness of God (Rom. i, 28). When once
sinful indulgence darkens the mind, it becomes stupid, and its active powers are
suffered to sleep in stupidity. Men could not preserve the truth and philosophy,
could not retain the knowledge of God, without moral aid. Habits of sense and
sin, of indulgence and passion, destroy the perception of the mind and blunt the
understanding. Sensual life impairs and paralyzes the intuitive powers and bedims
the judgment. What a sad picture to see the decay of knowledge, to see the moral
sense extinguished in man, the king and lord, the minister and interpreter, of
nature! It is melancholy to see the fair creation, which God pronounced good,
poisoned and cursed by disease and death. But to make religion degenerate into
idolatry, to pervert the moral instincts of our nature, and confound by evil habits
and constant crimes the distinction between right and wrong, light and darkness,
is sad beyond degree! ‘If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness!” 2. Sensual indulgences deaden the affections. Man is a creature of
appetites and instinctive desires, in common with the mere animal. If he were
nothing more, he would be innocent in the abandonment of himself to their gratifi-
cation. But they need controlling, lest his higher interests be endangered—his in-
stincts and affections must be subordinated to a sense of duty and the love of God.
If the sensuous predominate over the spiritual, and self-indulgence and self-gratifi-
eation become the law of life, then his nobler feelings are crushed and his affections
vitiated. “ Fleshly lusts” war against the soul, the very centre and citadel of
man’s nature. The “divers lusts and pleasures,” to which natural man is a slave,
are dishonourable to the Christian and perilous to all. They disturb the peace of
the soul by corroding care and by the tumult of passion—they darken its vision,
and taint its powers with corruption—they threaten its life, and intercept its com-
munication with God and spiritual influences. To be carnally-minded is death.
In spiritual death men are “past feeling” and beyond the charms of life. The
conscience is stifled, the heart hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and they
are left without moral sense, and shame, and hope. 3. Sensual indulgences debase
the moral nature. Every created object expresses some thought, some quality of
the Divine nature. The moral character of God was revealed in the moral nature
of man. “God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he
him,” in knowledge and true holiness. “Man,” says Clement, “ is the most beautiful
hymn to the praise of the Deity.” Divine properties in him were incarnated and
humanized, and lodged in him were principles before at large. He was “crowned
with glory and honour.” But he voluntarily broke away from God, deranged the
harmony of his moral nature, disturbed the peace of the universe, and expused
himself to death. Sin has defaced God’s image, and man has lost his criginal


60 AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA (CHAP.





righteousness. The understanding is blinded by ignorance and prejudice. The
heart is alienated from God by wicked works, The affections are disordered, and the
desires corrupted. Man is now subject to sense anda slave tosin. He defile. him-
self by the filthiness of the flesh, and deforms himself by sensual indulgence.
Litsury and lusts bind the will and make him unable and indisposed to restore
himself. He has become the sport and prey of his passions. There is a tendency
to animalism, and an immortal being is compelled to ride on the back of lusts and
“presumptuous sins.” There is a loss of the consciousness of God and a forgetful-
ness of the presence of God. The supernatural tie is broken, and man wanders into
error and lives in earthly, sensual, and devilish sins. Any idol debases the moral
nature, and changes the glory which distinguishes man “into the similitude of an
ox” (Ps. cvi. 20). IV. Sensual indulgences are oftenconnected with supersti-
tion. ‘My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declareth unto them.”
It was a sad fall for the people of the living God to consult a heathen staff and say
to mere wood, My father (Jer. ii, 27). But the descent is easy and gradual. There
is a tendency in man to depart from God, to acquire and foster false ideas of God,
even in the midst of the clearest indications of his existence and the tenderest
reasons for clinging to him. Guilt, fear, and despair isolate the soul and turn it
from God—make it drop, and cut it off as a plant from the light of the sun. Then
we approach God in terror. We ereate gods of our own fancy, philosophy, and
early prepossessions. “ Fear made the gods,” says a heathen writer. It is certain
that superstition, polytheism, and atheism are only the counterpart and exponent
of the moral condition of nations. Our nature is religious, and the corrupt heart
will produce gods like itself. The philosopher contemplates nature, rejects a per-
sonal God, and becomes a pantheist. The wicked wishes there to be no God;
governed by his wishes, and led to believe against all moral evidence, he says there
is no God, and becomes an atheist. The ignorant multitude, dreading God, become
superstitious, and foster and express their religious feeling in figurative representa-
tions “ made by art and man’s device.” Men associate their notions of Deity with
the palpable realities by which they are surrounded, and in every light of heaven
and every elemert of nature they behold the presence of a presiding power. The
grove and the mountain, the valley and the stream, have been peopled with
divinities. The pride of monarchs and the ambition of heroes, the veneration of
priests and the licentiousness of people, have swelled the catalogue of gods. In
kgypt and Assyria, in Greece and Rome, in their palmiest days, idolatry was sup-
ported by the deepest principles, the most violent passions, and the most obvious
interest of legislator and prince, sculptor and poet. Originating in the depraved
propensities of fallen nature, depending upon their activity for existence and sup-
port, it afforded a patron for every vice, a plea for every cruelty; it consecrated
every lust and sanctioned every crime. Its terrible effects are written in the
destruction of institutions, the corruption of morals, and the doom of nations.
Modern civilization fares no better. If men do not consult blocks of wood and
stone, they kneel before statues and pictures, endow human conceptions with the
attributes of Divinity, and set the creature on the throne of the Creator. "We have
Ritialism and Romanism, priestcraft and priesthood, sacrifice and offering, with
their deadly evils. The mind is filled with narrow conceptions, the eyes are habitu-
atecl to artistic nullities, and the morals are polluted by gross caricatures and sen-
suous worship.’ In the bosom of the Christian Church untaught myriads are sink-
ing into modern heathenism, and believe ‘the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver,
or stone.” We have material idolatry and superstition in the present day. The
gods of sensualism are represented by lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God—
by those who seek enjoyment in the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life. The worshippers of the golden calf bow down to riches and worldly
success. Devotees of literature and science deify Nature and turn her into a temple
af odoration. Weridliness, idolatry, and superstition, in their most refined and


d


eHAY. TV.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 61





plausible forms, vitiate our conceptions of God, lower the standard of morality,
wounds society at its core, and spread dire results in families and nations. They
have breathed pestilence in the ordinances of the Christian Church—corrupting
their simplicity, polluting their sanctity, and tarnishing their glory. Though up-
held by the traditions of antiquity, the suggestions of expediency, or the dictates
of human authority, they entice, deceive, debase, and are rebellious against the
authority, the absolute and sole right of God to claim our homage. “ Thou shalt
not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven
above, or that is in the earth beneath.” V. Sensual indulgences affect posterity.
“ Therefore the people that doth not understand shall fall.” Sin and suffering are
inseparable. The moral order of the universe must dissolve and perish betore a
breach of God’s law can bring anything but evil and distress. Under the moral
government of God, the consequences of an act do not pass away with the trans-
gressor. We are taught to calculate upon remote results, impressed with our
responsibility and aided in duty. The Jews were commanded to obey God—taught
that obedience would secure, and disobedience would forfeit, their privileges to their
posterity, and reminded that the principle of involving their children in the tem-
poral condition of the fathers was a just and merciful provision. Religion appeals
to the strongest instincts of our nature, guards its purity by enlisting the affection
of parents for their offspring, and grafting on that affection a salutary fear of the
visitations of God. 1. By the influence of example sensual indulgence affects
posterity. ‘Therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses
shall commit adultery.” Children naturally imitate, do as you do, not as you
say, and “catch the infection” of parents. Hence a wise man speaks of his
children as his “ future state.” According to example, will this future be good or
evil, a success or a failure. If parents drink and swear, neglect the house and
forsake the service of God, will their children walk in any other way? If fathers
and mothers are spendthrifts, pleasure-seekers, and indulgent in vice, their children
will follow their steps, and God recompenses parents in their children. The child
copies the foibles of the father and pleases him ; he copies his vices and punishes
him. Men may love their sins, but they will be alarmed when they see them in
‘heir posterity. Antipathies are imbibed, reproduced, and intensified. Lusts are
bred and born, and bring forth death in the rising generation. In the French
Revolution, the children amused themselves by killing birds and small animals with
little guillotines. This was the natural result of what they had seen. Children
live again the lives of their parents, act their deeds, and are rewarded or punished
by their example. “God layeth up his iniquity for his children.” 2. By a natural
law sensual indulgence affects posterity. Parents and children, the present and
the future generation, are bound together not by accidental circumstances, but by
organic unity. The existing generation is giving the impress of its character to the
one that is to follow it. No man liveth unto himself. Every action in this life
is the beginning of a chain of results, the end of which cannot be seen. As in the
natural, so in the moral world, there is a ‘conservation of force.” Example is
contagious. Men beneficially or perniciously influence others, raise them up or
bring them down to their own standard of morality. Good and evil are diffusive,
aud seeds of conduct ripen and reappear in the life of others. ‘That which is born
of evil begets evil,” says Ruskin, “and that which is born of valour and honour
teaches valour and honour.” ‘The sensualist and the sabbath-breaker, the drunkard
and the glutton, are spreading “ the savour of death unto death!” The wicked and
licentious are influencing the morals of those around them. The health and hap-
piness, the honour and the degradation, of posterity are in the power of the present.
When children are “born thieves,” or “born liars,” their parents and progenitors
are to blame. Drunkards beget drunkards; dishonesty and lusts are hereditary
vices. Sensual and vicious parents beget sensual and vicious children. Diseased
parents transmit weakened constitutions and diseased tendencies to their offspring.


62 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


(cHaP. IV


Thus “the evil that men do,” as well as the good they do, “lives after them.”
The law of influence is a continuous, ever-increasing power, working consequences


to the end of time.
of their children after them.”


“‘ Thou recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 10. Take heed to the Lord. 1.
God the object of love, regard, and life.
2. When men do not take heed, disre-
gard God, they fall into sin, wander into
the vanities and lusts of the world. 3.
Culpable neglect of God, persisted in, is
lawless and hopeless, involves the loss
of blessing, and ruin. ‘As the true
cause of all men’s departure is their not
serious minding of God, that they might
observe and love him, so where this
neglect is he cares not for external form
and performance, and especially is he
provoked when men make apostasy from
better things to this temper, for it is
challenged as the root of their miscar-
riage and God’s judgments, because
they have left off,” &c. [Hutcheson].

Ver. 1l. The Triple Association.
Whoredom, voluptuousness, and drunk-
enness—their influence upon individu-
als, families, and societies. ‘As it is
God’s judgment on unfaithful ministers
and people that they are given up to
sensuality, so that will soon besot them
and make them sapless in their doctrine
and careless in their duty” [Hutcheson].

The Threefold Apostasy. 1. By
whoredom, or illicit worship rendered to
heathen gods by the chosen people.
This worship was spiritual fornication,
and by it their hearts were captivated,
taken away from that exclusive trust
and allegiance which they owed to God,
their covenant King. 2. By yayin,
wine—the type of sensual gratification
—their hearts had been taken away
from supreme affection to God, their
Divine Redeemer and Benefactor. 3.
By tirosh, the fruit of the vine—the
type of natural earthly good —their
hearts had been captivated from God,
the infinite goodness and Fountain of
spiritual joy. This was the apostasy of
which the children of Abraham had
been guilty; they went after strange gods
instead of-the true God; their best
affections centred in sensual pleasures,


instead of being fixed upon the Divine
love; and their estimate of good was
limited to earthly things (represented by
tirosh, one of the most delicious of
natural elements), instead of embracing
him “from whom all blessings flow.”
Or taking the ascending scale, their
understanding was darkened, for they
esteemed temporal good above the Giver
of eternal good; their affections were
sensualized, by being exclusively en-
gaged with animal delights; and their
spiritual nature was debased, by being
prostrated before stupid idols [Temp.
Commentary?

Ver. 12. Idolatry does not consist
merely in calling upon idols, but also in
trust in our own righteousness, works,
and service, in riches and human in-
fluence and power. And this, as it is
the most common, is also the most
harmful idolatry [Luther].

Idolatry never stands alone. All the
sins of Israel were centred init. By
association even good was magnetized
with evil, and confirmed it. In heathen
nations it is connected with cruel and
barbarous rites—in modern times, las-
civiousness and intemperance, with al)
their attendant evils, follow in its train.

Ver. 13, 14. When men forsake
God, mark the steps of degradation. 1.
They worship sticks and stocks, inferior
creatures. 2. They seek counsel and
direction from them, and take any al-
lusion for response. 3. They set up
human ordinances for Divine, the
creature for the Creator, and consecrate
mountains and hills, groves and valleys,
as temples of superstition. 4. They
forsake God’s direction, go from under
his providence and protection. God
will not accept any but spiritual wor-
ship, and all who forsake him shall
perish. 5. They bring ruin upon them.
selves. ‘‘ The people that doth not un-
derstand shall fall,” and be confounded
(Prov. x. 8, 10). “Ignorance which


CHAP. Iv. }


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 6s


a eee


we might avoid or cure, if we would, is
itself a sin. It cannot excuse sin. They
shall, he says, fall or be cast headlong.
’ Those who blind their eyes, so as not to
see or understand God’s will, bring
themselves to sudden ruin, which they


often to the children, both in the way
of nature, that the children inherit
strong temptations to their parents’ sin,
and by way of example, that they
greedily imitate, often exaggerate them.
Wouldest thou not have children which


hide from themselves, until they fall
headlong in it” [Pusey].
The sins of the fathers descend very


thou wouldest wish unborn, reform thy-
self [ Pusey].


HOMILETICS.
THe Doom or some a WARNING TO oTHERS.—Verses 15—17.


A different turn is now given to the prophecy. Israel had sinned, would not
heed, and must be punished ; but Judah, who had the law and the temple of God,
ought not to prove so stubborn and incorrigible. God specially warns his own, and
if they sin their condemnation will be greater. The idea is that we must not par-
take of other men’s sins lest we share in their punishment.

I. The provoking sin. Israel had played the harlot, backslided from God, and
continued in idolatry, heedless of Divine warning and judgment. 1. Israel were
guilty of idolatry. They knew Jehovah, but set up idols. They had made graven
images and worshipped golden calves in opposition to God’s command. They did
not intend to worship the images themselves, but God through the images. One
step led to another in the corrupting practices. Papists and Ritualists spring from
ranks which some would call earnest and devout. Men make gods, honour and
serve them, and fall into gross superstitions and idolatry. The proneness of the
Jews to polytheism is instructive to us. Churches favoured with the purest
worship, nations enriched with the oracles of God, individuals privileged with
means of grace, may fall into formalism, perfect apathy in religion, and undue
veneration of the creature. Formalism, corrupt worship, and entire abandonment
of God are the steps which lead to idolatry. God has real claims upon all his
creatures. ‘ Thou shalt have no other gods but Me.” Obedience to his law is not
merely an integral part of true morality, but essential to all religion. Regard to
him, therefore, is our first and highest duty. Disregard to God accounts for
idolatry in all its forms, for moral evil in all its features. 2. Israel were guilty of
neglecting Divine warnings. They listened not to the prophets. Servant after
servant was sent by God, but all to no purpose. They despised the message, and
persecuted the messenger. A person unwarned may have some excuse ; but “ fore-
warned, forearmed,” yet Israel repented not nor turned from danger. Many sit
under the sound of the gospel, but take no heed. If you despise exhortations,
warnings, and reproofs, neglect privileges which exalt you to heaven, how can you
escape at last? You incur sevenfold guilt by such conduct. Continuance in sin
after Divine admonition will provoke God to anger. ‘“ Ephraim is joined to idols ;
let him alone.” 3. Israel were guilty of despising Divine chastisements. God not
only warns, but chastises the sinner to wean him from his sins. Personal health
fails, business prospects fade away, and family circumstances change, but prayer is
not made to the God of our life, and comfort is not sought in him (Ps. xlii. 8).
Grievous sickness, personal and domestic troubles, do not convert men, nor turn
them from the error of their ways. Trials ought to make us think, they are the
strokes of a loving hand, designed to purify our hearts and lives. The gem cannot
be polished without friction, nor man perfected without affliction. ‘Sweet
indeed ” should be “the uses of adversity,” but they often fail to correct. They
do not remind of neglected duty, nor separate the sinner from his sin. Pharaoh,
Jehoram, and the Jews, are solemn warnings. “ O God, I have made an ill use of
thy mercies,” says Bp Hall, “if I have not learnt t ps content with thy correction.


64 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. YX.








tS





The intractable ox resisting the yoke is an apt image of the impenitent casting off
Divine restraints. Conviction follows upon conviction, chastening upon chasten-
ing, still he rebels, hardens his neck, and invites threatened: judgments. Ahab
would not be corrected, and “ the bow drawn at a venture” performed its mission.
Pharaoh grew more stubborn under the rod, and madly rushed to ruin. “If men
will harden their hearts, God will harden his hand,” says Howe. Unheeded re-
proof ripens us for judgment. ‘ He that being often reproved hardeneth his neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.” II. The fearful doom.
“The Lord will feed them as a lamb in a large place.” Scatter them into exile
and expose them to danger, as a lamb becomes the prey to wild beasts. And this
“now.” The judgment is immediate and at hand, no longer delayed. ‘“ Ephraim
is joined to idols,” in love with his sins; “let him alone,” let him rest from further
correction and expostulation, and take the consequences of his folly. This is the
last and most hopeless state of guilt. 1. Let alone by man. The godly must not
reprove nor exhort some men. They feel on account of the sins, and are deeply
anxious for the welfare, of their fellow-creatures. But there are sins beyond hope,
total apostasy and final impenitence. ‘There is a sin unto death; I do not say
that he shall pray for it.” Apostasy and idolatry are not only sins against God,
but destructive to men. The intercession of Moses and Samuel would not avail
(Jer. xv. 1), when God is angry. “ Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither
lift up a cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me; for I will not
hear thee.” 2. Let alone by God. It is sad to be without the sympathy and
prayers of men; but to be left of God is a most awful condition. It is something
more than being without the warnings of the minister, and the exhortations of a
mother or friend. One let alone is not troubled with the power of truth, the
checks of conscience, and the restraints of providence. He is undisturbed and un-
fettered in his course of sin. He goes from bad to worse, and his end is destruc-
tion. Like the adder, he cannot and will not hear the wisest charmer. The will
is averse, the purpose is fixed, and the ear is deaf. As stones fall to the ground,
sparks fly upward, and rivers roll to the ocean, so silly men run from God, and
beyond the reach of mercy. “The soul that sinneth presumptuously shall have no
atonement ; it shall be cut off from the midst of my people.” 3. Let alone without
any pity and protection. “Asa lamb ina large place.” A lamb exposed to peril
isa most helpless and pitiable creature. What more lamentable to behold than
the sinner let alone, exposed to temptation and death. This made Christ weep
over the guilty city, and Paul wish that he was accursed for his kindred in the
flesh. “The large place” of Israel were the territories of the Medes, where they
were deprived of temple worship, prophetic teaching, and Divine protection. The
large place of the sinner is the broadway to destruction; to places where strong
drink drowns reason and conscience; where sensibility is consumed by burning
passions ; where tender memories are quenched, conscience benumbed, and every
noble feeling destroyed. The man who ruins his health and his happiness, his
circumstances and his life, and who implicates his family and his fellow-creatures
by the unbridled gratification of sense, is to be pitied for his folly. Woe to that
man who has forsaken Christ, and whom God permits to go the downward road,
unpitied, unprotected, and unsaved! III. The kindly warning. ‘Though thou,
Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend.” Israel and Judah were at variance,
and such warm sympathy could not be expected from those at enmity with each
other. But the heart of the prophet beats warmly for Judah, who alone represented
the people of God. God is anxious to preserve Judah from the ways of Israel.
Spiritual, theocratic feelings are stronger than natural feelings, and must prevail.
Christianity is not insensible to private friendship and the claims of kindred; but
it kindles within us the fire of universal benevolence. 1. A needful warning. (a)
Proximity to Israel endangered Judah. Temptations are near, friends and neigh-
hours entice, and the Christian is in danger of conforming to the world. Like a


cap. Iv.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 65


rebellious province, the world has customs, statutes, and pursuits, contrary to the
law of God. Friendship with it is forbidden. Its pomp and vanities must be
renounced. We must “come out from the world, and be separate,” that is, be
Christians wholly or not at all. (b) The mixture of idolatry with the worship of
God endangered Judah. “Come not ye unto Gilgal,” &c. Gilgaland Bethaven were
places of note and great resort. Here people were accustomed to “swear the Lord
liveth,” or associate the living God with idols. Formulas of Christian worship
were employed to justify the service of idols) Man will worship something.
When the worship of Jehovah is forsaken then the devices of man are chosen.
Examples and places infect. God will not divide his claims with idols. Supersti-
tions are not more warranted or imitable because they are practised under the pre-
tence of serving God. Aaron’s golden calf was no excuse for the neglect of Jehovah.
We must have no halting, no mixture in religion. Either Baal or the Lord must
be our master and God. We cannot serve two masters. To swear by idols, by
heaven or earth, or any creature, dishonours our nature, offends our God, and makes
us a warning to others. “Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.” 2. A timely warning. God warns
before he strikes. Spaces for repentance are given men, and they are urged to flee
from the judgment before it is too late. Though Israel is given up, yet Judah
must be cautioned. This indicates Divine wisdom, love, and forbearance. ‘Sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily.” ‘‘ The long-suffering of God waited
in the days of Noah.” Provocations are given, yet God forbears to punish. But
we must not question his providence, disregard his word, and abuse his mercy.
There is clear and constant warning. The impenitent are without excuse, and the
punishment will be complete. Punishment lingers long, but falls heavily at last.
“Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him.” 3. A reasonable warning. Let
not Judah offend, “though Israel play the harlot.” The separation of Israel from
Judah was most unrighteous and disastrous in its results on both kingdoms; but
Israel’s departure from God was most aggravating and hazardous. It was harlotry
and wantonness. God’s service is a reasonable service, in harmony with our
mental and moral constitution. God is no hard task-master, demanding impossi-
bilities and requiring bricks without straw. ‘“ His commandments are not grievous.”
He treats men as rational and responsible beings, beseeching them to repent, and
warning them of the consequences of neglect.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 15. Places of good reputation
become infamous, lose all honour, hy
connection with idolatry and immutral-
ity. Bethel, the house of God, becomes
Beth-aven, the house of idols, the house
of vanity. Places consecrated by the
piety of our forefathers and the mercy
of God are turned into scenes of cor-
ruption and vice. We are forbidden to
go to such places lest we should be in-
fected. Christians must not sanction
worldly customs and amusements in
which God has no place. Abstain from
the very appearance of evil.

Ver. 16. The sinner, like Israel, is
often fretful under Divine restraint, im-
patient in the narrowness of God’s ways,
and is bent on backsliding; but when


God lets him alone, gives him his wish,
liberty brings no security and happiness,
like a lamb bleating alone, bewraying
its solitude, and he wanders about to
destruction. How much better to be in
God’s fold, daily fed, and led into green
pastures, and beside the still waters !
Ver. 17. “ Hphraim is joined,” &c.
I. The Alliance.—1. Unholy. 2. Ruin-
ous. II. The Abandonment.—l. Just.
2. Severe. 3. Hopeless, “A man may
be given up to Satan for the destruction
of the flesh, that the soul may be saved;
but to be given up to sin is a thousand
times worse, because that is the fruit of
Divine anger, in order to the damnation
of the soul” [John Shower]. Ah, Lord!
this mercy I humbly beg, that whatever


6 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [CHar. IV.








a


thou givest me up to, thou wilt not give good in his own eyes.” Do anything
me up to the ways of mine own heart; with me, lay what burden thou wilt
if thou wilt give me up to be afflicted, upon me, so that thou dost not give me
or tempted, or reproached, &c., I will up to the ways of my own heart
patiently sit down and say, “It is the [Brooks]. Deliver me, O Lord, from
Lord ; let him do with me what seems that evil man, myself [Augustine].


HOMILETICS.


THe BIvTeRNESS AND THE PUNISHMENT OF Sin.—Verses 18, 19.


In these verses we have another triplet of vice. The people are guilty of intem-
perance and adultery. The princes and leaders are covetous, pervert justice, and
ery, “ Give, give.” The whole nation had become sapless and corrupt. “ Drink”
is here put for the effect of sweet intoxicating wine. As sourness was opposed to
sweetness, so sin is opposed to holiness and idolatry to the service of God. The
verses set forth the bitterness and the punishment of sin.

I. The Bitterness of Sin. ‘Their drink is sour,” their delights are insipid and
dead. Man’s spiritual appetite is strong, and God has made abundant provision
for our happiness. But men indulge in sin, are not satisfied with healthful refresh-
ment, and “add drunkenness to thirst.” The appetite, cloyed with indulgence, turns
with disgust from the sweetest dainties, while “every bitter thing is sweet” to the
hungry soul (Prov. xxvii. 7). So in spiritual things. The sinner has no relish,
and feels no need for the bread of life. He seeks to quench his thirst by intoxi-
cating pleasure or sensual indulgence. This may make him merry, but cannot
make him happy. Whatever be the relish and allurements of sin, “ at the last it
biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an adder.” There is poison in the cup.
Like the little book which the Apostle John had to take, sin is sweet as honey in
the mouth, but when committed, bitter in the belly (Rev. x. 9). “Life, they say,
is sweet; I have found it bitter,” said a young artist in the closing scenes of death,
Lord Chesterfield echoed the sentiment, when he said, “I have run the silly rounds
of business and of pleasure, and have done with them all. I have enjoyed all the
pleasures of the world and know their futility, and do not regret their loss. I
appraise them at their real value, which is very low; whereas those who have not
experienced them always overrate them. They only see the gay outside, and are
dazzled with their glare; but I have been behind the scenes. . I look back on all
that is passed as one of those romantic dreams which opium commonly produces,
and I have no wish to repeat the nauseous dose.” This Marah is never dry. No
art can sweeten, no draughts exhaust its perennial waters of bitterness, The bitter-
ness of sin consists—l. In its wretchedness. Byron described himself as a man
whose happiness was gone and could not be restored. ‘If I were to live over
again,” he writes, “I do not know what I would change in my life, except not to
have lived at all.” 2. In its dissatisfaction. After all toil and labour “the good”
is ever absent. The thing which was expected to give joy palls on the instant it is
obtained, like the apples of the Dead Sea, which turn to ashes when tasted. On
and on! the spirit still cries, “Give, give.” 3. In its disappointment. Solomon
had tried everything, but unalloyed happiness was still beyond his grasp. Ha
drank from broken cisterns, tasted the wormwood and the gall, and gives the
verdict—“ All was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the
sun.” II. The Punishment of Sin. “The wind hath bound her up in her wings.”
The simple meaning of this is that they would be carried away with a swift and
shameful destruction. So sudden is the overthrow of the wicked, that his designs
are baffled, his life upset, and he himself overwhelmed with the tempest. “ He
shall take them away as with a whirlwind.” 1. This destruction is sudden. The
wind may sleep and be forgotten, but justice never faila, The aky is clear, men


CHAP. IV.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 67


settle down, and undisturbed pursue their folly ; but ‘“‘ when they shall say peace
and safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon them.” In their revelries they
will be surprised, and, like Belshazzar, “they shall not escape.” 2. This destruction
is violent. What more violent than mighty winds tearing up the mountains and
rending the rocks (Job xxviii. 9). The wicked cannot stand before the tempest
of God’s wrath and the thunder of his power. Cambyses, invading Ethiopia, sent
a detachment to ravage the country. Herodotus says that “after they had left
Oasis, they halted to take some repast, when a strong south wind arose and over-
whelmed them beneath a mountain of sand.” Plutarch, in the Life, speaking of the
design of Alexander “to visit the temple of Jupiter Ammon,” adds, “it was a long
and laborious journey, and they might be surprised by a violent south wind amidst
the wastes of sand, as it happened long before to the army of Cambyses. The
wind raised the sand, and rolled it in such waves, that it devoured full 50,000
men.” 3. This destruction is shameful. ‘They shall be ashamed because of their
sacrifices.” Ashamed on account of their sacrifices, or of them, and should forsake
them and turn to God. But in any case both they and their sacrifices would be
put to shame. (a) They would be disappointed in their sacrifices. They had
brought nothing but evil, and not any good. Nothing good should be sought, or
can be found, away from God. (b) They would be detected on hill and in dale, in
public and private worship. They could not hide their shameful ways from God.
Justice would discover them. ‘As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is
the house of Israel ashamed.” (c) They would be exposed in their shame. Exposed
without refuge to Divinejudgment. Shame and confusion of face will be the final
issue of all the lofty expectations and the sinful ways of the ungodly. Shame is
their present fruit, and what will be the results in eternity “ of those things whereof
ye are now ashamed?” “Many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake ;
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.” Avoid the
guilt if you wish to escape the doom of Israel.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IV.


Ver. 1—5. When God has a “con-
troversy ” with a people he appeals to
conscience as a witness to his cause. He
demands and should secure earnest heed.
The speaker is great. The cause is most
important, and concerns our spiritual and
eternal welfare. If we cannot plead ex-
cuse now, how can we stand before the
judgment-seat at last ?

Consideration is the duty of the
Church. Faith cometh by hearing, and
every faculty of the mind should be bent
to receive Divine teaching.

Ver. 6. Knowledge. Some years ago
a vessel sailing on the northern coast of
South America was seen to make signals
of distress) When hailed by another
vessel, they reported themselves as
“dying for water!” “ Dip it up, then,”
was the response ; ‘‘ you are in the mouth
of the Amazon river.” There was fresh
water all around them, they had nothing
to do but to dip it up, and yet they were
dying of thirst, because they thought


themselves surrounded by the salt sea.
How often are men ignorant of their
mercies! How sad that they should
perish for lack of knowledge! Jesus is
near the seeker even when he is tossed
upon the oceans of doubt. The sinner
has but to stoop down and drink and
live; and yet he is ready to perish, as if
salvation were hard to find [Spurgeon].
Those are marked for ruin that are
deaf to reproof and reject good counsel.
“ Therefore,” says Bp Pilkington, “ let
every one keep himself in God’s school-
house and learn his lesson diligently.
For as the body is nourished with meat,
so is the soul with the word of God.”
Ver. 7. Gratitude. Special favours
call for great gratitude, as those who rent
the largest farms generally pay the most
for them. There is ingratitude in con-
cealing a benefit or forgetting it, as well
as not making a return for it; but the
worst ingratitude is returning evil for
good Prosperity. No sooner does the


68 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


warm aspect of good fortune shine, than
all the plans of virtue, raised like a
beautiful frost-work in the winter season
of adversity, thaw and disappear [ War-
burton).

Ver. 8, 9. Covetousness never judges
anything unlawful. Blood is not too
sacred for it to buy, nor religion too
Divine for it to sell. It has turned the
priests and ministers of God into mer-
cenary hirelings. In Popery every
shrine has its gift, every confession its
cost, every prayer its charge, and every
benediction its price [ Weson].

Ver. 10, 11. Stn is a disease equally
dangerous, whether it works secretly
within, or breaks out into odious displays
of vice. Yielding to immoral pleasure
corrupts the mind ; living to animal and
trifling ones debases it; and both in
their degree disqualify it for its genuine
good, and consign it over to wretchedness
| Wilson].

Ver. 12—14, Idolatry is the adoption
of a false god. Apostasy is the rejection
of the true God. The idols of the
heathen stood, so to speak, between
heaven and earth, obscuring the vision
of God, intercepting and appropriating
the incense which should have ascended
to the eternal throne. If we look upon
the world as a musical instrument, well-
tuned, and harmoniously struck, we
ought not to worship the instrument,
but the Being that makes the music.

Ver. 15—17. If sin be fashionable,
Christians should be out of fashion. If
others be punished for it, we should
take warning from them. Three things
arise from sin, viz, fear, shame, and


punishment. The first arises from the
guilt of sin, the second from its defile
ment, and the third from its demerit.
A sinful life is the death of the soul.
Look at sin in its guilt, malignity, and
curse. Abhor it, oppose it, and dread it
more than death [ Wilson].

Ver. 18, 19. Pleasure taken into the
soul is like liquor poured into a vessel :
so much of it as it fills it also seasons ;
the touch and the tincture go together.
It is certain sin has no real pleasures to be-
stow ; they are all embittered, either by
the strokes of providence from without,
or the accusations of conscience from
within. The fine colours of the serpent
do by no means make amends for the
smart and poison of his sting.

Penalties are often so long delayed,
that men think they shall escape them ;
but they are certain to follow. When
the whirlwind sweeps through the forest,
at its first breath that giant tree, with
all its boughs, falls crashing to the
ground, But it had been preparing to
fall twenty years. Twenty years before
it received a gash, the water commenced
to settle in it at some notch, and from
thence decay began to reach in towards
the heart of the tree. Every year the
work of death progressed, till at length
it stood all rottenness, and the first gale
felled it to the ground. There are men,
who for twenty years shame the day and
the night with debaucheries, who yet
seem strong and vigorous, but in reality
are full of weakness and decay. They
have been preparing to fall, and the first
storm will strike them down in ea
moment [ Beecher].


CHAPTER V.


>


Critica, Notrs.—1. Hear] A fresh beginning of reproof, connected with chapter iv., addressed
to the priests, the royal family, and the whole kingdom. Judg.| Lit. the judgment announced in
id ti


preceding chapter. ee Priests and court.


a trap. Miz. and Tab.


its covered over for beasts to fall in.


Snare] A net lai
Noted places, and peculiarly adapted for bird-catching. 2. Profound]
Lit. they have made slaughter deep, i e. they have sunk deeply into it,
slaughter, butcherics, and not offerings to God (cf. Is. xxxi. 6).
Others give the sense of stretching out (Ps. ci. 3).


o entice the people, like birds in


Their sacrifices were
Some, that the allusion is to deep
They


ave deepened to stretch out excesses, i. e. they have gone to great lengths, are deeply sunken in
excesses. The ringleaders laid deep designs to ensnare in idolatry, Rebuker] Lit.a rebuke or cor-
rection. God’s attributes and conduct had taken the form of rebuke only towards them. 38. Know]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. a9





their plans, deceit, and profound cunning (Rev. ii. 29), All things are naked and opened to God.
Now] Even at the present time, when they forget me. Their wickedness is done in public and is
undeniable. 4. Will not frame] Heb. give their doings. Margin, will not suffer them. ‘They are
slaves, not free to turn from evil habits. Their works stand in the way, prevent them from return-
ing. Habit is a second nature domineering over men’s thoughts and ways, In them] The know-
ledge of God was wanting, the evil spirit had taken possession of their very centre, had its seat
within them, and held resistless sway over them. 5. Pride] The haughtiness of Is. shall be a wit-
ness before God of their folly. Others refer it to Jehovah, the glory of Is., who will witness by
Peed and the destruction of their false glory (ch, vil. 10; Amos viii. 7). Jud.) shall fall,

ecause participating in Israel’s guilt. 6. Flocks] to propitiate God. Sacrifices of no avail. He
has withdrawn from them and will not hear prayer. 7. Gives the reason, Treacher.] Acted faithlessly
in the marriage contract (Jer. iii. 20). Strange children] Aliens, that have not sprung from
conjugal union (ch, i. 2; cf. Deut. xxv. 5). Month] A very brief time; judgment is sudden and
near. Others, the new moon, the festal season for sacrifices, will devour them. “ Your sacrificial
feasts shall not bring deliverance, but ruin” {HeiZ], 8. The evil denounced is vividly described as
actually come. 9, Shall surely be] Lit. established or well grounded in God’s purpose. On lofty
summits the invasion of the enemy is announced, Jud. is menaced, and Is. is occupied, destruction is
sure and permanent. The kingdom shall be overcome and for ever laid waste. 10, Bound]
Removers of land-marks were to be cursed (Deut. xix. 14; xxvii. 17). Princes of Jud, had removed
the boundaries of truth between Jehovah and Baal, the worship of God andidolatry. “If he whe
removes his neighbour’s boundary is cursed, how much more he who removes the border of his God ”
{Hengsten.]. God’s anger would fall upon them like water in full stream (Ps, lxix. 25; Jer. x. 25).
11. Oppressed] with heavy calamity. Broken] Crushed in contest with God. Command.] The
statutes of Jeroboam and Omri (1 Kings xii. 28; Mic. vi. 16), 12, Moth and rottenness| Destruc-
tive powers, one injuring cloths, the other wood and flesh ; slowly but surely do they work (Job xii:
28). The sinner has foes within and without; conscience gnaws like a worm, and Divine judgment
falls like a plague. 18. Sick.] Not civil war between tne two kingdoms, for both were wounded.
Apostasy with its train of moral corruptions was the disease of the body politic (Is. i.6). Eph.] with
whom the prophecy has chiefly to do, sought help and found none from Assyria, 14, Lion] A fierce,
roaring lion. Young lion] An emblem of strength and ferocity. They can no more defend them-
selves from God’s judgments than from fierce lions which attack. Tear] to pieces. Go away]
leisurely back into its cave with its prey. 15, Acknowledge] i. e. feel the guilt and punishment of
sin; repent and return to God. The Heb. includes the idea of suffering. Afflict.] awakens the need
of mercy, and urges to God. Seek] most earnestly and urgently (cf. it. 9; Deut. iv. 29, 30).


HOMILETICS.
Nationa Sins anp Diving Detsction.— Verses 1—3.


In this chapter God proceeds in the same method and carries on the same con-
troversy as before. The kingdoms are first cited and then accused. All ranks are
guilty of idolatry and pollutions, of obstinacy and impenitency in guilt. It is not
an ordinary challenge, as of one displeased only, but the judicial procedure and
sentence of the Supreme Judge. “ Hear ye this.” The words set forth national
sins, the Divine detection, and open rebuke of them.

I. The national sins. All ranks are accused: the priests, the rulers, and the
people. Though some were enticed by others, that does not render them without
excuse. The prophet rebukes all, without respect of persons, and shows how justly
God was angry with their sins. 1. The priests were guilty. They used their sacred
office and their high position to ensnare the people. (1.) They corrupted the law
of God. They were the depositaries of this sacred trust; were appointed to
expound and keep unsullied the truth of God. They had to teach the statutes
which the Lord had spoken unto them by Moses (Lev. x. 11). The people
inquired from them, and they gave judgment (Deut. xvii. 9,11). They were the
messengers of the Lord of hosts, and should have preserved knowledge (Mal. ii. 7).
But instead of feeding the people they starved them, lead them into error and sin.
There was neither freshness nor power in their ministry. The science of salvation,
the word and the work of God, were not the study of their life. When ministers
study and prepare to consume it upon pride and self-confidence ; when they seek
to please the fancy rather than gain the souls of men; when they grow cold and
careless of their own, then they get dull and pitiless concerning the souls of others.
Vnto them are committed the oracles of God. These oracles they must consult


70 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. Vv.





and declare to the people. Their word and doctrine, their life and example, like
the breastplate of Aaron, must be a bright reflection of them. The truth of God
must not be mixed with human tradition, nor displaced by commandments of men.
To teach the law to others and profane it ourselves is mockery.
“T venerate the man whose heart is warm,
Whose hands are pure, whose doctrine and whose life
Coincident, exhibit lucid proof
That he is honest in the sacred cause,”
(2.) They corrupted the worship of God. The spirituality of God is a practical
truth demanding corresponding spirituality in worship. God has absolute and
sole right to prescribe how he will be worshipped. But the history of mankind
abundantly proves a disposition in human beings to devise and act for themselves
in this respect. In the patriarchal and prophetic periods the worship of God was
mixed with idolatry. Heroes and beasts have been deified. The heavens and the
earth, the ocean and the air, have been peopled with gods. Even now men are
dissatisfied with the simplicity and forgetful of the authority of Divine istitutes.
Worship is thought to consist in words, forms, and gestures. The body assumes
the posture and the lips utter the language of devotion, but often there is neither
prayer nor praise. It is sad when the priests of God are guilty of innovation, and
teach that “fear towards him was' taught by the precepts of men” (Isa. xxix. 13).
The apostles were exceedingly jealous of any defect, redundancy, or admixture in
the worship of God. But Jewish priests debased the institutions and corrupted
the law of God. They had embraced and strengthened the idolatry by which they
were surrounded, and by apostasy had seduced the people. Their teaching was a
snare and their livesacurse. (3.) They despised the reproof of God. ‘‘Though I
have been a rebuker of them all.” God by his prophet and by his providence had
sought to correct them in vain. Rebuke after rebuke had been given, forbidding
idolatry and urging amendment, but Israel was immersed in sin; kings and priests
revolted more and more. God warns his Church and his servants, and gives smaller
corrections to reclaim them; but if these are despised, the sin becomes more
ageravated and the punishment more severe. Apostates and revolters are often
given up to gross superstitions, cruel rites, and deeper courses. They may have
ability to adorn and defend their crafty designs, but they will be caught by their
own deceits. The rebuke of the formalist is solemn; but to immoral teachers, who
make grace a cover for sin, and soundness of creed for rottenness of life, God
speaks in thunder. Scribes and Pharisees were openly reproved for rejecting the
‘law and misleading the people. ‘ Unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to
do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth?
seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee.” 2. The rulers
were guilty. “Give ye ear, O house of the king.” The priest had to teach and
the king enforce the law; but king and priest were alike guilty for corrupting it.
Both had been crafty and cruel in carrying out their designs, by patronizing
idolatry and leading the nation from Jehovah. Monarchs fulfil a high vocation
as representatives of God and his law. They should care for the purity of religion
and the administration of justice. If they neglect and violate the law, pervert
justice, and encourage vice, they are recreant to God, from whom they receive
authority and to-whom they are responsible. They are not to assume undue
authority, but to establish and preserve good and just laws; to govern in wisdom,
equity, and love; to punish evil-doers and encourage them that do well. Asa
removed wickedness from the throne, and Amaziah punished it with death.
Nehemiah was a great reformer, and Alfred the Great a witness for truth in an age
of darkness. But the court of Israel was as corrupt as the priesthood. Instead of
being benefactors, they were contaminators to their race. Priests in their saintly robes
and kings in their royal garbs have oft been foes in human forms; solemn warn-
ings to the ungodly and profane. They are the greatest siuners, in seducing others,


CHAP. V.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 71





and must suffer the severest punisliment. (1.) They enticed to idolatry ; (2.) They
enticed to destruction. ‘Judgment is toward you.” 3. The People were guilty
Though ensnared by their teachers and princes, they were to blame and had no excuse
for their sin. We are to think and act for ourselves. Neither the enticement of
the priest nor the terror of the king can force us to do wrong; neither the laws
nor the lives of superiors can make us bow down to sin. Like the three Hebrew
youths, we should not regard the fashions of the court nor the dictum of the priest.
We must not partake of other men’s sins lest we share other men’s sufferings.
Ephraim was duped willingly and therefore inexcusably. ‘He willingly walked
after the commandment” and was “‘ oppressed and broken in judgment” (verse 11).
(1.) The people followed bad examples; (2.) Voluntarily corrupted themselves by
idolatry. National sins are the sum of individual contributions. God here arraigns
and condemns all classes in the threefold summons. The privileges of the priest,
the dignity of the prince, and the number of the people, cannot excuse and do not
exempt them from Divine judgments. ‘‘ Daniel Webster,” says Dr Thomas, “ was
once asked, ‘What is the most important thought you ever entertained?’ He
replied after a moment’s reflection, ‘The most important thought I ever had was
my individual responsibility to God.’” “ Every one of us shall give an account of
himself to God.” II. The Divine detection. “I know Ephraim, and Israel is not
hid from me.” God intimately knows and observes the conduct of men. His
knowledge is without defect and his judgment without error. Nothing can be
hid or concealed from him. Men may deceive themselves, think God does not
notice them, and vail their ways from others, but the omniscient eye of God pene-
trates the covering and brings all things to light. By his word and providence
he discovers sin, puts it before us in true colours, and warns us to flee from it. All
excuses and plausible pretexts are torn away, and the sinner is exposed in nakedness
and danger. ‘All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom
we have to do.” 1. Sin ts detected notwithstanding human ingenuity to cover it.
Men excuse and plead infirmity and mistake. (1.) Sin is often covered by ignorance.
Ignorance itself is a sin when it can be removed. Ignorance in daily calling is
“not bliss,” for lessened power involves lessened earnings and fewer comforts and
conveniences of life. Men always pay for ignorance. They cannot justify them-
selves when they sin against light and truth. Ministers will not be able to plead
at last, ‘““ We knew it not.” They should watch for souls as those that must give
account. (2.) Sin is often covered by cunning craft. Jewish leaders were crafty in
their designs and deep in their schemes. They pretended friendship and goodwill,
but they were snares and nets to the people (Ecc. vii. 26). Their rulers with
great subtlety laid hold of Israel’s love for idols and reverence for their ancestors,
and sought to replace the presence of God by the symbols of nature. Around the
worship of Baal were gathered the rites of Moses. The services were decked out
and adorned with feasts and fasts, instrumental music and songs; upheld by tithes,
by civil authority, by prophet, priest, and king. Leaders sought to please that
they might ruin ; to flatter that they might devour; but “God taketh the wise in
their own craftiness.” 2. Sin is detected notwithstanding State policy to uphold it.
In Israel selfish interests were put before eternal; policy before principle; and the
welfare of the State must be upheld though the people be ruined. In these
modern days expediency is often put before morality, State revenues before virtue,
and immorality sanctioned by legislators and teachers. We shall do well to heed
what a writer says concerning England. ‘We may succeed for a fime by fraud,
by surprise, by violence, but we can succeed permanently only by means directly
opposite. It is not alone the courage, the intelligence, the activity of the merchant
and manufacturer which maintain the superiority of their productions and the
character of their country ; it is far more their wisdom, their economy, and above
all their probity. If ever in the British Islands the useful citizen should lose these
virtues, we may be sure that, for England, as for every o'er country, the vessels


72 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


(onar. ¥





of a degenerate commerce, repulsed from every shore, would speedily disappear
from those seas whose surface they now cover with the treasures of the universe,
bartered for the treasures of the industry of the three kingdoms” Religion raises,
strengthens, and dignifies a nation. Its industry and civilization depend upon true
character and not false policy. Even in war Napoleon said the moral was ten to
one to the physical. State policy is often State folly and God-dishonouring policy.
“Tt is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness, for the throne is established
by righteousness.” III. The solemn call. “Hear ye this.” 1. A universal
call. A call to all classes in Israel to hear and consider their ways. 2. An urgent
call. ‘For judgment is toward you.” The judges are summoned before the
Judge of judges and the King of kings. This is a matter that must be attended
to. All ranks are guilty when God has a controversy with a nation. 3. A
present call. Hear and repent now; delays are dangerous. ‘Now is the accepted
time.” Indifference, moral insensibility, are seen on every hand. Ignorance,
carelessness, and opposition to the gospel abound. The authority of the caller,
and the interests at stake, urge attention to the message: “Unto you, O men, I
eall; and my voice is to the sons of men.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Kings and priests snares to the people,
by erroneous doctrine, fraudulent coun-
sels, evil example, and subtle edicts, and
by employing exalted position to lead
astray.

Men-trappers — their motive, efforts,
pretences, and punishment. Why not
attack openly? Why plot and scheme?
Because subtlety is the nature of sin and
the serpent, and most likely to succeed.
“Great ill is an achievement of great
powers. Plain sense but rarely leads us
far astray.”

Silly people—led astray; like beasts
and birds, always exposed and easily


overcome by “the snare of the fowler.”
We are foolish and weak, and apt to be
lured to destruction by cunning foes,
Hence the need of (a) watchfulness,
(6) prayer, and (c) dependence upon
God.


Cunning policy. 1. Most impudent.
2. Most guilty. 3. Most degrading.
4. Most ruinous.

Hear ye this. Preachers should
rebuke the sins of rulers as well as those
of subjects, so that they bear not the
guilt of the souls that are lost, whose
blood God will require at their hands
[Lange].


HOMILETICS.
Tae Power or Evin Hasits.— Verse 4.


The prophet makes a fourth charge of obstinacy through affected ignorance o1
God and long custom in sin. God had been “their God” by covenant and tender
care, but they despised and abused his mercy, and “would not,” could not turn unto
him. They were so habituated to evil practices that they were not only indisposed.
but ill-affected towards God. They lost all power to return, and were perfect slaves
to evil habits. They were possessed by the spirit of whoredom, an evil spirit
which impelled and carried them on to sin.

I, The spring of evilhabits. “The spirit of whoredom is in the midst of them.”
In their centre and seat a mighty power held resistless and triumphant sway.
Sinful habits spring from sinful nature. 1. They spring from ignorance of God.
“They have not known the Lord.” They might have known him, for they had
the law and the prophets of God. They were wilfully, shamefully ignorant.
Some have not knowledge of God—I speak this to your shame. Sin at first was
the cause of ignorance, but now ignorance is the cause of sin. Swearing, lying,
and murder abounded in the land “ because there was no knowledge of God.” AJ
sins are seminally lodged in this one, It leads to error (Matt. xxii. 29), persecu-


CHAP. V.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 73





tion (John xvi. 2, 3), and to rejection of Christ. Aristotle says ignoranze is the
mother of all misrule in the world. As certain epidemics are generated and
become active during night, in places not visited by the beams of the sun, so
mental and moral ignorance spread pernicious influence and scatter seeds of death.
That ignorance which keeps men slaves to evil makes them hate the freedom of
truth. Sinners dread, decline to know God, lest they be disturbed in their sinful
ways. They are ignorant of his beauty and excellency, goodness and love;
they despise his merey and forbearance; providential warnings and judgments
fail to convince them of sin and bring them to repentance. Knowledge is the life
of the soul—the life of intelligence to know God; the life of power to love him.
2. They spring from an evil heart towards God. The heart of the Jews was
alienated and perverse. Love which appealed to their affections could not reclaim
them. ‘The heart is the source, the mainspring of human conduct, and when that
is defiled the character and the life will be defiled. ‘As a man thinketh in his
heart so is he.” His thoughts and feelings identify him with his moral self, and
discriminates him from others. They place him in a distinct relation to God, and
morally fix him in “his own place.” This “hidden man of the heart” subordin-
ates the outer man and the outer world to itself. Habits result from acts repeated ;
and from habit results character and its consolidation. Like the gradual growth of
an everlasting mountain, character is always acquiring a bolder outline and firmer
base. It is the slow and conscious product of man’s voluntary nature.
Each man makes his own stature, builds himself ;


Virtue alone outbuilds the pyramids:
Her monuments shall last, when Egypt’s fall.


II. The result of evil habits. “They will not frame their doings to turn unto
their God.” If their habits of sin had not got the mastery over them they rendered
them indisposed to return. But the margin gives another sense. Their doings
would not suffer them, and they could not turn inwardly, while they did not turn
outwardly. 1. Habits influence the will. “They will not.” The more they sinned
the more disposed they were to sin, and the less power they had to do right. This
is just the result of habit. by repetition of evil, moral power is diminished. The
wil: L.“omes impotent and the conscience seared. But moral power is required to
resist e i] passions which prompt to repetitions of acts, hence the less the power to
resist the easier the repetition of an act. Thus evil begets a tendency to evil; goes
on repeating and enlarging itself ; binding the will, alienating the heart, and driv-
ing men from God. “ It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not
known my ways.” “Ye will not come unto me.” 2. Habits enslave the life. There
was not simply the tendency, but the tyranny of sin. We may calculate the
immediate efiects of an act, but if the act lead to the habit the ultimate results
must not be overlooked. Drunkenness and sensuality have sprung from repeated
acts. Perverted judgment at the beginning of life may disqualify a man for
believing the gospel at the close. Men may not mean to plunge deeply into vice,
but when the steps are taken and repeated they are fastened with their own chain.
Habit is stronger than reason and stronger than taste. When a man gives himself
up to its power he loses freedom and self-control, and it governs him “ with
authority.” Wicked men allow free will to be inactive ; give bridle to desire and
passion ; acquire habits of vice; and at last are bound by chains of iron. Augus-
tine thus speaks of the force of habit in his Confessions : “ My will the enemy held,
and thence had made a chain for me, and bound me. For of a froward will was a
lust made; and a lust served became custom; and custom not resisted became
necessity. By which links, as it were, joined together (whence I called it a chain)
a hard bondage held me enthralled.” Most people think lightly of sins, believe
they can give them up easily, but Saul found his evil passions his torment and
captivity. He had convictions of duty, but his very efforts to extricate himself
from evil increased his guilt and misery, and he rushed from habituai crime te


74 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


(CHAP. v.





endless misery (1 Chron. x. 13, 14).
ciple.


—


“A rooted habit becomes a governing prin-
Every lust we entertain deals with us as Delilah did with Samson: not
only robs us of our strength, but leaves us fast bound,” says Tillotson.


“ His own


iniquities shall take the wicked himself; and he shall be holden with the cords of


his sins.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


The longer the continuance in sin,
the more difficult is the return, He
who commits sin is the servant of sin,
At first he will not return, at last he
cannot. The heart is hardened. The
spirit of whoredom : not single sins that
are committed, but an evil spirit rising
up and taking possession of. the soul.
The more men sin against God, the
more they lose the knowledge of him,
and the more difficult it is for them to
return; and so the chastisement of God
must be more severe to bring them back
to him [Lange].

The slavery of sin.
to conscious guilt and innumerable
habits. They are often the dupes of ig-
norance, prejudice, and passion. 1. There
is the slave of ignorance. 2. There
is the slave of superstition. 3. There
is the slave of bigotry. 4. There is the
slave of passion. 5. There is the slave
of sensual appetites. 6. The slave of
evil habits.


Men in bondage


“He is the freeman, whom the truth makes free,
And all are slaves beside.’


Frame their doings, i. e. take neces-
sary steps to conversion. 1. By con-
sideration. 2. By amendment of life.
“They. might have sought and yet not
made speed, because of their unsound-
ness and formality in their way, but
they were either so ignorant, or malicious
and impious, as they did not so much
as endeavour to bend their course that
way ” [ Hutcheson].

Men “know not the Lord,” or else
they would not persistently and suicid-
ally turn from him. They may have
intellectual but not practical knowledge.
A man really knows no more than he
puts into practice. Elis two sons
“knew not God,” because they loved
and obeyed him not. Ignorance of
God, affected or acquired, is “the
mother” of mischief and misery, not


“of devotion.”


HOMILETICS.


Gop TestiryInG aGainst Man.— Verses 5—7.


The power and pride of Israel were great. They boasted of their kings, their
privileges, and even of their sins. This pride testified against them in the sight of
God. Pride never conceals itself, but rises in rebellion and pleads for punishment.
Or if God himself be their boast and pride, he would witness against them for
their presumptuous sins and self-reliance. ‘They know not Jehovah ; they do not
concern themselves about him; therefore he himself will bear witness by judg-
ments, by the destruction of their false glory (cf. ch. ii. 10—14), against the
face of Israel, i. e. bear witness to their face.” God witnesses against man’s sin
in the following ways:

I. God testifies against sin by the ministry of the word. God has three
grand witnesses in the world; the Holy Scripture, Christian Church, and the Christian
Ministry. All testify to his existence, love, and truth. But the ministry is a
special agency, a Divine appointment to bring sinners to Christ; a monument of
truth, and the means to spread it. The true cause of man’s wretchedness and the
only cure must be kept inview. Ministers must proclaim the guilt and the conse-
quent danger of men, their inability to renew and save themselves—must ever testify
to the justice of God in punishing the impenitent, and the love of God in Christ.
Boldness in the commission must be met by boldness in the reproof of sin. Sinners
are careless, and must be roused by Divine threatenings. Ministers must reprove
and rebuke, curse and condemn all sin ; save themselves and those that hear them.
Their testimony against iniquity must be constant and clear. “Do vou not know


CHAP. V.)} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 78





that my life has been licentious, and that I have violated the commandments of
God?” said a dying nobleman to his clergyman, for whom he sent. “ You have neg-
lected to warn and instruct me, and now my soul will be lost!” ‘The Lord testi-
fied against Israel and against Judah by all the prophets and by all the seers,
saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes.”
II. God testifies against sin by the witness of conscience. Fallen as human
nature is, God has not left himself without a witness in its centre and seat. Con-
science, the vicegerent of God enthroned within, pronounces sentence, and acquits
or condemns. A guilty conscience needs no accuser. It is the harbinger of wrath,
and makes “the wicked flee when no man pursueth.” “Conscience doth make
cowards of us all.” The victim of remorse withers beneath an influence unseen,
and shrinks from an anticipation of judgment to come. Adam tried to hide him-
self from God. Cain was terrified at his own guilt. Infidels have often felt that
“the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them.” ‘There is no man that is know-
ingly wicked,” says Tillotson, “ but is guilty to himself; and there is no man that
carries guilt about him, but he receives a sting into his soul.” Conscience allows
no excuse, no compromise. There is nothing but right or wrong in its court.
Moral government is administered by moral sanctions, and the wisdom of God is
seen in fixing a tribunal in the bosom of every human being. “ He that will not
hearken to the warnings of conscience must feel the woundings of conscience.”
III. God testifies against sin by the judgments of providence. “ Therefore
shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity.” Pride always comes before de-
struction, and a haughty spirit before a fall. Sin ever brings ruin upon churches
and nations. Men combine and exalt themselves in wickedness, but in the pro-
vidence of God they fall, and great is their fall. The destruction of the cities of the
plain by fire and of the world by flood are sulemn lessons in history. 1. Judgments
come suddenly. Tne festal season on which they prided themselves and offered
sacrifices to God would bring no joy nor deliverance. Judgment would be sudden
and surprising. Rapidly and unexpectedly the end would come. Invasion would
sweep away their garrisons and resources. The month, the moon waxing till full
and waning away, would measure the time. Men may indulge in luxury, intem-
perance, and vice; but the day of retribution will carry them away. Cruel devices
will be detected, and wicked men “ fall” helpless and undone. Easy transitions
from one thing to another cause no terror ; but in everything sudden and unex-
pected attention is roused and nature startled. God warns, “but evil men” are
wilfully ignorant, and “understand not judgment.” “ Desolation shall come upon
thee suddenly which thou shalt not know.” 2. Judgments come impartially. There
is no respect of persons with God’s providence. Special promises and special privi-
leges may be given to some ; but they do not escape the general calamity. Judah
and Ephraim were alike guilty and alike punished. National judgments are uni-
versal, spare neither saints nor sinners, young nor old, rich nor poor. They fall on
all ranks impartially. The priest cannot protect the prince; nor the prince the
priest. Those who entice will not be able to deliver the enticed ; nor the enticed
excuse for being misled. When God pleads, “it shall be as with the people, so
with the priest ; as with the servant, so with his master ; as with the maid, so with
her mistress ; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the
borrower ; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury tohim,” 3, Judg-
ments come unavoidably. They cannot be warded off by any device or desire of
man. ‘The sentence is uttered and must be fulfilled. God cannot change nor be
defeated in his purpose. He withdrew from Israel and would not aid them. (1.)
Late repentance cannot ward off judgment. The people had been careless and in-
different in their prosperity. Now when judgments are threatened they are alarmed,
and vow to God in sacrifice. Many repent of sin, but their sorrow is that of
Judas, not of Peter, They are sorry for the consequences of sins, but not for the
sins themselves; confess their wrong, but do not wish to forsake it. They vow


76 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [cHaPr. ¥,





and resolve, pay homage to God, and wish to escape, but they cannot. Nothing
could rouse them when punishment was. only predicted, but when it comes, then
they bestir themselves and cry for mercy. They are “lashed from sins to sighs ;
and by degrees from sighs to vows; from vows to bended knees.” Life is often
spent in sin, and then offered to God in its dregs and decrepitude. “Tiue repentance
is never too late, but late repentance is seldom true.” ‘“ Ah! Mr Hervey,” said a
dying man, “the day in which I ought to have worked is over, and now I see a
horrible night approaching, bringing with it the blackness of darkness for ever.
Woe is me! When God called I refused. Now I am in sore anguish, and yet
this is but the beginning of sorrows. I shall be destroyed with everlasting destruc-
tion.” (2.) Outward reformation cannot ward off judgments. Many are penitent,
give up some sins, but not all. They make great sacrifices, and put forth desperate
efforts to amend their lives, Whatever will shelter them from present calamity
they earnestly seek. ‘They go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the
Lord,” but do not devote themselves to him. Good works cannot compensate for
evil works. Tears may be abundant and sorrow deep, but no art can evade and no
power resist the punishment. Superstition and Infidelity have devised means to
allay the anguish of a wounded spirit; but their rites and sophistries, salvos and
palliatives, have been in vain. The bitterness of the spendthrift cannot recover his
lost property ; nor the sorrow of the sensualist restore the bloom of his cheek.
The sinner cannot repair the injury done to himself and others, nor reinstate
himself in holiness before God. Justice is immutable, and punishment is certain
to follow the violation of moral as of physical law. It is sad to think that many
“ fall” without deliverance, and seek when it is too late. Sin brings judgments
which cannot be averted by formal worship and outward reformation. “I have
no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your


hand.”


“To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?” &c.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 5. The Pride of Israel. 1.
Pride their greatest sin. 2. Pride their
continual sin. 3. Pride their destruc-
tive sin.

Ver. 6. They shall not find him.
God is not found—1l. When not sought
earnestly ; 2. When not sought with a
pure motive; 3. When sought in slavish
fear; 4. When sought too late. When
the judgments of God are drawing near
fear impels the most reluctant and the
most reprobate to seek God; but the
words of Christ prove true—‘ Ye shall
seek me, and shall not find me; and
where I am, thither ye cannot come.”
“God waits long for sinners: He
threatens long before he strikes: He
strikes and pierces in lesser degrees and
with increasing severity, before the
final blow comes. In this life he places
man in a new state of trial even after
his first judgments have fallen upon the
sinner. But the general rule of his
dealings is this ; that when the time of
each judgment is actually come, then as


to that judgment it is too late to pray.
It is not too late for other mercy or for
final forgiveness, so long as man’s state
of probation lasts; but it is too late ag
to this one. And thus each judgment in
time is a picture of the eternal judg-
ment, when the day of mercy is past for
ever to those who have finally in this life
hardened themselves against it” [Pusey].

Ver. 7. Treacherously. Men cloak
their sins and act deceitfully in God’s
service—i. When they vow and do not
perform; 2. When they pray and do
not labour; 3. When the outward per-
formance does not agree with the inward
condition. In the sanctuary they are
often one thing, in daily life another
“Measure not men by Sundays,” says
Fuller, “without regarding what they
do all the week after.”

1. He that serves God with the body,
without the soul, serves God deceitfully.
2. He that serves God with the soul,
without the body, when both can be
conjoined, doth the work of the Lord


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 73


deceitfully. 3. They are deceitful in
the Lord’s work that reserve one faculty
for sin, or one sin for themselves, or one
action to please their appetite and many
for religion. 4. And they who think
God sufficiently served with abstaining
from evil, and converse not in the ac-
quisition and pursuit of holy charity and
religion [Jer. Taylor].

The unfaithfulness and treachery of





Isracl were transmitted to their children,
who were regarded by God as the off-
spring of idolatry. When children, the
hope of the future, are reared in apo-
stasy there is little prospect of nation
al amendment. Godless children are
punished like Godless parents, the rising
generation suffer with the present, may
be cut off, and both may perish with their
portions and possessions.


HOMILETICS.


‘“ Aw Earnest MINISTRY THE WANT OF THE Times.”—Verses 8—11.


The prophet is now commanded to warn the people—to sound the horn, and
stand upon the most prominent places on the borders of Benjamin. The judgment
is certain; the enemy is near, and the nation must be roused from its slumbers.
With intense feeling and earnestness the alarm is given. Hence the title of our
subject borrowed from Angell James.

I. The nature of an earnest ministry. Life is earnest and happy only in
the degree in which it is consecrated to action. Action and enjoyment are contin-
gent upon each other. When we are unfit for work we are incapable of pleasure
and success. Hence the advice, ‘ Be in earnest.” Earnestness in the Christian
ministry is not mere activity, noise, and bustle. It is the pursuit of a certain object,
and the determination to accomplish it; an endeavour to realize our aspirations,
“This one thing I do.” 1. I¢ is specific in design. One thing filled and fired the
mind of Hosea. He saw the danger, and longed to deliver his people from it.
Amid many inferior designs, the preacher has one chiefly in view. His mind is
not intently employed nor his heart deeply engaged on a multiplicity of objects.
He has not energy and time thus to divide. He has selected his object, made up
his mind, and cannot be driven from it. His sermons are preached and his efforts
directed to the conversion of sinners. When a few friends stood round the bed of
Dr Beecher, one put the question, “Dr B., you know a great many things, tell us
which is the greatest of all things.” In a moment he brightened up and replied,
“Tt is not theology, it is not controversy, but it is to save souls.” No earnest
minister will be satisfied without this. Applause, honour, and position sink into in-
significance. He cries out, “ My little children, of whom I travail in birth again,
until Christ be formed in you.” 2. I¢ is enthusiastic in feeling. ‘“O Benjamin,”
cried the prophet. The heart yearns “when thought” is “enkindled to a high
degree.” ‘The abstractions of the intellect kindle the affections of the heart.
Where there is no feeling, there can be no fervour of spirit. ‘‘ We want men with
burning hearts,” said a heathen to a missionary. Ministers are the best orators
when they feel. The spring of power is within, and the life that quickens dwells
in the soul. Feeble preachers result from feeble Christians. There is often cold
orthodoxy without fire. The soul is not poured into duty, and all is routine and
form. “The wildest enthusiasm is more rational than indifference,” says Paley.
It is said of Baxter when he preached, “ you might find his very spirit drenched
therein.” Noise and display may attract attention, just as Eastern mourners wail-
ing for the dead stir the sympathies of the multitude. But the man whose soul is
profoundly moved is “ pressed in spirit” and often of “silent tears.” He speaks
in words that burn and thoughts that breathe. “O that I was all heart and soul
and spirit,” said Rowland Hill, “ to tell the glorious gospel of Christ to perishing
multitudes.” 3. I¢ is conducted under Divine guidance. We all feel the need. of
direction in the choice of a sphere and the discharge of duty. But in the ordinary
and the special work, in the cottage and in the pulpit, the minister must seek


78 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. {cuaP. v.


Divine aid. In the study of the word and the discovery of truth: in matter,
manner, and results, our sufficiency must come from God. God directed the pro-
phet to speak. The Spirit guided the apostles to persons and places, and in public
and private efforts “the hand of the Lord was with them.” We must not only
recognize, but honour the Holy Spirit by seeking his direction and speaking under
his ‘inspiration. If Pericles never ascended the rostrum without imploring a
blessing from the gods, does he not condemn many Christian ministers? “I forgot
explicitly and expressly, when I began, to crave help from God, and the chariot-
wheels drove accordingly. Lord, forgive my omissions, and keep me in the way of
duty,” wrote Philip Henry. In a large town or a country village, in the beginning
and at the end of our ministry, we must “ stand and wait,” eager for work—
“ Ready to run at his command ;
At his command stand still.”
4, It 1s characterized by constant activity. Work is the law of our being, the ~
living principle that carries men and nations onward. Nothing but constant toil
maintains their authority and extends their dominion. “ We must work (Labore-
mus),” said the Emperor Severus on his death-bed at York, where he had been
carried on a litter from the foot of the Grampians. A fervent spirit will prompt
to active life, Hearty relish for our work, and a sense of its importance, will inspire
with ardour. The nation requires a living ministry, earnest men, men that will
pray and labour, watch and weep for souls. “Oh that I were a flame of fire in my
Master’s cause,” cried Brainerd.
“Wake, ere the earthly charm unnerve thee quite,

And be thy thoughts to work Divine addrest :

Do something, do it soon—with all thy might!

An angel’s wing would droop if long at rest,

And God himself inactive were no longer blest.”
ITI. The necessity of an earnest ministry. Ephraim was not merely to be chastised,
wasted by famine, but destroyed; to become a desolation, an entire waste. When
Judah had removed the bounds, broken through all restraints human and Divine,
then destruction like a flood would overwhelm the land. Yet they were careless
and insensible to danger. Men now are asleep in sin, heedless of Divine warning.
Ministers must “cry aloud and spare not.” “I love those that thunder out the
word,” said Whitfield. ‘‘The Christian world is in a deep sleep. Nothing but a
loud voice can awaken them out of it.” 1. Harnestness is demanded by the spirit-
ual condition of men. ‘Ephraim shall be desolate ;” “I will pour out my wrath
upon them like water.” God rebuked, judgments were threatened, but they were
impenitent and presumptuous. (1) The danger is real. It is not imaginative, not
an alarm to frighten. Sin and punishment, heaven and hell, are awful realities,
The truth must be told. Without Christ the sinner cannot escape—will be lost,
eternally lost. (2) The danger is near: Not like an enemy afar off, but on the borders,
in the land, spreading desolation on every hand. Sin enters the heart, exposes to
present danger and eternal death. (3) The danger is overwhelming. ‘“ Ephraim
is oppressed and broken in judgment,” crushed by his own folly and oppressed by
captivity. Danger within and without, nothing but danger! Who can withstand
when God pours out his wrath like a deep and irresistible flood? (a) It was severe—
“a flood.” (b) It was fixed—* which shall surely be.” (c) It was perpetual—the
desolation was for ever, the grandeur of the nation was never restored. ‘ Flee from
the wrath to come.” 2. Harnestness is demanded by the activity of the age. The
features of the age are peculiar and not a little hostile to the gospel, notwithstand-
ing great revivals, Earnestness marks every department of life. Restlessness and
energy are found in trade and commerce, science and literature. Rationalism, Ritu-
alism, and Scepticism are seen in battle arrayed. We must meet this activity, whieh
is the boast, before it becomes the bane, of the age; direct it to its proper ends ;
and turn its turbid currents into streams of life. What}~ anearnest ministry can


CHAP. V.] HOMILELIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 79





intone society, rouse and help God’s people to bear up against Mammon and the
selfish spirit of the day? Energy in politics, education, and philanthropy necessi-
tate deeper feeling in the preacher. Tame and spiritless sermons, common-place
performances cn Sunday, will not break the spell of six days’ excitement and influ-
ence. We requirea Whitfield and a Wesley, sons of thunder, the spirit of Luther,
to rebuke this material and utilitarian age. ‘ Nothing is more indecent,” says
Baxter, “than a dead preacher speaking to dead sinners the living truth of the


living God.”


The earnestness of this holy man was exemplified in his own lines—


“T’ll preach as though I ne’er should preach again ;
And as a dying man to dying men!”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 9. I. Days of rebuke. 1. Days of
solemn warning; 2. Days of grievous
affliction; 3. Days of actual calamities, to
individuals and families, churches and
nations. II. Days of rebuke unheeded.
Followed by—1. Severer threatening—-2.
Awful destruction. The scattered sons of
Israel were made preachers to the nations
around, Divine warnings to all people.
Or, I. The cause of rebuke—* iniquity ”
(ver. 5). God pronounced sentence upon
the nation ; individuals contribute to
national guilt, and must feel their re-
sponsibility. God is angry with sin, and
seeks to purge his people from it, to take
away the evils, not the comforts of life ;
the dross, not the gold. II. The design
of rebuke. Trials are not penal afflic-
tions to God’s people, but fatherly cor-
rections, friendly rebukes. III Yhe
effect of rebuke—* desolate in the day
of rebuke.” Ephraim was not restored.
The wicked are consumed, utterly de-
stroyed, when rebuked in wrath and hot
displeasure. The believer is chastened,
but not destroyed ; treated not as an
enemy, but as an erring child. “God
may rebuke when he is angry, and yet
restrain in hie auger; but to rebuke in
his anger, is to let loose the reins to his
anger, and to make it outrun his mercy.
Then what a miserable case to be in! to
have his anger assault me and not his
mercy relieve me.”

Ver. 10. Bounds. The land-mark
was a memorial of antiquity and the
rights of man (Proy. xxii. 28). Its re-
moval was forbidden as selfish and un-
just invasion of property (Deut. xix. 4) ;
irreverence for well-established princi-
ples ; love for rash innovation ; branded
with a curse (Deut. xxvii. 17); and re-


garded as the cause of national provoca-
tion. The heathen admitted the sanctity
of land-marks, and honoured them as
gods, without which every field would be
subject to contention. God himself has
set bounds in the physical and moral
world ; locating each nation; restraining
each part; and governing the whole.
Hence removal of bounds is—1l. En-
croachment upon Divine authority ; 2
Destruction of moral distinctions; 3.
Exposure to moral guilt. Some remove
bounds and set up others. Israel re-
moved the law of God and set up their
own will (ver. 11). Rome takes away
Scripture and sets up tradition. Philo-
sophy rejects the gospel and substitutes
science. The application must not be
absolute and universal. We are not to
be too conservative in politics and re-
ligion, nor yet too rash with innovations ;
but seek the mean between blind rever-
enc? for antiquity and love of novelties.

Ver. 11. Notice—I. The object of
pursuit— the commandment.” An ob-
ject sinful, ensnaring, and dangerous.
II. The method of pursuit-—“ willingly.”
A method easy to comply with, fashion-
able, and upheld by State authority.
III. The results of pursuit—“ oppressed”
from without, “ broken in judgment”
from within. (a) A natural result ; (0)
A just result. “ Ephraim preferred
man’s commands and laws to God’s; they
obeyed man and set God at nought,
therefore they should suffer at man’s
hands, who, while he equally neglected
God’s will, enforced his own. For this
sin God judged them justly, even through
the unjust judgment of man. God
mostly puuishes, thro’ their own choice,
those whc rhoose against his, The Jews


80 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA.


eas


said, We have no king but Cesar, and
Ceesar destroyed them [Pusey].

The commandment of men, though
-enforced by authority, terror, and danger,
is no excuse for sin. Sin does not cease
to be voluntary, inexcusable, and aggra-
vating on that account. Oppressors
corrupt the worship of God, flatter and
carry away the people, till their own
ends be accomplished, but they will crush


[CHaP. VY.





on the rent under pretence of ridding the
people of great oppressions, and invented
a way of religion pretending the peo-
ple’s ease, yet by him and his successors
“ Ephraim is oppressed and broken in
judgment;” not only in the righteous
judgment of God, but in the adminis-
tration of justice they were crushed by
corrupt rulers, who were great bribers
(ch. iv. 18) [Hutcheson].


them in the longrun. Jeroboam carried


HOMILETICS.


Dustruction Stow anp Sure.—Verse 12.


The ten tribes are compared to a garment eaten by the moth, and Judah is con-
sumed by rottenness. The moth is injurious to clothing. The worm penetrates
both wood and flesh. Both prefigure the inward and outward corruption of Israel ;
destruction slowly and surely progressing (Job xiii. 28).

I. Destruction small in its beginning. The moth is a small and mischievous
creature. ‘Touch it, and you kill it; permit it to live, and it makes havoc in the
dwelling. Sins of youth may be despised and indulged, but they harden the heart
and prepare for greater sins. Nations are not destroyed at once; families and
churches are not always suddenly overcome. Some moral disease, like the moth,
quietly gnaws away their beauty and vitality. Pride, intemperance, and vice prey
upon their reputation and royalty. They are crushed with the moth. ITI. Destruction
slow in its progress. Little by little the hardest wood is pierced. Silently and slowly
do rottennessand decay work their end. Yonder river rolling to the sea, rises fromsome
small spot, and widens as it flows to join the mighty deep. The inhabitants of primeval
forests are often startled by the fall of some giant tree. For centuries it was strong
and grand in its foliage, but fell a victim to rottenness and decay. Insects came and
gradually bored its sides and peeled its bark; the wind and air got access to its centre
and heart. Now it lies a helpless trunk, to blend in common dust—“ the place thereof
knows it nomore.” Family honour, mercantile prosperity, and national enterprises,
may be upheld and flourish for a season. But secret sins and religious declensions,
luxury and effeminacy, are, like the moth, slowly working out destruction. Rotten-
ness entered the nations of antiquity, and their grandeur decayed like a flower.
Superstition and priestly ambition, a sectarian and worldly spirit, will destroy
spiritual life in our modern churches ; lukewarmness and pride will hasten their
ruin, and make them “ desolate in the day of rebuke.” III. Destruction sure in
its end. Wherever the moth dwells destruction is costly and sure. ‘The house of
the moth is not a mansion of iron, a lasting habitation which never falls to ruin.
The most precious stores are devoured. Rich perfumes and purple apparel are con-
sumed and frittered away. ‘‘ The moth,” says Dr Thomas, “is often so small and
secret in its workings that medical science can seldom find it out, and when it finds
it out, though it may check it for a time, it cannot destroy it: the moth defies all
medicine.” So the judgments of God upon sin may be small in beginning, but in-
crease in severity, and at length bring death and destruction. At first God tries
gentle measures, mild chastisements, then loss and decay in bodily health, family
prestige, and national glory; finally, after respite and space for repentance, calamities
wear out and destroy the impenitent. ‘For the moth shall eat them ur like a
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool.”


CHAP. V.]} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSRA. $i





a ee ts EE TEED


HOMILETICS.
Nationa Sickness and Spurious Remepies.— Verse 13.


At iength Ephraim saw the sickness within and felt the wounds inflicted from
without. But instead of returning to God, they sought help from Assyria, “ sent
to King Jared,” but were grievously disappointed. Idolatry and corruption,
apostasy from God, could not be cured with earthly bandages. The whole head was
sick, and the heart faint. The wounds and bruises and putrefying sores could not be
closed, bound up, nor mollified with worldly alliance. God had stricken them, and
he only could cure them, but they refused to return (cf. Is. i. 6; Jer. v. 3). In
the moral condition of Israel we have a picture of humanity.

I. Men are morally sick. The heart is depraved, “deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked.” Sin impairs the energy of the mind, and robs the soul of enjoy-
ment and bliss. The political head and the mora] heart of nations are sick and
wounded. ‘The politics, the philosophy, and the religion of the world require moral
purity and spiritual health. Ceaseless activity without and unspirituality within
crave for satisfaction and God. The life-blood is impure, the very heart is diseased, and
the evils of the day are the expressions, the signs of its moral maladies. Everywhere
we have sighs of the heart, efforts of the mind, and strivings for forms of liberty, states
of life, and conditions of happiness which are considered the true harmony of moral
being, the panacea for moral ills. 1. This sickness must be seen. Ephraim did not at
first discern his condition. Men are often insensible to disease, take little warning
of Divine judgments, until they are roused by some sudden stroke. Men may fancy
themselves healthy because insensible ; but apathy may suppress the natural feeling
and cravings of the heart. A sound body suffers pain, if injured ; but a frame be-
numbed by sickness or death has lost all feeling. ‘“ Health has no ‘feeling of sick-
ness,” says Augustine, ‘but yet it feels pain when it is wounded. But stupidity
feels no pain; it has lost the feeling of pain; and the more insensible, so much the
worse.” 2. This sichness must be scen in its true light. According to our view
of afflictions so we think and act. They are designed to teach reflection and
humility ; to strengthen penitence, faith, and patience; to promote the health and
sanctification of the soul. But if we see the distress and not the causes of it ; if
we feel no guilt, no need of a physician ; then our temper is soured, our lot embit-
tered, we forsake the true remedy, and pine away and die. II. Men morally sick
often seek wrong remedies. ‘Then sent Ephraim to the Assyrian.” This only
invited the enemy into their kingdom and increased their distress. After they
had paid money and spent all they had they were no better, but worse. Mark v. 26.
1. Individuals often fly to wrong sources. Music and merry company, novels
and scenes of amusement, are tried in vain, and found to be miserable comforters
with all their attractions. Impressions remain, the conscience is still wounded and
disappointment is the result. 2. Nations suffering heavy calamities trust to impotent
remedies. Commercial prosperity, military prowess, political liberty, and intellec-
tual culture, may uphold the outward show, but can never cure the inward disorders
of a kingdom. In national judgments, amid general dissolution of manners, reliance
on arts and arms, wealth and allies, will not save us. The experience of Ephraim
will be the result of all application to an arm of flesh. ‘“ Yet could he not heal
you, nor cure you of your wound.” III. When men in moral sickness apply to
wrong means for relief they will be disappointed. Human aid will be useless
when God is slighted ; the philosopher and the legislator, the warrior and the poet,
will not avail. ‘‘ Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is grievous.” Scripture
is emphatic on this point. “Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed,
on Egypt ; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand and pierce it” (Is. xxxvi.
6; Ezek. xxix. 6, 7). “Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils ; for
wherein is he to be accounted of 9” (Is. ii, 22.) “It is better to trust in the Lord

6


82 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. (CHAP. ¥.





than to put confidence in princes.” ‘ Put not your confidence in princes, nor ix
the son of man, in whom there is no help.” History gives warning sufficient.
Nations that have relied upon human genius, arms and confederacies, have failed in
efforts to remedy their evils. Unholy alliance with Egypt and Assyria could not
preserve Israel from their doom. Policy without principle, alliance without God,
shall be broken. Moral maladies can only be cured by moral means, There is but
one physician, all others are physicians of no value. “I kill, and I make alive ;
I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.”


Destruction OPEN aND VIOLENT.— Verses 14, 15.


God, who had been as a “moth” gradually eating away and destroying the nation,
would now change his procedure, and attack as a fierce lion, tear to pieces, and none
could rescue. If nations take no heed to small judgments they cannot escape great
ones. The lion, an image of strength, seizes its prey, and carries it away in safety
(Is. v. 29). As the lion withdraws into its cave, so God witlidraws his help, and
retires from Israel until they repent and seek his face. I. God’s judgments are often
severe. “I, even I will tear.” Here are no soft metaphors. The destruction is
most painful and severe. Like a lion or an eagle God tears to pieces; tears the
garment, tears body and soul. Punishment sometimes falls upon men like wild
beasts upon their victims, to crush and destroy. The lion is cruel and ferocious ;
rends its prey (Deut. xxxiii. 20; Ps. vii. 2) ; and carries it in triumph to its den
(Nah. ii, 12). This is not an overdrawn picture of danger and the anger of God
against presumptuous sins. ‘‘ Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver.” II. God’s judgments axe often irresist.ble.
‘‘ None shall rescue him.” The shepherd can neither defend nor interfere. In a trial
of strength God is omnipotent and cannot be overcome. Assyria was no protection
to Israel. In national calamity none can plead. At the day of wrath no hope, no
refuge can be found without God. III. God’s judgments are often irrevocable
“‘T will go and return to my place.” None can ward off Divine judgments ; none
can bring back when God retires from men. When God deserts a society or a
people, the mightiest and most learned are no defence. Noble institutions, religious
ordinances, and great men, wealthy citizens and abundant revenues, are not the
chief strength, the real power of a nation. God can consume these like a flower,
and no fasting nor penitence can purchase favours once withdrawn. Riches melt,
power decays, and happiness turns to misery before the wrath of God. Nothing
can revive a nation when God destroys it; nothing can change his purpose when
carried out in his providence. To be forsaken of God at any time is awful woe ;
but in trouble to have his countenance turned from us and against us, to have
frowns instead of smiles, must be hell, and not heaven. ‘‘ When distress and
anguish cometh upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer ;
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 13. Man cannot have two objects
of trust—God and himself, or fellow-
man. Half of salvation cannot be
ascribed to one and half to the other. To
put confidence in man, and expect him


kindness, and the faithfulness of man
are helpless. God alone should be our
hope and trust (Jer. xvii. 7).

Ver. 14. When we strengthen our-
selves in sin by outward helps against


to do what God alone can do, is idolatry
or departure from God, cleaving to the
cistern and forsaking the fountain, lean-
ing upon a broken reed which will fail
and pierce the hand. The power, the


the providence and corrections of God, we
challenge him to a trial of strength, turn
the “moth” into a “lion,” and bring
greater judgments upon ourselves. God
can tear a vation to pieces by sword,


CHAP. V.]





famine, and civil discord. ‘ What is
stronger than a lion?” “Tt isa fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living
God.”

Ver, 15. God's retirement from men.
I. The cause. Offended at sin, driven
away by men forgetting and forsaking
him. Sin separates between God and
man, and hides his face from us. JI.
The design. “Till they acknowledge
their offence,” &c. 1. To lead to repent-
ance, sorrow, confession and forsaking
ofsin. 2. To bring back to God, ‘In
their affliction they will seek me early.”
The desertion is not always final nor
total. God withdraws his aid in duty
and his comforts in life not to cast off
entirely, but to beget penitence and hope,
to induce return and amendment of life.
“ We smart under dreadful desertions.
Some of us have had to cry with the
Master on the cross, ‘My God, my God,
why hast thou forsaken me?’ We
know why he has forsaken us: it is be-
cause we have forsaken him, and _ there-
fore he has hidden the light of his
countenance from us until we could
scarcely believe ourselves to be his
children at all. We have turned to
prayer, and found words and even desires
fail us when on our knees. We have
searched the Scriptures with no consola-
tory result: every text of Scripture has
looked black upon us; every promise
blockaded its ports against us. We
have tried to raise a single thought
heavenward, but have been so distracted
under a sense of the Lord’s wrath, which
lay heavy upon us, that we could not
even aspire for a moment; we could only
say, ‘ Why art thou cast down, O my
soul? Why art thou disquieted within


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 88


———


me%’ Such suffering of soul will often
be to the erring Christian the very best
thing that could befall him. He has
walked contrary to his God, and if his
God did not walk contrary to him he
would be at peace in his sin; and re-
member, no condition can be more dan-
gerous, not to say damnable, than for
a man who is no longer agreed with his
God to believe that all is well, and go
on softly and delicately in the way
which tends to destruction” [Spurgeon|.

True repentance, in its first step,
leads to conviction of sin, confession of
guilt, and acceptance of punishment as
due to oursin. Then to seek the face
of God. ‘“ Without the latter, despair,
not repentance, would be the result, as in
the case of Judah’s remorse. Without
the former step, to seek God’s face would
be presumption.” Unsanctified affliction
only hardens, but blessed, will lead the
chastened penitent earnestly and dili-
gently to seek and serve God.

True seekers after God. 1. They
seek him, sensible of their distance and
their guilt. 2. They seek him when
they do not enjoy him. 3. They seek
him (a) early, i.e. diligently. Former
negligence is followed by double dili-
gence ; . earnestly intent on finding
God ; (c) perseveringly, though he has
withdrawn from them. They seek until
they find him. ‘ All these duties re-
quired in right seeking of God ought
to be especially set about in sad times.
Simes wherein affliction press men hard
on all hands ought to be times of seek-
ing God indeed, and ought to put an


‘edge on diligence and duties, otherwise


it may draw to asad account” [ Hutche-
son).


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER V.


Ver. 1—3. Inferiors are very apt to
be formed up according to the mould and
manners of those above them. ‘The ex-
ample of kings and princes are seldom
unconformed to by their subjects. There
is a great power in example; what is
done persuades, as well as what is
spoken. And the errors of those that
rule, become rules of error; men sin
with a kind of authority, through the
sins of those who arein authority. Jero-


boam made Israel to sin, not only by
commanding them to worship the calves
at Dan and Bethel, but by commending
that idolatrous worship to them in his
own practice and example [ Cary/].

The common people are like tem-
pered wax, easily receiving impressions
from the seals of great men’s vices ; they
care not to sin by prescription, and
damn themselves with authority
[Harding].


84 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY, HOSEA,


Ver. 4. Nothing but the hand of
God can hold man from ruining hin-
self. The heart of man is so set upon sin,,
that he would rather lose his soul than
his lusts. "Tis as easy to stay the motion
of the sun, or to turn back the course of
nature, as to stay or turn back the
natural motion or course of the heart
in sinning. An almighty power must do
the latter as well as the former [Cary/].

Other tyrants can but tyrannize over
our bodies, but sin is a tyrant over body
and soul. Itis the worst and greatest
tyrant in the world. It hath a kind of
jurisdiction in most men’s hearts: it sets
up the law of pride, the law of passion,
the law of oppression, the law of form-
ality, the law of carnal reason, the law
of unbelief, and strictly commands sub-
jection tothem. Other tyrants have been
brought down and brought under by
human power, but this cannot, except by
Divine [Brooks].

Ver. 5—7. Our consciences (which
are God’s) keep a record, write our lives
and count our steps. Many cannot
read the book of conscience, and so know
little that is in it. But a time will come
(if conscience be not purged by the blood
of Christ) when they shall perfectly
read all their sins in this book within ;
and if conscience, which is God’s deputy,
testifieth against sin and marketh it, how
much more God, who is the Judge of
conscience, God needs not judge upon
information, but upon observation. He
will reprove every man whom he doth
not pardon, and is able to set before us
in order whatsoever any of us have done
[ Caryl}.

Though repentance be never too late,
yet late repentance is seldom true
| Brooks]. Mercy, in this the day of her
reign, sovereignly seizes judgment before
its time, and works that mighty lever to
move mankind. The terrors of the
Lord are not permitted to sleep unnoticed
and unknown, till the day when they
shall overwhelm and overflow all his
enemies ; they are summoned forth in
the interval, and numbered among the
all things that work together for good.
Though kept like a reserve in the rear,
their grim hosts are exposed to view, in
order that they may co-operate with


[CHAP ¥


kindlier agencies in persuading men to
yield, and fight against God no more
[Arnot].

Ver, 8—11. Brainerd had such
intense compassion for souls, and was
so earnest for their salvation, that he
said, “I cared not where or how I
lived, or what hardships I went through,
so that I could but gain souls to Christ.
While I was asleep I dreamed of these
things, and when I awoke the first thing
I thought of was this great work. All
my desire was for the conversion of the
heathen, and all my hope was in God.”
It is amazing what difference heat makes
on both mental and material objects.
The only difference between ice and
steam is, that the one has less and the
other more heat. Now earnestness con-
verts ordinary qualities into powerful and
elastic forces. It enhances everything
it touches, turns bricks to marble, and
copper into gold. It changes liking
into love, joy into ecstasy, and expecta-
tion into hope. It stamps on every
virtue its currency, whether in heaven or
in earth. Love, pity, kindness are all
cold and worthless unless they bear the
impress of a fervent spirit [Dulce
Domum|.

Ver. 11—14. Vice is sometimes
punished instantly and sometimes gra-
dually. This seems to be the method
of Divine procedure. We have slow
and rapid consumption in the bodies of
men. We have the gradual decay and
the sudden overthrow of empires, the
seed-time of evil and the harvest of
judgment. The changes of circumstances
are so various and frequent, so great and
sudden, that the same person, the same
people, afford an example of the greatest
prosperity and the greatest misery.
Henry the Fourth of France was de-
spatched by a sacrilegious hand in his
carriage, in the midst of popular applaus>
and the triumphs of peace. Like Herod,
the grandson of Herod the Great, he
found but one step between adoration
and oblivion. The ruin which God in-
flicts upon the impenitent and presump-
tuous sinners is often beyond precedent”
most sudden and most fearful. What
fuily, then, to trust in man, when God


can easily destroy him !


OMAP. VL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. &


———





Ver. 15. To afflictions, instrument- his providence, Afflictions dispose ua
ally, many have to date the awakening to pray; and we are sure to want
and conversion of their souls. “Happy nothing if we find God in prayer”
is that condition which forces us to trust [Bishop Wilson].
in God only, and to be in the hand of





’ CHAPTER VL


CarricaL Norres.—i.] Contains an appeal addressed by Israelites one to another, Some, as
spoken by the prophet to the exiled and smitten people. 2 Two days.] A proverbial way of ex-
ressing the certainty of an event in the time specified ; primarily applied to the conversion of Is, :
in fulness only realized in the resurrection of Christ. 8. Then] i. e. the consequence of following,
hunting and zealous seeking after, would be knowledge in its practical results (ch. iv. 16; Jer, xxil.
15,16). Going forth] Heb. rising, applied to the sun (Ps. xix. 23; Gen, xix. 23); setting forth
transition from night to day; the dawn of salvation before the orbed glory of heaven (Is. liii. 8;
lx. 2). Prepared] Lit. fixed, certain as the morning, an established law of nature, a special appoint-
ment of God (Gen. vill. 22). The rain] Reviving and refreshing blessings (Deut. xxxii. 2; Is. lv. 10).
The latter] Lit. the crop-rain which fell in the middle of March or April to ripen the grain for
harvest. Former] Spring rain, which fell from middle of Oct. to middle of Dec, Rain generally, and
these two specially, promised by God (Dent. xi. 14); great blessings, without which would happen
the greatest calamity in Pal. ‘The blessings of Messiah are compared to rain (Ps. Ixxii. 6;
2 Sam. xxiii. 4), 4] Begins a bitter complaint. What] Both in mercy and judgment (Is. v. 4).
God was constant and kind, Is. inconstant. Goodness] Godliness, Heb. mercy, kindness, all
virtues towards God and man; love which fulfils the law (Rom. xiii. 10). Morning cloud] Evan-
escent and uncertain, Dew] Generated by the cold of the night, it appears with the dawn; yet appears
only to disappear. The Jewish people a type of many amending and relapsing. God’s mercy is first
set forth, and then men are upbraided for neglecting it, committing those sins which will be their
ruin. Israel’s piety was “ quickly assumed and quickly disused.” 5. Hewed] Cut off, cut down like
a tree (Is. x. 15) ; or to hew out a stone into the right shape. Israel was obdurate, and was hewed
by the prophet, and hammered with the word (Jer. xxiii. 29). Slain] The word has power to kill and
to make alive (Is. xi. 4; xlix. 2). “ The stone which will not take the form which should have been
imparted to it, is destroyed ze the strokes which should have moulded it” [Pusey]. Thy judgments]
Lit. that thy judgments might be as the light. Penal justice is conspicuous, clear as the sun ; every
one should take heed (Zeph. ili. 5); lightening (Hender. trans.; cf. marg. Job xxxvii. 3, 15).
6. Sac.] which they brought, Merey] which they lacked ; a comparison by negatives; things less
worthy are rejected. Moral obedience is better than ritual offerings (Mat. ix. 13). Knowl.] experi-
mental and practical, which is more than empty service. Internal is put before external worship ;
the prophet, a teacher and interpreter of the law, rebukes apostasy. 7, They] Eph. and Jud,
God’s professed people. Like ea Lit. like Adam in covenant relation to God, have wilfully trans-
gressed, are guilty of a breach of fidelity. Others, like men generally, who break lightly every day
compacts with their fellows. God sought to preserve Adam and Israel in intimate relation to him-
self. Sin is a violation of the covenant—Israel contradicted their destiny as the people of God.
There] Wherever and whenever sin is committed, the place is known to God and pointed out by the
Divine finger. 8. Gilead] A city of refuge, the residence of priests, and the centre or metropolis of
the hilly region beyond Jordan, yet polluted and the leader of ruin! 9.] Even priests acted like
predatory bands, to murder and surprise travellers on the way. Destruction was met where safety
was sought. By consent] Lit. with one shoulder, as oxen yoked together (Zeph. iii. 9), The sanctity
of the place and the privileges of the priesthood did not check them in banding together for mischief.
Lewdness] Heb. froma root to form deliberate purpose ; deliberate crime, enormity (Marg.). ‘‘ The
word literally means, a thing thought of, especially an evil, and so, deliberate wickedness, be-
thought of and contrived. They did deliberate wickedness, gave themselves to do it, and nothing
else” [Pusey]. 10, Horrible thing] Heb. from a word meaning to shudder, be astonished.
Whoredom] spiritual and literal singled out as the chief sin—‘* In another nation, idolatry was error.
In Israel, which had the knowledge of the one true God, and had received the law, it was horror ”
[Pusey]. 11. Harvest] Not a harvest of joy, a promise of ingathering of Israel, but a ripeness for
Divine judgments to be inflicted by Assyrians. When] I would, upon their repentance, have turned
away the captivity of my people. Judgment might have been averted, but will end in captivity.
The Heb, is used of restoration also (Deut. xxx. 3; Ps. xiv. @ ; hence many take it in this sense, aa
in harmony with the beginning of the chapter—‘‘ a promise of restoring their captivity in due time,
which yet imports a sentence of banishment tor-sin to be inflicted before” [ Hutcheson].


5


86 HOMIZE’IC COMMENTARY ; HOSEA. [CHAP VL





eee
.


HOMILETICS.


Nationa AMENDMENT.— Verses 1—3.


Man’s miseries are often messengers of mercy. When mild measures did not
move Israel, God tried severe. Vengeance came at length, and they were carried
captives by a cruel people, brought to a penitent state of mind, and they resolve
to return to God.

I. Return to God is a necessity. ‘‘ My people are destroyed for lack of know-
ledge.” An intimate acquaintance and fellowship with God are a moral necessity.
Man cries for God as Father, Friend, and Helper. 1. Man has capacity to turn to
God and enjoy him. He has power to discern right and wrong ; to recognize the
character and appreciate the claims of God. We have reason, conscience, and a
moral nature. Though fallen and sinful, we have not lost our religious cravings and
necessities. ‘‘The notion of a God,” says Tillotson, ‘‘is so inseparable from human
nature, that to obliterate the one you must destroy the other.” The word of God
appeals to our helpless condition, and invites us to return to God. The grace and
the Spirit of God are promised to aid us in returning. Our life and enjoyment
consist in friendship with God. ‘This is life eternal, that they might know thee.”
2. Man lives in distance from God. Nota mere natural, but moral distance ; an
alienation of heart and life from God. In affection and purpose, in thought and
deed, man is at variance with his Maker. To be absent from a friend is grief;
to be without food and shelter is sad ; but to be without God is the greatest infelicity.
“ Having no hope and without Godin the world.” 3. Man suffers in distance from
God. Sin wounds the spirit and brings judgments upon the life. It vexes and
enslaves ; torments the conscience, and exposes to condemnation and death, Like
Ezekiel’s roll, within and without it has written, “‘ Lamentation and mourning and
woe.” From its guilt springs fear; shame from its defilement ; and destruction
from its punishment. “It is that which puts thee out of the possession and en-
joyment of thyself, which doth alienate and separate thee from God, the fountain
of bliss and happiness, which provokes him to be thine enemy, and lays thee open
every moment to the fierce revenge of his justice.” Man has felt his distance and
his misery, but could not heal his diseases and restore himself to God. Bleeding
and burdened, the soul longs for restoration to its centre. ‘Oh that I knew where
I might find him! that I might come even to his seat!” II. Return to God is en-
couraged. “Come, and let us return,” says the prophet. 1. Mercy is held out.
“‘ He will heal us” and “he will bind us up.” The Assyrian could not heal, but
they are persuaded that God who had smitten them could. He was Israel’s phy-
sician in the time of Moses, and preserved them from the diseases of Egypt, the
death of the first-born, and the destruction which overtook Pharaoh. No sickness
baffles his skill. He gives efficacy to medicine for the body, and his grace renews
and sanctifies the soul. As Christ drove out demons and diseases from men, so
God heals all our infirmities of body, mind, and heart, until sin is eradicated, and
“the inhabitants shall no more say, I am sick.” 2. The certainty of this mercy is
relied upon. “ After two days will he revive us.” The time is short, but, God who
promises will fulfil the promise. None need hesitate or despair of God’s mercy.
It is offered to all, and may be received with faith, A firm persuasion of mercy
will draw the penitent to God ; without this he would despair or go from him. But
the torn shall be healed, the dead quickened, and the humble and contrite received.
** We shall live in his sight.” His face will no longer be turned away in displeasure
nor anger. The returning sinner, who seeks his face, shall know God’s will, feel
his love, and rejoice in the light of his countenance. “ For a small moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee.” ITI. Return to God should
be urged as a social duty. “ Come, and let us return.” We'should not only seek
God ourselves, but try to induce others ; in times of sorrow urge repentance, and of


CHAP. VI.j BROMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 87





revival incite to duty. The sympathy of numbers is great. “I was glad when
they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord.” In business and common
themes men unite and take counsel ; should not Christians aid and mutually cheer
each other? Sin has separated men or debases their intercourse ; but religion
unites them in love and confidence, Jewish doctors say that men are to go in
haste and with speed together to the synagogue, but return very leisurely. So we
should ‘walk in company,” and with enthusiasm to God, but never forsake him.
This duty is urged for many reasons. 1. All have need to be stirred up. The
careless and impenitent must be roused from slumber, the inquirer directed, and
Christians excited to greater love and activity. “That they may all call upon the
name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.” 2. As social creatures we can
influence one another for good. Example is most potent. Precept points out the
way, but example carries us along. Great is the power of goodness to charm and
command. The pious man is a king, drawing all hearts after him. We all love
the brave and the magnanimous; derive inspiration from them ; and incited to
action by them. ‘“ We live in an age that hath more need of good examples
than precepts,” said George Herbert. And entering upon the duties of life he
resolved: ‘ Above all, I will be sure to live well, because the virtuous life of a
clergyman is the most powerful eloquence, to persuade all who see it to reverence
and love, and at least to desire to live like him.” 3. Jt should be our aim to stir
up others to do good. ‘The humblest and most obscure may do this, Wealth and
position are not necessary. A warm heart will create and communicate enthusiasm,
energy and zeal will evoke courage and devotion in the cause of God. If we
return to God others will follow our example. By prayer and holy life we may
persuade men and help on that happy time when “the inhabitants of one city shall
go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of Hosts ; I will go also” (Zech. viii. 21). IV. Return to God will result
in great blessings to a people. “Bliss from the Creator and duty from the
creature answer to one another,” says a writer. We live in love, action, and God. Life
is a delight and success in the degree in which it is consecrated to God. The
greatest happiness is found in God’s presence and service. 1. Quickened life. He
“ will revive us.” “ He will raise us up.” Spiritual death is overcome by God’s
grace. The sinner is raised from a death of trespasses and sins; the saint is
revived in heart, hope, and duty. Action begets strength, and faith leads to con-
version from sin and deliverance in trouble. Spiritual life is first imparted, then
supported and increased. “For in him we live, and move, and have our being.”
2. Practical knowledge. “Then shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord.”
True knowledge is obtained by experiment. Experiment isa test of scientific truth.
In Chemistry it is a guide, discoverer, and test. The existence of light, heat, and
electricity is indebted to it. Christianity claims to be tested by experiment, and
when thus tested it is found to be true. No learning and wealth are required.
Love, and you shall know God ; believe, and you shall feel. “If any man will do
his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God.” This know is (a)
experimental, (J) practical, and (c) progressive; beginning in the heart, mani-
fest in the life, seen in duty and daily progress. 3. Constant fertility. ‘ He shall
come unto us as the rain ;” in its refreshing fertilizing showers. he early and
latter rain, beginning the good work in the heart, carrying it on in the Christian
Church, and reviving it in the nation. Both are required and given ; rain from the
first to the last; one shower falling after another upon thirsty pastures and desert
ground, filling the pools and clothing the hills with verdure. ‘‘ He shall come down
like rain upon the mown grass: as showers that water the earth.”


Man’s Hieuest Socran Action.— Verse 1.


Man as a member of society has much to do with his fellow-men ; he should cone
tribute to the advancement of general knowledge, to the progress of political purity


88 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. {cHap. Vi


—





and freedom, and to the augmentation of the general health and comfort of the
kingdom. But there is a higher work than this for him in society: it is that of
stimulating the community to which he belongs “to return unto the Lord.” Taking
the words in this application they imply—I. That society isaway from God. Not
locally, for the Great Spirit is with all and in all, but morally. Away from him
in its thoughts ; it practically ignores his existence and claims. Away from him
in its sympathies ; its heart is on those things which are repugnant to his holy
nature. Away from him in its pursuits: its pursuits are selfish and carnal grati-
fications and aggrandizements. ar gone, in truth, is society from its centre—God.
It is like the prodigal in “a far country.” II. That estrangement from God is the
source of all its trials. Because the prodigal left his father’s home he was reduced
to the utmost infamy and wretchedness. Moral separation from God is ruin. Cut
the branch from the root, and it withers; the river from its source, and it dries up;
the planet from the sun, and it rushes to ruin. Society has left God, its root,
source, centre,—hence the terrible evil with which he by his government “ hath
torn” it. Nothing will remove its evils but a return to God. Legislation, com-
merce, science, literature, art, none of these will help it so long as it continues from
him. III. That return to Him is a possible work. Were it not there would be no
meaning in the language, “‘ Come and let us,” &c. With some estranged spirits in
the universe a return may be impossible for ever; not so with human spirits on
earth. There is a way, a true and living way, by which all may return ; repent-
ance towards God and faith in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

Conclusion. Who are the greatest social benefactors ? Those who are the most
successful in exciting and stimulating their fellow-men to come back to God, the
Great Father of love who awaits their return. He says, ‘‘ Come now, let us reason
together,” &c. To bring society back to God is pre-eminently the work of the
gospel minister ; to this he consecrates his power, his time, his all [The Homilist].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 3. We follow on, confessing that
it is he who maketh us to follow him,
and draweth us to him. We know, in
order to follow; we follow, in order to
know. Light prepares the way for love.
Love opens the mind for new love.
The gifts of God are interwoven. They
multiply and reproduce each other, until
we come to the perfect state of eternity.
For we know in part. only; then shall
we know, even as we are known [Pusey].

I. The end in view—to “know the
Lord.” It is objected that we cannot
know him. We are only finite crea-
tures: he is infinite and omnipotent.
We cannot know God perfectly, only in
part. None by searching can find out
God to perfection. But God has re-
vealed himself in his works, word, and
Son. 1. We are capable of knowing
and loving God. 2. The knowledge of
God is a moral necessity. “ My people
perish for lack of knowledge.” 3. A
personal, practical, and experimental


knowle.!;;5 of God should be our aim.


II. The method of attaining this end.
“If we follow on,” &c. 1. We must
not be satisfied with present attain-
ments. “This one thing I do,” &e.
2. We must meditate more. Study the
works and ways, the word and Christ of
God. “Some have not the knowledge
of God; I speak this to your shame.”
3. We must practise more. This a law
of nature. To get more you must use
what you have, “To him that hath
shall be given,” &c.

III. The success guaranteed. If we
follow on to know, “then shall we
know.” 1. It is not a vain pursuit.
2. Success is promised. 3. Success is
realized. This proved from personal
experience and the fulfilment of God’s
word. If probability actuates men in
pursuits of earth, how earnestly should
we follow God, who gives such blessings
and gain.

‘Whether we consider these words as
an excitement and encouragement ad-
dressed by the godly to one another, o*


OHAP. VI. |





to their own souls, they remind us of
an important aim; a necessary duty ;
and an assured privilege. The aim is
“to know the Lord.” Nothing can be
moral or religious in disposition and act,
that is not founded in knowledge ; be-
cause it must be destitute of principle
and motive ; and the Lord looketh at
the heart. Real repentance must spring
from proper views of the evil of sin in
Christ. Faith is impossible without
knowledge. It is not a philosophical
knowledge of God as the Almighty, the
maker and upholder of all things; nor
a knowledge of him as holy in his ways
and righteous in his works. Such
views would gender dread and aversion
in the mind of the sinner. The grand
thing is to know that he is reconcilable,
and that he has given proofs of his love
in Christ. Neither is this knowledge
speculative, but experimental. The
necessary duty is “to follow on” to
know the Lord. This includes the
practice of what we already know. Neg-
lect only increases sin and condemnation.
It also includes diligent use of appointed
means. Hearing and reading the word,
and prayer. It means perseverance in this
course. Nor shall this bein vain. “Then
shall we know,” &c. The privilege is sure
as the word of God, confirmed by history
and experience, can make it. Let this
full assurance of hope influence us jirst
in regard to ourselves. Keep the way.
Perplexities will be solved and doubts
removed. Ye shall know more of him
in his word, providence, and grace ; more
of him asthe strength of your heart, and
your portion for ever. Second, in regard
to others. Be not impatient if they can-
not embrace your views. In grace, as in
nature, there must be infancy before
manhood. God will enlighten them
and finish his work. If their heart be
broken off from sin and the world, and
they are asking the way to Zion with
their faces thitherward, they shall not
err therein. ‘ Who hath despised the
day of small things?” [Jay].

God as the morning. I. Prepared as
the morning. It is fixed and regulated
in its hours—prepared and in readiness.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY . HOSEA. 89


Nothing can hinder its rising. “Seed
time and harvest,” &c. II. Gradual as
the morning. Light comes in no haste.
God is never ina hurry. What a dif-
ference between the dawn of light and
perfect day!  Fretfulness and im-
patience will only cloud its brightness
and darken the soul. III. Silent as the
morning. Silent in its progress and
influence ; gliding over city and hill,
glittering on the dew-drops, and bright-
ening the landscape all around. IV.
Joyous as the morning. Night a time
of fear and danger; the sun brings
morning and revives all nature. The
birds sing, flowers open, our health and
spirits are improved. “ Truly the light
is sweet,” &c.

God as rain. 1. Divine in its
origin. 2. Refreshing in its nature.
3. Comprehensive initsend. The early
and latter rain, as the beginning and
end ; the sum and substance of Christian
experience and national revivals. “ Both
together stand as the beginning and
the end. If either were withheld the
harvest failed. Wonderful likeness of
him who is the beginning and the end
of our spiritual life; from whom we
receive it, by whom it is preserved
unto the end ; through whom the soul,
enriched by him, hath abundance of
all spiritual blessings, graces, and con-
solations, and yieldeth all manner of
fruit, each after its kind, to the praise of
him who hath given it life and fruitful-
ness ” | Pusey].

Christ the Day-Dawn and the Rain.
Looking upon his personal coming, as
represented by the morning, and his
coming in the Holy Spirit as symbolized
by the rain, we have—I. The common
resemblances which they have. 1. The
same manifest origin. 2. The same
mode of operation on the part of God.
3. The same form of approach to us.
4, The same object and end. II. The
points of distinction between them.
1. A general and yet a special aspect.
2. Constant and yet variable. 3. With
gladness, yet also with trouble. 4. But
they tend to a final and perfect union
[John Ker].


9 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [CHAP. Vi.





HOMILETICS.
Justion on Muroy 1— Verses 4, 5.


These words express intense love, parental discipline, and reluctance to punish
any more. God hesitates, seems perplexed, and condescends to ask the sinner him-
self, to specify a mode of treatment which will answer the purpose. ‘ What shall
Ido?” When justice was about to punish it was prevented by repentance. When
mercy was about to bless it was hindered by fickleness and relapse. God’s kindness
was constant, but their goodness was evanescent as the dew. ‘ What could have
been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it?” Nothing more to
bring Israel to himself could he have done, therefore nothing remains but to adopt
the treatment mentioned. God knows best what will answer the end in view.

L Justice and Mercy had failed. Warnings had been given and judgments had
fallen heavily upon the nation, but that did not answer. Mercyhad shone forth in all
its splendour, like the noon-day sun, but that prevailed not. Gentle means did
not win them. The greater his favours, the more they forgot him and sacrificed te
other gods. ‘Then vengeance came, and they were torn by the enemy and carried
into captivity. This is a picture of many whom God has blessed with mercy upon
mercy. Long health, continued prosperity, and all the world calls good, have been
poured out upon them. Their cup has run over. But they have forsaken God and
abused his mercies. Now he is changing his ways with them. Health has
decayed, business has failed, children have been taken in youth and hope, and all is
black and threatening. ‘“ His wrath lieth hard upon me, I cannot look up.” But
do not envy, and misconstrue this chastisement. There is goodness and loving-
kindness in this treatment. It is designed to draw you to God and wean you from
sin. “It lightens the stroke,” said an afflicted Christian, “to draw near to him
who handles the rod.” II. Mercy was withheld. Their goodness was like the
morning cloud and early dew; which promised only to disappoint. Merey was
withheld, from their false and hypocritical conduct. 1. They were vain in their pre-
tences. Professing to worship God and offer sacrifices, when their hearts were far
from him. Their religion was outward show and formality, empty sound and
waterless as a cloud. Like the morning cloud, full of colour, yet driven away by
the heat of day. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, in origin, principle, and aim, you “shall in no case enter
into the kingdom of heaven.” 2. They were fickle in their principles. Sound
principles are a necessity in life. Without principles a man is likea cloud driven by
every gust of wind; like a ship without rudder or compass, drifted hither and thither
by every tide. There can be no rule, order, or government without true principle.
“Moral principles,” says Hume, “ are social and universal. They form, in a manner,
the part of humankind against vice and disorder, its common enemy.” But the good-
ness of some is like the “ early dew,” sparkling as diamonds for a while, but not to
last. Reverence and religion disappear in extremes; we have the form, but not

the power of godliness. 3. They were unstable in their conduct. Repenting and
relapsing ; smitten and returning; resolving and forgetting; ever beginning and
never finishing. There was a fair show of leaves, but not any fruit. Most men
are good fora time. In visitation from God, at the prayer-meeting or in the class,
they are under deep impressions ; but these wear away, and the last condition of
these men is worse than the first’ There must be no sham, butreality. Principle
must be powerful and supreme. Goodness must endure under the burning heat of
the sun. It is the incorruptible seed which liveth and abideth for ever. TIT.
Justice is the only alternative. “Therefore have I hewed them,” &. Kings
and rulers, prophets and priests, past misery and present mercy, seemed not to in-
fluence them. Whatmore shall Ido? Iniquities had not exhausted, but only
limited God’s lova’ ‘How often would I have gathered thy children together,


CHAP. VI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. VA





even as a hen gathereth her chickens,” &c. There remains nothing but further
chastisement in their desperate condition, a just retribution in kind. “ There
fore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew that passeth
away” (ch, xiii, 3). 1. The word which might have saved shall punish them. (a)
God would ‘‘ hew” them by the prophets. God’s work is identified with that of
his servants. The word is the instrument for the accomplishment of his will The
word disturbs in sin and produces convietion ; it reproves and corrects, and “like a
hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces,” (0) God “slays” them by the words of
his mouth. Denunciations of wrath had disquieted them and broken their spirits.
The word had been “ quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,”
to slay their hopes and joys. Men will either be better or worse, quickened or
slain, under the preaching of the gospel. ‘To the one we are a savour of death
unto death ; and to the other the savour of life unto life.” 2. The judgments
which they unheeded shall consume them. ‘And thy judgments are as the light
that goeth forth.” They might have been delightful as the morning, but they shall
be terrible as lightning. (a) Clear and visible; palpable to the senses, and a warning
to those who see them. They will break out like day-light upon all men. (b) Just
and equitable. What they deserved, and what they should not murmur at. They
despised the mercy, and now they must behold the severity of God. (c) Terrible
and severe; sudden and overpowering as lightning. Christ comes the first time
to save, the second to judge and destroy. Duty is clear. The sinner is without
excuse. God at last will be a consuming fire.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 4. Morning cloud, Evanescent menor make them alive. IV. A sug-


goodness, generated by the chill of
affliction, full of promise, but vanishes
away. Many in childhood affectionate
and beautiful, do not always realize what
they promise. Men in sickness and be-
reavement vow what they do not per-
form. The evening does not accord
with “the morning of life.” Dawn does
not ripen into day.

Ver. 5. “ Hewed them.” Moral
statuary. What sculpture is to a block
of marble education is to the mind and
religion to the character and life. ‘The
word presents us with—I, An insight
into human nature. Rough and deformed.
Hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. II. An expression of G'od’s design.
God, the Great Sculptor, seeks to correct,
cut into shape and symmetry. To bring
“an angel out of the stone,” make
‘corner stones, polished after the simili-
tude of a palace,” to prepare “lively
stones” for his great spiritual temple
(1 Pet. ii. 5 ; Eph. ii, 21). IIL. A deserip-
tion of the word, A hammer wielded
by a Divine hand, authoritative and
efficient in breaking the rock, the hardest
heart, to pieces. Hence (a) energetic in
its nature, (b) varied in its effects, to slay


gestion concerning the ministry. Min-
isters have not to soothe men in sin, nor
fear to wound the conscience. As
hewers of wood and stone-masons, they
have to cut and hammer men. They
meet with rough stones and obdurate
hearts which must be humbled and
hammered. Luther said that faithful
ministers labour and sweat more in a day
than husbandmen do ina month. With
hard blows and sharp instruments have
they to work, for men neither receive
the image nor submit to the will of
Goa.

Judgments as the light. 1. Revealing
sin and exposing the works of darkness
(Eph. v. 13), 2. Warning men in duty
and danger, ignoranceand sin. 3. De
stroying rebels, on whom they burst with
sudden terror. “In this life also God’s
final judgments are as a light which
goeth forth, enlightening not the sinner
who perishes, but others heretofore in
the darkness of ignorance, on whom they
burst with a sudden blaze of light, and
who reverence them, owning that the
judgments of the Lord are true and
righteous altogether” [Pusey].


82 HOMILUTIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. [ORAP, Vi.





HOMILETICS.
Mercy AND Not Sacririce.— Verse 6,


There are two sides of religion, the outward and the inward, Israel depended
upon sacrifices, ritual forms, rather than moral life, the knowledge and love of God.
If men offer “ sacrifice” to God without joining it with “mercy ” to men, or offer it
in fanatical zeal and unmercifulness, he will reject it. He prefers “mercy” which
contains cheerfulness and self-sacrifice. Looking at these words in their connection,
learn—

I. God desires to give mercy rather than accept sacrifice. Israel would give
to God rather than seek the healing mercy required. But God will take nothing
from them, desires to impart mercy to them. It is for us, first and above all, to
seek pardon ; confess and forsake sin. “The less is blessed of the better,” without
any contradiction. God requires no sacrifice from us. Our offerings cannot enrich
or bless him. Pagan sacrifices were considered feasts to the gods. “If I were
hungry,” says God, “I would not tell thee ; for the world is mine, and the fulness
thereof.” He can provide for himself, and will never be suppliant to his own crea-
tures. ‘The cattle upon a thousand hills” are his gifts, are not our own; and
faith in the offering without love in the heart represents God as beholden to man.
“Thou desirest not sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt-
offering.” No form of burnt-offerings can purchase Divine favour; no banners
and music and incense will be acceptable “without truth in the inward parts.”
_ God will have mercy and accept a broken spirit. ‘“ A broken and a contrite heart,
O God, thou wilt not despise.” II. God stamps mercy with more value than
sacrifice. God does not reject all, only heartless sacrifices. They must not be neg-
lected nor despised, but offered in the right spirit. Christ commends the scribe for
giving due place and proportion to the ceremonial and moral service. Sacrifice is
good for its own sake, required by God and reasonable in man. But “go ye and
learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice” (Matt. ix. 13). The
ritual must not be esteemed above the moral. We must not be religious before God
and immoral before men; alive to the letter, but dead tothe spirit of the law;
scrupulous in the formalities, but negligent in the moralities of life. He who finds
mercy from God, will be kind and compassionate to men. We must “do justly,
love mercy, and walk humbly with God.” ‘The tithing of cummin must not be
neglected,” says Gurnal, “but take heed thou doest not neglect the weightiest
things of the law—judgment, mercy, and faith: making your preciseness in the less
a blind for yeur horrible wickedness in the greater.” ‘‘To do justice and judg-
ment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.” III. Sacrifice must not be sub-
stituted for mercy. No amount of offerings can replace the everlasting principles
of xaorality. But how easy to present the one for “the living sacrifice” of the
vther.. The Corban gift stands in the place of filial piety. The present on the
altar stenes for the offence to a brother. Love to God whom we have not seen
covers charity to man whom we see day by day. Temple service is honoured
above godly life, and sacrifice is offered before mercy. God delights in showing
mercy, and “éarthly power doth then show likest God’s when mercy seasons justice.”
God is better pleased with the relief of suffering than gold and silver offered
in the church. Transient enthusiasm, fashionable benevolence, and party spirit
must not supersede love to God andman, The first commandment is like unto the
second. One cannot supersede and must not be placed instead of the other. “To
love him with all the heart, and all the understanding, and with all the soul, and
with all the strength, and to love his neighbour as himself, is more than all burnt-
offerings and sacrifices.” IV. Sacrifice and mercy must ever be united together.
One is the outward form and fruit of the other. ‘He who prays as he ought, will
endeavour to live as he prays,” says Dr Owen, There is a balance of moral as of


CHAP. V1., HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: I1OSH.4, vb





natural forces. Religion unites what philosophy could not—supreme devotion to
God and paramount obligation to man. Faith and works, piety and charity, con-
templation and activity, heaven and earth, are reconciled in Christian life. The
life hidden with God is the life that diffuses blessings among men. Without love
to man, love to God grows languid. They are inseparable and essential to each other,
This union was perfect in the life of Christ, and constitutes the keystone of morality.
All true philanthropists have worked in his spirit and carried out his teaching.
Howard in the prisons of Europe, Judson in benighted Burmah, and Florence
Nightingale in the Crimea, were devoted to God in their sacrifices for humanity.
A life of purity is a life of public duty. The man who loves God will not serve his
country less. “ Allow them to pray to God, they will not fight the worse for it,”
was said of some. The heat and the light can never be separated from the sun; .
benevolence to men can never be cut off from love to God. What God has joined
together let not man put asunder. ‘Pure religion and undefiled before God and
the Father, is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to
keep himself unspomed from the world.”


CovENANT BREAKERS.— Verse 7.


In this verse we have a reference to the fall of man and the first covenant with
Adam, God stood in covenant relation to man. Israel was bound by God’s good-
ness and their own oath. But they sinned after the similitude of Adam’s trans-
gression. God was constant and faithful, bn* they were inconstant and treacher-
ous, they broke the covenant. Notice—

I. The guilt of which they were accused, They “have transgressed
the covenant.” 1. Out of irreverence to tts authority. If it be only a man’s
covenant, there is something sacred and binding (Gal. iii. 15). But God’s word is
supreme and of Divine authority. 2. In forgetfulness of their own promise and
privileges. Israel solemnly took an oath to keep all the words of the law—not to
forsake God ; but they sacrificed to other gods, and were base and_perfidious in their |
conduct. Men who break their promise and despise their obligation bring shame
and disgrace upon themselves, and deserve not the confidence and esteem of ‘heir
fellow-men. ‘Truthfulness should shine in every word and deed. II. The spirit
in which they indulged. “They dealt treacherously.” They not only rebelled,
but aggravated their guilt by falsehood and treacherous dealing. They disregarded
most singular privileges, thought most sacred obligations of no consequence, and
covered most heinous sins in the garb of religious forms. They sinned (a) wilfully, —
(b) obstinately, and (c) deceitfully. ‘For the house of Judah and the house of
Israel have dealt very treacherously against me, saith the Lord.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Transgressing like Adam. 1. Violat-
ing sacred obligations. 2. Justifying
sin when committed—charging it upon
God or their own nature, upon circum-
stances or fate, ‘Man, as man, that is
as sinful man, desireth that there might
be a seal set or a vail put upon all his
sins. Itis as natural to man to be a sin-
ooverer as a sin-committer; and he had
rather make some poor shift of his own
to cover it than go to God (whose privi-
lege and glory it is to cover sin) to


have his sin covered. Neither Adam
nor the woman denied what they had
done ; but both thought they were very
pardonable in doing it. Both made a
confession, yet theirs was a faulty con-
fession. They covered while they ac-
knowledged their sin, and hid it in their
bosoms while they held it out upon
their tongues. Thus did Adam the
first man, and thus do the sons ot
Adam excuse their sins, and increase
their guilt and punishment” [Caryl].


a4 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [CHar, #1,





oe


HOMILETICS.


A sap TRANSFORMATION.— Verses 8—11.


We have now particular proofs of the charges brought against Is:ael. Special,
places, certain persons, and the whole people are faithless and polluted. The best
become the worst.

I. Sacred places become polluted with sin. Regarding Gilead as a city of
refuge, or the country beyond Jordan, it “is a city of them that work iniquity.”
God had hallowed the place, and made it a city of safety ; an institution of heaven.
designed for special good. But this place of justice and protection, the glory of the
land and the centre of distinguished privileges, was polluted with crime. Its in-
habitants had stained its name and filled it with blood. Cities are blessed or
cursed by the character and conduct of the inhabitants. Wealth and population,
genius and prosperity, fade away by vice and debauchery. Great cities may be
filled with great sins ; exalted to heaven with privileges, they may be cast down to
hell for abusing them. Rome and Paris have been by-words, and Nero and Robes-
pierre have left a stain in history. “ By the blessing of the upright the city is ex-
alted; but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.” II. Ministers of
religion become abettors of murder. The priests, who should have been ex-
amples of virtue, fostered abominable sins and were guilty of murder. It was their
duty to save life, but they killed both body and soul. They were—l. Cruel in
their designs. They sought to lie in wait and murder pilgrims on their way to the
city. 2. Crafty in their designs. They plot “as troops of robbers wait for a
man.” 3. Deliberate in their designs. They thought of their schemes, and deliber-
ately adopted and carried them out. 4. Confederate in their designs. “ By con-
sent.” They were one in sympathy, agreed in sentiment, and banded together in
purpose. They were taken from the lowest of the people, intruders in office, and
were a curse to the land. Of all societies of men, none are more vile and mis-
-chievous than ministers corrupted by office or evil. The sweetest wine becomes
the sourest vinegar, the whitest ivory burnt becomes the blackest coal ; so the best
men, the noblest institutions, may be transformed into the most disgraceful and
criminal. ‘Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy
things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane.” III. The
noblest design perverted to destruction. The way to the cities of refuge, by
‘God’s command, was to be prepared (Deut. xix. 3); clear and kept open without
hindrance or danger to fugitives ; but it was filled with robbers and tracked with
blood. Those who fled for life met with death. What power in the human will
and in human conduct to corrupt the ordinances and hinder the designs of God!
Means of grace perverted to motives of crime, and sacred places changed to scenes
of corruption. The devil gets into the church, and the foulest crimes are committed
in the garb of religion and a good name. In Christendom now we see religion
made the tool of priests and governments: its sanctions brougnt to support
schemes of aggrandizement and oppression ; and plans that display God’s wisdom
and benevolence employed to prostrate our nature, to pollute the land, and make it
“desolate and’a perpetual hissing.” IV. A chosen people degraded with
punishment. All these crimes were done “in the house of Israel,” an elect nation.
‘Whoredom was widespread, and the whole land was detiled. 1. The enormity of their
sin was great. “ An horrible thing,” enough to make one shudder; “a thing in
Israel, at which both the ears of every one that heareth shall tingle.” Ordinary
sins are evil, but the sins of Israel were gross abominations. Sins against light
and privileges, the warnings of prophets and the judgments of God. Heathen
nations could not commit such crimes, tle greatness of which can only be estimated
by God. But ancient Israel and modern Churches, pre-eminent above other peoples,
exchange God for vain idols. Holy heaven is amazed at the monstrous folly of


CHAP. V1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 95


men. “Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my people
have changed their glory for that which doth not profit. Be astonished, O ye
heavens, at this, and be ye horribly afraid; be ye very desolate, saith the Lord.”
2. The punishment of their sin was disgraceful. 'The people of God were bereft of
their glory and defence ; carried captives and humbled by a foreign foe, The seed
was reaped in an awful “harvest” of punishment by both Ephraim and Judah. God
is no respecter of persons—the highest and the lowest, the priest and the peasant,
are alike judged for their sins. He makes them “base and contemptible before all
the people.” Sin sinks the most exalted to the most degraded. It is a blot in the
escutcheon of the mightiest nation which no worldly glory can efface. “ Righteous-
ness exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any people.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


The substance of these verses may be
summed up in few words. 1. Man has


rate than merely doing wrong. The
effect of sin must be measured by the


a tendency to abuse the best and highest
things. This is proved from history,
Scripture, and observation. 2. When the
best and highest things are abused they
become the worst. Moral order and dis-
tinctions are confounded. A downward
course is begun. Conscience must be
quicted, moral feelings be suppressed, and
bold extravagance required to cover and
defend sin. 3. Abuse of the best and
highest things greatly increases the
guilt. When men check religious im-
pulse and resist good they go at a faster


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1—3. Conversion. In con-
version the sinner has a deep sense of
his distance and desert, a full persuasion
that God will forgive and restore him,
and perseverance in seeking God. He
will strive to return and carry out his
resolution like the prodigal, in confession
of sin. “I willreturn tomy home; my
father will forgive me,” said a wandering
disobedient son. He was forgiven, and
restored to parental favour.

Morning. The morning breaketh
forth in crimson, and the beauteous
flowers of the field spread wide their
odorous cups to drink the blooming
influence of the rising genial sun
[G. 8. Green].

Rain. What would nature be with-
out raint We are entirely depend-
ent on the grace of God. But under
the influences of his word and Spirit we
revive and grow as the corn. These
influences are always needful; but ob-.
serve, there are two seasons when they


power of moral sensibility. Perfection
of guilt and punishment is gained by
using the truth and ordinances of God,
to do the bidding of selfishness and
lust.

I have seen an horrible thing. God dis-
cerns sin when covered by craft and
counsel, by excuse and ignorance. The
smallest sins and the most horrible
crimes are detected by him, and will be
discovered to the perpetrators. Men
may cover their ways and hide their sins,
but they cannot prosper.


TO CHAPTER VI.


are peculiarly experienced. The one is
connected with the beginning of the
Divine life—this may be called the
former rain. The other with the close
of it—this may be called the latter rain
[Jay].

Ver. 4. Tiransitoriness. When Da-
guerre was working at his sun-pictures,
his great difficulty was to fix them.
The light came and imprinted the image ;
but when the tablet was drawn from the
camera, the image had vanished. Our
lamentation is like his, our want the
same, a fixing solution that shall arrest
and detain the fugitive impressions.
He discovered the chemical power which
turned the evanescent into the durable.
There is a Divine agency at hand that
can fix the truth upon the heart of
man,—God’s Holy Spirit [ J. Stoughton]

Ver. 5. I presume the Lord sees I
require more hammering and hewing
than almost any other stone that was
ever selected for his spiritual building,


96 HOMILETIC’ COMMENTARY; HOSEA,


and that is the secret reason of his deal-
ings with me. Let me be broken into
a thousand pieces, if I may but be made
up again, and formed by his hand for
purposes of mercy [R. Hall].

Ver. 6. The outward service of
ancient religion, the rites, ceremonies,
and ceremonial restraints of the old law,
had morality for their end. They were
the letter, of which morality was the
spirit ; the enigma, of which morality was
the meaning. But morality itself is the
service and ceremonial of the Christian
religion [Coleridge]. The artist may
mould matter into forms of surprising
beauty, and make us feel their elevating
snd purifying influences: but what is
the marble Moses of a Michael Angelo,
or the cold statue of his living Christ,
compared to the embodiment of Jesus


(CHAP. VIZ.





are all the forms cf moral beauty in the
Pharisee of religion, compared with the
true and holy life of the heart of the
devoted Christian? [Bishop Thompson].

Ver. 8—11. Best and worst. The
best things when abused become the
worst: there is no devil like a fallen
angel ; no enemy to the gospel like an
apostate Christian; no hate like the
“theological hate ;” no war like a re-
ligious war; and no corruption like re-
ligious corruption. The reasons are not
far to seek. The best things are the
strongest: they can do most always,
most evil when used in an evil way.
Bad men know this: Simon the magician
was not the only one that has cast a
covetous look at Christianity and said,
“Give me also this power” [A. J
Morris}.


in the sculpture of a holy life? What





CHAPTER VIL


Crrricau Nores.—1.] Exposure of wickedness continued. Healed] politically and morally. The
danger of a wound only discovered when probed and healing attempted. Spoileth] Heb. strippeth off
a garment: plunder extensive and without resistance. Falsehood] Deception toward God and man.
“Falsehood was the whole habit and tissue of their lives’’ [Pusey]. 2. Consider] Lit. say not te
themselves in serious reflection. Rem.] Notice and punish (Deut. xxxii.34; Ps. xc. 8). Beset] as
fetters and witnesses against them (Ps.ix. 16; Prov. v. 22). 8. Lies] People conformed to wicked lawa
and seductive rites of kings and princes; flattered and pleased them with applause and immoral-
ities (Acts xii. 18). 4, Oven] “ In this passionate career the nation resembled a furnace which a
baker heats in the evening and leaves burning all night while the dough is leavening, and then causes
to burn with a still brighter flame in the morning when the dough is ready for baking” [esl]
6. Day] Birth or coronation day, probably a feast day. Bottles] Lit. with heat through wine ; bottles,
not glasses, drunkenness, excess, and debauchery. Hand] In token of fellowship, health-drinking.
Scorners] Ridicule of sacred things, derision of God, natural at intoxicating feasts (Dan. v. 3, 4),
6, Ready] Lit. applied (marg. brought near) their heart to sin. For] The reason for the open sin ;
their heart is ready, and only waiting for the spark to kindle it. 7%. Devoured]} Results of their con-
duct stated. Judges and kings, inflamed by the passion, here.consumed and fell into the abyss, the
six last kings in succession (2 Kings xv. 10, 14, 25), B. c. 772, None sought help from God in
national calamity. 8. Mixed] by leagues and adoption of idolatrous customs, The Heb. indicates
a mixing which disorders and involves confusion. A cake] burned at the bottom and sad at the top,
—an image of worthlessness. One side scorched and black, the other unbaked and doughy ; the whole
spoiled and only fit, to cast away. 9, Gray hairs] Symptoms of age and declining strength. “Thx
gray hairs are thy passing bell ’’ [Pusey]. Wisdom is not always found with age (Job xxxil.7; Prov.
xxili, 35). Israel indifferent, though ripe for destruction. 11, Dove] A type of simplicity (Matt. x. 16).
Silly] Simplicity. Without heart] Lit, without understanding, easily taken in the net (Ezek. xii,
13). 12. Congregation] ¢ ¢. the threatenings of the law read to them . teachers in assemblies (Lev.
xxvi, 14; Deut. xxviii. 15). 18, Fled] As birds from their nests (Prov. xxvii. 8; Is. xvi. 2). Ba-
deemed] from Eeyp first, and constantly afterwards, *‘ habitual, oft-renewed deliverance.” J and they
hoth emphatic. J redeemed, they lied. God’s mercy overflowed man’s ingratitude. 14. Cried] in
anguish, not in penitence. Howled] in deep affliction and despair. Assemble] Crowd together
in idol temple to deprecate famine and depart from God. Rebel] Lit. withdraw themselves, Against]
From me; they cast off all allegiance to God. 15. Bound] Weakened and relaxed, an image from
surgery (chastened, marg.). “ Instructing the arms. according to the analogy of Ps. xviii. $5, is
equivalent to showing where and how strength is to be acquitted: The Lord has not contented him-


CHAP. vER.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. oF





self with merely instructing, he has also strengthened their arms and given them power to ficht and
vietory over their foes (cf. 2 Kings xiv. 26, 26)” [KeiZ]. 16. Deceitful] Which cannot carry the
arrow; too slack or ill-constructed, which the archer fears will miss its aim. coil Blasphemy
against God. Derision] Egypt, on which they depended, will ridicule them for their boasting and
failure (Is. xxx. 35).


HOMILETICS.
A sap Discovery.— Verge 1.


The exposure of moral depravity is continued. The efforts of God to heal are
frustrated by the disease. Greater iniquity is discovered. The grace of God is
turned into lasciviousness,

I. A disease malignant in its working. 1. Jt was secretly hidden. It wroke
oat in one place when the physician was curing another. ‘When I would have
healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered.” Sin is never hid from
God. It lies concealed in the heart of man, and only waits for a chance to break
out in acts. ‘ Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.”
2. It was openly violent. The thief cometh in, and the troop of robbers spoileth
without. They were infested with thieves within and spoiled by foreign invaders
from without. Wounded afresh day by day. No place was secure and free from
sin. Secret sins indulged in become stronger and more violent in their manifesta-
tions. Spots break out in the character and errors in the life, like some malignant
humour in the body. The body is robbed of its beauty, the mind of its vigour, and
the life spoiled in its influence and end. II. A disease complicated in its
symptoms. Within and without, politically and religiously, the disease was
spreading. 1. There was falsehood toward God. “ For they commit falsehood.”
Falsehood in their worship and profession, in their principles and practices.
They said they were willing to be healed and to be ruled by God: “ neverthe-
less they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with
their tongues.” 2. There was treachery toward man. Take away the fear of God
and there will be no regard to man. “ He cannot be faithful to me who is unfaith-
ful to God,” said the father of Constantine the Great. Jeligion is the basis and
cement of society. If we throw off fidelity to truth and God, what is there to bridle
passion and check corruption? Treachery destroys all principles of confidence ana
security by which society is bound together. The Romans even disdained to
practise it towards their enemies. How disgraceful for a Christian people to be
guilty of it. “Why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother?” III.
A disease incurable in its nature. “When I would have healed”-—-by the
teachings of the prophets and the chastisements of Providence—“ they would not
hearken nor be amended.” The disease defied all remedy, was more irritated by it
and laid open in its extent and malignity. Many distempered churches and afflicted
nations neglect the hopeful crisis, then go from bad to worse, and never get cured.
Their wickedness is incorrigible and their disease incurable. When once inwardly
rotten and corrupt, the foulness will break out and be externally visible. No
earthly physician can sew up or heal the wound. Death in the body can never
be cured. There is no death so sad and momentous in its results as the death of
things which die within. ‘‘ The greatest epoch in a man’s life is by no means the
day of his physical death, but the day in which he died to something more import-
ari to him than the whole world.” “ We would have healed Babylon, but she is
not healed ; forsake her.”


Diving ReMEMBRANCE OF Sin.— Verses 2, 3.


God saw the wickedness of Israel. All things are naked and opened before him.
The manifold and intricate ways of sin, with their surroundings and consequences,
are known to him. “They are before my face.”


88 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA, {cHaP vil


I. God remembers the sins of men. “I remembered all their wickedness.”
These words are full of awful truth, confirmed by Scripture and every-day experi-
ence. God is omnipresent ; beholds us everywhere; and we can never sin with
security. If I wished to escape inspection, “‘ whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or
whither shall I flee from thy presence?” God is omniscient, having infinite and
intimate knowledge of the affairs of men. He needs no light to discern sin, but
the light of his countenance. Our open transgressions and secret sins are before
his face. ‘Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.” But this knowledge is remembrance. Not that God ever forgets.
Though punishment does not always immediately follow transgression, yet the sin
itself is not forgotten or buried in oblivion. God sees and knows it. Men may wink
at sin and forget it, but God never does. God’s remembrance is—1. Minute,—even
the most secret things are known tohim. 2. Constant,—‘ remember” continually.
3. Individual,— their wickedness.” 4. Universal,—“ all their wickedness.” IIT.
Men think that God is indifferent to their sins. ‘They consider not in their
hearts.” They forget God, and think that God forgets them. “They say, The Lord
shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.” 1. Men forget God in their
thoughts. ‘They consider not.” If they acknowledge him in words, they do not
wish to have him near to them. They do not speak to their own hearts, nor listen
to the voice of conscience within. The young and old, the rich and poor, the gay and
busy, shun acquaintance with him—put him in the background of life, and curtain
him out of sight lest he should trouble them. They desire not the knowledge of
his ways, wish to remain ignorant, and say, ‘Depart from us.” A French philo-
sopher even declared, “that the first duty of an intelligent and free man is to chase
incessantly from the mind and conscience the idea of God.” Practical atheism
abounds now in the world. Men abandon faith in the unseen and spiritual, and
virtually say, No God. “The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will
not seek after God, God is not in all his thoughts.” 2. Men disregard God in
their ways. If God is not in our thoughts he will not bein our ways. Conduct
results from thoughts, as fruit fromatree. Thought may not always be embodied
in deed ; may inadequately be represented by a man’s life; but the connection of one
with the other is like cause and effect. ‘For as he thinketh in his heart, so is
he.” “There are many devices in a man’s heart” which lead him to act independ-
ently and forgetfully of God. Scientific men talk of “ generative powers,” “ vital
energies,” and ‘eternal laws.” We have the designs of Balak and Balaam, of
Haman and Herod. Men take no account of God in their daily duties and avocations,
their plans and pursuits. Self is their oracle and self their counsellor, “for they
have perverted their way and forgotten the Lord their God.” III. When men dis-
regard God in their ways, they become more wicked in their lives. Due re-
gard to God is essential to the order and harmony of society. What a desolation
would happen to a world without tLe knowledge of God! The French Revolu-
tion is a lesson to all nations in this respect. The results of idolatry have been sad
in the extreme. Even among the chosen people, amid light and privileges, when
God was forsaken, every barrier was removed. Falsehood and injustice, cruelty
and sensuality, increased more and more. They gave full play to passions and
lusts ; perpetrated sins without fear or shame; and indulged in unbridled folly.
Two things are specially pointed out. 1. The highest ranks were corrupted. “They
made the king glad with their wickedness.” Those who should have been models
of truth and virtue, encouraged the people to sin by their example and influence.
Their unjust laws and customs were eagerly obeyed ; they were pleased with the
flattery, made glad with the homage of the people. In pomp and unbounded arro
gance they proceeded further in sins, like Herod; and not only did the same, but
had pleasure in them that did them. 2. The lowest ranks were servile. “And
the princes with their lies.” An unhappy complaisance was the ruling characte
of Israel, Their consciences were versatile and accommodating to the circum.


‘CHAP. Vil.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 99


———





stances of the day. They approved and followed whatever was commanded by
those in power; acquiesced in legalized idolatry, and preferred their kings to
their God. They pleased the king, but they were not sincere. They flattered the
prince, but. they lied in their hearts. They conformed to the customs, but cursed
the persons of their rulers. Even now, men bow in homage to those who crush
them to poverty ; lose their manhood by worshipping the rich and the mighty.
“Tt is the voice of a god, and not of a man.” Wicked sovereigns and wicked
people are a curse to each other. When kings and princes are corrupted the people
will be corrupted. Ahab preferred falschood to truth, and was surrounded by
lying prophets. ‘“ Lies will be told to those that are ready to hearken to them.”
The sinful ruler is a tool for all kinds of wickedness. He drives the godly from
his presence, and ever finds those that minister to his folly. “If a ruler hearken
to lies, all his servants are wicked” (Prov. xxix. 12).


ENOIRCLED In Sin.—Verse 2.


It the sinner pays no regard to reason and the All-seeing eye of God, he cannot
hide his sins. They will chain and imprison him, go with him and encircle him at
all times. His sins become a constant torment and a deadly punishment. “Now
their own doings have beset them about.” The sinner is beset—

I. By the sting of conscience. He seeks to hide his sins, but conscience de-
tects them, brings them to remembrance, and accuses him of guilt. The conscious-
ness of sin haunts him continually, and his sin is ever before him. II. By the
force of habit. Sin by repetition grows into habit. Habit becomes a ruling
power, and cannot be given up easily. ‘A rooted-habit,” says Tillotson, ‘“ becomes
a governing principle. very lust we entertain deals with us as Delilah did with
Samson; not only robs us of our strength, but leaves us fast bound.” III. By the
influence of example. The doings of men live before them in their effects upon
‘others, They cannot die, but they encircle them in the bands of associates and
companions. Example is repeated and imitated by others; goes forth with self-
propagating power, and may descend from one generation to another. ‘The evil
that men do lives after them.” IV. By the consequences of natural law.
Punishment follows sin by a natural law, the law of causation. Even now men
are encircled by their own doings, in loss of health and position; in decay of in-
tellect and disorders of mind; in the torments of conscience and the tyranny of
habit ; in misery, despair, and death. In the future, punishment awaits the sinner.
“Ts not this laid up in store with me and sealed up among my treasures?” Un-
less repented of, and washed in the blood of Christ, sins are destined to be cited
against the sinner. In time and eternity “his own iniquities shall take the wicked
himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins.”


Sin a Furnaocz or Firn.—Verses 4—7.


The passion of Israel for idolatry is likened to a furnace, heated by the baku,
and left burning during the process of fermentation. There is little or no cess-
ation to their indulgence. All are guilty, and fan the flames which consume them
without reflection and return to God. Keeping up the figure, sin is like a furnace,

I. In the method by which it is kindled. Man is capable of warmth and
enthusiasm. We are made for fervour. We feel the glow of friendship and the
power of principles fondly cherished and firmly defended. We have properties not
simply attributed to matter, but possessed by the Seraphim of heaven and atvri-
buted to God himself. ‘The zeal of the Lord of Hosts.” We are more influenced
by evil than good. The heart, with its affections, is kindled into a passion ;
the temperament warmed, and men are ‘‘set on fire” with lust, and “set on
fire of hell.” Like “an oven heated by the baker,” they burn with hatred,
envy, and adultery ; “burned in their asts one toward another.” In whatever


100 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. VIt





light we look at sin “it is a fire that consumeth to destruction, and would
root out all mine increase” (Job xxxi 12). II. In the fuel by which
it is fed. The same material that kindles must keep alive the fire. It is
heated and fed by lust; by constant and unnatural excitement. MRespites only
ferment; the flames slumber to break out into greater fury. Anger, ambition,
and filthy lusts fill the soul, and the fire burns upon the altar and never goes out.
Certain sins are mentioned in the text. 1. Prevalent adultery. They are all adul-
terers. ‘Given up to vile affections, and punished with impurities of heart and
life.” “It is better to marry than burn” (1 Cor. vii. 9). 2. Hacessive drink.
The princes made the king “sick,” heated him “with bottles of wine.” Intem-
perance in any is degrading, but especially in men of place and power. Priest and
prophet “err through strong drink” (Is. xxviii. 7; lvi. 11, 12). The glory of
Benhadad (1 Kings xx. 16), of Belshazzar, and of “the princes of Israel,” was
covered with shame, Philip of Macedon, when drunk, unjustly condemned a
woman. She boldly said, “I appeal to Philip; but it shall be when he is sober.”
Roused by the appeal, the king examined the case, and reversed his judgment.
‘Tt is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine ; nor for princes
strong drink: lest they drink, and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any
of the afflicted” (Prov. xxxi. 4, 5). 3. Impious scorning. “He stretched out his
hand” in friendship, and associated “with scorners.” The king jested with
drunkards, praised idols, and scoffed at God. Atheists and scoffers, wine and mirth,
are often found together. ‘‘ Hypocritical mockers at feasts” give license to their
tongue, and lose control over their conduct. ‘‘ Wine is a mocker, strong drink is
raging; and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.” III. In the results which
it produces. These are innumerable. The temptations to criminality are fearful.
Every kind of “ wickedness burneth as the fire” (Is. ix. 18). “Cana man take
fire in his bosom and his clothes not be burned? Can one go upon hot coals
and his feet not be burned?” 1. Jt influences the heart. ‘For they have made’
ready their heart.” It hardens and encrusts it; disposes it to prepare, practise,
and perfect evil. The heart is brought nigh, stirred up to sin, though the occasion
for it be taken away. This oven, once heated, gives no breathing time, no real
rest. Corrupt passions burn with intense heat, until extinguished and overcome
by the grace of God. 2. It consumes its abettors. The fire “devoured their judges ;
all their kings are fallen.” Jeroboam and other kings corrupted the people to
establish their own authority ; were flattered and slain by those who flattered them.
Their sins returned to their own bosom. The flames, like the furnace of Nebuchad-
nezzar, devoured those who were thrown into them and those who kindled them.
It is ever thus with sin. The heathens taught that “the artificers of death
perished by their own art.” ‘Kindle not the coals of a sinner, lest thou be burnt
with the flame of his fire” (Ecclus, viii. 10).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 5. Theday of our king. Birth- anti-religious carousal; making them-


days and coronation-days of rulers;
national fasts and feasts spent in drunk-
enness and rioting—scenes of revelry,
scenes of debauchery, scoffing, and mur-
der. Drinking healths and taking lives!
Kings falling in feasting and mirth!
What a portrait history gives of human
folly and God’s providence! ‘Their
holy days, like those of so many English
now, were days of excess. Their festi-
val they turned into an irreligious and


selves like the brutes that perish, and
tempting their king first to forget his
royal dignity, and then to blaspheme
the majesty of God” [Pusey].

Drink, debauchery, and scoffing a
triple association in feasting without
God. “Fools make a mock at sin.”

Ver. 6. Their heart like an oven.
Men who are wicked and vile may seem
to be lying by and doing nothing, yet-—
1. Their hearts are bent on their course ,


CHAP, Vil.]}


their oven is heating while they sleep.
2. Their designs are still going on ; the
heat is tending to burning as a flaming
jire while the baker sleeps. 3. Iniquity
that is hatched, through abundance of
lust, is most violently executed, when
opportunity offers; and the more vio-
lently that it hath been long delayed
[ Hutcheson].

Ver. 7. Kings are fallen. Those
who murdered others are murdered


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 104
a





None that calleth on me. God can
correct the evils and subdue the sedition
of a nation. But mark the stupidity and
perversity of sin which make people in-
sensible in danger and neglect God in
trouble. Not even distress, in which
generally men betake themselves to God,
awakened any sense of sin in them.
“Those are not only heated with sin,
but hardened in sin, that continued to
live without prayers, even when they


themselves. Plots of sin recoil onthose are in trouble and distress.”


who originate them.


HOMILETICS.


Tue CHRISTIAN CHUROH ENDANGERED AND INJURED BY WORLDLY ASSOCIATION,
—Verses 8, 9.


From the internal corruption, the prophet passes on to the foreign policy of Israel,
and unfolds its disastrous effects. God separated the nation to be his peculiar
people ; to train them up in virtue; and make them a blessing to the world. But
they mixed themselves with other nations in social customs and political leagues.
In the application of these words learn—

I, That the Christian Church is in danger of unlawful association with the
world. “ Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people.” We are not to shut
ourselves out from all intercourse and innocent association with the world. Family
ties, business and spiritual engagements, bind us to it. But we must not “be
conformed to this world,” in its evil customs and pursuits, its principles and spirit.
We have no need to go out of the world literally ; but keep ourselves from its evil ;
separate ourselves from its frivolities, and be Christians entirely. 1. The Christian
Church is endangered by outward proximity to the world. The world is near,
present with us, and appeals to our senses, It influences more than things
spiritual and unseen, Its wondrous forms and fair pretences gradually get hold
upon and eventually overcome the careless professor. Demas-like, he forsakes
God, having loved this present world. Its pursuits and demands engross our atten-
tion. Before we are aware we are brought under its spell; walking according to
rules, and governed by “the prince of this world.” 2. The Christian Church is
endangered by the inward tendency to love the world. There are snares and dangers
within us, from natural cravings and corrupt desires. We are fond of its company
and eager for its rewards. Its attractions are strong, because resistance is weak ;
its trifles realities, because we prefer toys to eternal treasures. ‘ Love not the world,
neither the things that are in the world.” II. The Christian Church is injured
by association with the world. Contact with it wears away seriousness of mind, in-
disposes for religious duties, neutralizes religious influence, and expels religious
sentiment. Professors who needlessly mix up with sinful practices and company ar3
sure to suffer in their character and condition. The text specifies—1l. Moral deterio-
ration. “Ephraim is a caks not turned.” They had been mixed up and steeped
with heathen idolatries and vices, and had become worthless. The fire of Divine
judgment made only an outward impression upon them, and they were more hope-
lessly spoiled by their conduct. Burned on one side and dough on the other,
perfectly useless. Many Christians now are utterly worthless in their lives and ex-
amples. Many societies have lost their prominence and savour; sunk into degrada-
tion, and do not answer the end for which they were created. Inward corruption
will never overcome outward temptation. If individuals, churches, and nations
do not contain power to prevent deterioration and impart life, they will become


103 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. VII,


morally insipid, and fit for nothing but the fate which history and Scripture declare
awaits them. 2. Socialinjury. ‘Strangers have devoured his strength.” Foreign
powers, Assyria and Egypt, whose aid Israel had invoked, robbed them of money,
wasted their treasures, and diminished their numbers. Like Samson, bereft of his
strength by sensual pleasure, Israel was stripped of social privilege and power. Sad
to think of many socially and individually ruined by unlawful connections and
sinful lusts. Intellect and memory, dignity and manhood: the health of the body
and the happiness of the soul “ devoured” by strangers to God and his people §
“‘ Evil communications corrupt good manners.” 3. Unnatural decay. “ Gray hairs
are here and there upon him.” Loss of inward strength and outward beauty will
soon bring age and decay. “Men get old before they are young.” A general
laxity of morals may sap and undermine our commerce. The body politic may
be covered with marks of hoary age and ripening for destruction. Christian
churches may decay through discord, worldliness, and pride. Families and indi-
viduals may fall by sin and die while young. Gray hairs are forerunners and fore-
warners of death. 4. Religious insensibility. “Yet he knoweth it not.” To be
insensible of disease and decay is the worst symptom of all. Men hide from them-
selves tokens of death, and it comes upon them unawares. They think that out-
ward forms, orthodox creeds, and the course of time will recover their strength.
They are insensible and stupefied in sin, and sleep quietly amid dangers and death.
“They have stricken me, shalt thou say, and I was not sick: they have beaten


me, and I felt it not ; when shall I awake 1”


(Prov. xxiii. 35; Is. xlii. 25.)


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 8. Acake not turned. Softand
pliable under Divine chastisement, hard-
ened and cold in sin—half-heartedness,
half-baked and half-burned, displeasing
to God—hypocrisy, hot in forms, dead in
spirit, rejected by God. ‘Such were the
people; such are too many so-called
Christians ; they united in themselves
hypocrisy and ungodliness, outward per-
formance and inward lukewarmness ; the
one overdone, but without any whole-
some effect on the other. The one was
scorched and black ; the other, steamed,
damp, and lukewarm; the whole worth-
less, spoiled irremediably, fit only to be
cast away.” “Thou art neither cold nor
hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.
So then because thou art lukewarm, and
neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee
out of my mouth.”

Ver. 9. Gray hairs. I. Gray hairs
are a signof decay. God for wise pur-
poses gives distinctive features to human
life. Nature teaches us to reverence age
in the pages of an old book ; in the leaf-
less branches of an old tree ; in the silent,
deserted halls of an old roofless ruin ;
still more in one whose head is white with
She snows of fourscore or a hundred


winters. Gray hairs are associated with
—(1) Parental honours, (2) the ripe wis
dom of age, and (3) the piety of vener
able men. II. But in the text they ara
signs of decay, premonitory symptoris
of dissolution : and teach that men live
in ignoranée and act in disregard of signs
that should warn and alarm them. 1.
This appears in the history of States. In
the kingdom of Israel, in England, ille-
gitimacy, drunkenness, continental mor-
ality, Sabbath-breaking, and irreligious
customs are signs of national decay ;
which, but for thousands of good and
earnest men, who know it, would bring
death upon us, 2. This applies to the
false security of sinners. 3. This appears
im men’s insensibility to the lapse and
1essons of time [From Dr. Guthrie].

I. Explain the ignorance here mention-
ed, or show how it is that many a man
is backsliding and declining in grace, and
yet knows it not. This is often caused
by a want of acquaintance with one’s own
soul. Some there are who do not want
to know any evil thing of themselves.
Many see not the gray hairs because they
do not look into the glass to see thei.
There are some who look into the glass


CHAP. VIT.]





to see whether there are gray hairs com-
ing, but they use a false mirror, one
which does not truly reflect the image.
YW. Tam to hold up the looking-glass. One
of the gray hairs which marks decay is
a want of holy grief for daily sin. A
second gray hair is the absence of lament-
ation in the soul when Jesus Christ is
dishonoured. A third gray hair in the
Christian, a very plain one, and marking
that the disease is gone far, is the indulg-
ence of certain minor sins. Covetous-
ness is a very common gray hair upon
the heads of professors. With some it
is not quite covetousness, but worldliness.
Another gray hair is pride. Neglect of
prayer another, It isa gray hair when we
have no delight in listening to the word.
And another is, want of love to God.
Want of love to perishing sinners is a sad
gray hair to be found, I fear, in some min-
isters, as well as in the people. Another is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


103





the suspension of communion with God.
IIL. Recommend certain remedies for this
decay. Inquire whether you be a child
of God or not. Next remember what
will be the result of decays in grace. I
recommend to every believer a daily
self-ecamination. Then with repentance
join much supplication and renewed faith
and daily watchful activity | Spurgeon].

Ver. 10. Pride prevented humility and
confession. 2. Return to God, who had
afflicted them. 3. Testified against them
in their stupidity and rebellion against
God. “ Mencomplain of their ‘fortune,’
or ‘ fate,’ or ‘stars,’ and go on the more
obstinately to build up what God de-
stroys, to prop up by human means or
human aid what, by God’s providence,
is failing ; they venture more desperately,
in order to recover past losses, until the
crash at last becomes hopeless and final”
[Pusey].


HOMILETICS
Tus SILLINESS OF THE SINNER.— Verses 11—13.


Ephraim was stricken and afflicted, stupefied and insensible, because without heart
or understanding they revolted against their best interests, Like a silly dove, simple,
and liable to be befooled (Job xxxi. 27) ; easily seduced, and trusting to its rapidity
of flight instead of taking the nearest shelter. Israel negotiated with others, depend-
ed not upon God, and was caught in the net. Looking at sin generally—

I. The sinner is silly in boasting of knowledge without wisdom. There is
a great difference between knowledge and wisdom. The knowledge of this world
and the wisdom from above are not always found together. The world may consider
men wise and cunning, but a wicked man is not awiseman. Sinis folly, and folly
denotes insipidity, which is opposed to wisdom derived from tasting or experience.
There is no true knowledge without godliness. There may be intellect and useful
learning, but men are brutish and foolish through sin. ‘The ox knoweth his owner,”
—we know not our owner,—“ and the ass his master’s crib ;” but we are insensible of
our dependence upon God; “do not know” nor consider. We “lack wisdom.”
Some are totally ignorant. Others, gifted with genius and erudition, “ think highly of
themselves.” Allare liable to be duped by their own fancy or snared by their own
understanding. ‘A head full of vain and unprofitable notions, meeting with a
heart full of pride and self-conceit, disposes a man directly to be an atheist,” says
Philip Henry. Men are silly for boasting of knowledge, and ensnared by leaning
to their counsels. ‘“‘ Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom: and to depart
from evil is understanding” (Job xxviii, 28). II. The sinner is silly in depend-
ing upon human and forsaking Divine aid. “They call to Egypt, they go to As-
syria.” 1, They called not upon God, who could help them as he had done in the past.
2. They called to Egypt, delusive in promising and disappointing in execution.
3. They go to Assyria, a powerful oppressor; sought each by turns to help against
the other. Thus men, troubled and oppressed, seek relief from one thing and then
anoth3r, only to display their folly and bring on their ruin. “ What else is almost the
whole history of Christian states?” asks a writer. “The ‘ bala ce of power,’ which


104 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY HOSEA, {CHaP. Vi,





has been the pride of the later policy of Europe, which has been idolized as a god, te
which statesmen have looked as a deliverance out of all their troubles; as if it were
a sort of Divine Providence, regulating the affairs of men, and dispensing with the
interference of God; what is it but the self-same wisdom which balanced Egypt
against Assyria?” Men flee like a bird from their nest and security (ver. 13), only
to be caught in the net of “ destruction.” III. The sinner is silly in not discovering
his danger. The dove has neither courage to stay in its resting-place when fright-
ened, nor sense to discern its peril when it flies away. Instead of remaining in pro.
tection it flies away and is caught in the net. So men in sin rush from God into
risks, seek no place of safety, and have no sense of loss. As “the ox goeth to the
slaughter,” unconscious of its fate, and dreaming of pasture; “asa fool to the cor-
rection of the stocks,” careless and unfeeling; “as a bird hasteth to the
snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life,” so blindfolded and silly men go
to their fall. They soar upward, ‘‘as the fowls of heaven,” in freedom, independence,
and pride, but the net is “spread upon them.” They are humiliated and over-
whelmed. 1. The danger may be seen. It is openand exposed. The net is sprea‘|
out to surround them and hold them down. But “ man also knoweth not his time ;
as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare.
so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them.”
2. The danger is not without warning. ‘Their congregation hath heard.” In the
law and by the prophets, by judgment and mercy, God had forewarned Israel. Si
men now sin against light and truth, in the face of God’s word and God’s providence.
If you add blows to reproofs, so incurable is the folly of some that they will not
grow wiser and better. ‘ Yet will his foolishness not depart from him.”


Tue Fowuer oF Rerrisution.— Verse 12.


As they go to Egypt and Asshur for help, God will spread his net over them like a
bird-catcher, and bring them down to the earth like flying birds, ¢. e. bring them
from the open air—freedom—into the net of captivity or exile. Here the work of
retribution is spoken of as the work of the fowler, and includes two things—entrap-
ment and abasement. I. Entrapment. The literal reference here is 2 Kings xvii. 4.
The retributive providence of God employed Assyrians to ensnare Israel. This
entrapment of providence was seen in the case of Joseph’s brethren and the ‘cruci-
fixion of Christ. Popery confined Luther in Wartburg Castle, where he trans-
lated the Bible, which shattered the whole system. Anglican bigots imprisoned
Bunyan in Bedford jail ; there he produced a book which has given him immortal
fame. The net that entangles sinners is not made in heaven, but on earth, by
themselves. Righteous providence permits them so to be ensnared as to render that
enthralment painful and lasting. JZ. Abasement. ‘TI will bring them down,” &c.
However high they may tower, retribution has missiles to bring them down. Men in
worldly prosperity, pride and ambition, soar like eagles above the rest. An ancient
philosopher, when asked what Jupiter did in heaven, replied, “He pulls down
the haughty, and exalts the humble.” Read the words—“ The pride of thine heart
hath deceived thee,” &c. (Obad. 3, 4). Ponder well thy condition, sinner. Retri-
butive justice is upon thee wherever thou art and whatever thou dost. If down
grovelling in the earth, working out thy sordid soul, it has nets that will ensnare
thee there. If high up in the heavens of worldly prosperity and haughty ambition,
proudly exulting in superiority, it has shots that will reach thee and bring thee
down to the dust [The Homilist].


Man’s WEAL anp Wor.— Verse 13.


There are but two conditions in which men are found, near to or distant from
God. There can be no neutrality in religion. We must either be for or against God.
If to depart from God be woe; to be intimate with him, to know and love him,
must be man’s weal, moral health, wholeness, and happiness) Hence—


,


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 105





I. God is the chief good of men. “Who will show us any good?” is the
ery of the “many” in disappointment or unbelief. Man wants good: hates evil as
evil, becanse it brings woe, suffering, and death. He wishes to find that supreme
good which he eraves for, which alone will satisfy his heart. This is not found in
the creature, in the pleasures of sense and sin. God alone can satisfy the soul. He is
the elief, the only good of men. But the swmmum bonum, the well-being of man,
is not mere happiness, it is right character, the perfection and harmony of being.
Happiness and joy are secondary and incidental to this. The only blessedness is
the blessedness of the godly. We have not found this until restored and reconciled
to God. To seek the chief good of man without God, without conformity to his
will, is to subvert supreme reason, break down the eternal laws of the universe, and
seek the impossible. ‘ Fear God and keep his commandments; for this is the
whole of man ”—not his duty merely (duty is interpolated), but his health and
happiness—the sum of all that God requires—the end and perfection of his being.
II. Departure from God brings misery upon men. “ Woe unto them, for they
have fled from me.” 1. Forsaking God involves misery. ‘Woe unto them.” Those
who sin against God wrong their own soul (Prov. viii. 32); rob it of happiness and
vigour, and are tempted to soul-murder. They forsake their own mercy (Jon. ii. 8) ;
the God of my mercy (Ps. lix. 17), the personal knowledge of whom is the con-
dition of happiness, Estrangement from God involves misery and deep distress
(Jer. ii, 13; xvii. 13). Therefore the laws of God are (a) the expression of benevolent
- design, () in harmony with our moral constitution, and (c) should be constantly
obeyed, 2. Forsaking God involves destruction. “ Destruction unto them, because
they have transgressed against me.” God is not only the happiness, but the pro-
tection of the soul, “Salvation is of the Lord,” and those who forget or forsake
him bring present woe and future destruction upon themselves. God has con-
nected our safety with the keeping of his law. Obey and we shall be saved;
but disobedience to all laws, physical and moral, will result in pain and death.
Sinners die because they will die: put from them that which will be their life,
and love that which will be their death. “They that hate me love death.”


Gop’s Ways anp Man’s Ways.


I. God’s ways towards man. (God’s ways to train the believer and save the
sinner are manifold and wonderful. ‘There are three specially indicated in the
text. 1. We have love. The prophet speaks not mechanically, The man’s soul is
touched, and we see the sympathy of God in his pleadings and expostulations.
With melting overtures he pours out the tenderest feelings of Divine love. ‘“ How
shall I give thee up, Ephraim?” &. It is not a love cold and indifferent to the
sins and sorrows of men. Some men with a selfish stoical heart behold the misery
around them without the slightest feeling. Some are annoyed, and others endeav-
our to shun it. But few are pained at the sight, try te bear or remove it. God’s love
is wounded with the sins of his people, bursts forth into deep emotion. His “ soul
was grieved for the misery of Israel.” Like a father’s pity and a mother’s tender
care, this love is heard in the cry, “O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God ; for
thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.” 2. We have law. “They have transgressed.”
Sin is the transgression of the law, ‘‘for where no law is there can be no trans-
gression.” Law is found in all departments of the universe ; is essential to order
and good government. God has expressed his love in law, and entered into human
history with authority and redeeming grace. Love is the natural, the parental
feeling of God. But positive law is required to direct and control the actions of
men. “Thou shalt not” is a necessary part of education; a boundary line be-
tween right and wrong—an essential condition of a happy life. God has written
the words on the shore of every sea, in the constitution of every moral being, and
in the historv of every nation. Passions must be curbed ; order must be pre


106 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [CHAP. Vil.





served, lest confusion and death should spread in God’s dominions. 3. We have
providence. Love may exist in the heart and not be displayed in outward act.
Providence is God’s love in action, written in facts. Divine agency is dis-
played in human history, delivering men from sin, God had redeemed Israel
from captivity and bondage. He made known to them what he promised to be
and what he was by what he did. Thought and character are known best when
expressed in deeds, A mother’s love is not known simply by word ; but when she
cares for her child, walks with it, and delivers it in danger, then she gives life and
meaning to her words. So God fulfils his promise, honours his law, and redeems
his people. The name Redeemer should therefore be above every name, should
quicken and inspire our hearts with love. In the death of Jesus we have love his-
torical and supernatural; redemption and moral influence spreading themselves
through all time and reaching to all people. God’s providence in Israel and God’s
love in Christ have become history and action in the past, energy in the present,
and promise for the future. ‘ He saved them for his name’s sake, that he might
make his mighty power to be known.” II. Man’s ways towards God. Suck
treatment from God ought to excite gratitude and service. The truths of the Bible
and the blessings of providence should not be entertained as mere external verities,
but should become living and abiding sources of thought and feeling ; motives to
action and praise. The mercies we receive should be specially acknowledged.
“‘ Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.” Israel were guilty
of three glaring sins. 1. There was apostasy from God. “For they have fled
from me.” God had made them a peculiar people, gave them a special covenant,
and took them into intimate relationship with himself; but they forsook him, and
were guilty of religious defection. It was not a partial, but a complete falling
away. They turned from God in their hearts, and wandered from him in their
ways. They fled in fear and anger, as if God was a cruel and inveterate enemy.
God called unto them, but they refused to come: he sought to reclaim them, but
they wandered further from him. The instinct of the bird teaches that its only
place of safety and rest is the nest. Seldom does she return without injury or in-
convenience to herself. Soman, wandering from “the precincts,” remains not under
“the protection” of God. To leave his place and duties in society exposes him
to temptation. He has no true rest, and only changes imaginary for real troubles.
The discontented man, the unsteady professor, departing from God, wanders from
his proper place and position. Man isa fugitive, wandering from his home, broken
away from the law of holy and blessed allegiance. Sin has separated him from
God. Where art thou? was the significant question put to rouse our first parent
to a sense of guilt. Like a kind father, God calls now to men, holds out his arms
of love to embrace them in return. “ But to Israel he saith, All day long I have
stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.” 2. There was
rebellion against God. It was no ordinary crime of which they were guilty. To
apostasy they added open rebellion, “They have transgressed.” Once depart
from God, the way is open for all sins and temptations. When Israel had fied from
God, they sinned wilfully and presumptuously, with a high hand and a stiff neck.
They broke the law and thwarted the design of Divine love. Many now have
no determination, no decision for God: changeful as the waves and fickle as the
winds. Their heart is not right, neither are they stedfast in his covenant.
They detract from the authority of God, and continually break the bonds of law;
they set up self and refuse to yield to God; and, like a refractory horse and un-
tamed bullock, constantly reject the bridle and draw back. “A stubborn and
rebellious generation.” 3. There was contradiction to God. ‘They have spoken
lies against me.” Oft as he redeemed them so often did they traduce him. Their
whole life was a contradiction to his will, character, and conduct. They spoke
lies in their ips and profession, added insult t’ ingratitude. They belied hig
prophets, and set up false gods in opposition te che true, They denied the pre


CHAP. VII.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


107


a


vidence and power of God, robbed him of the glory of their deliverance, and ascribed


all their blessings to idols.


“ Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth,
and they lied unto him with their tongues.”
ness, and provoked him to anger by their sins.


Thus Israel treated God for his kind-
Well might God say, “My thoughts


are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Spoken lies. 1. Men lie in thought.
When they have hard or slight thoughts
of God—when they think that prosperity
is given by idols, is gained by their own
skill. 2. Menlieinword. When they
declare that God does not see them and
will not punish their sin. 3. Men lie
in worship. When they represent God in
graven images, offer prayers which do
not come from the heart, and defraud
God of his due. 4. Men lie in conduct.
When they profess one thing and are
really another — when they substitute
error for truth, and deny the Holy
One.

Sin is emphatically a Ze. The sinner is
antagonistic to God and his ways, a
contradiction to God in his character
and condition. In his whole conduct


and career he has “belied the Lord,”
Yet this lying to God is—1. A common
sin, 2. Ahatefulsin. 3. A dangerous
sin.
The visible Church doth lie against
God, having been delivered of him,
either when she denieth him in her
practice (Tit. i. 16 ; Ps. xiv. 1); or when
being delivered she doth belie her those
professions and promises she made in
trouble ; or, when she cleaves still to
false doctrine or corrupt religion, pre-
tending it to be the truth, and constructs
of God’s delivering her, as if it were a
testimony that he favoured her way ; or
when in her prosperity she forgets God,
ascribing all her deliverances to her idols,
as all her afflictions to him, as chap. ii.
5; der. xliv. 17, 18 [Hutcheson].


HOMILETICS.
Tae Howiine or Distress.— Verse 14.


If «ja sinner will not take warning, but madly rush on, he must take the con-
sequene of his folly. But when sorrow and punishment come upon hin, he frets
and cries to God in distress. When Israel suffered, they wept for their sins. God
reproves them ; they should have turned to him before. It is often too late to re-
pent when the deed is done.

I. Men are often in great distress. Suffering of some kind we cannot avoid ;
it is incident to our mortal state. The ills that flesh is heir to are many. But
sin brings suffering ; neglect of Divine warnings brings Divine chastisement. 1. Men
often lack the necessities of life. “Corn and wine” are not always given, often in
justice withheld, and then famine results. The Irish famine through failure of
potatoes created great distress. The luxuries and the necessities are taken away to
humble our pride, punish our sin, and teach us dependence uponGod. “The Lord
gave” is the language of Scripture ; that of atheism and pride, ‘ My own hand hath
gotten me this wealth” (Deut. viii. 17). Heathens even acknowledged God as
“the Giver of good things.” He has the right to withdraw at his pleasure. God’s
hand must be seen in losses as well as gains. ‘The Lord gave, and the Lord
hath taken away.” 2. Men are often put on beds of affliction. “They howled upon
their beds.” Active energetic persons are confined to their habitations, thrown
helpless on their beds, and led to cry for mercy. Many have wearisome nights and
days; bitter pains and sorrows; then they cry for mercy in sickness, which they
despised in health. Their punishment is greater than they can bear. A sick bed
is a place of trial and a school of discipline. II. Men ery to God in great dis-
tress. In prosperity and freedom they are right enough. Even beasts do not
utter their cry when they have food. But how natural to feel and comp’sin under


108 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: P0SEA. [cHap. vi








severe suffering! It is not palatable to reap the reward of our own doings. Hence—
1. Men cry, but it is not the cry of penitence. It is the howling of anguish ; the
ery of despair ; mere noise without spiritual feeling. 2. They cry to God. Like the
atheist on the Aigean Sea, they may forget or ridicule the idea of God in calm and
sunshine, When the storms come they change their creed and cry to their God. Men
may live without God, but they never want to suffer or die without him. ‘“‘ Then
they cry unto the Lord in their trouble.” 3. Their cry is insincere. (a) It is not
from the heart. ‘They have not cried unto me with their heart.” Their tears
were wrung from them on account of distress and not sin. Their hearts were not
set on God, and they could not pray unto him. The howling of the ancient heathen
or the modern Indian is not true devotion. The prayer from a sense of pain and
want is not the prayer of ‘“‘a broken and contrite spirit,” which is acceptable
to God.

Pleads he in earnest ? look upon his face :

His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest ;

His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast :

He prays but faintly, and would be denied :

We pray with heart and soul, and all beside.


(0) Their cry is public clamour. ‘They assemble themselves,” gather tumul-
tuously together, to join in stormy debate or clamour to their gods. They thought
more of corn and wine than pardon of sin and peace with God. Men are more anxious
for the body than the soul, and when deprived of the blessings of this life fret. and
murmur against God. 4. Their cry ended in rebellion. ‘ They rebel against me,”
turn away from God, and then turn round to insult him to his face. This proved
the insincerity of their prayer. Sanctified afflictions improve and wean from the
world ; unsanctified afflictions harden and lead to ungodliness. The iron when
heated by the fire is soft and flexible, but afterwards goes hard and cold. When
God slays men, then they seek him, return and inquire early after him. When re-
stored they forget their vows and prayers, and live in estrangement from him, .
“For all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works ’”'
(Ps. Ixxviii. 32, 34).


THe UnerateruL Return.—Verses 15, 16.


God tried ali ways with his people, but of no use. He chastised them in judg-
ment and remembered mercy. He gave them into the hands of enemies ; they cried
in distress, and he delivered them. Whatever God did, they were still the same.
Four words sum up the varied methods of God to restore them ; the one result was
shameful abuse ending in fresh rebellion.

I. God’s kindness toman. ‘I have bound and strengthened theirarms.” In what-
ever sense we take the words, the fact of ingratitude remains, 1. God chastised them,
Time after time were they afflicted, but God withdraws his displeasure. Men see the
greatness of Divine compassion, but never feel all the power of Divine anger. “He
being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not; yea, many a
time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath.” 2. God taugh! them.
Taught them to walk by their arms, as parents teach their children (ch. xi. 3 ; Deut. i.
31); taught them to war (Ps. xviii. 34) ; gave them victory over enemies (2 Kings
xiv. 25, 26); “girded them with strength for battle.” To him they owed all their
military skill, strength, and success. All warlike prowess is the gift of God. The Lord
is mighty in battle, and “the Holy Spirit is the great Drill-Master of heavenly sol-
diers,” God taught and instructed Israel by his prophets and providence, by his word
and worship, and by a peculiar mode of discipline trained them up for his service and
honour. 3. God strengthened them. Weak within and wounded without, like a kind
physician he bound up their wounds and healed their sores. He strengthened their
arms and relieved them in sickness. God often restores individuals and reinstates
pecious in prosperity and health, but what thanks has he? “O Israel. thou hast de


CHAP. VITI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 109





stroyed thyself, but in me is thine help.” II. Man’s ingratitude to God. Men like
Hezekiah render not again according to the benefit done unto them (2 Chr. xxxii. 25).
God intends to do them good, but they hate and forsake him. 1. In wicked thoughts.
“Yet do they imagine mischief against me.” Right thoughts of God are essential
to right conduct. If we think evil in our hearts, evil will be manifest in our lives.
“The thought of foolishness is sin.” Men think lightly of the responsibility of
thought, and declare that thoughts can hurt noone. As the thoughts the fountain
of the act, God counts it as the act, and holds us responsible for it. Bunyan, unlike
many professors, was deeply troubled in remembrance of one sinful thought. Yet
how men devise wickedness in their hearts! One meditates on objects of lust and
avarice ; another on schemes of ambition, Some think in envy, and others in
malice and revenge ‘“O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou
mayest be saved. How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee?” 2. Jn evil
conduct. ‘They return, but not to the Most High.” The health restored and the
life preserved from death should be given to God. God’s kindness should beget
loving thoughts and constant gratitude to him. But the conversion of many is feigned
and hypocritical ; a turning point in life, but not return to God in acknowledgment
of his majesty, and dependence upon his word. Man changes from one thing to
another: turns “from the sins of youth to the sins of age, from the sins of pros-
bee to the sins of adversity ; but he himself remains unchanged,” says a writer.
‘rue turning is wpwards, in recognition of God’s presence and holiness. The sinner
looks forward and round, but forgets God in thought and conduct. The prodigal
must come home, The penitent must return not half way, but entirely up to God.
To forsake some sins and indulge in others, to denounce earthly things without
devoting ourselves entirely to God, is not genuine conversion nor guarantee of
amendment. ‘If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return unto me.”
3. In blasphemous language. “ For the rage of their tongue.” The princes were en-
raged themselves, and gave vent to their anger against God and his providence to
others. The tongue, that unruly member, uttered lies and blasphemy. The nearer
destruction approached the more madly princes and politicians contradicted the
prediction. ‘‘ Their tongue is as an arrow shot out ; it speaketh deceit.” Thus did
Israel and thus do men treat the kindness of God. In evil thought, rebellious con-
duct, and abusive language do they manifest ingratitude. Mark the fearful grada-
tions oftheir sin. (a) Surrounded by mercies, they design mischief. (b) Invited to
return, they turn further away from God. (c) Then insults were added to ingratitude
and rebellion. (d) Finally their language and conduct drew down God’s anger upon
them, and were the instruments of their own destruction. To render good for evil
is God-like, but to render evil for good is devilish. What should we do with an
undutiful, rebellious child nourished up in tender care? Could any virtue atone for
this unnatural conduct? Yet God complains. “I have nourished and brought np
children, and they have rebelled against me.” Rewarding evil for good is con-
demned by the heathen, hateful to God, and will bring destruction to the sinner
himself and his house, ‘ Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart
from his house,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Subject. Divine dispensations abused.


Ver. 15. Mischief. Sin is essentially
I. God's dispensations with men are


mischief; mischievous in its designs


and consequences—to God and man.
In one sense man can do no hurt to
God, but so bold is he in his sins that
he tries, by robbing God of his glory and
abusing his gifts. “ Man would dethrone
God if he could” [Pusey].


characterized by variety. II. That what-

ever the character of the Divine dispensa-

tions they are often perverted. Observe—

First, The force of the human will.

Secondly, The depravity of the human
eart [Ths Homilisé].


110


»


Ver. 16. A deceitful bow. 1. Mis-
directed in its aim. Looked more to
selfish and sinful things than things of
God. 2. Treacherous in its acting.
When bent, would suddenly start aside
and recover its former position. Not
to be depended upon. The bow of
Jonathan “turned not back” (2 Sam. i.
22). 3. Unfit for use. Israel boasted
of the bow, and sang the song of the bow,
and a deceitful bow is made a type of
their own unstedfastness and degenerate
condition. God can turn man’s glory
into shame, and cast them away as unfit
for his purpose in the earth. ‘“ They
were turned aside like a deceitful bow ”
(Ps. xxviii. 57).

Men’s shortcoming, in the matter of
repentance and conversion to God,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSA


[CHAP. VII.





showeth from their want of straightness
in not intending what they pretend to,


which is also a great sin: therefore it is


added they are like a deceitful bow, that

is, as a bow which hath a throw in it.
does never direct the arrow to the mark,

however it seem to.aim at it; so, how-

ever they pretend true repentance, yet

they do not intend it, but only to deceive

and flatter God till they might get out

of trouble [Hutcheson].

Return. True repentance consists—
1. In decided turning away from evil.
Not half turning, nor halting short of
God. 2 In decided turning to God.
Positive devotion to God, so that he
only is served and worshipped, It is
not outward reformation, but inward
renewal.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER VII.


Ver. 1. If we had eyes like those of
God, we should think very differently
of ourselves. The transgressions which
we see and confess are but like the
farmer’s small sample which he brings to
market, when he has left his granary
full at home. We have but a few sins
which we can observe and detect, com-
pared with those which are hidden from
ourselves and unseen by our fellow-
creatures [Spurgeon].

Ver. 2. Habits. As impossible as
it is for a blackamoor to cast away his
skin and to become white, and for a
leopard to put away his spots; so im-
possible is it for them that ensnare
themselves, and accustom themselves
with evil doing, to change their custom
and do well [Cawdry].

Ver. 4—7. ire. Some few years
ago a noble steamer moored in one of
the harbours of the Uinited States was
discovered to be on fire. The engines
were instantly started, and the prow of
the vessel directed te the shore. But
the flames soon rendered the helm use-
less, and such of the crew as were on
board were obliged to jump into the
small boat, and leave the steamer to her
fate. Soon the engines worked more
fiercely ; the wheels revolved with fearful
speed and hurried the vessel through
the water. The sight was terrible. At


last came one tremendous shock, and all
was darkness and ruin. Such is man,
when seized and heated by an evil.
passion, whether the spirit of pride or of
envy. He grows worse and worse,
and is consumed in eternal ruin, unless
God interpose.

Ver. 5. Feasting. Times of festivity
require a double guard. “ Blasphemy
is wit, and ribaldry eloquence, to a man
that is turned into a brute ” [Lawson].

Ver. 8. The World and The Church.
Companions may be compared to the
river Thames, which is a sweet and
pretty river enough near its source ; but
in the great metropolis it has kept com-
pany with drains and sewers, under the
belief that its current was too powerful
and pure to be injured by them. It was
meant that the river should purify the
sewer, but, instead of that, the sewer
has corrupted the river [Union Vaga-
zine].

Ver. 10. Pride is observed to defeat
its own ends, by bringing the man who
seeks esteem and reverence into con-
tempt [Bolinybroke].

“ Pride hath no other glass
To show itself, but pride ; for supple knees
Feed arrogance, and are the proud man’s fees.”
Shakspeare.

Ver. 12. Retribution. As some

eagle pierced with a shaft feathered from


OHAP. VII.]





its own wing, so many a sufferer, even
in this present time, sees and cannot
deny that it was his own sin that fledged
the arrow of God’s judgment, which has
pierced him and brought him down
[Trench]. _

Ver. 13. Woe. The iniquity of a
bad man will itself be his ruin. Those
wicked devices by which he designed
and expected to secure himself becoming
the instruments of his destruction. The
essence of all wickedness is forsaking
God.

Ver. 14. Cried. Many have been
greatly afflicted and cried to God; been
humbled, yet not made humble; humbled
by force in their outward condition, but
not humbled in their inward temper.
“But when the sickness has passed away,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 11)
a I


the sweetness of the forbidden fruit
again comes to mind; and as the dog
returneth to his vomit,”’—to the food
which had caused his sickness,—“ so a
fool returneth to his folly” [Bridge].

Ver. 15, 16. Ingratitude. At the
battle of the Alma, in September, 1854,
a wounded Russian was piteously calling
for water. Captain Eddington, whose
heart was kind and charitable, ran up to
him, and stooping, gave him the much-
desired beverage. The wounded man
revived. The Captain ran forward to
join his regiment, when the wretch who
had just been restored by his kindness
fired and shot him who had been his
friend in time of need. So many seek
to injure God by returning him evil for
good [Biblical Treasury].





CHAPTER VIII.


Criticau Norgrs.—1.] Abruptness indicating sudden judgment. Henle Swift and alarmin
(Deut. xxviii. 49). He] Shalmanezer, king of Assyria. House] Not the temple, nor land, but Israe
viewed as the residence of God and one family (Num. xii. 7; Jer, xii. 7). 2. We] Heb. joins Israel
with the last clause, “ We know thee, we Isvacl,” a plea of descent to move God to mercy; but
hypocrisy, the ery of fear and not love. Dead knowledge cannot deliver. 3. Cast off] implies dislike,
the breaking of relative bonds. Good] (ob) may include God, the supremely good, and all the
blessings of salvation. Pursue] in retribution for rejecting God. 4. Kings] The self-authorized schism
from the house of David. All their princes not from God. Many and violent were the usurpations
and dethronements. . caypell Approved (Ps. i. 6; Matt, xxv. 12). Idols] and calf-worship a further
sin. They] ¢.¢. the gold and silver, as verse 6 [ Kee?]. Lit. that he may be cut off. The whole people
destroyed [Pusey]. Though forewarned, yet heedless (Jer. vii, 15; xliv. 8). 5. Cast off] disgusts,
Israel had cast off God; calf-worship would cast off them or be the means of God casting them off.
How long] Lit. how long will they not be able innocency to endure (cf. Is,i. 14; Ps. ci. oH} they were
incapable of purity before God (Jer. xix. 4). 6. For] The reason of displeasure. It also] The calf as
well as the kings set up, made by Israel, not by God. It deserved not their homage, no creature can be
God; idol worship therefore folly in the extreme. 7. Wind] animage of labour in vain, from which
ruin springs as naturally as harvest from evil sowing; as the wind becomes a tempest (Prov, xxii. 8;
Gal. vi. 7). Whirlwind] Intensive form, a mighty whirlwind. Three things first—no stalk, no yield,
devoured by strangers. Israel’s efforts in every direction were fruitless. 8. Swallowed] up as de-
voured by beasts of prey. Vessel] worthless and dishonoured (2 Tim. ii. 20) ; and broken (Ps, xxi.
12; Jer. xxii. 28; xlvili. 38). 9. Assy-] to gain friendship and alliance. ‘Wild ass] A comparison
which shows their folly, not as a paramour burning in lust, but heady, obstinate, and undisciplined ;
outstripping the swiftest horse in pursuit of lust, hunger, and thirst, ‘‘ Whilst even a wild ass, that
stupid animal, keeps by itself, to maintain its independence, Ephraim tries to form unnatural
alliances with the nations of the world, that is to say, alliances that are quite incompatible with its
vocation” [Kei]. 10. Hired] by presents. Gather] them among the nations, Now] They shall not go
as suppliants, but captives; the nations will oppress and not help them (Hzek. xvi. 37). Sorrow]
(not, as margin, begin). A little] The greater judgment, the deportation, suspended. Burden] Tribute
imposed on Israel (2 Kings xv. 19, 20). 11. Many] Israel should only have one altar (Deut. xii. 3,
6). To sin] Altars made by them should be the source of their punishment; they shall go where
there is nothing but altars. 12. Written] Lit. I write. Israel could not plead ignorance; no excuse
for men now, with the written word. Great] Deut. iv. 6, 8. Wondrous things (Ps. cxix, 18;
cxlvii. 19, 20), a great many things, expressing the care and condescension of God and the compre-
hensiveness of his word. All the greater is that guilt which regards these commands as strange, no
concern of theira, though specially for them. 18, Sacrifices] multiplied with the stars. Slain.


112 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (cHar. VH—I.


offerings were presented for gifts. Offerings which should be burnt for me they slay and devour.
They profaned the sacrifice, and were concerned only about the flesh. Rem-] Sins for which sacrifices
were thought to atone. To Eg-] A type of renewed bondage, like that from which they were
delivered ; abandonment to abject condition (Deut. xxviii. 68). 14. Forgotten] Deut. xxxii. 18.
Israel reared idol temples: Judah increased fortified cities; the sin of both, forgetfulness of God and
deification of self as displayed in their buildings. God would destroy all these castles of security
(Jer, xvii. 27; Amos ii. 5), Nothing can protect in judgment but the refuge, the hiding-place
which he has provided.


HOMILETICS.


A Corrupt Cuurcu.—Verse 1.


Judgment is again threatened upon Israel for their sins. They were corrupt
aotwithstanding all profession to the contrary. They had forsaken God and cast
off all good ; they had changed the civil government, and maintained the golden calf,
and were bringing upon them destruction swift and sure. Taking the house of God
as meaning the family of Israel, the professed people of God, we have a corrupt
Church endangered and warned.

I. The sins of a corrupt Church. ‘‘ They have transgressed my covenant, and
trespassed against my law.” 1. The covenant was broken. In condescension God
made a covenant with them, to which they consented, and for the keeping of which
he promised them rewards. They transgressed not the mere command, but their
own original contract; revolted from their allegiance ; and in effect declared that they
would no longer be God’s chosen people. They acted foolishly and deceitfully.
2. The law was transgressed. Divine authority was disregarded. Their sins were
malignant and defied the bounds of law. All sin is lawless. When men break
their own, God’s laws cannot bind them. Those who have no respect for human
stipulations will have no regard for Divine covenants. Israel were the professed
children of God, yet how grievously they sinned. ‘“ God help me, my own children
have forsaken me,” cried James II. Hecould bear the defection of a kingdom and
the desertion of an army, but burst into tears and wept in agony at the disloyalty
of his family. II. The danger ofa corrupt Church. 1. Its sins are great. The
sins of a people who profess much, the defections of a Church which belongs to God,
are more aggravating than ordinary transgressions. Israel were guilty of apostasy
from God and sins against their neighbour. The Church can have no pretence of
ignorance, nothing to excuse or extenuate her sins. She has the covenant, the law,
and the gospel. ‘‘ Woe unto thee, Chorazin ; woe unto thee, Bethsaida,” &c. 2. Its
danger is imminent. ‘He shall come as an eagle against the house of the Lord.”
Their fair titles and exalted privileges will not keep otf the stroke. Enemies are
ever prepared to execute judgments. ‘The eagles gather where the carcass is found.
The destruction‘is—(a) near, (2) swift, (c) certain, and (d) violent. Swift as an
eagle swooping on its prey does retribution come upon false professors and conven-
tional churches (Deut. xxviii. 49 ; Is. v. 26). III. The warning of a corrupt
Church. “Set the trumpet to thy mouth.” So God bids Isaiah, ‘ Cry aloud,
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet.” As the sound of a war-trumpet would
startle a sleeping army, so God would have religious teachers to rouse a sleeping
Church, They are “watchmen,” and must warn of coming judgments. There
must be no cowardly silence, when the house of God is imperilled by sin and
destruction, Augustine prayed, “ Lord, deliver me from other men’s sins.” David
cried, “‘ Deliver me from blood-guiltiness.” Men are asleep, and the danger is nigh.
The trumpet must neither be silent nor give any uncertain sound. ‘ Then whosoever
neareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning ; if the sword come and
take him away, his blood shall be upon his own heaa.”


Vain Reuigion.— Verse 2.


Israel in the hour of need call upon God, plead their knowledge of him as
covenant people, and depend upon help for the sake of their relations to him;


CHAP. VIIT. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 113


God denies this claim, and will reject all who honour him with their lips merely,
when their hearts are far from him. Knowledge without practice is all in vain.
God will not own those who only profess, who cry, “ My God,” and do not forsake
iniquity.

I. The religion of natural descent. “ We Israel,” the sced of Jacob,
who was called Israel. This was the boast of the Jews. “We be Abraham’s
seed.” Natural relationship and noble birth avail nothing before God. Yet men
boast of their ancestry and pious parents, and trust God will regard them on that
account. God has a peerage of his own. The grace of God can create children of
Abraham from stones of the wilderness: the outcasts and the heathen. ‘“ Whose
son art thou” spiritually? The son of God, or the son of the Devil? “He isa
Jew which is one inwardly.” II. The religion of formalism. “My God, we
know thee.” Kn wledge is a necessity, and may be acquired by all. The know-
ledge of God is within the reach of every one. There is no excuse for ignorance
of God. But many profess and use the name of God who do not know him; ortho
dox in their creed, but sinful in their life. “They profess that they know God ;
but in works they deny him.” They cry, “ Lord, Lord,” in their devotions, but in
their lives are sinful and iniquitous. The religion of many is mere profession and
words ; a matter of form and ceremony. We as a nation say, “My God,” boast
of our morality and knowledge, build temples to God and swear by his altar; but
our conduct contradicts our profession. To know God’s will and do it not involves
greater punishment; to possess great advantages and not to use them brings
greater responsibility at the judgment-day. ‘ Many,” presumptuously boasting
of their profession and work, “ will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name? and in thy name cast out devils? and in thy name done
many wonderful works?” III. The religion of merit. The spirit of the text
is a spirit of pride and superior merit. We are Israel and we know thee, and have
therefore a claim to thy mercy. God answers the plea in verse 3. Israel indeed !
then why cast off good, and sin against me! You have no plea to urge and no
merit to secure my favour. It wasa plea of hypocrisy and fear. There is a fearful
tendency in men to cling to good works, and hope to merit Divine mercy through
religious duties. They mention benevolent deeds, devotional forms, and social!
morality, in hope of procuring God’s favour. The Papist repeats his prayers, counts
his beads, and makes his stated confessions, and feels that he is at peace with his
Maker. The Protestant paces the round of religious duties in self-righteousness and
pride, and soothes his soul with the hope of heaven. Merit we have none. The most
holy and devout only do their duty. There are no works of supererogation. Sal-
vation is of grace, not by works, lest any man should boast.








Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this,—
That in the course of justice none of us
Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy,


Forsakine Goop anp Pursuine Evin, tot Surest Way To Ruin.— Verses 3—5.


These words declare the true position of Israel. They were only Israel in name,
and not in reality. They had cast off God, and with him everything good. They
set up their own kings and institutions, did not seek to please, and were therefore
disowned of God. Like sinners now, they pursued ways, the ends of which were
death, and were so infatuated in their folly, that they seemed to act with a view to
be “cut off” and utterly rejected.

I. The abandonment of good. “ Israel hath east off the thing that is good.” 1.
God, the chief good, was cast off. He was forgotten in his law, resisted in his
demands, and forsaken in his worship. A thing cast off indicates supreme contempt,

8


114 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; HOSEA. (CHAP. VIM.





utter abhorrence. We neither think of it nor care for it. This casting off of God—
(a) Is most unreasonable. It is to forget our highest interests and wound our own
souls ; to offend our best friend, and involve ourselves in the greatest misery. (b) Is
most ungrateful. “Is not God thy father that hath made thee?” Should we,
then, despise a father’s love and reject our greatest benefactor? “ Hear, O heavens,
and give ear, O earth, for the Lord hath spoken. I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me.” 2. All good was cast of. It is
good to draw near to God (Ps. Ixxiii. 28), and is best for us to do so, and therefore
perilous to forsake God. It is our honour, peace, safety, and riches to love and
worship him. Those who are far from him, those who reject him, cast off all that is
good. They despise good in this world and in that which is to come. Howsad the
condition when men say, “ Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways. What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? Who is the Lord, that
we should obey his voice?” II. Evil pursued. Forsaking God opens up the way to
the pursuit of evil. Spiritual good is the only safeguard of the soul. Cast off this,
and you open the way for the ravages of sin. Israel had committed two evils. 1. They
were guilty of civil apostasy. In founding the kingdom by Jeroboam, and in sue-
cessive rule, they had set up kings without Divine authority (1 Kings xi. 27—40).
They rebelled against the royal house of David, encouraged successful conspiracies,
and sought their own selfish ends. Men now in family affairs, national politics, and
religious life, set up their own and consult not God’s will. They do not acknowledge
God in all their ways ; they act without his license and approval. As they begin, so
they continue. They made and removed princes, as the Roman armies did em-
perors of old. In the “ vicissitudes of families” and nations we have the rise and
the fall of the mighty ; the misfortunes of all who live and rule without God. Self-
will will ever bring self-destruction. But God, whose power we cannot resist, and
whose wisdom we should not dispute, will accomplish his own will in the affairs
of men. 2. They were guilty of religious apostasy. “Of their silver and their
gold have they made them idols.” 1. This idolatry was encouraged by nobility.
The kings and princes whom they set up patronized their customs and pleased their
minds. They were ambitious in their aims, thought themselves absolute and free
in their rule, and sought to gratify their own lusts. 2. This idolatry was supported
by wealth. The gold and silver which God gave were devoted to the making of the
calves or the support of their worship. One sinful change brings another. Civil
rebellion must be upheld by ecclesiastical defection. Usurp the throne of men, and
the next step is to set up idols on the throne of God. Withhold talents and wealth
from God, or be niggardly in maintaining the true, and you will be lavish in up-
holding a false religion and a selfish scheme. Men employ their wealth against
God ; are constantly setting up their own kings, casting off Jehovah, and ungrate

fully abusing the gifts of his providence and grace. III. Certain ruin resulta

The course men pursue will determine their fate. Fallen angels cast off allegiance
to God, and were driven from him. Many devout men, once true worshippers of
God, have fallen into sin and idolatry. The gods you make will govern your life,
fashion your character, and determine your destiny. J orsake all good and cast off
God, you imperil your ‘soul. Such conduct is ruinous and most destructive, attracts
God’s vengeance, and brings down his wrath upon the sinner. If they forsake him
he will turn his hack upon them, and “ woe unto them whenI depart from them.”
“Woe” in trial and distress, “woe” in the hour of death, “ woe” in the eternal
world. “ Woe unto the wicked, for it will be ill with them.” 1. This is the fulfl-
ment of God’s word. God denounced a curse upon them if they forsook him
(Deut. xxviii. 15, 25). 2. This isthe natural retribution of Divine providence. All
the idols of men—wealth, ambition, and beauty—will fail them in the hour of need.
They will be “cast off” by the gods in whom they trusted. “Thy calf, O Samaria,
hath cast thee off.” But “the Lord will not cast off his faithful people, neithey
will he forsake his inheritance.”


ohare vu.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA.


B18





HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 2. Cry, My God. Men are ready
enough to cry to God in affliction, when
they forget him in health. Trouble
drives the stoutest sinners and the most
corrupt Church to prayer. “ But religion,
which is the best armour, is the worst
cloak ; and will serve hypocrites as the
disguise Ahab put on, and perished”
[Trapp].

Ver. 3. Casting off God. First, the
good God, who is good, original, univers-
al, all-sufficient and satisfactory, pro-
portionate and fitting to our soul. He
both is good and doeth good (Ps. exix.
68), and that both naturally, abundantly,
freely, and constantly (Ps. Ixxxvi. 5).
Israel cast, or rather kicked him off, as
the word signifieth. So do all gross
hypocrites; they are rank atheists,
practical atheists, though professed
Christians. Secondly, they reject Christ
as a Sovereign, though content to have
him a Saviour. They will not submit
to the laws of his kingdom, nor receive
him in all his offices and efficacies.
Thirdly, hypocrites reject the good Spirit
of God, the fruit whereof is all godli-
ness, righteousness, and truth (Eph. v. 9).
When God striveth with them, by yield-
ing to Satan’s suggestions they grieve
that Spirit, by grieving resist him, and
by resisting quench him, and by quench-
ing him oppose him maliciously and
do despite unto him, and so cast them-
selves into the punishing hands of the
living God (Heb. x. 29, 31). Lastly,
they cast off the good word and true
worship of God; those right judgments,
true laws, good statutes and command-
ments (Neh. ix. 13); they put the
promises far from them, and judge them-
selves unworthy of eternal life (Acts xiii.
46) ; they hate instruction, and cast God’s
words behind them (Ps. 1.17). Ina
word, “‘ he hath left off to be wise, and
to do good ; he setteth himself in a way
that is not good; he abhorreth not evil”
(Ps. xxxvi. 3, 4) [Trapp].

I. The thing cast off— Good,” —God,
Christian worship, the Scripture. De-
spising them, throwing them away as
worthless, putting them out of sight


as obnoxious. Many bvasters of the law
did this practically. In these days many
cannot endure practical duty and respon-
sibility, contemptuously treat and despise
the law of God, as Moses indignantly
dashed it on the ground. J/. The
spirit indicated. 1. Pride. 2. Contempt
of Divine authority. 3. Indifference to
Divine truth. 4. Atheism of heart.
5. Deadness of conscience and all moral
feeling. JI. What this leads to.
Sooner or later it leads to (1) open trans-
gression, and (2) outward rejection. If
men cast away the thing that is good
there is no wonder when evils pursue
and overthrow them (Ps. exl. 11; Prov.
v. 14).

‘When men once begin to turn their
back on their own happiness and on the
way of God, they will still grow more
averse from it, till they become to
abominate and abhor it ; and this fills up
the measure of their iniquity. God will
not let sin thrive in their hands, but
will send on judgments, and let them
feel their loss in their strokes who would
not see their prejudice in forsaking what
was good [Hutcheson].

Ver. 4. Set up kings. Such were
all their kings except Jehu and his house.
During 253 years, for which the king-
dom of Israel lasted, eighteen kings
reigned over it out of ten different
families, and no family came to a close,
save by a violent death. The like self-
will and independence closed the exist-
ence of the Jewish people [Pusey].

In the government of nations and the
choice of rulers, in family duties and in
individual life, God should be consulted
and pleased. For he can put down what
we set up, and set up what we put down.

Ver. 5. Cast thee off. Rejected by
one’s own God, disappointed in one’s
own choice! If Samaria had been firm
and faithful to the God of Israel it
would have been of great service, a
powerful help in need; but the calf
was a broken reed, a miserable comforter,
So this will ever be the case. Beauty
and fame may fade like flowers. Riches
take unto themselves wings and fly away.


116 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. VIZ.


me





Idols will be shivered to pieces, and the HO Orouwell! Crumiy ei
men who trusted on them disappointed Had I but served my God with half the zeal
for ever. All fail and nothing abides, I served my king, he would not in mine age
ewe God, the only true and permanent = Have left me naked to mine enemies.”
good.

HOMILETICS.


Ipontatry; Its Ortarn, Errzors, anD Destiny.— Verses 5, 6.


These words describe the cause and nature of Israel’s sin, and justify God’s angen
against them.

I. Idolatry in its origin. Idols are the device of man. “The workman
made it.” Man in his natural and primeval condition had a knowledge of God
sufficient for the condition in which he was placed. But sin alienated him from God
and robbed him of fellowship with God. ‘There is a natural tendency in man to
embody in living forms (eidola) the image of God, to imagine and honour other
gods. Dissatisfied with the law, and forgetful of the claims of the true God, he
has wandered in the conjectures of reason and the creations of fancy ; in the beasts
of the field and the fish of the sea, in all the lights of heaven and in all the elements
of nature, he beheld the movements of a false deity ; and associated vague notions
of power and wisdom with the realities by which he is surrounded. Hence the
creation of gods many and lords many. They are things made, the work of men’s
hands. “They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; they
have ears, but they hear not.” They are not gods, but vanities, and have become a
crime and a curse to heathendom. ‘‘ They that make them are like unto them, so
is every one that trusteth in them.” But “ from Jsrael was it also,” who boasted of
the knowledge and law of God. Israel knew her sin, and felt that calf-worship was
not the worship of Jehovah. This rendered her inexcusable and aggravated her guilt.
Now among people to whom the oracles of God are committed, even in the Christian
Church, we have idolatry. Men cut and carve gods of their own fancy. The wife
of their bosom, the child of their loins, may be agod. An image of gold or of clay ;—
business, fame, and success, may be set up, take the place of God in our affections,
and unduly absorb homage and attention due to God. ‘‘ Little children, keep your-
selves from idols.” II. Idolatry in its effects. 1. I¢ ts dishonouring to human
nature. Man assimilates himself to the moral character of the object which he wor-
ships, becomes like the thing which he loves. He looks upon his God as the stand-
ard of virtue ; abandons everything in life which offends ; and desires favour by
conformity to the will and character of his deity. The history of idolatry confirms
this truth. When men have bowed down to the brutes, they have lowered themselves
in the depths of vice. The more they worshipped the more they resembled the
objects of their worship. Medhurst says that in China the priests teach this doc-
trine of assimilation, ‘Think of Buddha and you will be transformed into
Buddha, If men pray to Buddha and do not become Buddha, it is because
the mouth prays, and not the mind.” Our character and conduct can never rise higher
than our aims. If we follow earthly objects we become earthly and grovelling. The
pleasure-seeker becomes lightand frivolous ; the mammon-worshipper sordid and mean.
““ My people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit.” 2. It is dis-
pleasing to God.» ‘‘ Mine anger is kindled against them.” God here speaks after
the manner of men to remind us of his claims. As men who incensed will execute
their displeasure, so God will punish idolatry. It forbids his worship and denies his
existence, It is degrading to his creatures and calamitous tothe universe. Its tem-
poral consequences have been awful to its votaries. What then must be its eternal
“ They that make a graven image are all of them vanity ; and their delectable
things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses; they sce not, nor know ;
that they may be ashamed.” 3. Jt is a hindrance to moral purity. “How long


+CHAP, VIII. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 117





eae


will it be ere they attain to innocency?” God is the fountain of all goodness,
and his will the standard of all virtue. When God’s will is rejected there is
no check to moral pollutions, and no motives to moral purity. The knowledge
of God is essential to holiness and progress! inseparable from the welfare of
men: and necessary to extricate a fallen world from the evils of idolatry.
(1) Purity of heart is necessary to purity of life. This is only gained by the
love and worship of a pure object. A sinful object defiles physically and spirit-
ually. God is opposed to sin, revealed as our example, renews the heart, and
satisfies the conscience in Christ. ‘‘I am the Almighty God; walk before me,
and be thou perfect.” (2) Purity of the object worshipped must therefore have
sufficient influence to beget holy life. The mere representation of God, the pres-
entation of a holy object would not touch the heart, change the opinions, and
draw men from evil practices. A display of power and persuasion alone can
overcome evil habits, wean men’s affections from idols, and fix them on God.
God has interposed by his Son and his Spirit, and sinners are converted from
the error of their ways. We have one true and living God made known
to us as the object of supreme love and regard. ‘‘Thou shalt worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.” III. adolatry in its destination.
“The calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.” In origin it is a thing of nought,
the work of men’s hands and ingenuity. In its end it shall be nought. Idolatry
is a nullity, and is doomed to destruction by its inherent weakness and God’s pur.
pose. 1. Idolatry is doomed to destruction by its own weakness. With all its splen-
did rites and forms, its ancient priesthood and prevalence, it is coming to nought.
It cannot satisfy the heart and the conscience. The heathens are closing their temples
and pagodas, breaking their gods and forsaking their worship. Deserted by
devotees, and their altars bereft of gifts and offerings, idols shall pine away and
idol-worship perish by mere inanition. Idolatry in the old Roman Empire was thus
destroyed, and this will be the process everywhere. Its seat is in the soul, and out-
ward force cannot overturn it. But the gods of the heathen will be starved to
death, by the failure of their revenue and offerings. ‘The Lord will be terrible
unto them: for he will famish all the gods of the earth ; and men shall worship
him, every one from his place, even all the isles of the heathen.” 2. Idolatry is
doomed to destruction by the power of the gospel. God has purposed to send the
gospel to all the nations of the earth. “As I live, saith the Lord, all the earth
shall be filled with my glory.” Nothing can frustrate this design nor rob the
nations of this glory. What a conception! What is there in patriotism, philo-
sophy, or philanthropy, to equal it? The mighty scheme, as a mere system of social
government and social culture, stands forth in peerless grandeur. But how blessed
that day when “a man shall cast his idols of silver and his idols of gold, which
they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats: to go inte
the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord,
and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 5. “ How long.” ‘The hardness as could not abide it: they were inve-
of heart and the stubborn holding out terate and incurable, their diseases in-
of the sinner a matter of astonishment grained, and not easily stirred by any
even to God. Continuance in sin and_ potion. Secondly, that God is most
aggravation of guilt only make the case patient, who though he thinks overlong
worse. God’s patience will end, and of the time that men continue in sin,
God’s anger will be the hotter. By this and therefore cries, How long! Wc.,
powerful expression three things are yet bears with their evil manners and
intimated. First, that these Israeiites inviteth them to better. TZhirdly, that
were refractory and desperate ; notonly he will at length break oll his patience
unclean, but enemies to innocency, suc and proceed to punishment, since there


118


is no other remedy (2 Chron. xxxiv.
16; Prov. xxix. 1) [Trapp].

The attainment of innocency. I. The
thing to be attained—* Innocency.”
Man was originally innocent in body and
soul, created in the image of God. But
this holiness he lost through sin and can
never perfectly, only comparatively at-
tain it in this world. Sinless perfection
is a delusion (1 Jn.i. 8). II. The method
of attaining it. ‘How shall man be
just with God?” Our guilt is removed
in Christ, our natures renewed by
grace, and the Holy Spirit imparts
Divine enlightenment and transforms
into the Divine nature. Believers in
Christ are justified before God. Their
faith works by love, and overcomes sin
and the world. All men may secure
this privilege. III. The reason why
men do not attain it. 1. Some despise
and do not feel their need of it. 2.
Others despond in seeking it. God is
able and willing to save. Examples of
men most degraded and abandoned en-
couraged. ‘‘ How long,” then, before
you accept the proffered mercy and find
peace with God !

Ver. 6. Not God. Such is the be-
witching nature of idolatry, though men
pretend that they worship God in the


HOMiLETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


(cHsP. Viti,


image, and the deceitfulness of the
human heart; that they are gradually
led to deify their idol. God therefore
proves that i ts not God (Ex. xxxii.
4,5; 1 Kings xii. 28).

Whatever estimation men have of
images, or whatever excellency or
Divinity they conceive in or represented
by them, yet it is sufficient to refute
them, that themselves, who are but vain
and empty things, gave all the excellency
they have; for the workman made tt
[ Hutcheson].

The workman was rather a god to his
idol, than it to him; for he made it; tt
was a thing made. To say that it was
made, was to deny that it was God.
Hence the prophets so often urge this
special proof of the vanity of idols. No
creature can be God. Nor can there be
anything between God and a creature ;
and that which is not a creature is God.
God himself could not make a creature
who should be God [Pusey].

Broken in pieces. Deifying any crea-
ture makes way for the destruction of it.
If they had made vessels and ornaments
for themselves of their silver and gold,
they might have remained ; but if they
make gods of them, they shall he
broken to pieces [Mt. Henry}.


HOMILETICS.


A Picrure or Uncopiy Lirz.—Verses 7, 8.


Israel is still threatened. Their continual labour is all in vain. They reap
no reward, will be grievously disappointed, and not only the harvest, but they
themselves will be devoured. Such will be the result of their ungodly conduct.

I. Laborious in its efforts. “For they sow the wind.” 1. Effort is put forth
by all men. They live and labour for good—seek to gain happiness and have a
seed-time in life. 2. Painful are the efforts of the ungodly. They “ plough iniquity,”
and practice it day by day. ‘They sow the wind,” most earnestly and persever-
ingly, in hope of profit. Sinners are sore labourers. They put themselves to trouble
and expense to make and worship their idols, to pursue their aims, but all in vain.
They are labouring for the wind (Ecc. v. 16) ; “embracing a shadow ; grasping the
air; wearying themselves for that which hath no substance nor true felicity in it.”
II. Disappointment in its results. “It hath no stalk: the bud shall yield
no meal,” &c.’ First no ear, or if an ear, no yield, or if it advance thus far, the
enemy will devour the produce. 1. Vanity ts reaped. He that soweth iniquity
shall reap vanity (Prov. xxii. 8). There is a harvest in sin, and men reap what
they sow (Gal. vi. 7, 8). Vanity, emptiness, and vexation result from sin. Satan
is a hard task-master. His service is slavery and the wages miserable. “ Where-
fore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that
which satisfieth not?” 2. Divine retribution is reaped. ‘They shall reap the
whirlwind,” The wind sown and penned up in ungodly life, will be reinforced in


CHAP. Vit. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 119





strength and burst forth into a mighty tempest. Men sow and cultivate what at
last wili make them the sport and mockery of its resistless violence. They will be
carried away with their own folly like chaff before the wind. The whirlwind will
overthrow their dwellings, wreck their hopes, and drive them away in their
wickedness. Sennacherib in olden time reaped the whirlwind (Is. x. 5—12, 24,
25 ; xxx. 31). Napoleon, robbed of empire, shorn of greatness, and driven into exile,
reaped the harvest of his own sowing. Spain with its Inquisition, and France
with its Black Bartholomew, countries remarkable for persecution, reaped the whirl-
wind in bloody revolutions and civil wars. The ungodly are consumed by Divine
judgments in this life and by Divine wrath in that which is to come. “They that
plow iniquity and sow wickedness, reap the same. By the blast of God they perish,
and by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed.” III. Destructive in its end.
“Tsrael is swallowed up.” Not mere disappointment, but destruction will be the
result of sin. Israel were carried away, the whole nation were swallowed up by
foes. They lost their privileges and honour. Their land was devoured and eaten
up by strangers. They were dishonoured by God, and despised by men as a broken
vessel. Sin and idolatry in gross or refined forms will bring misery and degra-
dation. They undermine the foundations of moral life, beget more place for vanity
and more thirst for pleasure. Those who do not love and serve God wil
be given up by God. There will come, though long delayed, a terrible day of
wrath, a harvest of whirlwinds to consume their glory and destroy their hopes.
“ Be not deceived : God is not mocked : for whatsoever a man soweth that shall he
also reap.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7. “They have sown.” 1. wind, and shall reap the whirlwind”


Human life a sowing time. “ Behold a
sower went forth tosow.” The relation
of men one to another like that of seed
and soil. Men are sowing by thoughts,
words, and deeds. In each a permanent
influence, a germ of imperishable life.
2. The kind of life—moral seed. Some


sow good seed, others worthless seed.


The pleasure-seeker and the man of the
world, the hypocrite and the false pro-
fessor, are sowing “the wind.” 3, The
accompaniments of life—the harvest.
The harvest is good or bad, the same
in measure and quality as the sowing.
Men reap to-day what they had sown
yesterday, will reap in eternity what
they sow in time. God’s laws are un-
changeable and will never be reversed.
“For he that soweth to his flesh shall
of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that soweth to the spirit shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting.”

Not only may men expect to reap as
they sow, but sinful and vain courses
will bring further disadvantages, and
raise violent tempests, either in the
undertaker’s conscience, or outward con-


dition, or both ; for ‘‘ they have sown the


[ Hutcheson].

Ver. 8. Sinful courses persisted in
may consume the Church, deprive of re-
ligious ordinances, and gratify the wishes
of the enemy, who greedily devour God’s
people (Ps. xiv. 4).

When professors decline in religion
and despise God, then God will despise
them before others. So long as Israel
was consecrated to the Lord those who
sought to injure her were injured them-
selves (Jer. ii. 3) ; but when they made
leagues with idolaters they were
swallowed up by them. “ For them
that honour me I will honour, and
they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed,”

Dishonoured vessels. 1. A useless
vessel. Empty of everything good,
filled with everything bad, and taking
the place of vessels more useful and
worthy. 2. A broken vessel. Broken
in credit and reputations, broken to
pieces in hopes and fortunes ; broken
by their own conduct and by the judg-
ments of God upon that conduct. 3.
A vessel put to some vile purpose. Israel
given to idolatry. Men dishonouring


120





a


body and soul by sin, making them
objects of loathing and disgust before
others. ‘There are not only vessels of
gold and silver, but also of wood and of
earth: and some to honour, and some
to dishonour” (2 Tim. ii. 20). All
men are vessels of mercy, or vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction (Rom. ix.
22).

dich has been the history of the ten


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


(omar. VIL





of them; despised and mingled among
them, yet not united with them; having
an existence, yet among that large whole,
the nations, in whom their natural exist-
ence has been at once preserved and
lost; everywhere had in dishonour;
the Heathen and the Mohammedan
have alike despised, outraged, insulted
them; avenging upon them, uncon-
sciously, the dishonour which they did


tribes ever since ; swallowed up, not de-
stroyed ; among the nations, yet not


to God [Pusey].


HOMILETICS.


Tue Fotty or Woripiy ALiiance.—Verses 9, 10.


A fourth sin is laid to the charge of Israel in seeking aid from Assyrians. This
sin is reproved by two similitudes—a wild ass loving its freedom, and a harlot
suing for paramours. It is folly to seek help in civil defection and religious
apostasy.

I. The alliance is unnatural. 1. It ts against the habitsof nature. The wild
ass, taken in its love for solitude, or its headstrong perversity in pursuing its lust,
reproves this conduct. Israel was a holy people, separated from others for a special
purpose, and intended to be the people of God. “Lo, the people shall dwell alone,
and shall not be reckoned among the nations.” God’s people should never mix up
with worldly men. Their name and their nature should separate them from sin.
They stand upon a moral elevation ; to trust to worldly alliance and hire foreign
aid is to sacrifice their principles and degrade their nature ; to acknowledge the

nperiority of the world, and sink themselves below their true position. The
ympathies and aspirations of the new man are with God and not the world. “I
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.” 2. J¢ reserves the
customs of men. ‘‘ Ephraim hath hired lovers.” The ordinary way is for lovers to
hire her (Ezek. xvi. 33, 34). When Churches are deserted, and professors are fox
saken by God, they often go further wrong than others, more bent on wickedness
than ordinary transgressors. What folly to purchase the aid of an enemy! what
value is that affection which can only be enlisted by gold and hire? The world
should be taught to admire the Church as a wise and understanding people; but
when they despise their own dignity, they pay dearly for the alliance of “ the
nations.” ‘The contrary is in thee from other women, in thy whoredoms,
whereas more followeth thee to commit whoredoms ; and in that thou givest a
reward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art contrary.” II.
The alliance is unfaithful. As a man should cleave to his wife, so Israel
should cling to God. But how loathing and immodest to forsake God, to
whom we are bound by marriage covenant, and tempt and hire other lovers! Such
was the baseness of Judah, and such the unfaithfulness of many now. When God
likens the idolatry of his ancient people to adultery and harlotry, the Christian
Church of the present age should take the warning and remain faithful to God.
III. The alliance is destructive. “ Yea, though they have hired among the nations,
now will I gather them.” The sin of Israel brought its own punishment. They
sought to secure themselves by hired kings, sent presents to them and made leagues
with them against God’s will: but their policy deceived them. God would gather
those very nations, not to help, but to destroy Israel. "When nations rely on hired
levies, and Churches have recourse to ungodly powers, to save from anticipated
judgments, God in just retribution makes these very powers the instruments of


CHaP. VIIi.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. i231








his purpose. Providing for their own glory and safety makes them easier prey to
their enemies. There is no security but in God himself. ‘I will gather all thy
lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them that thou hast
loved, with all them that thou hast hated ; I will even gather them round about
against thee.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 9. A wild ass typical of the
sinner, 1. In its disregard for its
owner. “ Neither regardeth he the cry-
ing of the driver” (Job xxxix. 8). 2.
In tts obstinate course. It is most un-
ruly and stubborn, intense in its thirst
and swift in its pursuit. Self-will,
frowardness, and intractableness the com-
plaints against Israel. Men now throw
off God’s yoke, seek to be free and un-
controlled, to pursue their folly without
restraint. ‘‘ The heart of man is fully set
in them to do evil.” 3. In its constant
danger. “‘ The wild ass is the lion’s prey
in the wilderness” (Eccles. xiii. 19).
Men who rush from God are exposed to
danger from themselves and others in
time and in eternity. Apart from grace,
man after his hard and impenitent heart
treasures up wrath against the day of
wrath ” (Rom. ii. 5).


Ver. 10. Sin and sorrow. “ Now


will I gather them,” &c. 1. The de-
ginning of sin is the beginning of sorrow,
Men do not believe this. It may be
contrary to their experience and observ-
ation, but the fact is declared in God’s
word, and written in our moral nature
and constitution. Now ‘they shall
sorrow a little.” 2. The end of sin
wil be the greatest sorrow. Israel
sorrowed “a little” under the bondage
and heavy taxes of Assyria, but their
future punishment was the greater
calamity. Now sorrow is a little, a drop
before the storm, hereafter it will bea
tempest. God suspends the greatest
judgments to prove his compassion for
men, give time for repentance, and oppor-
tunity to return to him. Here only we
have “the beginning of sorrows ;” what
then will be the end “of them that
obey not the gospel of God?”


HOMILETICS.
AGGRAVATED GuiLt.— Verses 11—13.


“The prophet had first shown them their folly in forsaking God for the help ot
man; now he shows them the folly of attempting to secure themselves by their
great show, pretences of religion, and devotion in a false way. God had appointed
one altar at Jerusalem. There he willed the sacrifice to be offered, which he would
accept. To multiply altars, much more to set up altars against the one altar, was
to multiply sin. Hosea charges Israel elsewhere with this multiplying of altars as
a grievous sin (x. 1; xii. 11).”

I. In multiplying altars. ‘ Ephraim hath made many altars.” Opposing the
commandment of God (Deut. xii. 5), strengthening the habit of sin (1 Kings xii.
30), repeating their own folly, and increasing their own punishment. “ Altars
shall be unto him to sin.” II. In despising the law. God had. given the law,
written and expounded it by Moses and the prophets, and continually renewed the
knowledge of it, so that they had no excuse for their sin. God has written the
law for us by his providence and gospel. His agency is ever fulfilling it; yet
men deny it, count it a strange thing, a word with which they have nothing to do.
The excuses which men make for rejecting it are not pleas, but sins ip the sight
of God. III. In offering lifeless sacrifices. ‘They sacrifice flesh for the sacri-
fices of mine offerings.” 1. Jt was mere external worship. It was mere flesh, not
a true sacrifice. External worship without internal ceremony, without sanctity,
is like a dead carcase, not a living sacrifice. The Lord accepts it not. 2. It
wes mere selfish worship,—* and eat it.” Sacrifices which should have been burnt


22 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (car. vIn.








for God they slaughtered and devoured. They were concerned only about temporal
affairs. Wecannot atone for contempt of God by forms of ourown. ‘“ Dissembled
holiness is double iniquity.” There is only one sacrifice for sin; if that be rejected,
sins will be remembered and punished.’ The devices of selfishness and will-worship
can never avert, will only hasten, the penal consequences of sin. ‘The sacrifice of
the wicked is abomination, how much more when he bringeth it with a wicked
mind 4”
PERVERSION OF Worsuip.—Verses 11, 12.


The passage leads us to notice the perversion of worship. This is one of the
oldest, the most prevalent ‘and the most hateful sins amongst mankind. Men have
perverted worship, not only by making false gods, but by making false altars for
the true God. There is only one altar in true worship, and that altar is Christ
(Heb. xiii. 10). Two remarks in relation to false worship. I. It is a great sin.
First, It is a very propagative sin. “ Ephraim hath mace many altars.” “If
men leave the rule,” says an old author, “they know not where to stay, hence the
multiplying of things thus amongst the Papists, five hundred altars in some one
temple.” How sublimely antagonistic the Jews were to the introduction of any
altar but one (Jos. xxii. 11), but now they had “many.” Once admit a wrong thing
in worship, and that one thing will multiply itself; superstition will give it fertility.
The Romish Church is a sad illustration of this, and the Anglican Church in some
sections is multiplying examples. Secondly, It is a selfpunishing sin. ‘ Altars
shall be unto him to sin.” The idea probably is, ‘‘ As you have gone on persisting
to multiply altars against my will, I will let you alone, you shall go on, your altars
shall be a sin unto you.” ‘That is, thus seeing they will have them, they shall
have them; they shall have enough of them. They refuse to see the light,
they are prejudiced against the way of God’s worship ; let them have their desires ;
let them have governors to establish by their authority, and teachers to defend by
subtle arguments what they wish for; they multiply altars to sin, and they shall
be to sin, even to harden them. This is the judgment of God, to give men their
heart’s desire in what is evil. And as it shall be to them for sin, so it
shall be to them for misery, the fruit of sin.” II. It is a sin against great
light. “I have written to him the great things of my law,” &c. They could
not say they sinned in ignorance ; God gave them directions most concise and
abundant concerning the nature and object of true worship. Some translate
the words—‘ I may prescribe my laws to them by myriads, they will treat it as a
strange thing.” First, God has given us laws concerning worship. Secondly,
Those laws are oft-repeated. By myriads or by thousands. We have “ line upon
line,” and “ precept upon precept.” Thirdly, These oft-repeated laws leave false
worshippers without excuse [The Homilist].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 13. Many altars. Altars to
God, altars to man, altars to pleasure, &c.
Sin its own punishment. It has fruit,
and the fruit shall not only be gathered,
but eaten. Men constantly live in the
fruit of their own doings (Prov. i. 31).
Many altars, many sins, and many punish-
ments. ‘‘As men are most fearfully
plagued when they go on in sin and
perish, so when they do not stand in
awe of the sin of their course, it is
righteous of (rod to make them feel how


ill sin is and how displeased he is with
it ; for the words import that they shall
be given up to that sin; and as they
sinned and cared not, so the Lord would
make it to be seen to be sin indeed, and
make them feel how sad that is”
[ Hutcheson].

Ver. 12. Scripture slighted. I.
Divine in their origin. God the author—
“ T have written.” “Given by inspiration
of God”—the grandest and sublimesi
origin frem whence anything can come.


CHAP, VIII.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA,


128





Then regard its authority, love its
truthfulness, and obey its precepts.
II, Excellent in its nature—“ the great
things of my law.” The word gives
the idea of things heaped together, then
greatness and increase from the overflow.
Hence the contents of Scripture—1. Are
great, containing the great things of God
(Acts ii. 11). 2. Wonderful (Ps. exix.
18; Deut. iv. 6, 8). 3. Varied, or
manifold (Eph. iii. 10). JZI. Specific in
its form. ‘I have written.” Nature and
philosophy teach us to record our laws
and hand them down to future genera-
tions in a permanent form. A written
revelation is necessary for all ages, and
has manifold advantages above an oral
one, God uttered his word at first,
writes it afresh in the wonders of his
providence, the work of his Spirit, and
the preaching of the gospel. The Bible
is a revelation of God’s will, full and
free, adapted to our wants and circum-
stances, and worthy of all acceptation.
IV. Despised in its mission, Accounted,
reckoned as or like a strange thing ; as
if an alien, or something with which men


a revelation from God. 2. Others dis-
regard it as a standard of duty. 3. By
all it is neglected and unread. It isa
book unknown, misunderstood, and de-
spised, Men excuse themselves ; consider
the Scripture unreasonable in its de-
mands, an enemy to liberty, progress, and
science. But given by inspiration of God,
profitable for doctrine and correction (2
Tim. iii. 16), the Bible can never be set
aside as useless and effete. God writes to
warn us of this danger and deprive us
of excuse.

Ver. 13. Many engage only in the
external duties of religion. Disregard-
ing God’s rule, they fix up their own, and
obey that no further than personal ends
uphold them. All is not given to God;
they must eat part and share with him.
God will have all ornone. The sacrifice
must be burnt, and self devoted entirely
to him.

God does not connive at sin—will
remember and visit it with judgments
here and punishment hereafter. “God
seems to man to forget his sins, when he
forbears to punish them ; to remember


have no concern. 1. Some reject it as them, when he punishes.”


HOMILETICS.
CasTLEs oF Fause Srcurity.— Verse 14.


The sin of Judah and Israel is here traced to one cause—forgetfulness of God.
Though he made and established them asa nation, their self-confidence and idolatry
led them to forsake and offend God, to build temples and palaces, which he destroyed
by fire.

a Men build temples in forgetfulness of God. ‘Israel hath forgotten his
Maker, and buildeth temples.” There was only one temple, to build more was to
disobey God. Yet they build in professed recognition of God, act religiously, but
sin wilfully. Giving land, building churches and benevolent institutions, not always
a proof of religious prosperity. 1. Temples are built in superstition, Like the
monasteries of the middle ages, for the remission of sins, the redemption of souls,
and the honour of saints. 2. Temples are built in spite. Men have grievances,
secede from other places and build for themselves. 3. Temples are built in
the interests of sectarianism. All sects rival each other in this respect, and
seek to cover the land with their churches and chapels. Temples built in
forgetfulness of God, to commemorate man, are not required at our hands. “ Ye
have not looked unto the Maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that
fashioned it long ago.” II. Men increase national defences in forgetfulness of
God. “Judah hath multiplied defenced cities.” Nebuchadnezzar erected Babylon
in self-confidence and pride. Samaria and Jerusalem were strongly fortified, but
destroyed at last. The strength of a nation depend not upon the skill of its par
liament and the splendour of its fleets ; nor the valour of its soldiers and the num-
ber of its fortifications. God alone is our defence; for he can “impoverish the


184 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. {cHaP. vii.


fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst.” Men who found empires and build cities in
opposition to him can never succeed. The Roman Empire crumbled away by the
weight of its greatness, The kingdoms of Alexander, Cxsar, and Napoleon came to
nought. Babylon and Carthage, Macedon and Persia, Greece and Rome were built,
prospered for a while, and then declined. The safety of a nation is in the moral con-
duct of its people and the guardianship of God. “ Except the Lord build the house,
they labour in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman
waketh but in vain.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER VIII.


Ver. 2. Hope. There are few men, Vite OMI ive


even among the most worldly, who do not
expect to be converted before they die ;
but it is a selfish, mean, sordid conver-
sion they want—just to escape hell and to
secure heaven. They desire just experi-
ence enough to make a key to turn the
lock of the gate of the celestial city.
They wish “a hope,” just as men get a
title to an estate. No matter whether
they improve the property or not, if
they have the title safe. A “hope” to
them is like a passport, which one keeps
quietly in his pocket till the time for the
journey, and then. produces it [ Beecher].

Ver. 3, 4. Casting off good. When
children get high notions and despise
home, when they throw off parental au-
thority and restraint, they become way-
ward and self-willed ; make the path of
life difficult, which their parents had
pioneered and made easy. So one who
casts off the fear of God and sets up his
own, or the authority of others, insults
his Maker and injures himself, makes
his future miserable, and may be cast off
himself at last.

Ver. 5, 6. Idolatry. Travellers tell
us that there isa tribe in Africa so given
to superstition that they fill their huts
and hovels with so many idols, that they
do not even leave room for their families,
How many men there are who fill their
hearts with the idols of sin, so that
there is no room for the living God, or
for any of his holy principles [Bate].

Man, that aspires to rule the very wind,

And make the sea confess his majesty;

Whose intellect can fill a little scroll

With words that are immortal; who can build

Cities, the mighty and the beautiful ;

Yet man,—this glorious creature,—can debase

His spirit down to worship wood and stone,

And hold the very beasts which bear his yoke,

And tremble at his eye, for sacred things.


[Landon.]


Our passions are seducers ; but of all,

The strongest love. He first approaches us

In childish play, wantoning in our walks ;

If heedlessty we wander after him,

As he will pick out all the dancing way,

We're lost, and hardly to return again,
[Southey ]


Ver. 10, 11. Sinincreased. Sin is
like a stone which is cast into water, and
multiplies itself by infinite circles [ Basil].
All sin and wickedness in man’s spirit
hath the central force and energy of hell
in it, and is perpetually pressing down
towards it as towards its own place. The
devilish nature is always within the
central attractions of hell, and its own
weight instigates and accelerates its
motion thither [John Smith].

Ver. 12. Scripture. I am of opinion
that the Holy Scriptures contain more
sublimity and beauty, more pure moral-
ity, more important history, and finer
strains of poetry and eloquence, than
can be collected from all other books in
any age or language [Sir W. Jones].
There are many books which are good
and sound, but, like half-pence, there goes
a great quantity to a little amount,
There are a few silver books, and a very
few golden books; but I have one book
worth more than all, called the Bible, and
vhat is a book of bank-notes [J. New-
ton].

there is not a more evident testimony
of a corrupt and depraved disposition
than an irreverent treatment o) sacred
things, a contempt of anything that
carries on it a Divine impression, or an
obstinate neglect of any of thoee
ordinances which the wisdom of God
has appointed to support and preserve
his religion in the world [Bp Gibson].

Ver. 13. Sacrifice. He was a man


OHAP. 1X.)





who stole the livery of heaven to serve
the devil in [ Pollock].

Where the fear of God is, there is the
keeping of his commands; and where the
keeping of the commandments, there is
the cleansing of the flesh ; which flesh
is a cloud before the soul’s eye, and
suffers it not purely to see the beam of
heavenly light, and worship God upon


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.





128
The gods themselves throw incense.
[ Shakespeare. }
Ver, 14. Defence. When Nice-


phorus Phocas had built a strong wall
about his palace for his own security, in
the night time, he heard a voice crying
to him, “O Emperor! though thou
build thy wall as high as the clouds,
yet, if sin be within, it will overthrow


such sacrif-—, it” [Foster].


CHAPTER IX.


Criticau Notes.] Israel had fallen away from God, would not enjoy the produce of the field,
but would be taken captive into Assyria, and be unable to keep the feasts. 1. Rejoice] Lit. to exulta-
tion (Job iii, 22). Their rejoicings are out of place; festivity and mirth are reproved. The blessings
of harvest were attributed unto the gods of the heathen, and would be taken away. Reward] Lit,
hire. In reward for idolatry thou hast desired temporal prosperity, corn on every threshing-floor,
2. Feed] Crops were abundant, but they would be no better for their plenty. 8. Land] which God
sware to give their fathers (Deut. xxx. 20). Egypt] Astate of bondage and oppression in Assyria,
Unclean] A sore trial, seen in the case of Daniel (ch. i. 8), Eleazar and the Maccabees (2 Mace.
vi. 7). They had wilfully transgressed the law, and would be forced to live in its habitual breach ;
had lived as heathen, and must be in the condition of heathen. 4. Wine] ¢.e. drink-offerings, con-
nected with burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, betokened joy in sacrifice. Hence public service
would cease ; they would no longer have the means for reconciliation, for pleasing God; and if they
should attempt to sacrifice, so far from being acceptable, their sacrifices would defile them as the bread
of mourning ; food which contracted pollution by being in the place of death. The dead defiled for
seven days the house and all that was in it (Num. xix. 14). In offering tithes a man had to declare
that he had not touched the bread (Deut. xxvi, 14). Sacrifice could only be offered in God’s land :
in captivity it would be a fresh sin to Israel. Their soul] ¢.e. for themselves, for the support of animal
life, and not for worship. 5. Solemn day] God “singles out the great festivals which commemor-
ated his great doings for his people as though they had no more share in these mercies.’ Sad to be
deprived of ordinary sacrifice, how much more to be excluded from feasts of joy! 6. Gather them]
in one common gravye—none shall escape. Memphis] called Noph (Is. xix. 13; Jer. ii. 16; Ezek.
xxx. 13); at this time the capital of Egypt; the seat of idolatry, the house of the celebrated Apis,
the original of Jeroboam’s calf; a favourite burial-pluce of the Egyptians. ‘It embraced a circuit
of about nineteen miles, with magnificent buildings ; it declined after the building of Alexandria ; ita
very ruins gradually perished, after Cairo rose in its neighbourhood” [Pusey]. Pleasant places] Heb.
the desire. Silver should be desired, but not found, or nettles should possess their pleasant houses. In
either sense thorns indicate utter desolation (Is. xxxiv. 13). %.. Visitation] Vengeance now at hand.
Fool] False prophets who predicted prosperity will be convicted of folly. The event will test them.
Mad] A man of the spirit, lit. maddened; pretending to inspiration (Lam. ii. 14; Ezek. xiii. 3; Mic. iii,
11). Those who mock the true prophets shall themselves become fools. Multitude] Manifold iniquity.
Hatred] Great enmity to good men and God. The punishment in proportion to the sin. 8. The
watchman] Looking out, waiting for Divine revelation (Heb. ii. 1). The true prophet always consults
God. Ephraim or Israel was designed to be the watchman of God, to witness among the nations for
him ; but was led\ by false prophets, whose words were “a snare of the fowler.’”” In] Lit. upon ai
his ways, t.e. wherever the people went they were beset with false prophets, who hated intensely the
nouse of God. 9. Deeply] Lit. gone deep, they are corrupted; deeply immersed themselves in
wickedness. Days] when Benjamin espoused the children of Belial (Jud. xix. 22; Gen. xix. 4).
10. Like grapes] with which the traveller delights to quench his thirst, Grapes and early figs a
great delicacy in the East (Is, xxviii. 4; Jer. xxiv. 2); so God delighted in Israel at first. He gave
them richness and pleasantness, but they corrupted themselves, and no longer answered his good
pleasure. Baal-peor] The Moabite idol to whom young females prostituted themselves (Num. xxv.
3), Shame] that foul idol (Jer. xi. 13). 11. Their glory] Children the glory of parents, sterility
a reproach, Eph.J= fruitiulness (Gen. xli. 52, marg.), which characteristic should cease; licen-
tious worship would diminish the people: leave them childless, by threefold gradation. “‘ First,
when their parents should have joy in ¢hetr irth, they were to come into the world only to go out
of it; then their mother’s womb was to be itself their grave; then, stricken with barrenness, the


126 HOMILETIC COMMENTAR”: HOSEA. (CHAP. Ix,





womb itself was to refuse to conceive them.” Cf. the threefold stages of failure (ch. viii. 7). 12.
Bereave] them, though they should rear children (Job xxvii. 14). A man] Lit. from man. Woe]
Lit. for woe. God's departure the source of all evil (1 Sam. iv. 21; xxviii. 15, 16). Loss of children
sad, but loss of God beyond description. 18. Planted] Ephraim chosen, and carefully put in soil
to grow and flourish, like Tyre, a royal city strongly built and pleasantly situated. The image sug-
gested from the name, a fruitful tree (Ezek. xxvi. 27, 28). Children] brought forth only to be slain.
14. Give] As if overwhelmed, the prophet deliberates; prays in compassion, let this never happen ;
then leaves it with God. Miscarrying] Barrenness, usually counted misfortune (Jobiii. 3; Jer. xx.
14), will be a blessing, so great will be their calamity. 15. Gilgal] where they rejected God and
chose a king (1 Sam. viii. 7; cf. 1 Sam. xi. 14, 15). Hated] Punished their sin (Mal, i. 3). 16,
Smitten] Under the image of a tree, repeats the sentence of God. Smitten from above, by blasting
and mildew (Am, iv. 9). Root] withered, and fruit impossible. Though] Before they are entirely
dead, fruit may appear, yet will I slay the beloved (lit. the desires) fruit of their bodies. 17. My
God] not theirs; supporting my authority and directing my course. Will cast] Lit. despises them,
and banishes them among the nations (Deut. xxviii. 65), a monument of his anger and a warning to
all people (Rom. xi. 20, 21).


HOMILETICS.
Tux Srnner’s Lire a Joyiess Lire.—Verses 1—4,


Israel is forbidden to rejoice like other nations. They had forsaken God, and
sinned wilfully against light and warning. Their prosperity was attributed to
wrong sources. The judgment of God was threatened against them. Other people
might enjoy the results of their labours, but they would be deprived of the fruits of
the earth and the services of religion! Thus God breaks into the mirth and festivity
of the sinner, There is no cause of joy in his present condition or future
prospects.

I. His present condition affords no joy. “Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy.”
All men seek to be happy. The wicked even have a kind of joy, a superficial,
short-lived pleasure. But true joy is the good man’s portion. “I have enjoyed
almost a fearful amount of happiness,” exclaimed Dr Arnold in reviewing the
past. 1. The sinner forsakes God, the fountain of joy. “Thou hast gone a whoring
from thy God.” All true joy springs from him, and is enjoyed only in him, in
living for him. What joy so pure as “the joy of the Lord”? Carnal joy is a
mere flash, which leaves the mind in deeper darkness and greater misery. Joy in
God is like the light of the sun, healthy and lasting. It may be overclouded
with mists and storms, but breaks out in greater splendour and sweetness. In
God’s presence only “is fulness of joy” (Ps. xvii 11); pleasures which
satisfy ; enough to fill every soul with “joy unspeakable and full of glory.” Joy
is forbidden, withheld from the wicked. The sense of sin robs them of peace (Is.
xlviii. 22) ; their present possessions are no security nor advantage to them. Living
in distance from God and at enmity with him, gloomy feelings damp their joy and
act as an alloy to their comforts. ‘‘ In the transgression of an evil man there is a
snare ; but the righteous doth sing and rejoice.” 2. The sinner fails in his efforts
to secure joy. ‘The floor and the winefat shall not feed them, and the new wine
shall fail in her.” Israel doted on prosperity which could not sustain them. The
fruits of the earth would fail, and all their efforts would end in bitter disappoint-
ment, The sinner turns away from God, and becomes restless and dissatisfied. He
loves to hire himself to sin and degradation. He tries first one thing and then
another, but all plans and policies utterly “fail them.” Men have recourse to every
mean shift, submit to the lowest drudgery, and suffer the greatest hardship in pur-
suit of sin. Like the prodigal, they become wanderers, spendthrifts, and slaves.
But the solemn pause comes, They are arrested, alarmed, and astonished. Their
pleasures forsake them, and hopes vanish like vain shadows, God curses the bless-
inge and frustrates the efforts of the sinner. ‘Doomed to disappointment as
asual,” many continually exclaim. “The wicked man travelleth with pain all
his days.” II. His future prospects afford no joy. Israel was to be deprived


ORAP. IX.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 137
of inheritance, carried into bondage, robbed of sacrifices and public service. All


their religious efforts would be rejected and turned into defilement and mourn- °
ing. It was a sad prospect to be driven from the house of God and a
land of plenty! What brighter future has the sinner before him as long
as he remains from God? 1. Thesinner’s future will be one of bondage. “ Ephraim
shall return to Egypt.” They knew how hardly Egypt had dealt with their fathers,
and how treacherously with them. They had been warned not to go, but were
determined to go, Against their own will God would send them into banishment
and distress. The sinner will be held in bondage by lusts which he indulges ;
driven by former habits into greater misery ; and find what he thought a place of
tefuge to be a place of exile. Captivity and exile were additions to the scarcity of
home. Future miseries will succeed present distress to the unbeliever. He cannot
expect freedom and joy in the service of sin and Satan. The prospect will be no
better than the retrospect, and the future worse than the present. ‘I know that
it shall be well unto them that fear God, which fear before him. But it shall not
be well with the wicked” (Ece. viii, 12, 13). 2. The sinner’s future will be one of
bitterness and sorrow. It was hard when Israel had to “ eat unclean things,” things
forbidden by their law, when they were forced to eat or starve, when their bread was
polluted and their sacrifices “as the bread of mourners.” Sin brings bitterness now
and hereafter. (a) Bitterness in the spirit of the sinner. (b) Bitterness in his for-
lorn condition. From affluence and privileges he comes to poverty and want. His
experience and his prospects are bi-ter, bitterness and sorrow past, present, and future.
“ Let us live on the past,” exclaimed Napoleon, but the retrospect was a course of
selfish aggrandizement. In thoughts of the future he sickened and pined for death.
“JT am no longer the Great Napoleon. How fallen Iam!” “Thy way and thy
doings have procured these things unto thee ; this is thy wickedness, because it is
bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart.” 3. The sinner’s future will be one of
exclusion from God’s inheritance. ‘‘ They shall not dwell in the Lord’s land.” God
had chosen Canaan to be the residence of his glory and the possession of his people.
But as sin drove man from Paradise, so idolatry drove the Jews out of Canaan.
They were disinherited, deprived of God’s favour and protection. This is a warn-
ing to all who live in the bosom of the Church and under the sound of the
gospel. Many professors forfeit present enjoyment and sin away precious privileges.
Sinners cannot enter the kingdom of God on earth, and will be excluded from
heaven at last. We cannot dwell with God unless we are subject to his authority
and obedient to his will. “If thine heart turn away so that thou wilt not hear,
but shalt be drawn away and worship other gods, and serve them; I denounce
unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye shall not prolong your
days upon the land, whither thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. Israel ever wished to joy as
other nations. When they cried for a
king, they forsook God and sought to


abused their plenty and ascribed it to
their idols ; therefore shall they be cut
short either in their store, as Hag. iii.


exult in their own ways. But the greater
the privileges, the greater the guilt in
despising them. Other nations were
idolators, but Israel’s sin was “ whoring
from thy God.”

There is always a snare in the ways
of sin, always a song in the service of
God [Bridge].

Ver. 2. Not feed them. Punishment
attendeth sin at the heela. They had


6, 10; ii. 16, or in their strength, as
Hos, iv. 10; viii. 7. One way or other
their hopes shall be frustrated, the crea-
ture shall lie to them and not answer
their expectation [Trapp].

Shall fail, Lit. “shall lie to her.”
Israel had lied to God (Hos. vii. 13).
So the fruits of the earth would disap-
point-and requite her. Men reap as they
sow. The punishment as the crime


128 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. (omar. rx.


a





‘** When the blessings of God have been things. Learn—l. Sin brings want.
abused by sin he in mercy takes them Like the prodigal, they were necessitated
away. He cuts them off, in order to, toeat unclean things, the husks of swine,
show that he alone, who now withheld because they had nothing else. 2. Sin
them, had before given them. When Orings disgrace. Perhaps the Assyrians
they thought themseives most secure, despised them, forced them to eat meats
when the corn was stored on the floor, forbidden by the law, in scorn to their
and the grapes were in the press, then religion and the profession of it. Those
God would deprive them of them.” who willingly slight the word will never
Ver. 3. Not dwell in the land. 1. be honoured to bear witness to it, or if
The Assyrian captivity was a mark of tested for its principles, will renounce
God’s displeasure, the loss of liberty and their profession of it. A French Pro-
surrender to a foreign enemy. Men are  testant Bishop in the sixteenth century,
only free through God, and only remain regarded as a pillar of the Reformation,
free as long as they serve him. By recanted and brought disgrace upon him-
apostasy nations lose their independent self and others. His apostasy staggered
existence and individuals their freedom many Christians, and was a misfortune to
and enjoyment. 2. This captivity a his country. When we forsake God we
great contrast to Israel’s former condition are left to the mercy of the ungodly. 3.
as God’s people. They ignored the law, Sin leads to conformity to the world.
and God abandons them. They are Israel voluntarily might conform to
“not my people.” 3. This captivity was heathen customs, as they were not
the loss of their possession, No humbled by any affliction. Driven from
possessions are secure to those who for- the land, deprived of their own ritual,
sake God. 4. Withthe loss of the land they adopted the religion of Assyria, and
there is peculiar distress, the loss of God left them, gave them up to their
sacrifice, and the sanctification of life own course. They would then appear
connected with it. Thus menare exiled outwardly what they were inwardly.
in lands of impurity, fall into bondage, Men who have only outward profession
and deprived of the means of serving will soon cast off that when tempted or
God. That which they are now able to thrown into the world. ‘ Be not con-
do, or wish to do, is not acceptable to formed to this world: but be ye
God, and will occasion bitter sorrow. transformed by the renewing of your
“The seeds of our punishment aresown mind,” &c.
when we sin.” They shall eat unclean


HOMILETICS.
Tue Sotemn Days or Lirzn.— Verse 5.


Israel had sinned away their privileges, and deprived themselves of sacrifices and
feasts. What would they do “in the solemn day” when it was impossible to re-
joice before the Lord (Num. x. 10)4 In captivity they would not be able to cele-
brate the festivals. The temple would be in ruins, and they would be exiled into
a foreign country. “‘ The more solemn the day, the more total man’s exclusion, the
wore manifest God’s withdrawal.” There are solemn days in our life which we
must all meet. How shall we meet them?

I. The day of affliction isa solemn day. ‘Man is born unto trouble as the
sparks fly upward.” Suffering is the law of our being, and co-extensive with our
race. As certain as we are born to live we are born to trouble, and our days are
“full of trouble.” No wealth can purchase, no power effect, deliverance from the
common lot. Reverses of fortune, poverty and want, disquietude and fear, prey
upon the mind. Inward consumption and outward accidents lay men on beds of
sickness. They caimot go to places of amusement, nor enjoy company of pleasure ;
they are shut out frum Christian fellowship, and deprived of all the means of grace ;
they are on “the bed of languishing” and sorrow. When the world deserts them,


CHAP. 1X.j HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 136


and remembrance of the past distresses them, what will they do? When a Christian
is sick God gives ease and health to his soul. “Thou wilt make all his bed in
sickness.” ut “in the day of adversity” what will the sinnerdo? II. The day
of death isa solemn day. ‘“ What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death?
shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?” Neither by wisdom nor
strength can we avoid the common doom. Death spares no rank nor condition,
calls with impartial step at the cottage of the poor and the palace of the prince.
“There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit ; neither hath
he power in the day of death ; and there is no discharge in that war.” Charles
V. was advised to retire from danger at the battle of Tunis, but refused, and said
that an emperor was never slain with great shot. William Rufus declared that
kings were never drowned. But the hero of athousand fights can claim no exemp-
tion here. What a solemn day is this day! What will you do when the physician’s
skill is of no avail? when millions of money would not buy an inch of time?
when there is no help from earth or heaven? The wicked may strengthen
himself in wickedness, but he can neither outwit nor overcome his enemy. His
“covenant with death and with hell shall be disannulled.” “The wicked is
driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous hath hope in his death.”
III. The day of judgment will be a solemn day. “ It is appointed unto men once
to die, but afer this the judgment.” ‘We must all appear before the judgment-
seat of Christ.” That will be the most solemn day, when the eternal destinies of
men are fixed by the Great Judge. Hvery work, great and small, public and private ;
every secret thing, good or bad, the hidden thoughts of the heart and the forgotten
sins of youth; “ every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account there-
of in the day of judgment.” Simeon, a holy bishop, was saluted on his way to
martyrdom by Urthazanes, a Persian courtier, and an apostate. But the
courtier was frowned upon by the bishop, and cried, “‘ How shall I appear before
the great God of heaven, whom I have denied, when Simeon, but a man, will not
endure to look upon me? If he frown, how will God behold me when I come be-
fore his tribunal?” This led to his reclamation. How will you appear before the
Judge? What will you do in that solemn day? ‘Will you call to the rocks and to
the mountains to fall upon youand hide you? Make your peace with God, and pre-
pare to meet him, “that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having
done all, to stand.”
* At his call the dead awaken,
Rise to life from earth and sea;
All the powers of Nature, shaken
By his looks, prepare to flee:


Careless sinner,
What will then become of thee!”


A Sap Picturzt.—Verses 6, 7.


Ieracl fled to Egypt because of the destruction of their own land, hoping to find
help in time of need. But they were disappointed. In Egypt they found their
grav@ ‘Ex. xiv. 11); they were gathered and buried together (Jer. viii. 2; Job
XXvVii. 15). Their tents were overrun with nettles, their treasures of silver were in
ruins, and the land desolate and without inhabitants. A sad picture of the conse-
quences of sin.

I. Expected refuge turned into destruction. “Memphis shal bury them.”
Men run away from one trouble only to get into another. Wealth, friends, and the
world are tried and fail. Places of refuge prove places of death. They are received
and gathered only to be buried. Those who flee from God, expecting life, will be
certain to meet their death. They flee from the smoke only to fall into the fire.
They seek good and find evil. Calamity sooner or later overtakes the Christless
and impenitent from which they cannot escape. They choose death and obtain

. v


ened


13 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. (CHaP. IX.


their choice. ‘The eyes of the:wicked shall fail and they shall not escape, and
their hope the giving up of the ghost” (Job xi. 20). II. Fruitful land turned
into desolation. 1. Silver, once treasured, had gone. 2. Nettles and thorns grew
amid their habitations. 3. The land was swept of its inhabitants. What a scene
of desolation and sadness! Sin has cursed the ground on which we tread, and
drained many a nation of its prosperity. The cities of the plain were destroyed
and “the garden of the Lord” turned into barrenness (Gen. xiii. 10). Where is
the glory of Greece, once so famous for arts and sciences? What will become of
‘“‘ England, great, glorious, and free,” if she forsakes God, her defence? God can
empty our stores, demolish our temples, and diminish our people. Let us take
warning. “ He turneth rivers into a wilderness, and the water-springs into dry
ground ; a fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.”


HOMILETICS.


Days or Visitation.— Verses 7—9.


Israel’s sin is one, but the tendencies and the manifestations are many. God
had shown them what little cause for joy they had, warned them of the coming
day ; and now, lest they should slight the warning, declares that retribution is
near. “The days of visitation are come.”

I. Days of retribution for guilt. “The days of recompence are come.”
Men deny such days, and seek to delay them, but they come. They come to re-
compense, to reward men for their ways, and fix their doom. “ For the Lord God
of recompences shall surely requite” (Jer. li. 56). There is retribution enough to
prove a moral government among men—that justice sees and will avenge the wrong,
and that hereafter right will be dealt to all. Nature tells us that every law must
have a penalty, or itis no law. Reason teaches that under no government, human
or Divine, should the just be as the unjust. As there is no law without penalty,
so there is no penalty inflicted but for law violated. ‘For the multitude of
thine iniquity” are the days of visitation come. ‘Punishment ripens on the
tree of evil.” ‘Punishment is justice for the unjust.” “Be sure your sin
will find you out.” II. Days of bitter experience. “Israel shall know
it.” Men will not heed Divine warning. They must know by feeling the
results of their sins. They cannot check the consequences, not confine them
to.the outer world when they come. They must experience the bitterness
of their course. A man of sin is a man of pains. He lives in sin, eats it up,
and it is bitter in his belly (Rev. x. 9). He tastes the wormwood and the gall,
and drinks the bitter for the sweet. “Everything that I love, everything that
belongs to me, is stricken,” cried Napoleon. ‘Heaven and mankind unite to
afflict me.” Lord Byron declared that his days were “in the yellow leaf”—‘ the
flowers ” and the fruits were gone, and “the worm, the canker, and the grief are
mine alone.” The poet Burns said in dying hours, “I close my eyes in misery, and
open them without hope.”

When haughty guilt exults with impious jo
Mistake shall toe or accident dexteoys =


Weak man, with erring rage, may throw the dart,
But Heaven shall guide it to the guilty heart.


III. Days of discriminating character. ‘The prophet is a fool, the spiritual
man is mad.” The man pretending to have spiritual inspiration, the prophets pre-
dicting prosperity, were mad, and retribution would convince them of their folly.
The event would show what spirit was in them. 1. Character in public teachers
is discriminated. Some called the prophets of God mad men, as Festus thought Paul.
Elisha (2 Kings ix. 11), Jeremiah (xxix. 5), and Christ himself were called mad.


CHAP. IX.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 13i





For ages the early Christian teachers were considered under the influence of
phrenzy or madness. True prophets have never been understood ; often called
fools and fanatics by those who pretend to higher revelations and superior wisdom.
False teachers commend themselves, glory in appearance, and condemn others.
Real prophets proclaim their message, are “ beside ” themselves to God and “ sober”
tomen. They are contradicted in words and blackened in character ; but God and
time defend their cause. The flatterer will be unmasked, the contrast between the
false prophet and the true “ watchman ” shall be manifest, and it shall be seen that
one walked “ with God” and the other was “a snare” to the people “in all his
ways.” “ Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit and have seen
nothing.” 2. Character in private individuals is discriminated. Christians have
often to bear reproach and maintain a dignified silence; but days of God’s visita-
tion, times of persecution, defend their character, and rank them in their position.
The wicked tremble and fear, the false professor forsakes God, but the righteous
suffer and are glorified. Days of retribution sift character and conduct. Men are
forced to confess that the wicked have not the best of it—that there is a God to
recompense truth and justice, and reverse the judgments of men. ‘Then shall ye
return (to a better state of mind), and discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7. If we apply the words to condemn the government as harsh and


religious teachers—l. J¢ is an unrea-
sonuble charge. Wise men have grounds
for their judgment; but it is most un-
just to condemn without a cause. These
men are servants of God, pure in their
life and noble in theiraim. 2. It isa
common charge. In every age when
selfishness reigns supreme and scepticism
abounds, men of deep convictions and
unwearied zeal for God have been re-
garded as fanatics and madmen. But
what appears insanity to some are
“words of truth and soberness” to
others. 3. Jt is a dangerous charge.
Those who deal plentifully in terms of
folly may have them flung upon them-
selves. Events may reverse the judg-
ments of men, and those who call others
fools may prove to be the greatest fools
themselves. ‘Judge not, that ye be not
judged. For with what judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged: and with
what measure ye mete,” &e.

The great hatred. 1. Against God.
The carnal mind at hostility with God.
The question at issue, the casus belli,
who shall govern—God or the sinner?
Many think they can adore and love
God as Creator and Benefactor, while
they rebel against him as Lawgiver.
Many may love Cromwell, the Queen, or
any ruler, for piety and courage, yet


despotic. God’s moral government ad-
mits not of this distinction. His nature
and office, his person and his throne, are
inseparable, No neutrality in human
affection and conduct. Either at peace
or at war with God. 2. Against God’s
Law. The law demands supreme and
universal obedience—-not only takes cog-
nizance of external actions, but touches
the inward springs of all action, weighs
the motives and thoughts concealed in
the heart. Its rigour never relaxes, its
demands never cease. Hence the en-
mity and resistance. 3. Against God’s
servants. Ahab said of Michaiah,
“T hate him” (1 Kings xxii. 8).
They hated so intensely (ver. 8) that
their whole soul was turned into hatred ;
they were hatred, as we say, personified ;
hatred was embodied in them, and they
ensouled with hate. They were also the
source of hatred against God and man.
And this, each false prophet was in the
house of his God/ for God was still his
God, although not owned by him. God
is the sinner’s God to avenge, if he will
not allow him to be his God to convert
and pardon [Pusey].

Ver. 8. Watchmen and fowlers. 1.
Watchmen walking with God, warning
of danger, and urging the people to duty.
2. Watchmen neglecting their duty, and


132


/


sleeping at their post. 3. Watchmen
turned into fowlers, predicting peace,
flattering the people and leading them
to destruction.
made thee a watchman unto the house
of Israel; therefore hear the word at
my mouth, and give them warning from
me.”

Ver. 9. Deeply corrupted. Sin cor-
rupts—(1) the understanding, (2) the
affections, and (3) the life. Sin corrupts
everything it touches. The touch and
the taint go together. It leads from bad
to worse, and makes men totally and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA,


“Son of man, I have,


[cHap. mx.


ment. 4. Days which epitomize Israel’s
history in guilt and judgment (Rom. i
32).

Sins and punishment. 1. Contempt
of God and his law will draw men into
bominable wickedness. 2. When men
have plunged into deeper wickedness
they cannot recover themselves. 3.
There is no wicked course into which
men have fallen which the Church,
departing from God, may not fall into
again. 4. Whatever patience God may
have, sinners ef one age who fall into
guilt will be visited by the same mea-


entirely depraved, if not forsaken.


sure as another. As God spared not in
Days of Gibeah (Judges xix.). 1.


the days of Gibeah, so now “he will


Days of great lewdness. 2. Days of remember their iniquity, he will visit
great shame, 3. Days of great punish- their sins.”
HOMILETICS,


Honovurep AND DisHoNoURED.— Verse 10.


These words indicate the great honour that God put upon his people, the great
worth which they had in his sight when he chose them, and the great care that he
took with them in training them up for his purpose and good pleasure. But they
despised this dignity, consecrated themselves to Baal-Peor, and became as abomin
able as the idol they loved.

I. God’s grace honours a worthless people. What refreshing grapes and the
first ripe figs are to the weary traveller, such was Israel at first to God. 1. By
nature we are in a helpless condition. Education, wealth, and outward distinctions
avail not before God. Israel was found in the wilderness ; in a barren, wild, and
solitary place. 2. God in love seeks men in their helpless condition. God could
not have found Israel, unless he had sought. ‘I have fownd him in the wilder-
ness” (Deut. xxxii. 10). God goes after men like the shepherd after the lost
sheep until he finds them. In love and kindness he restores and exalts them;
makes them holy and acceptable in his sight. They are not fownd until restored,
“T can wander, but cannot find my way back,” was the confession of Augustine.
“T have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant.” 3. When God finds
men he trains and cultures them for himself. Grapes and figs indicate continual
care and kindness. Israel were planted and trained for God. Their “ first ripe”
buds and future prosperity came from him. He gave them riches and wealth,
pleasantness and odour in the sight of others, They were precious in his sight and
honourable (Is. xliii. 4). God honours nations, Churches, and families now, pre-
serves them carefully, and prefers them constantly if they obey him. “The vine-
yard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant
plant” (Is. v. 1, 7). Men are dignified, nations are honoured, not by wealth, fleets,
and outward splendour—God’s presence makes them glorious, God’s grace roots
them, causes them to blossom, bud, and fill the world with fruit and sweetness (Is,
xxvii. 6). II. A people honoured by God’s grace may dishonour themselves by
idolatry. “But they went unto Baal-Peor, and separated themselves unto that shame,”
—and that was a most shameful and abominable idol. They joined the Moabites in
worshipping, in sacrificing, and eating to a god,” thefilthiest ar 1 foulest of the heather


CHAP. IX. ] HOMIL&TIC COMMENTARY . HOSEA. 188








gods (Num. xxv. 2, 3; Ps. evi. 28). They separated themselves, as Nazarites, united,
devoted themselves to shame. ‘The very people whom God exalted and blessed
forsook him, sank below others, and dishonoured their own nature (Jer. ii. 21).
Is England_free? are Christian Churches free from idolatry, debasing in its influ-
ence and tendencies? We hate cruel rites and bow not to Pagan gods; but do we
not dishonour God and blaspheme his name among others by formalism, hypocrisy,
and ungodly lives?) We clothe our evil imaginations, our depraved affections, with
attributes of power and wisdom, “and change the glory of the uncorruptible God
into an image like to corruptible man.” III. The dishonour of a people will be
according to the nature of the objects they worship. “Their abominations were
according as they loved.” If history proclaims one truth more loudly than another,
it is that man becomes assimilated to the moral character of the objects which he
worships. The gods and hero-kings, Odin and Thor, of the Scythians were blood-
thirsty and cruel—turned “ the milk of human kindness” into gall in the bosoms of
their votaries, and made them revel in slaughter and scenes of blood. Because
heathen deities have destroyed themselves suicide has been recommended, and a
natural death thought to exclude from eternal happiness. The more men worship
such idols the more they resemble them. Hence the notion that the gods did not
like the service, would not accept the sacrifice, of those who were unlike them.
Israel became like their loves—shame was the object of their worship, and they had
as many abominable idols as they had loves. Their deities corrupted their passions ;
their passions multiplied their deities, and corrupted their minds and _ lives.
“Man,” says an author, “first makes his god like his own corrupt self, or to some
corruption in himself; and then, worshipping this ideal of his own, he becomes
the more corrupt through copying that corruption. He makes his god in his own
image and likeness, the essence and concentration of his own bad passions, and
then conforms himself to the likeness, not of God, but of what was most evil in
himself.” Concerning all false gods the Psalmist says, “ They that make them are
like unto them ; so is every one that trustethin them.” Love the world, you be-
come worldly ; love God, you become godly. Love has a transforming power which
nothing else has. ‘“ N~thing else makes good or evil actions,” says Augustine,
“‘but good or evil affections. What a man’s love is, that he is.” ‘ Love the Lord
thy God.”


SEPARATED UNTO SHaME.—Verse 10.


Idolatry is not a harmless mistake, misdirected aim, but a serious evil, the source
of all evils. Its consequences are degradation and shame. ALI sin is shame, and
those who separate, devote themselves to sin, separate themselves to shame,

I. This shame is a common experience. Adam and Eve were ashamed, and
hid themselves in the garden. Men blush now when caught in the act of sin. They
excuse, palliate, and apologize for their guilt. They were ignorant, tempted, and
surprised. They are afraid to confess, and seek to cover their shame. If men do
not appear to blush, they feel ashamed. They may be light before men, but
serious before God—laugh in public, and sigh in secret, There are sad hearts
beneath cheerful faces. “The conscious mind is its own awful world.” IT. This
shame isa penal suffering. It is the result of wrong-doing, of broken law. The
violation of all natural laws brings suffering—sin brings suffering, and this suffer-
ing is shame. It is not a shame to labour, to be poor and afflicted; but it is a
shame to sin, and sin will expose a man to shame. The wicked are often put to
shame before men. They lose respect and honour, get exposed to contempt and
danger. They will be cursed by God in his providence. “Then time turns
torment, when man turns a fool.” ‘A wicked man is loathsome, and cometh to
shame.” III. This shame is a threatened punishment. Believers will ‘have con-


134 AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [cHaP. IX.





fidence, and not be ashamed” before Christ at his coming. But the wicked will “ rise
to everlasting shame and contempt.” Once great men of the world seemed wise,
and those who denied sinful lusts were fools; but at the judgment day all things
will be unmasked and realities seen in their true light. Shame will then be infam-
ous, and disgrace conspicuous to the universe. ‘The wise shall inherit glory ; but
shame shall be the promotion of fools.” IV. This shame is often a penitential
feeling. When sin is seen in the light of Divine love, judged by the sufferings of
Christ, it is felt to be exceedingly sinful. The penitent regards its pollution, not
its punishment, feels ashamed, reproached, and self-condemned. ‘The publican and
the Psalmist, Ezra and Nehemiah, Job and Isaiah, all felt ashamed for their iniqui-
ties, and cried to God for cleansing and pardon. This is a painful, but hopeful
experience. It attracts the notice of God. “ He looketh upon men, and if any say,
I have sinned and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; he will
deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.”


THe GLORY AND GRIEF oF A ProPLE.— Verses 11-—14.


Ephraim had parted with God, the true glory, and now all in which they gloried
should be taken from them. Their posterity should be cut off, their prosperity
would decay, and God himself would depart from them. The most powerful tribe
of the people became the most miserable, and all its glory was turned into grief.

I. The glory of a people. Fruitfulness and strength were promised to Ephraim
in great abundance (Gen. xlviii. 19). Moses had assigned tens of thousands to him,
while to Manasseh thousands only were promised (Deut. xxxiii 17). She was
proud of her offspring and increase, of her wealth and situation. 1. Posterity is
considered the glory of a people. In families “children are an heritage from the
Lord.” We boast of our sons and daughters. In them we love to see our image,
hope to perpetuate our name, and secure our fortunes. Like Cornelia, the mother
of the Gracchi, when asked to display our jewels we point to our sons and say,
“ These are my jewels.” In nations posterity are the hope and foundation of the
future. From the rising generation, fathers and mothers, leaders and teachers, are
to spring. As “the child is father of the man,” so children are the nation’s popula-
tion and prosperity in the bud. Hence to our posterity are entrusted the interests
of our commerce, the defence of our throne, and the glory of our name. In them
are the germs of national virtues and vices, feelings and sentiments which will
determine the character and decide the fate of this empire. “The worth of a
state, in the long run, is the worth of the individuals comprising it,” says J. S.
Mill. II. Outward prosperity is considered the glory of a people. “ Ephraim,
as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place.” Ephraim, like Tyre, was populous
and wealthy ; strong and beautifully situated ; planted with care, and defended by
God. Beauty and strength surrounded her, “Thou hast been in Eden, the garden
of God ; every precious stone was thy covering,” &c. (Ezek. xxviii. 2,13). So now
nations trust to the abundance of their revenues, the beauty of their public build-
ings, and the strength of their fortifications. England relies on its wealth and
position, its armies and its fleets, its philosophy and its morality. But our chief
strength, our real power, consists in the characters of the rising generation, the en-
lightenment of our citizens, and the integrity of our conduct. The nation that has
no higher god than pleasure, gold, or position, is poor indeed. Heathen deities
often imaged human virtues, but these are vanities to depend upon, and will cause
a people’s downfall. Glory is false glory when attributed to numbers and wealth,
to outward prosperity and empire, to anything short of God. God warns us as he
did Israel. ‘If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law—ye shall be
left few in number—the Lord will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring
you to nought” (Deut, xxviii. 58, 62, 63). III. The glory of a people turned
“ato grief. The glory departed from Ephraim in the destruction of their children,


OMAP. IX.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 135





the decay of national prosperity, and the departure of God from their midst. 1.
The loss of children brings grief. ‘Though they bring up their children, yet will
I bereave them.” This carriage and abortion, death at the very birth of their
offspring, would diminish their number, and weaken their nation. (a.) They would
die suddenly. ‘Their glory shall fly away like a bird.” Swiftly cut off, like Job’s
family, by tornado, whirlwind, or accident. (b.) They would die violently. ‘‘ Ephraim
shall bring forth his children to the murderer.” If any grew up to manhood, they
were to be cut off by the sword. (c.) They were to die hopelessly. ‘‘ There shall not
be a man left.” They were reduced in every stage from conception to maturity—to
die suddenly and prematurely by ruthless hands and sword. Thus the beauty of
all earthly blessings is quickly blasted (Is. lx. 6,8). Accidents and diseases, “ the
pestilence that walketh in darkness, and the destruction that wasteth at noon-
day,” cut down the hopes of our life. Wemourn like Burke at the loss of his only
son: “They who should have succeeded me have gone before me. They who
should have been to me as posterity are in the place of ancestors.” “Thou shalt
beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy them ; for they shall go into
captivity.” 2. The decay of national prosperity brings grief. Strong and rich,
proud and secure, as Tyre was, Ephraim’s glory would fade away like a flower.
Riches take unto themselves wings and fly away. Trade may prosper and
mechanism flourish ; the dew may couch beneath, and the sun shine above;
the chief things of the ancient mountains and the precious things of the
lasting hills may abound (Deut. xxxiii, 13—16); but the greatness of a
nation depends not on the wealth of its population, nor the extent of its
territories. Idleness and love of pleasure, idolatry and forgetfulness of God, will
cause inevitable decay. The fatal weakness of Athens were free men, outnumbered
by slaves, citizens, corrupt in morals, and women unchaste in conduct. The decline
and fall of Rome may be traced to the general corruption of the people. Ephraim
fell into sin, and her glory departed from her. 3. The departure of God from a
. people brings grief. ‘“ Woe also to them when I depart from them.” The loss of
children was grievous ; the decay of present prosperity and future hope sad enough ;
but God’s departure was the source of all evil to them. When God withdraws his
presence and providence nothing can sustain a Church or people. When Cain was
cut off, and Saul forsaken by God, they became more wicked and miserable. When
the ark of God was taken Ichabod was pronounced, for the glory had departed
from Israel (1 Sam. iv. 21, 24). Pestilence and famine can turn a nation’s glory
into grief. Withdrawment of Divine favour can change the pride of the Church
into shame, and the hope of the family into grief. God’s favour is the sublimest of
all joys, all triumphs, and all delights. But woe unto any with whom God is angry
and from whom God departs. Present afflictions only foreshadow future judgments.
Their sun will set, and darkness cover their lands. “I will forsake them, and I
will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and
troubles shall befall them; so that they will say in that day, Are not these evils
come upon us, because our God is not among us” (Deut. xxxi. 17)?


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


reserved !


Ver. 12. Bring up their children.
How soon could our God insensibly
waste the most populous nations! Nay,
how often does he thus decrease them !
and what awful instances of this has our
eventful age exhibited! Whatan alloy
it is to our comfort in our beloved
children to reflect for what purposes
they may possibly be brought up and


“This is a sore vanity ;”
but the best remedy of it is submission
and confidence in God, and a conscien-
tious performance of our duty : especi-
ally in training up our families in the
fear of God, and in seeking for them, as
well as ourselves, “first the kingdom of
God and his righteousness,” and setting
them a good example. Surely it is far


136


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


(cHar. m&





more desirable to be written childless,
than to bring up children in the service
of sin and Satan [Scot¢].

The destiny of the rising generation \
and the fate of the nation is in the
* Home School,” The great German
teacher Frobel declared that the great
motto of the people should be, ‘“ Let us
live for our children.” If Simon had
thought of what Judas might have been,
would not this have affected his treat-
ment of the boy? What if the mo-
ther of Napoleon, and of his brother
kings and sister queers, had foreseen
what became of those around her hum-
ble fireside in Corsica? We do not know
what part our children may play in life,
what joy or sorrow they may cause to


millions yet unborn. Think how much
depends upon early training!

God's departure. They had departed
and turned away from or against God.
It had been their characteristic (ch. iv.
16). Now God himself would requite
them, as they had requited him. He
would depart from them. This is the
last state of privation, which forms “ the
punishment of loss” in hell. When
the soul has lost God, what hasit [Pusey]?

Woe unto them. 1. In personal be-
reavement, 2. In national distress.
3. In the hour of death. 4. In the day
of judgment. “It shall be well with
them that fear God... But it shall not
be well with the wicked ” (Ecce. viii. 12,
13).


HOMILETICS.
GREAT WICKEDNESS AND GREAT PuNISHMENT.—Verses 15—17.


In the last part of this chapter God accuses Israel of idolatry, condemns their
princes for abetting it, and threatens to cast them off for ever, for “the wicked-
ness of their doings.” Notice—

I. Their great wickedness. The expressions indicate—l. Their wickedness
began with forgetfulness of God. ‘They did not hearken unto him.” They re-
belled against God, would not do what he commanded, nor abstain from what he
forbade. God makes himself known by judgment and mercy ; but men disregard ©
his voice, and pursue their ends. 2. Their wickedness was encouraged by their rulers.
“All their princes are revolters.” Political power had no check upon the general
corruption. Not one rebuked offence, recalled to virtue, or warned of danger. All
had departed, were alienated in heart and mind from God. Judges turned aside,
and persisted in sinful ways, Princes committed “the sin of Jeroboam, who made
Israel to sin.” ‘He who knows how to dissemble knows how to reign,” is the
saying of many. But the words of Louis IX. of France are more becoming a
prince. ‘If truth be banished from all the rest of the world, it ought to be found
in the breast of princes.” 3, Their wickedness was malicious in its design. ‘‘ The
wickedness of their doings.” ‘Their sins were not infirmities, but presumptuous,
daring evils; not common sins, but the wickedness of their wicked works, the
essence of wickedness which excited the anger of God. All sins are evils; but
gome are “presumptuous sins,” sins of greater rebellion and mischief than others.
Sins against light and truth, against Divine warnings, and in religious privileges
are more wicked than others. Men sin from choice, with eagerness, deliberation,
and design. “God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness.” 4. Their
wickedness was corrupt in its practice. Gilgal was the centre and scene of their
corrupt practices.’ Here God gave their ancestors the first-fruits of Canaan, renewed
his covenant with them, and rolled away their reproach. The service and sanctuary
of God once made the place holy. Now it is a place of idolatry, chosen as a pre-
text to cover their sin and to make it acceptable to the people. The nature of the
place adds to the guilt of the sin. Sins in England are worse than sins in heathen
lands, and sins in the house of God are more abominable than sins in the world.
Provocations turn God’s former loving-kindness into anger, and the place of sanctity
may become the place of rejection. _ “ In the land of uprightness they wil) deal un-


CHAP. IX.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


justly” (Is. xxvi. 10) ; “the faithful city is become an harlot” (Is. i. 21). IL
Great punishment. Great must be that wickedness which provokes God to hate
and reject his people. The judgments were national, and involved every individual
in the loss of outward privileges and position. 1. Huclusion from the house of God.
“‘T will drive them out of mine house.” He will drive them from the privileges of
his house, and drive them out of his land (ch. viii. 1). God will disinherit them,
and they shall never be restored to the kingdom. God deprives sinful nations of
their pre-tige and position, removes their candlestick for their ingratitude, and re-
jects them for their wickedness. Unfaithful professors will be driven from his
house and robbed of the means of grace. 2. Smitten by the judgments of God.
“Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit.” Their
national prosperity was smitten, by visitation from God, by blasting and mildew
(Am. iv. 9). Ifa tree be cut down it may sometimes sprout again (Job xiv. 7) ;
but there was not hope for Ephraim. Root and branch should wither away and
die. Nations have flourishing trade, and nobility grand mottoes; but God can
destroy their prosperity, pluck them up by their roots, and leave them without
power to revive, inwardly or outwardly. He can overturn a people as easily as
men uproot a tree. ‘“ Utrecht planted me, Louvain watered me, and Cesar gave
the increase,” was the inscription on the gates of the college, built by Pope Adrian.
But to reprove his folly, some one wrote underneath, “ Here God did nothing.” We
cannot flourish without God. God shall destroy thee for ever; he shall take thee
away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling-place, and root thee out of the land of
the living. 3. Rejected in the providence of God. “My God will cast them
away.” This is the climax—hated, forsaken, and cast away. They became objects
of aversion to God, and “ wanderers among the nations” of the earth. (a.) They
were divorced from God. “I willlove them no more.” They were not any longer
his people, and shared not his love. God put the spouse out of his house (6.)
They were forsaken of God. They first forsook him, and he forsook them. Cain
was a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth. If God scatters his own elect, because
they did not hearken unto him, what impunity can any Christian nation or indi-
vidual professor have, if they neglect Divine warnings, and do not bring forth
fruits cording to their high calling? “If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad
among he nations” (Neh.i. 8). “And among these nations thou shalt find no
ease, ne,ther shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the Lord shall give thee there
a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind” (Deut. xxviii. 65).


HOMILETI€ HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 15. The great wickedness—idola-
wry. 1. Turning places of worship and
renown into scenes of corruption. 2.
Masking present error under the garb of
former custom. Plato was reproving a
boy for playing at some foolish game on
one occasion. ‘Thou reprovest me,
said the youth, “ for a very little thing.”
“ But custom,” replied Plato, “is not a
little thing.” Bad custom, consolidated
into habit, becomes a tyrant and a curse.
3. Originating God’s anger, and 4, Ter-
minating in man’s rejection, “ Bind
not one sin upon another, for in one
thou shalt not be unpunished ” (Ecclus.
vii. 8). ‘ Wherewithal a man sinneth,


by the same shall he be punished ”
(Wisd. xi. 16).

Ver. 16. Men, Churches, and nations
like trees. 1. Planted and intended to
flourish, watered and cared for by God.
2. Sin brings judgments which smite
the root and wither the branches, It
corrupts and cuts off the offspring. It
leaves men to mourn with Edmund
Burke at the loss of his only son: ‘ The
storm has gone over me, and I am like
one of those old oaks which the hurri-
cane scatters around me. I am stripped
of all my honours ; I am torn up by the
roots; I lie prostrate on the earth.”
Men give themselves deadly wounds.


138


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA.


(cHap. Ix.





Professors are cursed as the fig-tree,
smitten as the vine, and beaten to the
ground,


“For the Lord shall smite Is-


rael, as a reed is shaken in the water,”
&c. (1 Kings xiv. 15). :


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IX.


Ver. 1—4. Joy. The joy of the m-
godly is superficial, but for a moment,
and not to be compared with the rejoic-
ing of the godly. Itis like water taken
from the surface, instead of the deep
well, and will end quickly and abruptly.
‘“‘ He that makes this mirth and he that
likes it—both are fools, and their pleas-
antness will soon have an end ” [ Pem;ble].

Ver. 5—7. While the sun shines
upon the earthly horizon the evil days
are put to a distance. We scarcely ad-
mit the possibility of a change of scene.
We exclude the prospect of dark days as
an unwelcome intruder. The young
revel in their pleasure, as if it would
never end. But oh! the folly, the pre-
sumption of creatures born for an eternal
existence, and to whom the present life
is but the preparation time for a never-
ending one, and to whom death is but
the door of eternity, so wilfully shutting
their eyes to this near approach, deter-
mining to live for this life only, and to
let eternity take its chance [ Bridges].
In the day of prosperity there is a for-
getfulness of affliction; and in the day
of affliction there is no more remem-
brance of prosperity (Ecclus. xi. 25).

Ver. 9,10. Corrupt. ‘“ O Lord, abhor
me not, though i be most abhorrible,”
said the dying Thos. Scott. ‘“ My re-
pentance needs to be repented of ; my
tears want washing, and the very wash-
ing of my tears needs still to be washed
over again with the blood of my Re-
deemer” [Bp. Beveridge]. There is no

_rice that doth so cover aman with shame


as to be found false and perfidious
[Bacon]. The disposition of a liar is
dishonourable, and his shame is ever
with him (Ecclus. xx. 26).

Ver. 11,12. Chiidren. “ Better is it
to have no children, and to have virtue :
for the memorial thereof is immortal ;
because it is known with God and with
men” (Wis. of Sol. iv. 1). “Our chil-
dren that lie in the cradle are ours, and
bear in them those lives which shall yet
make them to appear, the boy like the
father, and the daughter like the mo
ther” [Beecher]. Glory or shame lies
in the future of your child, accordin,, to
your conduct and training.

Ver. 13, 16. Root. Any number of
depraved units cannot form a great na-
tion. The people may seem to be
highly civilized, and yet be ready to fall
to pieces at the first touch of adversity.
Without integrity of individual charac-
ter they can have no real strength, co-
hesion, or soundness. They may be rich,
polite, and artistic, and yet hovering on
the brink of ruin. If living for them-
selves only, and with no end but plea-
sure, each little self his own little god,
such a nation is doomed, and its decay
is inevitable [Smiles].


This is the state uf man : To day he puts forth

The tender leaves of hope, to-morrow blossoms,

And bears his blushing honours thick upox
him:

The third day comes a frost, a killing frost ;

And,—when he thinks, good easy man, full
surely

His greatness is a ripening,—ni

And then he falls, as I do [&


his root,
peare),


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 139


CHAPTER X.


CriticaL Norrs.—1. Empty] Luxuriant. Lit. poureth out, emptying itself into leaves ; stretch-
ing itself far and wide towards foreign alliances (Ps, Ixxx. 9, 12); outwardly prosperous, but no ripe
grapes, sound fruit to God. Bringeth] Lit. sets or prepares fruit from and toitself. Altars] mul-
tiplied as his fruit. The greater prosperity, the greater ingratitude and idolatry. 2. Divided] by
themselves between God and idols (1 Kings xviii. 21). He] Emphat. Jehovah, not the enemy.
Break] Heb. behead—a bold expression. As victims are beheaded, so the horns of the altar shall be
broken off (Am. ii. 14). 8, Now] Lit. soon. King] Words of despair. Deprived of a king, or in
a state of anarchy: forsaken of God for their sin, what could aking do? To us] Lit. for us (ch,
xiii. 10)? Whatever we have will not avail, if God help not. 4. Words] without substance and
sincerity, nothing but vain talk (Is, lviii. 13). Falsely] Their covenants lack truth, and easily
broken (2 Kings xvii. 4). Judgment] A good and healthy plant to society, springs up and spreads far
and wide, like bitter and poisonous hemlock in the field. They prepared the soil for judgment by
cultivating injustice. Perverted justice is like rank poison, injurious to community. 5. People] of
the calf and idolatrous priests shall mourn for the golden calf; their glory can neither help itself nor
them. 6. It] Emphat. It itself, as well as Israel, shall be carried into exile. ‘7%. Sam-] The capital
and the kingdom itself destroyed. Foam] A straw or bubble on the water, empty, light, and worthless ;
others, like a splinter carried away by the current. 8. Sin] The altars, the buildings connected with
image worship. Thorn] The place shall be desolate, wild briars shall grow where the victims were
once offered. Altars were graves of idols, and monuments of death. The inhabitants in hopeless
despair will pray for swift destruction. Fall] To bury us from impending ruin, to escape more ter-
ribledoom, Spoken of Jerusalem (Luke xxiii. 30), and of the judgment-day (Rev. vi.'16). 9.] A
return to earlier days to prove deeper guilt. Stood] As at the beginning, so now they stand, persist-
ing in their sin. Others, though smitten in Gibeah, yet they avenged the sacred character of God’s law ;
but zow none of the ten tribes took the side of God. The battle shall overtake and utterly destroy them,
10. Desire] After the manner of men, God longs to punish in severity, to impress the mind. No
longer joy over them (Deut. xxviii. 63), but justice without mercy. Bind] Lit. at their binding,
¢, e. when God would bind them like oxen ploughing side by side. Two] transgressions, Forsaking
God, and revolting against the house of David. ‘‘ The breach of both tables of God’s law, or as
Jer. ii. 13” [Pusey]. 11, Taught] Trained, accustomed to work. Threshing easier than ploughing ;
an image of freedom and enjoyment (Deut. xxv. 4; xxxii. 15), of productive labour and prosperity.
Now put under the yoke, and employed in servile work. Ride] Not mounted, but drive in harness,
12.] Acall torepentance. Sowing and reaping = moral conduct. In] Lit, for right, which must be
the fruit. Reap] in the proportion of mercy, not justice; mercy from God and from man; mercy in
both this and the world to come. Fallow] Plough virgin soil, cuitivate fresh land (Jer. iy. 3).
New soil required, begin anew. Seek] With anxiety and diligence persevere ¢i// you find God,
Rain] in copious blessings (Ps. Ixxii. 6; Is. xlv. 8): Righteousness] which he will teach you, and
generate by the Holy Spirit (Ps. li. 12), 18.] Another reason for reformation, Ploughed] Been at
pains to sow wickedness and reaped the fruit of it. Iniquity] itself is the soil which they cultivated,
the seed and the fruit; its own natural reward. Lies] Ajust reward for their idolatry, the fruit was
bitter and unprofitable. Thy way] Perverse way (Is. lvil. 10; Jer. ii. 23); they trusted to Egypt
and their calves, not to Jehovah. 14. Tumult] War(Am. ii. 2). People] Lit. peoples, “not, as God
willed them to be, one people, for they had no principle of oneness or stability, who had no legiti-
mate succession, either of kings or of priests” [Pusey]. Against a7 Israel and the tribes connected
with her should tumultuous war arise. Sial-] Shalmanezer king of Assyria. The mother] and
children, inhuman cruelty, commonly practised (2 Kings viii. 12; Is. xiii. 16; Ps, cyaxvii. 8).
15. Bethel] The seat of idolatry prepares this destruction for the people. Wick-] Lit. the evil of your
evil, ‘‘ Wickedness in its second potency, extreme wickedness’’ [Kei]. Morning] In the hope
from alliance with Egypt against Assyria, when prosperity was expected to dawn; or suddenly and
surely shall the kingdom be utterly cut off.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Asuss of OutwaRD Prosprrity.— Verses 1—4,


Israel {s now accused of fruitlessness and selfishness. God blessed them with
abundant prosperity, but it was abused. The increase of their wealth only tended
to the increase of sin; the multiplication of images; the spread of deceit and per-
jury. They were good for nothing, a degenerate vine, luxuriant in leaves, but
empty before God (Ezek. xv. 3, 5).


140 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (car. x.


SSS


I. Outward prosperity used for selfish ends. “He bringeth forth fruit untae
himself.” Whatever fruit they had was expended on self. “ Life,” says Carlyle,
‘begins with renunciation.” The worldly man believes that life begins in getting,
is enjoyed by keeping, and that he who:renounces most will have the least. Men,
like Israel, seek refuge from trouble and pleasure in life, by living in a world of
their own. 1. Self was considered the source of their prosperity. Man is his own
creator and redeemer, self-sufficient and strong, in their estimation. All selfishness
is self-assertion, a practical repudiation of our helpless and sinful condition. The
gospel alone can break down the rule of self, and bring Christ as the object of love
and obedience, 2. Self was considered the end of their prosperity. Israel refused
culture. Men are self-willed, live not for God, but for their own lusts and aggran-
dizement. They detest and will not forgive in others what they indulge in them-
selves. Grasping in their disposition, using God’s gifts for self, they dedicate
wealth and business to self. Everything is expended for gratification, honour, and
position. Prosperity is abused, the right of our fellow-men and the claims of God
are disregarded. Men deny their stewardship, and retributive justice takes their
unlawful gains. ‘“ When ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for
yourselves, and drink for yourselves?” (Zech. vii. 6), II. Outward prosperity
used in disregard to God. In living for self they had no regard to the claims of
their God. Reason and revelation teach that God should be the supreme object
of affection. But selfishness seeks to rival God and alienate our love from him.
1. This disregard springs from divided allegiance. ‘Their heart is divided.” “‘ They
were fearers of the Lord, and they were servers of their gods” (2 Kings xvii. 32,
33). They would give up neither, but tried to worship both. We cannot serve
God and Mammon (Matt. vi. 24). One object must be supreme in our mind. If
we cast off God, then Mammon will govern, in some form, our thoughts, feelings,
and purposes. A divided heart is a faulty heart. God will not have part, but the
whole service. There must be no halting between God and Baal. Decision must
be made now before it be too late. ‘* How long halt ye between two opinions ?”
2. This disregard is clothed in the forms of devotion. They had altars and idols, a
fair show of profession, and outward forms; but their piety emptied itself in tran-
sient feelings and false notions. Like many now who make a fair show in the
flesh, but do not produce the fruits of the Spirit, love, joy, and peace. “ Fruits unto
holiness and to God” are acceptable ; but fruits unto selfishness are “nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned” (Heb. vi. 8). Whata mockery to put on the
garb of religion, when the heart is divided and alienated from God! Alas! what
empty vines in the Christian Church in this very day! Those who seek their own
credit or worldly profit in religious duties will be accounted unfaithful branches.
But all who abide in Christ, will bring forth fruit to the glory of God and the
benefit of men. 3. This disregard is in proportion to their outward prosperity.
“ According to the goodness of his land they have made goodly images.” Enriched
by the produce of their land, they made beautiful images, increased their ingratitude
and sin. The greater God’s blessings to men, the more they abuse his gifts. The
more God lavishes favours upon them, the more determined are they to adore
themselves and worship their idols. Flourishing trade begets wealth; wealth
begets pride; and pride self-sufficiency. Men grow in sensuality, avarice, and
wickedness. Prosperity destroys the piety of some men. ‘The sun shines, dulls
and extinguishes the fire. The insidious influence of prosperity may be seen in
William, Duke of Normandy, whose bravery and candour gained respect at a dis-
tance, but inthe possession of power fell into contempt among his friends and subjects.
Macaulay gives an instance in the Earl of Tarrington, who rose into a hero in
poverty and exile, but sank again into a voluptuary in prosperity. “I was ruined
by too easy success in early life,” said some one. ‘‘ In all time of our wealth, good
Lord, deliver us.” “The prosperity of fools shall destroy them.” III. Outward
prosperity abused will bring punishment. “’ He shall break down their altars,”


cHaP. X. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; HOSEA. 141


one ne





&e.” The sin of Israel became the very means of their punishment. The gold
with which they beautified their idols tempted the invader, and involved them in
hopeless ruin. Their own idols became their own misery. All who pursue plea-
sure and ambition, who give themselves to earthly idols, will, through their heart-
lessness and idolatry, lose both God and their own selves, and become a castaway
at last. Kings and princes, creature-comforts and creature-confidences, will not
avail, when God is lost. “ Because we feared not the Lord, what then should a
king do for us?” Every idolized dependence will soon be torn away from those
who fear not God. Nothing can help them in their distress, Suffering and remorse,
regrets and unavailing self-reproach for ever, will be their portion. ‘If the Lord
do not help thee, whence shall I helv thee?” (2 Kings vi. 27).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. Vine. The Christian Church
is a vine brought out of Egypt, an un-
friendly soil, displacing old trees, and
planted in its position by God’s hand
(Ps. lxxx. 8—11). Hence the parallel
between the Churchand avine. 1. Its
transplanting from an unfruitful to a
fertile soil. 2. Its careful keeping. 3.
Its grand design—to bear fruit. Then
(a) it is beautiful, (0) useful, (c) ac-
ceptable to God. If empty and fruit-
less, it is just the reverse of all this, en-
tirely worthless. The sap of life, the
energies of mind, in some men and in
some Churches, spent in ambitious
schemes, luxuriant leavesand professions.
The grace and gifts of God are received
in vain, All things “ bloom their hour
and fade.”


Nothing but leaves! ‘The Spirit grieves
Over a wasted life ;
O’er sins indulged while conscience slept,
O’er vows and promises unkept ;
And reaps from years of strife—
Nothing but leaves! nothing but leaves!


Ver. 2. A divided heart, I. A
fearful disease. 1. It affects a vital
part. 2. Itaffects after the most deadly
fashion—a divided heart. 3. It is pe-
culiarly loathsome. 4. It is one diffi-
cult to cure. It is chronic, got into the
very natureofman. 5. Itisa flattering
disease. JI, Its usual symptoms. 1.
One of the most frequent is formality in
religious worship. 2. Another, incon-
sistency. 3. Another, variableness in ob-
ject. 4. Frivolity in reliyion is another
symptom, JI. Its sad effects. 1. A
divided heart makes the man himself
unhappy. 2. He is wseless in the Church.


3. A man dangerous to the world. 4.
The most solemn is, reprobate in the
sight of God. IV. Its future conse-
quences. ‘Terrible will be the condition
of the hypocrite at the judgment-day.
He will be separated from the righteous
and found among those whom he taught
and reproved, If your heart is broken,
it differs from a divided heart. There
is hope and pardon for you, God can
give a new heart [Spurgeon].

1. The sin—a divided heart. 2. The
guilt—‘ found faulty.” 3. The punish-
ment—“ he shall break down,” &c. God
will convince the most obstinate of their
guilt, if not by the word now, by his
judgments hereafter. If they do not
suppress, but constantly maintain their
sins, God will take the work in his own
hands, destroy the monuments of idola-
try at their own expense. “ He shall
break down. .. He shall spoil.”

The state of the heart is the source
of the evil. As long as this does not
belong to him, so long will men rob
him of his own. God will have the
heart as his alone, and suffers none to
share that possession [ Lange].

Ver. 3. If men fear not God, but
seek to ward off his judgments, by con-
tinuing in sin and trusting to kings and
great men ; their defence will become a
snare, and their confidence will be turned
into disappointment. Men cannot shel-
ter when God is angry. “ What then
should a king do for us?” ‘These are
words of despair, not of repentance ; of
men terrified by the consciousness of
guilt, but not coming forth out of its
darkness ; describing their condition,


~


142 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. "CHAP. X





not confessing the iniquity which beyond hope of remedy. They groan
brought it on them. Without love the fcr their losses, their sufferings, their
memory of their evil deeds crushes them fears, but do not repent.”


HOMILETICS.


Prersury JOINED To Hypocrisy.—Verse 4.


Their dissimulation of heart was seen in their lives and general conduct. They
made no conscience of their duty. There was no dependence upon anything they
said ordid. The whole nation was corrupt.

I. There was no truth in their words. “They have spoken words.” Mere
words, empty vain words, without any truth or substance. Great swelling words,
full of noise and profession, to gain their point and bear down the prophets ; words
foolish as they were bombastic, to veil their deceit and decoy to sim. The mouth
should always express the heart. Pythagoras said he would rather his disciples
should throw stones at random than uttera false word. “Speak fitly, or be silent
wisely,” says Geo. Herbert. “The turn of a sentence,” says Bentham, “has decided
the fate of many a friendship, and, for aught that we know, the fate of many a
kingdom.” “ By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt
be condemned.” II. There was no sanctity in their oaths. ‘Swearing
falsely.” Whatever be the form of an oath, the signification is the same, We call
God to witness, or notice what we say. The offender therefore sins in the presence
of God, and in defiance of the sanctions of religion. His sin implies contempt of
God’s power and justice, man’s wants and confidence. “ Perjury, therefore,” says
Paley, ‘‘in its general consequence, strikes at the security of reputation, property,
and even of life itself. A le cannot do the same mischief, because the same credit
is not given toit.” ‘Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the
Lord thine oaths.” III. There was no faithfulness in their covenants.
‘“ Falsely in making a covenant.” In their agreements one with another, in their
allegiance to their kings, they could not be depended upon. In treaties with
foreign nations they concealed their treacherous intentions, and observed them only
so long as they were benefited by them. In covenanting with God they promised
to be faithful, yet supported idolatry and rebelled against their lawful sovereign.
They uttered and acted lies. No considerations can justify the sacrifice of truth, which
ought to be supreme in all the engagements and relations of life. Truth is the very
bond of society, without which it will dissolve into anarchy and chaos, or cease to
exist. A household cannot be governed by lying and perjury; neither can a
nation. Sir Thos. Browne was once asked, “ Do the devils lie?” “ No,” he answered,
“for then even hell could not subsist.” IV. There was no justice in their
judgments. “Thus judgment springeth up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.”
An unjust king sets a bad example to his people. A corrupt court will make a
corrupt nation. If the fountain be bitter, the streams cannot be sweet. Howsad
when judgment is perverted by those who should administer it! when injustice like
a bitter plant poisons the life, and spreads in the manners of a nation. If men sow
injustice, they will reap a harvest, full and obnoxious, “as hemlock in the furrows
of the field.” *Penn’s advice to hischildren was good: “ Let justice have its im-
partial course, and the law free passage. ‘Though to your loss, protect no man
against it, for you are not above the law, but the law above you. Live, therefore,
the lives yourselves you would have the people live, and then you have right and
boldness to punish the transgressor. Use no tricks, fly to no devices to support or
cover injustice; but let your hearts be upright before the Lord, trusting in him
above the contrivances of men, and none shall be able to hurt or supplant you.”
“We will sell justice to none,” is an article in the Magna Charta. Want of up


CHAP. X.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 143


a a


rightness will overthrow a people, “turn judgment into wormwood” and gall 3 but
“the king by judgment establisheth the land” (Prov. xxix. 4; Amos v. 7).


Tar Vanity or Eartuty Guory.— Verses 5—8,


God was the true glory of Israel. But they had exchanged God for the golden
calves, and turned thei: glory into shame, A day of visitation was near. Their
gods would be taken away and given to«thers. They would be left in sorrow and
shame, in captivity and helplessness. All earthly glcry departs from us. God
alone abides with us a rock and defence,

I. Earthly glory is unsatisfactory in its nature. “ Like foam upon the water.”
(a) It is superficial. It is only the outside, the surface of things. It does not
belong to the man himself, and does not enter the heart. Honour and applause,
position and wealth, obstinately remain outside, and only gild the surface. Like
flowers in the icy regions, they may cover the ground, when the soil underneath may
be intensely frozen. (b) It is light. Like a straw in the balance of blessings. It
stands for nothing in the sight of God and in the estimation of a true man. ‘It may
be admired and envied by the vulgar crowd ; but it is only “vanity turned into a
god” (c) It is unsatisfactory. What avails the pomp and grandeur of earth!
Men have shared all the glory the world can give, and have been willing to resign
it for real happiness. Goethe possessed splendid health and power, gained more
success and sufficiency than most men, and yet confessed that in the course of his
whole life he had not enjoyed five weeks of genuine happiness. The Caliph
mentioned by Gibbon, who expended three millions on the palace of Zehra, declared
that he had lived 50 years in victory or peace, beloved by subjects, feared by
enemies, and respected by all—that riches, honour, power, and pleasure had waited
on his call, and that no earthly blessings were wanting to his felicity. But “in this
situation I have diligently numbered the days of pure and genuine happiness which
have fallen to my lot—they amount to fourteen.” Such estimates may be exagger-
ated, but on all earthly glory is written “ vanity of vanities.” II. Earthly glory
is uncertain in its tenure. “ For the glory thereof, because it is departed from it.”
Kings and princes may be dethroned ; palaces and high places consumed by fire ;
children and friends cut off by death; change in condition, disappointment in pur-
pose, failure in life, may eclipse all our glory, and leave us in privation and sorrow.
(a) It is hard to secure. What intense anxiety and self-denial, what severe toil and
pressure, it costs! If gained at all, it is often at the sacrifice of comfort and
life. (b) It is difficult to retain. When we do secure it, how often, how suddenly,
does it elude our grasp! It is transitory in its existence, often taken away and
given to others, “carried into Assyria fora present to king Jared.” If it does not
leave us, we have often to leave it, just when we should enjoy it. Notwithstanding
anxiety and effort to get it, elation and pride in possessing it, men must leave their
glory. Power and personal attire, rank and riches, must all be left behind. ‘“ And
where will ye leave your glory?” III. Earthly glory will leave its devotees in
shame. ‘Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his own
counsel.” This will be the end, the portion of all pursuits apart from God. 1.
This shame often reverses the skilful policy of a nation. The special counsel of
Israel was that which Jeroboam took, worldly wise, and admirably suited their
immediate design. It was artfully devised, long in its existence, and successful in
its stroke. The people were separated from Jehovah, and a kingdom founded apart
from Judah. But the policy of rulers often becomes their destruction and
shame. Success which may uphold a family or a kingdom, ultimately becomes
fatal, ‘‘o’erleaps itself, and falls on the otherside.” ‘He taketh the wise in their
own craftiness.” 2. This shame often covers all ranks of the nation. (a) Kings
are dethroned. “ Her king is cut off” (ver. 8). Hoshea seemed in a hopeful way
of regaining peace and prosperity. But these promising appearances were like the


44 HOMEILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. {cHap. 3.


Se RE =





bubble on the water, they soun vanished and came to nothing. The king was
slaughtered. Whatever we set up and adore instead of God may be carried away
by the current of affairs and leave us vexed and disappointed. (b) Priests will
mourn. ‘The priests thereof that rejoiced in it.” Their gains and their glory
were all taken away with their idolatrous worship. Men who derive credit and
emoluments from illicit trades and sinful practices will regret their choice, and turn
their joy intoshame. (c) The people grieved. ‘The people thereof sliall mourn
over it.” They would regret the loss of their idols. They were in “fear” when
they saw the judgment of God against them (Ex. xii. 12). ‘Their protectors were
destroyed and they were undone. Ignorant, deluded people will lament bitterly at
the loss of their idols. ‘‘ You have taken away my gods, and what have I more?”
3. This shame often dishonours the whole land of the nation. (a) Its high places are
destroyed (ver. 8). Mountains of defence, palaces of splendour, and shrines of religion,
if consecrated to evil, will be levelled to the ground. Whatever place or power
creates and upholds idolatry will be destroyed. Houses of iniquity will be thrown
down, and one stone shall not be left upon another. (b) Its altars are desecrated.
“Thorns and thistles shall come up on their altars.” The fires of idolatry should
be extinguished, the altars should be broken and covered with briars. Monuments
of wickedness are often the grave-stones of hope and monuments of desolation. Seats
of idolatry will defeat the governors, tarnish the glory, and terminate the existence
of a nation which rears and relies upon them. “ Let him that glorieth glory in this,
that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord which exercise loving
kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight,
saith the Lord.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 5. 1. The vanity of idols, when
those who worship them cannot depend
upon them, but have to be concerned
about them in sorrow and affliction.
2. The ignominy of idols, when they
turn Bethel into Beth-aven, places of
holiness into scenes of degradation. 3. The
power of idols, when they corrupt the
priesthood and draw away the people. 4.
The glory of idols, a borrowed glory, no-
thing to commend it but novelty and
success, will at length vanish away by
the judgments of God.

Ver. 6. Men cast down by their
own counsels. 1. Because actuated by
false principles. 2. Because they aim
at corrupt ends. 3. Because they dis-
regard God. Plans likely tu succeed,
hindered and rendered abortive by God’s
providence. Pharaoh counselled against
Israel to his own destruction. The de-
struction of the wicked caused by their
own sin (Job xviii. 7). Take counsel
from God, and consult his word (Ps.
Ixxili. 24; cxix. 24).

It is one of the saddest ingredients of
a conquered people’s affliction when con-
querors tale occasion to triumph over


their religion, because they are subdued
[ Hutcheson].

Without the grace of God men mourn,
not their sins, but their idols [Pusey].

Ver. 7. Kings cut of. 1. God’s
judgments against human authority. 2.
The highest human authority unable to
ward off God’s judgments, Men of the
greatest weight but vain show (Ps. Ixii.
9). Only like grass (Jas. iv. 14), and
evanescent as spray on the surface of the
sea.

The kingdoms of the earth are like
‘foam upon the waters.” 1. For theiz
seeming brightness. 2. For their great
eminence. 3. For their instability and
inability to resist. 4. For their sudden
fall and disappearance |7’rapp].

Separated from God, all seeming
power is weakness, all apparent stability
is fluctuating and perishing as the foam,
“ One moment white, then gone for ever.”
Let England beware of all complicity
with Romish idolatry, on the false plea
of state expediency. For idolatry in
any form, whether veneration of images,
adoration of the mass, or worship of
mammor ~ another of our national


chap. X.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 146








temptations—is sure to make the great God is the only true basis of solidity
est seeming stability to become frailty and permanence [ Fausset].
and transitoriness itself. The fear of


HOMILETICS.


DEATH SOMETIMES PREFERABLE TO Lirz.—Verse 8.


The high places of Israel were so defenceless, their lot was so severe, and their
punishment so great, that they preferred death, entire destruction, to life. Present
death would be chosen, rather than future miseries, and the shame that those
miseries would bring upon them. Men sometimes prefer death to life.

I. In personal distress. Men in disappointment and fretfulness have wished
for death. Impatient of life, they have prayed God to take it away. Elijah (1 Kings
xix. 4) and Jonah (iv. 3) are striking examples. But in povertyand deep affliction it
would often be a relief to die. The soldier on the battle-field, wounded and
burning with thirst, feels that death would lessen his misery. When victims
of painful and incurable disease, and bereft of those we love dearest, life
seems to us to have lost everything attractive and desirable. Job cursed the
day of his birth, and would rather have been shut up in the womb
(iii. 11, 20). Bitter sorrows, added to a bitter spirit, make life a torment, not
a blessing. Wherefore is life given “unto the bitter in soul?” Take it away,
suggests Satan often, it is better to die than live in such circumstances. If life is
a grief, better not have been born, or rid yourself of the trouble by suicide, was the
doctrine of heathen philosophy. In times of outward trvuble and inward conflict
God alone can “administer to a mind diseased.” Grace helps a man to live in the
greatest privations and to die in the greatest comforts. We are only prepared to
die when we are prepared to live. ‘“ All the days of my appointed time will I wait,
till my change come.” II. In national calamity. Israel’s glory was consumed ;
her seats of idolatry, Samaria and Bethel, were destroyed, and there was no way to
break through the danger nor escape the judgment. ‘They were surrounded by evils
worse than death. Annihilation would have been a blessing. Nations are some-
times covered with shame and dishonour. Famine, sword, and pestilence have de-
stroyed their population. Their idolized gods are worthless as refuse in the street ;
their defenced cities and mighty men are laid in the dust, and the remnant left to
misery and despair. The chosen people becomes an “ evil family,” and the splendid
nation shall be “ for dung upon the face of the earth. And death shall be chosen
rather than life, by all the residue of them that remain” (Jer. viii. 3). III. At the
day of judgment. These words predict the awful misery of some at the great day
of accounts. The ungodly will seek annihilation, not from the torment of suffering,
but from the wrath of God before whom they stand. Opportunities lost and judg-
ments despised. Life spent and hope for ever gone; despair will seize the soul
There will be no shelter, and prayer will be in vain to the mountains and hills. By
the aid of death they cannot escape death (Rev. vi. 16). ‘In those days shall men
seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee


from them.”


ImiTaTING THE SINS AND SUFFERING THE PUNISHMENT OF OTHERS.— Verses 9, 10


In the days of Gibeah, grievous sins were committed and punished. But Israel
had not heeded the warning. They had now no zeal for God, nor fear of judgment.
They had sinned and continued to sin in imitation of former days. The terrible
battle in Gibeah did not overtake some ; now not a mere battle, but something far
worse shall come upon them. Though God “doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve
the children of men,” yet he longs, has determined to punish, and will gather
ieathen nations against them in overwhelming numbers. Those who partake in
other men’s sins will suffer other men’s punishment.

10


146 .HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA, (CHAP. X.


I. We commit other men’s sins by patronizing their works. The sins of
Gibeah, the calves of Jeroboam, were all upheld and patronized by high and low in
Israel. Kings and priests not only consented, but contrived to make the people
sin. The people approved and carried out the bidding of their superiors. All were
guilty. We may be afraid to resist and reprove, but if we silently consent and
support evil deeds, we are guilty of partaking in them. Saul did not stone Stephen,
but consented, approved of his death, and accused himself of the deed (Acts xxii.
20). ‘¢ Neither be partaker of other men’s sins.” II. We commit other men’s sins
by following their example. If you sin because another sins, you are guilty of
your own act, and will share in the punishment of their sins. Bad examples are
not landmarks to guide, but warnings to caution. Nothing forces you to walk in
their steps, for then you would not be responsible and free. Examples draw men,
and by imitating them they fall into habitual sin. The eye and the ear are inured.
Many have fallen into habits of swearing, drinking, and scoffing by the practice of
others. Young men indulge in filthy conversation, because incited by their evil
companions. Infidelity is a repetition of the first lie, and imbibed by others from
example. By imitating evil examples we establish and perpetuate national sins, in-
fluence national opinions and customs, and decide national destiny. “O Israel,
thou hast sinned from the days of Gibeah.” III. We suffer the punishment by
committing the sins of others. ‘The people shall be gathered against them.”
Israel could not escape. By their idolatry they had bound themselves in slavery.
The Assyrians, with their allies, would gather against them at God’s call. God had
determined to punish, and appeared to take pleasure in so doing. In every age, in
every Church, those who copy the example and emulate the crimes of antiquity will
be bound by their own fetters and delivered into the hands of their enemies. If
nations revive in this the sins of a former age, and commit them in succeeding ages,
they will fill up the measure of their iniquity. The sins of fathers and predecessors
will be visited upon their children. 1. This punishment is determined by God.
“Tt is my desire that I should chastise them.” 2. This punishment will not be
avoided by their own defence. They would unite their strength, fix themselves for
defence like oxen yoked together in the plough. ‘As the Lard rejoiced over you
to do you good, and to multiply you; so the Lord will rejoice over you to destroy
you, and to bring you to nought ; and ye shall be plucked from off the land, whither
thou goest to possess it.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES


Ver. 9. From the days, &e. I. Sin
aggravated. 1. By continuance from
age to age. 2. By neglect of Di-


want a weapon to chastise his rebels.
All creatures in heaven and earth will
present their service. How ready are


vine warning. (a) In preserving some, .


“did not overtake,” (6) in punishing
others. Benjamin did not escape.
Reduced to six hundred men. IL Sin
ripened for punishment. 1. When
imitated and propagated by posterity.
2. When provoking God to anger.

Conjunction of strength and forces to
uphold sinful courses will not avail any
nation against God’s wrath.

Ver. 10. God can bring in his armies
at his pleasure, for all creatures are at
his beck and check. He never need


the Assyrians here to be the rod in his
hand [Trapp].

O the venomous nature of sin that
maketh the merciful God to desire and
to delight in men’s miseries; to take
comfort in their punishments (Ezek. v.
13, 15), to laugh at their destruction.
And although he bear long with men’s evil
manners (Acts xiii. 18), yet he beareth
them as a burden whereof he desireth to
be eased (Is. i, 24), as a servitude
whereof bh» desireth to be freed [Trapp].


CHAP. X.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 147





HOMILETICS.
SHEKING TO ENJOY THE COMFORTS AND REFUSING THE Dutiesor Revicion.— Verse 11,


The metaphors in this and the next verse are taken from husbandry. Israel, like
an ox, was trained to tread out corn, and loved this easy luxuriant service. God
had forbidden to muzzle the ox (Deut. xxv. 4). It enjoyed freedom and partook
of the results of its labour. Israel served in ease, waxed fat and kicked in pros-
perity, but refused in adversity. This is typical of many who serve God for selfish
ends, who seek to enjoy the pleasures of religion, but refuse its duties. Now this
conduct does not commend itself.

I. It is unreasonable. We do not expect wages without work, nor can we reap
without sowing. Besides, the joy is in the labour itself. We work with delight
when the heart is willing. In all labour performed in a spirit of love there is
profit. The service of God is a reasonable, a most delightful service. He is nota
taskmaster, for his yoke is easy and his burden light. II. It is ungrateful. 1.
It is not returning according to benefits received. If God has blessed us with gifts
and graces, health and strength, should we refuse to thank him? Are we not under
deep obligation to make some return? 2. It is manifesting the disobedience of a
child. Children are indebted to parents, should be dutiful and obedient. But if
after all the care and special training of the child, he is rebellious and selfish, how
unkind, how unreasonable! Yet God prospers and blesses men, trains them up in
ease and comfort, but they forget and forsake him. 3. It indicates the stubbornness
of a beast. A pampered horse kicks and refuses to draw. The wild ass loves to
roam in freedom and shuns the yoke. So many love the privileges and cherish not
the spirit of the gospel ; seek their own ease in Zion, and labour not for the good
of others. III. It is selfish. Religion is not a rapture, but a habit ; not a sen-
timent, but a life. Many nurse their feelings and forget their duties. Like
Peter, they would always dwell on the mount, and forsake the market-place and
the shop. Instead of living on earth, amid the dangers and trials of service, they
seek to rise into ecstasy, and soar into the third heavens. There is nothing hon-
ourable or honest in this. It is selfish and crafty to shun our daily duty. We
must deny ourselves, count our master worthy of all honour and homage, “ that
the name of God be not blasphemed.” IV. It is impossible. 1. It violates the
order of nature. Everywhere action and enjoyment go together. The lark sings
when it soars aloft on its wings. The child laughs merrily when it plays. The
beauty and vigour of the body result from exercise. So the happiness of re-
ligion springs from a consciousness of duty done. The sphere of activity is higher
than that of passivity. Itis more blessed to give than receive, and the highest
blessedness consists in the legitimate exercise of the highest powers. This is the
law of our being, and makes us like God, who is “blessed forevermore.” 2. It con-
tradicts the will of God. God’s law is the rule of our life and obedience the
source of our happiness. God is only pleased with those who love and obey him.
“Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.” We must not seek our
own will, but follow him who “ pleased not himself.” We cannot possess the com-
forts unless we live the life of the righteous. We cannot eat unless we work. The
pleasures of religion must not be separated from the duties of religion. “If ye
know these things happy are ve if ye do them.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Spiritual husbandry. 1. Some tread when sown. Men are often united, as
out corn, to provide seed for the fields well as separated, in the work of God.
of labour. 2. Some plough, to prepare Each a work of his own, yet all co-
the ground toreceiveit. 3. Othershar- operate for the general good.
vow, break the clods to cover the seed Methods of train.ng men for Gal's


148 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [cHaP. X





service. 1. By gentle work, attractive to labour. In judgment God remem-
enjoyments, aneasy yoke. 2. By harder bers mercy. But if the mercy be de-
bondage, if easy labour will not win. spised and the work refused, the judg-
When mild measures fail, God often tries, ment will be the heavier. God would
harsh measures. Men have to plough, — set a riderin Ephraim to tame and sub-
break up clods, if they love the ease duethem. ‘Thou hast caused men to
and shun the toils of religion. 3. Yet ride over our heads.”

even then God displays mercy, handles


them gently, as we put the yoke tenderly The gods aro just, and all our pleasant vices
on a young untamed animal to inure it Make instruments to scourge us.
HOMILETICS.


Tue Catz to Rerormation oF Lire.— Verses 12, 13.


God calls the people to repentance in figurative language. Sowing and reaping
denote spiritual and moral condust, closely related as labour and reward. Israel
are to give up their former habits, begin afresh, and enjoy the blessings promised.

I. A present duty. “ Sow to yourselves in righteousness.” All life is a moral
sowing and reaping. The works of time are the seeds for eternity. But this sowing
must be no surface work. 1. Fallow ground must be broken up. “ Break up the
fallow ground.” Virgin soil must be ploughed, and life must be entirely new. The
sinner must forsake old habits and practices, turn up the weeds and roots of evil
within, and be renewed in the spirit of his mind. The heart must be cleansed from
lusts and corruption. Old things must pass away, and all things become new. The
Christian must break up all formality, and cultivate new ground. He must grow
in grace and holiness, forget the things behind, and look forward to those before.
The Church must stir up decaying piety and dying members ; grow in numbers and
in beauty, and by prayer and effort become a fruitful field. 2. Proper seed must
be sown. (a) Sow in righteousness. Return to the practice of righteousness and
obedience to the law, which is the rule of righteousness. Abound in works of piety
as the fruit, the proof of your penitence. Sow to the spirit (Gal. vi. 7, 8), and not
to the flesh. (b) Sow with intelligence. Understand the nature of the work you
have to do. Grow in personal acquaintance with God and his word. Abound in
wisdom and in knowledge. (c) Sow with diligence. Put forth constant and earnest,
not mere occasional, effort. We must plough, sow, and continue to labour, to reap
the benefit. “In the morning sow thy seed; and in the evening withhold not
thine hand” (cc. xi. 6). The exercise of charity and penitence must be ever
active ; not fitful impulse, but daily habits; not confined to outward formalities,
but thorough inward feeling. If righteousness be our aim, God will make it our
portion. He will not reward with ciphers instead. of gold, like the world. ‘The
wicked worketh a deceitful work (which disappoints) ; but to him that soweth
righteousness shall be a sure reward” (Prov. xi. 18). 3. ‘God must be sought.
“‘ Seek the Lord.” Husbandmen depend upon God, who gives seed-time and harvest.
He should therefore be sought and served. He alone gives strength to secure
righteousness, and creates it within the soul by the Holy Spirit (Ps. li. 12). (a)
Seck diligently. Do not leave off, nor desist, but persevere until you find him.
(b) Seek earnestly. There are difficulties in the way, reluctance and opposition to
overcome. Do not rest satisfied without a personal acquaintance, nor stop short of
attaining the object. Though not found immediately, “seek the Lord, ¢d? he
come.” II, Anurgent reason. “ For it is time to seek the Lord.” It is always
time toseek the Lord. But the unconverted especially are urged to do so. 1. The
Scriptures urge them. “ Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him
while he is near.” “ Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of
salvation.” ‘* Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith, to-day, if ye will hear his voice.”
2. Common observation urges them. Much of their time has been spent in sin and


CHAP. X.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 149





wretchedness. Life is uncertain, and opportunities are few. He that loses time
loses wealth, life, and all. ‘I have lost a day,” cried the ancient Emperor. Time
lost can never be regained. “ Millions of money for an inch of time,” cried Eliza-
beth, but her days were spent and could not be recalled. ‘‘ Redeeming the time,
because the days are evil.” 3. Past experience urges them. ‘‘Ye have plowed
wickedness,” &c. The past had been spent in labour and intense thirst for happi-
ness, but they had reaped nothing but sorrow and disappointment. (a) Their efforts
were fruitless. They ploughed and sowed, and reaped what they sowed. The harvests
of their ill-doings were iniquity and the results of iniquity. The sinner gains
nothing with all his toil. He spends his money for that which is not bread, and his
labour for that which satisfieth not (Is. lv. 2). “They that plough iniquity and
sow wickedness, reap the same.” (b) Their confidence ensnared them. They trusted
in their own devices and in the number of their mighty men ; but their valiant men
were slain, the kingdom came to nought, and their civil and sacred projects were
lying vanities. Men’s carnal confidences draw them into sinful courses ; whatever
fruit they promise, or whatever present comforts they bring, they will end in bitter
experience. They are lies,and will deceive. “Ye have eaten the fruit of lies.”
IIf. A blessed result. “Till he come and rain righteousness upon you.” 1. Jf
they seek the Lord he will be found. Those who humbly and earnestly seek God
shall not seek in vain. He will “come” to them, annihilating the distance, hasten-
ing the meeting, and removing every impediment. ‘Seek, and ye shall find.” 2,
If they sow in righteous works they shall “ reap in mercy.” Be merciful to men,
and they will be merciful to you. Abound in acts of love and piety towards God,
and he will return good measure, pressed down and running over. As children of
misery, we all need mercy. If we give it, we shall get it both from God and man,
Mercy is its own reward. The merciful shall obtain mercy (Matt. v. 7). 3. i
they turn from sin, Divine blessings shall be given in rich abundance. “ And rain
righteousness upon you.” God will work righteousness within us, help us to lead
a righteous and holy life, and be faithful in keeping his righteous promise.
Blessings, like showers, shall be given, rich in abundance, and refreshing in their
consequence. God will come in Christ as the Lord our righteousness, and grant us
abundant mercy. ‘I will cause the shower to come down in his season ; there shall
be showers of blessings” (Ezek. xxxiv. 26).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


xix. 8). 2. By faith. (1) In God
(Heb. xi. 6). (2) In Christ (Acts xx.
21). ID. When we are to seek the Lord.
Now! “It istime.” 1. Tosome of you


Moral husbandry. 1. Ploughing in
penitence or “iniquity.” 2. Sowing “in
righteousness” or sin. 3. Reaping “in
mercy ” or wickedness.


The activity of the wicked. They
plough, sow, and harrow mischief to them-
selves and others. If they would work
as hard for heaven as they do for hell
they could not lightly miss it.

Seeking the Lord an immediate duty.
I. Whom we are to seek. The Lord.
This implies—1l. That man is removed
from God by sin, 2. That man may get
near to God by seeking. 3. That it is
his duty to doso. IZ. How we are tc seek
the Lord. 1. By repentance. (1) The
heart broken for sin. (2) The heart
broken from sin, Genuine repentance
accompanied by reformation of life (Lu.


these words contain a reproof. 2. For
many of you these words contain a warn-
ing. (1) You will never have a better
time. Facilities for seeking the Lord
decrease with delay. (2) You may not
have another opportunity. Many have
waited for the ‘ convenient season,” and
been visited with “ sudden destruction.”
(3) To all these words contain a welcome.
‘Tt is time,” ¢. e. not too late. You may
have long put off, yet just in time—it
may be only just [The Study].

The fruit of lies. Sin a lie in its
promises, appearance, and results. It
looks fair, excites desire, but is rotten,


150


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


{cHar. x





deadly poison within. It lies, (1) asa
fact, and (2) asa doctrine. ‘“‘ Ye shall
not surely die.” ‘Yeshall be as God,”
said the “ father of lies” at first. Men»
have eaten the fruit of lies ever since,
which has “ brought death and all our
woe into the world.” 1. IJsrael’s history
the fruit of lies. They believed not
God, rejected good and tasted bitter evil.
2. The world’s history the fruit of lies.
The race has eaten the results of sin and
deception. 3. The sinner’s history the
fruit of lies. What is pleasure, gaiety,
and the world but lies? Men are daily
fed by lies. “‘ Every sin is a lie,” says
Augustine. Its fruit will neither profit


Rain righteousness. The liberality of
Divine gifts. Thou, O God, didst send
a plentiful rain, lit. a rain of liberalities
(Ps. lxvili. 9). Goodness free and full
provided for his people. 1. God the
source until “he come.” 2. Blessings
plenteous “rain.” 3. The Church re-
vived. Or, I. God’s mercy compared to
a shower. 1. Direct from above, not
through human mediums. 2. Given in
freeness. 3. No substitute for it. II.
This mercy is promised (1) To those
who repent and return to him. (2)
To those who pray and long for it. IIL.
This shower of mercy is wanted now,
to convert the sinner and confirm the


Church. Seek it in time and we shall
not fail.


nor satisfy. It is not only empty but
mischievous (Is. xliv. 20 ; lix. 4, 5).


HOMILETICS.
Tas Ev or Evits.—Verses 14, 15.


Therefore, such the fruit of departing from God, and trusting in idols and mighty
men. Tumults from within would prepare the nation for invasion without. The
king would be cut off and the kingdom destroyed by a sudden stroke. Idolatry and
the corruption of pure religion will bring judgment upon the Church. Sin is the
evil of evils, the source of all sorrows. :

I. It creates national wars. Nations get angry and disagree. High attitudes
and great tones are assumed, and war must support the dignity and maintain the
interests of the throne. Insults to flags and ambassadors, petty offences to rulers,
the policy of cabinets and the intrigue of courts, have been motives to war. 1. We have
aggressive war, Nations are not satisfied with their natural boundaries ; for gain
and self-aggrandizement they must invade the territories of others. Ambition,
passion for empire and glory, desire for vengeance and plunder, lead them to unjust
and unnatural aggression. 2. We have civil war. “ Therefore shall a tumult arise
among thy people.” Nations, one in language and interests, are divided by enmity
and tumult. In Israel there was no central principle, no oneness nor stability. Con-
fused noise and war sprang from the midst of their own ranks (Am. ii. 2). There
were peoples, not, as God willed them to be, one, but many. Foreign wars are
dreadful enough, but civil wars are fratricidal and abominably wicked. France,
England, and America have been rent asunder by civil discord, and bled to the core
through the evil of evils. II. It creates social revolutions. 1. Kings are de-
throned. ‘The king of Israel shall utterly be cut off.” Israel, like the dislocated
state of Rome under the first emperors, was distracted by anarchy and usurpation.
There was no legitimate succession of kings or priests, for they made both, but not
through God. “Each successor had the same right as his predecessor, the right of
might, and furnished an example and precedent and sanction to the murder of him-
self or of his son.” Monarchs are exalted and dethroned by political factions and
civil broils. They rise suddenly from the ranks, crown themselves with honour,
and are “cut off” in their projects. Sin creates wars which mingle royal blood
with common gore, and starts revolutions which sweep monarchies and republics to
destruction, like chaff before the storm. 2. Suljects are enslaved. Obedience to
arbitrary power begets servility aud slavery. Subsidies have been given for the
loan or purchase of armies. Men have been hired to slaughter their fellow-men !
The people have been reduced to bondage, intellectual, political, and moral degrad


CHAP X.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 151





ation. Taxes, laws, and princes have fettered their freedom. Immorality and
crime have undermined the health, and polluted the character of the people. The
rule of the oppressor “is like a sweeping rain which leaveth no food” in fertile
districts (Prov. xxviii. 3). ITI. It leads to cruel deeds. In the wickedness of
Israel there was an essence of wickedness, malice within malice. This brought—
1. The devastation of land. ‘The day of battle spoiled all the fortresses of Israel.
Their strongholds were taken by the enemy, and their fair cities levelled to the
ground. Their land was swept by foreign invasion and domestic strife, filled with
violence, and “ wasting and destruction within their borders” (Is. lx. 18). 2. The
murder of its inhabitants. With inhuman cruelty ‘‘the mother was dashed to
pieces upon her children.” Neither sex nor age are spared by barbarity. Men like
Herod have been ferocious as brutes. Nations ancient and modern have stained
their names with crimes dark as hell. ‘In Rama was there a voice heard, lament-
ation, and weeping, and great mourning ; Rachel weeping for her children, and
would not be comforted, because they are not.” Such are some of the ravages pro-
duced by sin. Wars which ravaged fields and sacked cities; kings dethroned and
palaces plundered ; people enslaved and virtue violated ; families murdered and
hearts broken in agony and despair ; crimes arresting the pursuits of commerce and
arts, extinguishing the lights of science and religion, and filling kingdoms with
pestilence and murder. These and a thousand other evils spring directly or indi-
rectly from the evil of all evils. “That sin might appear exceeding sinful.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER X.


Ver. 1. Fruit for self. Selfishnessis human happiness. Without this vir-


the universal form of human depravity.
Every sin that can be named is only a
modification of it. What is avarice,
but selfishness grasping, and hoarding 1
What is prodigality, but selfishness
decorating and indulging itself—a man
sacrificing to himself as his own God 4
And what is idolatry, but that God en-
shrined man, worshipping the reflection
of his own image [Harris]?

Ver. 2. Divided heart. In matters
of great concern and which must be done
there is no surer argument of a weak
mind than irresolution; to be deter-
mined where the case is so plain and the
necessity so urgent. To be always in-
tending to lead a new life, but never to
find time to set about it, this is as if a
man should put off eating and drinking
and sleeping from one day and night to
another, till he is starved and destroyed
[ Tillotson].

Ver. 4. Truthful. Above all things
speak the truth in words and actions.
Let your word be your bond. Every
violation of truth is moral suicide in the
liar and a stab at the health of human
society. “ Truth,” says Jeremy Collier,
‘is the bond of union and the basis of


tue there is no reliance on language, no
confidence in friendship, no security in
promises and oaths.”

Ver. 5—7. “ Earthly glory is a mere
shadow which eludes our effort, or, if
caught, shrinks to nothing in the grasp.”
It is transitory, a garland which withers
on the brow. “Is this all?” cried Cxsar
in the midst of all his glory.


Glory is like a circle in the water,
Which never ceases to enlarge itself,
Till by broad spreading it disperse to nought.


Ver. 8. Impatient of life. <A lady
once said to Fred. Robertson: “I
thought you of all people were like St.
Paul, and that you would wish for a
heavenlier life as much as hedid.” He
replied in words as true of others as of
himself; “ First of all, you thought
wrong ; next, if I do wish to die, it is
when I am in pain, or out of conceit
with life, which happens pretty often,
but which I do not consider spirituality.
It is only an ungracious way of saying,
‘I am dissatisfied with what Thou hast
given me, and do not like the duties that
are mine at all. I am in pain, and want
to be out of pain ;’ and I suppose a


dus


great many people could say the same
piece of sublime discontent” [Silver].

Ver. 9,10. Example. For good or
evil we act and influence men on earth.
This influence will survive and affect
others when we are gone. ‘“‘ Oh that my
influence could begathered upand buried
with me,” cried a dying man. Men
imitate and follow our example, and a
bad example, a life of sin, are most per-
nicious to posterity. ‘‘I have thought
some of nature’s journeymen had made
men, and not made them well, they
imitated humanity so abominably”
[ Shakespeare].

Ver. 11. Duty and delight. Those
who give to God only the shadow of
duty can never expect from him a real
reward [Flavel]. Employment is the
salt of life. As salt gives relish to food,
so employment prevents insipid and un-
wholesome feelings, and gives pleasure
to life. Life is a delight just in the de-
gree that it is consecrated to action.

Life is duty—noblest therefore
He who best that course selects;
Never waiting, asking ‘“‘ wherefore?”
Acting as his heart directs.

Ver. 12,13. Time. A dying noble-

man in a letter to a profligate companion


confessed, ‘I never awaked till now. I


HOM'LETIO COMMENTARY: HOSEA,


(cHaP. XI.





have pursued shadows, and entertained
myself with dreams. I have been trea-
suring up dust and sporting myself with
the wind. [ look back upon my past life,
and, but for memorials of infamy and
guilt, it is all a blank, a perfect vacancy.
Oh, my friend, with what horror I recall
those hours of vanity we have wasted
together. Let me dwell with hermits,
let me rest on the cold earth, may I but
once more stand a candidate for an im-
mortal crown, and have my probation for
celestial happiness.”


Then time turns torment,when man turns a fool,
[ Young. ]


Ver. 14, 15. The evil of sin. It de-
bases body, mind, and soul, robs of do-
mestic peace and enjoyment, and spreads
contagion all around. It is rebellion
against God and injurious to man.
Once all the evil in the world was com-
prehended in one sinful thought, but
now its results are a horrid progeny of
evils. Ambition. If kings would only
determine not to extend their dominions
until they had filled them with happi-
ness, they would find the smallest terri-
tories too large, and the longest life too
short, for the full accomplishment of se
grand and noble an ambition [Colton].





CHAPTER XL


Critica Norgs. 1.) The prophet shows how Israel had repaid God’s love in the past with ingrati-
tude and unfaithfulness, Child] ‘ First-born son” (Ex. iv. 22), the infancy in Egypt and the
wilderness; son byelection, Called] Brought safely out, typical of Christ’s call (Matt, ii, 15), and
of redemption through him, 2. They] Moses, Aaron, and prophets; many calls, bat Israel drew back
from them, went after gods, 3. I taught] Lit. set Ephraim on his feet (cf. Deut. i, 31; viii. 2,
5; Neh. ix, 21; Is, lxiii. 9), God supported them asa nurse her child, gently taught them to walk,
and carried them when tired (Num, xi. 12. See Acts xiii, 18, marg.). Knew] Ignored God’s
kindness, perceived not God’s design to restore them (Ex. xv. 26). 4. Cords of a man] Par. to
“¢ bands of love,” “ cords with which men are led, more especially children that are weak upon their
feet, in contrast with ropes, with which men control wild, unmanageable beasts (Ps. xxxii. 9), area
figurative representation of the paternal humane guidance of Israel” [Kei/]. Take off] Heb. lift
Up, 2. é ees the yoke higher up, to relieve oxen, that they might eat with comfort and ease. Pusey
gives, “ I was regarded by them as putting the yoke on, ever placing some new yoke or constraint
upon them,” but the words indicate God’s continued goodness. Laid meat] Gave means of grace
and manifestations of mercy in abundance; manna in the desert. 5. Shall not] An apparent con-
tradiction to viii, 18; ix. 3; but Egypt there is a type of bondage, here the hope of relief against
Assyria. They would no longer go to Egypt for help, but be taken captive to Assyria. 6. Abide}
Lit. to whirl round, turn in a circle, indicating the violence and extent of punishment, often the
sense of falling and staying until the mission is fulfilled (Jer. xxiii. 19; xxx. 23; Lam. iv. 6, 2
Sam. iii 29). Branches] Some, villages which are branches, dependencies upon cities; mighty


CHAP. XI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 153


ed





a es mn rccerner  r


men, others. Baddim] Sig. poles (Ex. xxv 13), made of branches, firmness derived from being
woven together; bars or bolts by which gates were fastened together (Job xvii. 16}. 7. Bent] Lit.
hung suspended on backsliding, “impaled or fastened upon apostasy as upon a stake, so that it can-
not get loose” [Ket/]. None] Lit. together they exalted not, they were all bent downwards, and
did not rise, lift themselves upwards to exalt and love God. 8. Ad. and Zeb.] Two cities de-
stroyed with Sodom and Gomorrah (Deut. xxix. 23), Turned] Heb. upon me (1 Sam. xxv, 36;
Jer. vili. 18). Repentings] My strong compassions are excited, glow with love and heat. Joseph’s
bowels (were hot), did yearn (Gen. xlill, 30; Lu. xxiv. 82; 1 Kings iii. 26), In all three places
the same word found. 9, Execute] As fierce conquerors often do; after destroying cities, he will
abate his anger and show mercy. For I am God] Ido not change my purpose like man (1 Sam. xv.
29; Num. xxiii, 19; Mal. iii. 6). The holy, the pure and perfect one, and known to be such in the
midst of thee, 10, They] A remnant should walk after the Lord. Roar] in judgments on the foe
(Is. xxxi. 4; Jer. xxv. 26—30). Tremble] Hasten, like birds in rapid flight from western parts
called the sea (Is, xi, 11; xxiv. 14; Zech. viii, 7). 11. As a dove] Ch. vii.11; Is. lx. 8.
Houses] from whence they will not be driven again (Ezck, xxviii, 26). The idea is this :—when
God shall call, like the roaring of a lion, in loud and far-reaching tones, Israel will hear, return,
walk with God, and remaim faithful to him, 12, Ephraim] is charged with lying and deceit again.
Jud. ruleth) not without God, as Ephraim, but by a legitimate succession of kings and priests, and
was outwardly faithful by maintaining the worship of God. Saints] The priests and Levites,
fathers and prophets, who kept the worship of God pure and holy: others, with God, the Most
Holy One, God will never be without witnesses in the direst age and the darkest nation


HOMILETICS.
Gop’s PaternaL Carp anpD Man’s Unarateru, Rueturn.— Verses 1—4,


There is a wonderful cluster of blessings in these verses, every one of which fs
significant, and the whole especially puts men under deep obligation.

I. God’s great kindness. God loved, trained, and treated his people with the
greatest care, though they sinned and rebelled against him. This kindness is dis-
played—1l. Jn the love of a parent towards a son. ‘“ When Israel was a child
then I loved him.” (a) This love is free. God loved them not because they were
better and more numerous than others. He loved them of his own free will, and
chose them because he loved them (Deut. vii. 7,8). (6) This love is undeserved.
“When a child,” wayward and self-willed, foolish and disobedient. We love
children because they are like us, or because they please us. But God loves men
that are unlike him in character and helpless in condition (Rom. v. 6). This love
is sovereign and undeserved ; “ for we were by nature children of wrath, even as
others.” When forlorn and outcast, God loves men and adopts them into his
family. 2. In the power of a redeemer to a captive. ‘‘ And called my son out of
Egypt.” God not only called by the voice of his servants, but gave power to obey
the call. Men are called for years, but do not, are unwilling and unable to come
to God. The Spirit makes us willing in the day of God’s power; reluctance is
overcome; we rise and obey the call. Power in a redeemer is a necessity. We
cannot trust a Saviour who cannot deliver us. But in Christ omnipotence is linked
with love, power is employed for the ends of mercy and the salvation of man.
Redemption from Egypt is a type of deliverance from sin, death, and hell. “For he
shall save his people from their sins.” 3. In the tenderness of a nurse for a child.
“T taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms.” Like a mother or
nurse, training a child in leading-strings, God carries men when young, upholds
them when weak, and teaches them gradually and gently to walk in his commands.
He takes them by their arms, lifts them up from dust and despair, and teaches them
“to go” in pursuit of better things. Itis the privilege of God’s people not only to
be loved and delivered, but taught and guided. When weak and weary, in paths
rough and dark, God is with them, leading them about, and instructing them and
keeping them as the apple of his eye (Deut. xxxii. 10). “In the wilderness where
thou hast seen how that the Lord thy God bare thee, asa man doth bear his son,
in all the way that ye went, until ye came into this place” (Deut.i. 31; Acts xiii.
18). 4. In the skill of a physician towards the sick. “I healed them.” God’s people
are not only cared for, but cured in sickness and sorrow. Sin is self-injury, but


154 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. [UHAP. x1.


God is our happiness and health. Men inflict wounds upon heart and mind, de-
stroy themselves, but in God is their help (Hos. xiii. 9). God cures their sicknesses
and pardons their sins, aids their infirmities and heals their diseases (Ps. ciii. 3).
No other physician can close our wounds and putrefying sores, no earthly ointment
can mollify our bruises. “TI am the Lord that healeth thee.” 5. In the kindness
of amaster towards his servants. 1. Kindness in drawing men into his service. They
are alienated and distant from God, naturally ill-disposed and unable to come to
him. All who come are drawn, “ Draw me and I will run after thee.” Compulsory
piety tends to infidelity. Lord Bolingbroke was compelled to peruse volumes of
controversial Divinity when far too young to understand them. This perhaps im-
planted in his mind seeds of aversion to the truths of the Bible. (a) This drawing
is by love, “‘ with bands of love.” Love only can draw, cruelty drives. God uses
no viclence nor force, never tries harsh when gentle means willdo. The law affects
us like frost the stream; it hardens and stagnates the soul: but the love of God,
like the shining sun and the gentle shower, melts the cold and breaks the heart into
gushing streams. Teachers who rule with a rod, and parents who govern with a
frown, will not win affection and obedience. God draws by loving-kindness, and
wins to his service by love. “I treat my enemies so well that I compel them to be
my friends,” said Alexander the Great. ‘No cord or cable,” says Burton, “can
draw so forcibly, or bind so fast, as love can do with only a silken thread.” (0)
This drawing is in harmony with our moral nature. “ With cords of a man.” Men
are not used like dumb driven cattle, but treated as responsible and rational crea-
tures. In the promises of the gospel, the work of the Spirit, and the character of
Christ, we are looked upon as men, and not machines nor brutes. All God’s dealings
are in harmony with our mental and moral constitution. ‘‘The love of Christ con-
straineth us” (2 Cor. v. 14; 1 Johniv. 19). 2. Kindness in refreshing men in his
service. (a) God relieves in distress, ‘I was to them as they that take off the
yoke.” Like a merciful man who regardeth the life of his beast, he eased them of
their burdens, and helped them in distress. Christ delivers from the yoke of bondage,
and from the hands of our enemies (Lev. xxvi. 13). (6) God provides in want.
“ And [laid meat unto them.” Manna from heaven, water from the rock, and “ food
convenient for them,” were provided for his ancient people. In Christ there is no
starvation nor stint. Blessings in abundance are given through him, Pardon, peace,
and joy; relief from harassing care, and rest in perfect security. ‘‘Take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.” II. Man’s
ungrateful return. God has put men under deep obligations by his goodness.
If the kind deeds of men bind us to think of them and love them, how much do we
owe to God, to whose ceaseless bounty we owe every comfort of life? What he
bestows upon us in kindness and constant care should be given back in sacrifice,
incense, and devotion. ‘How unsuitable it is,” says Edwards, “for us who live
only by kindness to be unkind.”
I’ve heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds
With coldness still returning;
Alas! the gratitude of men
Hath oftener left me mourning.

1. They reject Divine teaching. “ As they called them, so they went from them.”
Moses and Aaron, prophets and apostles, were unheeded. The more they were
admonished the more careless they grew; the more pressing the teacher the more
refractory the taught. Foolishness is bound in the kearts of children, When they
are taught to go, they go from God into ways of sin. Divine instruction is needful
and constantly given, yet many turn awayin contempt. Christ is preached and the
gospel offered, but men go to their merchandise and their farms. ‘Lo, they have
rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?” 2. They despise
Divine favours. ‘They knew not that I healed them.” They look to men as the
source of blessings, as though by their own power and goodness they procure them.


CHAP. XI.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA 156





Ourselves and othurs are thanked, and God forgotten. We do not see the end of
Divine chastisement, nor acknowledge Divine goodness in our prosperity. God is
constantly ignored, and wilful ignorance leads to base ingratitude. “The ox
knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib; but Israel doth not know, my
people doth not consider.” 3. They cling to their wicked course. ‘They sacrificed
unto Baalam,” went from one god to another, ‘‘and burned incense to graven
images.” When men forsake the true God, they cut, and grave, and adore idols of
their own. This is self-abasement and self-destruction ; a just ground of complaint
with God, and asad perversion in man. “I have nourished and brought up children,


and they have rebelled against me.”


Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
Thou art not so unkind
As man’s ingratitude.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. The chap. begins with love ;
ancient, sovereign, electing love. The
next sweet word is sonship. We see
immediately after in the same verse,
calling, salvation, deliverance. ‘I called
my son out of Egypt” [Spurgeon].

Ver. 1,3&4. God’s children young
to be cared for; weak to be strength-
ened ; ignorant to be taught; needy to
be fed ; tired to be refreshed.

Holding up. 1. To teach dependence.
2. To sustain the steps. 3. To regulate
the walk. God keeps from falling, lifts
up when down, gently, kindly, and gra-
dually leads along in the path of virtue.
What love and care! Be not afraid to
trust in God, he may chide, but will never
forsake you. He keepeth the feet of his
saints (1 Sam. ii. 9). He guideth their
feet in the way of peace (Lu. i. 79).

Ver. 4. Christian life a drawing from
sin and the world to God, greater faith
and attainments, to more intimate fel-
lowship on earth, and heaven at length.


“He did not say lead, but draw him.
This violence is done to the heart, not
to the body. Why marvel? Believe,
and thou comest; love, and thou art
drawn. Think it not a rough and un-
easy Violence : it is sweet, alluring ; the
sweetness draws thee” [ Augustine}. “Al
the methods and parts of God’s govern-
ment are twined together as twisted
cords of love from God, so ordered that
they ought to draw man with al) his
heart to love him again.”

God’s love in his word and in his pro-
vidence lays us under strong obligation
to duty. How thankful should we be
that all things are prepared and provided
for us day after day. But how aggra-
vating that guilt which despises such
love. ‘To sin against mercy is to sin
against humanity ; and as no surfeit is
more dangerous than that of bread, so
no judgment is more terrible than that
which grows outof love felt and slighted”


[Trapp].


HOMILETICS,
Tae SHort-sieHTeD Pouioy or Sinners.— Verses 5, 6.


Israel were rebelling against Assyria, and looking to Egypt for help. . They had
forsaken God and desired to escape his judgments. But they should have what
they did not wish, and be deprived of what they sought to have. There was no
refuge nor retiring place; Assyria would take them captive, and the sword would

. perpetually rest on their cities and people. This punishment would be the result
of their own short-sighted policy.

I. In refusing Divine and following their own counsels. ‘‘ They refused
to return” to God and his ways, and were defeated by adopting their own plans.
God’s counsel is continually given to guide and correct us, and to reject this counsel
is folly in the extreme. 1. It is the only safe counsel. Human guides may err.
The wisest only guess. We require certainty and security, Many stumble, but in


156 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. X21


God “shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble.” 2. It
ts the only firm counsel. Man’s instructions change, and his purpose can be frus-
trated. He may adjust circumstances and take precautions, yet not escape. God
has knowledge to foresee and power to overcome opposition. “The counsel of the
Lord, that shall stand.” 3. It is the only rational counsel. It is the only probable
way to succeed according to our desire. The wisdom of the fool is conceit and self-
delusion. He wanders into danger, and wrongs his own soul. “The way of a fool
is right in his own eyes; but he that hearkeneth unto counsel is wise.” II. In
bringing destruction upon them when they expected safety. They were
trusting to Egypt, and depending upon their mighty men and fortified cities, but the
sword would devour them. 1. The destruction was violent. The sword fell,
whirled down upon them in all its weight, like “a whirlwind of the Lord gone forth
in fury, a grievous whirlwind which fell grievously upon the head of the wicked ”
(Jer. xxiii. 19), 2. The destruction was extensive. It “shall abide on his cities
and shall consume his branches, and devour them” like flames of fire. Whether
branches mean mighty men, villages, or bars of the cities, it is all one. Power could
not defend the mighty, and defenced places were levelled to the ground. Princes
and people, storehouses of wealth and palaces of splendour, fall through the sins of
the nation. 3. The destruction was lasting. The sword abode upon them as long
as they continued their rebellion against God. Israel’s kings were inaugurated by
blood, and by God’s appointment they should reap just retribution. ‘ Now, there-
fore, the sword shall never depart from thy house.” III. In rushing into the
bondage from which they seek to escape. They sought to avoid Assyria by
flying to Egypt, but this was the very means to bring them into bondage. We
cannot escape God’s presence, nor shun the consequences of broken law. What
appears the nearest refuge is often the remotest hope and the swiftest punishment.
Persons to whom we fly for help are often the weakest to defend, and rushing from
one danger the surest way to fall into another. Men fall by their own counsel and
are taken in their own craftiness. They mistake if they think to avoid the judg-
ments of God by cunning artifice and deceit, to promote their true interests by
refusing to follow Divine counsel (Job v. 13; xviii. 7). ‘ Thine own wickedness
shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee.”


Bent on Baoksuipine.—Verse 7.


In all men there is a tendency to sin. The principle of evil is within us. But
sad must it be for the Christian Church, for those who profess to own God, to re
fuse allegiance to him, and dethrone him in their hearts. How grieving to God for
his own chosen people to backslide from him, and to be bent, given up entirely, to
this fixed course of aversion from God.

I. They were constant in backsliding. Prophets and teachers continually
“called them,” but they did not forsake their ways. God calls men by his word
and by his servants, but they turn away from him, They may halt betimes, veer
round in a circle of duties, but their continual thoughts and daily life are departure
from God. II. They were unanimous in backsliding. ‘None at all would
exalt him,” all together they apostatized. They refused as one man to return. Evil
majorities and idolatrous customs influence in the wrong direction. The lower learn
from the higher classes, and the country’s creed becomes the prevalent practice.
When all ranks patronize evils, they are established by general consent. Those who
corrupt the faith or taint the morals of the community may commit an injury or’
spread a disease which will ruin generations to come. III. They were obstinate
in backsliding. “They would not.” They were obstinate as an ox, which refused
to be driven out of the wrong into the right path. When the will is bent in sin,
‘he current of life follows, overturning all obstacles and defying all counsels, “ Ever

seaker” the will “ grows through acted crime,” until men get stubborn and insens-


OMAP. XI.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 10





ible, unable and unwilling to repent. “Ye will not come.” Well might Edward
VI. pray, “ Order my living, so that I may do that which thou requirest of me,
and give me grace that I may know it, and have will and power to do it.” IV.
They were fixed in backsliding. By continual practice it had become a settled
habit. Their whole life was centred and fastened in this course. They were fixed
and immoveable in adherence to their sins. The sinner may habituate himself to
evil until he is impaled on it, unable to resist and overcome it. It may so abso-
lutely possess a man that he cannot break its dominion, nor free himself from its
power. The condition of men is the consequence of life, and the cords of sin the
result of evil habits. ‘ His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he
shall be holden with the cords of his sins,”


Divine JusTIOg AND Diving Meroy IN APPARENT CONFLICT FOR THE SINNEL.—
Verses 8, 9.


This passage is one of the most mysterious and interesting in the Bible. There
actually seems a struggle between one attribute and another. Justice and mercy
are in conflict ; righteousness and peace kiss each other for the good of the sinner.
God is represented after the manner of men, as kindling in compassion, yearning to
bless, while anxious to show justice ; and at length, though punishing in measure,
determining to mitigate the sentence. ‘“ How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?”

I. Justice is deserved. They deserved to be treated like Admah and the other
cities of the plain. 1. They had forgotten God. Favoured with sensible manifest-
ations and unspeakable privileges, they ignored his presence and disregarded his
works. The memory of God’s mejcies is soon effaced, written in water, not on
marble, and one generation after another needs renewal of the blessings. ‘Cana
maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten
me days without number.” 2. They had ill requited God. They repaid with
the mouth, not with the heart. There was no depth in their penitence, nor firm-
ness in their conduct, “for their heart was not right with him.” They changed
from reverence to apostasy, from fair profession to base ingratitude. The favours
of men touch us, but the love of God kindles no fire upon the altar within. Love
free, abundant, and precious is the only friendship for which men make no returns,
This seems a miracle, a monster of stupidity, if we argued against experience.
“‘ Annihilate not the mercies of God by the oblivion of ingratitude.” II. Mercy
prompts to save. Mercy exists with justice in the purpose, and one attribute
does not destroy another in the work of God. 1. God is merciful. If God were
just, and dealt with us after our sins, mercy would be unknown. Justice might
sweep the earth, or rear its monuments of vengeance.


When we slip a little
Out of the way of virtue, are we lost?
Is there no medicine called sweet mercy ?


Yes, God is more compassionate than a tender father. “ My heart ts turned within
me,” with deep compassion. Give up? No, how can I do that? I delight in
mercy. “ My repentings are kindled together,” I have punished enough. “ Is
Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant child? For since I spake against him, I
do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him ; I will
surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord.” 2. God’s mercy shall be seen. “I
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger.” Mercy prevails over the rigour of
justice. God will not “destroy Ephraim,” as soldiers that return a second time to
pillage a city they have wasted: God’s mercy is seen—(a) In Christ, who came
not to destroy men’s lives, but to save them. (6) In Christian experience, in the
forgiveness of sin, the bestowment of grace, and the gift of glory. Mercy now
is proclaimed to all Godis just, and yet the justifier of him that helieveth.


158 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. HOSEA. (CHAP. XI.





“For I will not contend for ever with my people, neither will I be ewe wroth:

for the human spirit would fail, be crushed before me” (Is. lvii. 16). III. God
determines to exercise mercy and not\justice. ‘I will not execute,” &c. The
reasons for this choice are given. 1. God is unchangeable in his covenant mercy.
“For I am God, and not man.” Man is fitful and swayed by human passion.
“Man punishes, to destroy ; God smites, toamend,” says Jerome. Men are angry,

_ vindictive, and cruel one to another; implacable, unmerciful (Rom. i. 31) ; but
God is compassionate and forgiving. Men are mutable, the truest friends are un-
certain ; but God is not man. “I am Jehovah, I change not; therefore ye sons of
Jacob are not consumed.” 2. God is revealed among men to be a God of mercy.
“The Holy One in the midst of thee.” Hence his procedure does not contradict
his known character. God is holy and just, true and faithful, and that might be
considered a reason for rejecting a rebellious people. But how can this happen?
How can justice be reconciled with mercy, and the providence proclaim the love
of God? The difficusty is solved in Jesus Christ. In him God is “faithful and
just to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” His holiness
is the defence of his people, and an argument for a consecrated life. Ina corrupt
Church and a degenerate age let us “give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Mercy interposeth her four several
“hows” (in the original only two, but
the other two necessarily understood, and
by interpreters fitly supplied) for such
pathetical interrogations as the like are
not to be found in the whole book of
God, and not to be answered by any but
God himself; as he doth to each par-
ticular in the following words: “My
heart is turned within me,” that is the
first answer; the second, “ My repent-
ings are kindled together ;” the third,
“T will not execute the fierceness of my
wrath ;” the fourth, ‘I will not return
to destroy Ephraim.” And why? First,
“‘T am God and not man ;” secondly, the


God’s mercy—1. Springs from him-
self. ‘ Repentings kindled together.”
2. Contrasted with men’s conduct. “I
am God and not man.” 3. Overcoming
God’s justice. “I will not execute.”
4, Supplying man’s need. “Greater is
the mercy of God than the misery of
all men,” says Augustine.

Iam God, §c. God unchangeable.
1. An encouragement to the penitent.
2. A warning to thesinner. As God is
in mercy, so in power. Let all be
thankful that white man’s pity is soon
exhausted God’s pity is great, and dis-
played to those who carefully seek it
with tears.


“Holy One in the midst of thee” [ Trapp].


HOMILETICS.
Tae Penitent’s Return to Gov.— Verses 10, 11.


God will pity his people once more. They shall hasten to him in fear and
trembling, be recalled from exile and bondage, and restored to their inheritance
and their God.

I. It is areturn from great distance. Man wilfully departed from God, lives
now without desire to return, and is alienated from Godin life and affection.
Distance from God is the moral condition, the natural law, and the penal conse-
quence of sin. ‘“ Why standest thou afar off, O Lord?” II. It is a return in
deep penitence. “ They shall tremble as a bird.” The contrite heart trembles in
fear. The sinner almost despairs in remembrance of his desert, and the holiness of
God ; or if moved by fear, he is conscious of guilt, greatly mourns his sin, and
returns to confess to God and cry, “ God be merciful to mea sinner.” III. It isa
return in swift obedience. ‘As adove out of the land of Assyria,” remarkable


CHAP. XI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 159





for its swift flight, its rapid and constant speed when flying to its cot. The sinner
makes haste from his danger to his rest. There is no time, no reason for delay.
God draws, and he runs. Like the prodigal, he resolves and executes. “I will
arise and go.” Nosooner said than done. Like the manslayer of old, he has “ fled
for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.” IV. It is a return through
severe discipline. The inward experiences and the outward conditions of the
penitent have been most bitter and distressing. But many have been brought
through severe trials and strange providences to God. Pain and sufferings have
punished them for their sins. God has not only roared, but torn them to the
astonishment of others. The call has been loud and the impressions deep. In fear
and trembling, they have returned to “the lion of the tribe of Judah.” V. It isa
return to intimate friendship with God. ‘They shall walk after the Lord.”
Walking with God includes friendship with God; for how can two walk together
except there be agreement between them? It includes obedience, love, and constant
activity in God’s service. Some turn away and flee from God. They are not near
in thought nor deed. But the humbled penitents wish to please God and walk
with him. They desire the abiding presence, and seek to dwell in “ the everlasting
habitations” of God. They follow after him with intense thirst and determined
pursuit. The will, the word, and the character of God are their constant rule and
delight. Many nations shall say, We will walk in his paths (Mic. iv. 2).


IsraEL’s Return To Gop PREDICTED.


God would not destroy all Israel, a remnant should be preserved and walk after
him. Hence many take the words as a prediction of the future restoration and
return of God’s people.

I. They shall be gathered from distant places. ‘“ From the west,” “ out of
Egypt,” and “out of the land of Assyria.” No distance destroys God’s love, no
bondage limits his power, and no enemy can keep his people when he calls them to
himself. Many shall come from east and west, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, in the kingdom of God (Matt. viii. 11). II. They shall be joined
together in great numbers. ‘As adove out of the land of Egypt.” Doves not
only fly swiftly, but flock together. The sympathy of numbers is great in every
undertaking, but especially in the service of God, where that sympathy is purified
and rightly directed. ‘ Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as doves to their
windows” (Is. lx. 8)? are words which describe the future converts to God. III.
They shall be restored to great privileges. 1. Fellowship with God. “They
shall walk after the Lord.” They would be many days without leaders and sacri-
fices, but afterward should return and seek the Lord God and David their king
(ch. iii. 4, 5). They would live in loyal obedience to Jehovah, their lawful
sovereign, and walk with him in sweet friendship and joy. 2. Security in their
own habitations. ‘TI will place them in their houses.” They would dwell securely,
not in defenced cities, but in their homes, under their own vines and fig-trees (Mie.
iv.4). Man, like a bird, needsa shelter. Security and peace are only found in God.
He can place them in Christ, in the Christian Church, and in his eternal kingdom.
“Tn my Father’s house are many mansions. . . I go to prepare a place for you.”


Tur TRUE AND THE FaLtszE WorsHIpperR.—Verse 12.


The prophet makes another charge against Israel. Lying and deceit are applied
to their idolatrous worship and hypocritical pretences. Ephraim compassed, sur-
rounded God with lies ; but Judah maintained the worship of God, and walked after
the example of godly priests and forefathers. The words distinguish the true from
the false worshipper.

I. The false worshipper. He draws near to God with his people, and honours
God with the lip, but his worship is all pretence and hypocrisy. 1. He lies to God
in worshyp. Israel lied in setting up and honouring the golden calves. All their


160 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. [ CHAP. XL





prayers, repentance, and sacrifices were lies, When the heart is not right with God,
when worship is mere formality and custom, then all prayers, offerings, and pro-
fessions are lies and deceit. All half-heartedness and unbelief, all counterfeits in
religion, are falsehoods to besiege God and deceive men. 2. He lies to God in daily
life. He surrounds God in manifold, not isolated acts. Lying is a general custom
with him. He keeps up religious forms and assumptions, lives a moral life out-
wardly, and “fills up some radical defect with some shallow pretence.” But he
professes and does not practise ; has the form without the power of godliness ; and
“seems a saint, when most he plays the devil.” All his life is a disguise. He is
darkness disguised in garments of light; the devil’s servant dressed in Christ’s
livery ; falsehood practised “ under saintly show.” Thus men worship God in les,
transact business and deceive their fellow-men with fair promises and pretences.
O hypocrite, thy boldness strikes at heaven,
And makes its fervid saints appear impostors.

II. The true worshipper. 1. He is acceptable to God. God looks for attach-
ment and fidelity in his people. He is their true and rightful Lord, and will bless
all who honour him, Some are accused by conscience, and condemned by God for
deceit and hypocrisy ; others are commended and blessed in their approaches to
him. Their prayers are heard, their gifts accepted, and their sacrifices are well-
pleasing to God. 2. He walks in the steps of good men. Judah was “ faithful
with the saints.” If we take the margin, he was faithful with God, the Holy One ;
far from false and fraudulent dealings by which Ephraim circumvented God. Or
take saints as describing the priests and Levites, the fathers and prophets, who
handed down and defended the pure worship of God. They did not set at nought,
but followed good examples. We should be loyal to the kings and faithful to the
priests whom God has appointed to rule over us. We should hold to the principles
and walk in the steps of God’s people, the good old way in which our forefathers
walked before us. ‘* Whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.”
3. He is dignified by ruling with God. “ Judah yet ruleth with God.” Obedience
to God’s people is co-operation with God’s work. Ephraim sought to rule without
God, and cast off the worship of God. But to submit to God is to conquer ; to serve
God is to reign over sin and the world, the flesh and the devil. In persevering
prayer we have power with God ; in holy, consistent life we prevail with men ; and
in God’s service we have true liberty, real dignity, and everlasting dominion. “The
saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever,
even for ever and ever.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XI.


Ver. 1,4. Drewthem. No being ever
yet drew another to him by a display of
authority and terror. God himself never
drew one soul to him by the law, which
is only a system of authority and terror ;
but by the gospel, which is his scheme
of mercy and grace. The whole of
Christianity may be considered an in-
finite expediency, devised by the only
wise God, to dispossess our minds of bad
and unworthy thoughts, to fix in our
trembling bosoms confidence, and thus
to cause us to returnto him. When we
wish to influence a man we reason with
him, inform his mind—we argue and
persuade. This is precisely the method


in which God deals with us. “He
works in us to will and to do of his good
pleasure ” [ Jay].
Who overcomes
By force, hath overcome but half his foe,
[Ailton].

Ver. 5, 6. Shall consume. Guilt
and punishment are bound together,
One should act as a warning to the other.
The threat of punishment is a merciful
declaration to some, though a terror to
others. If there are rocks and shoals in
the ocean of life, it is not cruelty to chart
them down ; it is an eminent and great
mercy [Beecher].


Ver. 7. Backsliding. Tt is not one


CHAP. XIL]





of the least miseries of a backsliding
state, that every state of departure from
Zod disposes the soul toa greater de-
gree of alienation. As it is said of a
sheep, that having once wandered from
the fold, it never thinks of returning,
but “wanders on still more and more
astray;” soit may be affirmed of the
wanderer, that in most cases his back-
slidings are multiplied, until frequent
disappointments and direct extremities
force him to retrace his steps, or the
etrong hand of the Good Shepherd brings
him back.

Ver. 8,9. The perfections of God
afford a refuge for the sinner. God is
just. Nothing that he does can be un-
just, arbitrary, or hard. But naked jus-
tice affords no comfort. It may fix the
sword to keep the gate of Eden, send the
surging sea over Sodom, Gomorrah, and
Zeboim, and smite the shepherd and not
the sheep with the sword, but it exacts
full and perfect obedience to the law,
and punishment for every sin, Where,
then, can we look? Justice no longer
appals when satisfied in Christ. It is
the love, the mercy of God, which is our
citadel, And God will never cease to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


161


be merciful to his Church. He is per-
petually and gloriously displaying his
mercy to men. To destroy them would
frustrate the Divine plan and rob them
of hope and consolation. The Eternal
One is ever the same. No centuries,
no sidereal cycles, measure him whose
name is [ am that I am. Our lives
vanish every moment ; not so with God.
His mercy is everlasting—his mercy en-
dureth for ever [J. W. Alewander].


Ver. 10,11. Repentance.


At length corrected by the filial rod

Of his offended, but his gracious God,

And lashed from sins to sighs; and by degrees

From sighs to vows, from vows to bended knees;

From bended knees to a true pensive breast ;

From thence to torments not to be expressed ;

Returns, and (from his sinful self exiled)

Finds a glad Father, he a welcome child.
[Quartes.}


Ver. 12. The hypocrite.


His virtues being overdone, his face

Too grave, his prayers too long, his charities
Too pompously attended, and his speech
Larded too frequently, and out of time,

With serious phraseology—were rents

That in his garments opened in spite of him,
Through which the well-accustomed eye could


see
The rottenness of his heart [Pol/ok].





CHAPTER XII.


uxrricAL Notes.) 1. Feed] To eat or graze.


aothing, labour in vain. East] A fierce and destructive wind, oppressive and violent (Job xxvii. 21) ;


figurative of that destruction which sinners bring upon themselves,
multiplies lies and violence by their sins (ch. iv. 2), by which the kingdom is desolated. To this
they add gifts, to win alliance with Assyria and Egypt, but all in vain.
2. Jud.] Whose guilt was not open apostasy. Jacob] The ten tribes or chief part of Israel.


doms.


God will punish, will visit according to their deeds.
God spares not the favoured, how shall the deserving escape ?
should imitate his good, not his bad qualities.


his (Mie. ii. 7).
To hold the heel (Gen. xxv. 26).


God (Gen. xxxii, 24—29), and acquired the name of prince.
4. Angel] In human form God wrestled, put Jacob’s thigh ont of joint, but did not prevail.
Jacob could no longer stand. Wept] and poured out intense desires in supplication, and though
wounded, was not overcome in conflict, but found God and talked with him at Bethel.
speaks to us by Jacob, girt with his spirit and might we may prevail.


ness,


The original indicates a purpose to visit,


plies constancy, by which God is distinguished and ever remembered (Ix. iii. 15; Ps. exxxv. 13).


G. Turn] Lit. thou shalt turn, so turn as to enter into vital fellowship with God (Is. x. 22).


who wishest to be a true descendant, pray and act as Jacob. 7%. Merchant] Marg. a Canaanite, a


11


Wind] What is empty and vain; to hun after
Increaseth] 7.e. continually,


God will visit both king-


3.] Jacob was their forefather; they
They are descendants, but their ways contrast with
He secured the birth-right and the blessing with it; wrestled with God and pre-
vailed in prayer. IZe wrestled in the womb, and as an adult he wrestled with man and with God. Took]
Strength] In his manly vigour he behaved himself princely with
This strength given in conscious weak-


There] he
5. Lord] A name which im-


Thou]


162 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (cHaP. XIt





heathen, unlike Israel, to whom Canaanites were a reproach (Ezek. xvi. 3). Oppress] Lit. deceive,
Men whose trade is deceit, whose balances are unjust, cannot love mercy and dojudgment. 8. Eph.
said, in a spirit of disregard to the prophets, and in self-justification, “I am become rich,
God prospers me; this is a proof that he is not displeased, and that there is no iniquityin me,” But
these riches were not enjoyed on account of sin. \ Their attitude towards God and man was the very
opposite of right. 9. I] God meets their delusion by reminding them that he had been their guide,
defence, and source of prosperity, from wandering in the wilderness, and to settlement in tents now.
Others take this as a threat to reduce them to their ancient helpless condition. 10, By prophets] who
left no means untried, speaking in metaphors and methods adapted to rouse the attention (Num. xil. 6,
8; Joel ii, 28). 11. Vanity] The question strengthens the affirmation. All was to no purpose.
Warnings unheeded, altars as numerous as heaps of stones gathered out of the field, and scenes of
solemn history were corrupted and ruined. 12. Jacob] was a fugitive and a servant, in a low con-
dition (Gen. xxx. 31; 1 Sam. xvii. 20); did not marry an idolatress: his honest poverty reproves
your ungodly gains, and his faith in God your idolatry and unbelief. 18, Israel] as represented
in Jacob, the individual, and in the nation in Egypt, has been preserved (Num. xii. 6, 8; Deut. xviii.
15, 18), Kept by God, as Israel Aept his flock (Ps. Ixxx. 1; Is. Ixiti, 11), 14. Anger] Lit. with
bitterness, instead of gratitude and praise, hence punishment. Blood} Blood-guiltiness a grave crime
(Lev. xx. 9). Leave] The opposite of taking away or forgiving. Return] Dishonour to God re-
payed to Eph. His] For God does not give up his rights, though men set aside his dominion.


HOMILETICS.
FreepIne UPON THE WIND.—Verse 1.


God has still complaints to make against his people. They turn from him, seek
satisfaction in idolatry and in creature confidence. This is to feed upon the wind
and to chase after the east wind. A course most unprofitable and most injurious.

I. This conduct is most unprofitable. In every department of business men
look for profit. “ What shall I gain by this?” is an all-important question. Ina
course of sin, in seeking safety and felicity from the creature instead of the Creator,
there is no gain whatever. 1. It ts labour without satisfaction. The wind will not
satisfy the hungry man, Pleasure and mirth, worldly honours and religious form-
alities, are empty husks. Men can only feed upon bread. Grass for cattle, straw
for swine, but “food for man.” Sensitive joys gratify the passions, intensify the
eagerness and increase the speed with which men seek pleasure; but it is only
spending money for that which is not bread, and ‘labour for that which satisfieth
not. 2. Jt is labour in vain. The sinner delights in vain things, and pursues,
hunts after emptiness and vanity. He spends his strength for nought, bestows the
gifts of body and mind upon those who cannot help him, and seeks to support
himself in things worthless and unsubstantial. His appetite is strengthened, not
satisfied ; his capacities enlarged, not filled ; “‘ an aching void,” a blank, is left behind
which the world cannot fill. The wisest man took an inventory of pleasures and
the best things in the world, and gives the sum total as “vanity of vanities.”


The world’s all title-page, without contents.


II. This conduct is most injurious. It is not only feeding upon wind, but
following after what is most pernicious, “ the east wind,” the most destructive of
all. 1. It increases injury by increasing lies. ‘‘He daily increaseth lies.” Men
- lie in false speech, false dealing, and false worship. They lie to themselves and to
others by declaring the sufficiency of human help, and making covenant with man
in forgetfulness of God. All things which prop up the false notions and the false
systems of men are lies and delusion. The house built upon this foundation will
fall, and great will be the fall of it. 2. It brings ruin instead of shelter. He daily
increaseth “ desolation.” The Cretians were always liars, and must be rebuked
sharply (Tit. i. 13). Multiplying lies will multiply sorrows and punishments. (a)
This ruin is certain. “ Hethat speaketh lies shall not escape” (Prov. xix. 5).
Not escape by devices of his own, nor “ covenant with the Assyrians.” Egypt with-
held its aid, and Assyria was turned against Ephraim—everything false is a broken
reed, 2 rotten support. (b) The ruin is great. “He that speaketh lies shall
perish” (Prov xix. 9). God is faithful and true; repeats denunciations against lies


@HAP. XIL]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.





and deceit, and warns all of their danger.
swearers, and them that fear not me, saith the Lord of Hosts.”
fore, to expect from the world what it cannot give, what is not in it.
infatuation to be willing to be deceived with the very shadow of profit.
like this there is no happiness “under the sun.”
“in all this, because I meet death in every walk.”


“‘T will be a swift witness against false
What folly, there-
What
In labour
“T have no comfort,” said one,
As a punishment for this


perversity God says, “ Behold, it is not of the Lord of Hosts that the people shall
labour in the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for very vanity.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


1. Men are so naturally averse to God
that they fly to any source for help.
Israel sometimes went to Egypt and
sometimes to Assyria; to one or both
according to their need. 2. Human
helps will be of no avail in the day of
trouble. Israel’s allies could not ward
off the judgments of God. 3. Men who
deal falsely with God will deal falsely
with their fellow-men. If the covenant
of God be despised, the contracts with
man will not be treated with sanctity.
A man’s word will not always be his
bond. 4. Men who forsake God will
find their own ways expensive and
ruinous. They get nothing whatever but
‘‘ wind,” and they bring upon themselves
the tempestuous and stormy wind (Jonah
and Job, xv.°2). Oil and labour are
lost, solemn leagues and covenants are
broken, and the more they increase lies
the further they run from their own
mercies, “ Anempty body meeting with
tempests will have much ado to bear up.


If Ephraim first feed upon the wind, and
then fall under the east wind, it must
needs go hard with him.”

Ver. 2. A controversy with Judah.
J. adhered to the house of David and
priesthood of Aaron—did not publicly
commit idolatry, and was not so guilty
as Israel; yet God blamed them and
would punish them. Professors may
have true forms and sound creeds, but
ungodly lives. Men may glory in titles
and descent, as Israel gloried in Jacob—
be commended for some things, and sadly
guilty in others. But God is impartial,
and will not spare any sins, but measure
out judgment according to the degree
and obstinacy of guilt. He admonishes
Judah, and indicates his purpose to visit
Israel “according to his doings.” ‘The
justice of God falls more severely on
those who degenerate from a holy parent
than on those who have no incitement
to good from the piety of their home.”


HOMILETICS.
Imiratine THE ExamMpLes oF Procenitors.—Verses 3, 4.


The Jews boasted of their relation to Jacob, but did not walk in his steps,
Their trusting in man was a contrast to his believing in God. The prophet reproves
them for their apostasy, shows how justly they were accused, and urges them to
imitate the virtues, not the faults of their ancestor. We must not live under the
shadow, but walk after the example of good men.

I. In Jacob we have an example of anxiety for God’s blessing. He was
eager to secure the birthright and the blessing connected withit. 1. In the wom,
‘“‘he took his brother by the heel” (Gen. xxv. 26). He was to have precedence
over the first-born by nature, and there was unconscious striving for Divine favour
in store for him. Larly indications of piety are encouraging. Some are chosen
from the womb, and preserved from sins of youth and riperage. Potential develop-
ment of children demands reverence and care in parents and teachers, Luther’s
schoolmaster took off his hat and bowed to his scholars when he entered the
school-room and thought of their destiny. The solemn possibilities of the future
should stimalate parents to train up children in the fear of God and the love of
truth. ‘Even a child is known by his doings.” 2. In after years “he had power


164 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (cHar. xm.


cee


with God.” In the womb he seized the heel; in manhood he cherished the same
spirit, and became a prince with God. One struggle was the beginning of the other.
The possession of God’s promise was the object of both. Having striven for it in
secret, he secured it in public. What he sought in childhood he gained in man-
hood. Larly impressions are the elementary tissue out of which mature life and
conduct are developed and organized. In this instance “the child is father of
the man.” Strength with God and power among men are the result of prayer and
providential discipline. Those who are filled with true ambition, who seek to be
great by following the example and serving the God of their forefathers, shall have
the precedency. But profane persons like Esau, worldly-minded in their desires,
and leagued with sin in their pursuits, will forfeit their birthrights and blessings.
“The elder shall serve the younger.” II. In Jacob we have an example of
power with God. “By his strength he had power with God.” 1. Power through
prayer. In great fear and distress, he was no match for the armed force of his
angry brother. He could neither resist nor flee. He found succour and strength
in God. He acted princely, was strong in faith, and prevailed over man.
In prayer our own strength is increased, and more is given to us by’ God,
We are strengthened with might by the Spirit in the inner man (Eph. ui, 16).
The nature of this prayer is briefly described. (1) Supplicating prayer. He
“made supplication unto him.” Supplication is earnest, constant prayer, and
often accompanied with crying (Ps. xxviii. 2; Jer. iii 21). (2) Wrestling
prayer. “ There wrestled aman with him until the breaking of the day.” The
word indicates a twisting of bodily limbs ; intense energy and exertion to prevail.
Jacob’s prayer was a struggle with the angel, physically and spiritually, in faith and
determination. (3) Prevailing prayer. “He had power over the angel and prevailed.”
He conquered, received a new name, “for as a prince hast thou power with God
and with men” (Gen. xxxii. 28), Luther on one occasion had wrestled hard with
God, and came leaping out of his closet, shouting, “ Vicimus, vicimus. We have
conquered, we have conquered!” 2. Power through human tears. “ He wept
and made supplication.” Vehement desires and earnest prayers often find vent in
tears. Hence ‘“‘to implore means to ask with tears,” says one. His tears were not
mere signs of weakness, but of strength ; not the relief of nature, but the expression
of spirit. Esau wept in anger and disappointment ; Jacob in prayer and penitence.
The tears of one were music to God ; the cry of the other, complaint to men. He
was a type of Christ, “who in the days of his flesh offered up prayers and suppli-
cations, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from
death, and was heard in that he feared.” 3. Power through Divine aid. Jacob’s
purpose was strong, and his natural power great ; but power to prevail was the gift
of God. His physical strength was impaired ; but though thrown in the contest,
he would not give up. “I will not let thee go except thou bless me.” The
blessing was all, the injured thigh was nothing to him. From night till break of
day he wrestled with human tears and Divine energy. His spirit and perseverance
put to shame his degenerate sons. It is folly boasting of ancestral glory without
possessing ancestral virtues. Let us imitate the life and remember the prayers of
our fathers. They were girt with the might of faith, and victorious over the Lord
of hosts, ‘‘ Out of weakness” they were “made strong,” and “ waxed valiant in
fight” with evil. Their glory is not the glory of the warrior, but the splendour of
princes with God. Their new name supersedes the old, as the sun exceeds the
stars. ‘ For by it the elders obtained a good report.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 3, 4. The wonderful combat. II. The olject of the combat. “ Bless
I The combatants. Jacoba man,and me.” In the night of sorrow and in
the angel, “the angel of the covenant.” the weakness of nature “turn to him


CHAP. XII.|


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


166





that smiteth.” The blessing of the Lord
maketh rich. JII. The issue of the com-
bat. ‘‘ Power over the angel and pre-
vailed.” Persevering, wrestling prayer
will always prevail. “The father in
wrestling with his child is willing enough
for his child’s comfortand encouragement
to take a fall now and then ; so it was
between the angel and Jacob. In this
blessed story, as in a crystal glass, we


see the great power and prevalency of:


private prayer; it conquers the con-
queror ; it isso omnipotent, that it over-
comes an omnipotent God” [ Brooks].
Jacob was knighted on the field. He
had two names, and both of them were
gained by wrestling; the one by wrest-


ling with his brother in the womb, the
other by wrestling with the angel at Pe-
niel. Jacob signifies a supplanter; Is-
rael means a prince with God—and the
reason of the new name was, that he had
“power with God and with men, and
had prevailed ” [Jay].

Ver. 4. Bethel. Revelations of God
to men. 1. God reveals himself by his
word. “ Hespake.” 2. The revelations


of one age are designed for the instruc-


tion of another. ‘Spake with us.”
Most important lessons from this place.

Bethel in Jacob’s time and Bethel in
Israel’s time ; or Bethel in its ruin and
Bethel in its royalty.


HOMILETICS.
THe Memoria, Namn.—Verse 5.
When Jacob felt the power of his antagonist he asked, “Tell me, I pray thee,


thy name.”


which do not concern them, the revelation is withheld ;
petitioner God gives blessings and encouragement.


significance and splendour.


I. The name in its absolute perfection.


To those who neglect what is plain and useful, and pry into things


but to the earnest
Here the name is unfolded in


“The Lord.” Jehovah, the true and


living God, distinguished from idols, and deserving the homage of his creatures.


2. Lord by creation.
another. The Lord our Maker.
than creation.
deem us,
choice.


submit to him as their “ Master and Lord.”
Of all things visible and invisible, of angels and heavenly


tion. “God of Hosts.”


spirits, of all creation, “ the host of heaven and earth” (Gen. ii. 1).


“Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price.”
His people do not resist his claims, nor serve other gods.


Greater proprietary right over us than we have over one
2. Lord by redemption.
He had only to speak to make us ; he suffered, gave his Son, to re-


This is a greater claim


3. Lord by
They willingly
II. The name in its universal rela-


This indicates


—1l. Supreme government. He has all power, directs and sustains all creatures, and


rules all things by his own will.


2. Supreme order.


“ Order is heaven’s first law.”


He keeps all things in subordination, and by him all things consist or stand to-


gether. 3. Constant obedience.
equipped, like Israel leaving Egypt.


and renders their service natural, pleasant, and delightful.
father, and a servant his master” (Mal. i. 6).


He leads his people, his armies, organized and
He reigns over them, enthroned in affection,


* A son honoureth his


4. Continual triumph. The hosts


of the Lord are in a state of martial discipline, to contend for the cause and fight


the battles of their captain.
“ fichting the good fight of faith.”
deadly opposed tc holiness.
infinite resources.
name ir its continual manifestation.


The cause of truth is a warfare.
The world is a foe to the believer, and sin is
But the Lord God of hosts has omnipotent power and
He will rule until all enemies are put under his feet.
“The Lord is his memorial.”


Christian life is


III. The


The name


Jehovali sxpresses his nature, and will ever be what it has been, a memorial to men.
God is ever to be remembered in his merciful and unchanging attributes (Ex. ill.
15). We need no images nor unlawful helps to remind us of God. His works
and ways declare his wisdom, truth, and love. He will be to us what he was to
Jacob and Moses, and all his people the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever. In


166 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (cuar. xm,








this name lies a fulness and sufficiency which the exigencies of life will reveal.
How little have we known of it in prayer and practical life! Seek to know more,
and get hope, strength, and success in Christian work. ‘Thy name, O Lord, en-
dureth for ever, and thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations.”


True Conversion to Gop.—Verse 6.


“ Therefore” to this God, who rules heaven and earth, Israel had only to turn
in truth, and they would find in him what Jacob found. God offers himself to his
apostate people, and all may claim a covenant right in him if they sincerely return
to him. This return or conversion to God is described.

I. Induced by the revelation of God’s character. “Therefore,” if God is
good, and able to save, they need not seek help from any other source. 1. Revela-
tions in his word. “Thy God.” We may disown, but can never cast off, ow
relationship to God as dependent, guilty creatures. He claims us in our sin, and
does not reject us when we returnto him. He is a God of love, not revengeful and
unmerciful. The revelations of his word are suited to quicken our hearts, to
destroy our “enmity with God,” and draw us to him in penitence and faith. We
clothe God in attributes of vengeance and thunder. But a persuasion of personal
love wrought in the soul will induce the sinner to return. ‘He hath loved. me.”
This is “the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus,” and revealed only in
him. 2. Revelations of his mercy to others. What God has done for others he
can do for us. Paul obtained mercy for a pattern to others. Bunyan and New-
ton were sinners saved by grace. Men in every age and in every degree of guilt
have been monuments of God’s mercy, and living examples of the power of God’s
word. ‘‘To show in the ages to come the exceeding riches of his grace in his
kindness toward us by Christ Jesus.” II. Evidenced by the practical duties
of life. When the sinner turns to God, he will bring forth fruits meet for repent-
ance (Matt. iii. 8). His life will not be empty profession, but filled with fruits of
righteousness to God and man. 1. Duties to man. The duties of the second
table, the weightier matters of the law, must not be overlooked. For if we disre-
gard man, whatever professions we make before God, our religion is vain. “ He
that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath
not seen?” (a) Mercy. Men are weak and miserable, and need sympathy and
compassion. We must not treat them with cruelty and injustice. Mercy wins and
“blesseth him that gives and him that takes.” On one occasion the ministers of
Alphonsus, king of Naples, complained that his lenity did not become a prince.
“What, then,” said he, ‘‘ would you have lions and tigers reign over you?’ Know
you not that cruelty is the attribute of wild beasts—clemency that of man?”
“ Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.” (b) Judgment. Justice,
by which we give to all mentheirdue. It is opposed to dishonesty, fraud, and un-
fairness of any kind. “ A just man,” says Jeremy Taylor, “does justice to every
man and to every thing; and then, if he be also wise, he knows there is a debt of
mercy and compassion due to the infirmities of man’s nature, and that is to be paid ;
and he that is cruel and ungentle to a sinning person, and does the worst to him,
dies in his debt and is unjust.” ‘All things whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye even so unto them, for this is the law and the prophets.” 2.
Duties to God. ,To cherish and keep up the fruits of conversion, we must “ wait,”
in communion with God. He only who begins can perfect the good work. Our
sufficiency in every duty can only come from God. Hence, “ wait on thy God con-
tinually.” (a) Wait in dependence upon God. Such as turn to God truly will
be careful to keep closely to God, and will feel their need of God daily. In him
we live, and move, and have our being naturally and spiritually. Dependence is
essential to spiritual life. Just as human wants promote human efforts and
energies, so trust in God will prompt to love and duty. (6) Wait with hope in


CHAP. XII.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 187





God. Waiting implies hoping. ‘The longer we wait the more we prove that our
expectation is not crushed, The hopeless will be a lifeless soul ; but hope kindles
desire, and makes “expectation rise.” “If we hope for that we see not, then do
we with patience wait for it.” (c) Wart continually upon God. There must be
no cessation, no interruption of this duty. The greatest joy destroys not our
dependence ; the greatest failure should not drive us to despair. Sad desertions
and apparent rejections do not warrant us to giveup. “ Wait on the Lord: be of
good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.”


Prosperity UNLAWFULLY GAINED AND ABUSED WILL BE TAKEN Away BY Gop.—
Verses 7—9.


Israel was not like Jacob, who wrestled with God, but like a merchant who
sought to become rich by fraud and oppression. Instead of keeping judgment and
mercy (ver. 6), Ephraim prided himself in deceit, and justified his wickedness by its
success. But God threatens to punish by stripping them of wealth, and throwing
them into privation and distress.

I. Prosperity acquired by unlawful means. When men make haste to be
rich, they rush into danger, and care nothing for the means, so that they accomplish
the end. Trade is lawful, necessary, and advantageous. Prosperity is a cause for
gratitude; but how many have become Canaanites in their character and conduct.
1. Deceit. ‘The balances of deceit are in his hand.” Fraud is sadly too common
now. Short weight and short measure, trickery and false dealing, evading legal
duties, taking advantage of the unwary, are a flagrant breach of the golden rule,
and an abomination to the God of truth (Prov. xx. 10). ‘That no man go beyond
and defraud his brother in any matter.” 2. Oppression. ‘‘ He loveth to oppress.”
Oppression assumes many forms. When artisans are compelled to buy at a loss at
their master’s premises, when their lawful wages are withheld, or their proper
rights trampled upon, there is oppression. In all abuse of power and insolent
treatment of others we see oppressive conduct. A bargain is sometimes unmerciful
as a robbery, and wealth gained by oppression is of little value. ‘ Better is a little
with righteousness, than great revenues without right.” II. Prosperity considered
to justify wicked conduct. “Ephraim said, Yet I am rich.” I| have succeeded ;
I must be right. If God prospers me, it is a proof that I am innocent, and that he
is not displeased with me. Men have pleas for their sins, and excuses to ward off
conviction from the word. Here we have—l. Prosperity defended in pride. “I
am rich.” Wealthy men are apt to be proud, to forget God, and claim honour and
reverence from their fellow-men. Oppressors are esteemed great by the world ; but
men are to be judged by God’s rule, not by man’s rule. “Envy thou not the
oppressor, and choose none of his ways.” 2. Prosperity defended, in self-
righteousness. ‘They shall find none iniquity in me.” They protest their
innocence, and declare none can find any sim in their buying and selling.
None suspect themselves less than the self-righteous and the proud. ‘They
see fraud and deceit in other traders, but not in themselves. They glorify
themselves, build up their fortunes, defend them by wickedness, and deceive
their own souls. ‘Thou sayest I am rich and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked.” III. Prosperity abused will be taken away by God.
God reminds them of forgotten mercy. In all their history he never left himself
without witness of his goodness. 1. Past prosperity was the gift of God. In one
brief sentence he reviews the past and comprehends the present. ‘‘I that am the
Lord thy God from the land of Egypt.” They were in bondage and slavery, and
God delivered them. They depended upon him for food, clothing, and guidance in
the wilderness. And they were grateful to God once, commemorated his goodness

“in feasts of tabernacles ; but now these mercies are all forgotten. They boasted in
their wealth, and sought it independently of God. God will therefore teach them


168 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA, [cHar XI.


dependence upon him. 2. Present prosperity is the gift of God. From Egypt up
to the present time have “I the Lord thy God” taken an interest in thee. Israel’s
possession of the land and deliverance from enemies, all their glory and wealth, had
come from God. We have nothing that we have not received, and we should not
boast as if we had not received it. Our skill and fortunes are from God, on whom
we all depended. If we attribute all to self, and nothing to him, he will claim his
own, and rob us of our enjoyments. 3. God who gives prosperity can easily take
it away. He “ will yet make thee to dwell in tabernacles as in the days” of old.
What a helpless people Israel were, when kings and nobles, rich and poor, left their
palaces to dwell in booths! How unsettled their residence, and how slight the
tenure of their worldly wealth which they held at the command of God! In God
alone is power and stability, true riches and happiness. If we indulge in oppres-
sion, pride, and deceit—defend acts of injustice, and trust to unlawful gains, God


will reduce us to poverty and want.
ed.”


‘Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminish-
Revenues without right can never be kept.
upon dishonest trades there will be no shelter.


When the judgment of God falls
“ Riches profit not in the day of


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


wrath.”
Ver. 8. The shadow taken for the
substance. ‘* I have found substance.”


1. It is folly to take wealth and
worldly honours as substance, for they
are emptiness and vanity, things that are
not (Prov. xxiii. 5; xxvii. 4). 2. Itis
wrong to think that we gain substance
and prosperity by our own industry and
skill. ‘“ Zhavefound it.” We say con-
cerning our houses and fortunes, Look
what “I have built for the house of the
kingdom, by the might of my power,
and for the honour of my majesty.”
3. Itis selfish to think that all our sub-
stance is given for our own use merely.
“T have found me out substance.”
Wealth, time, talents, and all are given
in trust, to be employed for the good of
others and the glory of God. 4. Itis
deceptive to think that wealth sinfully
acquired will increase our happiness and
protect our souls. The love of ease and
oppression, pride and dishonesty, ripen


5


for destruction. “The prosperity of
fools shall destroy them.” ‘In all
time of our wealth, good Lord, deliver
us.”

“ Find none iniquity in me.” Charac-
ters innocent before men ungodly in
the sight of God. Men considered suc-
cessful, remarkable for business tact, and
held up as examples, condemned and
punished by God.

Honesty is the best policy.
matter of policy. 2. As a matter of
principle. Character is property. A
man may not be rich in this world, yet
be rich towards God and in the genera:
good willofmen. ‘ Asa man can never
be truly honest unless he be religious,
so, on the other hand, whatever show of
religion .he may make, he cannot be
truly religious in God’s judgment un-
less he is honest in his conversation to-
wards his neighbour” [Bp Mant].


1. Asa


HOMILETICS.


Gop’s Meron or Treacuine THE PrEOPLE.—Verse 10.


Ver. 10 expands ver. 9, and further proves that the people had no excuse for


their ignorance and sin.


God had taught them from the first, “at sundry times
and in divers manners,” by the prophets.


Prophet succeeded prophet, and precept


upon precept, line upon line, were given to impress Israel, and wean them from


their sin.
I. The ministry of the prophets.


God speaks to men now by his word and providence.
“‘T have also spoken bythe prophets.”


Is-


rac] at Sinai requested that God wouid speak to them through human messengers,
and from Moses to Malachi they had proofs of mercy and condescension The


CHAP. XII.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 169








ministry of the gospel is a singular mercy (Is. xxx. 20), and suffers us not to walk
in our own ways as other nations do (Acts xiv. 16). The prophets were “holy
men of God,” exalted to dignity and consecrated to office. They had Divine teach-
ing and Divine authority in their message. To reject them was to despise God.
The eminence of their position and the solemnity of their words, aggravate the
guilt of sinners. God reveals his will and speaks to us in his word, and by his
servants now. Time after time, by minister after minister, does he urge men to
repent and turn to him. Fearful will be the punishment of those who disobey
his voice. “The Lord hath sent unto you all his servants the prophets, rising early
and sending them, but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear.” II.
Visions of the night. The prophets were seers, highly privileged, and favoured
with visions and dreams of the night, “ when deep sleep falleth upon men” (Job
iv. 13). These visions were—1l. Continual. ‘I have repeatedly and continually ”
instructed them by visions. Ezekiel and Daniel, Paul and John, had wonderful
visions. ‘If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known
unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him ina dream” (Num. xii. 6—8), 2.
Multiplied. “TU have multiplied visions.” No age was left without its vision of
the future. There were manifold dreams, and often a repetition of the same. If
men disregard, God speaks once, yea twice, that he may bless them with light and
truth. Such communications prove the dignity of our nature, the weakness of our
fallen condition, and the connection of oar souls with the invisible world. They
are only given in secret, and require special strength and preparation to receive
them (Dan. x. 7, 8, 17—19). ITI. Similitudes of nature. “ And used simili-
tudes.” All nature is a similitude or parable. Christ directs our attention to the
grass of the field and the face of the sky, the earthly and heavenly sides of crea-
tion. God himself employed them (Is. liv. 5; v.1), and taught the prophets to use
them. Christ taught by parables, and his servants cannot do better than imitate
him. The manner as well as the matter of preaching must commend itself to the
people. Material signs symbolize spiritual truths. “Things take the signature
~ of thought,” and we may find theology “ wrought in each flower, inscribed on every
tree.”
Tongues in trees ; books in the running brooks ;
Sermons in stones; and good in everything.


This method is simple and attractive, impressive and successful. The great teacher
sanctions and commends it, and ‘‘ the common people heard him gladly.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


The frequency and continuance of a
ministry indicate God’s care and kind-
ness to a people. But the more means
of grace we have, the more earnest and
powerful the sermons we hear, the great-
er our account if we persist in sin.
“ Ministers must turn themselves into all
forms and shapes, both of spirit and
speech, for the reaching of their hearer’s
hearts ; they must come unto them in


the most wooing, winning, and convinc-
ing way that may be. Only in using
of similes, they must—1. Bring them
from things known and familiar, things
that their hearers are most acquainted
with and accustomed to. 2. Similes
must be very natural, plain, and proper.
8. They must not be too far urged


[Trapp].


HOMILETICS.


Sins ReprovepD BY THE VIRTUES OF PROGENITORS, AND PUNISHED BY THE
ProvipENCE oF Gop.—Verses 11—14.


Israel did not permit themselves to be warned and taught, gave themselves up
‘o idolatry and superstition. Conduct which contrasted greatly with Jaco) their


170 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (cHar. X11.


ancestor. He had become rich by God’s blessing on honest toil, but they were
given to wicked customs, which provoked God to anger, destroyed the nation, and
banished the people out of the land.

I. Sins reproved by ancestral virtues. Jacob is again referred to that they
might learn his humiliation and servitude. 1. Jacob’s conduct reproves them.
His faith reproved their unbelief, and his devotion to God theiridolatry. He fled
from an angry brother, and served a covetous uncle for a wife, rather than marry
an idolatress (Gen. xxviii. 5). He laboured with diligence, endured injustice, and
trusted in God. But they were dishonest in their trade, and insolent in their be-
haviour. Honest poverty is better than dishonestly-gotten wealth. ‘I have
searched carefully through all the traditions of our family,” said Livingstone’s an-
cestor to his children round his death-bed, “ and I never could discover that there
was a dishonest man among our forefathers. If, therefore, any of you should take
to dishonest ways, it will not be because it was in our blood. [I leave this precept
with you—Be honest.” 2. Jacob’s blessing reproves them. He set out with his
staff alone, and became two bands (Gen. xxxii. 10). The Syrian ready to perish
became a mighty nation (Deut. xxvi, 25). God preserved the fugitive and exalted
himtohonour. But Israel, forsaking God and enriching himself, would be dishonoured
and driven into exile. God alone is the source of wealth, and honest toil the
spring of national prosperity. ‘“‘ Not what I have, but what I do, is my king-
dom,” says Carlyle. ‘A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that
maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent” (Prov. xxviii. 22, 23; x. 22). IL.
Sins punished by God’s providence. Israel’s ingratitude and corrupt practices
brought severe judgment upon them. 1. The desert of their sins. (a) It was
found in places of sacred note. In Gilead and Gilgal, sacred in history and beau-
tiful by nature, ‘‘ only man was vile.” Spots of signal blessing may become scenes
of pollution and guilt. Home, the house of God and the closet, may be conse-
crated to idols. (0) It was prevalent as the stones in the field. In east and west,
in palace and eottage, it abounded. Like a malignant disease, it spread around.
(c) It was morally corrupting. Their altars were like heaps of dung-hills ; theiz
worship was vanity, and their sacrifices worthless. Endless gifts and innumerable
altars only corrupted the morals, and cursed the people. Mere forms will not
satisfy the conscience. Moral decay will bring physical decay, and worthiessness
will be punished by vanity. (d) It provoked God to anger (ver. 14). The provo-
cations were most bitter and grievous. All sinis offensive to God, but sins against
light and truth, sins in religious privileges and in Divine warnings, are exceeding
sinful. (e) It was constantly committed. Committed against the goodness of God,
in delivering them from bondage, guiding them like a shepherd, and teaching them
with a prophet. God keeps and blesses men, but they despise his love, and bring
condemnation upon themselves. 2. The punishment of their sins. ‘ Therefore
shall he leave his blood upon him.” (a) The penalty shall not be taken away.
His blood shall rest upon his own head ; for he is guilty and deserves death (Lev.
xx. 9; Josh. ii, 9; 2 Sam. i. 10). Blood had been shed profusely, and the
guilt of his sin remained upon his soul, and punishment cannot be longer delayed.
(0) The dishonour done to God shall be given to him. Idolatry is an insult to
our Maker, robbing him of his glory, and giving it to the likeness of a man or a
beast. Those who reproach God will be dishonoured themselves. For centuries
shame and reproach have been the lot of God’s unbelieving people. What a warn-
ing tous! What an aggravation of misery to be inflicted by God who desired
to biess! If “his Lord” turns against the sinner, who can deliver him? Shame
and contempt on earth, “shame and everlasting contempt” hereafter! ‘Them
that honour me, I will honour; and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed.”





CHAP, XI.}





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


171


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 10—-14. Memorials of God’s
goodness to a people. I. Heraised them
from meanness to honour. Jacob a
poor fugitive, Israel a mighty nation. JT.
He raised them from bondage to liberty.
“ Brought Israel out of Egypt,” and gave
them freedom to worship God. He thus
acquires special gratitude and service.
III. He taught them by his prophets.
By Moses (ver. 13) and by the ministry
of others (ver.10). IV. He guided them
by his providence. As Jacob kept
sheep, so Israel was kept and preserved
by God. Special care and kindness
were displayed towards them as a flock
(rs. ixxx. 1; Is. Ixiii, 11).

Ver. 11. Certain places and certain
altars do not palliate guilt, but testify
against it, and prove all forms to be vain
and deceitful. Considering the mean-
ness of our origin, we should magnify
God’s grace in present prosperity. The
Atheist expects riches from diligence
alone ; the slothful without it; but the
true Christian from the blessing of God
with it. ‘‘The blessing of the Lord, it
maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow
with it.”


Ver. 12,13. Scripture narratives are
useful to remind of sin, warn us of
danger, and urge us to God. They were
written for our learning (Rom. xv. 4).

Ver. 13. “By a prophet of the
Lord.” God chooses the humblest in-
struments to do the mightiest works.
“A prophet he is purposely called, and
his name concealed: 1. To show that
the work was done, not by might nor
by power, but by God’s Spirit (Zech. iv.
6). 2. To show what God will do for
his people by the prayers, and for the
sake of his prophets, when they are
most shiftless and hopeless. 3. To let
this unworthy people see how much God
had done for them once by a prophet,
how little soever now they set by such.”

Heirs of grace may suffer humiliation
and distress. In Christ the fullest
measure was seen. His people must
have their portion.

Ver. 14. “ Let us remember if we will
not have God for owr God in service, we
must have him in spite of ourselves as
our Lord to judge and punish us. Let
us rather prove his love than his aveng-
ing justice” [Fauwsset].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XII.


Ver. 1. Wind. Plants can feed upon
ashes, the worm upon earth, but man’s
spiritual appetite requires higher and
more nutritious food. Wind will not
nourish, To chase after worldly plea-
sure, and depend upon worldly aid in
time of distress, will disappoint and toss
the soul in disquietude and misery. The
sinner’s labours are a great nothing.
‘* My life is wind.”

Ver. 2. Recompense. God would
have us read our sins in our judgments,
that we might both repent of our sins
and give glory to his justice [Bp Hall].

Ver. 3, 4. Power. We might be like
Barthvolomew, who is said to have had
a hundred prayers for the morning, and
as many for the evening, and all be of
no avail, “ Fervency of spirit” is that
which avails much [Bp Hall]. He that
has never prayed, can never conceive ;


and he that has prayed as he ought, can
never forget how much is to be gained
by prayer [Dr Young].

Prayer ardent opens heaven, lets down a stream
Of glory on the consecrated hour

Of man, in audience with Deity.

Ver. 5. God. When holy Augustine
walked by the sea-side, wrapt in the
meditation of God and of his ways, he
heard a voice which bade him lade the
ocean with a cockle-shell. We may
sooner drain the ocean with such a shell,
or with a spoon, than the perfections of
God with our largest understandings
[Caryl]. A king is there where his
court is, where his train and retinue are ;
so God the Lord of Hosts is there spe-
cially present where the heavenly guard,
the blessed angels, keep their station and
rendezvous [Mede].


Ver. 6. Judgment, The one thing


172





constantly reiterated by our master ; the
order of all others that is given oftenest,
“Do justice and judgment.” That’s
your Bible order ; that’s the “service of
God,” not praying or psalm-singing,
Unless we perform Divine service in
every willing act of life we never per-
form it at all, The one Divine work—
the one ordered sacrifice—is to do jus-
tice ; and it is the last we are ever in-
clined to do [Ruskin].

Ver. 7, 8. Rich. Endeavour to be
honestly rich, or contentedly poor ; but
be sure that your riches be justly got, or
you spoil all [Izaak Walton]. He that
resteth upon gains certain, shall hardly
grow to great riches; and he that puts
all upon adventures, doth oftentimes
break and come to poverty. Itis good,
therefore, to guard adventures with cer-
tainties that may uphold losses [ Bacon].

Ver. 10. Similitudes. I remember
well, how once God preached to me by
a similitude in the depth of winter.
The earth had been black, and there was
scarcely a green thing or flower to be
seen. There was nothing but blackness
as you looked around—bare hedges, leaf-
less trees, and black, black earth wherever
you looked. On a sudden God spake
and unlocked the treasures of snow, and
white flakes descended, until there was
no blackness to be seen, all was one
sheet of dazzling whiteness) I was
seeking the Saviour, and it was then I
found him. I remember well that ser-
mon. ‘Come now and let us reason


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


(omar. xth


together ; though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as snow; though they be
ted like crimson, they shall be whiter
than wool” [Spurgeon].

Ver. 11—14. Vanity. In his re-
ligion. His holiness is vain conceit;
his natural light, Egyptian darkness ;
his religious forms, “‘a vain show in the
flesh.” In outward circumstances. His
rank, a bauble; his beauty, a fading
flower; his wealth but glittering dust.
“ All is vanity and vexation of spirit.”
Jacob’s life. No kind of studious en-
tertainment doth so generally delight
as history, or the tradition of remarkable
examples: even those who have an
abhorrency or indisposition toward other
studies are yet often much taken with
historical narrations. And such are
those which present to us the lives and
examples of holy men, abounding with
wonders of providence and grace: no
attempts so gallant, no exploits so illus-
trious as those which have been achieved
by the faith and patience, by the pru-
dence and courage of the ancient saints;
they do far surpass the most famous
achievements of pagan heroes. No
triumphs are comparable to those of
piety ; no trophies are so magnificent
and durable as those which victorious
faith erecteth; that history therefore
which reports the res geste, the acts
and sufferings of most pious men, must
in reason be esteemed, not only the
most useful, but also the most pleasant
[Barrow].


CHAPTER XIII.


>


Critica Norzs.] 1, Eph.) formerly enjoyed great distinction in Israel. Men listened with fear


and trembling to him (Job xxix. 21) ; he exalted himself, secured the rule among the tribes, and
then seceded and established a separate kingdom. By the introduction of the worship of Baal and
the custom of calf-worship he offended and died. Two conditions of Eph. are contrasted, prosperity
and destruction. 2. Sin} Add sin to sin, ¢.¢, continue in former transgressions. “ This seems to
bea third stage in sin. First, under Jeroboam, was the worship of the calves. Then, under Ahab,
the worship of Baal. Thirdly, the multiplying of other idols (2 Kings xvii. 9, 10), penetrating and
pervading the private life, even of their less wealthy people” [Pusey]. Say of them] Such things
as these mentioned, Kiss] An act of adoration (Ps.1i. 2; evi. 20). 8. Therefore] punishment shall
be swift. Their goodness is fleeting as the dew, and the morning cloud; their prosperity worthless
as the chaff or the smoke. 4. Yet] Another contrast between the idolatry of Israel and the merey
of God t’ .nem (ef. xii. 10), 5. Know] ¢.e. cared for them, and loved them as his own (Pa. cxliv.
33; Amos iii. 2). 6.] A reproof from catile growing wanten in abundant pasture ; the very thing


cHaP. Xt. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 1738








FP ee RE Rafe


against which they were warned (Deut. viii, 11; xxxii. 15). 7 Therefore] Israel, the flock in the
field, shall be devoured by wild beasts, fierce as a lion, swift as a leopard, and savage asa bear robbed
of her whelps (1 Sam. xvi. 34; 2 Sam. xvii. 8), 9.] This destruction is entirely their own, Against
God, men are against their own help and welfare. 10. Where] thy king to save when Assyrians attack
cities? Where thy judges who surround the king and help to administer right ? God gave and God
punished them through aking. 12. Bound up] like money in a bag, and put in seeret places (Job
xiv. 17; 1 Sam. xxv, 29). The punishment preserved, kept in store, is certain to come (Job xxi,
19), 13.] Pains and violent agony, sorrows like a woman in child-birth shall come (Jer, xxx. 6).
Unwise] in not foreseeing and escaping the danger (Prov, xxii. 3). 14.] May be applied to Israel’s
deliverance from Assyria, then to future times of restoration, which typify redemption in Christ and
resurrection from death at last. Believers should never despair. 15.] The name Ep/. shall become
a truth, and the blessings promised shall not be lost (Gen. xlviii. 4, 20; xlix. 22), say some. But
promises are only fulfilled when persons keep to the conditions. In Ephraim and in the Christian
Church those only are saved whe walk with God. Whatever be the appearance of the fruitful
field, judgments will be like a fearful tempest which will destroy all before them (Jer. iv. 11; xviii.
17; Ezek. xix. 12). He] The conqueror will plunder and destroy all costly vessels. 16. Her God]
An aggravation of guilt because against him who made himself her God. he destruction was com-
plete. The living children dashed to pieces, and the unborn to he destroyed in their mother’s womb
(2 Kings viii, 12; xv. 16; Amosi. 13). Not a memorial left of all the outward pomp and pros-
verity. When God is forsaken for the world, the choice will be regretted.


HOMILETICS.
SELF-ESTIMATION THE Measure or Revicious Inrturencr.—Verses 1—3,


God raised Ephraim to chief power, and Judah was afraid of him. Through
God’s goodness he was respected ; but when he sinned, he lost his reputation and
honour. When he exalted himself, he offended and died. When we walk humbly
before God we prosper; but when we are proud and forsake him we die.

I. Humility exalts. “When Ephraim spake” all reverently feared him.
“ Princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth.” Men whom God
blesses have mighty influence, 1. Humility exalts before God. God looks upon
the contrite, and dwells with the humble. The world counts nothing great
without display. The “honour that cometh from God only” is despised. Men
like Job, Isaiah, and Paul, who abhor themselves in dust and ashes, are considered
weak-minded. Humility is not a heathen, but a Christian, virtue. Conscious de-
pendence upon God, as the animating principle of life in all its relations and duties,
is opposed to the self-esteem and self-confidence of modern philosophy. ‘True
humility will lead to dependence upon God, and those who trust most in God will
be the strongest and most honoured by God. Such “the king delighteth to
honour.” 2. Humility exalts before men. Self-conceit will lower men in the
estimation of others; but a true spirit and noble life will gain real worth. The
dogmatical opinion, the fancied superiority, the over-weening pride of men will
clothe them with shame (Prov. xxvi. 12; xxix. 20). We lost our position through
pride, and must recover it by humility. He that would build a lasting fame must
begin low. David was as distinguished in retirement as in the court of Saul.
Washington as a private citizen was admired as much as Washington the com-
mander of an army. Some become great by elevation, others by condescension,
We stoop to conquer, and ‘before honour is humility.” When God exalts and
magnifies men, they are formidable, as Joshua and Moses. When crowned with
virtues, and strong in faith, they are greater than Alexander and Caesar. “It is an
uncontroverted truth,” said Swift, ‘that no man ever made an ill figure who under-
stood his own talertts, nor a good one who mistook them.” ‘Every one that
exalteth himself shall be abased ; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.”
II. Self-exaltation destroys. The proud and insolent fall into danger. “A
man’s pride shall bring him low; but honour shall uphold the humble in spirit.”
1. Self-exaltation tends to idolatry. Man unduly values himself, and raises himself
to lofty heights only to fall from them.-Men are proud of rank, talent, and success.
They adore their gold and silver, and make idols of vanities. Disaifected toward
(od, they run to excess, unchecked by Divine goodness, and emboldened by humap


!
(CHar. XILL


‘


174 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.





flattery. They lean “to their own understanding,” and reject the word of God,
They cut out and carve images of their own, multiply and deify gods with their own
fancies, and worship them. “Go not after other gods to serve them, and to
worship them, and provoke me not to anger with the works of your hands.” 2.
Self-exaltation tends to self-degradation. ‘Let the men that sacrifice kiss the
calves.” What a degradation for king and counsellors, priests and people, to fall
down to calves! What do we see now? The objects may be changed, but the
same spirit is displayed. We have rivals of the Living God in the forms of
human device, Potentates and princes kiss the feet of the Pope. Rich and poor
adore the consecrated wafer, and fall before the golden crucifix. In the Christian
Church, we have ‘‘craftsmen,” and gods that oppose and exalt themselves “above
all that is called God.” Mortals sitting ‘‘as God in the temple of God,” and
demanding the homage and service which are due to God. God has made us for
himself, and to kiss any idol is to degrade our mental and moral nature. “Stand
up; I myself alsoamaman.” 3. Self-ewaltation tends to self-destruction. “‘ When
he offended in Baal, he died” by the judgments of God, which he brought upon
himself, (1) It increases sin. ‘They sin more and more.” They added one sin
to another, until it became habitual and universal. Sin is essentially cumulative
in its nature and consequences. One sin contains and brings on another. The
perversion of religion leads to more ungodliness. To the guilt of idolatry is added
obstinate persistence in evil courses. Under the pretence of ignorance and infirmity,
idolators pursue their malicious designs. 2. I¢ brings destruction. ‘He died.”
Death, spiritual and eternal, is the penalty of sin. Israel died as a kingdom and
nation. God is the fountain of all life, and departure from him is real death.
“The wages of sin is death.” All prosperity and reputation based on wickedness,
will violently and swiftly pass away like the morning cloud and the early dew.
Every fleeting object in nature preaches the vanity of idolatry, and the transient
hopes built upon it. Judgments upon the proud and impenitent will bring utter
desolation. ‘As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no more; but the
righteous is an everlasting foundation.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. Natural conscience cannot
but stoop to the image of God in whom-


their own understanding.” 2. An idol
is the work of man. “ All of it the


soever found. When Ephraim was first
in the throne he became formidable ;
but when he fell openly from God he
grew feeble; first he was a terror and
then a scorn [Trapp].

Ver. 2. Idolatry. TI. Its origin. A
human creation. ‘God hath made man
upright ; but they have sought out many
inventions.” Discontent with God,
they have invented a new mode of hap-
piness. The first invention was the
parent of many, all marked by the same
folly and lies. Craftsmen now make
their own deities, and worship crea-
tures inferior to themselves. 1. An
idol ts the conception of man. It
was the device of the human mind.
It represents what the mind has
imagined, and is no better, no higher
than its creator. “Idols according to


work of the craftsmen,” who completed
with their hands what they conceived
with their minds. Diana was said to
have come from Jupiter (Acts xix. 35) ;
but men stamp their names upon and
give their hearts to their own workman-
ship (Is. xliv. 9). The scene at Sinai
is often repeated in history and experi-
ence. “These be thy Gods, O Israel.”
IT, Its expense. ‘ Molten images of
their silver.” Wood and stone were not
good enough. Gold and silver were
thought to honour and exalt the gods.
Wealth is often lavished on selfish ends,
and men spare no expense to decorate
and support their own idols. They tax
their minds and spend their silver in
the service of sin. What a blessing if
men would devote as much time and
energy in the service of God as in the


cHAaP XIII.)


cause of idolatry! III. Its degradation.
“ Men kiss the calves.” 1. It degrades
human nature. When we exclude
spiritual interests, inferior matters be-
come great, and the same energy of
mind that might be employed for good
will be expended in evil. The mind
ccutracts its dimensions, impairs its
powers, by devoting itself to objects be-
low itself, and lowers itself to the level
of those objects. But applied to higher
objects, it is expanded, elevated, and
strengthened. God’s service dignifies
human nature by giving it useful ac-
tivity, wise direction, and Divine influ-
ence. 2. It degrades the Divine nature.
The conceptions and ideas of a corrupt
mind are in harmony with that mind.
Its worship is “‘ according to the flesh.”
As man cannot rise to God, God is
brought down to the level of sinful man.
“ And changed the glory of the uncor-
ruptible God into an image made like
to corruptible man, and to birds, and
four-footed beasts, and creeping things.”
IV. Its guilt. ‘They add sin to sin.”
Idolatry is not a mere mistake, nor in-
firmity, but a guilty departure from God,
1. Men sin by forgetting God. We never
forget anything in which we take great
interest. The carnal mind takes no
interest in God, is enmity against God,
and is not subject to the law of God.
God is excluded from the thoughts and
life of the wicked. 2. Men sin by sub-
stituting idols for God. Men will
worship something. If the true God is
forsaken, they make gods of their own.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA 1%





This provokes God to anger, and brings
misery upon them. Impenitence after
Divine chastisement, perseverance in
known sin after Divine warning, will
ageravate human guilt, and result in
“fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation, which will devour the
adversary.” ‘Kiss the Son, lest he be
angry, and ye perish from the way.”

Ver. 3. The prosperity of the wicked.
I. It is of short duration. It may
flourish and makea fair show for a while;
but it vanishes away. It is evanescent
‘Cas the early dew,” which glistens only
to pass away. It is deceptive “as the
morning cloud.” You admire its beauty
and changing hues. But its existence is
short ; it is only a temporary substance,
and like men’s goodness, “it goeth
away” (ch. vi. 4). JI. It ts worthless
in tts nature. If it continues long it
does not satisfy. Like chaff, it is light
and unsubstantial ; lifted up, the sport
of every wind, and carried along to be
seen no more. “As smoke out of the
chimney,” empty, baseless, and inflated,
it disappears for ever. Such the pros-
perity of Ephraim, and such the pros-
perity built on any wickedness. The
wicked may seem to live and flourish ;
but they sin, die, and perish eternally.
‘Virtue makes man upright and stable ,
vice, empty and unstable,” says an
author. ‘They are as stubble before
the wind, and as chaff that the storm
carrieth away” (Job xxi. 18; Ps i. 4;
xxxv. 5; Prov. xiv. 32).


HOMILETICS.


Gop THE onLY Saviour.—Verse 4.


The people may be worthless, and driven away like smoke, but God is the same
as of old. None else should be their Saviour. They should know and worship
no other but Jehovah.

I. This character of God is declared in his word. Since we cannot know
God but by revelation, how precious is that volume in which all manifestations of
him are embodied. We are constantly reminded of his attributes and relations,
The knowledge of them is of supreme consequence, and repeatedly set before us,
that we may not forget. “There is one God ; and there is none other god but
he.” “Iam the Lord, and there isnone else: thereis no god beside me.” “Thou
shalt have none other gods but me.” “Is there a god besides me? Yea, there is no
god ; I know not any.” “I am the Lord, that is my name; and my glory will
I not give to another; neither my praise to graven images.” II. This character
of God is displayed in his providence. “The Lord thy God from the land of


176 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. {cHap. XII.


en ee RRR EER ACL TR mr Mn


Egypt.” Israel are not only reminded of God’s revelations previously given, but
of his character displayed in his providence towards them. The events of thei
history are briefly stated, and their own experience testifies tothe truth of God’s word.
He had guided and provided. for them unceasingly, and saved when there was no
strange God among them. Men have abundant proofs in their own lives that God
alone can save. In sickness and distress, in domestic and national history, the
goodness of God has been displayed. The sinner and the saint have been delivered
from dangers, and can declare this. ‘Ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God
beside me?” III. In proportion as we know this character of God are we ob-
ligated to him. “Thou shalt know no God but me.” It is not enough to ac-
knowledge God as a Saviour. His claims and glory must not be shared with
another. He has natural and moral rights over us. We owe duties and homage
to him. We must evince our belief, and express our regard, by constant obedience
to his law, studious efforts to do and delight in his will, in enjoyments and suffer-
ings, and recognizing his presence in his word, providence, and grace. We.are for-
bidden to indulge in atheism, polytheism, and idolatry. We must know and fear
Ged only. We must love and serve him, with all our heart, soul, and strength.


No Saviour BESIDE Gop.— Verse 4.


There is no Saviour beside me.

I. What the wordsimply. That God is—1l. A powerful Saviour, proved from
the nature of redemption and the events of providence. No sins can limit his
grace, no enemy baffle his skill. Save to the uttermost (Heb. vii. 25). 2. A con-
stant Saviour. Present with Israel in Egypt, the wilderness, and the land of Ca-
naan, Present with us in every time of need. 3. An only Saviour. No other could
do what he did for Israel. No other can pardon our sins, renew our hearts, and
save our souls. ‘There is salvation in none other, “ for there is none other name
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.” II. What the
words forbid. hey forbid—1. The worship of tmages. We are not to make any
likeness of things in heaven above, earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth.
God is the object of supreme worship and affection ; incapable of representation
to the senses, like false deities of men. 2. The worship of God by images. We
dishonour God when we attempt to worship him “in gold, or silver, or stone,
graven by art and man’s device” (Acts xvii. 29). 3. All hypoerisy and formal-
ity in worship. Excessive use of forms and ceremonies is forbidden. God isa
spirit, and all worship must be in spirit and in truth. Is he the only Saviour?
Then let us thank him and trust him more. In private and in public, let us
earnestly and constantly look to him. “ Whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved.”


Hep in THE Exiaencizs or Lire.—Verse 3.


God loved and provided for his people in the wilderness. ‘In the land of
great drought” and danger he never forsook them. Hence they should know and
follow him. God is with his children now in the exigencies of life.

I. Our sinful condition is a wilderness. A barren and unfruitful land, where
no water is. Without God the sinner is destitute of happiness and hope. He can
neither quench his thirst nor satisfy his desires in sin. But God leads his people
from sin to Christ. He knows the anguish and despair of the penitent, and gives
joy and peace in believing. II. Our outward circumstances are a wilderness.
What uncertainty and change! What disappointment and sorrows! We are
often led into solitude and distress, and have to cry unto God. We are often
thrown into danger and surrounded by enemies. “ They wandered in the wilder-
ness in a solitary way: they found no city todwell im. Hungry and thirsty, theiz
soul fainted in them. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he de-


OHAP. XIU] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 177


=





livered them out of their distresses.’’ III, Our inward experience is a wilder.
ness. We are not self-sufficient. We do not carry our own resources within us,
We have neither power to defend nor wisdom to guide us. Day by day we de-
pend upon God, and have to live by faith, hope, and obedience. But God knows
our emptiness, and sends manna from heaven. His presence is continually with
us, and he provides a table in the wilderness. We are brought safely “ through
a land of deserts and of pits ; through a land of drought and of the shadow of
death ; through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt.”
“Happy art thou, O Israel ; who is like unto thee, O people saved of the Lord?”
God’s goodness forms a marked contrast to the conduct of our fellow-creatures. We
should show pity to one another. But, alas! we scarcely know a friend in trouble!
God’s goodness should lead us to know and love him. Does God know that we are
weaned from the world—in love with the means of grace, and ready to follow and
seek him at all times ?


Divine GoopNESS TURNED INTO Diving Wratu.— Verses 5—8.


God knew and loved Israel in the wilderness, commended them in their low
estate, but complained of them in their prosperity. When they were delivered from
the privations and hardships of the desert, fixed in the land of vineyards and _fig-
trees, they forgot God in prosperity and pride, and brought upon them righteous
displeasure.

I. Goodness displayed to the helpless. ‘I did know thee in the wilderness.”
When Israel were a helpless and dependent people, they often cried to God in dis-
tress, and he heard and helped them. ‘Their situation yielded no supplies, but
God permitted them to want no good thing. He gave them water from the rock
and bread from heaven ; suffered not their raiment to wax old upon them, noi
their foot to swell in travelling ; sent them his Holy Spirit to instruct, and ordin-
ances to bless them. “ He hath not dealt so with any nation.” We are under
the immediate care of God, who provides for us and defends us. Some one says,
“Life is a great want, and therefore should be one continual prayer.” II. Good.
ness displayed to the ungrateful. “Therefore have they forgotten me” (ver. 6).
Their luxury, sensuality, and pride, made them insolent and secure. Worldly
prosperity often feeds men’s pride, and makes them forget the giver of it. They
remember God in want and sickness, but forsake him in plenty and ease. ‘‘Je-
shurun waxed fat and kicked” (Deut. xxxii. 15,18). Men seek pasture, self-
gratification, and not God. They abuse every gift, because their hearts are exalted
against him, Prosperity, which ought to draw them to him, alienates them from

‘him. They are ungrateful in proportion as they should love and praise him. Thus
selfishness ever tends to hardness of heart and ingratitude. “If aman lacks grati-
tude,” says Pitt, ‘‘ when there is infinite obligations to excite and quicken it, he
will be likely to want all other virtues towards his fellow-creatures, whose utmost
gifts are poor compared with those he daily receives from his never-failing Al-
mighty Friend.” “Then beware lest thou forget the Lord which brought thee forth
out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.” III. Goodness turned to
wrath. ‘Therefore [ will be unto them asa lion,” &c. Those who forget God
in the gifts of his providence, wax fat end get proud in their prosperity, only pre-
pare themselves a prey to retribution. Ingratitude at all times is most base.
Capt. Speke found in the natives of central Africa the belief that “ ingratitude,
or neglecting to thank « person for a benefit conferred, is punishable.” If ingra-
titude from man to man be odious, in the sight of God it is without excuse and
despicable, Its guilt is increased in a fourfold proportion, and must be estimated
by the greatness of the giver, the unworthiness of the receiver, and by the number
and excellency of the blessings bestowed. The ungrateful are ‘‘a generation of
vipers,” who sting the bosom in which they have been nursed. How “ sharper
than a serpent’s tooth” is an ungrateful child! 1. Wrath most severe, ‘1 will

le


178 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; HOSEA. {cHAP. XIil





—_


meet them as a bear that is: bereaved of her whelps.” God is not overcome and

carried away by passion as men. He is not vindictive in feeling, and unjust in
his proceedings. But these figures set forth his determined opposition to wicked-
ness, and the righteous visitation of judgment upon those who turn mercy into
wrath. His anger will be fierce as a leopard watching by the way to seize upon
travellers ; furious as a bear enraged by the loss of her young; strong as a lion,
the most terrible beast of the forest. 2. Wrath most destructive. The very vitals
are destroyed. “ Rend the caul,” devour them “and tear them.” The indignation,
the punishment, seems almost beyond description. God can torture the soul, and
cause his anger to burn against the sinner. “ Who knoweth the power of his
wrath?” He should be feared according to his anger, and praised for his goodness
(Ps. xc. 11). His mercy should lead us to repentance and gratitude. Those who
despise “ the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering,” treasure
up unto themselves “ wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 6. Therefore have they forgotten spirit. This consists not only in avoid-


me. Ingratitude. 1. A common sin.
2. Most unnatural. 3. Most unreason-
able. 4. Mostdangerous. ‘How shall
I pardon thee for this? thy children
have forsaken me, and sworn by them
that are no gods: when I fed them to the
fullthey committed adultery ” (Jer. v. 7).
Forgotten me. Forgotten their depend-
ence upon me; their relationship to me ;
their duties to me. If not theoretically,
men practically forget God (Ps. x. 4).
Sins often connected with ingratitude,
pride, hard-heartedness, selfishness, and
idolatry. If men take gifts and feed
upon them, in forgetfulness of the Giver,
it need not be thought strange if God


withholds them. Prosperity abused ,


will be taken away. ‘“ When God gives
thee prosperity, do thou enjoy it with a
cheerful and thankful heart,” says Bp
Reynolds, ‘In all time of our wealth,
good Lord, deliver us,” is a prayer never
out of season in times of ease and plenty.

First—Selfish indulgence. ‘ Accord-
ing to their pasture, so were they filled.”
God “ giveth us richly all things to en-
joy.” But the enjoyment of Christians
differs from the excess of the sensual.
We are not to feast without fear; to
make provision for the flesh, to fulfil the
lusts thereof. Many mistake and sup-
pose everything their own. They are
only stewards. The first lesson in the
school of Christ is self-denial. Where
does this appear in the lives of some?
Temperance is one of the graces of the


ing drunkenness and gluttony, but in
not “filling ourselves according to our
pasture.”

Secondly—Pride, ‘‘ They were filled,
and their heart was exalted.” Hezekiah
rendered not according to the benefits
received ; for “ his heart was lifted up.”
The apostle charges them that are rich
in the world not “to trust in uncertain
riches,” and shows the tendency there
always is in worldly success to gender
vanity and false confidence. Hence it
is said, “‘ Pride compasseth them about
as a chain; violence covereth them as a
garment.” They think highly of their
understanding, as if wisdom grew with
wealth. They speak with authority,
and answer roughly.

Thirdly — Unmindfulness of God.
“Therefore have they forgotten me.”
How common for men in the midst of
their sufficiency to lose the sense of their
obligations to God, dependence upon
and need of him! Hence the prayer of
Agar against being rich, “ Lest I should
be full and deny thee, and say, Who is
the Lord?” Hence the caution to the
Jews when they entered Canaan, “ Lest
thou forget the Lord which brought thee
forth out of the land of Egypt.” The
admonition was unavailable. This gives
us a very humbling view of human
nature. View it, not in the dregs of
society, but as seen in common and re-
putable life. It will not appear so
innocent, so amiable so noble as some


CHAP. XIII.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


179





represent it to be. Lord, what is man,
that thou art mindful of him? Let the
fact arouse us to caution and circum-
spection, if Providence smiles upon us,
and we are placed in easy and comfort-
able circumstances. Watch and pray,
lest ye enter into temptation. Seek
grace which only can help to manage a


snares and discharge its duties. It was
said of Vespasian, that he was even a
better man for being an emperor. So
the prosperity of some, instead of destroy-
ing them, displays and increases their
excellency ; they are rich, not only in
temporal things, but in faith and good
works [Jay].


full estate properly, so as to elude its


HOMILETICS.
Moray Suicipe anp Divins Hueue.—Verse 9.


The prophet once more refers to the cause of their sorrow, and declares God to
be their only help when they were ruined and undone.

I. Moral suicide. ‘“O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself.” Many moral aa
well as physical evils may be traced to want of well-trained spirituai power, well
exercised self-control, and to absence of life in the soul. Solomon contrasts the
influence of sin with the health of a true heart. ‘A sound heart is the life of the flesh;
but envy is the rottenness of the bones” (Prov. xiv. 30 ; xvii. 22). Sin is madness,
and not medicine; death, and not life. 1. All sin is destructive. It is essentially
death. It ruins the soul. “The soul that sinneth it shall de.” It often destroys
reputation and character. It always destroys liberty, peace, and happiness. It is con-
trary to the constitution and health of the soul ; hence the misery which is ever felt.
It wounds the conscience, impairs the judgment, and brings disease and manifold
deaths. He whoforsakes God and worships idols ‘‘destroyeth his own soul. A wound
and dishonour shall he get” (Prov. vi. 32, 33; v. 22, 23). 2. Voluntary sin ts volun-
tary destruction. “Thou hast destroyed thyself.” The sinner commits moral suicide,
and has no one to blame but himself. Circumstances do not force him to sin. Fate,
admitting such a thing, does not compel him. God destroys him not; for he is not.
willing that any should perish, but that all men should be saved (Jer. xxvii. 13,
Ezek. xviii. 31). Men are the authors of their own destruction. They may blame
whom they like, but the guilt rests upon their own head. Every bait to sin is the
temptation to suicide—to self-murder. Sinners die because they will die and not,
live. They are inexcusable, and make their doom more intolerable, because the. :
choose death rather than life. ‘‘ He that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul ,
all they that hate me love death.” II. Divine help. ‘In me is thine help.” A
wise man will call the best medical help he can find in times of sickness aad
danger. This disease defies the skill of man, There is a consumption of the
body which no man can cure ; and there is a consumption of the soul more deadly
in its nature. Man may destroy himself, but God only can restore him. 1. Help
the most free. We might have been left to perish in our sin, but God loved us
and saved us in our blood (Hzek. xvi. 6). God was not desired, not constrained
to do anything. Desert there was none. “According to his mercy he saved us.”
“By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of ourselves, it is the gift of
God ; not of works, lest any man should boast.” 2, Help the most suitable. As
the beauties of nature are adapted to the senses, and food to the taste, so the gospel
is suited to our wants and woes, our weakness and danger. 3. Help the most
efficient. Nothing less than an Almighty Saviour would do for mankind. The
wounds are sore and the breach is great, who can heal thee? (Lam. ii. 13). “I
am the Lord that healeth thee.” The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. The
grace of God subdues the proudest rebel and upholds the weakest believer. God is
mighty to save. “I looked, and there was none to help ; and I wondered that there
was none to uphold ; therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me.” 4. Help
the most extensive. God can not only help beyond desert, but save to the uttermost


180 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (cHar, Xm,











all that come unto him. None are excluded, except those who exclude themselves
from his help. Everywhere the invitations of Scripture are full, free, and universal.


“Whosoever will, let him come and take of the water of life freely.”


take hold of my strength.” ;


I know the grace is on
The gift of faith is all


“Let him


y thine,


ivine ;


But if on thee we call,

Thou wilt the benefit bestow,

And give us hearts to feel and know,
That thou hast died for all,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Themalady is of no ordinary character.
It is not a mere slight indisposition—
a trifling attack—a little derangement
of the system, but a sickness unto
death—an incurable disease.

The physician is able, kind, and free.
“Without money and without price”
cures are givep. Others heal the hurt
slightly (Jer. vi. 14), or physicians of
no value; but God heals, and we are
healed (Jer. xvii. 14). We hear much
of “the cure of souls,” let us not forget
to care for them. God has healed and
will heal by his word, Spirit, and grace,
“Lord, be merciful unto me; heal my
soul, for I have sinned against thee.”

First, Sin, self-destruction. It destroys
the health and moral beauty of the soul ;


disables from duty, and ends in death
Secondly, God, the sole restorer, work-
ing in us perfect soundness, saving us
and granting us help in time of need.
Nothing can destroy us before God
but sin, the only real evil ; and sin is
wholly from us, God can have no part
in it. But every aid to withdraw us
from sin, or to hinder us from falling
into it, comes from God alone, the sole
source of our salvation. ‘The soul, then,
must ever bless God, in its ills and its
good ; in its ills, by confessing that itself
is the only cause of its suffering ; in its
good, owning that, when altogether un-
worthy of it, God prevented it by his
grace, and preserves it each instant by
his Almighty goodness [St Bernard].


HOMILETICS.


Gop tHE onty Kine.—Verses 10, 11.


God shows again how he will help them. When their kings and princes—whom
they sinfully sought, and whom God would take away in displeasure—could not
save them even in one city, he would prove their King and Helper.


I. God is our lawful king.


“T will be thy king,” &c.
self the source of wisdom and counsel, of power and authority.


God proclaims him-
1. Man requires


aking. Our moral constitution is a witness that we are under authority, made to
obey laws, and are only happy in loyal obedience. To satisfy his wants, man has
often gone to his fellow-men, trusting to them, because thought to be great, wise,
and even divine. Hence nations and ages have had their heroes, poets, orators, and
prophets. But man still cries fora king. No human person can satisfy the to-
tality of his nature, remove his guilt and fear, and reconcile the conflict between
conscience and heart. God alone is the rest and satisfaction of the soul. No code
of laws, no idea of society, though pure and transcendant as that of Plato, can
supply the want of a king. God in Christ reveals his claims, and demands our
homage and obedience. He is our Divine lawgiver and sovereign Lord. ‘ Behold
your king!” 2. God alone should be our king. “ We are the people of his pas-
ture and the sheep of his hand.” He feeds and guides us by his special providence,
like a shepherd leading his flock. He has dominion over heaven and earth, there-
fore worship is due to him. He demands obedience, and to refuse is most unrea-
sonable aud most insulting. ‘“ For God is the king of all the earth.” II. God is


CHAP. XIII} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 181








often rejected by the choice of an unlawful king. ‘Thou saidst, Give me a
king and princes.” Israel rejected God and demanded Saul, and subsequently
chose Jeroboam to free them from the taxes imposed by Rehoboam. They de-
spised God, and looked to man for help. “Nay, but we will have a king over us,
that we may also be like other nations, and that our king may judge us, and go out
before us, and fight our battles.” God is often put i competition with others.
Half-prayers and half-allegiance are given to him. Some other god is sought and
served with him. God is sometimes rejected, and an idol set up to govern our
hearts and lives. In distress and social pressure we flee to man. Pleasure, pas-
sions, and the world rule over us. God is dethroned, and our affections are
centered on self, or an unlawful sovereign. The heart can only have one power
supreme, one king enthroned at once. "Whatever monarch that may be, it dictates
toevery faculty and every effort, saying, ‘‘Do this,” and it doesit. Obedience is
willingly and continually given. As the beginning, such will be the end ; as the rule,
such will be the result. ‘ But where are thy gods that thou hast made thee? let
them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble; for according to the
number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah.” III. When God is rejected and
another king chosen the end will be misery. “Where is any other that will
save thee in all thy cities?” God was against Israel and their kings. As they
began by rejecting God, so they end in rejection by God. Civil commotions,
anarchy and murder, were the repeated issue. Not one in all their cities could help
them when God had forsaken them. Sinful rulers will be tyrants, and their rule
will ever prove impotent and destructive. 1. Sometimes our supports are taken
away. “I gave thee a king in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath,”
What God gives or permits us to take to ourselves he can take away. By rejecting
God we cannot defeat his purpose. We may have our wish granted, yet be disap-
pointed in our choice. The gift and its loss will be a grief tous. What we inor-
dinately desire, what we are determined to have in opposition to God’s will, whether
granted, withheld, or taken away, will be the occasion of wrath and tribulation to
our souls. ‘Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn
aside and serve other gods and worship them, and then the Lord’s wrath be kindled
against you.” 2. If our supports are not taken away they are rendered impotent.
“Where is any that may save thee?” Kings and princes may be shorn of power.
_ Danger may threaten every city in the nation, and blessings unlawfully gained or
ungratefully abused afford no shelter. All courses and carnal policies of men will
not avail against God. If we forsake God disappointment will meet us in every
condition, and a way which is cursed at the beginning will be more cursed at the end.
In anger a king was given ; in wrath was he taken away. There is no help but in
God. “I will be thy king.”
INIQUITY RESERVED FOR Future Punisnment.—Verses 12, 13.


The nation had accumulated wickedness from time to time. This sin, though
spared, was not forgotten, but sealed up and reserved for future judgment. The
affairs were coming to a crisis, like a woman in travail, and could not be avoided.
Unless they rescued themselves from the danger, the result would be that individ-
ual citizens and political existence would entirely perish. Hence, they should nct
neglect the means, but earnestly seek God before it was too late.

I. Iniquity is treasured up by God. “ The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up.”
Men treasure or seal up what they want to keep. Sinis hid by a wonderful pro-
vidence to be accounted for at a future time. ‘“ My transgression is sealed up in a
bag, and thou sewest up mine iniquity.” 1. God does not forget iniquity. He
numbers our steps, keeps a strict account of our actions, and brings sin to our re-
membrance. We are not to presume on God’s forbearance, and think because sin
is not punished it is forgotten (Ecc. viii. 11). This is to ignore the future and
treasure up “ wrath against the day of wrath” (Rom. ii 5). 2. God does not for


182 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA, [cHar. XIIL





give iniquity without repentance. If sin is not confessed and forsaken, it is stored
up. -Unrepented sin is an ever-increasing store, hid from the sight of men, but of
which God will lose nothing. Sinners may excuse and defend themselves in pride
and self-righteousness, but a day of accounts will come. “Is not this laid up in
store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? To me belongeth vengeance and
recompense.” II. Iniquity treasured up by God will be punished. “The
sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him.” 1. This punishment ts cer-
tain, “ shall come.” There is an order of sequence in moral as in physical law,
and we inevitably suffer if we break that order. Results are fixed and certain.
Punishment may be long delayed, but cannot be avoided. Delay does not diminish
its certainty either here or hereafter. ‘‘ Evil pursweth sinners.” 2. This punish-
ment is distressing. Agony unexpected and inevitable. Sorrows often in this life,
and in the life to come the full cup of bitterness. ‘ Avenging deities are shod
with wool,” but they never pause nor mitigate their judgments. We may doubt
or deny the fact, but we see day by day that “the mill of God grinds late, but
grinds to powder.” ‘ Never sin went unpunished,” says one, ‘‘and the end of all
ein, if it be not repentance, is hell.” III. If men do not escape from iniquity
treasured up they are foolish. “For he should not stay long in the place.” He
that lingers between death and life, and vacillates between God and the world, “ is
an unwise son.” If we “stay long,” and delay in anything, we never bring forth
results. Decision is necessary. Despatch is better than discourse. Men who halt
are at the mercy of every temptation and fall before the foe. ‘I never defer till
to-morrow what can be done to-day,” declared one. But when immortal interests
are at. stake, what folly to hesitate or resist. How fatally “ unwise,” to put off
repentance and return to God. Judgment is impending, to-morrow may be too
late. ‘A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself: but the simple pass
on, and are punished.”

Lose this day, loitering, ’twill be the same story

To-morrow, and the next more dilatory.

The indecision brings its own delays,

And days are lost lamenting o’er lost days.

Are you in earnest ? seize this very minute!

What you can do, or think you can, begin it!

Boldness has genius, power and magic in it |

Only engage, and then the mind grows heated ;

Begin it, and the work will be completed!


Tue GREAT Conqurst.— Verse 14.


To preserve his people from despair, God promises to help them. Though like
dead men in the grave, he will redeem them, and they shall triumph over death
and destruction. He will never repent of this purpose concerning them.

I. The mighty enemies. 1. We have death. “I will redeem them from death.”
(a) Death as a spiritual condition. Sinners are dead in trespasses and sins. Sense-
less and helpless in their spiritual condition. But the Holy Spirit quickens, and
Christ redeems them from their danger. The sentence against them is blotted
out, the curse of sin removed, and they are delivered, raised to newness of life in
Christ Jesus. (b) Death as a reigning power. Men live in captivity, are held in
bondage, all their lifetime through the fear of death. It is a universal and resist-
less foe. It spares no rank and pauses for no request. It rends our hearts with
grief, fills our homes with sorrow, and the grave with its victims. (c) Death asa
mortal enemy: An enemy to Christ and his people. Till death is conquered,
Christ cannot realize his hopes nor his people gain their inheritance. The media-
torial glory will never be acquired without this conquest. “The last enemy that
shall be destroyed is death.” 2. We have the grave. ‘“ The power of the grave.”
Like death, the grave has a mighty power, and is a triumphant foe. ‘The king
of * rs” makes this his palace. “ ‘The grave is my house ” (Job xvii. 13) ; “ ery-


CHAP. XIII.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. HOSEA.





ing, Give, give” (Prov. xxx. 15). It has received its countless millions, and still
eraves and yawns for more. “ Hell and destruction are never full.” (a) As a
mighty terror, and (2) a final-resting place, it must be conquered to gain the crown
and the kingdom, II. The glorious conqueror. “J will ransom, J will redeem,” says
God. None but God could deliver from such a state of misery and death. God
in Christ conquers death and hell. “ He will swallow up death in victory ” (Is.
xxv. 8). The Captain of our salvation has entered into the conflict for us, and
come out victorious. ‘He hath abolished death, and brought life and immortality
to light.” “He hath destroyed him that had the power of death” (Heb. ii. 14),
and his victory becomes ours by faith. “I am the resurrection and the life : whoso
believeth in me shall never die.” III. The wonderful method of conquest. “I
will ransom.” “I will redeem.” 1. Christ has paid a price for our deliverance.
He hath redeemed us by his blood, “ Who gave himself a ransom forall” (1 Tim.
ii. 6; Matt. xx. 28). He became near of kin, by taking our nature and suffering
in our stead. The first and second death are overcome by him. He is the plague
of death and the destruction of the grave. Death the curse is turned into a bless-
ing; death an enemy is changed into a friend, and the grave is made the portal to
glors. “ Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood.” 2. Christ
does now morally deliver us. The blessing is not a prospective one. It is en-
joyed in the present time, as an earnest and foretaste. The Spirit enlightens and
grace redeems from the power of sin and corruption, The people of God are free ©
and live without fear of death. The weakest believer confronts his deadliest foe,
answers every accusation by pointing to “ the salvation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who died for us.” We are not merely conquerors, but triwmphant, “more than
conquerors through him that loved us.” The benefits of redemption have become
“‘nowers in the world to come,” and powers in the heart and life of a Christian.
We have read and often seen the glorious victories over death and hell. “Is
this dying? How have I dreaded as an enemy this smiling friend?” cried Dr
Goodwin. ‘The battle’s fought,—the battle’s fought, and the victory is won,
—the victory is won for ever!” said Dr Payson. ‘‘ Victory! glory ! hallelujah !”
were the words of another. “O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is
thy victory?” 3. This proceeding of God will never be reversed. “ Repentance
shall be hid from mine eyes.’’ God is unchangeable in his nature and promise.
“The gifts and calling of God are without repentance” (Rom. xi. 29). He
never revokes what he once gave to his people. Though they sin and fall into
danger, he will love and deliver them still if they call upon him. “ My covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips” (Ps. lxxxix.
34). Alterations and after-thoughts belong to us. God dwells upon his covenant,
and repeats it continually, that we may love and obey it,


EarTaty Fotsrains or Ensoyments Faru.—Verses 15, 16,


The prophet had spoken of the blessings of the righteous, now he pictures the
desolations of the wicked. The pomp and luxuries of sin, the glory and vanity of
the world, shall perish, and leave not a wreck behind. Its springs of joy shall be
dried up, and its fruitful scenes made desolate as a ruined city.

I. Earthly prosperity is a fountain which fails. ‘Though he be fruitful
among his brethren, an east wind shall come,” &c. Men may be planted in favour-
able circumstances, grow and flourish for awhile, but the “wind of the Lord”
comes, and their leaves wither. Cities may be populous and powerful, but the
enemy can destroy them. ‘Samaria shall become desolate.” All fair scenes and
national fruitfulness can be laid waste as the wilderness. “The treasure of all
pleasant vessels” can be taken away, and the infant of days, with the women of
beauty, be “‘ dashed to pieces” by deeds of barbarity. II. Earthly pleasure is
a fountain which fails. ‘‘ His springs shall become dry.” The pleasures of the


1&4 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA.


[cHaP. XIIL


world are soon exhausted. They are shallow and deceitful ; “as a stream of brooks
they passaway” (Job vi. 15). As rivers roll their hasty current to the sea ; so the
sum of sinful pleasures ends in endless sorrow and desolation. III. Earthly joy
is a fountain which fails. The joys which spring from domestic prosperity and
success in business are soon cut up and withered at the root. “Joy hath passed
me like a ship at sea,” said David Scott the painter. ‘“‘ Folly” is always “joy to
him that is without wisdom.” “No joys are sweet and flourish long, but such as
have self-approbation for their root, and the Divine favour for their shelter,” says


an old divine.
nothing can destroy it.


If our prosperity springs from Christ, and is rooted within us,
But if it is centered in the world, and enjoyed without


God, then it will be cast up by the roots, and consumed by the blasts from —


heaven.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


1. Often the most outwardly prosper-
ous, by abuse of prosperity, ripen most
for the judgments of God. God may be
preparing the wind “from the wilderness,”
2. When these judgments do fall upon
them, they are the most destructive. A
very great wind, “the wind of the Lord :”
“ an east wind shall come,” which is most
terribleand tempestuous. 3. Nothing will
beleft to defend them. Adults shall “fall
by the sword,” the beauty of the present,
and the seed and hope of the next gener-
ation shall be cut off. Without fruit-
fulness in good works, springing from
the Spirit of Christ, all other fruitful-
ness will be fouud as empty as the un-


certain riches of the world ; the wrath of
God will wither its branches ; the springs
that watered it will become dry, and it
shall be spoiled, and come to nothing.
“Tn short, ‘tribulation and anguish’ be-
long to those who have rebelled against
God, and are fixed immoveably on all
who impenitently persist in rebellion ;
and their woes will be far more terrible
than any that are experienced in that
cruelty and carnage which sometimes
attend the storming of populous cities.
From such miseries and murders, and
from sin, the fruitful parent of all sorrow,
‘Good Lord, we beseech thee to deliver
us’” [Scott].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIII.


Ver. 1—3. Humility. The more
God honoureth men, the more they
should humble themselves. The more
bounty God shows, the more humility
he requires. Humility teaches us in
our works to draw strength from God,
not from ourselves; in our graces to
ascribe their goodness to God, and
their weakness to ourselves [Reynolds].
Praise is a comely garment. But though
thyself doth wear it, another must put
it on, or else it will never sit well on
thee. Praise is sweet music, but it is
never tuneable in thine own mouth.
If it cometh from the mouth of another
it soundeth most tuneably in the ears of
all that hear it [Jermin].

When people once fall into the habit
of admiring and encouraging ability as
such, without reference to moral charac-
ter, they are on the highway to all
sorts of degradation.


Kiss. Read the first chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, and see if there
is one exaggerating touch. That
chapter is a terrible but true picture of
the lower strata of humanity. What
were the deities in heathen times}
Jupiter was a monster, Mercury a thief,
Mars a sort of cannibal, who drank the
blood of his victims. Such the gods
of the heathen; and like gods lke
people.

Ver. 4. Thy God. The claims of
God are enforced by reference to that
particular event by which the Hebrews
were separated from the nations, to re-
mind them, and the world by them, that
the character of God is displayed in the
agency of his providence, and that in
proportion to our knowledge of that
character are our obligations to him.
Each individual is here addressed, that
each may feel that he has means of


CHAP. XII]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


185


a


knowing, and constantly surrounded
with motives for personally loving
Sod.

Ver. 5. Know thee. This cannot
mean a mere acquaintance with their
condition and circumstances ; for what
can be hid from him whose understand-
ing is infinite? But it intends two
things. First: He knew them so as to
provide for them. Secondly: He knew
them so as to approve of them and ac-
knowledge them. The word now has
this meaning often. ‘ The Lord know-
eth the way of the righteous” [Jay].

Ver. 6. Pastures. A curious instance
of a change of instinct is mentioned by
Darwin. The bees carried to Barbadoes
and the Western Islands ceased to lay
up honey after the first year. They
found the weather so fine, and the
materials for honey so plentiful, that
they became exceedingly profligate, and
ate up their capital, worked no more,
and amused themselves by flying about
the sugar-houses and stinging the negroes
[Bib. Treasury].

Ver. 8. Bear. When the female
is robbed of her whelps she is said to be
more fierce than any other animal ;
hence many sayings refer to her rage,
and are applied to the fury of violent
men. “I will tear thee to pieces as a
bear which has cubbed ;” ‘“ Begone, or
I willjump upon thee asa bear.” When
a termagant goes with her children to
scold, it is said, ‘‘ There goes the she-
bear and her whelps” [ Roverts]

Ver. 10, 11. King. Edward the


Black Prince, having conquered and
taken prisoner King John of France,
nobly condescended to wait on his royal
captive the same night at supper.
Christ having first subdued his people
by his grace, waits on them afterwards
to the end of their lives [ Whitecross].

Under which king, Bezonian? speak or die.

King Henry LV.

Ver. 12. Bound up, as indictments
drawn up and tied together against the
day of trial ; or as bills and bonds tied
up that they may be ready against the
day of account, when all must be paid
[ Poole].

Ver. 14. Triumph. In this world,
he that is to-day conqueror may to-
morrow himself be defeated. Pompey
is eclipsed by Cesar, and then falls by
the hands of conspirators; Napoleon
conquered nearly all Europe, and was
then himself conquered. But the
Christian’s conquest of death is absolute.
The result is final. He has vanquished
the last enemy, and has no more battles
to fight [ Foster]

Ver. 15, 16. The world has delusive
charms to flatter with a face of substan-
tial bliss, when in reality it is a fleeting
shadow [ Wilson]. Iam more and more
convinced of this world’s tastelessness
and treachery—that it is with God alone
that any satisfying converse is to be
had [Chalmers].


We should not stoop so greedily to swallow
The bubbles of the world so light and hollow ;
To drink its frothy draughts, in lightsome mood,
And live upon such empty, airy food.





CHAPTER XIV.


Crrrican Norss.] The guilt of the sinful nation and the panes awaiting have been de-


seribed: now there is a call to conversion, and a promise that Go
Unto] Lit. «p to, not merely towards the Lord.


Heb. intensive, expressing strong desire.


1. Return]
“ Great


will bless abundantly.


is repentance which maketh men to reach quite up to the throne of glory,” is a Jewish saying.


2. Words] Not empty, yet outward gifts not required ; only words, and these even found.


Ree-]


Lit. receive the good, viz. the words of sincere repentance, given by thyself (1 Chron. xxix. 14),


Calves] 7. ¢. our lips shall be for calves.
praise, the fruit of our lips (Heb. xiii. 5).


horses (warlike power) and the work of our hands (idolatry) are entirely renounced.


Instead of offering sacrifice we give thanksgiving and
8. Save] Israel relied upon Assyria and Kgypt; now


Father-


less} Descriptive of Israel’s condition without God; a reason for turning from idols, and an induce-


ment to prayer (Ex. xxii. 22; Deut. x. 18).


&,] Promise of mercy follows.


First heal all injury


186 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. (CHAP. XIV.





caused by apostasy. Freely] Gratuitously and with perfect spontaneity (Ezek. xvi. 60—63). “The
word means impelled thereto by Himself alone, and so moved by His own essential bountifulness,
the exceeding greatness of His goodness, largely, bountifully ”’ [Pusey]. 6.] This love will be
manifest in great blessings. Dew] Not the early, but constant, refreshing, and enlivening dew (ch.
vi. 8, 4; Prov. xix. 12; Job xxix. 19; Is. xxvi. 19) ; thro’ which Israel will grow splendidly, deeply
root itself, and spread abundantly. Lily] A beautiful and most productive plant. 6. Smell] like
Leb., rendered fragrant by its cedars and spices (Cant. iv. 11), ‘“ The rooting indicates stability, the
spreading of the branches, propagation and the multitude of inhabitants; the splendour of the
olive, beauty and glory, and that constant and lasting; the fragrance, hilarity and loveliness ’’

Rosenmiiller|. '%.| Hence Israel compared toa tree. Return] Those forced to leave shall return and

well in safety. Others take His shadow, the shadow of the Almighty (Ps, xvii. 8; xci. 1). Revive
as the corn] Enjoy a second life and great increase. Others, will revive, 7. e. cause the corn to grow,
culture it for support. Scent] The fame of Israel (Cant. i. 3), like wine of Zed., celebrated for aroma
and flavour. 8.] God speaks now. Idols] Eph., I have no longer to plead with thee, on account of
idols. I have nothing more to do with them, and thou hast not. I have answered and observed
him, ¢.e. answered and cared for him, when idols did not. I am like a green fir, green winter and
summer alike, and whatever fruit thou yieldest, it is from me. Some represent Eph. speaking, and
acknowledging its flourishing condition; but God reminds him that it is owing to his blessing.
Both senses represent God as the shelter and the life of the nation. 9.] A most important concluding
lesson. Wise] Those who are not, cavil at God’s word, and his providence to them is a complete
riddle, The prudent—“ properly gifted with understanding, the form of the word expressing that
he was endowed with this understanding, as a gift of God”—shall know and discern. Right]
Straight and direct, leading to the object. Ways which lead some to life and others to death, ac-
cording to the attitudes which men assume towards God. The just, the righteous, walk in them and
live; sinners deviate from them, stumble and perish. Moses announced to Israel that this would be
the result to them (Deut. xxx. 19, 20); Paul tells us that such will be the effect of the gospel at all
times (1 Cor. i. 18).


HOMILETICS.


Reau Conversion to Gop Dzscrisep.— Verses 1—3.


There is a change in the words of the prophet now. Wrath and threatening ara
past, and “sweetness and light,” like the sun, burst from the dark clouds. Every word
of the invitation is full of mercy, urgent upon Israel and upon all who have gone
astray. God is still unchangeable and true to his covenant. There is hope for all
who sincerely repent and return to him. The character of this return is clearly
described in the text.

I. Its necessity. ‘For thou hast fallen.” This is the first dawn of light upon
tne sinner. God discovers to him the abyss into which he has fallen. 1. He has
fallen by iniquity: not a mere stumble, but a fall. All sin is a deep fall. A
fall from God into idolatry ; from holiness into guilt; from honour to disgrace. A
fall from which we cannot raise ourselves. It is a pit of distress, “an horrible pit
and miry clay” (Ps. xl. 2), out of which God alone can deliver us. “ Remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works.” 2. He
has fallen by his own iniquity. Nations often ascribe their calamity to civil dis-
sension, foolish rules, and disuse of military discipline: to the cruelty of the enemy
and reverse of fortune ; but the fall is caused by opposition to God, and contempt
of his word. Individuals blame their circumstances and their fate ; but sin is their
own act and deed. The fali is the result of their own conduct. The sinner eats
the fruit of his own way, and is filled with his own devices. But though fallen he
need not stay in his sin. The way of return is open. The invitation is given.
“Return unto the Lord thy God.” II. Its nature. “ Return (up to) the Lord
thy God.” ‘True conversion is abandonment of all sin and restoration to all good.
1. Idolatry is abandoned. ‘ Neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, Ye are our gods.” It is folly to trust to creatures which God has made
How much greater folly to adore things which we ourselves have made. The peni-
tent renounces all idolatry, and views God as the Lord his Ged. Williams gives a
graphic account in his missionary enterprises of the conversion of a chief from
idolatry. Romatane decreed the destruction of his temples, the conflagration of his
gods, and the erection of a house for God. We must not pride ourselves in monw


cHaP. XIv.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. 184





ments of genius, gains of the world, and external performances in religion. Conse.
cration to God excludes every kind of worship to strange gods. ‘“ Make no mention
of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth” (Ex. xxiii. 13),
2. Former sins are renounced. Israel were guilty of two things—reliance upon
foreign aid and upon their own warlike strength. (a) Human dependence is re-
nounced. ‘ Asshur shall not save us.” They will betake themselves no more to
an arm of flesh ; for vain is the help of man. Human helps must never take the
place of God. All merit and self-righteousness must be renounced. ‘The best proof of
true repentance is utter forsaking of former sin. (6) Dependence upon self is re-
nounced. The horse was a symbol of their own, as well as foreign strength. “A
horse is a vain thing for safety, neither shall he deliver any by his great strength.”
The strongest self-defences are nothing when most needed. Sennacherib with all
his cavalry was no match for the angel of God. We must not look to creature
strength, to personal merit, for salvation. “The sufficiency of my merit is
to know that my merit is not sufficient,” says Quarles. ‘Some put their trust in
chariots, and some in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our
God.” 3. Entire return to God is seen. The true penitent rises up from his
fall, feels that he cannot stay in distance, and returns right up to God. Many
vow and never perform, resolve and resolve again, but never forsake their sins.
Others shed tears, feel desires, and take some steps towards repentance, and con-
clude that they are safe. The prodigal started home, did not merely turn his
face, nor stop half-way; but ‘“‘came to his father,” up to his father’s house, quite
home.—Many come out of Egypt who never enter Canaan; put on garments of
sorrow, who never rend their hearts and return to God. Half-conversions are un-
safe ; ‘almost a Christian” is not enough. Nothing short of actual conversion wil
do; an entire change is necessary. Whatever distance we travel, however high we
mount in religion, if we come short of Christ we cannot be saved. “If thou wilt
return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return wnto me” (Jer. iv. 1). III. Its method.
“Take with you words and turn to the Lord.” ‘Words are not necessary to God.
We do not induce him to bless us by mere words. We may argue and persuade
men to grant a thing ; but words without meaning are sounding brass and tinkling
cymbal. 1. Take words of confession. God does not require costly gifts; nor
burnt-offerings of goats and bullocks; but a humble and contrite heart ; a full and
free confession of sin. ‘If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” 2. Take words of prayer.
“Say unto him.” God himself supplies the words and directs our hearts. We are
sensible of inaptitude and ignorance ; but he bestows the spirit of prayer, and orders
our speech before him (Job xxxvii. 19). Method is helpful in everything, and the
ordering of words in prayer, words marshalled like military ranks, may quicken and
discipline. ‘Method is the soul of business,” Ask for two things. (a) Take
' away iniquity. The true penitent is most concerned about sin, desires to be free
from its consequences and dominion, to be entirely cleansed and preserved in the
future. “Ali iniquity.” We must not have partial zeal, but strike at all sin, great
and small. God must take it away from our hearts and lives. We can neither
remove its guilt nor destroy its power. God’s grace can deliver, renew and save.
“Tf the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed.” (b) Receive us graciously.
When God has pardoned sin and imparted grace, he accepts our imperfect services.
“Give what thou demandest and then require what thou wilt,” says Augustine.
The gifts are from God and then received by him. “ For all things come of thee,
and of thine own have we given thee.” 3. Take words of thanksgiving. “So will
we render the calves, 7.e. the fruit, of our lips, giving thanks to his name” (Heb. xiii.
15). Those that receive much from God “ will offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually.” The expressions of the lips will spring from a grateful heart. Lip
service without sincerity of heart is an abomination to God: but a holy life isa
perpetual thank-offering. The sacrifices of the law are abolished ; but God’s good-


igs HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSHA. (CaP. XIV.


ness lays us under deep obligation to praise him. The penitent feels that he can-
not praise too much, and resolves that the language of his lips and the fruit of his
life shall be given to God. “ Excellent speech becometh not a fool: much less
do lying lips a prince.” IV. Its motive. 1. God will hear prayer. This we may
presume, and hence the request. “Take words.” But this truth is specially re-
vealed and taught in the word of God. The grand fact which distinguishes God
from heathen deities is the fact that he is accessible. “O thou that hearest
prayer!” We have every encouragement and every motive to pray. “It is the
first thing wherewith a righteous life beginneth, and the last wherewith it doth end.
So much of our lives is celestial and divine as we spend in the exercise of prayer,”
writes Hooker. 2. God will have mercy upon the miserable. “ With thee the
fatherless findeth mercy.” Men without God are fatherless ; orphans in a sinful
world, Israpl was helpless, and the prey to every oppress@#. The sinner forsaking

x0d forsakes his own mercy. Christ does not leave his people orphans, or com-
fortless (John xiv. 18), God, “the Father of the fatherless,” will have compassion on
returning sinners. Men are cruel, but God is kind, and reserves his greatest mercy
for ereatost need, God governs not as an absolute monarch, but as a tender father.
He has greater pleasure in showing his goodness than his power. ‘‘ The poor com-
mitteth himself unto thee: thou art the helper of the fatherless.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.
Ver. 1. Fallen. The holy contrast-


ed with the sinful state of man. Fall-
en in nature and condition, in pursuit
and desire. God calls men to him by
his prophets and his providence, ‘O
Israel.” “Tt is well to hear when God
calls through his deeds; but it is better
to hear his words.”

Return. 1. The object. “The Lord
thy God,”—not to a strange god. The
God of mercy, and the fountain of all
good. 2. The reason. “Thou hast
fallen.” Thoughts of a fall should make
us think of rising from our sad condition.

Ver. 2. Take words. The influence
of words in prayer—l. Not necessary
to inform God of our wants. 2. A
means of stirring up and relieving our
own hearts. Words require more exer-
tion than thoughts, and influence our
minds by their sounds. 3. Exercise a
power over others often when uttered—
prompts them to kindred feelings and
acts, and quickens them with pathos,
passion, and thought. 4. When our
words accord with our hearts and the
Scriptures we shall be encouraged, 5.
God supplies’ us with words ‘adapted
to our varied feelings and necessities.
Come to God with his own words.
Plead help in his own promises, and
you shall find it. “Men must as well


look to their words, as to their feet,
when they come before God; and see
that their affections in prayer be not
without answerable expressions in lips.”

Say unto him, Mentally and vocally,
with spirit and speech. Prayer is not
the labour of the lips, but the travail of
the heart, and God hath promised to
answer his people before they cal
(Is. Ixv. 24). By calling upon his name
we neither inform him of what he knows
not, nor move him to show us more
mercy than he intendeth. But yet
prayers are necessary, as a means which
God will have used, that he may receive
what he of free mercy giveth. Besides,
it prepareth us holily to enjoy the
things received; and makes us ready
either to wait for them or to want them ;
and to be content, that he may be glori-
fied, though we be not gratified [Trapp].

Prayer to God to take away all in-
iquity, contains a confession of sin and
expresses our faith, that we place our
whole hope of recovering our lost purity
and of obtaining salvation in the mercy
of Christ. Receive good. What other
good can we offer, than detestation of
our past sin, with burning desire of
holiness? This is the burnt-offering.
Lastly, we will repay the calves of our lips,
is the promise of that solemn vow, most


CHAP. XIV. ]


MHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA.


189


————“-“-  __e-e,——————————


acceptable to God, whereby we bind
ourselves to keep in continual remem-
brance all the benefits of God, and to
render ceaseless praise to the Lord, who
has bestowed on us such priceless gifts


[ Pusey].
Ver. 3. Fatherless, A plea for
orphans. God takes special care of


them in his law (Ex. xxii. 22) and pro-


vidence (Ps. xviii. 4,5 ; xxvii. 10). 1. A
description of the sinner’s condition.
Without the love, help, and guidance of
a father. 2. A display of God’s mercy.
When earthly fathers sleep in the grave,
God watches over and provides for
orphan children. This should be a
motive to penitence, prayer, and daily
trust in God.


HOMILETICS.


Heatta anp Divins Favour.—Verse 4.


In response to penitential return to God, he will heal the wounds of his people
and bestow upon them the blessings of his grace.

I. We have health. “TI will heal their backsliding.” 1. The disease. “ Back-
sliding.” All sin is a disease ; backsliding is the most dangerous. It endangers
present holiness, joy, and usefulness, and imperils the future. It begins almost im-
perceptibly, first in the heart, then in the closet, and then in the Church. Private
prayer loses its relish, spiritual enjoyments cease, and then the means of grace are
neglected. As a sheep that wanders from the fold never seeks to return, so the
backslider ‘“‘ wanders on still more and more astray,” till the Divine shepherd brings
him back. “If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.” 2,
The cure. “I will heal.” Apcastasy is no ordinary wound, but God can heal it.
(4) By the pardon of sin. The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. (6) By re
moving the effects of sin. Taking away its guilt, power, and dominion ; destroying
the bent, the tendency within us to go back. (c) By restoring to all good. God
himself and lost comfort are regained. The cure is efficient. It is restoration to
perfect soundness. The cure is certain. ‘TI will heal.” God is a physician that
never fails. Cases helpless and hopeless can be healed by him. Christ cured most
desperate diseases, so backsliding children may be restored, “‘For I am the Lord
that healeth thee.” IL Wehave Divine favour. “I willlove them.” 1. Anger
is turned away! “ Mine anger is turned away from him.” God is displeased with
sin, but his anger will be turned away from those who repent. This is a proof and
an assurance of his love. The clouds with which a guilty conscience covers God
shall disperse, and sunshine beam forth in brightness and beauty again. 2. Love
is manifest. ‘I will love them.” (a) Love in tts widest scope. “Them.” Whoi
Moralists and worldly respectable? No! but those who have despised his authority
and trifled with former mercies. Backsliders from God. (b) Love in its gracious
nature. “Freely.” Spontaneously and liberally, because he will leve. Freely,
without money and without price ; freely, without inducement and without merit ;
freely, without reluctance and stint. (c¢) Love in tts loftiest source. “TI will love
them.” God is love—pure, unchanging benignity, the fountain, the fulness of love.
A word to the sinner—God loves thee. A direction to the penitent—believe and re-
turn to God. T's the Christian—“ love so amazing, so Divine, demands thy soul, thy
life, thy all.”

Grace AnounpING.— Verse 4.


This sentence is a body of divinity in miniature. The sense hinges upon the word
“freely.” Here is the glorious, the suitable, the Divine way by which love
streams from heaven to earth. In the text we have two great doctrines. I will
announce, establish, and apply the first. é

I. The first great doctrine is this, that there is nothing in man to attract the
love of God to him. We have to establish this doctrine. Our first argument


190 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. (CHAP. XIV.


——.


is found in the origin of that love. Our second, that the whole plan of Divine good-
ness is entirely opposed to the old covenant of works. Thirdly, the substance of God's
love, clearly proves that it cannot be man’s goodness which makes God love him.
Remember, further, the objects of God’s love, and we shall soon see that it could not
be anything in them which constrains God to love them. We are informed in
Scripture that the love of God and the fruit of the love of God are a gift. But what
practical use of this doctrine? It offers comfort to those who do not feel fit to come
to Christ. The text is a death-blow to all kinds of fitness and unworthiness. It
invites backsliders to return. The text specially written for them. II. Nothing
in man can be an effectual bar to God’s love. If anything in man to bar God’s
grace, then this would have been a hindrance to its coming to any of the human
race, it would have prevented the salvation of those undoubtedly saved, it would
mar the sovereignty of God, be a great slur upon the grace of God, and detract
glory from the gospel. The love of God has provided means to meet the
extremest case. They are twofold—the power of Christ and the power of the Spirit
Spurgeon}.


Revivine Grace.— Verses 5—7.


The promise of good is continued. The supply is unfailing, and many images are
given to exhibit the manifold grace of God and the results of that grace. We
have refreshing influence, luxuriant growth, and social usefulness, in a sevenfold
metaphor.

I. Refreshing influence, “TI will be as the dew unto Israel.” This is a great
contrast to the desolation of sin (ch. xiii. 15). Spots most barren revive and flourish
by God’s blessing. The “liquid diamonds of the morn” descend on the mown
grass to quicken and refresh it (Ps. lxxii. 6). Drops of dew are ‘fruitful nourishers of
herbs and flowers.” Gardens and vineyards parched with heat shall flourish again.
This heavenly baptism of dew shall invigorate dying plants, renew vegetation, and
beautify the garden of the Lord. ‘“ Times of refreshing from the presence of the
Lord” shall come, and the Church shall grow in beauty, strength, and fruitfulness.
This influence will be—l. A constant, 2. An efficient, 3. An abundant blessing.
“‘Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness
from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth.” II. Luxuriant
growth. The prophet dwells with delight and at some length on the idea of
fruitfulness. This Divine influence is given to promote the growth of the Church.
We are chosen to “‘ bring forth fruit, and that our fruit should remain.” God is
“ glorified ” when we “ bear much fruit.” What God promises to give we should
earnestly desire to have. 1. Beauty in growth. “He shall grow as the lily.”
The lily is the fairest of flowers. Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one
of these plants. God seeks to make his people morally beautiful and pure in their
lives. The beauty of holiness is comely to God and useful toman. But this beauty
is permanent. The beauty of the lily soon decays, but that of “the olive tree ”
lasts for ever. What a lustre from the life of one “beautified with salvation” !
His outward conduct is attractive in every part, and his inward dispositions of love
and humility are well-pleasing to God himself. Man transformed into God’s image
is more attractive and more durable than natural beauty. ‘‘ God in the redemption
of the soul,” says Emerson, “has solved the probiem of restoring to the most
original internal beauty.”


Beauty is truth, truth beauty,—that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.


+


2. Rooted in growth. ‘Cast forth his roots as Lebanon.” There must be down-
ward ag well as upward growth. God’s people must not be all foliage and pro-
fession. All spiritual growth is growth at the root. The root of the matter must
be within, to ‘spread its branches,” and manifest its vigour in every good word and


CHAP. XIV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. 191


NE ,


work. This alone can give stability to principle and character. The seed without
root withered away (Matt. xiii. 6). We must be rooted and grounded in love (Eph.
iii, 17). If only like a lily, we may be wafted by the wind, and in danger of being
carried away. But if firm at the root, we shall be immovable as cedars of Lebanon,
which storms of centuries could not uproot. “They that trust in the Lord shall be
as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever.” 3. Expansive in
growth. “His branches shall spread.” True religion will manifest itself in open
profession. It leads its possessors to come forth from obscurity, and openly confess
Christ before men. “His branches,” his acts and example, are seen in the family,
the prayer-meeting, and the house of God. But like the trees of Lebanon, his
branches widely spread, to offer shade and shelter from the burning heat and
terrible storm. His religion is luxuriant and his heart expansive. He outgrows
the narrowness of a creed and the boundaries of a sect. His sympathies and efforts
are world-wide: his outstretched arms afford grace and protection to all. “It be-
cometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.”
4. Fragrant in growth. “ And his smell as Lebanon.” This is twice mentioned,
and is worthy of notice. ‘The scent of Lebanon’s wine has a remarkable aroma.”
Christian influence, like the name of Christ, “is as ointment poured forth.” His
conversation is refreshing and delightful ; his prayers are sweet odours (Rev. v. 8) ;
and his deeds of charity are an odour of good smell (Phil. iv. 18). In proportion
as a Christian lives near to God, does the smell of life reveal itself to man.
“Thanks be to God which maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in
every place.” The Church shall yet revive, and be like ‘‘ the smell of a field which
the Lord hath blessed.” ‘How much better is thy love than wine! and the smell
of thine ointments than all spices!” (Cant. iv. 10). III. Social usefulness.
The corn and the vine are emblems of Christian usefulness. They are often
unpromising in appearance, but revived by the genial influence of the sun and
the rain, and bless others with their fruitfulness. In others restored to God
there will be a revival of religion. They shall be for protection and progress.
1. The Church blessed shall protect others. ‘‘ They that dwell under his shadow
shall return.” Religion is not selfishness. It is intended for others. Ministers,
parents, and Sunday-school teachers have men dwelling under their shadow
requiring sympathy and instruction. Where can we flee for help, in exposure
and penitence, but to the people of God? If you want to do good to others, and
be eminently useful in bringing them to Christ, live to him yourself, and be
rich and fragrant in the odour of his grace. Live under his shadow, and others
“shall return” to dwell with you. Lord Peterborough said of the home of Fenelon,
“If I stay here any longer I shall become a Christian in spite of myself.”
2. The Church blessed shall contribute to the progress of others. ‘“ They shall revive
the corn.” In whatever sense we take these words, the thought is this—quickened
themselves, they shall quicken and advance others. They revive and cultivate
everything good and useful. God’s people help on, and never hinder, the progress
of the world. They are greater blessings to it than corn and wine. Delivered
from sin and misery, they grow to maturity, as “corn” ripens for harvest; bear
fruit as “the vine,” and are delightful to all around them, through example, con-
verse, and prayer. Thus the cause of God revives in one place after another ;
believers ripen for heaven, and grow more useful on earth ; God is glorified, and
sinners are saved.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Dew. 1. The dew falls very quietly Beautiful as the dew; sheddingaglory
and gently. 2. The dew falls very over every common thing. Invisible as
copiously. 3. The dew is very refresh- dew; not inthunderand power. Pene-
img. 4. The dew is very fertilizing. trating as the dew; insinuating itself
5. The dew is very near [D+. Raleigh]. into every plant on which it falls, and


192





maintaining its vegetative powers.
1. As dew is the purest water in nature,
so the presence of God is the greatest,
blessing. 2. As dewis necessary to the
growth and beauty of herbs and plants,
so the blessing of God is necessary for
the beauty of the heart and life. 3. As
dew falls most copiously in the night,
so God’s presence is most felt in dark-
ness and trouble.


Ver. 5. As the lily. 1. In silence
asa lily. 2. In beautyasa lily. 3. In
purity asa lily. 4. In fruitfulness as a
lily.


Happy are the pure, whose heart
Freely blooms in every part ;
Godly acts are living gems,

Fit for crowns and diadems,


Learn—l. That God can make his
Church beautiful and pleasant. 2. That
beauty and apparent excellency are worth
little without root and stability. 3. That
no pretence of root and stability should
hinder visible fruits of grace. 4. That
visible fruits of grace must not consist
in profession or ostentation, but in living,
green, and permanent deeds. 5. That a
Church thus fruitful will be acceptable


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA.


[CHAP. XI¥


to God, and useful to others. 6 That
it is our duty to seek these things, for
God has promised to bestow them
Christian fruitfulness is a manifold
and various thing. It is not all of one
kind. One life is not meant exactly to
be like another life. Each is cast in its
own type, and when the life is cast, the
type or mould is broken. Of course it
is broken, because it was composed in
part of circumstances which never were
before, nor ever can be again. Let each
“ planted ” soul rejoice to feel rooted in
him ! and then let each grow freely ac-
cording to his will—not fearing, but
gladly daring to branch, and blossom,
and fructify, according to the law of in-
dividual life. The lily ! the olive tree !
the corn! the vine! the cedar! all these
are growing in God’s garden ; and there
is room and dew for them all [ Raleigh}.
Types of Christian character found in
the vegetable kingdom. The lily in its
beauty ; the olive in its greenness ; the
cedar in its firmness; the vine with
its clusters; and the corn with its
bounty ; all set forth the variety and
completeness of Christian character.


HOMILETICS.


Gop in ReLaTION TO A CONVERTED PEoPLE.— Verse 8.


These words represent Ephraim in his return to God; and God in his kindness
to Ephraim. God has nothing to do with idols, therefore his people do not put
them in competition with him ; entirely renounce them ; return unto him, and are
accepted and blessed.

I. God attracts a converted people. “ Ephraim shall say, What have I to do
any more with idols?” Once he was “ joined to idols,” and in the midst of Divine
chastisement stupidly resolved, “I will go after my lovers.” Now he renounces
all former sins and depends upon God. The world has no attraction to the true
convert. He forsakes his evil ways and companions ; parts with everything which
disputes allegiance with God ; and makes no idol of opinions, parties, or means.
He has been drawn to God in love and power. He turns away from the glitter
which fascinates to the treasure which enriches. He envies not, he seeks not,
the worldling’s portion. God is all in all to him. ‘“ Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee.” II. God accepts
a converted people. “J” is here emphatic. I have heard the confession and ac-
cepted it. God had hid his face before, or observed them only in his displeasure ;
now he watches over them and provides for them. 1. God hears their prayers.
“‘T have heard him.” Prayer is an indication of a change of heart. Saul was no
sooner converted, than he cried, “ Lord what wilt thou have me todo?” Angels
in heaven say of such a one, “ Behold, he prayeth.” Prayer is the first breathing
of Divine life, and then becomes ‘‘the Christian’s native air.” He may be despised,
and considered weak in mind, or disvriered in imagination, by the world; but God


HAP. XIV.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HOSEA. ‘195





regards and hears him. “ Before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet
speaking I will hear.” 2. God delights in their character. “ And observed him.”
God is everywhere and observes all men, But more is intended here than mere
observation. He is anxious about his people, cares for them and provides for them.
He delights in them, and seeks to do them good. He sees the penitent a great way
off, and desires his return. He knows and approves of his conduct. He is
acquainted with all the remorse, the contrition, and the resolutions of the returning
sinner. ‘Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant child? For since I spake
against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are troubled for
him ; I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord.” III. God beautifies a
converted people. He is “like a green fir-tree” unto them. The fir is tall and
stately , beautiful in appearance, fragrant, and useful. Without pressing the
metaphor ; it pictures the constant shelter, the lasting beauty, and the perpetual
life of God to the soul. Created beauty is a faint image of moral life. Christians
are beautified, winter and summer ; are ever fresh and ever flourishing by sap and
virtue from God. God is the same to the soul at all times and in all places: the
constant shade and the undying verdure of his people. In the restoration of God’s
image to man and the godly life of a believer we have the embodiment of “ the
sublime and beautiful.” “He will beautify the meek with salvation.” IV. God
fertilizes a converted people. “From me is thy fruit found.” Before conversion
they have neither beauty, enjoyment, nor fruit in life. But God supplies all de-
ficiency in them. He affords repast as well as repose. The fir-tree may be a
shelter and evergreen, but yields no fruit. Fruit and shelter are united in God.
“T sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my
taste.” 1. The fruit they enjoy comes from God. In pardon and peace, in the
comforts of the Holy Ghost, and the foretastes of heaven: they have the earnest,
the first-fruits of eternal bliss. They possess it in their hearts, but God is the
source and giver. The Church is not the fountain of sufficiency ; the creed not the
supply of grace. In God is our joy, from God our life, and to God must be our
praise, “All my springs are in thee.” 2. The fruit they produce comes from God.
Grace in the heart leads to activity in the life. We receive the gifts, but he im-
parts them. We repent and believe, but faith and repentance are produced by him,
We obey, but he inclines and helps us. “ As the branch cannot bear fruit of it
self, except it abide in the vine ; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.” God
therefore is the source of all fruits in this lifeand that which is to come. “ With-
out me ye can do nothing.” The fruits of the Spirit result from the work of the
Spirit. “The fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ to the glory and
praise of God.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Idols. The language expresses former withGod. “I have heard him ;” there
attachment, present aversion and rejec- fore the response should be, “‘ What have
tion. ‘What have I to do any more I todo any more with idols?”
with idols?” 1. They have been a source 1. God is a protection to his people,
of pain. 2. A source of shame. 3. A “like a green fir-tree.” They often en-
source of degradation. The more peni- counter blasts and dangers in returning
tent we are, and the more we taste of to him; but he shelters them from the
God’s goodness, the more useless do idols storm (Is. iv. 6). 2. God isa support to
appear, and the more do we loathe former his people. Without him they are bar-
sins. “What fruit had ye in those zen in their souls, and unfruitful in their
things, whereof ye are now ashamed?” lives. Support in penitence and duty

Those who pray oftenest and secure springs from him. “From me is thy
greatest blessings will see the emptiness fruit found.”
and vanity of everything in competition Human nature, by itself, can as little

12


194 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HOSEA. [CHap. XIV





bear fruit well pleasing to God as the grace, is a miracle of grace. The
pine or cypress can bear fruit for human presence of works of grace attests the
use. As it were a miracle in nature, immediate working of God the Holy
were these trees to bring forth such Ghost, as much as any miracle in nature
fruit, so, for man to bring forth fruits of [Pusey]. ,


HOMILETICS.
Tas Ways oF Gop AND THE DestiINnIgs oF Mren.—Verse 9.


In this epilogue the prophet sums up his teachiug, and seeks to “justify the
ways of God to man.” The dealings of God with men are often mysterious and
difficult to understand; but are right in themselves, designed to lead to life, and
will influence men according to their treatment of them.

I. The ways of God in their aspects towards men. These ways indicate the
ways of Providence and the paths of duty; God’s treatment of men and his
requirements from them. 1. They are right in themselves. ‘The ways of the
Lord are right.” No fault can be found with them. (a) They are conformed to
the will of God, which is holy and just; the standard of righteousness to the
universe. (b) They are the most direct and straight line toa right end. They
never deviate from truth and duty. They are more holy and more trustworthy
than any code of morals. Invincible in power and unimpeachable in justice.
“The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.” (c) They are
proved to be right by our moral nature. The written word accords with the
human conscience ; the law without is confirmed by the testimony within. We
have a sense of obligation, approve the right, though we follow the wrong. We
are filled with remorse and delight. The work of the law is written in our
hearts, our conscience bears witness, and our thoughts accuse or excuse us cun-
tinually (Rom. ii. 15). 2. They are difficult to be understood. ‘ Who is wise?”
Mystery and majesty, justice and mercy, are displayed in God’s providence. We
are finite creatures, and should not presume to penetrate “the clouds and darkness
round about him.” There are “things hard to be understood” in the works as
well as in the word of God. We may go forward and backward, cn the right
hand and on the left, and yet not perceive God (Job xxiii. 8—10). “It is the
glory of God to conceal a thing” (Prov. xxv. 2). “Little can we at the beginning
of any action guess at God’s intention in the conclusion,” says Bp Hall. ‘ His
judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out.” Some are obvious
and plain; written with beams of light and love; and he that runs may read.
Others are obscure and beyond our comprehension. ‘Lo! these are parts of his
ways; but how little a portion is heard of him!” 3. Yet enough may be known
for the duties of life. The question indicates that some know, that all who wish
may know, and do right. “The prudent shall know them.” God’s ways are |
unsearchable to the intellectual and the theorist, but intelligible to the humble
and the obedient. We know a part, and that is enough to practise. Aristotle
teaches that the end of moral science is not knowledge, but practice. ‘‘Those have
the best knowledge who know their duty,” says Matt. Henry. ‘“ Let no man,” says
South, “ presume that he can see beforehand into the ways of Providence. His
part is to contemplate them in the past, and trust in them for the future: but so
trusting, to act always upon motives of human prudence, directed by religious
principles.” -II. The ways of God in their requirements from men. “ Who is
wise and prudent?” 1. They require to be known. Many have aslight acquaint-
ance with them, but few study them. The wise alone meditate upon them and
understand them. The proud and self-conceited often scoff and ridicule. A right
and teachable disposition is required. ‘He that comes to seek after knowledge
with a mind to scorn and censure, shall be sure to find enough for his humour,





CHAP. XIV.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. HOSEA.


195


but none for his instruction” [Bacon]. True wisdom is to understand what we
have to do, and “knowledge is easy unto him that understandeth” this. A true
heart and a ready mind, a single eye and a right motive, will make the path of
duty easy. “If any man will” (is willing, wishes to) “do his will, he shall know
of the doctrine, whether it be of God.” 2. They require to be observed. ‘The
just shall walk in them.” We are not to speculate, but to obey ; not to stand, but
walk in the way; not merely continue, but advance in it. Delay and sloth
create difficulty, raise “‘a hedge of thorns,” and harass to the end of the journey.
Exertion and hope will make the way plain and prosperous (Prov. xv. 19). Wait
not for louder calls and greater opportunities. ‘Duties are ours, events are God’s.”
“To wait for God’s performance and do nothing is to abuse that Divine providence
which will always so work as not to allow us to remain in inactivity” |Bp Hall].
“Whoso is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
lovingkindness of the Lord.”
Act an honest part.


Look before thee as thou goest,
Do the duty which thou knowest,


III. The ways of God in their influence upon men. “Transgressors shall fall
therein.” Truth will influence according to the method in which it is received.
The best blessings may be perverted by malicious dispositions. “The things
which should have been for his wealth become to him an occasion of falling” (Ps.
Ixix. 22). “Christ himself is set for the rising and falling of many” (Luke ii.
34). Hence the ways of God influence men in two methods. 1. The righteous
walk in them and live. The wise discern their rectitude and desire to secure their
and. ‘The righteous walk in them, become like them, and live in them. There is
much to discourage and oppose ; but the sincere persevere in holiness, add strength
to strength, and enjoy foretastes of heaven. ‘The righteous also shall hold” (take
firm hold) ‘‘on his way, and he that is of clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.”
2. The ungodly deviate from them and perish. If God’s ways lead to life, depart-
ing from them must be death. The disobedient stumble at the word and the ways
of God. They are offended at the requirements and the providence of God. They
transgress, fall, and perish. This is the sum of Hosea’s ministry; the fulfilment
of ancient prediction (Deut. xxx. 19, 20); and the general effect of gospel preach-
ing (1 Cor. i. 18). God’s ways are just and true. Those who walk in them shall
live, and those who depart from them shall perish. ‘‘ Whoso readeth, let him


understand.”
ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIV.

Ver. 2. “ Worde are the daughters permitted to mount; and thus accoutred,
of earth, and deeds are the sons of galloped to the shrine at Godmundham,
heaven.” where the chief idol stood, hurled his

Ver. 3. Gods. At the introduction lance into the enclosure, and profaned


of Christianity into this country, a
general council was summoned to con-
sider the new doctrines of Paulinus. All
present were unanimous as to the utter
inefficiency of the gods whom -aey
worshipped. Coifi, the pagan high-
priest, in an eloquent harangue proposed
their overthrow, and casting aside his
priestly garments, called for arms, which
Saxon priests were forbidden to wield,
and for a horse, which they were not


the consecrated shrine. The people,
encouraged by the example of their
priest, destroyed the sacred temple.
Ver. 4. “We would always look
hopefully at a sinner under correction.
For surely so long as the physician
administers the medicine there is no
ground for despondency” [Bridges].
“Consumption, when it once comes to
be really consumption, is beyond ali
doubt utterly incurable by ordinary


196


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY . HOSEA.


(cHar. XIV.





medicine; and though many remedies
may assist the sufferer and prolong his
life, yet, as a rule, consumption is the
herald of death; and so backsliding is
incurable by any human means, and
would be the forerunner of total apos-
tasy were it not for Divine grace”
[Spurgeon].

Ver. 5—7. “How full of beauty and
poetry is this passage! There is no
book so poetic in its character as the
Book of inspiration. Apart from the
sublimity of the matters treated and
the glory of the doctrines, the style
itself is enough to make the book pre-
cious to every reader. It is a wondrous
book ; it is the book of God: yea, as
Herbert says, ‘the god of books.’ It
is a book full of stars: every page
blazes with light; from almost every
sentence there beams forth some beauti-
ful metaphor, some glorious figure”
[Spurgeon]


Smell, Whitfield speaks of one young
man who said, “I will not leave my
old father’s house, for there is not a
chair or a table there but smells of his
piety.”

Ver. 9. Providences are sometimes
dark texts, which require an expositor
(Gen. xlii. 36), They that would judge
aright of any one of the Lord’s dis-
pensations must be careful students of
them all. They must not slight any
work of his, because all, though they
may be many and difficult to us, make
but one entire work in God’s hand,
And every part of that work is a com-
mentary, clearing the nature and use of
the whole and God’s intent therein
[Nisbet].


Just are the ways of God,
And justifiable to men ;
Unless there be: who think not God af 21,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


JOEL.


INTRODUCTION.


The Person. Joel (Jehovah is God), is distinguished from others of that name as
“the son of Pethuel.” This is the only direct notice of him; all other incidents
must be gathered from his prophecy. He was commissioned to Judah, probably
lived in Jerusalem, for he was familiar with the temple, priests, and ordinances of
worship.

The Time. Nowhere expressly stated and cannot be fixed with certainty. He
makes no allusion to idolatry. The temple service seems to be flourishing, and the
only enemies mentioned are the Phoenicians and Philistines, the Edomites and
Egyptians. Amos alludes to the words of Joel, which must have therefore been
written and known before that time. He was probably the earliest of the prophets,
and delivered his predictions in the early days of Joash, king of Judah, B. o. 870—
865. His style belongs to an early date, and the time agrees with the state of things
under Jehoiada, the high priest who placed Joash on the throne (2 Kings xi. 17,
18; xiii 2—16; 2 Chron. xxiv. 4—14).

The Book. The order of O. T. books not arranged according to date, but for
convenience. Joel is free from local circumstances, political and geographical al-
Jusions. J¢e style is animated and finished, proves the prophet to be an accom-
plished man. “ He has no abrupt transitions, is everywhere connected, and finishes
whatever he takes up. In description he is graphic and perspicuous, in arrange-
ment lucid, in imagery original, copious, and varied.” He was accustomed to think
clearly and speak logically. Ewald says that “he was in early times the
highest model, so that his successors all followed his elevated precedent.” He had
an eye for the beautiful in nature, and in love with its wondrous scenes. He
watched the ways of insects and read the lessons of the stars. Like Christ, he
saw the image of the invisible God in creation, and taught us ever to reveal it
in our ministry. ts contents most easily and naturally divided into two parts.
Part First. Lessons of Providence; devastation by locusts; general drought
and summons to renentance (chap. i—ii. 18). The description was held to be too
terrible for locusts. But naturalists and travellers have confirmed its truth, and we
have no need to imagine armies or invasions to account for the destruction. “ Where
they swarm and descend, all vegetation instantly vanishes ; they spare neither bark


198 INTRODUCTION.


I i ee NN | MNES ge





nor root, much less leaf and flower. They darken the air, so that the sun and even
men at a little distance become invisible. They advance in a close military array,
which yields to no obstacle of stream or fire. As they advance a peculiar roaring
noise is heard, like that of a torrent or waterfall.” No sooner do they settle to eat,
than, as Volney puts it, the grating sound of their mandibles reminds one of the
foraging of an invisible army. In these calamities the prophet saw the providence
of God, and a reason for national humiliation. Hence the moral lessons from thes:
natural events. Part Second. ‘Lessons forthe future ; deliverance from judgment
and promise of fertile seasons to Israel; the day of the Iord introduced by the out-
_ pouring of the Spirit; a day of destruction to all enemies, but to the Church a day
of salvation (chap. ii. 19—ii.). Joel is the prophet of judgment, the prophet of
repentance, and the prophet of hope. His truths are spiritual, relate to all times, and
belong to all individuals. There is a dreadful judgment before men ; but they
need not despair. God will save them if they repent and believe. But how is repent-
ance possible? The Holy Spirit will bestow it and aid us to live to God. This
relation deepens our responsibility before our Judge. Grace is offered, a renewed
life is possible, and if we use our privileges aright, the day of judgment will
be to us a day of deliverance and blessedness. Thus these doctrines form an
inseparable whole; revealing God in nature and grace, predicting the Saviour,
giving the Holy Spirit, and offering eternal glory to all.


CHAP. L] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JCEI.. 199





CHAPTER IL


Criticaz Nores.] The prophecy opens with lamentation over the land, made desolate by sue-
cessive swarms of locusts. Ver. 2—4 contain the spirited introduction. Old men] are called upon
to note the unusual course of nature. Inhabitants] of Judah, whatever part they occupy, and what-
evcr calamities they have witnessed, are asked to say if in their own, or in the days of their fathers,
, there had ever been a calamity so sweeping and so terrible. Children] must be impressed with a
sense of national disaster, and admonished by the providence of God (Ex. xiii. 8; Josh. iv. 6, 7,
Ps. Ixxviii. 6, 8; ver. 4). The four names of the locusts have been thought to be four different species
mdicated by the etymology of the words, the gnawer (gizim); the multiplier (’arbeh); the
licker (yeltq) , the devourer (chazil). Some critics say that four is the symbol of universality.
6. Drunkards] An appeal to different classes. Wine-bibbers indulging in their favourite liquor must
be roused from stupor to “ teep and how,” though usually jolly in national calamity, 6. A nation]
Lit. some; four successive empires; symbolically others. The epithets dgeerive their number
and savage hostility. 7. Vine] and fig-trees, common and greatly valued in the days of Solomon
(1 Kings iv. 25), now destroyed. 8. A virgin] The impersonated nation to lament with the sorrow
and despair of a young girl, whose hopes have been blighted, and her beloved taken away by a stroke
(Ezek. xvi. 8). 9.] The cessation of temple service would be the greatest sorrow, and would impress
the nation with a sense of Divine displeasure. Cut off] by locusts, who have eaten up the vine, the
olive, and the wheat, for sacrificial use. Priests] lost not merely subsistence, but appointed offerings
to Jehovah. 10. The field] Nature sympathizing in the woes of men; the open uninclosed coun-
try and the land, Heb. rich red soil, fenced and cultivated, feel the loss. 11.] The third appea
to husbandmen and vinedressers. Wheat and barley destroyed before their eyes; vines languish and
choice fruit-trees perish. 12, Joy] Tne joy of harvest withered away (Ps. iv. 7; Is. ix. 3). 18.]
A summons to repentance, Priests] first; they have been negligent, and must set the example of
penitence, Sackcloth] Outward garments must indicate inward grief (Is, xxxii. 11; Jer. iv. 8).
14, Sanctify] Set apart, hallow days of fasting. Solemn assem.] Lit. proclaim a restraint, i.e.
let young and old cease manual labour to fast and pray (2 Chron, xx. 3—13). Elders] in office
and age. Cry] Not a mere formal fast, but intense and earnest prayer for mercy and help. 15. The
day] of anger (Is. xiii. 9) and ill omen; evil in itself, and foreshadowing greater evils ; a transition
from invading locusts to the day of judgment upon all ungodly men. Present calamities are clothed
in greater terror when regarded as a type of the last judgment. Joel would have the people thus to
regard them. Hence present suffering should quicken to penitence and faith. Destruction] An
aspect of the last day seen now. 16.] Food cut off, the joy of festivals and sacrifices banished. 17.
Seed] decayed under the clods. Garners} Storehouses went to ruin and pe of future harvest
were blighted. 18,] From the homestead attention is directed to the fields. Cattle] bewildered
because the plains often rapped yield no pasture. Sheep] seem to mourn the ed of man. 19.]
Beasts cry to God, but man hears not; the prophet is touched and cries for the impenitent. To
thee] beasts even lift their heads in dumb appeal, and to thee I oy, for thou art the only hope
(Is. xv. 5; Jer. xxiii. 9), amid the insensibility of man, the distress of nations, and the judgments of


providence


HOMILETICS.


Gop’s Mzssacz DEMANDS Earngest A?Prmntion.— Verses 1—4,


Since the establishment of the kingdom Judah had seen partial and temporary
judgments, but none that threatened such destruction as this fearful plague of
locusts. Hence the prophet calls attention to it, and urges them to consider its
design and transmit its record to posterity. Generations to come must know the
judgments of God.

I. The message. “ Hear this,” recorded in ver. 4. The visitation is unparalleled
and never to be forgotten in history. 1. J¢ was verrible. Nota mere visit of flying
insects, but a succession, plague was to succeed plague, each more destructive than
its predecessor. In ordinary providences God testifies against sin. But some ages
and churches are made warnings to all generations by the justice of God. God’s
penal resources are unlimited, and great as afflictions may have been in the past,
the future may bring upon guilty sinners greater still “Why should ye be


200 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. (cHapP. 1.


stricken any more?” 2. It was unprecedented. ‘‘Hath this been in your days,
or even in the days of your fathers?” Old men who could remember events years
ago, accustomed to extraordinary things in nature, had never seen anything like this
Even in the days of their fathers, in the records of the nation, was there any judg
ment so terrible in its consequences. Neither the present nor the past generations
had known such a calamity. The plague of Egypt lasted only a few days and con-
sisted of few insects; but for multitude and mischief, this was unprecedented.
“‘Very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither
after them shall be such.” 3. I¢ was ever to be remembered. “Tel. ye your
children of it,” &c. Four generations were to note it. “This shall be written for thu
generation to come.” National disasters live in the records of the past, and present
caiamities are to be fixed in the memories of the future. Greece and Rome, France
and England, have each their record written in bitter experience. Woe is pronounced
upon those who “regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation
of his hands” (Is. v. 12). II. The hearers. This calamity was sq striking that
the attention of the present and all future generations is directec to it. 1. Old
men. “ Hear this, ye old man.” “ Days should speak and multitude of years
should teach wisdom,” and none are too old to learn. Men of the greatest age and
ripest experience have more to learn in life, especially if their lot has fallen in
grievous times. If our stock of knowledge be not increasing it is wasting. All
should hear the voice of judgments. ‘“ A wise man will hear, and will increase
learning ; and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels.” 2. All the
inhabitants of the land. Lest any should escape, all the people are urged to give
earnest attention. What concerns one concerns all. None like to hear evil tidings,
but they must be pressed upon men sometimes. When God speaks, when vital
interests are at stake, all should hear. “Hear this, all ye people; give ear, all ye
inhabitants of the world.” 3. Children of another generation. God's dealings with
the present age have a relation to the future. The events of one nation are lessons
to all nations. Whatever concerns humanity concerns all men. Generation must
declare to generation the wonders of God’s love and the might of his judgments.
ur woes must be warnings to posterity, and our corrections their instructions
(1 Cor. x. 6). If the memory of God’s love does not stir up to gratitude, thi
memory of woe must entreat them to repentance. ‘‘ Take heed to thyself, lest thou
forget the things which thine eyes have seen; but teach them thy sons, and thy
sons’ sons” (Deut. iv. 9; vi. 6,7; xi. 19). ILI. The purpose. The present
generation must hear and the future be taught for a wise purpose. People are
negligent, persist in sin, and bring punishment upon themselves. Hence they must
be taught,—l. That God watches over men’s conduct. This fact is constantly
impressed upon our minds by God’s ways in providence and in creation. Men
cannot sin and defy the visitations of God with impunity. Our children may learn
this lesson, future generations may read it in our history without our experience.
2. Lhat God directs the events of history. All events are under his control and
are overruled for the fulfilment of his will Yet men “regard not the works of
the Lord, nor the operation of his hands” (Ps. xxviii. 5). Israel forgot God in his
‘calings with them. Even at the Red Sea, amid the greatest displays of mercy
«id judgment, they could not discern him (Ps. Ixxxviii. 11; evi. 13). 3. Tha
God warns men of their danger. Those who forget God’s works are in great danger,
and have need of Divine teaching. Israel was a favoured nation, a standing testi-
mony of God’s truth and existence to idolatrous peoples. Israel’s sufferings were a
warning to all nations to avoid Israel’s guilt. God designs to educate the world in
the knowledge of his love and power. The lessons are given to one man to relate to
another, written in the experience of one age that another may be impressed; “ that
they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his
commandments.”





201


CHAP. 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL.
HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.
Ver. 1. It is a mercy that God an influence as long as the race shall


reveals his word to the Church, when he
is about to inflict punishment upon it.
This word is not to be sought in wild
fanatic spirits, but in chosen servants of
God. The word of the Lord that came
to Joel.

Individuality merged in Divine com-
mission. Little known of the birth,
life, and deeds of Joel. Some known by
personal service rather than personal
history—David’s mighty men. Others
content to live and act in obscurity, and
wish to be known only by efforts to save
the souls of men.

Ver. 2. Hear God’s word addressed
to all classes. 1. The common dangers
of men. 2. Thecommon needs of men.
3. The common privileges of men. Take
heed how ye hear.

Ver. 3. Tell your children. Parental
duty. 1. A necessary duty. 2. A
personal duty. 3. A solemn duty. 4.
A duty commanded by God (Deut. vi. 7).
As far as life and means permit we must
prepare for the instruction of the future
youth, and transmit the doings of God
by succeeding families. The word of
God is for this and every age. The
doctrines of that word are not effete, but
adapted to our wants, and will exert


last.

1. God’s word explains God’s pro-
vidence, that we may know the auth»r,
cause, and design of our affliction. 2.
What we learn in the school of pro-
vidence we should transmit to posterity.
“That the generation to come might
know them, even the children which
should be born; who should arise and
declare them to their children” (Ps.
Ixviii. 6).

I. What is to be told? This, i.e.
the judgments of God upon Israel.
II. To whom are they to be made
known? (a) Your children. (0) Their
children, and (c) Another generation.
Four generations are to keep up the re-
membrance. III. How are they to be
known? “ Tell, Heb. cipher them up
diligently, after the manner of arithme-
ticilans; reckon up the several years
with the several calamities thereof to
your children and nephews, that they
‘may hear and fear, and do no more so”
(Deut. xix. 20).

Family Religion. I. The fathers’
knowledge the children’s heritage. IL
The fathers’ fall the children’s preserv-
ation [Treasury of David].


HOMILETICS.
Nationa Cauamities.— Verses 4, 6, 7.


These verses set forth that terrible calamity which was coming upon a land which
God once protected and blessed, but which was devastated by a nation of savage and


innumerable hosts.


I. Calamities by diminutive creatures. In one sense nothing is insignificant


in the hands of God. “ A fly with God’s message could choke a king,” says Jeremy
Taylor. Armed with his vengeance, the meanest creatures become the mightiest.
In the East so proverbial is the power of the locusts, that the insects are made to
say to Mahomet, “‘ We are the army of the great God; we produce ninety-nine
eggs; if the hundred were completed we should consume the whole earth and all
that is in it.” ‘In every stage of their existence,” says Dr Thompson, “ these
locusts give a most impressive view of the power of God to punish a wicked world.”
All creatures are under God’s control. The lion from the forest and the wind from
heaven do his bidding. Hosts of angels and swarms of insects can punish a guilty
people. II. Calamities in dreadful succession. Whatever time intervened,
calamity followed calamity, each destructive, but all together most terrible in their
consequences. ‘Travellers tell us that swarm succeeds swarm, darken the sun, ex-
tend hundreds of miles, and devour every green thing. Volney says that “the
quantity of these insects is a thing incredible to any one who has not seen it him-
self.” The judgments of God are often linked together like a chain, each one draw-


202 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL. [CMAP. x.


ing on the other. Yet, says one, “ at each link of the lengthening chain, allowing
space and time for repentance to break it through.” If mea like Pharaoh harden
their hearts they will be destroyed. ‘“ By executing thy judgments upon them by
little and little thou gavest them place of repentance, not being ignorant that they
were a naughty generation ” (Wisd. xii. 10). III. Calamities most destructive.
1, Fierce as a lion. “Whose teeth are the teeth of a lion,” &. Nothing can resist
their bite. ‘They gnaw even the doors of houses,” says Pliny. The sharp and
prominent eye-teeth of the lion and lioness are ascribed to them. ‘‘ They appear
to be created for a scourge,” says a traveller, “since to strength incredible for so
small a creature they add saw-like teeth, admirably calculated to eat up all the herbs
in the land.” 2. Destructive to all vegetation. One feature is presented after another
in a way to rouse attention. (a) All tender herbs were destroyed. What was left
by the palmer-worm was eaten by the locust; “and that which the locust hath left
hath the canker-worm eaten ; and that which the canker-worm hath left hath the
caterpiller eaten.” (b) Choice fruit trees, such as vines and fig-trees, were destroyed.
The vine is most prominent as the more noble and valuable tree. It flourished
from time immemorial, was most fruitful, and a source of wealth to the people.
These were the trees of Judea, and to have them destroyed was a calamity not
common to a people whose common drink was wine. (c) Desolation was extreme.
Young shoots and even the bark of trees were not spared. Drooping vines and
injured fig-trees, with their leafless branches and peeled bark, were effects of wasting
plagues for many years. This picture is not exaggerated in the least. It is fear.
fully accurate, and an awful symbol of the desolation of churches and nations caused
by sin. The Christian Church is God’s vineyard. If it yields not fruit, it may be
laid waste. Prevailing sins will be visited by corresponding judgments. How
great must be that guilt which leads God to punish his own land! “I will lay it
waste: it shall not be pruned, nor digged ; but there shall come up briars and
thorns.”
A Sotemny Warnine to DrunKkarps.— Verse 5.

All classes are called upon to repent. The wine-bibbers are to wake up toa
recognition of the hand of God, to “weep and wail,” for the judgment has touched
what they most love. Drunkenness is the greatest curse of this land, and the
greatest hindrance to the gospel. In a community educated, wise, and pious, it is
a source of powerful mischief; but among the masses of mankind, governed by
appetite and not intelligence, it has been terribly destructive.

I. Drunkards frustrate the desiga of nature. Whatever produce of the earth:
is fit for food is placed at man’s disposal. He should co-operate with God in the
laws of providence, for the growth and increase of this food. All waste in nature is
sondemnable. Yet the sole end for which some cultivate the fig-tree and the vine, the
garden and the farm, is selfish indulgence. Nature’s gifts are abused, and the benevu.
lent design of God is nullified and reversed. Drunkards virtually say concerning
fruit and grain, ‘‘To me they shall not be for meat.” II. Drunkards render
themselves insensible to danger. “Awake, ye drunkards.” All sin stupeties ;
but drunkenness intoxicates the mind, lulls the conscience, hardens the heart, and
turns into society a sordid, selfish animal. This delirium is the most solemn feature
of the case. The victim having lost all sensibility and will, has no power to awake,
and sleeps quietly like one “lying down in the midst of the sea, or upon the top
of the mast.” The senses even seem stupefied. He may be “stricken and beaten,”
but he feels it not (Prov. xxv. 35), more senseless than the brute who satisfies
nature, not lust; he is lost to shame, enslaved by appetite, and seeks relief from
temporary awakening, by yielding himself again to his ruinous sin. “When shal
LT awake? I will seek it yet again.” —


With ceaseless, ravenous, and remorseless rage,
By day and night—on Sabbath and on work day,
The monster feeds and feasts and fattens on its prey.


CHAP. I. | HOMILETIC COMMMNTARY : JOEL. 203





IIT. Drunkards will be roused from sottish slumber. “For it is cut of from
your mouth.” Locusts were to destroy the vines, the grapes would cease to grow,
and the sweetness and strength “of the new wine” would be taken from them.
“Take away my wine, you take away my life,” said one. God will deprive
men of idolized indulgence, and force them to “weep and howl” by his judg
ments, The more inordinately they lust, the more pinching will be their distress.
“A wilful waste will bring a woeful want.” If temporal sufferings do not rouse
the drunkard, the epicure, and the sensualist to a sense of their sin and danger,
what must be their feelings when weeping and howling will be without hope and
intermission? Let weeping for things temporal beget care not to lose things eter-
nal. “ For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red : it is full
of mixture ; and he poureth out of the same: but the dregs thereof, all the wicked
of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them.”


Nationat LAMENTATION.—Verses 8—10.


The second appeal is to the impersonated nation, clothed in sackcloth, and
weeping for her lord, which death has taken away. The land is desolated, public
worship is interrupted, and the temple forsaken by God and man. The nation’s
hope is cut off, and she is left as ‘‘ a virgin” to lament in passionate grief and utter
despair. ;

I. The character of this lamentation. “Like a virgin girded with sackcloth
for the husband of her youth.” Between young persons that are married or about
to be married there is great love, and therefore great grief when separated by death.
Virgin love is purest and most sincere. ‘ She must weep or she will die.” The
affections in youth are strongest and most capable of resentment. ‘ I remember
thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals” (Jer. ii. 2; Is. lxii. 5).
The Church unfaithful to her Lord and Master, the professor who gives his heart
to the world, will lose the protection and blessings of Christ, our Divine Head and
Redeemer. ‘The more wedded to the creatures the more bitter their loss. It is not
mere conventional grief that God commands, but that of one who has lost all joy
and v ho clothes herself with penitence—

Give sorrow words ; the grief that does not speak
Whispers the o’er-fraught heart, and bids it break [Shakespere].
II. The reason of this lamentation. 1. The lund is devastated. “The field is
wasted, the land mourneth ; for the corn is wasted.” The cultivated and the open
lands were unproductive. The luxuries and the necessities, the corn and the wine:
bread that strengthens man’s heart, wine that maketh glad the heart, and oil to
make his face to shine, were all taken away (Ps. civ. 15). Nature shouts and sings
for joy under the benediction of God (Ps. lxv. 13); the valleys are covered with
corn and all is vocal with praise. But uncer man’s sin creation mourns in sorrow
and casts off its beauty and fruitfulness; “ groaneth and travaileth in pain together
until now ” (Rom. viii. 22). ‘‘ How long shall the land mourn and the herbs of
every field wither, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein” (Jer. xii. 4)1
2. The temple was forsaken. The locusts devoured the vine, the olive, and everything
that constituted the meat and drink offerings in the house of God. (a) Forsaken
by God ; for God was supposed to have forsaken the temple when the altar was not
duly furnished. He was offended at the nation, and could not dwell with a sinful
people. (b) Forsaken by men. The priests could no longer present the accustomed
offerings. Public worship was suspended. The temple is the residenca of God.
Divine worship must be kept up in due order and regular time. On the continu-
ance of our morning and evening service depends the continuance of God’s presence
with us. Suspend the one, we suspend the other. Terrible must be that scourge
which robs us of the benefits of Divine ordinances, and drives God from his own
emple ; when “joy and gladness are cut off from the house of the Lord.” III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY JOEL. (cHAP. L


204





The extent of this lamentation. 1. The priests mourned. “The priests, the
Lord’s ministers, mourn.” Some would spiritually lament the suspension of God’s
offerings. True ministers feel deeply the ungodliness of men; set the first example
of penitence and confession ; and mourn greatly interrupted fellowship with God.
Others mourn naturally for the loss of their perquisites and the means of self-
indulgence. When the house of God is forsaken and holy communions become
rare, the ministers of the sanctuary should mourn. 2. The nation mourned. Priest
and people, rich and poor, were to lament the judgments that had fallen upon them.
Vegetation had languished, the land was ravaged, and the temple forsaken. Judea
was to lament like a virgin, and all were to bow to the dust in sackcloth and ashes.
“Tn that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to
baldness, and to girding with sackcloth.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


for his goodness in filling our hearts


Ver. 9. Poverty and Religion. 1.
with food and gladness! But cleave


Poverty the result of sin. 2. Poverty


bringing Divine judgments. 3. Poverty
prejudicial to public worship. ‘* Want
of means of livelihood must exert a very
prejudicial influence on the public serv-
ice of God. Under the old economy
there would be of necessity a failure of
tithes and offerings. So now, when
people have a hard and constant struggle
for the bare means of subsistence, they
will be far behind others in knowledge
of the truth, in the proper training of
children, and in mutual love [Lange].


not too closely to temporal blessings,
which may be cut off by judgment, and
taken suddenly away. God takes from
an ungodly people the means of grati-
fying their lusts, and will bring them
to repentance by deep afflictions, The
prosperity of the Church depends not on
a grand ceremonial, or crowds of admir-
ing devotees, or the countenance of the
State, however desirable these things
may be, but only on the favour of God,
whose blessing and whose Spirit will be


Ver. 10. What reason we have to
praise God for bountiful seasons, and


withdrawn, if we defile his sanctuary
with superstitious rites [Robdinson. |


HOMILETICS.
Disappointep HusBanpMEen.— Verses 11, 12.


The next picture is a group of husbandmen and vine-dressers, pale and sick in
disappointed toils. Wheat and barley the most important field crops; the vine,
fig, and pomegranate, the choice fruit-trees of the land, were destroyed. The date-
palm, “ which has neither a fresh green rind, nor tender juicy leaves, and therefore
not easily injured by the locusts,” and all other trees wither away. Joy is turned
into shame, labour is lost, and mourning results.

I. Wasted labour. “The harvest of the field is perished.” The husbandman
ploughs, sows, and labours in hope. He waits “ for the precious fruit of the earth,
and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain.” Between
seed-time and harvest there is a time of ‘trial, an opportunity for faith. In all true
labour we must expect fruit, and receive it as the precious gift of God. But unsue-
cessful labour will shame our skill and faith, and confound our hopes. Sin will
prevent results, and God will blight our harvests. 1. Husbandmen will be disap.
pointed in anticipation. 2. Vine-dressers will be robbed of choice fruits. “The
ground was chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the plowmen were ashamed,
they covered their heads” (Jer. xiv. 3, 4). II. Withered joy. “ Because joy is
withered away.” The loss of harvest is the withering of joy and enjoyments. 1.
The joy of men is withered. “ Withered away from the sons of men.” The joy
that depends upon the creature is uncertain and unsatisfactory. Those that place
happiness in the delights of sense may be deprived of them. Wine and oil maw


CHAP. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL. 206


EES
A eee Seen NSS NOSaae oo oes ocean’ -


delight, but not satisfy ; they have their vacuity and indigence, All outward com-
forts sooner cloy than cheer, and weary than fill. Christ in the heart is better than
harvests in the barn and wine in the vat. “It is better,” says one, “to feel God’s
favour one hour in our repenting souls, than to sit whole ages under the warmest
sunshine that this world affordeth.” “Nature’s common joys are common cheats.”
2. The joy of nature is withered. Joel again declares the sympathy of nature with
man. “The trees of the field are withered, because (for) joy,” &c., as if it were
impossible for the natural world to rejoice when the hearts of men were sad and
sinful. Poets in all ages have taught “that one life beats throughout the universe,
revealing itself in subtle and manifold interchanges of sympathy ; that therefore
Nature feels with her foster-child man, rejoicing when he rejoices, weeping when he
weeps.” Scripture shows that sin may turn a paradise into a wilderness, and “a
fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein” (Ps.
evil. 34). Whata picture of demoralization, sensuality, and judgment in the language
of Isaiah! “All the merry-hearted do sigh. There isa crying for wine in the streets,
all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone.”


MINISTERS OF THE SAaNcTUARY AN EXAMPLE OF PENITENCE AND PIBTY IN THE Day
oF CaLamity.— Verses 13, 14.


The fourth call is to priests of the temple, who are first to humble themselves in
private as a preparation for public confession. A fast must be appointed, and they
must lead the princes and people in solemn prayer before Almighty God. When
Judgment begins at the house of God, penitence should begin also, for priests are
often the first and greatest cause of sorrow.

I. They must mourn for sin. “Lament” and howl. In all true penitence
there will be a due sense of guilt. Physical evil may cause sorrow, the destruction
of vegetation and vineyards may create lamentation ; but moral evil compels us to
feel guilty; and justice cries for punishment. 1. Mourn in sackcloth. “ Gird
yourselves.” Outward garments are of no avail without inward contrition. We
must rend our hearts, not our garments. Yet by outward acts we must incite others,
testify our abject condition before God, and renounce all carnal customs and delights.
“ For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl; for the fierce anger of the
Lord is not turned back from us.” 2. Mourn continually. “Come, lie all night
in sackcloth.” Day and night was the temple service. So there must not be
occasional grief, but lamentation without intermission. Guilt often disturbs the
sleep of night, and men lie not at ease, but insorrow. Instead of going to rest and
employing the night in Psalmody, many have more reason to confess their sins and
deprecate the wrath of God. “ All the night make I my bed toswim: I water my
couch with tears.” 3. Mourn with others. All classes, the princes, and elders, and
all the people, were to mourn universally. Chiefs in authority, and elders in sanctity
and grey hairs, were to form one band and lament with one heart and voice. The
example of old men must stimulate the young to repentance ; and the authority of
priests must urge others to the fear and worship of God. All had contributed to
national guilt, all were equally exposed, and all must join together in national
humiliation. The more public and prevalent, the more pleasing and acceptable to
God is national sorrow. “Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went
up, and came unto the house of God and wept, aud sat there before the Lord”
(Judg. xx. 26; 2 Chron. xxx. 3; Jon. iii. 5,7, 8). II. They must sanctify a fast.
“ Sanctify ye a fast.” 1. Universal cessation from labour. The day must be fixed,
set apart and solemnly observed. “ Proclaim a restraint,” let manual labour cease,
and hallow the fast with acts of devotion and fruits meet for repentance. Nc
servile work must be done, the time must be consecrated, like the Sabbath, not tc
eating, and drinking, and seeking pleasure, but to supplication and obedience. 2
Universal worship. The elders and all the inhabitants were to assemble in the
house of God. England did well to observe a day of thanksgiving for the restora


206 _HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL. (CHAP, 1.


tion of the Prince of Wales. What a spectacle to continental nations! Fasting
without devotion was only a form of sorrow. Festive joys must give place to re-
ligious worship. Fasting must be connected with the mortification of the flesh, the
contrition of the spirit, and humiliation in the house of God. Here all were com-
manded to repair to confess their guilt and obey their laws. The house of God is the
house of prayer; the place in which he has put his name, and the centre of Divine
influence and Christian friendship. Here the world loses its charms, trials are for-
gotten, the mind is elevated, and sympathies “meet and mingle into bliss.” “I
have hallowed this house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever ;
and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually ” (1 Kings ix. 3). “What
prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, in
this house. Then heer thou in heaven thy dwelling-place ” (viii. 38; 2 Chron. vi.
33). 3. Universal supplication. ‘“ And cry unto the Lord.” (a) Supplication
must be united. All must not merely be present, but all must join together in
prayer. Attendance must be devout, the time must be spent before God, not in
gazing at men. United prayer has power with God and influence upon men. It
is thus that heaven is taken by violence and national calamities averted. (b) Sup-
plication must be earnest. ‘‘ Cry unto the Lord.” It is not a listless, irreverent
prayer, but a loud earnest cry. No formal customary supplication will suffice ; the
distress is great, the routine of life and worship must be disregarded, and the “cry”
must be with impassioned earnestness and repetition. Cold prayers are a mockery
and never climb to heaven. ‘‘ So long as the light shines bright and the fires of
devotion and desires flame out,” says Jeremy Taylor, “so long the mind of a man
stands close to the altar and waits upon the sacrifice; but as the fires die and desires
decay, so the mind steals away and walks abroad.” We are taken from the fields
to the sanctuary in this picture. A train of priests, clothed in sackcloth and worn
with vigils, stand between the porch and the altar, weeping and making supplica-
tion to God; a large assembly, led by the elders, gather round them, bend their
heads in passionate grief, and unite in earnest cry for mercy and deliverance. Priest.
and peasant, kings and princes, old and young, bow in confession, petition, and
humiliation before their Maker, and thus own their dependence and set an example
to others. ‘‘Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and
the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord.” ;


Tue TrerRRIiBLE Day.— Verse 15.


The prophet urges them to repentance by fresh motives and more calamities.
Judgments had fallen upon the city and the field, in the temple and the vineyard.
Hints are now given at the truths typified by the plagues. ‘Trouble is not only at
a distance but near. So great is this trouble that men will cry, “ Alas for the.
day !”

I, This day is a day of terror. 1. On account of the evils which attend it.
(a) The chastisement of God’s people for their sins. What can people expect but
desolating strokes when they continue to sin? ‘‘ In the day of adversity consider.”
(6) The destruction of sinners for their guilt. All the enemies of God’s kingdom
will be destroyed. ‘Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and
fierce anger, to lay the land desolate, and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out
of it” (Is. xiii. 6,9). (c) The desolation of the land (ver. 10—12). 2. On account
of the evils which it predicts. ‘ As a destruction from the Almighty shall it come.”
In every judgment almighty power is seen. This aspect of the day was seen in
present events. Vegetation was consumed, and the face of nature blackened by fire ;
flocks and herds roamed disconsolate over wasted fields ; food was cut off before the
eyes of the people, and joy and gladness departed from the house of God. J}ut
present calamities predicted greater evils to come—evils beyond description, dis-
plays of power never seen before. ‘Alas! for that day is great, so that none is
like it; it is even the time of Jacob’s trouble” (Jer. xxx. 7). II. This day is near.


CHAP. I.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. 207


“The day of the Lord is at hand.” Sinners put evil days far away, and think they
will not come. “ Evil tidings to-morrow,” said one in festive joy. The word of
God declares that they are present and pressing—that it is folly to delay repentance,
and that judgments may fall suddenly upon men to overwhelm them (Ecc. ix. 12 ;
Is. xxvili. 15). The antediluvians disregarded the warnings of Noah, and were
swept away by the flood. Men now cry, “ Where is the promise of his coming ?
for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning
of the creation.” Some put off the day in a sort of philosophic argument. “The
course of nature has remained the same for ages, and therefore not likely to change.”
Others live in stolid indifference, quench their forebodings of evil, and deceive them-
selves by lies. Alas, some change the threatened vengeance into mirthful jest, and
ridicule the devout anticipations of the godly. “ The Lord of that servant shall come
in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of”
III. This day should be regarded by men. Destruction from the Almighty
shall come. There is no uncertainty, nodelay. In this light the prophet regarded
and desired the people to regard the day. Present adversity should quicken us to
a profound sense of the moral government of God, to continual recognition of his
purpose in life, and to live so that we may escape the dangers of that eventful day.
Heed not the sneering infidelity of the times.. Go to your beds to-night, enter upon
your duties to-morrow, as in sight of the judgment-seat. Live daily under the
powers of the world to come. Grow in love for the appearing of Christ. The
promise will not fail. ‘For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so
cometh as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then
destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall
not escape.’


Tue Day or JUDGMENT.


I. The day of judgment written in the convictions of men. Natural theology
teaches a retributive providence. The writings of the heathen are full of ideas of
God asa God of justice. Retributive justice was made a separate deity, whose
awards would only be full and perfect in a future life, There is a sense of future
judgment in the heart. Every sin committed carries with it a monition, a predic-
tion of this judgment. The idea is inwrought in the consciousness of mankind, and
clearly taught in the writings of ancient philosophy. Seneca says, “The gool man
(iod aceustoms to hardships, and prepares him for himself. But the luxurious, whom
he seems to indulge and to spare, he reserves for evils to come. For you are mis-
taken if you think any one excepted. The man who has been long spared will at
last have his portion of misery ; and though he seems to have escaped it, it is only
delayed for a time.” “Thus ought we always to believe,” says Plato, ‘those ancient
aud sacred words, which declare to us that the soul is immortal, that judges are
appointed, and that they pass the highest sentences of condemnation when the
spirit is separate from the body.” Thus it is a dictate of natural religion, that the
future state will be one of misery to the wicked. The day of the Lord is fore-
shadowed in our moral constitution. All men fear it and all men believe it. It is
a mark of the Divine origin and moral nature of man, which nothing can destroy.
“That which may be known of God is manifest in them ; for God hath showed i?
unto them.” II, The day of judgment prefigured in the events of history.
The judgments of God, extreme and awful, have even been regarded by the darkest
minds as evidences of God’s anger against sin, and his determination to punish it.
Heathen seers and Jewish prophets bid us regard the inner meaning of calamity
and look at it, in some sense as a part and prediction of another. The vicissitudes
of life, the unequal conditions of men, and the providences of God, point to a day
when all things will be rectified and each one receive his due. Lach particular
judgment is a warning of its approach and a pledge of its certainty. Present
chastisements must be viewed as steps in a progressive plan, realized in the final


208 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. (oHap. I.





day ; the beginning and the anticipation of “the day of the Lord.” The history
of the world, through the government of God, is turned “into a continuous judgment,
which will conclude at the end of this course of the world with a great and universal
act of judgment, through which everything that has been brought to eternity by the
stream of time unjudged and unadjusted will be judged and adjusted once for all,
to bring to an end the whole development of the worid in accordance with its Divine
appointment, and perfect the kingdom of God by the annihilation of its foes.”
‘“< All these are the beginning of sorrows.” III. The day of judgment predicted
in Scripture. What is rendered possible by the creed of the atheist, and prohable
from the teachings of nature, is morally certain from Divine revelation. Scripture
confirms natural theology in this respect, and teaches distinctly that God designs to
impress upon our minds that he will by no means clear the guilty, but reserve them
to the day of punishment. The judgments of God are said to have happened as
examples, warnings to us to repent of the sins and avoid the dangers which
brought them on. Earnest and emphatic declarations are given in Old and New
Testaments. ‘ He hath prepared his throne for judgment. And he shall judge the
world in righteousness, he shall minister judgment to the people in uprightness.”
“He hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness
by that man whom he hath ordained.” ‘ For we must all stand before the judg-
ment-seat of Christ.”


Great NationaL Cauamities.— Verses 16—18.


As a proof that the day of the Lord is approaching the prophet sets in detail
the judgments that were upon the land. Present prospects were cut off, all future
hope frustrated, rotten seed, withered fruits, and desolate land, cause man and beast
to mourn.

I. Human sustenance taken away. ‘Is not the meat cut off before your
eyes?” When the fruits were ripe, the corn ready for the reaper, and the grapes
longing to be pressed ; when everything was set before their eyes for their enjoy-
inent, they were taken away. God can easily disappoint our expectations. Meat
is often cut off from our eyes by sin, True sustenance is in God and in his word.
Man’s life, even his physical life, is not dependent for its continuance upon bread
alone. God has but to will to the subject elements, material and spiritual, and
any other means will suffice, as well as bread, to sustain life. ‘ Man shall not live
by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.” II.
Festive joy cut off. “Joy and gladness from the house of our God.” Pinched by
famine, the offerings for the priest and the temple had perished. Annual teasts
and national thanksgivings had departed. The joy, all the deeper because it was
“the joy of the Lord,” the gladness, all the more pure and sweet because it was
“gladness in the house of their God,” had ceased perforce. How sad to be deprived
of necessary food and the ordinances of God’s house! When the body is not fed
the mind will starve, the morals will suffer. As the brain depends upon the blood
{or its nourishment, so the soul depends upon God for its health. He imparts to
those who love him a joy of exuberance in all the good things of life. None are poor
but those who sin and despise the warnings of God’s providence. “The Lord will not
suffer the soul of the righteous to famish ; but he casteth away the substance of the
wicked.” III. National drought prevailed. The land greatly suffered, cattle
aud herds were distressed, and groaned out their life through want of pasture. 1.
The cattle suffered. ‘How do the beasts groan! the herds of cattle are per-
plexed.” Touch after touch is given. Not only do men suffer, but innocent cattle
groan who depend upon their care. The herds of oxen find the oft-cropped plains
destitute of pasture. The sheep, which can feed where herds cannot, wander in
their pitiful distress and bleat in vain. ‘Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled.
thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust.” 2. The home-
steads woe destroyed. “ The barns are broken down.” It is not enough to lose


CHAP. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. 209








joy and mirth. The very “ seed is rotten under the clods.” The prospects of the
harvest are destroyed. Vegetation and grass, smitten by the burning sun, have
withered. The husbandmen despair, and suffer their “ barns” to break down, and
their “ garners” to become heaps of ruins. Thus one mischief is heaped upon
another, All nature is touched in sympathy and robed in mourning for man’s
guilt, ‘Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein
shall languish, with the beasts of the field and with the fowls of heaven” (Hos. iv. 3).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


The husbandman was called to mourn-
ing for a threefold calamity that lay
upon his tillage (Amos v. 16). First,
immoderate rain in or about seeding ;
secondly, locusts and other vermin at
spring ; thirdly, extreme drought after
all (ver. 19, 20). Thus God followeth
sinners with one plague in the neck of
another (as he did Pharaoh, that sturdy
rebel), till he has made his foes his
footstools. To multiply sin is to mul-
tiply sorrow (Ps. xvi. 4); to heap up
wickedness is to heap up wrath (Rom.
ii. 5) [Trapp].


the Spirit of God who speaks by the
mouth of his prophet; for it is to be
feared that we do not make enough of
the humanity of God, of his intense de-
light in trees and flowers, in herds and
flocks ; of his humane care for them, of
his tender sympathy with them. The
Psalms and Prophecies are full of this
Divine humanity, no Prophecy fuller,
perhaps, than that of Joel; and in no
passage of Joel’s is that tender, intense
humanity more beautifully and pathetic-
ally expressed than in the verses (18—
20) we have just considered [ Coa].


Let us here recall the fact, that it is
HOMILETICS.


Srupiwity in NationaL CALAMITIES REPROVED BY Brutes aND Goop Mzyn.—
Verses 19, 20,


The fact that irrational creatures suffer with man should make him cautious in
his conduct. If the people neglect the warnings of the prophet, they should heed
the cries of the brute creation. Both the animal and vegetable world are included
in man’s destiny for good or for evil. Should we be silent when beasts implore
help 4

r Some men are insensible to sin in great national calamities. The drought
had consumed the pastures of the field, burned the trees of the forest, and dried up
the waterbrooks, but Israel did not see the hand of God inthis. Man is a creature
of emotion, and is bound to acquaint himself with all the phenomena calculated to
move. him; to estimate them according to their design, and to carry out the
emotions which they produce into final acts. Every chject is adapted to pro-
duce a certain state of mind. The hand of God in history, the judgments of God
in nations, should be read and observed by us. If we discern not the presence of
God, if through selfishness and hardness of heart we despise the chastisements of
God, we aggravate our sin and unbelief. God has placed us in certain relations to
himself and his works as sentient and intelligent beings. We have capacities higher
than brutes, can see and hear God in his dispensations, and live habitually under a
sense of duty. But the complaint is often made, “ Israel doth not know, my
people doth not consider.” ‘‘ For God speaketh once, yea, twice, yet man perceiveth
it not.” II. This insensibility to sin in great national calamities is censurable.
Men ought to feel in distress. If they do not they violate their own nature and
disregard the voice of God. 1. Brutes reprove insensible men. “The beasts oi
the field cry also unto thee.” They depend upon God, and he gives them their
meat in due season (Ps. exlv. 15). When young lions lack and suffer hunger,
they “seek their meat from God” (Ps civ. 21). They enjoy the gifts of nature

14


210 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. fcwap. 1.


with sensitive pleasure and apparent gratitude, But men are heedless of their
groans, stupid in their folly, and turn not to God in their trouble. ‘The stork in
the heaven knoweth her appointed times ; and the turtle, and the crane, and the
swallow observe the time of their coming ; but my people know not the judgment
of God.” 2. God’s people reprove insensible men. The prophet stirs them up by
his own example. If no one else will call upon God, “O Lord, to thee will I cry.”
When others are unmoved God’s people are touched with national calamities.
‘They set others an example, and seek to provoke them to repentance and return to
God. 1. An example of penitence. The heart of the prophet was deeply moved
for innocent creatures and for ungodly men, We hear his sighs, see his tears, and
dwell upon his words. He comes before us, an embodiment of the spiritual and per-
sonal duty he teaches. He is the prophet of repentance, and sees in the judgments
of God motives to repentance. National sins brought national affliction, and should
cause national humiliation, 2. An example of patriotism. God’s people are as
keenly alive to the interests and dangers of the nations as others. The Hebrew
prophets were patriots and statesmen, to whom nothing that affected the national
welfare was alien or indifferent. ‘‘ May Heaven save my country,” cried a British
legislator. So good men see God in everything ; point out the real causes of suffer-
ing; the operation of moral under physical law; and lament the state of the coun-
try and the condition of the people. ‘For the mountains will I take up a weeping
and wailing, and for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation, because they
are burned up, so that none can pass through them ; neither can men hear the
voice of the cattle.” 3. An example of prayer. The prophet turned to God, our
only hope in distress. In public calamity men write pamphlets, make speeches, and
enact laws to meet and overcome it. But the man of God goes to the root of evil,
and points out its only cure. He holds the principles of Divine life in his soul,
believes that individual circumstances and national events are controlled by God’s
will, and sees in present visitations the future results to the wicked and the righteous.
God was working out his mysterious purposes, and he prays that the visitations of
anger may be turned into corrective discipline. As Abraham prayed for the cities
of the plain and Moses for the tribes of Israel, so Joel betakes himself to Jehovah.
“QO Lord, to thee I will cry: for the fire hath devoured the pastures of the
wilderness,”

Lord, what a change within us one short hour

Spent in thy presence will prevail to make,

What heavy burdens from our bosoms take ;

What parched grounds refresht as with a shower}

We kneel, and all around us seems to lower ;

We rise, and all—the distant and the near—

Stands forth in sunny outline, brave and clear—{ Trench].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


There is an order in these distresses. plying their wants. An argument


First he points out the insensate things
wasted ; then those afflicted, which have
sense only; then those endowed with
reason ; so that to the order of calamity
there may be consorted an order of pity,
sparing first the creature, then the
things sentient, then things rational
[ Pusey]. ’

Beasts cry. I. The dependence of
all creatures upon God. II. The com-
passion of God to all creatures—1. In
removing their sufferings, 2. In sup-


against cruelty to animals and a motive
to prayer. If God hears the cries of
dumb animals will he not hear our
prayers ?

The double purpose of Divine judg-
ments upon a nation—l. Restoration
of land. 2. Improvement of men.

1. A suffering world in sympathy
with suffering man. What a mystery
man’s sin, desolating the land, blighting
the trees, and adding to the groans of
the brute creation ! The whole creation,


cuaP. L|


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL.


211





animate and inanimate, touched by the
fall of man! What evidences of sin!
What motives to repentance! 2. A
beneficent world in sympathy with re-
stored man. <A cheering thought that


true penitence and restoration to God
will give pasture to flocks, beauty to
flowers, and freshness to the landscape.
** New heavens and a new earth, wherein
dwelleth righteousness.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER I.


Ver. 1—4. The Jewish theocracy is
passed away, but God is still the moral
governor of the world ; and in perfect
harmony with the principles of the New
Testament, which teach us not to pro-
nounce a man to be asinner above other
men, because on him the tower of Siloam
falls, we may interpret the prevalence
of natural evils in any country as meant
by God to call the attention of the peo-
ple to those moral evils which abound
amongst them. So that if untimely
weather come, or malignant diseases
come, or any form of calamity come ;—
if people ask one another, “ Hath this
been in your days, or even in the days
of your fathers? Did you ever know
such a season, such weather such sick-
ness, or such death?”—s+ is only the
province of religious duty ts look on such
things as the working out of great laws,
of moral righteousness ;--to recognize
man’s sin as the awful fect lying under
what man calls his misfortunes, and by
timely repentance to secure forgiveness ;
and thus turn the visitation into a
blessed chastisement [Stoughton].

Ver. 4, 6, 7. Locusts. The insect
that destroyed alJ the peach-trees in St.
Helena was imported from the Cape,
says Kirby and Spence. ‘“ We know,”
says Burke, “that a swarm of locusts,
however indjvidually despicable, can
render a country more desolate than
Gengis Khan or Tamerlane. When
God Almighty chose to humble the
pride and presumption of Pharaoh and
pring him to shame, he did not effect
nis purpose with tigers and lions. He
sent lice, mice, frogs, and everything
tosthsome and contemptible, to pollute
and destroy the country.”

Ver. 5. .Drunkards. Be sober in
djet. Nature is content with a little ;
but where sobriety wanteth, nothing is
enough. The body must have sufficient
lest it faint in necessary duties ; but


beware of gluttony and drunkenness.
Christ saith, ‘‘ Take heed, overload not
your hearts with these burdens of ex-
cess.” “Be not drunken with wine.”
These lessons are fit for England, where
ancient sobriety hath given place tosuper-
fluity, where many such men are as fare
daintily day by day. God grant their
end be not like his, who riotously wast-
ing here the creatures of God, wanted
afterwards a drop of water when he
would gladly have had it [Sandys].

Ver. 8—10. When we bear in mind
that in spite of the help given them
from this country one fourth part of
the people of Ireland died in one year
(1847) through the failure of a single
article of food, we may have some idea
of the distress of successive years. Not
all the vast wealth of England would
restore the withered joy that would re-
sult from the failure of the harvest and
the destruction of herbs for a single
year. The blight of a fly might consume
cereal crops and prove more terrible than
destructive war.

Ver. 13,14. Ministers. A country
parson fighting against the devil in his
parish has nobler ideas than Alexander
had [Adam]. Example works more
than precept; for words without practice
are but counsels without effect. But
when we do as we say, we illustrate and
contirm the rule which we prescribe.
“Men believe more by the eyes than by
the ears,” says Seneca.

Ver. 15. Judgment will assign to
every onea place according to character ;
ranks will be adjusted and precedency
set right ; virtue will be rewarded and
vice punished. Thoughts of this day
should restrain from vice and urge to
virtue, preserve human society and de-
fend religion, vindicate the character of
God, and justify his providence to men.

Ver. 16—-18. Nature presents two
aspects towards us. If we sin and op-


: HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOKz. (cHaP. I





pose her, she is stern, implacable, and and is an important means of its im-
destructive, charged with storms and provement. The progressiveness of
thunder, famine and pestilence; if we creation is made subservient to the moral
yield and obey, we secure her blessings, educationand advancement of the human
co-operate with her laws, and command race. A single alteration throws the
her forces. Love and serve God, and whole into disorder. What a picture,
nature shall be at peace with thee. then, for man to be ungrateful, insensi-

Ver. 19,20. Animal sensibility forms ble, and rebellious in the sufferings of
a perpetual appeal to human sensibility, nature for his conduct !





CHAPTER IL


Critroat Nores.] This chapter still urges repentance, directs for a meeting of the people, and
assures that God will have compassion. 1. Blow] Priests must sound an alarm, as if foreign in-
vasion nigh. 2. Darkness] Four terms used to indicate the intense calamity (Ex. x. 22; Is. viii. 22).
Swarms of locusts literally obscure the sun. People] numerous and most formidable. Like] Ex-

ressive of extraordinary judgments (cf. 2 Kings xviii. 5; xxiii. 5). 3. Fire] They consume. Eden]
Fruitfulness. Nothing] No herb, plant, nor tree, shall escape. ‘The word used elsewhere of persons
who escape, suggests that we should not linger by the type of locusts only, but think of enemies more
terrible, who destroy not harvests only, but men, bodies and souls.” 4, Appearance] like horses
prepared for battle (Job xxxix. 20; Rev. ix. 7); swiftness and sound like chariots on rough mountain-
tops. 6, Pained] with terror. ‘More terrible than the locusts,” says an Arab proverb. Blackness]
from anxiety and fear (Lam. iv. 8). Hed. flames (Is. xiii. 8), to glow with heat: some to lose colour,
to grow pale (Jer. xxx. 6). 7—9] depict their military order and discipline; it is vain to resist
(Ex. x. 6). A picture perfectly true to nature, says Jerome and others. 10.] Heaven and earth feel
their presence like a tempest-cloud of Divine wrath, covering all in darkness (Matt. xxiv. 29), 11.]
“ Lord of the locusts,” say Mohammedans, commands and makes the meanest the instruments of venge-
ance (Rev. xviii. 8). 12. Therefore] repent with heart undivided, and with fasting, for heinous
sins demand extraordinary penitence. Mourning] Lit. beating on the breast, like the publican
(Lu. xviii, 13; xxiii, 48). 18. Not garments] as customary in great sorrow (Gen. xxxvii. 29;
Job i, 20). External repentance will avail nothing (Ps. li. 19; Ezek. xxxvi. 26). 14. Knoweth]
if the least chance, secure it, God may restore blessings sufficient to maintain his worship and sup-
ply our wants (Jon. iii, 9), 15. Blow] Convene the people. 16, 17.] No age and condition ex-
empted, for all deserve punishment ; the joy of the bride and bridegroom even must give place to
penitential mourning. 17.] The priests must take their position, and pray to God on behalf of his
covenant people. 18. Then] No longer threatenings, but promises. Jealous] of dishonour to them,
love and pity for their welfare. 19, 20.] Renewed fertility and removal of the cause of desolation ;
answer to prayer and bestowment of great things (Ps. exxvi. 2, 3); expressive of a universal truth.
21. Fear not] as in ch. i., on account of judgments, but rejoice in the destruction of the hosts,
22.] Verdant pastures and trees laden with fruit shall be given. Beasts of the field shall no longer
want. 23, Rain] The former moderately, lit. according to right, i.e. in due measure, not in ex-
tremes to injure (Deut, xi. 14; Prov. xvi. 15). The rain] Generically, showers. The latter rain}
to mature the crops; rain in season, rain in opposition to drought, and rain a type of all blessings.
24—27.] Effects of the rain—abundance of all kinds of food; reparation of damage by locusts ; re-
demption of Israel from the heathen ; vindication of God and gratitude for his grace. 28—82,
Afterward] These outward things are only a type of spiritual gifts, a prospect of richer blessings ;
and a grander dispensation is held out, a dispensation remarkable for the Holy Spirit, as its sign
and substance. This gift shall be poured out in copious and refreshing showers upon all flesh, Jew
and Gentile (Acts x. 44; xi. 17), upon servants and handmaids, the most degraded and despised
(Acts ii, 18). As the result, sons and daughters shall prophesy ; dreams to the old and visions to the
young ; all shall know Divine things clearly. 30, 31.] These manifestations, full of joy to believers,
will be menacing to unbelievers, ‘This day of the Lord will be attended by convulsions on earth,
prognostications in heaven ; to God’s children, to all who call upon him, it will be a day of redemp
tion ; but these will be a remnant only. Seek to belong to it (Acts ii. 40),


Omar. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL. 218











HOMILETICS.


Tur Auarm In Zion.—Verse 1.


In the dreadful calamities described what must be done? Jehovah shows that
the danger can only be averted by repentance, humiliation, and reformation of
conduct. In this verse the prophet interprets present chastisements, and lays a
foundation for intimations which follow. Alarm must be given, the people roused,
and called to solemn assembly.

I. The place of alarm. “In Zion.” Zion was once the seat of Divine
government and consecrated by God’s presence. The Church of Christ is now the
holy mount, the city of the living God, and the school of instruction to the universe.
It is the spiritual palace of the Great King, who rules his people by his Spirit, and
governs the world by his providence. Here he displays tokens of love and judg-
ment. Great everywhere, his judgments are specially great here. It is a solemn
thing when judgment begins in the house of God. But he will not permit sin in
his own residence, The Church must be conspicuous in its elevation, adorned with
holiness, and luyal in obedience. ‘‘ For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the
word of God from Jerusalem.” II. The means of the alarm. In times of old it
was the duty of the priests to warn the people and blow the trumpet (Num. x. 8).

- Ministers now must sound the alarm and declare the wrath of God against the un-
righteousness of men. The watchmen of Zion must be awake, sound and “ take
the alarm they give.” They must be “sons of thunder.” They must not hesitate
nor seek to hide the truth. The blast must wax louder and louder to startle thought-
less men. Ministers must never grow cold, careless of their own, and pitiless of
the danger of others. When Perkins of Cambridge uttered the word damned, a
solemn awe struck his hearers and the echo of it lasted many days. Whitfield
brought tears in the eyes of old people, when he cried in the spirit of his Master,
“QO Glasgow, Glasgow!” ‘ Blow the trumpet, and warn the people ; then who-
soever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning, if the sword
come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.” III. The reasons
foralarm. “For the day of the Lord cometh.” 1. The dangeris near. ‘The day
cometh.” Many ridicule and call earnest men enthusiasts. Others cry, “Be calm,
there is no need for that ado ;” but the prophet of God sees the danger and urges
swift escape. The day “is nigh at hand,” and not afar off; seen in present judg-
ments and will come in sudden terror. Men are warned now of judgment to come
and of enemies gathering together for fearful destruction. ‘‘The great day of the
Lord is near, it is near and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord ;
the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.” 2. The people are careless. “‘ Let all
the inhabitants of the land tremble.” Though danger is nigh yet men neglect or
despise it. They should ¢rembie, start up from apathy and sullen indifference, and
haste to the refuge. How stupid for persons in face of impending ruin to sit in
ease! They provide in summer for winter, in youth and health for age and sick-
ness, but strive not to escape spiritual death. They seek to ward off temporal evils,
but eternal destruction is not foreseen and prepared for. Few hear the distant
thunder which betokens the coming storm. In their fancied security they laugh at
those who prepare for the evil day, laugh on the brink of that day which, unless
sovereign grace intervene, will make them wise too late. “Lord, when thy hand
is lifted up they will not see, but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy a!
the people ; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them,”


Toe Dark Day.—Verses 2, 11.


With four terms the day of Jehovah is described as a day of judgment, “A
day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness.” J mrknesa


214 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL. (cHar. Il.


fell upon Egypt (Ex. x. 22), and enveloped Sinai at the giving of the law (Deut. -
iv. ne This typical of the mysteries of God and the miseries of. men.

I. The profound mystery of the day. As clouds of locusts darken the sky, sc
obscurity hangs over all Divine proceedings. We know that all calamities are judg-
ments of some sort ; that we are tried and judged now, “ already made manifest to
God,” and that a day is nigh when all must stand before the judgment-seat of
Christ. But when and how the day will come no man knoweth. God veils his
purpose and splendour. ‘“‘ Clouds and darkness are round about him.” Wisdom
prepares for events, folly rushes on and falls into the confusion. Walk by faith,
do present duty, and cease to speculate. ‘“ Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing
up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.” II. The great misery
of the day. As clouds indicate obscurity, so darkness denotes misery. The dark-
ness of the locusts would be unparalleled. ‘There hath not been ever the like,
neither shall be any more after it.” Present punishments are only the beginning,
the foretastes of eternal. If justice and judgment distress men now, what will
they be at the day of fina] accounts? The destruction of the temple, and the re-
jection of the Jews, signal visitations upon churches and nations, are faint sym-
bols of the terror of that day. “That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and
distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day
of clouds and thick darkness.” III. The overwhelming destruction of the day. -
So great and terrible is the day, that the words are wrung from the prophet, ‘‘ Who
can abide it?” The displays of power will be omnipotent. ‘‘ Who knoweth the
power of thine anger?” It consumes like a fire and none escape or resist it. God
has not diminished in majesty and might. As he discomfited Egyptians, so will he
overcome his enemies at last. ‘ He ruleth by his power for ever.” ‘ Who may
abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth?” There
is only one way of escape. Repent and believe in Jesus Christ, and you shall
be saved.

Bold shall I stand in that great day,
For who aught to my charge shall lay ?


Fully absolved through Christ I am,
From sin and fear, from guilt and shame.


Tus Army or THE Lorp.—Verses 4—11.


The locusts are led by Jehovah, under his command, and sent to execute
his will. “Lord of the Locusts” is one of the names of God in Mohammedan
writings. .

I. Numerous and strong. “A great people and strong” (ver. 2). ‘“ What more
countless or mightier than the locusts?” asks Jerome. Each small and contempt-
ible in itself, is made powerful by the strength of God. All agencies, human and
Divine, are pliable to his hand, when he wants instruments of displeasure. II.
Courageous and swift. ‘As the appearance of horses ; and as horsemen, so shall
they run.” Their heads are exceedingly like that of a horse. In flying they make
a noise like rushing wind, and loud “as dashing waters,” saysa traveller. Like war-
chariots rattling on rough mountain-tops, they speed to do their work. “The shapes
of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle” (Rev. ix. 7). “ And
the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots, of many horses running to
battle” (ver. 9). III. Universal and ill-omened. As “a morning spread upon
the mountains,” like dawn ushering in a day of darkness and gloom. Or with
yellow lustre on their wings, produced by the rays of the sun, they sweep down
the mountains and announce the advent of terrible calamity. Travellers have
noticed this feature. ‘“‘The day before the arrival of the locusts,” says one, “ we
could infer that they were coming, from a yellow reflection in the sky, proceeding
from their yellow wings. As soon as this light appeared no one had the slightest


cHaP. It.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. 212








doubt that an enormous swarm of locusts was approaching.” IV. Orderly and
well-equipped. “ Neither shall one thrust another.” All keep their rank, march
in ease and battle-array. ‘They charge like heroes,” mount the walls and assail
fortified cities with dauntless might. Like David’s army, “they know how to
keep rank,” and diverge not to the left or right. They close up as comrades fall,
and keep unbroken in military array (ver. 7, 8). Having surmounted the walls,
they storm and sack, ‘‘and rush through the city” in fearful speed. ‘ The locusts
have no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands.” V. Terrible and destruc-
tive. 1. The land is desolated. Like a devouring fire, they consume every green
thing on the earth. ‘‘ Yea, and nothing shall escape them.” ‘Thus the land was
desolate after them, that no man passed through nor returned; for they laid the
pleasant land desolate.” 2. The inhabitants are alarmed. They inspire terror, as
universal and abject as that caused by an invading army. “ Before their face the
people shall be much pained, all faces shall gather blackness.” In the agony of
despair Eastern nations wait their approach to-day. “They shall be amazed one
at another ; their faces shall be as flames.” 3. Portentous signs in heaven and earth
appear. ‘The earth shall quake and the heavens shall tremble” (ver. 10). Take
this in connection with the next, and we see the terrible day, the dissolution of
the social fabric, symbolized by signs. Sun and moon grow dark and stars with-
draw their light, because Jehovah comes to judge (Is. xiii. 13; Jer. x. 10; Nah.
i. 5, 6). Nature is clothed in mourning, the universe trembles from predictions
of judgment to come. Three sentences give the reason, for God does this—
(a) Because his army “is very great.” (b) Because this powerful army “ executeth
his word.” (c) Because the day of judgment is so great and terrible that no one
can stand before the wrath of the Judge.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7. They are on God’s message terrible—1l. In the country. The gar-


and they linger not, but rejoice to run
their course (Ps. xix. 6). Men can
mount a wall few at a time, the locusts
scale much more steadily, more com-
pactly, more determinately and irresisti-
bly. The picture unites the countless
multitude, condensed march, and entire
security of the locusts with the might of
warriors [ Pusey].

On his ways. So each Divine judg-
ment is directed, not by chance; adapted
and weighed by infinite skill; and
reaches in time and method just that
person for whom it isintended. Nothing
is lost, nothing escapes.

The judgments of God. I. The nature
of the judgments. A day of darkness
and gloom, none like them before or
since. Most awful and extraordinary.
II. Vhe executors of the judgments.
Not lions and beasts of savage name,
but small and insignificant creatures,
united, ranked, and commanded by the
Divine leader ; swift, furious, and irre-
sistible in attack. ITI. The effects of
the judgments. The execution most


den of Eden was turned into a desolate
wilderness. In front and rear the army
was like a devouring fire. No green
thing escaped. 2. Jn the city. They
climbed the wall, and, as a thief, entered
the windows and ransacked the place.
No fortifications nor force can resist the
commissions of God (Jer. ix. 21). If
the weakest creatures cannot be turned
aside, and the smallest judgments cannot
be resisted, what of the greatest? what
of the last of all? .

They shall not break their ranks.
Ver. 7. Unity is strength. The weak-
est efforts and agencies combined are
powerful for good or evil Rank and
order are necessary to accomplish any
victory. Confusion and disorder weaken ;
but when eack goes on his way, patiently
and perseveringly does his duty, success
will be gained. Small armies, well
disciplined and marshalled for battle,
have vanquished and scattered hosts of
disorderly foes.


The least confusion but in one, not all
That system only, but the whole must fall.


216





Learn—1. The resources of God to
punish are abundant. 2. The power of
God to punish is—(a) omnipotent, and
(d) irresistible. 3. The times of God to
punish are ominous.

Ver, 11. The camp of God. 1. Birds
and beasts of prey. The meanest and
mightiest creature. The lion in the
forest and the moth in thesun. 2. The
elements of nature. Winds and tem-
pests, thunder and lightning, obey his


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL.


{cHaP. I





will. Sun, moon, and stars cease to
shine, and darkness covers the earth. 3.
The hosts of heaven. Angels, armed
with vengeance, destroy the ‘first-born of
Egypt and the army of Sennacherib
The resources of the universe are under
his command to bless or to destroy.


What is creation less
Than a capacious reservoir of means,
Formed for his use, and ready at his will?


HOMILETICS.
Space FoR PersonaL Repentanosr.—Verses 12—14.


The design of chastisement is not destruction, but salvation. Mercy rejoiceth
against judgment. ‘The attainment of salvation is only by repentance and return
to God. Hence the prophet in God’s name urges personal and national amend-
ment. Personal repentance is described in these words.

I. Its nature. “Turn ye even to me.” 1. It is return to God. Return
quite up to God, not half-way (Hos. xiv. 2). Half conversion, and half amend-
ment will not avail. The whole distance must be overcome and God must
be gained. Many are near to Christ, but not in him. All are alienated from
God ; and true reformation is not forsaking one habit to form another ; changing
one church or creed for another; but turning round in thought and feeling
and coming to God. 2. It is a sincere return. It is real, not affected, “ With
all your heart.” The mind and affections have been stolen from God, now
all are centred upon him. Outward expressions are worthless, mere trappings of
sorrow. ‘ Rend your heart and not your garments.” Partial feeling and feigned
sorrow God will not accept. He requires truth in the inward parts. ‘The sacri-
fices of God are a broken spirit ; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not
despise.” 3. It ts a sorrowful return. “ With fasting, and with weeping, and with
mourning.” There may not always be striking outward signs. But deep sorrow
and contritior of spirit are accompanied with humiliation, self-denial, and prayer.
The penitent weeps, mourns, and strikes his breast like the publican. Signs of
grief often stir up the heart to more grief, and indicate to others the sincerity of con-
version. Penitence must not be slight and superficial, but deep and real. ‘“ Bring
forth therefore fruits meet for repentance.” II. Its motive. <“ For he is gracious
and merciful,” &c. Hope of acceptance is held out. This hope is grounded on the
gracious character of God, revealed on Sinai (Ex. xxxiv. 6, 7), and reproduced here
to encourage repentance. 1. God is gracious and merciful. Though mercy has been
despised and grace abused, he delights not in the death of sinners, but wishes all
to turn and live. If he were not merciful we could not hope for pardon; and if he
were only merciful and not gracious we could not expect to receive anything from
him. 2. God is slow to anger and of great kindness. He can be angry and deal
out punishment, but he pauses, lingers long, and gives opportunity to escape. His
kindness is beyond human pity. He is longsuffering under the greatest provoca-
tions (Ps. citi. 15). 3. God repents of the evil. If he repents of the punishments
inflicted, will they not be accepted when they repent and return? Evils are against
his will, his strange work, therefore on the first tokens of sorrow he will take them
away. “For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy
unto them that call upon thee.” 4. God is a covenant God. “Turn unto the
Lord your God.” They had turned away from God, but they were still his people.
He is interested in their welfare, and unchangeable in his love and purpose. God
must be approached as a covenant God. H/’%s Divine nature and mercy, bis cove-


BHAP, IT.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL. 217


nant relations and promises, are all brought forth to urge men to return unto him.
His goodness and mercy never fail. ‘“ Despisest thou the riches of his goodness,
and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth
thee to repentance?” III. Its necessity. ‘Therefore also now.” Now, though
it be late it is not too late. Now, though the day is near and locusts are at hand.
“ Now is the day of grave, the visitation from God.” ‘Now or never.” Sinners
should not delay. Time is precious, opportunities may not be given again. Re-
pentance is a spiritual, a personal, an immediate duty. ‘“‘ Now is the accepted time,
to-day is the day of salvation.” ‘God now commandeth all men everywhere to
repentance.” IV. Its possibility. ‘Who knoweth if he will return and repent,”
&c. Judgments may be taken away, the meat-offering restored, and a blessing
left behind. Space is given men for repentance. We are not to be too confident
lest we be careless. But there is no doubt in the prophet’s mind. God will return.
He never changes nor lies (1 Sam. xii. 22). His favour is not like the shifting
clouds, nor the winter’s sun casting occasional light, but withholding heat and joy.
If we return to God he will return to us. “Therefore say thou unto them, Thus
saith the Lord of Hosts; Turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn
unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 12. Although all sorrow for sin Ver. 13. God’s character in its


hath not the same expression, nor the
same degree of pungency and sensitive
trouble, yet it is not a godly sorrow
unless it really produces these effects,
i. e. (1) that it makes us really to hate
and (2) actually to decline sin ; and (3)
produces in us a fear of God’s anger, a
sense of the guilt of his displeasure ; (4)
and then such consequent trouble as can
consist with such apprehension of the
Divine displeasure [Jeremy Taylor].
Repentance is—1l. A change of mind,
a turning of the soul toGod. 2. A real
turning, not resting in shadows, not rent-
ing the mantle only, but the offering of
the heart to God. 3. This is a personal
dut7. It cannot be done by represent-
ation or in the mass; but by each alone,
the children alone, the parents alone,
and the priests alone. 4. God will be
satisfied with this, but with nothing less.


relation to our character and condition.
Grace to the unworthy, mercy to the
miserable, long-suffering to provocation,


truth to the promise, and change towards


the penitent. “Thou, O Lord, art a
God full of compassion and gracious,
long-suffering and plenteous in mercy
and truth” (Ps. Ixxxvi. 15).


Ver. 14. Prospects opened up by
repentance. 1. Remission of temporal
calamities. 2. Restoration of fruit and
subsistence. 3. Spiritual blessings left


behind dreadful curses. The storm will
pass away and the sun will shine again;
flowers and fruit shall come, birds shall
sing, and joy and peace crown the land.
“Then shall the earth yield her increase ;
and God, even our own God, shall bless
us. God shall bless us; and all the ends
of the earth shall fear him,”


HCMILETICS,


A Cau to Pusiic Rerentance.— Verses 15—17.


Once more a day must be set apart for public fasting and humiliation.
repentance when genuine will lead to public confession.


Personal
A sense of sin in the


hearts of individuals will produce fruit and find expression in the actions of the


community. Hence all the nation are summoned to solemn assembly.


wrumpet in Zion.”


“ Blow the


I. Great national danger urged them to public assembly. The nation is
endangered ly sin, sorrow has fallen upon all ranks, and sympathy unites tiem into


2i3 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL. [CH.AP. 1


one. Assemblies are called for scientific and political purposes; but no assembly
so solemn as that called by natural calamity. Affliction cements the hearts and
binds the hopes of nations. It is in vain to sound an alarm for war, to blow the
trumpet and muster our armies, without the favour of God. The most effectual call
is that of a Church or a nation to repentance. The most powerful defence is uni-
versal penitence and prayer to God. By this alone can we overcome our enemies
and avert the judgment of God. “ Let'tyrants fear,” cried Queen Elizabeth when
threatened with the Spanish invasion; “I put my trust in God, and in the loyal
hearts and good will of my subjects.” ‘For the Lord is our defence; and the
Holy One of Israel is our king.” II, None of the nation were exempt from the
call to public assembly. “Gather the people.” 1. The aged must assemble.
“ Assemble the elders.” Men of understanding and ripe in years must be active
and eminent examples in times of fasting and humiliation. Wisdom and experi-
ence belong to them, advice and help are expected from them. 2. Children must not
be exempt. ‘ Gather the children and those that suck the breasts.” The youngest
and most helpless were involved in parental danger, and must touch parental
hearts. The sight would be very affecting, and if God spared Nineveh for the sake
of the children, he might spare Israel. The prayers of the aged and the cries of
the young may not avail with men, but they are power with God. ‘“ All Judah
stood before the Lord, with their little ones, their wives and their children” (2 Chi.
xx. 13). 3. The newly married must obey the call. “‘ Let the bridegroom go forth
of his chamber and the bride out of her closet.” Marriage joy must give place to
national fasts, and feasting must be turned into mourning. There is a time for all
things, and private interests must give place to public duties. The raptures of
love must be forgotten in the guilt of the nation. It is mockery to spend time in
making merry which ought to be consecrated to God insorrow. All unfit for battle
and all exempt from war (Deut. xxiv. 5); all classes of the community, the
aged and the young, the mirthful and the mournful, the priests and the people,
were required to attend. ‘‘In that day did the Lord God of hosts call to
weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth”
(Is. xxii. 12). III. National confession was the object of public assembly.

It was not an assembly for social entertainment and mirth. Not mere attend-

ance and cessation from toil were required. It was “a solemn assembly,” a

meeting for deep humiliation before God. 1. Confession was made through their
public representatives. The priests, “the ministers of the Lord” in dignity and office,
must set the example, lead the assembly in weeping and prayer. In front of the
Holy Place, in which Jehovah was enshrined, they must bend and plead for the
people. Ministers should ever be intercessors for the nation, feel the condition of
men, and urge them by precept and example to devote themselves to God. 2.
Confession was made on national grounds. Prayer is basod on grounds which should
never be forgotten by God’s people in like circumstances. It is a special liturgy
for the solemn occasicn. And God who reads the heart in the werds will surely
hear the words which he himself breathes in the heart. Mercy is the common
ery. Punishment is deserved, but all were earnest in praying for deliverance from
famine and reproach. “Spare thy people, O Lord.” (1) God’s covenant reiation
is pleaded. Spare us, not because we weep and fast, not because we deserve mercy,
but because we are thine heritage, though unworthy of thename. Thou hast chosen
us for thyself, remember and keep thy word with us and our fathers. The cove-
nant of God is not to be renounced and forgotten by the penitent, but pleaded to
secure a perpetual interest in God. (2) God’s honvur among the heathen is con-
cerned. ‘Wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?”
If God does not fulfil his word and protect us, if we are utterly ruined by judg-
ments, and insulted by idolaters, the enemies would rejoice and blasphemously
inquire what God could do for his people? The penitent is humbled for his own
sin ; but when God is reproached, and his love called in question because he appears


CHAP. 11.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL.





severe, this is an addition to his sorrow, a sword in his bones (Ps. xlii. 10). He
therefore pleads that God would defend his own glory, and not permit men to be


confirmed in their error and folly (Ezek. xx. 5; xxxvi. 21, 23).


“ Wherefore


should the heathen say, Where is their God ? Let him be known among the heathen
in our sight by the revenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed” (Ps.


Ixxix. 10).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 15. Sanctify a fast. Care
should be taken both by ministers and
people in their stations, that every duty
be not profanely gone about, nor exter-
nal performances rested in ; but that it
may be done in a spiritual and sancti-
fied manner, that there should be due
preparation for it, and that the congre-
gation come purified (as the word signi-
fieth), according to the law, and fast in
a sanctified manner [Hutcheson].

Ver. 16. Gather the people. 1. In
times of calamity fasting may be appro-
priate. 2. In times of national calamity
the nation, all the people, should join.
3. Men of superior rank should use their
- influence and stimulate others to attend
God’s house and regard God’s word, By
penitence and prayer an entire com-
munity may be saved from distress.

Gather the children. Anniversary
Sermon. I. Many gatheringsforchildren.
Exeter Hall meetings ; the Great Exhi-
bition; children in Peel Park; Man-
chester ; annual sermons and festivities.
II. Many purposes for which children
are gathered. 1. School education. 2.
Social enjoyment. 3, Christian worship.
4. Solemn fasting and humiliation, in the
text. III. Many advantages result from
gatherings of children, 1. It is the ful-
filment of Scripture. 2. Necessary for
’ children themselves. 3. Beneficial in
many ways to parents.

Ver. 17. Weeping priests and guilty
people. The sins of the people and the
sufferings consequent upon them should
weigh upon the hearts of ministers. If


God frowns upon a people, if error and
evils abound in a community, are not
the shepherds to blame? Of all mem-
bers of a stricken Church, ministers have
the greatest cause to mourn.

Reproach of Israel. 1. Departure
from God. 2. Exposure to Divine judg-
ment. 3, Enslaved by the heathen.
Christians should maintain their credit
and character, and especially deprecate
reproach cast on the character and con-
duct of God.

Where is their God?—1. The spirit of
the question. A question often put—l.
In ignorance. 2. In atheism. 3. In
ridicule. Carnal men ignorant of the
character of God, the mysteries of his
providence, and regardless of his people.
II. The substance of the question. 1.
This question reflects upon God. God’s
presence, God’s providence, and God’s
word. 2. This question reflects upon
God’s people. They are considered
worthless, forsaken, and despised. It is
the most bitter of all taunts.

Spare thy people. I. The prayer.
Spare, deliver from trouble, pardon sin
and help in future. II. The plea. 1
Thy people, words ot interest, submission
and affection. 2. Thy people 7x danger,
“that the heathen should not rule over
them.” God alone has the sole right to
the homage and service of his people.
We may always plead the interest which
God takes in our spiritual welfare, as
the reason for averting judgments from
the Church and the nation which our
sins have merited,


HOMILETICS.


Restoration oF Lost Biessincs.— Verses 18—20.


These verses form a transition from one part of the prophecy to the other When
God’s people returned to him in penitence, “then” he would be jealous for that land in
which the cemple stood, and for that people whom he still loved. He would hear
their prayer, remove the curse, and restore the blessings, material and spiritua..


220 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. (CHAP. IL


There is no contingency, no uncertainty in the promises. The predictions are
absolute, the condition of repentance on which they rest being complied with. Israel
was thus encouraged by Divine, not human, security for the fulfilment of God’s
word. Chastisement leads to repentance, and restoration of logt blessings the
result,

“I. This restoration depends upon the sincere repentance or men. “ Then will
the Lord be jealous.” God’s promises indicate conditions, and are adapted to certain
states of mind. 1. Blessings are restored through penitence. They pre-suppose
repentance, the efforts and the faithfulness of men. The removal of judgments
and restoration of blessings were the result of the penitence and return of Israel.
God waits to be gracious, and when sinners humble themselves and seek Divine
favours they will be given. ‘“‘ For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent him-
self for his servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut
up or left.” 2. Blessings are restored in prayer, ‘The Lord will answer and say.”
Infidels object to prayer for daily food and propitious weather. Why should we
pray for rain or sunshine, say they, when both depend upon laws of meteorology
The laws of nature are not incapable of modification. [very time we throw a stone
or build a house, when we graft a tree, or restore a limp, laws are suspended and
varied. If we can direct the hidden forces of creation, and make them subservient
to useful purposes, shall the God of nature be powerless! But prayer itself is one
of the most natural and prevalent laws of nature. We have proof in Scripture and
in our own experience that in the history of men and the events of providence
God has changed his proceedings in answer to fervent prayer. “The earth shall
hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.” IZ, Restor-
ation springs from Divine pity to men. The Lord will display his love, ‘and
pity his people.” Before, God was set upon their destruction. He was at the
head of a great army, giving the word and combining the strength of the enemy.
Now he is full of tender compassion, which resents injury done to them as if done
to himself. God spares a people whom he may justly destroy. Humble penitents
are permitted and encouraged to plead an interest in him. Natural affection
prompts parents to help their children in distress ; so God gives his people room
in his pity, and blessings in their trouble. Compassionate kindness to the sutfer-
ing is a dictate of humanity and one of the first principles of religion (Jas. i. 27;
Matt. ix. 13). “To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed” (Job vi. 14).
That pity which we should display towards our neighbour God will show to us,
He is ready to turn away his anger and have mercy on us. “ Ye have seen that
the Lord is very pitiful.”


He hath a tear for pity, and a hand
Open as day for melting charity.


III. Restoration is in rich variety. Calamities were not simply removed, but
abundance of temporal and spiritual favours were bestowed. 1. Material blessings
were restored. ‘I will send you corn, and wine, a1. oil, and ye shall be satisfied
therewith.” The material condition of a nation and the outward prosperity of a
people depend upon God, He can send famine, pestilence, ad war. He alone can
take them away. All human efforts are perfectly impotent without Divine co-oper-
ation. The husbandman may plough and sow, but God “ causes the sun to rise and
set.” Parliament may legislate and the nation employ its resources, but God alone
can remove oppression and restore fertility in the land. It is good for a people to
hearken to God in distress, to recognize their dependence upon him in the seasons
and operations of nature, and call upon him as the Giver of every good and perfect
gift. “Oh that my people had hearkened unto me! He should have fed them
also with the finest of the wheat ; and with honey out of the rock should I have
satisfied thee.” 2. National reproach was removed. “I will no more make you a
teproach among the heathen.” Reproach is a sad thing for the people of God


CHaP. II.! HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: J OEL. 231


oe








But in due time he will take away all visible signs of judgment. His people shall
not suffer in reputation and on account of apparent unfaithfulness to them. They
shall be free from insult and tyranny, and shall enjoy the credit and comforts of
their religion. The best of men may have the bitterest foes, and be subject to the
most cruel taunts. But the brutality of the enemy will move the pity of God.
He will not long endure to see his children ill-entreated. His love will rouse his
anger, and then it will be worse for the scorner and reviler. 3. The mighty enemy
was destroyed. “I will remove far off from you the northern army.” Whether “ the
Northerner ” (Heb.) means the pest of locusts or the Assyrian army, God promises de-
liverance from them. As locusts were driven with the wind, to perish in the Arabian
Desert, in the Dead Sea, and in the Mediterranean, to breed pestilence by the stench
from their putrifying bodies, so the enemy shall be driven every way but the one from
which he came, The destroyer shall do no further mischief. (a) The destruction
is entire. They shall perish for lack of sustenance. Nothing shall remain but their
ill savour. (b) The destruction is deserved. ‘ Because he hath done great things,”
magnified himself against God. Pride and violence against God’s people have ever
been the features and forerunners of destruction. (c) The destruction is fearful.
The countless hosts, full of life and activity, were scattered by the word of God on
the waves of the sea, and thrown upon the shorea putrifying mass. Human malice
and pride shall be destroyed. God takes away their breath and they become a
carcase. Sennacherib’s army in the evening inspired te:vor, “ and before the morn-
ing he is not” (Is. xvii. 14). “And when they rose early in the morning, behold,
they were all dead corpses” (Is. xxxvii. 36).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


God's favours towards penitent sinners.
1. Zeal against them turned into pity
for them. 2. Their prayers answered
in abundant blessings. Material and
spiritual good. 3. Their condition re-
versed. (a) Freedom for oppression.
(b) Honour for reproach. (c) Feasting
for fasting. (d) The removal of every-
thing sad, and the bestowment of every-


Abundance enjoyed. 3. Blessings per


petuated.
Divine favours, 1. Their source—
God’s pity. 2. Their subjects—God’s


people. 3. Their result—“ Ye shali be
satisfied.” P

Ver. 19. Iwill send you corn. God
averts the failure of crops and the
scarcity of food. These evils neither


thing joyful.
The excellent condition of restored
sinners. 1. Enemies subdued. 2.


come nor cease by accident. God gives
us our daily bread. He opens his hand
and we are satisfied with food [Lange],


HOMILETICS.


Tue Great THines or Gop.—Verses 21—-27.


The locusts seemed to exult in the ruin they caused ; but Jehovah doomed them
to destruction, recovered the land from barrenness, and crowned it with beauty.
The enemy had done great things against them; now God would do great
things for them. No longer wasted fields and withered harvests. Joy is to suc-
ceed sorrow. The blessings are to be wide as the judgments, and man and beasts
are to rejoice in the restoration of fruitful seasons and spiritual privileges.

I. Great temporal blessings. The seed shall be prosperous, and the vine give
her fruit ; the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens their dew again (Zech.
viii. 12). 1. Copious rain. The plague of locusts aad of drought had caused the
land to mourn. “The garden of Eden” had become “a desolate wilderness.” The
only hope of recovery was in abundant and copious rain. Rain is promised by
words multiplied in wonderful emphasis, First, showers in general, then in due


222 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. [CHar. DO





season, early and latter rain for autumn and spring. Rain in mercy and moderation.
God sends or withholds the rain in sovereign wisdom. It comes not by chance,
but Divine commission. It is given in due measure, and sent in special direction.
“* He causes it to rain upon one city, and not upon another.” 2. Mruitful seasons.
“The pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig-tree
and the vine do yield their strength.” Grass will spring, tender herbs bud, and fruit-
trees yield their fruit. Living pastures shall satisfy groaning beasts, and universal
fvar shall give place to universal joy. God never left us without witness of his good-
ness and mercy, “in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.” 3. Replenished granaries, “ And
the floors shall be full of wheat,” &c. Barns shall no longer fall into decay, but
wine, grain, and oil shall be given in abundance. Every trace of ruin shall disappear.
“T will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten.” The devastation of
former years shall be undone. Threefold blessings shall benefit the three depart-
ments of nature. The parched ground shall robe itself in living verdure, flowers
adorn the field, and trees rustle with foliage. The herds of oxen and flocks of
sheep shall no longer roam in agony and distress. Husbandmen, vine-dressers, and
ministers of the altar must cease to weep, rejoice in God, and eat their bread in
gratitude. ‘ Your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall
reach unto the sowing time ; and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in
your land safely” (Lev. xxvi. 5). II. Great spiritual blessings. ‘And ye shall
know that I am in the midst of Israel,” &c, 1. Restoration of national praise.
Through the sins of the people and the consequent judgments of God, sacrifices had
ceased to he offered and joy had been cut off from the temple (ch. i. 16). The loss
of religious privileges is a most grievous calamity. There is no place like tne house
of God to Christians. They prefer Jerusalem above their chief joy. Loss of bread
is nothing to loss of the worship of God. It is a loss of social help and natural in-
fluence. Worship is man’s greatest dignity and supreme good. When a nation
gives praise to God they reap the highest enjoyments. ‘They shall praise the
Lord that seek him ; your heart shall live for ever.” 2. Manifestation of Divine
presence. ‘‘ Yeshall know that I am in the midst of Israel.” Men do not always
know, nations do not often recognize God. In prosperity and plenty they forget
him. Harvests are expected as a matter of course. Human ingenuity and natural
laws produce results. Creation is a mere machine without maker and controller.
Thus the blessings of God are received in a forgetful, selfish spirit. But God inter-
rupts the sequence of events, judgments are sent, to bring nations to regard Him.
He withdraws his presence and permits plagues to bring them to repentance. ‘“‘ Are
not these evils come upon us because our God is not among us?” The heathen
taunts, ‘Where is their God?” But God is sought in distress and found, and
loving fellowship is restored. God is in the midst of the nation; she shall not
be mowed ; “God shall help her, and that right early.” 3. Revival of national
joy. ‘ Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God.” Israel
were not only to rejoice in God, but in God as the Lord their God. The world
may be unable to rejoice, but God shall have their share of gladness. God pro-
mises and puts joy into their hearts ; a joy greater than that created by corn and
wine. Abundant crops and splendid seasons give uncertain gladness ; but the
manifestation of God’s presence is a source of pure and permanent joy. “In thy
presence is fulness of joy.” Better empty barns than forsaken temples. Joy un-
speakable and full of glory is the heritage and honour of that nation with whom
God delights todwell. “ For, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people
@ joy.”

A Deity believed is joy begun ;

A Deily adored is er Dyescals

A Deity beloved is joy matured ;

Each branch of piety delight inspires.


eHaP. 11.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL.





4. Deliverance from national shame.


“ And my people shall never be ashamed.”


Pitied, delivered, and honoured, the people would be free from reproach. God’s
honour is linked with our honour, though we suffer reproach for a time; if we be
ashamed of our sins against God, we shall never be ashamed to glory in him. He
will never render his grace and purpose void. By the performance of his word
and the destruction of his foe he will wipe away all dishonour. In Christ especi-
ally are these words realized. He suffers when we suffer, and relieves in poverty
and tribulation. In him God returns to men, and turns again the captivity of Zion.
Then we sing and cease to fear; we “obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and


sighing shall flee away.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 23. Rain a symbol of spiritual
blessings. J. Their source. ‘He hath
given you,” “he will cause to come down.”
The laws of nature and heathen gods
do not bestow rain. It comes from
heaven (Acts xiv. 17; Is. lv. 10). JU.
Their method of bestowment. 1. In due
season. The influence of the Spirit, like
early rain in seed-time, waters instruction
given, and like latter rain matures the
soul in growth, and ripens it for heaven.
2. In rich abundance. Like copious
showers, blessings shall descend and flow
downto men. III. Their blessed results,
1. Barren land rejoices. Pastures revive
and trees bring forth fruit. The little
hills shout and sing for joy (Ps. Ixv.


12, 13). Gospel blessings refresh
thirsty souls and quicken desolate
churches. 2. God’s people are glad.


“Be glad then, ye children of Zion.”
Joy springs from their hearts and har-
vests are reaped from their labours.
By heaven’s influence, corn and plants do spring;
God’s showers of grace do make his valleys sing.
Ver. 26. Spiritual feasting. 1. The
guests. ‘Ye shall eat.” God’s people
shall never want, though sometimes poor
and persecuted. 2. The provision. Not
mere temporal blessings (ver. 24); but
joy in God’s presence, all spiritual
blessings in Christ Jesus. Plenty of it;
not the least scarcity. 3. The result.
(a) Satisfaction. “Be satisfied.” Nothing
but this will satisfy. “The meek shall
eat and be satisfied” (Ps. xxii. 26).
(b) Praise. ‘“ And praise the name of the
Lord.” Thanksgiving shall come after
the fast. They shall never die of grief.
Immortal joys shall be their portion.


“‘ Whosoever eateth of this bread shall
live for ever.”

I. The wondrous dealing of God.
Israel in the wilderness and Israel de-
livered from the plague a type of God’s
dealings with us. He smites by wonders
and he recovers by wonders. ‘ God
hath dealt wondrously with you.” 1,
In the bounties of nature. How wonder-
ful te quicken the earth and send the
beauties of spring, to give sunshine and
shower, bread and sustenance, manna
from heaven and waters from the rock.
2. In the blessings of providence. (a)
Common mercies. Health and habita-
tions. Thousands worse off than you.
Many in poverty, prison, and disgrace.
You have a goodly heritage among men.
(d) Special mercies. Removal of family
reproach and personal shame, deliver-
ance from sickness and judgment. You
are a wonder to many (Ps. lxxi. 7).
3. In the gifts of grace. (a) In the gift
of Christ. Wondrous love, &c. (b) In
the gift of the Holy Spirit to enlighten
and teach. (c) In continued grace to
renew and strengthen. “Thy love to
me was wonderful.” JI. The consequent
gratitude of man. ‘* Praise the name of
the Lord your God.” 1. By acknow-
ledging your obligations. ‘“ Your God.”
2. By remembering his works. Israel
forgat God even at the Red Sea, the
most signal spot of their pilgrimage.
“Talk ye of all his wondrous works.”
3. By obeying his word. Show your
gratitude in practical conduct. Let lips
and life praise the Lord. “The Lord
hath done great things for us, whereof
we are glad.”


224 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOBkn L CRAP. 2.





HOMILETICS.
Tor New DIspEensaTIon.— Verses 28—32.


By a natural transition the prophet rises from the temporal to the spiritual, from
showers of rain to the outpouring of the Spirit. One blessing “first” (ver. 23),
then “afterward” (ver. 28) a second and greater blessing. The words have
special reference to the new dispensation, the dispensation of the Spirit. There
are three distinct features. connected together: the outpouring of the Spirit, the
judgment upon the ungodly world, and the salvation of a faithful few.

I. The outpouring of the Spirit. ‘And it shall come to pass afterward that I
will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh.” The outward blessings were typical of
extraordinary spiritual blessings. Joel felt the need of spiritual influence, and be-
lieved that it would bring true enlightenment. We have not only a supernatural
prediction, but a gleam of his own pure spiritual life. 1. The extent of the com-
munications. “ Uponall flesh.” It was not to be confined within the narrow bounds
of Judea, not limited to one, but extended to all races. It was to be given to the
pious and to those deemed incapable of spiritual life. (1) Without distinction of sex.
“Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy.” Not only parents, but children
would receive this gift. Four sisters in one family were prophetesses (Acts xxi. 9).
The young are capable of Divine teaching, and God has promised to continue his pre-
sence and propagate his word from one generation to another. ‘ All thy childreu
shall be taught of the Lord ; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” (2)
Without distinction of age. ‘Your old men shall dream dreams, your young men
shall see visions.” God adapts his grace to the condition of men. The inexperienced
and the infirm ; extremes in life may possess it. (3) Without distinction of rank.
“‘ And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids.” This was something un-
expected and had never been seen before. ‘‘ Hven the slaves,” bondsmen and
bondswomen, are to share in the gift. The lowest are exalted, and the gospel breaks
the fetters of slavery. ‘ Prophecy,” said the Jews, “doth not reside except on the
wise, and mighty, and rich ;” but the poor have the gospel preached unto them. In
Christ ‘‘ there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female: for ye are all one.” 2. The form of the communications.
“Shall prophesy, dream dreams, and see visions.” These were the three modes by
which God revealed his will to men in the O. T. days (Num. xii. 6). They are physic-
al rather than spiritual ; do not necessarily involve renovation of moral nature, but
are made the symbols of fuller manifestation of miraculous gifts to some, and the out-
pouring of the Spirit to all. Yet taking into account the effects of this outpouring,
we have reason to find a spiritual meaning. The Spirit would burst through every
barrier and quicken the energies of life in all classes. Men would have the power
to see and apply the truth of God to the facts of human life, past, present, and
future. Spiritual light would not be confined to a select few. Dreams and visions
should be given to others, and the mysteries of salvation be proclaimed to all
nations. By these gifts the Church is founded, the ministry taught, and the Scrip-
tures expounded in all ages. ‘‘ Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among
you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto
him in a dream.” II. The dreadful judgment. Judgment is connected with tlic
outpouring of the Spirit. When God comes in the majesty of his power heaven
and earth quakes. ‘‘ Each revelation of God prepares the way for another,” says
an author, ‘until that last revelation of his love and of his wrath in the great day.”
‘6 T will show wonders in the heavens and inthe earth.” 1. Inthe earth. “Blood
and fire, and pillars of smoke.” Blood and fire were manifest in the plagues of
Egypt, and smoke ascended like the smoke of a smelting-furnace in the descent of
Jehovah on Sinai (Ex. xix. 18). Pillars of cloud roll up from burning towns in
times of war (Is. i¥ 17). 2, In the heavens. ‘‘The sun shall be turned into dark-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. 26


CHAP. rn)





ness and the moon into blood.” The darkening and extinction of the lights of
heaven are often mentioned as harbingers of approaching judgment (Is. xiii. 10 ;
Jer. iv. 23; Ezek. xxxii. 1—8 ; Matt. xxiv. 29). The language may be figurative
to a certain extent ; but strange phenomena in the physical creation have been ob-
served to precede great catustrophes of the moral world. In the judgment on
Jerusalem, Josephus tells of physical prodigies, massacres and conflagrations.
Humboldt cites cases of remarkable obscuration of the sun, in very eventful years.
But whether we understand the words naturally or symbolically, they teach that
the judgment day does not come without warning. 1. Foreseen by Gtod’s people.
These signs have no terror for them. They call upon God, and find in Him that
refuge of which Mount Zion was only a type. 2. Heeded by the penitent. For
among those who do not pray to God, some shall be called from their sins to find
peace and security in him. “The remnant whom the Lord shali call.” 3. Neg.
lected by the ungodly. Understood and improved by right-minded persons ; un-
heeded and often despised by enemies of God. Thus there is a gradual process of
separation among men, a ripening for “the great and terrible day of the Lord.”
“Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape
all 38) things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man” (Luke
xxi 36).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 29. Pour out my Spirit. Pour
out like a rain-fall, or water-fall. The
Spirit was not entirely wanting in the
nation before this; but the prediction
indicates—1l. A greater measure. Not
merely drop by drop, but pour out in
greater abundance. 2. A wider extent.
Not confined to members of the covenant
nation, but upon “all flesh.” This a
great contrast to Gen. vi. 3. “This
word ‘ flesh’ (basar), as contrasted with
‘the spirit,’ denotes human nature so
sunk in bondage to its lower elements as
to be incapable of spiritual life. But
according to Joel, even this impenetrable
‘flesh’ is to be penetrated by the Di-
vine Spirit ; even the ‘ natural man’ is
to be transformed into ‘a spiritual man ;’
even the incorrigible are to be recovered
to obedience ” [Coz].

In those days. This special truth
connected with one special time, con-
cerning which he knows little. The
prophets sought diligently to know this
time (1 Pet. i.10). Apostles evidently
studied the prophet Joel; but how re-
luctant was Peter to learn, and how
astonished beyond degree that God
would pour out his Spirit upon the Gen-
tiles. ‘It needed,” says one, “ an ex-
press revelation and direct command
befowe he could be persuaded that all
flesh meant more than Jewish flesh.
So, often all our lives through, we Zave


words in our mouths, and read and hear
them, and yet their true, full meaning
never strikes us. The truth is familiar
to us, it is daily confessed and repeated
by rote, but has never reached our
hearts ; then perhaps at length some-
thing wakens us up, and henceforward
the truth is a living reality, influencing
and moulding our lives” (ver. 30, 31).
Physical phenomena serve— 1. To
awaken men’s minds from lethargy.
They quicken attention and put them
into attitudes of fear and expectation.
Thus they urge repentance, and provide .
space for it to those who are induced to
profit by them. 2. To prepare God’s
people for approaching trouble. They
stimulate prayer, hope, and effort. In
deliverance from Egypt (Deut. vi. 22) ;
in the destruction of Jerusalem (Matt.
xxiv. 29); and before the final judg-
ment, God displays signs and wonders
to the joy of his people and the terror
of his enemies.

Ver. 31. The terrible day. 1. Great
in its nature. The last day. The end
of time and the beginning of eternity.
2. Great in its design. To give to all
their due. Great things will be done.
Men judged, angels ranked, and all ac-
counts settled. 3. Great in its bearings,
Great to believers, terrible to unbe-
Hevers. Men separated and sent to
their own place.


226


Call upon the name of the Lord.
“ Implies right faith to call upon him as
he is; right ¢7ust in him, leaning upon
him ; right devotion, calling upon him
as he has appointed ; right life, ourselves
who call upon him being, or becoming,
vy his grace what he wills” [Pusey].

Ver 28—31. The gospel dispensation
is characterized — 1. By spirituality.
2. By liberty. 3. By power. 4. By
expansiveness [Pulpit Analyst].

Shall be saved. 1. The danger. The
word delivered means safety by escape.
“ Those who should be saved,” i.e. those
who were escaping from perils imminent
and terrible (Acts ii. 47). The condition
of the Church is often desperate ; but
that of the sinner is more desperate.
2. The Saviour. ‘The Lord.” None
other than Jesus. “For there is none
other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we must be saved” (Acts
iv. 12; ii. 36). 3. The encouragement.
(1) Whosoever, Jew or Gentile. ‘Thank
God for that whosoever,” said an aged
person, “for it includes me.” (2) Ae
the Lord hath said. God has promised
to save all that call upon him (Rom. x.
13). 4. The result. Those who are
delivered are only a “semnan‘,” a part of
the whole. History and Scripture con-
firm these words. In the fiood and de-
struction of the cities of the plain; in the
entrance into Canaan and the return from
, captivity ; in the first preaching of the
gospel and the destruction of Jerusalem,
a remnant only was saved. One is


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1—3.. Alarm. We might
reasonably expect that the world would
gather round the feet of the teacher.
There is need for alarm, for men are
indifferent. There is a way of escape,
but men know or heed it not. Multi-
tudes pass on and perish in the evil day.
Woah regarded the signs of the times, and
“moved with fear, prepared an ark for
the saving of his house.” “He that
hearkeneth unto counsel is wise.”

Be wise to-day ; "tis madness to defer :

Next day the fatal precedent will plead ;

Thus on, till wisdom is pushed out of life.
{ Young. }

Ver. 4—11. Locusts. The head is
exceedingly like that of a horse [Theo


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL.


(cHaAP. Ti


tempted to ask with the disciples,
“ Are there few to be saved?” but the
answer is, that has nothing to do with
you. “Strive ye.”

The remnant saved. I. The blessing
given. Salvation. Not merely promised,
but actually given and cheerfully en-
joyed, not in word, but in deed. Human
beings redeemed and human nature re-
newed. II. Tne source from whence it
comes. “In mount Zion and in Je
rusalem,” i.e. from God himself who
dwelt and was worshipped in these
places. The Church is the place of
safety, and where God may be most
easily found. III. The method by which
tt ts secured. 1. God calls men to him.
2. Men call upon God in prayer. One
description is a counterpart of the other ;
both go together, one is the human, and
the other the Divine side of salva-
tion. Deliverance depends not upon
the worshippers alone, but upon God
also. Those only are saved whom God
calls to himself, and who call upon or
choose him to be their God. It is all
of grace. God must first call by his
grace; then we obey his call, and call
upon him ; and he has said, “Call upon
me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee and thou shalt glorify me.”
God accounts our salvation his own
glory. ‘‘The promise is unto you and
to your children, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call.”


TO CHAPTER II.


doret]. Their noise is like the rushing
of a wind [Forbes]. When they alight
and feed, the plains are all covered.
They make a murmuring noise as they
eat, and they devour herbs, trees, and
forage without restraint. ‘‘ They over-
shadow the sun,” says Pliny, “thenations
looking up with anxiety, lest they should
cover their lands.” ‘The height of
walls cannot hinder the charge of the
mighty ; they enter not by the gates,
but over the walla, They fly, by the
disposal of God ordaining, in such order,
as to hold each his place, like the minute
pieces of mosaic, fixed in the pavement
by the artist’s hands, so as not to in-
cline to ore another a hair’s breadth ”


CHAP. XII]





(Jerome]. Nothing in their habits is
more striking than the pertinacity
with which they all pursue the same
line of march, like a disciplined army
[Thompson]. They teach us the ne-
cessity of unity, steadfastness, and
order. Many prefer an _ individual
course instead of going by bands. They
belong to no cohort, and are under no
discipline. The strength of the Church
lies in united, concentrated action.
Every soldier well-disciplined and in his
ranks ; every officer at his post, and ready
for the contest ; each under rule, helpful
to each other and to the common cause.

Ver. 11. Voice. Lest God should
be forgotten, he is represented as com-
manding a mighty army in the midst of
judgments. Their presence indicates his
presence and power. “The Lord of
hosts mustereth the host of the battle”
(Is. xiii, 4). He called the Medes and
Persians to execute judgments upon
Babylon. “He sent forth his armies
and destroyed” Jerusalem, “and burnt
up their city” (Matt. xxii. 7). Hence
the threefold ground of terror. 1. His
camp is very great. 2. He has strength
to accomplish his purpose by the weakest
instruments. 3. When this purpose is
accomplished, it will be a terrible day to
the enemies.

Ver. 12—14. Fasting and penitence.
Men accused in times past were wont
humbly to abase themselves before the
judge, with long beards, uncombed hair,
and black array, that they might secure
his mercy. So when pestilence, famine,
or war begin to rage, or any calamity
hangs over us, it becomes us to present
ourselves in piteous array, with fasting
and prayer, before the Judge of all the
earth, that his anger may be turned away
from us [Cawdray]. But no amount of
fasting will do without true penitence.
Lifeless repentance is fruitless. No out-
ward propriety and offerings will wash
away the stain of sin. We must not
only confess but forsake our sins and
turn unto God. God will have mercy
upon the penitent.


The fruitless showers of worldly woe
Fall dark to earth and never rise ;
While tears that from repentance flow,

In bright exhalement reach the skies.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL.


Ver. 15—17. In this assembly
kings and priests lead the way ; nobles
and common people promptly join. The
whole multitude bow like one man, and
fall prostrate at the footstool of mercy.
All acknowledge their guilt and are
sensible of theirdanger. All repent and
pray that God would spare his people.
Though repentance is now put in the
inward dispositions of the soul, yet on
occasion of national humiliation, and
peculiar religious solemnity, it may be
suitable to testify by our deportment
and dress, the seriousness and sadness of
our minds. Splendour and gaiety of
apparel, if ever becoming Christians,
should be laid aside at such seasons. It
is well when the government of a nation,
in its spiritual and political authorities,
takes the lead in the promotion of piety
and regard to the doctrines and duties of
religion. It is most touching and in-
structive to see all classes of the com-
munity lift up their hearts in prayer for
mercy and deliverance.

Ver. 20. The south and east winds
drive the clouds of locusts with violence
into the Mediterranean, and\ drown them
in such quantities that when their dead
are cast on to the shore, they infect the
air to a great distance [ Volney]. Won-
derful image of the instantaneousness,
ease, completeness, of the destruction of
God’s enemies; a mass of active life
exchanged, in a moment, into a mass of
death [ Pusey].

Ver. 22—25. Itis too clear for either
argument or illustration, that if you
change the moral character of any
country from ignorance to intelligence,
from indolence to industry, from intem-
perance to self-discipline, from sensual-
ness to spirituality, from enmity to
love, that the whole material region in
which they live may abound with
plentifulness and beauty. Such a change
throughout the whole human population
to-day will give to all a new heaven and
earth [Dr Thomas].

Ver. 26, 27. In the midst, It was
to induce this devout and thankful
recognition of the Divine presence that
the judgment had been sent. Dulled
by routine blinded by use and wont, the
Jews har tome to regard the succession


228


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL.


[cHaP It.





of the seasons and the bounty of the
year ina hard mechanical way, as though
Nature were a mere engine or machine.
It was to convince them of his presence
in Nature, to make them pure, strong,
and happy, that God interrupted the
usual sequence of events, first by dis-
asters over which they had no control ;
by plagues (literally “ blows”), which
they understood as judgments ; and then
by acts of grace and good will, which
they understood as signs of his returning
favour. ‘Terrified by disasters, and at-
tracted by blessings which seemed to
them answers to repentance and prayer,
as they “ate and were satisfied,” the
people “praised the name of Jehovah
their God,” who had dealt wondrously
with them; they felt, they acknowledged
that he was “in the midst of” them,
in their fields and in their vineyards
as well as in the temple, and that
Jehovah was their God and none else,
since only he could send them rain and
fruitful seasons, and fill their hearts with
gladness [Samuel Cox].

Ver. 28—32. So large a promise
uaturally awakens inquiry. We ask,
“When was it or will it be fulfilled?”
Joel expected and saw a fulfilment of it
in his day. The people saw God in the


ordinances of the sanctuary, but not in
the fields and laws of Nature. The
beneficent order of Nature was inter-
rupted. This was taken as a judgment,
and led to repentance and recognition of
God. Were not the same conditions
repeated in St Peter’s time with the
like results? The Jews came up to the
temple to worship, but failed to see
“God manifest in the flesh.” Judg-
ment came upon them. They awoke
to a consciousness of their sin, repented,
and turned unto the Lord. The Spirit
came down upon them, and this new
accession of life was a judgment to the
men of that generation, trying what
manner of spirit they were of, revealing
the evil spirit by which they were ani-
mated, who opposed themselves to the
power and grace of God. None the
less may we say, “ This is that which
was spoken by the prophet Joel,” in
every new crisis of the religious life, in
a man, in the race, or in the world. In
all ages the same sequence recurs—sin,
judgment, repentance, a new spirit, and
in this new spirit a new test and
criterion to which men are brought, and
by which they are either approved or
condemned [Samuel Coz].


CHAPTER IIL


Criricaz Norss.] For] Explanatory of judgment predicted (ch. ii. 31). Those days] Viz. the
outpouring of the Spirit, further described by the words “when I shall bring,” &c., redemption from
distress of every kind; including gathering together of the dispersed, elevation into new and greater
glory, exceeding earlier political or spiritual condition. 2. Valley of Jehoshaphat] where confeder-
ate foes were overthrown, say some (Ps, lxxxiii. 6—8; 2 Chron. xx. 22—26); others think it is
near Jerusalem (cf. Zech. xiv. 4), and the term given to indicate the judgments of God upon the
nations there. ‘The ultimate events are still future, and fill up the space between the restoration of
the Jews and the second advent of Christ. Plead] Not merely argue against enemies, but deal with
them in judgments (Is. xvi. 16; Ezek. xxxviii. 22). 8. Lots] A common way of dividing captives
(Nah. iii, 10). ‘The harlot was not paid in money, but with a boy; and a girl was of so little value
that they sold her for a drink of wine. This depicts the ignominious treatment of Israel by the
enemy. 4. With me] ie, my people, with whom God identifies himself, Recompense] “If ye in-
jure me”’ (my people) “‘in revenge for fancied wrongs” (Ezek.xxv. 15—17), ‘I will requite you in your
own coin swiftly and speedily.” 5. Taken] Not only plundered the temple and its treasury, but
palaces and houses of rich, which always followed conquest of towns (1 Kings xiv, 26; 2 Kings
xiv. 14). Your temples] Spoils of war were often hanged up in heathen temples. They spoiled
Jehovah's temple and profaned their own. 6. Far] Captive Jews cut off from all hope of retura.


CHAP. IIL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. 229 ,





7, 8.] The nations repaid by the /ex talionis, God’s people would regain liberty, and sell their enemiea
as they had been sold by them. 9.] A call to war (Ezek. xxxviii. 7). Prepare] Lit. sanctify, for
heathen war began with religious ceremonies (Jer. vi. 4; 1 Sam. vii. 8,9). Wake up] Arouse the
heroes from sleep ; forge tools of peaceful agriculture into weapons, and the weakest must be a hero.
11. Assemble] Hasten, quickly as possible meet together. I2. Wakened] Not now to war with
God and his people, but to be judged (Is. ii. 4; Ps. cx. 6), 18.] The judgment compared to a double
figure. 14.] A description of the streaming of nations into the valley of judgment. Multitudes,
multitudes] Heb. immense multitudes; akin to our hum, noisy crowds (2 Kings iii. 16). 15—17,)
Dreadful commotions will happen before that day. Out of Zion Jehovah will destroy his enemies,
protect his people, and purify his sanctuary. 18,] After judgment upon all nations, the land of
Jehovah shall overflow with Divine blessings; but the seat of the world will become barren waste.
Drop] Poetic for great fertility, happy times and plenty. Valley of Shittim] Even the arid desert
shall be fertilized with blessings from Jerusalem (Zech. xiv. 8; Rev. xxii. 2). 19. Egypt and
Edom | Both remarkable for enmity to Jews and emblems of enemies to God’s people. They have
been desolate for centuries (Is, xix. 1; Jer. xlix. 17; Obad. 10). 20. Dwell] Abide; the true
Church shall never be destroyed, but all false, persecuting people will be annihilated (Amos ix, 16).
21. Cleanse] Wipe away blood-guiltiness, the climax of her sin, and for long not purged away, but
visited with judgment. Amid extraordinary manifestations of wrath in the destruction of the wicked,
Israel will be saved, and learn anew that Jehovah is their holy God and King.


HOMILETICS.


PUNISHMENT UPON THE PerRsgcuTORS oF Gop’s Prorie.— Verses 1—3,


The prophecy from ch. ii. 28 to the end of this book constitutes one whole,
embracing the Messianic period, from the day of Pentecost to the final triumph and
consummation of the kingdom. The events of the past are framed to describe the
revelations of the future. In the second division (ch. iii. 1—21) we are intro-
duced to events which issue in the restoration of Israel, which form the crisis of the
destiny of the world, and which describe the final conflict of good and evil. Israel,
viewed as the representative of God’s kingdom, are persecuted by the Gentile nations
who are enemies to God. But he will deliver them from oppression and destroy
their persecutors.

I. The cruel treatment of God’s people. God’s people, consecrated to him by
covenant, have ever been despised by the world. Ungodly men belong toa system
entirely opposed to their spiritual interests, and established upon laws and insti

tutions which resist the authority ot God. The indignities done to Israel are speci-¢
fied in the text, and typical of many forms of persecution. 1. They were robbed
of their own land. ‘ And parted my land.” All the earth is the Lord’s, but he
locates his people, and dwells with them in certain places. The land belonged to
him as well as the people, and when they cannot defend it, he will assert his rights
to it and regain it. The enemy acted on the ancient motto, ‘“ Conquer and divide.”
They parted the land and shared it amongst them. But those that enrich them-
selves by robbing God’s people will be spoiled of their own treasures. Wealth and
reputation taken from others will not fit well on ourselves,


Who steals my purse, steals trash ;

But he that filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
And makes me poor indeed.—


2. They were scattered in other lands ‘Whom they have scattered among the
nations.” God’s people were driven by violence into heathen nations and enslaved.
The disciples were persecuted and fled from city to city. The early Christians were
banished to mines of other countries, and islands of the sea. “ In the world ye shall
have tribulation.” Christ had it, and his people cannot expect any better treatment.
Scorn and ridicule, social calumny and religious degradation, cannot be avoided.
ever excite the ill, and “all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall

” 3. They were indignantly treated. “They have cast lots for

They despised them. Treated them all alike, honourable and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL


mn i


230 {cwaP. I.


dishonourable. They were all worthless, despised, and distributed by lot, a greater
indignity than captivity and slavery. To trample on the weak and the fallen is most
inhuman. “ How unsuitable is it for us, who live only by kindness, to be unkind,”
says Edwards. “And they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great men
were bound in chains.” (b) They sold them as slaves, They were disposed of to
slave-dealers at most ridiculous prices. A boy was given instead of money for the
hire of a harlot, and a girl was sold for a drink of wine in revelry. This was done
by Assyrians, Chaldees, and Romans. Enmity to God and persecution of his
people have often been connected with scenes of sensuality. But how barbarous
for men to sport with their own species, and prefer a moment's gratification to the
permanent interests of men. What inhumanity to subject young, innocent childrer
to extreme hardship and anguish from such base motives! Let us thank God
that the horrors of slavery are past, that we live in a land of personal liberty and
religious laws. II. The punishment of their enemies. “TI will gather all nations,”
&c. God may suffer enemies to prevail for a time, but the year of recompenses
will come. God will avenge his own elect. 1. The time is fixed. “In those days
and in that time.” The day, the hour may be unknown to us; but they are fixed
immutably in the purpose and providence of God. There isa year of the redeemed,
an acceptable year for the opening of the prison to them that are bound, for the
bringing again of the captivity of Zion (Jer. xxx. 3). 2. The place is fixed. The
valley of Jehoshaphat may mean the valley in which God destroyed the numerous -
enemies of that prince (2 Chron. xx. 26— 28) ; or, in allusion to the word {meaning
“the Lord hath judged”), it may refer to any scene when God will deal vut retri-
bution and execute his enemies. In due time and in some great valley God will
punish sinners and reckon with nations for their infamous conduct. God is
gathering men now in mysterious ways, will soon plead with them, accuse and
condemn them, and “ there shall be tribulation, such as there had not been from the
beginning of the world.” 3. The reason is assigned. “For my people.” God’s
people are precious in his sight, whatever be their treatment and outward con-
dition in the world. (a) They are his people. They have given themselves to
him, and belong entirely to him. Others refuse allegiance and forget God, “ but
the Lord’s portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.” (b) They
are his heritage. He chose Israel as his heritage and peculiar treasure, his portion
and treasure above other people (Deut. xxxii. 9). When weak and desponding in
trial he assured them of his love and defence. The most precious things in the
universe are holy people. God claims them for his own, will never permit them to
be lost, but will vindicate their cause and redeem them from death. “ He that
toucheth you, toucheth the apple of my eye.” ‘ Inasmuch as ye have done it untae
one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. JL. The sad condition.


slavery. III. The time of the ch.
“‘Captivity of Judah.” The Church is a me”


“In those days and in that time.”


often oppressed and persecuted by ene-
mies, thrown into captivity by backslid-
ings, and bound fast by things of time
and sense. The sinner is under the
bondage of sin, captivated by lust, and
lashed by a guilty conscience. JI. The
blessed change. ‘“‘ Bring again the cap-
tivity.” Sins are forgiven, and perse-
cutors are overthrown. God’s power
redeemed Israel from literal, and God’s
grace delivers men from spiritual,


God has his own times of deliverance.
His people should have patience and
hope, for they shall not sorrow a day
longer than he has purposed. Divine
decrees have fixed the time for blessing
the Church, and neither Rome nor in-
fidels can hinder the work. “Thou
shalt arise and have mercy upon Zion ;
for the time to favour her, yea, the set
time, is ccme” (Ps. cii. 13). IV. The
author of the chanye. “TI shall bring


CHaP. IIL]





again.” It is God’s work and not man’s.
He makes, keeps, and saves the Church.
He purchased and will defend his
people. He will in judgment and in
grace destroy the wicked, and bless the
righteous. ‘‘ When the Lord bringeth
back the captivity of his people, Jacob
shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.”

Ver. 2. 1. The assembly. “ All
nations.” 2. The place. ‘‘ The valley
of Jehoshaphat.” 3, The purpose. I
“will plead.” 4. The reason. “ For
my people.” “Here the fate of whole
nations is obviously bound up with that
of Israel, and is to depend on the re-
lations they have sustained to the people
of God” [S. Coz].

Valley. In the days of Joel valleys


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL.


231


mountainous and wooded country being
unfavourable to the movements, tactics,
and strategical combinations of ancient
military art. Naturally, therefore, the
Prophet would select some valley as the
arena of the final conflict. But this
conflict was also to be a judgment. Was
it possible to select a valley whose very
name should convey the idea of judg-
ment and of Divine judgment? Yes;
close outside the eastern wall of Jerusa-
lem lay a valley, known as the “ valley
of Jehoshaphat.” <“‘ Jehoshaphat means,
Jehovah judges. Here ready to his
hand were the very symbols the Prophet
required. The scene of the final con-
flict and the final judgment would be the
valley in which Jehovah judgeth and


were the usual fields of “battle,” will judge [S. Coz].


HOMILETICS.
KighttEvus Recompense.— Verses 4—8,


Before depicting final judgment upon hostile nations of the world, Joel glances
at the enmity which the neighbouring peoples displayed towards Israel, and fore-
tells a righteous retribution for sins they had committed against God’s people.

I. The sins of which they were guilty. In their idolatries they grievously
sinned ; but their greatest offence was insult to God and his people. 1. They sold
the people as slaves in captivity. They had scattered them among the nations, and
forced them to seek for shelter where they could. (a) It was cruel captivity.
They were dispersed and divided for fear of incorporation with the common in-
habitants, (b) It was hopeless captivity. ‘Ye have sold them unto the Grecians
that ye might remove them far from their border.” By selling their fighting men
they would weaken the Jews, and taking them afar would render more hopeless
the return to the land they loved. They displayed great malice, were delighted
with the distress of the persecuted, and sought to triumph over God himselt.
‘Traffic in the souls of men, slave-dealing and men-stealing, is the worst kind of
traffic, branded with infamy, and will bring down the curse of Heaven. What has
become of American slave-trade, “State rights,” and secession? God has broken
in pieces the oppressor ; and well did Abraham Lincoln say: “ This is a world of
compensations, and he who would be no slave must consent to have no slave. Those
who deny freedom to others deserve it not for themselves, and under a just God
cannot long retain it.” 2. They plundered the temple and palaces of the land.
“Ye have taken my silver and my gold.” The vessels of the temple and the
treasures of the palace were carried away, and the land treated as conquered
territory. The Prophet says my gold. All the wealth bestowed upon Israel and
upon us, in the providence of God, belongs to him, and should be recognized as
the gift of God (Hos, ii. 8). If we are his people, what we have we hold from
him, and should devote to him, “The silver is mine, and the gc.4 is mine, saith
the Lord of Hosts” (Hag. ii. 8). 3. They profaned the sacred things of God.
“ And have carried into your temples my goodly pleasant things.” They dedicated
the spoils to their gods, hung up the vessels of the holy sanctuary on the walls of
their temples, and attributed victory over God’s people to the power of their idols.
The ark was put in the temple of Dagon, the gold and silver adorned Belshazzar’s


rg


332 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL.


Cae a


(cHapP. I.


feast, but God maintained his honour, and defended his cause. Robbery itself is
most unjust, but when the spoils are consecrated to idolatry, and given to support
cruelty and false religion, this will prove most destructive to the worshipper. “ He
entangleth his soul in the snares of death who resumeth unto a profane use that
which is once consecrated unto God,” says Bishop Hall. “It is a snare to the man
who devoureth that which is holy.” II. Divine recompense upon these sins.
“Will ye render a recompense ¢” &c., indicate that they had no cause to retaliate
upon God or his people ; that if repayment is the question, God will very speedily
settle that for them, and bring back their doings upon their own heads (Isa. v. 26).
1. Retribution is declared. The life as well as the death of his saints is precious
in the sight of God. Those who injure them injure him. He will not suffer them
to be insulted and enslaved. He will demand an account for them. Suffering and
blood cry to Heaven for justice. Martyred saints and God’s captives will not be
forgotten. He will honour, spare, and avenge them. “When he maketh in-
quisition for blood, he remembereth them : he forgetteth not the cry of the humble.”
2. Retribution in kind. ‘“ And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the
land,” &c. As they had sold and scattered the Jews, so they would “be paid back
in their own coin;” they in turn would be sold by the Jews. Here we have the
true lex talionis. The rod which men make to smite others, shall smite them-
selves. ‘Curses are like young chickens, they always come home to roost.” “As
he loveth cursing, so let it come to him” (Ps. cix. 17). Dogs licked the blood of
Ahab in the vineyard of Naboth. The evil deeds of persecutors will fall upon
themselves in this world, or that which is to come. “His mischief shall return
upon his own head, and his violent dealing upon his own pate.” 3. Retribution
with certainty. ‘For the Lord hath spoken it.” This was fulfilled in the time of
Alexander the Great and his successors, when Jewish prisoners were set at liberty,
and Pheenician territories were under Jewish sway. Sooner or later retribution
will come, and there is no escape. No idols can deliver them. The inhabitants
of Tyre chained their gods, that they might not forsake them when besieged by
Alexander, but the word was spoken, and the city is no more. 4. Retribution
with speed. “‘Swiftly and speedily will I return your recompense.” God threatens
these piratical slave-dealers with the vengeance of their captives, whom he redeems.
When they pride themselves in triumph and forgetfulness, a sudden change shall
come. With ease and speed God will send the punishment and “judge his people.”
God seems to delay, but at length unexpectedly does he surprise men. And when
once he begins, he hastens on and makes short work in the execution of his judg-
ments. “According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay fury to his
adversaries, recompense to his enemies,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 4. What have ye to do with
me? 1. The words and also show that
there is something additional to the
deeds of those spoken of before. Those
instanced before were great oppressors,
such as dispersed the former people of
God, and divided their land. In addition
to these, God condemns here another
class, those who, without having power
to destroy, harass and vex his heritage.


2. The words, what are ye to me? are


like that other phrase (Jos. xxii. 24;
Matt. viii. 29), what is there to thee and
me? i.e. what have we in common!


3. These words, what are ye to me?
also declare that those nations had no
part inGod. God accounts them aliens.
What are yeto me? Nothing. 4. But
the words convey, besides, that they
would have to do with God for harassing
his people without cause. They ob-
truded themselves, as it were, upon God
and his judgments ; they challenged God;
they thrust themselves in, to their de-
struction, where they had no great tempt-
ation to meddle, nothing but inbred
malice to impel them. They stand
among the most inveterate and unpro-


CHAP. II.]





voked enemies of God and his people
[Pusey].

Ver. 7. Iwillraise. I. Deliverance
of God’s people. Though carried far
away and put under grievous bondage,
God will gather them again. Neither
former judgment nor present distress
shall hinder. . Though like men asleep,
he will raise or awake them, as the word
imports. Though their condition be
hopeless as the dead, he can deliver
them (Ezek. xxxvii. 11, 12). The
might of the foe and the wonderfulness
of the promise should not impede our
faith. ‘“ Behold, I will raise.” JI.
Destruction of God’s enemies. “TI will
return your recompense.” 1. The agent.
God himself, not chance, nor mere change
of circumstances. “ J will sell.” 2. The
instrument. The Church, the people
themselves who were persecuted. What
wisdom, power, and providence! 3.
The measure. God repaid in the same
proportion which they gave to his people.
The guilt of these nations was great,
beyond ordinary persecution, hence the
retribution severe, and in kind upon
their own heads. History confirms the
fact that men get back what they give
to others, (a) in quality, good or bad ;
(6) in quantity, so much, whatever the
meas..® may be. “For with what
judgme + ye judge, ye shall be judged :
and wit what measure ye mete, it shall
be measured to you again.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY « JOBL.


233





Retributive judgment. I. Often given
by men. In society men reap as they
sow. Kindness begets love, and cruelty
begets hatred. The suspicious are sus-
pected, the dishonest robbed, and the
tyrants in turn led into captivity.
“There is an important element,” says a
writer, “ of the judicial action of God in
the retributive instincts of men. It is
one of his ways of bringing the self-con-
ceited and the censorious to his bar.
He whose hand or tongue is against
every man, need not wonder that Divine
providence should so balance the scales
of justice, that every man’s hand or
tongue will be ultimately against him.
He reaps what he sows.” JJ. Always
administered by God. “The Lord hath
spoken it.” All retripution comes from
him, given by men or laws of nature.
In the present it is true—“ With the
merciful, thou wilt show thyself merciful ;
with an upright man, thou wilt show thy-
self upright ; with the pure, thou wilt
show thyself pure; with the froward, thou
wilt show thyself froward.” But the
Bible predicts a retribution, most just,
adequate, and terrible. The innocent
will then be cleared, and the persecutor
condemned.


Oh! blind to truth and God’s whole scheme
below,
Who fancy bliss to vice, to virtue woe.


HOMILETICS.
Tas Hoty War— Verses 9—12.


God is now about to execute the sentence, and all nations are summoned
together. At God’s command, yet of their own accord, they assemble in the
valley of Jehoshaphat, to receive righteous retribution.

I. The solemn preparation. ‘Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles.” The
sombatants are mighty, and the results will be decisive. Every preparation is
pvedful for this moral warfare. 1. This warfare is moral. “ Prepare, i. e. sanctify,
war.” It is a holy war, a crusade between good and evil. Not like those in which
the pilgrims of Europe sought to rescue the holy sepulchre from the hands of
infidel Turks. God’s people and God’s enemies are in battle-array. Moral powers
and evil principles are engaged in mortal contest; the kingdom of darkness and
the kingdom of light are striving for dominion. ‘“ For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers ot the dark-

this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.” 2. This warfare
‘‘ Let all the men of war draw near.” The armies are not spectators, nor
d afar off, daring and defying one another, like Israel and the


334 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOHL. (cmap. It.





eS Se a | ew RD


Philistines did (1 Sam. xvii. 3), and the Turks and the Christians in the reign of
Baldwin II., king of Jerusalem. They “come up” into close quarters, and fight
for life. The enemy is bold, comes up into the very presence of God, and insults
his people. We must not hesitate nor fear. ‘Into the ranks of the enemy,”
cried a general, on the field of battle. Stand still, and you are overcome ; fight,
and you conquer. ‘Quit yourselves like men, and fight.” 3. This warfare is
urgent. “ Assemble yourselves and come.” The nations must hasten and come
speedily. All “round about” must gather themselves together, and draw closer
and closer in the contest. Christian life is urgent and important. The gospel cle-
mands immediate and earnest decision for God. There must be no delay. July
ment delays not. ‘‘ Now is the accepted time.” 4. This warfare demands sacrifice.
“ Beat your ploughshares into swords,” &c. The tools of peaceful agriculture must
be forged into weapons of war, the reverse of the time when instruments of war will
be turned into implements of agriculture (Isa. ii. 4; Mic. iv. 3). All was un-
settled ; the means of subsistence and the care of health were to give way to war.
In spiritual warfare, ease and pleasure, sin and the world, must be given up. All
must be equipped. The aim is not temporary ; it requires a weapon and strength
to use it. “ He that hath no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one.” God
has provided a complete armour in which he must fight, and by which alone, he
can triumph. The self-willed, who fight in their own way, and with their own
weapons, will never conquer. ‘‘ Put on, therefore, the whole armour of God, that
ye may be able to stand.” II. The mighty hosts. “Come, all ye heathen.”
“Multitudes, multitudes, in the valley of decision.” 1. A universal gathering.
“ All nations.” Not simply all the heathens, but all nations of the world are con-
cerned in this warfare, and will stand before the throne of God at last. All the
generations of men, innumerable angels will appear before the Great Judge. Our
Lord directs our attention to this very thought of Joel. ‘“ When the Son of man
shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels, with him, then shall he sit on the
throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations.” 2. An im-
posing gathering. ‘Wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near.”
Heroes, men of valour and experience, will be there, and, like Homer’s gods, engaged
in the conflict. The Great God who calls it, the solemn purpose for which it is
called, and the method of dealing with it, will make that assembly most awful.
The Judge will be clothed in majesty and terror. Angels and millions of the
human race will stand before the great tribunal. The splendour of the great white
throne will eclipse the sun.
No sun had e’er dawned on
So fearful a day,


No trumpet had marshalled
So dread an array.


3. An enthusiastic gathering. ‘The whole nations are seized with warlike enthu-
siasm, and rise from slumber at the summons. Even “ the weak” one must “say,
I am strong.” None, however apparently unfit, was to be spared, and none left
behind. Inspired with ardour, and drawn by numbers, they gather “to the battle
of that great day of God Almighty” (Rev. xvi. 14; xx. 8). III. The great
defeat. Ostensibly the nations assemble to destroy God’s people, but are over-
come themselves. God sits upon the throne to judge “the heathen round about.”
The conflict is instigated by the very parties whose dooni is settled for ever.
1. Their resistance was in vain, Let the mighty men “wake up” to gather their
resources and strengthen their ranks, all is futile. Men may resolve, and eagerly
undertake opposition to God, but they will be disappointed. “The heathen rage,”
but their rage displays their folly. God is omnipotent, and can overcome the
mightiest hero. ‘The people imagine a vain thing,” for “He that sitteth in the
heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall hava them in derision.” 2. Their overthrow
was great. ‘There was not mere failure, but terrible disaster. God’s mighty ones


cuar. [it] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY © JOEL.





came down, the powers of nature robed themselves in opposition, the sentence was
passed, and execution followed. The purpose was defeated, and those who mustereo
for victory were overthrown with disgrace. Popery has hastened its downfall, by
trying to break the power of Protestantism. The French were crushed in their
efforts to destroy the political influence of Germany. Those who fight against God,
‘lespite imperial strength, will be broken in pieces. The ruin of sinners will be
eternal if God shall smite them. “ Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be
broken in pieces ; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shali
be broken in pieces ; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.” (Is. viii. 9.)


Tue TERRIBLE OvertHRow.—Verses 13—16.


The prophet earnestly besought God to call his “ mighty ones” in the final scene,
God responds, brings his messengers, and bids them put in the sickle, for all things,
good and evil, are ready for judgment. Three things are to be noted in the descrip-
tion of this judgment.

I. It is a moral result. As ripe corn is ready for harvest, and full vats and
winepresses for treading out, so men prepare for judgment. 1. Sin ripens men
for destruction. It unfits the soul for the enjoyment of God, creates many horrors
and foretastes of hell, and renders men ready for destruction. 2. Holiness ripens
men for glory. It fits the soul for the society of the blessed, makes meet for the
heavenly inheritance, and will be consummated in God’s presence. Thus judgment
is only a harvest for which men are ripening in the present life. The wicked are
filling up the measure of their iniquity (Gen. xv. 16); the righteous are reserved
for degrees of holiness which will perfect their character (Eph. iv. 7—13). Both
will reap as they sow. “ For whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap.
For he that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that
soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.” II. It is universal.
The prophet seems amazed at the great throng assembling together. ‘‘ Multitudes,
multitudes, in the valley of decision.” It is one living, surging mass, an innu-
merable army, rushing blindly on to their own destruction. Or, to take the figure of
the text, vast numbers are ripe for judgment. Angels and wicked spirits, good men
and bad, will be present. None will be forgotten, none can escape. ‘‘ We must
all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ.” III. It is awful. It is attended
and followed by convulsions, in which the framework of society shall be shaken,
and by symbolic signs in heaven and earth. Countless multitudes assemble in the
valley, the heavens above darken with the frown, and the earth beneath trembles
at the thunder of God. ‘The wickedness” of men “is great,” and ripe for harvest.
The day of judgment, the day of decision and separation, has come. The grain
must be gathered into the garner, and the wine into the vats ; the worthless chaff
consumed, and the wheat preserved. “Thrust in thy sickle and reap; for the time
is come for thee to reap ; for the harvest of the earth is ripe” (Rev. xiv. 15).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 13. May be taken literally righteous and the wicked, growing to-
as a harvest sermon, in proving ‘3 the gether like tares and wheat for their
power, (2) the providence, and (3) the properend. IJ. The state of maturity.
goodness of God. We think nothing 1. Wilful ignorance, sin against con-
of God’s mercy, because the effects of it viction, and total insensibility, in
are common. How faithful to the some. 2. Growing likeness to Christ,
promise, “ While the earth remaineth, and sincere desire to be with him, in
seedtime and harvest,” &c. Every har- others. III. The reaping. Not before
vest should remind us of the truth of the corn is ripe, is the sickle put in,
God. The harvest a type of final judg- There are stages of growth in sin and
ment. I. The ripening process The grace. In gradual law anc due season


336





judgment comes. Every act and every
day promotes maturity. “The harvest
is the end of the world ; the reapers are
the angels.”

Consider the text as addressed—
First, to ministers of the Word. Weare
allowed such an application. “The
harvest truly is plenteous,” &c. Means
of usefulness and opportunities are in-
tended by harvest ; by labourers, those
whose office it is to make use of them.
When the grain is ripe, if not gathered
in, it is liable to perish. The season
for saving it is short and uncertain.
Men therefore forego ease, and endure
fatigue, to secure it. What is the safety
of grain to the salvation of souls!
How many destroyed for lack of know-
ledge! We have religious freedom,
means and opportunities for doing good.
There are loud calls to preachers, parents,
and Christians generally. But the time
for work will not continue. ‘“ Whatso-
ever thy hand findeth to do,” &c.
Secondly, as addressed to public judg-
ments. ‘The people spoken of were ripe
for ruin. So with the Canaanites, when
their iniquity was full, and Joshua and
his army were the reapers. So with the
Jews, when Nebuchadnezzar was called
to punish and the Romans to destroy
them. So with many nations and com-
munities since. We have reason for
apprehension if we estimate our con-
dition by our guilt, and our guilt by our
privileges. God is never at a loss for
instruments. Hearts, events, elements,
are all his; but threatenings are merci-
fully conditiona.L “If that nation
against whom I have pronounced turn
from their evil, I will repent of the evil
I thought to do them.” Thirdly, as
addressed to the messengers of death—
accidents, diseases, whatever can bring
us to the grave. This regards indi-
viduals, We know our own destiny,
whatever be that of nations. It is ap-
pointed unto each once to die. But
when men are ripe it is not easy to
decide. It is certain that sin ripens for
nell, but the most grossly and openly


LOMILLLIC COMMENTARY : JOEL.


(CHap. Im.


vicious are not always the most guilty
before God. It is wise to keep from
every approximation to such a dreadfut
state. Surely when a man is insensible
under the word ; incorrigible under the
rebukes of providence ; when conscience
ceases to reprove, and he can turn Divine
things into ridicule, he must be “ nigh
unto cursing.” Holiness ripens for
glory, but when matured and meet for
it we cannot ascertain. We should
think favourably of one dissatisfied with
himself, and who esteemed the Lord
Jesus; who was anxious to resemble
him and trusted to him in all things.
But God knows them that are his ;
chooses the proper time for removing
them ; the wheat for the barn, and the
chaff for the burning. But the end of
all things is at hand. Sfourthly, God
thus addresses his angels at the last day.
We are sure of the event if ignorant of
the period. Then cometh the end; his
purposes will be accomplished, his
promises and threatenings verified, and
all will be ripe. Time will be no longer.
The earth will be cleared of all the pro-
duce, and the fields in which it grew
will be destroyed. ‘‘ Wherefore, be-
loved, seeing that ye look for such
things, be diligent that ye may be found
of him in peace, without spot, and
blameless” [Jay].

Ver. 14. The day of the Lord. 1.
Near ; comes suddenly, and may find
many unprepared. 2. Decisive ; cannot
be repeated. Every one’s doom will be
fixed, and the struggle between Satan
and God end. “The valley of decision.”

Ver. 16. The different aspects of the
day to men. I. A terror to God’s
enemies. ‘ The Lord shall roar.” Now
he speaks in mercy, then his terrible voice
will be like a roaring lion (Is. xlii. 13,
14; Jer. xxv. 830; Amos i, 2). II. A
hope to God’s people. The material
universe may be destroyed, but God will
be the refuge of his people. ‘“ Happy
is he that hath the God of Jacob for his
help, whose hope is in the Lord his
God” (Ps. exlvi. 5 ; Jer. xiv. 8; xvii. 7).


CHAP, III.| HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. ar





= Be _—_———


HOMILETICS.


THe Unproranep Ciry.—Verse 17.


fhe scenes which now follow lie beyond the bounds of time, ‘To the trembling
«niverse and the terrors of judgment there succeeds “a kingdom which cannot be
moved.” God will dwell with his people. Zion will become a holy mount, a
sanctuary no more profaned by alien and unrighteous feet. As a description of
heaven, the text sets forth :—

I. Its distinguished glory. “Iam the Lord your God dwelling in Zion.” 1.
It ts the residence of God. God dwelt with man in Eden ; but sin drove man from
Gods presence. The tabernacle and the temple were the house of God; but the
symbols of the one and the glory of the other have departed. These were only
figures of the true residence. Heaven is “the palace of the great King,” the pa-
vilion of his splendour, and the place where his honour dwelleth. The Elysian fields
of Paganism, and the Paradise of Mohammedanism, were cold and revolting ; but
“glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God.” 2. Zt is the permanent re
sidenceof God. “God dwelling in Zion.” ‘ Permanency adds bliss to bliss,” says
the poet. Fellowship with God on earth is short, and often interrupted. In heaven
he will dwell for ever with his people. It is this which makes heaven itself.
What would be all its glory and company without the presence of God? Could
the angels and the harps be a substitute for him? O blissful thought, to be “ for
ever with the Lord,” in the “ city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem.”


Come, join our wing, and we will guide the flight,
To mysteries of everlasting bliss,

The tree and fount of bliss, the eternal throne,
And presence-chamber of the King of kings.


II. Its happy citizens. “So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God.”
1. They are enriched. God is their portion. In heaven there will be access
to the most holy, and residence with the most dignified society. Patriarchs
and prophets, apostles and martyrs, will be there, but the presence of Christ
will be “unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.” Your God,
as much your own as if possessed by none besides, filling all with gladness, and
fully possessed and enjoyed by each. “Thou art my portion, O Lord.” 2.
They are intelligent. God is known to be their God. He is not simply with them,
but Anown, seen to be with them. It is a personal, experimental, pre-eminent, and
perfect knowledge. We know but little here, and that superficially. “‘ But when
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.” In
heaven the mental powers will be glorified, study will be a delight, and knowledge
will be acquired in direct converse with the objects of knowledge. We shall know
by experience, by sight, face to face, what we only believe now. ‘“ We see through
a glass darkly ; but then face to face: now I knowin part; but then shall I know
as also] am known.” 3. They are holy. The place is God’s “ holy mount,” and
none can enter it but those who are holy. Only those who awake in his likeness
will behold his face in righteousness. ‘‘ Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord.” Heaven would be hell to the alienated heart, the unrenewed sinner ; but
“blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.” To see God and be like
him is the earnest desire of God’s people. This desire will be gratified in his
“holy mount.” And if the glad smile of a friend begets joy in the heart, how will
the light of God’s countenance quicken souls in heaven to a sense of his love !
As the light of the sun transcribes its joyous image upon one who contemplates it,
s0 the holiness which beams from the presence of God will purify those upon whom
it shines. “One sight of his glorious majesty,” says one, “ presently subdues and
works the soul to a full subjection. One sight of his purity makes it pure. One
susht of his loveliness turns it into love” The saints thus become assimilated to


238 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. [cHaP. OL








God, whom they perpetually love and adore. “ We shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is.” III. Its eternal security. ‘And there shall no strangers pass
through her any more.” Mount Zion, literally and spiritually, was a place of beauty
and stability. ‘‘ And he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which

he hath established for ever.” 1. No foe to fear.. There will be no enemy to en-
~ counter. Death and hell will be overcome. Its possessors will never be subdued.
and taken captive. ‘The wicked shall no more pass through thee” (Nah. i, 15).
“In that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of
hosts.” 2. Nothing to defile. Profane nations and ungodly men can never enter.
There is nothing in heavenly blessedness compared to its moral and holy chazacter.
There will be nothing to defile, or capable of being defiled. Not an act, word, or
look will be contaminated by evil. ‘‘ There shall in no wise enter into it anything
that defileth, neither whatsoever maketh a lie; but they which are written in the
Lamb’s book of life.” 3. Nothing to corrupt nor decay. The locust and cater-
pillar will not destroy. The worm will not devour the heart of ripening fruit.
‘“‘ The sun shall not smite by day, nor the moon by night.” On earth, everything
is subject to vicissitude and decay ; but the joys of heaven are abiding and secure.
“ Where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through


nor steal.”


ence of time, nor be destroyed by the constant friction of disturbing forces.


This inheritance will never wear and waste under the gnawing influ-


It is


“ an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in


heaven for you.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Many take the words as a description
of Zion in the millennium. Zhe metro-
polis of a converted world. 1. Its gran-
deur. God will dwell there. 2. Its
sanctity. ‘Then shall Jerusalem be
holy.” 3. Its security. 4. Its per-
petuity. It will be the scene of delight-
ful privileges and blessings. It will be
invested with absolute and inviolable
safety. It will possess renown and em-
pire throughout the whole world.

This heavenly city, where Christ’s
throne is, is called Zion, because there
all the expectations whith the O. T.
saints connected with the earthly Zion
will be fulfilled, and because, also, there
everything which the Jews associated
with the shadowy picture of the earthly
Zion is for ever pertected in a glorious


cious kingdom, in all directions, is
supplied, preserved, sanctified, and built
up by blessings and gifts. For this
reason that place is called, in the Epistle
to the Galatians, Jerusalem, which is
above and free, the mother of all his
believing children, the true and eternal
metropolis of Christendom [Harbaugh].

The words prove—l. That interest in
God is the ground of encouragement to
the Church. 2. That interest in God
is sweetened by God’s gracious presence
with his people. 3. That interest in
God is confirmed by experimental know-
ledge. ‘‘ They shall know” (1 Cor. ii.
12). 4, That interest in God is evi-
denced by holy life. Sanctification is
the fruit and end of God’s presence (Ps,
xciii. 5).


actualization. From thence God’s gra-


HOMILETICS.


> Tue New Worip.—Verses 18—21.


In these verses, says Lowth, “either the times of the Messiah are described;
or we have a description of Jerusalem after its final restoration, when a golden age
shall commence among its inhabitants, and when the knowledge of God and his
Christ shall a second time be widely diffused from it.”

I. The scene of manifold blessings. These blessings are predicted under
significant figures. ‘The mountains drop down new wine and the hills flow with


CHAP. I11.| HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL. 239








milk” in rich abundance. Divine influences will attend the preaching of the
word, converts shall rapidly increase in number and fruitfulness, the ordinances
of religion shall water the land and make it exceedingly productive. “All the
rivers of Judah” shall make glad this world of beauty, and streams of pure water
shall quench the thirst and quicken the virtues of its people. II. The abode of
perfect happiness. 1. Freedom from foes. Inveterate enemies, as Egypt and
Edom, will be destroyed. All opposition, violence, and cruelty to God’s people
will be at an end. They shall be free from injury and perpetuated to the end of
time. 2. Freedom from barrenness. “ A fountain shall come forth of the house
of the Lord” to fertilize the most unproductive regions. Temporal blessings shall
be accompanied with spiritual blessings without stint or measure. The vivifying
and refreshing waters of life shall flow from Christ to bless the capital and the
world. “And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jeru-
salem ; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the hinder
sea: in summer snd in winter shall it be” (Zech. xiv. 8). III. The residence of
righteous people. The inhabitants will be purged and cleansed from sin. Pollu-
tion in general shall be wiped away. Special sins, such as shedding innocent
blood, shall be forgiven. Knowledge shall spread, and every one shall know the
Lord from the least to the greatest. There will be new heavens aad a new earth
wherein dwelleth righteousness. No strangers will defile nor disturb the peace
and prosperity of these happy regions. God will dwell and make his Church a fit
residence for his presence and praise. In his presence will be fulness cf joy,
and at his right hand pleasures for evermore. Seek to be numbered with the
saints in glory. While on earth prepare for this glorious era. Help it on by


daily effort and incessant prayer.


Teach us in watchfulness and prayer
To wait for the appointed hour;
And fit us by thy grace to share
The triumphs of thy conquering power.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 18. The glorious fountain. I.
Its source. ‘The house of the Lord.”
All springs of grace, comfort, and glory
are in God. These blessings take their
rise in the sanctuary, like the waters of
Ezekiel (xlvii. 1), or those from under
the threshold of the temple. The ordin-
ances of God’s house are like fountains
of joy and refreshment to thirsty souls.
II. Its abundance. It is a fountain,
not a mere spring. An abundance to
fill all the rivers, lit. channels of Judah.
Rivers of living water flow from the
Spirit (John vii. 38). There is no scarcity
of gospel blessings to sinners and saints.
III. Its fertility. It creates fertility in
the king’s gardens (2 Kings xxv. 4;
Jer. xxxix. 4). The waters in Christ
vivify and refresh the barren spots in
the Church. Valleys of Shittim, arid
deserts, shall be. fruitful. “There is a
river, the streams whereof shall make
glad the city of God, the holy place of


the tabernacles of the Most High” (Pa
xlvi. 4).

Or if Zion’s hill
Delight thee more, or Siloa’s fount that flowed


Hard by the oracle of God, I thence
Invoke thine aid to my adventurous song.


Ver. 19. 1. The desolation. In con-
trast to the fruitfulness of the Church,
the curse falls upon open enemies and
treacherous friends. The low condition
of Egypt and Edom for centuries proves
the truth of this prediction (Is, xix. 1 ;
Jer. xlix. 17). So at the second coming
of Christ all foes of Israel typified by
these nations shall be destroyed. 2.
The cause of the desolation. (a) Vio-
lence to God’s'people (Ezek. xxv. 12, 13).
(6) Shedding innocent blood. How
highly does God esteem the death of
his people, the blood of the faithful.
The warning is repeated time after time
to deter nations from the danger. In
every place where his cause and crown


240


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JOEL.


{cHar. m1.





have been disregarded ruin has followed.
Sin blights nations, destroys their pa-
laces, and desolates their land. ‘“ Come,
behold the works of the Lord, what de-
solations he hath made in the earth,”
“The three words of Joel, Egypt shall
become desolation, are more comprehen-
sive than any prophecy, except those by
Ezekiel. They foretell that abiding
condition, not only by force of the
words, but by the contrast with an
abiding condition of bliss. The words
say, not only ‘it shall be desolated,
as by a passing scourge sweeping over
it, but it shall ‘itself pass over into that
state ;’ it shall become what it had not
been; and this in contrast with the
abiding condition of God’s people. The
contrast is like that of the Psalmist
(Ps. evii. 33—35). Judah should over-
flow with blessing, and the streams of
God’s grace should pass beyond its
bounds, and carry fruitfulness to what
now was dry and barren. But what
should reject his grace should be itself
rejected” [Pusey].

Ver. 20. The perpetuity of the
Church. Egypt and Edom, all enemies
of God, will come to an end. But the
gates of hell shall not prevail against
her. No enemy can destroy, no ages
consume her. She knows no injury, nor
decay. The Church of God shall abide
in him and by him on earth, and shall
dwell with him for ever.

Ver. 21. This verse has been inter-
preted in various ways. God would
cleanse, or pronounce the blood which
had been shed by the enemies to be


innocent. This cleansing or sentence
would be accomplished by punishing
those who shed it. “TI will exact full
atonement of their enemies for all their
oppressions and violence.” Or the mean-
ing may be, “TI will blot out their own
transgressions, so far as these have not
already been purged away.” In one
case, the principle is that guilt cannot
be cleansed without complete satisfac
tion. In the other, that security with
God can only be enjoyed by removal of
all transgression. Hence peace and
security with God by atonement for
guilt. 1. To the sinner, Guilt must
be removed, justice satisfied, and every-
thing taken away which renders him
unfit for God’s presence. Without
shedding of blood there is no remission
of sins. 2. Tothe Church. The secur-
ity and happiness of the Church depend
upon God’s presence. God will not
dwell with a worldly people. “ Holi-
ness becometh thine house, O Lord,
for ever.” God will not dwell with
evil, nor will he tolerate it in the be-
liever, or in his house. Only when
cleansed from blood are we fit for the
dwelling of the Holy God and King.

The crown and seal. For the Lord
dwelleth in Zion. 1. To sanctify. 2.
To be praised. 3. To defend. ‘“ And
the nam : of the city from that day shall
be, The Lord is there” (Ezek. xviii.
35).


The Church has all her foes defied,
And laughed to scorn their rage ;

E’en thus for aye, she shall abide
Secure from age to age.


HOMILETICS.


Tue Finat Scenet.— iii. 1—21.


The whole of this chapter may be summed up into two parts, of unequal length


and graphic description.
I. God’s judgment upon the nations.


cuted (ver. 9—16).
given


in it (ver. 17).


Ver, 1—16,
in time and place with its nature and ground (ver. 1—8).


1. The verdict pronounced
2. The sentence exe-


The call to hear it (ver 9—11); the throne from which it is
ver. 11 & 12); and the dreadful overthrow which it specifies (ver. 13—16).
ITI. The final glory of God’s kingdom. Ver. 17—21.
2. Its abundant blessings (ver. 18).


1. The presence of God
3. Its perpetual blessedness


(ver. 19—21). This is contrasted with the destruction of its enemies, and all that


oppress its subjects.


‘Tn fine,” says a writer, “the closing chapter of Joel’s pro


phecy is a brief apocalypse, cast in the forms of Hebrew thought and aory indeed,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JOEL. 24}








and only dimly bodied out, yet setting forth, in language which even the Jews
zould not and do not mistake, the terrors of the last judgment, the issue of the time
long struggle of good with evil, and the golden age of peace and fruitful service,
which is to succeed to the conflicts and storms of time.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IIL.


«or. 1-3. Persecution. Ob, if
when we oppress and goad our fe.low-
creatures, we bestowed but one thought
upon the dark evidences of human error,
which, like dense and heavy clouds, are
rising slowly, it is true, but not less
surely, to heaven, to pour their after-
vengeance on our heads—if we heard
but one instant, in imagination, the deep
testimony of dead men’s voices, which
no power can stifle, and no pride can
shut out, where would be the injury and
injustice, the suffering, misery, cruelty,
and wrong, that each day’s life brings
with it [ Dickens] 4

Sold a girl for wine. A woman in
Glasgow, some time since, in order to
gratify her immoderate craving forardent
spirits, was said to have offered her own
child for sale as a subject for dissection
[ Whitecross].

Ver. 4—8. Retribution. Society is
like the echoing hills. It gives back to
the speaker his words, groan for groan,
song for song. Wouldest thou have
thy social scenes to resound with music 4
then speak ever in the melodious strains
of truth and love. ‘‘ With what mea-
sure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again” [Dr Thomas].

Ver. 9—12. Here, as in other re-
spects, the predictions and promises are
but partially fulfilled in the literal Is-
rael, Their real accomplishment, their
awful completion, will be when Zion’s
King comes in glory and majesty, with
a rod of iron, to dash in pieces the great
antichristian confederacy of kings and
peoples, and to take possession of his long-
promised and dearly-bought inheritance.
The signs of the times seem to indicate
that the coming of the Lord draws
nigh.

Ver. 12—14. Judgment day.
Spencer says that two soldiers entered
the valley of Jehoshaphat, when one of
them said, ‘*In this place shall be the
general judgment, and I will now take
my place where I shall then sit.” He


then sat down upon a stone, anda looked
up to heaven as if to receive his sen-
tence ; when such dismay overwhelmed
him, that he fell to the earth trembling,
and ever after remembered the day of
judgment with horror.

Ver. 15, 16. How sublime is this
description! How should we adore the
God before whom the unconscious earth
and sky do reverence, and act asif they
knew their Maker! Though the solid
world is convulsed at God’s presence,
saints do not fear. God is their refuge
and strength (Ps. xlvi. 1). The enemy
will be destroyed, but the Church shail
be saved. ‘She shall not be removed ;
God shall help her.”

The heavens and earth shall pass away,
And be to dissolution brought,

But Zion’s strength shall ne’er decay,
For her Redeemer changeth not.

Ver. 19. A French traveller thus
describes this desolation—“ Instead of
those ancient cultivated and fertile
plains, one only finds, here and there,
canals filled up, or cut in two, whose
numerous ramifications, crossing each
other in every direction, exhibit only
some scarcely distinguishable traces ct
a system of irrigation : instead of those
villages and populous cities, one sees
only masses of bare and arid ruins, rem-
nants of ancient habitations reduced to
ashes ; lastly, one finds only lagoons,
miry and pestilential, or sterile sands,
which extend themselves, and unceas-
ingly invade a land, which the industry
of man had gained from the desert and
the sea.”

Ver. 20, 21. The human mind has
ever conceived a reward for the righteous
and punishment for the wicked in a
future state. Heaven is all the more
resplendent by contrast with the dark
back-ground of another state.


If there’s a Power above us
(And that there is, all Nature cries aloud,
Through all her works), He must delight in


virtue, ; .
And they, whom he delights in, must be happy.
16


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


AMOS.


INTRODUCTION


The Prophet. Amos was a native of Tekoah, a village six miles south of Beth-
lehem, whose ruins are still preserved in the modern name of Tekua. He was a
herdsman, not a wealthy sheep-owner ; in rather indigent circumstances, but culti-
vated sycamores for his support (ch. i. 1; vii. 14, 15). He rejected the summons
to Judah and eat bread there. He did not prophesy for bread. He was satisfied
with his simple fare. He was neither a prophet, nor the pupil of a prophet. He
was “a self-made man,” employed in humble life, among ordinary men.

The Time. Somewhat earlier than Hosea, yet contemporary with him. Younger
than Joel, whose writings he read when composing his own, and from whom he
quotes in exact words (ch. i. 2; ix. 13). It is stated that he prophesied in the
days of Uzziah, king of Judah, &c. (i. 1). This earthquake appears to be the same
as that mentioned in Zech. xiv. 5, and Josephus (Ant. ix. 10. 4), asa token of Divine
displeasure, in addition to leprosy, against Uzziah, for usurping the priest’s office.
Jotham his son acted as regent during the latter part of his reign (2 Kings xv. 33).
As Uzziah and Jeroboam were contemporaries for about 27 years (B. C. 808—782),
the latter part of this period will fix the date of Amos, This agrees with ch. vii.
10. This was a period of national splendour and prosperity. Under Jeroboam II.
the kingdom of Israel was restored to its ancient Ifmits, and stood at the zenith of
its power. But this restoration was followed by the prevalence of luxury, licen.
tiousness, and vice, which provoked the judgment of God. The poor were oppressed
(viii. 4); the ordinances of religion felt burdensome (viii. 5); and idleness
and extravagance were common (iii. 15). The idolatry of the golden calf was
practised at Bethel and Gilgal, Dan and Beersheba; was offensively united with
the true worship of Jehovah, and was the source of all their prevalent evils. In
the midst of thisvice and prosperity, the prophet was called from his seclusion to
proclaim judgments, most unlikely and most terrible, the fall of the kingdom of
Israel. Judgments upon individual nations, typical of hostile forms to God, and
his Church in every age: judgments upon all kinds of corrupt religion in the
Church, are given with special emphasis, and comprehensive fulness. In a time
of moral corruption, and political security, he was sent to remind nations of a retri-
butive law, and a God of justice.


INTRODUCTION











The Book. We have nine chapters, taking up the words of Joel, and containing
threatenings against the kingdom of Israel chiefly. Surrounding nations are
briefly noticed, and a promise of deliverance and prosperity is given to Israel. [ts
Analysis is simple. First, a solemn prelude (ch. i—ii. 1—5) to the main subject.
Nation after nation ig summoned to judgment, with a striking idiomatic expression
(“For three transgressions,” &c.), similar to Prov. xxx. 15, 18, 21. After the in-
troduction, we have two parts. Jn chaps. tii.—vi. we hawe special charges and
threats. Chap. iii. sets forth the certainty of coming judgment; for the prophet
of Jehovah cannot speak in vain. Chap. iv. declares that since previous visitations
had been in vain God must punish. In chap. v. we have the outcry of calamity
with calls to seek the Lord and escape. Woe is pronounced upon those wke desire
the day to come, who are not yet prepared for it. Chap. vi. rouses those who fancy
the day is far off, and who continue in folly until overtaken. Then chaps. vii.—
tx. recount five visions. The first two threaten judgments (chap. vii. 1—6); the
next two point out the ripeness of the people for them (ch. vii. 7—9 ; viii. 1—3).
Between these a conversation between the prophet and the priest of Bethel is given
(ch. vii. 1O—17). The substance of the fourth vision ends in a simple prophetic
address (ch. viii. 4—14). The fifth vision (ch. ix. 1), the overthrow and ruin of
Israel, is expanded to an address (ver. 2—10), to which is appended the promise of
restoration to the fallen kingdom, its extension in Gentile nations, and its eternal
glorification. The close points to the beginning of the book, which seems “a
grand panorama of God’s judicial majesty.”

Its Style indicates vigour of mind and great moral culture. Images are taken
from country life in abundance and originality. The earth with its vineyards,
the heavens with lights, and cities in their luxury, impart beauty to his conceptions.
Historical events and national customs show that he was a student of the law
as well as “a child of nature.” He read the relations of the physical to the moral,
and wonderfully combined the justice and the mercy of God. Minute concep-
tions express the deep experience of the writer. He was a man of prayer and
moral courage, He scorned mero forms of worship, and felt that repentance was
spiritual work. He valued Divine revelation, and for the thunder of reproof or
the gentle tones of mercy to be silent was to him the greatest of evils. We shall
try to bring out the hidden beauties of his language, apply his lessons to events of
the present day, and by God’s help, in # method in which no other writer has yet
employed.


244 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [omar. 1





en


CHAPTER L


CarticaL Nores.] Amos] Different from the father of Isaiah, Asmots, Tek.) 2 Chron. xx. 20
fartk.] 2 Chron. xxvi. 16. A premonitory sign in nature of revolutions in guilty kingdoms (Matt.
xxiv, 7, 8). 2. Roar] Cf. Joel iii. 16; Jer. xxv. 30. God will spread terror like beasts of prey
(Ps. xviii. 3), Zion] Seat of government from whence they revolted. Hab.] Poetical for inhabit-
ants. Carmel] whose summit abounded in olives and rich pastures ; owing to its nearness to the
sca, renewed its freshness and verdure (Song vii. 5; Is. xxxiii. 9; Jer. 1.19). 3. Three] The
numbers serve to denote the multiplicity of sins, ‘‘ ungodliness in its worst form” [Luther]. Turn]
Reverse, to make a thing go back, to withdraw it (Num. xxiii. 20; Is. xliii. 13). 4. A fire]
Material, as cities burned in war (Ps. lxxviii. 63) ; or an emblem of God’s judgments. 5. Bar] of
its gates (Jer. li. 30). Inhab.] Subject. Him that holdeth) Ruler. Saith] Strengthens the threat,
wich was fulfilled when the Assyrian king conquered Damascus and broke up the kingdom (2 Kings
xvi.9). 6. Whole captivity] 7. ¢. left none, but sold them to Edomites, the most deadly enemies to
Israel: hence the greatness of the sin. 7. Fire on the wall] An enemy shall destroy it. Fulfilled
by Hezekiah (2 Kings xviii. 8), Sennacherib (Is, xlvii. 1), and by Alexander the Great. 9, 10.
Tyrus] The crime here is sale of prisoners, like the preceding, to Edom ; a violation of the covenant
ot David and Solomon with the king of Tyre (2 Sam. v, 11; 1 Kings v.1;ix.11). 11, 12. Edom]
No particular crime, but implacable hatred charged, which broke out into acts of cruelty. 138—15.
Ammon] Ammonites joined the Chaldeans to invade and plunder Judea. Hazael perpetrated the
cruelty predicted (2 Kings vili. 12). Ripped up] A cruel act, done to leave Israel without heir, so as
to secure the inheritance. The punishment is by foreign invasion, swift, sudden, and resistless as
a tempest; violent and terrific as a whirlwind. King] ‘Their Moloch (the idol of Ammon) and
his priests’’ { @roti#s and LXX.]. Or, as the English, their king and his princes would go together
into captivity. The reigning head and those who shared his counsels were removed. Their idols
and their earthly kings were unable either to save themselves, or those who submitted to them.
‘ Hand in hand the wicked shall not be unpunished” (Prov. xi. 21).


HOMILETICS.


Tue Man anv HIS Messace.—Verses 1, 2.


Amos uttered words which were the embodiment of Divine communicanons in
vision. When engaged in the daily routine of homely duties he received a Divine
summons, “Go, prophesy unto my people Israel.” His predictions are wonder-
ful. It was a strange event for a prophet to be sent out of Judah into the king-
dom of the ten tribes. For a man of no training and position, to rise up from the
rank of a shepherd, and foretell the destruction of a prosperous and powerful
nation. This would demand universal attention.

I. The Word of God often comes to men of humble birth. “The words of
Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa.” Amos was only a common
shepherd and a fig-cultivator. A man of no learning and connection in life. Yet
she call came to him. We pander to the prejudice of sects, regard the opinion of
the great, and fear the scorn of the ignorant. Most popular and talented men of
the times are sought to render our cause welcome to the people. But God
“chooses the foolish things of the world to confound the wise.” The proud and
mighty are passed by, and men from the dunghill are exalted to the throne and
the ministry. Elisha from the plough, David from the sheepfold, Matthew from
the receipt of custom, and Peter from the fishing-net, are selected to be messengers
for God. Christ made publicans and fishermen apostles to men. The philoso-
vhers of Greece and the senators of Rome were passed by. ‘‘ He hath put down
the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.” Men of the greatest
viminence and usefulness have risen from the lowest ranks. God knows the “right
men” for the times, finds them, and puts them into “the right place.” Many are
now cultivating high qualities in humble callings, despised ana unknown, but
whom Cod is preparing for more honourable spheres.


omar. Ly HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. a4








This law, though custom now directs the course,
As nature’s institute, is yet in force,

Uncancelled, though diffused: and he whose mind
Is virtuous, is alone of noble kind;

Though poor in fortune, of celestial race,

And he commits the crime who calls him base,


II. The call from God often takes men from a lower to a higher sphere of life.
A humble shepherd was sent to warn the kings of Israel. Some men are discon-
tented in their place, think they deserve a higher, and cherish ambitious schemes
for the future. But if we are not faithful in little we shall not be in great things.
“First deserve and then desire.” If we fill our present position with diligence,
faith, and earnestness, we are on the way to honour. ‘“‘ Merit well the honour and
you shall obtain it.” ‘The force of his own merit makes his way.” Moses was
a faithful servant in his own house before he became master in Israel. Our
secular avocations are sacred and should not be despised, filled with grand possi-
bilities and elevate to higher blessings. God speaks to men in business, awakens
dormant powers, and calls to distinguished honour, Cincinnatus was called from
the plough to the dictatorship. Matthew from the toll-booth, and Peter from his
boat, were called to follow Christ and become historians and ambassadors of the
age. Work in your daily tasks and trust God for the future. “ For promotion
cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south. But God is
the judge: he putteth down one and setteth up another.” III. The call from
God often comes to men in special times. ‘In the days of Uzziah king of
Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam.” ‘Judge a man by the times in which he
lived,” is a common saying. If we thus estimate the prophet Amos, we learn his
moral courage and intense feeling as he delivers the burden of the Lord. He was
accused of conspiracy and advised to flee, but defends his innocence and authority,
and with the heroism of God’s servant repeats the unpleasant message, and “ufolds
the Divine displeasure. In shepherd’s dress he denounced the idolatry of the
court, foretold the destruction of the kingdom and the captivity of the people. 1.
Times of natural prosperity. During the vigorous reign of Jeroboam II. the
kingdom of Israel enlarged its dominions by the subjugation of adjoining states.
With greater security from without, and firmer administration within, there were
profound peace, material prosperity, and social gratification. Uzziah also had sub-
dued the Edomites and the Philistines, and made the Ammonites pay tribute.
He fortified Jerusalem, and raised a powerful army. His name had spread even
to Egypt (2 Chron. xxvi.). Under these kings the two kingdoms had reached
the summit of their power and splendour. 2. Times of moral corruption.
National prosperity is no guarantee for pure religion. It often begets indifference,
love of ease, and maturity for judgment. ‘‘ Prosperous times” are very often the
least prosperous. Idolatry was sanctioned by the State, and mixed with the
worship ef God. The luxuries, debaucheries, and reckless conduct of the rich were
upheld by oppressing the poor (ch, ii. 7, 8; iii. 9). Perversion of justice (ch. ii.
7; v. 7), bribery (ch. ii. 6; v. 12), and false measures abounded. In business a
griping, hardfisted bargain was sought (ch. viii. 5, 6). Everywhere in the events
of life, sin showed itself in the vile price given for articles of luxury (ch. ii. 6 ;
viii. 6). In the palace and the sanctuary, from the metropolis to the borders,
moral corruption prevailed. But Amos thundered out the word of God amid the
splendour and wickedness that surrounded him. He sets before them their sins
and pronounces God’s sentence upon them. “Therefore thus saith the Lord God.
Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel. Therefore the Lord, the God of hosts,
the Lord saith thus” (iii, 11; iv. 12; v. 16). 3. Times of physical events.
“Two years before the earthquake.” Earthquakes are sometimes natural har-
bingers of coming revolutions. When wen are steeped in sin and living
in utter carelessness God has many meanr t) ronee them fror: sleep. When


246 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS [CIAP. I.





they disregard his word, unnatural and extraordinary signs proclaim his
anger. This earthquake must have been very great. It is described as “the
earthquake,” and was vividly remembered in the days of Zechariah. Whole
cities, like Lisbon, are destroyed by earthquakes in the East, says a writer.
Josephus says that in one, a little before the time of Christ, “some ten thousand
were buried under the ruined houses.” Referring to this he says, “By it half
of a mountain was removed and carried toa plain four furlongs off, and spoiled
the king’s gardens.” But in this shaking of the earth we hear the voice of God
warning nations of their danger, before the flash falls and the fire consumca
them. IV. The call which comes from God to men is often a call to deliver
an unpleasant message. ‘The Lord will roar from Zion and utter his voice from
Jerusalem.” Many are willing to deliver pleasant tidings, to preach “ smuvotl.
things ;” but few have the courage and self-denial to go in the face of public
pinion, and declare the truth at the risk of their lives. Amos had to denounce
judgments, which are often as necessary as mercies. They both have one aim, and
to separate them indicates perverted views of the Divine character and prucedure.
L. Judgments authoritative in their origin. “ From Zion” and from Jerusalem,
where God dwelt and was worshipped. Neither in Bethel nor in Dan, nor in thw
cities of Samaria and Jezreel, but in the cities of Israel did God manifest himself
Zion was the seat of government and the centre of mercy. From thence issueu
edicts and decrees for Israe] and the world. At the very beginning, therefore,
the prophet warned Israel, and declared the name and authority of Jehovah, King
in Zion. “The Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy
habitation.” 2. Judgments loud in their nature. Jehovah will roar against them
as a lion, terrible to shepherds and their flocks. His voice must be heard, and the
message demands attention. God roars before he tears, and warns before he strikes.
“Thus hath the Lord spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion roaring
on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him, he will not
be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so shall the Lord
of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof.” 3, Judg-
ments specific in their design. “ Concerning Israel.” <‘‘ All troubles,” says Bishop
Reynolds, “have their commission and instructions from him—what to do, whither
to go, whom to touch, and whom to pass over.” The storm passed over adjacent
countries, but at last falls down in terrific power and darkness upon the kingdom
of Israel, None are beyond the reach or can escape from the punishment of God.
The arrows of the Almighty never miss their mark, and stick fast into those at
whom they are shot. Sent in love or judgment, they cause a wound which only
he can heal. Under his power and presence men are stricken down, and the slain
of the Lord are many when he leads in war. Those who sin against light and
privileges deserve greater judgment than others. Israel’s advantages were great,
and Israel’s sins were grievous. “Go, prophesy unto my people Israel.” 4. Judg-
ments terrible'in their consequence. This is read in the terms which describe them.
Not only like the roaring of a lion from his secret place , bus like the outburst of
a thunder-storm, which sweeps over the land, and carries desolation in its train
(a) The land ts smitten. Its fruitful portions are made barren. The summit of
Carmel, denoted for its fertility and excellency, was consumed by drought. All
herbage and verdure withered like a flower. “Sharon is like a wilderness; and
Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits ” (Isa. xxxiii. 9). (6) The habitations of
men suffer. .“ The habitations of the shepherds shall mourn.” This is not mere
poetic personification. The shepherds mourn at withered pastures, and their habit-
ations are made desolate by the general calamity. Nature, beasts and men, feel
the visitation, and mourn in sorrow. God can blight the fairest blessings of men.
baba the earth mourneth and languisheth,” Jet us weep in penitence and tun


Char. LJ


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


The same lessons are here repeated
and enforced that we have found else-
where. 1. Those who take no heed to
yne message may have others louder.
“4) Given by strange men. (6) Confirmed
vy extraordinary signs in nature. 2.
But God is slow to anger, and waits
patiently. Before the last puniskment
is inflicted real space is given for re, ent-
ance. “Two years before the earthquake.”
3. If all warning is despised, the minis-
try of the prophet and the sufferings of
nature, then there is “ fearful looking
for of judgment,” &c. The populous
cities, the peaceful homes, and the fruit-
ful fields will all suffer when God speaks
in wrath.

The shepherd has shaken, not one
zountry, but the world ; not by a pass-
ing earthquake, but by the awe of God,
which, with electric force, streamed
through bis words [ Pusey

Ver : It is observable that Amos,
the shepuard of Tekoa, south of Beth-
tehem in Judah, directs his prophecies
specially to the ten tribes of Israel. He
thus presents an example of Divine
kindness and tender sympathy for aliens
and rebels ; and in this respect is like
the Good Shepherd, who was born at
Bethlehem, and laid down his life for
his sheep when they had gone astray
[ Wordsworth].

God chooses instruments for important
service from inferior stations in society.


1. Men should not be ashamed of their
mean extraction, or low occupations in
life. Some have childishly wished to
blot out every incident concerning their
origin. Rousseau, a French lyric poet,
is said to have been ashamed that
he was the son of a shoemaker.
2. Men should not be reproached for
former life, if they earnestly discharge
the duties of their present position. 3.
God thus magnifies his grace, and re-
bukes human pride. It is a false notion
of true dignity and usefulness, to sup-
pose that they belong to an illustrious
pedigree or a long purse.


Honour and shame from no condition rise:
Act well your part—there all the honour lies.


Ver. 2. Roar from zion. Thus
Amos joins on his own prophecy of
judgment to that of Joel (iii. 16). God
roared out of Zion by the voice of Joel,
and of Amos himself, denouncing his
judgments. And God roared by the
voice of the earthquake, confirming
that denunciation by a solemn peal of
subterranean thunder. The earthquake,
as¢it were, an Amen to the prophecy
ye

Mourn. os, like Joel, notes the
sympathy of the natural world with man
in his sorrow. H¢ also displays his own
sympathy for the class to which he be-
longed, by remembering the home which
he loved and now left.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Jup@mMENT on Damascus.—Verses 3—5,


The prophet having declared the object of his mission, and the authority by
which he was sent, now gives the several messages in order. First to the sur-
rounding nations, grouped together into two classes. Damascus (Syria), Gaza
(Philistia), and Tyre, more distantly related to Israel ; Edom, Ammon, and Moab
allied in origin, and nearer to Israel. Then to Judah, and finally to Israel herself,
the chief transgressor. In the succession of groups we see a climax of guilt.

I. The guilt of Damascus. “For three transgressions of Damascus and for
four.” All the judgments are introduced by the same formula, which does not
mean that four transgressions were added to three, but that there was @ series of
sins, each one greater than the one before it, and the last the greatest, the climax
of all. All these nations were guilty of multiplied sins. We notice those specially
mentioned in each case. Damascus, that is, the Syrians under the reigu of Wazael,


848 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.








amvaded and subdued the eastern regions of Israel. They treated the captured
Gileadites with great cruelty, and crushed them under iron threshing-machines
(2 Kings x. 32, 33; viii. 12). Elisha foretold this cruelty, and Hazael actually
did it, though he stood aghast at the prediction. The women of Israel were thrown
like sheaves on the threshing-floor. II. The punishment of Damascus. 1. Jt is
srreversible. ‘I will not turn away the punishment thereof.” ‘Ihere are ante-
cedent stages when the consequences may be averted. There are times of warning
and patient waiting. But when men abuse God’s patience, and continue in sin
till there be no remedy, they must reap what they deserve. 2. It is wide-spread.
(a) The royal palaces are destroyed. “TI will send a fire into the house of Hazael,
which shall devour the palaces of Benhadad.” Royal palaces, though richly
furnished and strongly built, avail nothing before God. The habitations of the
rich are no protection against the wrath of God. They turn to dust and ashes
before the fire. (b) The capital is made defenceless. ‘‘I will break also the bar
of Damascus.” The bar, the gates of the city were broken. It was exposed to
the enemy, who could go in and out at pleasure. The seat of empire and the
empire itself was shorn of its strength. All means of resistance were shivered
Disgrace and ruin followed. ‘ Behold, Damascus is taken eway from being a city,
and it shall be a ruinous heap” (Is. xvii. 1). (c) The inhabitants greatly suffered.
Some were cut off by the sword. The people from the plain of Aven and princes
from the house of Eden, the inhabitants of the valley and the cities, were put to
death. Neither their wealth nor their gods could protect them. Others were
taken captives to the land of Kir, an Assyrian province on the banks of the river
Kir, the modern Georgia. This was accomplished when the king of Assyria took
Damascus, and carried away its people into captivity (2 Kings xvi. 9). How easily
can God uproot and transplant a nation that sins against him, and acts with cruelty
towards his people! Those who abuse the power which God bestows upon them
to uproot others, shall themselves be uprooted.


Toe JUDGMENT oN Gaza.—Verses 6—8.


In similar terms as before, the special sins of the leading and most influential
city of the Philistines are mentioned. Sm in every place grows and ripens for
punishment.

I. The sins of Gaza. “For three transgressions,” &c. 1. The provocations
were great in kind. They are called transgressions, or rebellions. 2. The provoca-
tions were multiplied in number. The sins were not few, but many, and multi-
plied. “For three and for four,” that is, for continued provocations against God
Sin was continually added to sin. 3. The provocations reached a climax in their
cruelty towards the Jews. ‘“‘ Because they carried away captive the whole captivity,
to deliver them up to Edom.” (a) This captivity was most complete. The term
‘whole captivity ” means “a full captivity.” The captives were numerous. They
took all they could and left none behind. They intended to destroy Israel entirely.
“They have said, Come and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the
name of Israel may be no more in remembrance” (Ps. lxxxiii. 4). () This cap-
tivity was most cruel. ‘The Philistines appear to have sold their victims partly to
the Edomites, the bitterest foes of Israel, and partly to the Phoenicians, who resold
them to Edom (ver. 9) and to the Grecians (Joel iii. 6). Amos emphasizes the
hatred of the, Philistines. They were not satisfied with taking them captives
themselves, but added affliction to affliction, by delivering the Jews into the hands
of implacable foes. Fugitives who flee to us for refuge should never be treated
with cruelty nor robbed of their liberty. ‘‘ It was like driving the shrinking flock
of sheep to the butcher's shambles,” says a writer, reeking with the gore of their
companions. Yet were they driven there to the slaughter. Open markets there
were for Jewish slaves in abundance. “Sell us only not to slaughter,” ‘“ Spare
the gray-headed,” “Spare my child,” would go up in the ears of those, who though


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 249





enemies understood their speech. But no! Such was the compact of Tyre, and
Philistia, and Edom against the people of God. Not one was to be spared ; it was
to be a complete captivity, and that to Edom. The bond was fulfilled. “ Whoso
stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he too shall cry and not be heard.” ITI.
The doom of Gaza. “ Behold, I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall
devour the palaces thereof.” The sentence upon Gaza stands out prominently,
because the first city in power and in sin. It was the merchaat city of the five. -
Each had its own petty king. But all formed one whole, and were involved in
one sin and ruin. As they had treated Israel, so God would deal with them.
Measure for measure. “He shall have judgment without mercy that hath
showed no mercy.” 1. Gaza and affliated cities would be destvoyed. The
ravages of fire and sword would devour the palaces of the land. Cities
strong by nature and art would be smitten by the fire, when human foresight
would pronounce them impregnable and secure. 2. The people were doumed to
perish. So complete would be the destruction that “the remnant,” those who
were left after one destruction, should fall in the other. The political strength
which escaped one calamity should be overtaken in another. God will make a
full end of those who sought to exterminate his people. Judgment upon judg-
ment fell upon Philistia, until they ceased to be a nation (Jer. xlvii.). Cruelty
to the helpless, and persecution of God’s people, ripen nations and individuals for
destruction with great rapidity. Flourishing families and magnificent palaces are
destroyed, as if by tremendous fire. Fortified cities are leveled to the dust, fertile
regions are depopulated, princes are dethroned, and mighty empires are reduced to
slavery and ruin. ‘“‘ Rejoice not thou, whole Philistia, because the rod of him
that smote thee is broken: for out of the serpent’s root shall come forth a cocka
trice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.”


Tue Jupement on Tyre.—Verses 9, 10.


The third people spoken against are the inhabitants of Tyre.

I. The ground of the judgment. Like other nations they were guilty of many
sins. 1. They trafficked in human souls. If they did not carry away, ‘they
delivered up the whole captivity” to the mortal enemy of the Jews. They sold
their captives to Grecians far away (Joel iii. 3), and cared not for the hardships of
those who fled to them for shelter. 2. They violated the sacred covenant. ‘ And
remembered not the brotherly covenant.” David and Solomon entered into a
friendly alliance with the king of Tyre (2 Sam. v. 11; 1 Kings v. 15). Hiram
supplied Solomon with timber and carpenters in return for oil and corn ; recog-
nized David as chosen of God, and was “ever a lover of David” (1 Kings v. 1).
The covenant no doubt recognized God as the true God, and guaranteed religious
privileges, undisturbed peace and safety. No king of Israel or Judah had ever
made war with Phenicia. Yet they forgot this friendly feeling, and remembered
not the brotherly covenant. They sinned in helping Edom in their vile trade ; in
forgetting their solemn obligation, and in disregarding God for the sake of mer-
cantile gain. A costlier object than man does not exist. He who seeks to
enrich himself by the possession and traffic of his fellow-creatures will be branded
as a pest to humanity.


God gave us over beast, fish, fowl,
Dominion absolute; that right we hold
By his donation; but man over man

e made not lord, such title to himself
Reserving—human left for human free.


YI. The nature of the punishment. “I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus,
hich shall devour the palaces thereof.” Many parts of Tyre were burnt by fiery
missiles of the Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar. He took it after a thirteen
veus’ siege. Alexander of Macedon subsequently overthrew it. “ Note,” says


250 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. (CHAP. I.


Ne TEE


one, “that though the crime charged may have been immediately due to the
greed of the merchants of Tyre, acting in their private capacity, the whole
community is held responsible for their deeds. It is the duty of every State to
restrain and punish the unjust aggressions of its citizens on other communities,
and if it fails to do so, it must abide the consequences.”


THE JUDGMENT OF EDOM.—Verses 11, 12.


Edom and the two following nations were related to Israel by lineal descent.
But they set aside the ties of blood, and perpetrated abominable cruelties.

I. The reason of the judgment. A relentless hatred towards God’s peopie,
breaking out in acts of cruelty, from one generation to another. 1. It was wn-
natural hatred. ‘Did cast off all pity.” His better feelings were subdued.
Natural pity for a brother in distress was stifled or suppressed as if pity were evil
in itself, and to be extinguished within us. This is most sinful and unnatural.
It corrupts, deadens a man’s feelings, and “steels him against sympathy with
others.” ‘For pity melts the mind to love.” ‘Compassion is an emotion of
which we ought never to be ashamed,” says Blair. “Graceful is the tear of sym-
pathy, and the heart that melts at the tale of woe; we should not permit ease and
indulgence to contract our affections, and wrap us up in a selfish enjoyment. But
we should accustom ourselves to think of the distresses of human life, of the solitary
cottage, the dying parent, and the weeping orphan.” 2. It was cruel hatred. ‘“ He
did pursue his brother with the sword.” His malice destroyed his compassion. He
east off the pity of man and indulged in the fierceness of a beast. His anger was
insatiable arid knew no bounds. ‘“‘ Fierce are the wars of brethren ; and they who
love exceedingly also hate exceedingly,” says the proverb. No hatred seems so
intense as that between relations and brothers. To slay a neighbour is to slay a
man, and to pursue a brother is fratricide. “ Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrage-
ous; but who is able to stand before envy?” 3. It was perpetual hatred. “His
anger did tear perpetually, and he kept his wrath for ever.” Their enmity was
intensified by their kinship, and the murderous thoughts of Esau towards Jacob
seemed to be revived in posterity, and become a prominent feature in national
character (Ezek. xxxv. 5; Obad. 1). Wrath was not kept in restraint, but let
loose like a raging beast. It was hereditary, full of revenge, which they gratified
by outrageous cruelties. ‘Thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the
blood of the children of Israel, by the force of the sword in the time of their
calamity.” II. The character of the judgment. Their cities would be over-
thrown, and their capital destroyed vy fire. God may forbear awhile, even with
the worst persecutors, but their cruelty will at length bring vengeance to their own
doors. ‘The fire of our anger against our brethren kindles the fire of God’s
anger against us,” says an old writer. ‘For I have sworn by myself, saith the
Lord, that Bozrah shall become a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a curse”
(Jer. xlix. 13).


Ture JupGmMent on AmMMON.— Verses 13—15.


In the fifth place the Ammonites are accused of guilt, and their punishment is
described.

Y Their crimes, consisted in most atrdcious deeds towards the Gileadites. 1.
barbarous cruelty, ‘They have ripped up the women with child.” Hazael and
Ammon were guilty of this barbarity. Probably Syria and Ammon were leagued
cogether for the extermination of Israel. The offspring of the incest of Lot ever
retained the stamp of their origin, and were noted for sensuality and ferocity.
One would think that human beings could not become so inhuman, but history
npens its pages of darkness and blood. 2. Unbownded selfishness. ‘That they
might enlarge their border.” These deeds were not only performed in rage, but in
deiiberate design to extirpate the people and take possession of the land. Covet


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 281


an. Ste


amess leads to great cruelty, and those that seek to extend their borders often
use unscrupulous means to accomplish their design. Pharaoh killed the Israelites,
and Ammon displayed unwonted ferocity towards the women of Gilead. But
neither their kings nor their idols could protect them from the coming storm. II.
Their punishment. Their attempts to exterminate others recoiled upon them-
selves. 1. Their chief city was burned. ‘I will kindle a fire in the wall of
Rabbah.” It wasa strong city with a stronger citadel, but it was utterly destroyed.
Its ruins still exist, some of which perhaps date back to this prophecy. “TI will
make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the Ammonites a couching place for flocks.”
2. War desolated the country. “Shouting in the day of battle.” Foreign
invasion would sweep the land like a storm. (a) Swift asa tempest. (6) Violent
as a whirlwind. The onset would be irresistible. Like the hurricane carrying the
caravans of the desert, so the enemy would carry the walls and fortress of the
city. 3. Kings and princes were taken into captivity. There would be no one
left to resist and renew the revolt. On every side waste land and ruined cities.
All defences, human and religious, were impotent. Inhabitants and gods were
carried into a foreign country. Kings and counsellors, priests and people, linked


together and driven to one common destruction.


‘‘Cry, ye daughters of Rabbah,


gird you with sackcloth ; lament and run to and fro by the hedges, for their king
shall go into captivity, and his priests and his princes together” (Jer. xlix. 3).


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER I.


Ver. 1. Station in life. Low station
is no obstacle to God’s favour. St John
was the son of a fisherman; recom-
mended to our Saviour neither by
refinement of education nor by honour-
able employment, he was diligently en-
gaged in the labours of an humble
occupation when chosen to accompany
nis Lord, For those, indeed, whom it
hath pleased God to place in the higher
states of life it is right that they should
endeavour to perform the duties of their
stations, by a due cultivation of their
talents, by the acquirement of suitable
accomplishments, and by acting up to
the rank in society to which by the
good providence of God they are born
and designated [Bp Manton].

Ver. 9. Brotherly covenant. Be
steadfast in thy covenant, and be con-
versant therein, and wax old in thy
work (Eccles. xi. 20). Remember thy
covenants, and bear no malice to thy
neighbour (Ibid. xxviii. 7).

er. 11, Cast off pity. Bonaparte


carried the town of Jaffa by assault, and
many of the garrison were put to the
sword. But the greater part fled into
mosques, implored mercy from their
pursuers, and were granted their lives.
But Napoleon expressed resentment at
the conduct of the troops, lost all pity,
and to relieve himself of the care of his
prisoners, ordered nearly 4000 to march
on rising ground to be shot. When
Bonaparte saw the smoke from volleys
of musketry and grape, it is said that
he could not contain his joy.


Pity is the virtue of the law,
And none but tyrants use it cruelly.


Ver. 13. Heathenism is cruel, and
multitudes of victims have been de-
stroyed under the sanction of the gods.
But what can we say when kings and
enlightened nations commit such deeds
as these ¥


hile: not ambition and revenge descend
to ” :


252 HIOOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [CHAP,





CHAPTER II.


CriricaL Notss.] Bones] An act of cruelty revenged ; others, an insult to the remains of ~
dead king, probably the king joined in alliance with Jehoshaphat and Jehoram (2 Kings iii. 9},
2. Kir.] A principal city of Moab, the plural form indicates the acropolis and town (cf. Jer. xlviii.
24, 41). Tumult] These expressions describethe city taken bystorm. Trumpet] The signal for
assault. 3. Judge] Supreme magistrate (Deut. xvii. 9). 4, Judah] condemned for idolatry anc
despising the law, i. e. the instructions and revelations given by God to his people. Command. |
Separate precepts. Lies} Their idols, which not only deceive, ‘butas fabrications and nonentities.
having no reality in themselves, and therefore quite unable to perform what was expected of them.’
[Keil]. Fathers] Forefathers generally. 6, Israel] The ten tribes the main object of the pro
phecy. First, prevalent crimes of injustice and oppression, shameless immorality, and daring con-
tempt of God. 6—8. Sold] Perverted their cause, and gave an unjust sentence for asmall bribe
(Deut. xvi. 9). Shoes] Lit. sandals. Needless ornament was thought more valuable than man.
Pant] Eaverly thirst (Ecc. i. 5) for this object, i.e. they long to see the head of the poor coverec
with dust or earth. or to reduce them to such misery that they scatter dust upon their head (cf
Job ii. 12; 2 Sam. 1. 2). Turny bena, bring them into a trap, cast them into destruction, b:
impediments laid in their path. Unto] Not se much as named among the Gentiles (1 Cor. v. 1),
Clothes] pawned; upper garments or square piece of cloth, to wrap all around and serve the poo
for a counterpane. If a poor man was necessitated te pledge this garment, it was returned to hin
before night (Ex. xxii. 25); and a garment so pawned was not to be slept upon (Deut. xxiv. 12, 13)
Godless usurers kept them to stretch themselves upon at feasts, at sacrificial meals in the temple.
Wine] bevght with money of those whom ‘they unjustly fined, 9—12. Yet] Former benefits make
ingratitude more base. Israel delivered from Egypt and from the most powerful enemy of all the
Cunaanites. Roots] Destroyed utterly, no fruit above, no root from which to spring beneath.
Raised up] additional privileges ; furnished with religious instructors and examples of self-restraint.
Gave] Tempted the Nazarite to break his vow. 18—16,] Judgment the inevitable consequence.
Press| I will depress your place, ¢.¢. make it narrow, opposite to enlarging or relieving (Ps. iv. 1 ;
Prov, iv. 12); others, I will press you down. It is a rustic figure, a cart full of sheaves sets forth
the pressure of their provocations, God was weary of them (Is. xliii. 24; Mal. ii. 17), overlaid
with their wickedness [Bp Hall]. Neither agility of man or horse, neither courage nor valour,
would deliver them; few would escape, and those few would be fugitives in other countries, or
naked captives in the hands of the enemy.


HOMILETICS.


Tue Jup@Ment on Moas.—Verses 1—3.


I. The punishment of Moab. Moab was to be laid waste by the fire of war,
and its palaces to be destroyed. 1. A tumultuous destruction. ‘“ Moab shall die
with tumult.” The sound of the trumpet would stir up the assailants. Noise
and commotion would be heard in the streets, and as they had raised tumults
themselves so they would perish by tumults. ‘Every battle of the warrior is
with confused noise.” 2. An entire destruction. God will cut off its rulers. The
chief magistrate, the princes and the rulers of all ranks, shall be taken. Those
who are high in rank and authority are bound to do justice to the people. Judges
should learn that there is one above them, from whose judgment they cannot escape.
iI. The reason of this punishment. “Because he burned the bones of the king
of Edom into lime.” The king of Moab, either when he sought to avenge himself
ym Edom (after the raising of the siege, 2 Kings iii. 27), or at some other time, let
vut his fury on the very dead. The malice which vents itself on the insensible
corpse is the vindictive rage of one, that would never cease to hurt if possible.
“Hatred which death cannot extinguish,” says Pusey, “is the beginning of the
eternal hate of hell.” To rage against the living, or to express malignant spite
against the remains of the dead, is odious to God. He is Lord of the living and
the dead. His dominion and providence extend beyond the grave, and he will
avenge insults to heathen or Christian.


CHAP. II.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


SL Di is RS SS
Tus JupGMENT on JupAH.—Verses 4, 5.


I. The charge against Judah. The guilt here is not as in other cases. Other
nations were judged for injuries done to man ; but Judah for insults to God They
despised the law, deceived themselves and one another with false excuses and the
customs of progenitors. Disregard to God is manifested in two chief forms. 1.
Contempt for the law of God. “They have despised the law of the Lord, and
have not kept his commandments.” The law as a rule of life and the command-
ments in their special bearing were treated with contempt. The wisdom of God
was despised by the pride of man. They first neglected, then set aside, the law.
If men have no regard for the law, and make no conscience of its authority, they
will soon resist ix. If we do not keep we virtually despise God’s law. 2. Wor-
ship of idols. Man will either worship God or love a lie. If he tries to explain
away the claims of God and to justify his sins, he will “err” by his lies and soon
lose power to discriminate between good and evil. (a) Idolatry is a lie. The
idols themselves are lies. They can do nothing, but lie and deceive. “ For an
idol is nothing in the world” (1 Cor. viii. 4). The pretences under which men
worship them are lies; snares to mislead and cause “to err.” (b) Lies lead men
astray. “Their lies caused them to err.” God’s law is the truth, but when the
truth is changed into @ lie, there is danger of sin becoming hereditary. The word
points the way to temporal and eternal safety ; but if despised, men wander into dark-
ness and idolatry. (c) Lies are sometimes defended by custom. ‘‘ After the which
their fathers have walked.” Men get accustomed to evils that arecommon. These
evils acquire prominence and authority. “The popular error of one generation
becomes the axiom of the next. Human opinion is as dogmatic as revelation.
The second generation of error demands as implicit submission as God’s truth.
The transmission of error against himself, God says, aggravates its evil, and does
not excuse it.” Thus children walk in the steps and fill up the measure of the
guilt of their fathers. Human opinion must not be exalted above God’s word.
Scripture, and Scripture alone, is the law of truth, and the rule of life. False
doctrines, delusive rites and idolatries, violate the word of God, perpetuate human
tradition in the Church, and cause one generation after another to err from the
truth. II. The calamities upon Judah. In few words and little detail, the
destruction by fire is said to extend not only to the cities of Judah, but to the
palaces of Jerusalem. Jerusalem was burnt with fire by the Chaldeans (2 Kings
xxv. 9; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 19), and afterwards by the Romans. Two centuries
elapsed before the first fire destroyed the city, but God sent it. Let us beware of
treating the word with contempt, of thinking because long delayed the judgment
will never come. God’s anger will consume dead members in the Church, and
purify it from all idolatry and abominations. “Then will I kindle a fire in the
gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not b.
@axenched.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


1. A visible Church which does not
keep up communion with God, nor im-
prove ber spiritual advantages, may fall
into provesations nothing inferior in
number and heinousness to the iniqui-
ties of nations about her. 2. And if
God does not spare heathens without
law and with but little knowledge of
(tod, tar sess will he spare his people
woc are lewd as they [ Hutcheson!


“Man first in act despises God’s law
(and whoso does not keep it, despises
it), and then he must needs be deceived
by some idol of his own, which becomes
his god. He first chooses wilfully his
own lie, i.e. whatever he chooses out o7
God, and then his own Jie deceives him
So, morally, liars at last believe them-
selves” [ Pusey].

Judgnenta af God compared to fire


254 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. {cHaP. IL.





a een a eT


1, Bire corsumes (Ps. xviii. 8; Jer. xv. 4. Fire refines. The judgments of God
14). 2, Fire breaks out suddenly. are intended to try men, to purify
The destruction of these cities is certain churches and nations, “The Lord’s
and inevitable. 3. Fire is violent. fire is in Zion, and his furnace in
Sodom and the great fire in London. Jerusalem” (Is, xxxi, 9; Zech. xiii. 9).


HOMILETICS.
Tua JupGMENT UPON IsRAEL.— Verses 6—l 6.


The storm which has been gathering all around, and threatening nation after
nation, now falls upon the ten tribes of Israel Their sins are minutely specified,
and the terrific consequences follow.

I. The guilt of Israel. Several atrocious crimes are charged upon them, soine
of which are sanctioned and upheld by persons of rank and authority. 1. Thes
perverted justice. The smallest bribe would induce the judges to give up a poor
man to the will of his oppressor. The debtor and the insolvent received no mercy
from his creditor. The righteousness of a man’s character or cause was no plea for
justice. Magistrates neither feared God nor regarded man. Man made in God’s
image was sold for some worthless price or some trivial ornament. All nations
more or less have honoured the sentiment of justice. In the administration of law
it is the glory of a people, and in commercial life the bonds of society. Ina moral
sense it gains respect from man and approval from God. But injustice in what-
ever form or degree, bribery for any cause, drags the ermine in the dust, and damages
the interesis of a nation. The national character of Rome in the degenerate
period when the judges received bribes had lost its purity and honour. When the
Jews sold the righteous Son of God for thirty pieces of silver, they perverted judg-
ment, disgraced humanity, and filled up the measure of theiriniquity. “ And thou
shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise and perverteth the words of the
righteous.” 2. They oppressed the poor. ‘That pant after the dust of the earth
on the head of the poor.” They brought the poor into such misery that they
strewed dust on their heads in sorrow, or they sank into the dust and perished
through oppression. ‘The least property of the poor excited their cupidity, and some
think that they “ grudged him even the dust which as a mourner he strewed on
his head, since it too was earth.” They turned “aside the way of the meek,” in-
jured their character, invaded their rights, and put hindrances in their path. — It is
sad when men take pleasure in trampling upon the poor, and grudge servants the
smallest luxury and advantage. ‘Those who rob others to increase their own store,
who act unjustly and over-reach the simple and meek, “ will receive the greater
condemnation.” God will reckon with them. “Riches profit not in the day of
wrath.” “What shall I do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth what shall
IT answer him?” 3. They practised incest. ‘A man and his father will go in unto
the same maid.” Prostitution was a part of the filthy worship of idols, and the
_ damsel s)oken of is probably one of the prostitutes belonging to the temple. ‘This
sin was most abominable and worthy of death. Cf. Lev. xviii. 7,15; xx. 11. Or
if prostitution is not intended, we have a daring contempt of the commands of God
(Lev. xxii. 32). Modesty will have little influence upon those who disregard jus.
tice. The name of God will be profaned by those who honour not the nature of
man, Father and son forget their filial duties and disgrace themselves by the same
erime. “Tam the Lord, and ye shall not defile my holy name! For I will be
sanctified among the children of Israel.” 4. They desecrated the sanctuary. (1)j
By unlaufully keeping the pledges of the poor. ‘‘ They lay themselves down upon
elothes laid to pledge.” Ifa poor man pawned his upper dress which was his only
bed, it was to be returned to him before night (x. xxii. 25); and a garment. se
pledged was noi to be slept on (Deut. xxiv. 12, 13). But creditors kept the gan


OuAP. IT. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 255





ments, treated them as their own property, and stretched themselves in luxuriant
ease “by every altar.” In shameless publicity and hard-heartedness they lay on
the garments of the poor and despoiled. They avowed their sins and insulted the
true God by the altars of false gods. (2) By drunken feasts in idolatrous temples.
“They drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God.” They fined
the poor, and were paid in liquor or expended the money in wine. What they got
by injustice they spent in sensuality. They added revelry to oppression, and the
wine which they poured out in libations or drank at idolatrous feasts was the price
of innocent blood. Idols may not refuse such abominable sacrifices, but God will
not accept them. “For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt-
_ offering.”
Not such the service the benignant Father

Requireth at his earthly children’s hands ;
Not the poor offering of vain rites, but rather

The simple duty man from man demands [ Whittier}.


II, The aggravation of Israel’s guilt. God’s benefits should strengthen our grati-
tude. He requires much from those to whom much is given. Israel’s guilt is
measured by Israel’s privileges. They despised the blessings and neglected the
warnings they received from God (ver. 9—11). 1. Israel was indebted to God for
its national existence. He created them for his own peculiar people, preserved them
from danger, and kept them in continued existence. (1) He redeemed them from
bondage. “I brought you up from the land of Egypt.” Mercies to our ancestors
are blessings to us, for we could not exist without them. Past deliverances should
never be forgotten. They should keep alive our gratitude and bind us to duty.
God dates our benefits that we may remember them. If we despise his kindness,
we aggravate our guilt. England has a wonderful past, and the present generation
should not forget God’s benefits. “ He hath not dealt so with any nation.” (2)
He defended them in danger. “Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them,” &c.
The Amorites were the most powerful of the Canaanites and most terrible to Israel.
Joshua, rehearsing God’s kindness, places the destruction of the Amorites as one of
the most prominent deeds to Israel. “ I brought you into the land of the Amorites
which dwelt on the other side of Jordan, and I destroyed them before you.” The
greater the danger, the greater should be our gratitude for deliverance. The more
God displays his leve and power towards us, the more should we keep his law and
praise his name. (3) He guided them in their journeys. “Led you forty years
through the wilderness.” This reminded them of innumerable blessings in the
course of their existence. Manna from heaven and water from the rock ; deliver-
ance from serpents and manifold perils; provoking sins and unqualified mercy ;
human guides and Divine presence. God led them and gave them possession of the
land, for they did not get it by their own numbers and skill. Thus were they
raised up and defended; planted in their inheritance and preserved in their exist-
ence. What echoes of the past resounded in their laws! The mercies of to-day
remind us of the miracles of yesterday. Past and present, memory and law,
remind us of our duty. “And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord
thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness.” 2. Israel was indebted to
God for inspired teachers. “ And I raised up of your sons for prophets.” From
the beginning to the end of their existence they were not left without light and
instruction. Men of sanctity and power, like Elijah and Elisha, were sent unto
them, filled with wisdom and the Holy Spirit. Messenger after messenger rebuked
their sins and revealed the will of God. They were never left without a witness
of God’s presence and a prophet to teach them. “Since the day that your fathers
came forth out of the land of Egypt, unto this day, I have even sent unto you all
my servants the prophets, <laily rising up early and sending them.” 3. Israel was
trdebted to God for noble ecumples. ‘‘ And of your yourg men for Nazarites.”
Prophets instruct, exampies show that tnase instructions may be put into practice,


256 HOMILETTC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [CHAP gy,


neem = none meerrnemennE





They are visible illustrations both of the possibility of doing what is enjoined and
of the method in which it is done. Hence the proverbs, “‘ Example is more power-
ful than precept ;” “Precepts lead, examples draw ;” “ Every art is best taught by
example.” The Nazarites were noble specimens of temperance and self-control, ex-
amples of men who vow and are able by God’s grace to keep the vow. We are
more apt to learn through the eye than the ear, and what is seen in fact makes a
deeper impression upon the mind. Israel were blessed with men, living among
them day by day, to quicken attention and incite to the obedience of that law
which they despised. Men who counteracted the evil and gave an impulse to the
virtuous tendencies of the age. Young men who are examples of self-denial and
devotedness to God are an honour to any country. They are monuments of God’s
grace, living reproofs of the impiety of the day, and deserve to be imitated in their
spirit and conduct. “I have given you am example that ye should do as I have
done.” 4. Israel did not acknowledge her indebtedness to God for theseprivileges. They
sought not to walk in the light, but to extinguish it. They perverted God’s gifts
into occasions for greater sin. (a) They tempted the Nazarite to break his vow

“ But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink.” It is a horrid sin when men will
neither be holy themselves, nor let others keep the law of God. It is the height
of ingratitude to abuse the temperate and seek to destroy their character. Yet such
crimes are committed in England to-day. Sons of temperance are tempted to break
their pledge (Num. vi. 2, 3); self-denial is considered weakness, and pious men are
exposed to ridicule and contempt. Young men are often surprised and allured, re-
proached and frightened, into sin, ‘ And so,” says a quaint author, “many do the
tempter’s work.” (6) They sought to silence the prophet in his teaching. ‘Com-
manded the prophets, saying, Prophesy not.” The guilty conscience hates reproof.
The godly teacher irritates the sinner, and God’s servants are often threatened if
they hold not their tongue. Jezebel swore by her gods to destroy Elijah (1 Kings
xix. 2, 3). Amaziah silenced the prophet: “ Art thou made of the king’s counsel 9
forbear. Why shouldest thou be smitten?’ Jeremiah had to face hatred, mock-
ery, and imprisonment. The chief priests sought to silence the apostles, first by
command, then by scourges, and lastly by persecution. If God’s ministers will not
preach evil tidings, they will be unmolested; but when they proclaim the judg-
ments of God on the sins of men, then nations rise up in authority and opposition.
“‘ Wherefore dost thou prophesy ?” (Jer. xxxii. 3). Those who deaden the voice
of God within, and silence the word of God without them, leave no means of access
to the soul or the people. Dreadful is the doom of those who harden themselves
against the gospel, and refuse its last offers of mercy from its faithful ministers

Such were Israel’s guilt and Israel’s punishment. “ They would none of my coun

sel: they despised all my reproof: therefore shall they eat of the fruit of thei
own way, and be filled with their own devices.” III. The severe punishment for
Israel’s guilt (ver. 13—16). Base contempt for covenant mercies God will visit
with severe punishment, The long-suffering of God will at length be wearied out
by obstinaate sinners and ungrateful nations. 1. Punishment most crushing.
Taking the words as alluding “ to the force of war, under which even the bravest
and most able heroes will succumb.” God threatens to oppress them most heavily.
As the cart full of sheaves presses the ground; so God would press them down,
by war and the effects of war. This is a fit retribution for their own oppression,
robbery, and injustice to the poor. Judgments in number and variety would fill
the land, and distress would overcome its inhabitants. Bradford the martyr said,
“ He that will not tremble in threatening shall be crushed in pieces in feeling.”
Men through their own sins often have to say, “ We were pressed out of measure
above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life.” 2. Punishment most
inevitable. The judgments are fixed and inevitable, and none can escape except by
repentance, the door of which is never shut in these Divine threatenings, (1) The
est/t cannot flee away. “The flight shall perish from the swift.” Men are afraid


oBAP. 1J.? HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. ot


Lt PO.





and wish to escape from the judgments of God. But it is too late, and .the escape
's impossible. “ He that is swift of foot shall not deliver himself.” A horse will
be a vain thing in that day for safety. ‘Neither shall he that rideth the horse
deliver himself” from his pursuers. (2) The strong cannot defend themselves.
“ The strong shall not strengthen his force” against the power of God. Military
hosts are not a match for an angry God. “The mighty,” who may have protected
others, shall not “deliver himself” then. ‘There is no king saved by the multi-
tude of a host ; a mighty man is not delivered by much strength” (Ps. xxxiii. 16),
Weapons of war will be of no avail. “Neither shall he stand that handleth the
bow.” 3. The courageous cannot withstand the attack. ‘‘ He that is courageous
among the mighty shall flee away.” ‘The most spirited and brave, the most firm-
souled and mighty, cannot deliver themselves. What a picture. Fear will disable
the skilled archer. The strong will be bereft of his might. Panic will seize all
ranks, and those who flee cannot escape. ‘‘ A kingdom for a horse,” cried one in
battle, but in the day of judgment every means of strength, resistance, and escape
will fail. Those who make not God their refuge, shall find none for themselves in
the day of visitation. ‘‘ Many among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken,
and be snared, and be taken” (Is, viii. 15 ; Amos ix. 2).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7. God had laid down the
equality of man, made in his own image,
and had forbidden to favour either poor
(Ex. xxii. 3) or rich (Ib. 6). Amos
calls these by different names, which
entitled them to human sympathy ;
poor, depressed, lowly ; poor, in their
absolute condition ; depressed, as having
been brought low ; lowly, as having the
spécial grace of their state, the wonder-
ful meekness and lowliness of the godly
poor [ Pusey].


fies them into sons of Anak. “T de-
stroyed ” (emphatic). God uproots all
fears, extirpates all enemies, and leaves
neither “fruit from above” nor “ roots
from beneath.” Not merely cut down,
but plucked up, and no chance of spring-
ing into existence again. A complete
and irrecoverable destruction. This—
1. Displays power. 2. Should excite
confidence; and 3, Stimulate progress.

Ver. 10. God’s fidelity towards
Israel contrasted with Israel’s conduct


Ver. 9. God removes difficulties out towards God (Deut. ii. 7; viii, 2. Cf
wf the way. ‘The pilgrim often magni- Mice. vi. 4).
HOMILETICS.


CuRISTIA® ~XtGRIMAGE.— Verse 10.


Life is a pilgrimage ; but all »_gri*o not consider themselves “ strangers ” on
earth. Had God intended this worle .. be the home of his people, he would have
made better accommodation. But they seek a country, even a heavenly one.

I. The destination. ‘To possess the land of the Amorite.” Canaan was
promised to the Jews, and though in the possession of the enemies, yet God drove
out the heathen and planted them (Ps. xliv. 2). A people numerous, warlike,
and strongly fortified, were overturned by a feeble nation. The oaks of Bashan
were torn up to plant his chosen vine. God now gives his people inheritance of
faith and knowledge, puts them in possession of wealth and vantage-ground on
earth, and will give them rest in heaven. II. The starting-point. “ I brought
you up from the land of Egypt.” The local and political elevation of Israel set
forth the deliverance and dignity of the Christian. All are found in the house of
bondage, under the dommnion and lash of sin. Egypt is the starting-place of Israel ;
the City of Destruction, for the Pilgrim. All are found in a state of degradation
and alienation from God. From a lower “t¢’s people are called to a higher con

17


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [oHar. 1.


dition, translated from the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of light. III
The way. “Through the wilderness.” After leaving Egypt, Israel were literally
in the wilderness. A dreary solitary place, full of privations and perils. The
world comparatively is a wilderness. It is not the rest, the home of God’s people.
It is polluted by sin, and unsuited to their moral nature. We must not form at-
tachments and secure possessions which bind us here. “ Here we have no continu-
ing city.” We must avoid the zompany and renounce the maxims of the world.
Our happiness is not here ; it is more elevated and on high.


All, all on earth is shadow; all beyond
Is substance: the reverse is vee creed ;
How solid all, where change shall be no more!


IV. The leader. “I brought you up.” Their safety and joy sprung from God’s
care. The pillar of fire by night and the pillar of cloud by day, went before them
and never left them. Moses and Aaron could not guide them. Hence the request,
“If thy presence go not with us,” &c. God conducts his children now by his
Spirit, providence, and word. He will never leave nor forsake them till they have
entered the land of promise. He “led them up through the wilderness, for his
mercy endureth for ever.” V, The time. “ Forty years through the wilderness.”
A considerable period, but appointed by God. What scenes and memories would
it recall! What proofs of God’s power, goodness, and truth! What displays of in-
gratitude, impatience, and rebellion! Thus God reminds us of important crises in
our life, that we may thank him for his goodness, ncte the progression of time, end
wepare for our journey’s end. “These forty years the Lord thy God hath been
with thee ; thou hast lacked nothing.”


Our life is a dream; our time as a shadow
Glides swiftly away;
And the fugitive moment refuses to stay.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


us with benefits, but we heap up sins


Ver. 11. 1. The gift of prophecy
upon him. IJ. The pressure of insults,


and the institution of the Nazarites are


considered special blessings to the na-
tion. 2. This effort to purify society
from a special evil is said to be of Divine
origin. “J raised up your young men.”
3. This method of sobering the people
must be as wise and necessary now as
then. ‘ We learn from these verses the
importance attached by God to the
Nazarite class, and also that their pre-
eminent characteristic was abstinence
from wine. Jehovah claims to have
raised up a succession of prophets and
Nazarites, and the attempt to subvert
the fidelity of the Nazarites is coupled
as asin with the impious effort to silence
the teachers of the nation, and the organs
of the Almighty ” [Temp. Com.].

Ver. 13. .God pressed down with
man’s iniquity is the sense in which
many take these words. I. The pres-
sure of ingratitude. God daily loadeth


Insult to his Being, Word, and provi-
dence. In whatever light we look upoa
evil, it is a burden to God and his works.
God faints not in the upholding and
government of the world. But he grows
weary with our iniquities (Isa. xliii. 24);
and creation groans beneath its weigh
(Rom, viii. 22). In another senso he
carries our sins and will take them fron.
us. Then if delivered from sin, we
shall not be crushed by judgments.

The judgments of God. With what
patience God bears with man’s sin!
Three transgressions are followed by ea
fourth ; sin is multiplied bv sin, before
he inflicts punishments ; but impenitent
sinners may be sure, that if Divine
patience lingers, not willing that any
should perish, yet their judgment “‘ lin
gereth not, and their damnation slum
bereth not.”


“HAY. IL)





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


264


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER UI.


Ver. 1—3. Bones burned. “The
wickedness appears to have consisted in
a wanton violation of the sanctity of the
tomb, by the disinterment and burning
of the royal remains. It was indicative
of an enmity which was not satisfied
with inflicting every possible injury
upon its victim while living, but pur-
sued him even into the regions of the
dead.” To exhume, burn, and disperse
the bones of the dead, has often been
adopted as a way of showing indignity.
The bones of Wycliffe were disinterred
and burnt, and Cromwell’s remains were
most indignantly treated.

Ver. 4,5. vil examples. As com-
panions are the objects of choice, admir-
ation, and affection, the repulsiveness of
vice is lost sight of amidst so much that
is attractive. In short, though the vices
of a companion be gross and palpable to
mvhers, yet, as Shakspeare says, “a
iriendly eye cannot see such faults”
| Brewer].

Evil examples are like pestilential
liseases—

‘fhe virtuous son is ill at ease

When the lewd father gave the dire disease.

[Pope.]

Ver. 6—8. Oppression. To rob and
yppress the rich is a great sin; but to
rob and oppress the poor is a greater:
but to rob and oppress the poor, because
he is poor and wants money to buy
justice, is the top of all inhumanity and
wnpiety. To oppress any one is a sin;
but to oppress the oppressed is the
height of sin. Poverty and want should
he motives to pity ; but oppressors make
them whetstones of their cruelty and
jeverity, and therefore the Lord will
lead the cause of his poor oppressed
against their oppressors without fee or
fear [ Brooks].

Ver. 9, 10. Wilderness, An Em-
peror of Persia, who designed to go om


a journey into Media, durst not provews
on account of the vast quantity of scor-
pions that were lying round about the
road. He sent a great number of stout
fellows to destroy these terrible creatures,
promising a superior reward to him
who killed most, Till this execution
was over he durst not venture his digni-
fied person abroad [ Whitecrose].

Wer, 12, A man once called upona
puv..can to settle an account, in a village
near Hivin, and was asked to take a
dram. The man was a member of a
Temperance Society and declined. The
publican first began to ridicule and then
to tempt him, saying that he would give
him a real good one, and that besides, a
gin dram would not be objected to. The
simple man at length yielded, and having
yielded was ~nore ready to sink before
other less powerful temptations. He
did so, and is no longer a temperate man


nor a member of a society. The con-


duct of the publican was most atrocious
in tempting a man, when he knew his
conscientious reasons fo votal abstinence.
If his unhappy victim die the death of
the drunkard, who will say he is guilt-
less of the loss of that man’s soul?
[ Whitecross],

Ver. 14—16. Swift. The mighty
hosts of Persia were no defence at the
battle of Arbela. Napoleon led more
than half a million of men into Russia,
but could not escape the danger by re-
treat. His valiant guards could neither
uphold his empire nor protect his per-
son at Waterloo, when he cried out—
“Tt is all over; save yourselves who
can.”


‘Not the chief his serried lances,
Not his strength secures the brave ;
All in vain the war-horse prances,
Weak his force his lord to save.’’
[Richard Mant,}


260 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. (cHar. m.





CHAPTER III.


?


Critica Notrs.] Hear] Cf. beginning of chaps. v. & vi., indicating this chap. to be one
whole address. Whole] Though the ten tribes threatened, yet all Israel are concerned and warned.
2. Known] Not only love and care, but gracious fellowship and treatment (Ex. xix. 5; Deut. iv.
20) ; “including both the motive and result of election.” 8. Two] Tha prophet and the Spirit of
God. Israel did not believe that God threatened such denunciations by the prophets (ch. vi. 1—3;
i. 7, 8). Amos spoke because God commanded him. 4, Lion] roars when the prey is before it,
before it actually seizes it, and there is no possibility of escape. ‘‘ After tac roar there immediately
follows both slaughter and laceration. For asa rule it only roars with that sharp roar when it has
the prey in sight, upon which it immediately springs.’”’ A young lion] which goes in pursuit of prey,
and is distinguished from the one that lies silent until the old one brings rrey near; then the scent
rouses him. 5. Bird] God not only has the nation ripe for judgment in his power, but the judg-
ment is deserved, As birds are not taken without the net of the fowler, and he does not take it u
until he has secured his prey, so God not only threatens, but is prepared to execute. 6. Trumpet
blown in the city alarms every one ; the coming evil should ~ use from self-security (Ezek. xxxiii.
1—5). 7%. Lord] This explains all the similes. God is tle author of these calamities. Pro-
phot being servants of God, must obey him in setting fort! Judgments upon Israel (Jer. xx. 9;

zek. ix, 11), 8.] As when the lion roars all men fear, so when God speaks I must prophesy ee
iv. 20; v. 29). 9. Publish] upon (the floor of) the paiaces, some; others, over them, to call the
princes and inhabitants to hear and see the acts of violence, and testify against Israel. ‘* Ashdod,
one of the Philistian capitals, is mentioned by way of example, as a chief city of the uncircumcised,
who were regarded by Israel as godless heathen ; and Egypt is mentioned along with it as the nation
whose unrighteousness and ungodliness had once been experienced by Israel to satiety. If therefore
such heathen as these are called to behold the unrighteous and dissolute conduct to be seen in the
palaces, it must have been great indeed” [Ke7/]. Tumults] Heb. deno:es a state of confusion and
noise in which order and justice are overthrown by open violence. 2%, Regard not] Not merely
ignorant, but cherish a state of mind hostile to knowledge. Moral corruption blinded the power of
discernment, so that the magnates of Samaria had no regard for right, 11.] Whatever was boasted of
would be removed. 12.] By an appropriate and pastoral image the prophet declares that if a scanty
remnant escape it will only be by miracle, like fragments of sheep left by the lion. Grandees who
sit on costly divans and rest in ease will escape with great difficulty (ch. vi. 1—4). 18, Hear]
Addressed to heathen who have now to witness the punishment upon Israel. 14 Altars] Venge-
ance upon the centre from which spread the evils (1 Kings xii. 32). Horns] destroyed in utter
contempt and desolation (Ex. xxvii. 2). 15. Houses] Eastern monarchs have summer and winter
residences : the former upon mountains or in forests, the latter in cities and sheltered situations
(Judg. iii. 20; Jer. xxxvi. 22). Ivory] Houses and palaces richly ornamented with this materiai
will be entirely ruined. Samaria is threatened with the overthrow of its palaces, and the extermina-
tion_of its people. Nothing will avail if righteousness be wanting in the day of the Lord (Prov. x. 2),


HOMILETICS.


Gop’s CHASTISEMENT OF A CovENANT ProPLE.— Verses 1, 2.


Before the end of chastisement can be answered its nature must be discerned.
In itself it may seem of no moment, but when viewed as the expression of God’a
purpose it is significant. Israel therefore should hear, for God Himself speaks and
will punish. Thrice does Amos address the same solemn call to a nation whose
former favours do not exempt from impending ruin—“ Hear this word.”

I. The grounds for chastisement. God always deals wisely, and often gives
reasons for certain proceedings against us. The grounds of Israel’s punishment are
specified. 1. Peculiar relationship abused. (1) Individually abused—* children of
Israel.” Each member of the tribes, every person in the nation, was owned and cared
for by God. (2) Socially abused—* the whole family.” God separated them from
others, and united them into one family. This was a natural protest against self-
ishness, a merciful design to secure obedience to the Supreme Lawvgiver, and a
method of Divine mercy to mankind. “At that time will I be the God of all the
families of Israel.” But Israel cherished not the disposition of children and dis-


€HAP. II. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 26.





owned their relation to God. “If I be your father where is mine honour?” 2.
Distinguished privileges neglected. “ WhichI brought up from the land of Egypt.”
They were redeemed from bondage and brought up, led to Canaan. This redemp-
tion was like a second creation, and a special ground for gratitude. But God’s
goodness to the nation was forgotten, and his gifts despised. Remarkable deliver-
ances are remembered by God, and should be improved by us. 3. Special obliga-
tions denied. God blessed and loved them like no other people. ‘ You only have
I known of all the families of the earth.” Others were aliens; they were children.
They were distinguished by rank and favour, ‘‘ made aspecial people unto himself,
above all people that are upon the face of the earth.” But they dishonoured their
character, and violated their obligations to God. Iniquity in some is disobedience
to express commands, revolt against Divine authority, and the addition of ingrati-
tude to sin. “ Forget not all his benefits.” II. The design of chastisement.
The nearer to God the greater the fall from him, Professors can either praise or
profane the name of God. Their sins are more provoking than those of other men.
They are against greater light, a higher principle of life, and more exalted relation-
ship. God will not wink at sin in his most favoured children. ‘ Therefore will
I punish you for all your iniquities.” 1. Punishment to purify moral character.
God will have all his children to be like him. Bastards may escape, but sons must
be chastised. Luther cried, “Strike on, Lord, strike on, for now I know that I
am thy child.” ‘As a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth
thee.” 2. Punishment to fit for greater service. Afflictions remind us of forgotten
duty, give discipline for future life, and fit us for a world of sin and sorrow. They
make us more fervent and holy, stronger with God and more pitiful to men.


“ More skilful in self-knowledge, ever more pure
As tempted more; more able to endure
As more exposed to suffering and distress ;
Thence also more alive to tenderness” [ Wordsworth].


3. Punishment to warn others of danger. ‘“‘ Against the whole family” was the
judgment denounced. They were the elect and beloved of God, but their sins
only deepened their guilt and made them a warning to others. The lessons
imparted to one people are for the benefit of another. There is unity and aim in
the moral life of all nations. Exalted privileges everywhere bring heavier respon-
sibility, and shameful abuse severer punishment. Hear this word of the Lord.
For “ the time is come that judgmer:t must begin at the house of God; and if it
first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?”


Divine INTENTIONS AND EXEcUTIONS.-—Verses 3—8.


In a few similes drawn from daily life, the prophet answers objections which
break the force of his threatenings and establishes his right to prophesy. The
words might -be taken to describe the nature of the punishment mentioned in vers,
1&2. 1. It is from God and not any secondary source. 2. It is deserved. 3.
It is prepared. 4. It will certainly be executed. 5. There is no possibility of
escape. ‘“ As the net does not spring up without catching the bird, that has sent
it up by flying upon it, can ye imagine that when the destruction passes by, ye
will not be seized by it, but will escape without injury” [Hitzig]? We shall take
the words as a solemn warning to rouse careless sinners, and show that word and
deed are one with God. He will execute what he threatens.

I. Threatening is identified with execution. Threats are not simply to
frighten men. Punissment will not come, unless it has been prepared. 1. Pun-
ishment is intended. You have no need to presume on God’s favours and God’s
presence with you. You do not agree and walk with God. You forget his law,
and dishonour his uame. There is a reason for the severity. If you walk con
trary to God, he will not walk with you. If we gpieve the Holy Spirit and


262 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [cHaP. Ru








offend God, they will depart from us. 2. Punishment will be executed. God will
not warn of calamity unless there be fit objects of his indignation. His threats
are not empty sounds. He has said and will do, spoken and will perform. The
lion only roars when he is about to spring on his prey, and God only threatens when
he is about to punish. He can neither lie nor change ; he is faithful and true.
II. Execution must be traced to God himself. The word and the providence cf
God declare this. 1. God's servant declares the truth. God has revealed his
secrets to the prophet, and he utters the purpose of God and not his own. What
right had he to speak? some would say, and the reply is: he was the servant of
God, specially called and qualified. He shunned not “to declare the whole coun-
sel of God.” His strength consisted in knowing that he was doing his Master's
will, and speaking his Master’s word. ‘The Lord hath spoken, who can but pre-
phesy?” 2. God’s providence entrapped the nation. Calamities which befall nations
and kingdoms do not happen by chance. God’s hand must be seen in them. If
a bird is caught in the snare, the snare was designed for it. So when a people
are involved in judgments, God has prepared the peril and misery for them, And
as no fowler takes up the net without securing tha prey, neither will God with
draw his judgments until he has accomplished 4is purpose. Men may resist '))
truth, but it is seen every day. Misfortunes as pumsnments are not casual, bus

come from God. They have a real author, a definite cause, and a special aim.
(od sends them in righteous retribution, determines beforehand who shail suffer,
aud who escape. ‘‘ He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that
teacheth man knowledge, shall he not know” (Ps. xciv. 7, 9; Mic. vi. 9)? III.
Warning is given before the execution of threatening. In the last image the
prophet seeks to rouse them to a sense of danger before it be too late. Repent-
ance may break the snare, and men may be delivered in mercy. 1. The alarm is
given. ‘Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid?”
They heed the sound which warns of approaching danger, tremble in fear, and seek
to escape. Or when the punishment has actually come, they ascribe it to the right
source, and humble themselves before God. ‘Shall there be evil in a city and
the Lord hath not done it?” 2. The danger is made known. “The lion hath
roared, who will not fear?” &c. God speaks through his servants, who reveal his
hatred to sin, and his justice in punishing it. He has always warned of the danger
before it actually comes. ‘Thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn
them from me.” The living ministry and the written scripture are a perpetual
warning to men of a judgment to come. Be not found unprepared. We may
repent now, but if we obstinately continue in sin God will be just in the punish-
ment of it. ‘I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts,
because they have not hearkened unto my words nor to my law, but rejected it.”


WALKING IN AGREEMENT WITH Gop.—Verse 3.


Taking these words generally we learn—

I. Agreement with God is necessary to walking with God. “Can two walk
together except they be agreed?” God and the sinner are not in agreement.
They are at variance in heart and life. There is nothing common between them.
They are opposite, as two travellers walking in different directions. Those who
justify self and disobey God, must recognize their guilt, and avail themselves of
the blood of Jesus. They must agree with God—1l. In disposition. 2. In cha
racter. 3. In.conduct. There is a basis for friendship in Christ, and men may
live at peace with God. “Be ye reconciled to God.” tr Agreement with God
will show itself in walking with God. Friendship naturally develops itself in
unity of mind and pursuit, in acts of gratitude and love. David and Jonathan
were real frienda, and walked together. Abraham was the friend of God because
he obeyed Goo and had perfect confidence in him. If we are agreed with God,
we eh!) seek to please and obey him. Our life will be like that of Enoch, a car


CHAP. III.J HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : AMOS.





stant, habitual, daily walk with God. Walking together is a common act of
human fellowship, indicating “evenness and similarity of gait,” interchange of
thought and opmion, and anxious desire to “keep step.” Walking implies action
and progress, Our life should be devoted to God, and our deeds performed
through and for God. If we are God’s people, his will will be the rule and his
glory the end of our life in all things. “Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever
things I command you.” III. Disagreement with God will interrupt walking
with God. “Can two walk together except they be agreed?” When com-
panions disagree they never walk together. Sin is disagreement with God.
separates from him, and puts us in opposition to his will and word. It is a breach
of the agreement, and a step in a crooked direction; “ For what fellowship hath
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with dark.
ness?” Outward profession, without love and conformity to God, will prevent us
walking with God. Insincerity of any kind will grieve the Holy Spirit and offend
God. God will never walk with us unless we walk with him. God is ready to
walk with us, “But if ye walk contrary unto me” (margin, “at adventures with
me,” or another reading, “‘ at hap-hazard with me,” in jerking, spasmodic fashion),
“then will I also walk contrary unto you” (Lev. xxvi.).


“ My business now is with my God to walk,
And guided by his holy eye to go;
Sweet fellowship with him to cultivate,
And his unclouded countenance to know” [J. F Ehwint


PREPARATION FOR Revivat.— Verse 3,


The believer is agreed with God concerning the Divine law; that it is “ hoy,
and just, and good”—that a breach of the law should be visited with penalty ;
agreed with God in the atonement for sin which God has provided in Christ ; and at
one with God in his ove of holiness. This agreement gives us power to walk with
God. As a Church our hearts are set upon a revival of religion in our midst. We
need as the first and most essential thing that God should walk with us. If we
desire his presence we must perfectly agree with him bot? ™ the design of the
work and the method of it.

I. Let us avow our desire that in our present efforts we may walk with
God, otherwise our strivings after revival will be wearisome, and always end in
disappointment. If we are not favoured by God’s presence in our attempts at
revival, prayer will be greatly dishonoured and the Church left in a worse condition
than it was before. Consider the blessings which flow from God’s presence upon
the ministry, the Church, and the congregation, and let this confirm your desire.
II. If we would have the presence of God, it is necessary that we should be
agreed with him We must be agreed with him as to the end of our Christian
existence ; as to real desirableness and necessity of the conversion of souls; as to
the means to be used in revival, and as to our utter helplessness in this work. If
any good should be done all the glory must be given to him. III. Let us put
away all those things which offend our God. Before God appeared at Sinai
Israel had to cleanse themselves for three days. {o here. Is there pride in me?
Am I slothful? Am I guilty of worldliness? Am ' covetous? Am I of an angry
spirit? Is there any Just inme? If so God wii not walk with me. If the
Master’s spirit is in you, and you long to see brighter and better days, lift up your
heads with confidence in him who will walk with us if we be agreed with him


[ Spurgeon}.
HOMILETIO HINTS AND OUTIINES.


Ver. 3—7. In these verses are “J#e | vernment in the affairs of the world and
Parables all showing God’s moral gr» his Church : and that nothing in the








history uf either happens by chance, but
is ordered by him, using the natural
elements and the greatest nations of the
world as instruments for the punish-
ment of sins committed after deliberate
warning, and for the manifestation of
his power and glory [ Wordsworth].

Ver. 3. Walking with God. 1. As
individuals we must be reconciled with
him. 2. As churches, co-operate with
him. 3. As a nation, promote his glory.

Ver. 6. The voice of God in the city.
No chance, fate, nor second cause has
sent the evil. It must all be traced to
God. His voice must be heard—1l. In
the consciences of its people. They have
a presentiment of danger at the sound
of the trumpet, hasten together and
devise means of escape. However stupid
and blind in sin, God has a witness
within men, that sin brings sorrow, and
is the cause of their misery. Hence
the appeal, “Shall there be evil in a
city, and the Lord hath not done it”
2. In judgments upon its sins. Drunk-
enness, debauchery, neglect of God's
house, and contempt of his word. “ Evil
is of two sorts, evil of sin and evil of
punishment. There is no other; for
evil of nature, or evil of fortune, are
evils, by God’s providence, punishing
the evil of sin. Evil which is sin the
Lord hath not done; evil which is
punishment for sin the Lord bringeth.
The providence of God governing and
controlling all things, man doth ill
which he wills, so as to suffer ills which
he wills not” [Pusey].

Ver. 7. In this verse a high honour
is vindicated to the prophetical office.
The holy men of God were, by inspira-
tion, entrusted with a knowledge of the
Divine purposes, in so far as it was
necessary for them to divulge them to
the world [A. Eizas].


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


{cwaP. In





Our darkness does not comprehend the
light. God imparts understanding, the
threatenings become more solemn, and
the promises more precious. 2. In the
revelation of his will to man. God has
spoken to men through patriarchs, pro-
phets, and apostles. He speaks to us
by the ministry now, and does nothing
without disclosing it to his servants.
This has ever been the law of the Divine
procedure. Nothing is coming upon
men which has not been revealed, ‘“ The
grand outlines of the plan of Divine
providence, and the events of history,
to this day and to the end of the world,
were made known to the prophets of
Israel and Judah, and a very large pro-
portion of them, many ages before they
took place; so that a general history of
mankind, as to the most important facts,
might be composed from their writings ”
[Scott in loco].

Ver. 8, Who can but. The intensity
of feeling expressed in these words in-
dicates—1. An inward struggle. Shall
I keep back or proclaim the unwelcome
truth? Shall I alienate some, harden
others, and render myself unpopular
(Jer. xx. 9; Ezek. xxxiii. 7)? Here
under depressing influence. To such in-
quiries the answer is, “ The Lord God
hath spoken.” 2. The declaration of @
necessity. Every true servant must utter
the word given to him. Moses, though
slow of tongue ; Isaiah, of polluted lips;
and Jeremiah, though a child, were not
excused. ‘The apostles were influenced
by this spirit (Acts iv. 20) ; and Paul ex-
claimed, ‘“ Necessity is laid upon me,
yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the
gospel.” 3. The assertion of a law.
God calls and commands his prophets,
their own spirits prompt them: hence
they cannot hesitate or refuse; they
must speak, whether men will hear or


God's secrets with his servants, 1. forbear. ‘ Who can but prophesy 3”
In the spiritual insight into his word.
: HOMILETICS.


NationaL Canamitizs.— Verses 9—12.


The gins of Israel are to be punished, and heathen nations are summoned to
witness. This turn in the address indicates the exceeding sinfulness of the sins
such as to surprise the heathen and put Israel to shame.


onAP. IIT. J HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 265





I. National guilt. Sin brings shame. From the heights around the injustice
of Israel is beheld, 1. Moral sensibility impaired. “They know not to do right.”
God has planted a sense of right in the breast of every one. This should be
cultivated and strengthened. Indulgence in sin blunts this moral sensibility, and
men at length become unable to do and perceive good. The love of evil blinds
the power of discernment, and brings moral corruption (Jer. iv. 22). “I would
have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil.” 2. Pudiic
justice perverted. Courts of law were the scenes of injustice, and the rights of the
people were neither known nor cared for. The poor were oppressed. God and
his law were set at nought, violence and robbery prevailed, and evil customs reigned
supreme, 3, Shameless fraud committed. ‘Who store up violence and robbery
in their palaces.” One sin leads to another. Riches gained by fraud will never
be used as means of benevolence and justice. All oppression is cruel; but to
defraud the poor to increase unrighteous wealth is aggravation most insulting to
God (Ps. xi. 5; xii. 5). Men may store up their treasures, and fill their palaces,
so crush the poor and cheapen their luxuries. But “sin pays its servants very
bad wages,” says a quaint author; “for it gives the very reverse of what it pro-
mised. While the sin of oppression promises mountains of gold, it brings them
poverty and ruin. Injuries done to the poor are sorely resented by the God of
mercy, who is the poor man’s friend, and will break in pieces his oppressor.”
“The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them, because they refuse to do judg-
ment.” II. National disorder. “ Behold the great tumults in the midst thereof.”
Injustice and cruelty in the upper will ever bring alarm and confusion in the lower
classes. A people intent on gain, turning law upside down, will create great
tumults. National honour has been stained, and a reign of terror introduced by
national disorders. Tumults have darkened the pages in the history of Greece,
Jost some of the noblest sons of Rome, and been terrible punishments to France.
Let England remember that licentiousness and cruelty, fraud and oppression, will
create confusion in the people ; that wealth unlawfully gained, and unjustly stored ;
that mammon and pleasure habitually worshipped, will only “ treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.”
III. . ational disgrace. It is a shame to any person to have his guilt and
punish. ent revealed to others. ‘ Every nation,” says Ryan, “is ashamed when
its disgrace is proclaimed to other nations, and especially if those nations are
remarkable for their hostility to it. Of all nations that have ever existed, the
Israelites were most vulnerable in this respect. ‘The position which they were
taught to maintain, the exclusiveness of that system which was given to them of
God, made them conspicuous objects of attention to other people, and exposed
them most completely to the language of reproach and scorn in the day of their
humiliation.” But God puts men to shame now, to keep them from everlasting
shame and contempt. IV. National invasion. Civil discord would be followed
by the ravages of an invading enemy. “An adversary” would hem them in on
all sides, encircle the land and assault their habitations. 1. Power which they
abused shall be taken away. “He shall bring down thy strength from thee.”
They would be bereft of all strength and resources on which they depended (Prov.
x. 15). When God is angry strength will prove weakness, and wealth end in
poverty. 2. Palaces which they stored shall be destroyed. “Thy palaces shall be
destroyed.” alaces are no defence to fraud and oppression. 3. There would be
a general and complete overthrow of the kingdom, with ony 4 remnant of escape.
The rulers had been guilty of oppression and robbery ; disregarded these evus in
others, notwithstanding the tumults and disorders they created; and filled their
palaces with the fruits of robbery. But as an appropriate punishment their
violence should be broken, and their wealth stolen from them. “The spoilerr
must themselves be spoiled.”

“To wrong-doers the revolution of time brings retribution ” (Shakspears.


ob HOMILKTIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.








(cHae, 111.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 9, 10. God’s assessors in judg-
ment. The character assigned to the
inhabitants of Philistia and Egypt is
virtually that of assessors, who not only
take cognizance of, but concur in the
judgment executed (cf.- ver. 13, lit.
“Hear ye and testify against the house
of Jacob”). From this we learn that
in the execution of his righteous judg-
ments God desires to obtain a verdict
in the impartial human conscience.
What is here figuratively represented
by the neighbouring nations taking
their stand on the mountains or Sa-
maria takes place inwardly and silently
in the minds of men. It is analogous
to what in modern times is termed the
verdict of public opinion. No institu-
tion is in danger until a sentence has
been recorded against it in the tribunal
of conscience and right reason. And
the like may be said of the general sta-
bility and independence of nations. In
such a case as the present two important
ends are served. 1, The witnesses or
jurors give a human attestation to the
righteousness of the Divine procedure,
and thus justify the ways of God. That
they are themselves guilty and sinful
takes their verdict all the more em-
phatic. 2. They thus obtain a truer
and deeper acquaintance with God and
his ways, and what they have seen in
others becomes a warning to themselves
[The Preacher's Lantern, vol. iv.].
‘Heaven gives the needful but neglected call.
What day, what hour, but knocks at human

hearts,
To wake the soul to a sense of future scenes P”
{ Young. ]

Vers. 10,11. Righteous requital. 1.
Requital from God. ‘Thus saith the
Lord God.” ‘There was no human
redress. The oppressor was mighty,
but mightier the avenger of the poor,
Man would not help, therefore God


would. An adversary there shall be
even round about the land; lit. an
enemy, and around the land” { Pusey],
2. Requital by means of their own
sons. ‘ Man’s sins are in God’s pro-
vidence the means of his punishment.
Their spoiling should invite the spoiler,
their oppressions should attract the op-
pressor; and they, with all which they
held to be their strength, should go
forth into captivity” [ Pusey}.

“The cries of orphans and the oppressor’s rage

Doth reach the stars” [Dryden].

3. Requital justified by human tes-
timony. ‘Publish in the palaces of
Ashdod.” The transgressions of which
Israel were guilty were to be manifest
to others, and attested by the human
conscience. “The Lord will be justified
in his sayings and in his works, when
he executeth judgment on us, and shall
be cleared, even by the most unjust
judges, when he is judged.”

Ver. 12. The miserable remnant. 1.
A remnant robbed of glory. Bereft of
the national glory which once belonged
to them, yet just enough to show that
they had once been a part of it. 2. A
remnant saved. After God’s righteous
vengeance had accomplished its end, a
remnant only shall be saved (Joel ii. 32).
“Taken out for the good of others, not
their own.” 3. A remnant injured by
violence, rescued from danger, like a
sheep almost devoured by the lion;
taken at the last extremity, a monu-
ment of God’s mercy, and a proof of
exposure to violence and risk.

As shepherds, ministers of God have
to defend the flock against wild beasts
and robbers. Carelessness should not
permit one to be lost or injured. The
Good Shepherd seeks to rescue all. Let
none sit in ease and carnal security, lest
they be destroyed by the lion going
about seeking whom he may devour.


HOMILETICS.
Divine Visttation.— Verses 13, 14.


These verses renew and raise the threatening to a higher degree. God wil!
visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, and utter destruction wiJl he the con


sequence of moral corruption.


ACML ETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 283





i penne teense


E, The seats of idolatry overturned. A people guilty of false worship are in-
eapable of seeing the evil and the danger of it. Sentence must be uttered against
the house of Jacob, for they cannot escape Divine judgments. 1. The centres of
idelatry destroyed. “The altars of Bethel” were the source of their sins, the
fountain-head of their superstitions. A special judgment is pronounced against
Bethel the religious, and Samaria the political, seats of corruption. 2. The objects
of idolatry destroyed. Destruction is threatened against the horns of the altar,
and all attractions to idolatry. These were to “ be cut off” with violence and “ fall
to the ground.” 3, The votaries of idolatry destroyed. The teachers and sup-
porters were to have their punishment according to their prominence. Their sup
port was withheld, and their doctrines proved false. Their religion was not de
fence, and all their hopes were disappointed. Natural religion can never be a
substitute for revealed. Those who trust in the former and reject the latter will
sink into ignorance and sin. Every kind of false worship, instead of helping,
will become an object of Divine displeasure. ‘So shall Bethel do unto you be-
zause of your great wickedness.” II. The palaces of grandeur pulled down.
“The great houses shall have an end, saith the Lord.” The mansions of the rich,
with their pomp and splendour, extravagance and folly, shall be spoiled by the
enemy. ‘The capital shall be robbed, and all its magnificent palaces destroyed.
Pride is not in keeping with prosperity. Prodigality to ingratitude will only
merease misery. Habitations decorated with art and inlaid with ivory, which
exclude the presence of God, will have an end and dissolve to dust. III. The
retreats of luxury destroyed. Luxury and pride generally follow idolatry. But
we have “the same minute filling up of the picture,” says one, ‘in the threat-
enings against the luxurious retreats of the rich. ‘The winter house,’ with its
comfortable shelter from the influences of cold; ‘the summer house,’ with all its
spacious provision to secure a cool retreat from oppressive heat; ‘the house of
ivory,’ which might show the refined taste of its possessor; and ‘the great house,’
which would display his wealth and give room for his revelry—all were marked,
ake trees in a forest; their end was determined, it would quickly come.” The
yalace of the prince and the cottage of the poor, the spacious mansion and the
fortified castle, will one day come to ruin. Let us “build high,” and secure ‘that
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 13. Divine visitation. J. Jn roused from their slumber and quicken


velaticn to the prophets of God. A new
charge is given to Amos and the rest of
God’s servants, to understand the mes-
sage themselves and proclaim it to
others. “It is of little avail to testify,
unless we first hear; nor can man bear
witness to what he doth not know; nor
will words make an impression, i. e.
leave a trace of themselves—be stamped
in or on men’s souls—unless the soul
which utters them have first hearkened
unto them” [Pusey}. II. In relation
to others. ‘In the house of Jacob”
the testimveny must be given; but Phi-
listines anu Kgyptians, as ver. 9, are
called upon to witness. Not only God’s
servants, buv cthers haye need to be


attention to the word and authority of
God. In the space of six verses the
prophet earnestly repeats the words,
“saith the Lord.” Men of our time
should not question nor limit the mes-
sage of the gospel. Be imbued with
the spirit of Samuel, “ Speak, Lord, for
thy servant heareth.” JI. In relation
to their design. The punishment of
sin and the correction of God’s people.
Sin is the procuring cause of all punish-
ment. God may endure long, but will
at length vindicate his holiness and visit
“the transgressions” upon those who
commit them.

Vers. 14, 15. We are strongly re-
minded hare of what ir recent years


268





befell Paris and Rome, which have oc-
cupied analogous positions in the Papal
world, to those which were then held


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


{cHar. 01





in Israel by Samaria and Bethel
[Preacher's Lantern, vol. iv.].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER III.


Vers. 1, 2. Special favours. Men are
not to be envied simply because they
are endowed with special favours.
Those very endowments, unless they
are faithfully used, only augment re-
sponsibility, deepen guilt, and ensure a
more terrible retribution. Where much
has been given much will be required.
It will be more tolerable for Sodom
and Gomorrah in the day of judgment,
&c. [Dr Thomas].

Ver. 3. When God walks with a
nation that nation prospers, but if that
nation falls to words with God, quarrels
with him about his will and law, and
rushes perversely into sinful courses ;—
nay, if there be some in it who have no
God at all, who do their best to ex-
tirpate his very name from the earth
which he himself has made, then we
cannot expect that God should continue
to walk with such offenders. Consider
whether there has not been enough in
England, and especially in this great
city, to make God angry with us? Has
there not been grievous disagreement
between the dwellers in this city and
God [Spurgeon]?

Vers. 3—6. The first question was
taken from travellers, the second from
wild beasts, the third from fowlers; the
fourth question implies that inasmuch
as God had a purpose in sending tribu-
lation, he will not remove it until that
design is answered ; and the fifth, that


an awakening should be the result
[Lbid. }.

Ver. 9. Samaria. The metropolis
of the kingdom of Israel was built on a
round hill, near the middle of a large
valley, surrounded by mountains on
every side, by which it was completely
overlooked. From these elevations per-
sons might distinctly see what was done
in the city [Hlzaz}.

Vers. 10, 11. They might seem to be
secure and at ease in Samaria and
Damascus, but vain would every such
remedy against fear and sorrow prove.
From the strong city, from the soft
couch, they would be dragged to misery
and destruction. In about 40 years
after the time of this prophecy we read
(2 Kings xvii. 3) of a siege of Samaria
which lasted three years, at the end of
which the city was taken ; and after the
horrors of war, the spoiling of their
palaces and their wealth, the remnant
was dragged into a distant land, to en-
dure the miseries of captivity and exile
[Ryan].

Vers. 14, 15. Visit. The sins of a
nation draw judgment after them as
the moon draws after it the billows that
beat upon the shore. Let no nation
hope to escape judgment until it gets
rid of sin. Judgments are but sins
ripened into a harvest, subterranean fires
breaking into volcanoes [Dr Thomas].





CHAPTER IV.


Onittoat, Norgs.] Kine] Fat and wanton, yet effeminate and luxuriant; reproved not for fieree-


ness, buf unfeeling Insolence and oppression,
aiter the analogy of Is. iii. 16; xxxil, 9—13,


Say] (1) Wives here intended, voluptuous women
“The sin of these women consisted in the tyrannical


oppression of the poor, whilst they asked their lords, ¢. ¢. their husbands, to procure them the


means of debauchery ” [ Kei/}.


3 (2) Others, princely oppressors, who say to their king, with whom
they induige .n drink, and whom they we 80 bo i ! 2


the bargain with wine. Oppress] Lit. com-


cHaP. Iv.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 9





oot


finually oppress. Crush] Heb. expresses vehemence. 2, Holiness] which binds him to punish
(Ps. Ixxxix. 85). Hooks] Invaders and spoilers compared to fishers (Jer. xvi. 16; Heb. 1. 16).
3. Breaches] of city walls broken by the enemy. Every] one before her, ¢. e. without looking to
right or left (cf. Josh. vi. 5, 20), as cows through a gap or fence. Cast] “‘‘The word may describe
the headlong motion of the animal, and the desperate gestures of the hopeless” [Pusey]. 4. G@il-
gal] The scene of idolatry. Multiply] Irony. Since you will not be reformed, go on, try whether
‘rod likes your sacrifices; eager as you are in worship, you will not prevent punishment. Your
tithe and incense only increase guilt, 5. Leaven] against the law (Lev. ii. 11). Liketh] This is
what you love. 6. Teeth] Famine, as threatened in the law (Deut. xxviii. 48, 57; cf. 2 Kings
viii, 1). 7% Yet three) The latter rain, which fell in latter part of February and beginning of
March, when most required (1 Kings xvii. 1). One eity] Distress so great that people from one
place had to go a great distance for supply, yet could not get enough to satisfy. 8. Wandered}
Heb. indicates the trembling, unsteady gait of those exhausted in quest of focd (Ps. lix. 15;
cix, 10; Jer, xiv. 1—€). 9. Blasting] Lit. an exceeding scorching. Mildew] Heb. intensive.
The mention of these would remind them of other judgments (Deut, xxviii. 22). 10, Manner]
t.e, the way in which God punished Egypt (Ex. ix. 3). “ Palestine was by nature healthy. Hence
on account of the terribleness of the scourge, God often speaks of it as of his own special sending”
[Pusey]. 11. Firebrand] Proverbial for escape from imminent danger. Yet] after all corrective
Ineasures, obstinately impenitent, and determined to persist in wicked courses! 12. Therefore]
punishments must be continued. This] not expressed, but discerned from what follows—all kinds
of things imagined in the uncertainty; but the last the greatest calamity. Prepare] ‘“‘ When thon
seest that thou hast resorted in vain to all kinds of subterfuges, since thou never wilt be abie w
escape from the hand of thy judge; see now at length that thou dost avert this last destruction
whieh is hanging over thee” [Calvin]. 18] To give greater emphasis to the command, God is
described as Almighty, reading the thoughts of men, creating prosperity and adversity as he changes
light and darkness, subjecting all things to his control, and ruling as the Lord of Hosts. What an
argument for being at peace with him.


HOMILETICS.
Sap Picrurses oF Human Lirse.— Verses 1—3.


Punishment is the leading thought in chap. iii., but in this sin is the prominers
thought, and its consequences incidental to prove its exceeding sinfulness. Civi
injustice and oppression were very common. The king and his ministers are
spoken of in terms of contempt, for sharp rebuke often becomes an imperative duty.

I. Insolent abuse of prosperity. Bashan was a place of rich soil and pastur-
age (Mic. vii. 14; Jer. 1.19). Animals fed there were among the strongest and

- fattest (Deut. xxxii. 14). Bulls furnished a type of the mighty, fierce, and unfeel-
ing men of earth ; Aine may indicate the luxury and effeminacy of men or women
—a life of wantonness and brutish feeling. Amos points out the princes ang
judges as ringleaders in provocation and insolence. They grew fat and prosperous,
abused their place and power, and made themselves base and contemptible. Ix
their pleasure and grandeur they despised the herdman and the poor. They
thought mcre highly of themselves than they ought to do. Like beasts, they
found their enjoyments in self-indulgence and luxury. Men who wallow in riches
and surfeit themselves in pleasure fatten themselves for slaughter. Those who
live a brutish life will die a brutish death. Men in worldly honour, without true
wisdom, are worse than beasts that perish. Their eminence is their peril, and their
fall is disgraceful. ‘Man that is in honour and understandeth not, is like the
beasts that perish.” II. Might ruling over right. Men in prosperity and high
rank often become extravagant and tyrannical. They lose the tenderness of their
own, and have no sympathy with the nature of others. Might overcomes right.
1. In oppressing the poor. The poor are always with us to kindse our sympathies,
teach our dependence, and fulfil the purpose of God. In true philanthropy there
is present blessedness and godlike action. “Blessed is he that considereth tbe
poor; the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble.” The poor must be defendea
provided for, and not oppressed. They are not of a lower grade than ourselves
If we mock or oppress them we reproach God. “He that oppresseth the pues
zeproacheth his Maker.” 2. In crushing the needy. Society is a medium for


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [cHaP. ry





illustrating the attributes of humanity, and building up the moral history of the
world. It is composed of all classes, and bound together by all ties. He who is
charitable to the needy exhibits moral likeness to God, and administers to the
glory of Christ in heaven (Matt. xxv. 40), But when men gratify pride in selfish-
ness, disregard the rights of the poor, and, like powerful cattle, trample the weak
under-foot, it is a mark of an unfeeling heart and social corruption—a way to
obliterate the moral character of society, and a prelude to Divine judgment. It is
sad when men vent their wantonness where there is no power to resist. Not the
wolf with the wolf, but the wolf with the defenceless lamb, “ devouring the poor
and needy from off the earth.” Yet they are found among the rulers of God’s own
people, among the teachers of religion, and in the common ranks of life. “Judge
righteously and plead the cause of the poor and needy.” III. Confederacy in
wickedness. “ Bring, and let us drink.” The wicked encourage and strengthen
one another in sin. ‘Come on,” said Pharaoh, “let us deal wisely with them.”
The king and his courtiers in Israel practised oppression themselves, abetted it
and connived at it in others. A sinful course cannot long prosper. Articles of
luxury are dearly bought by oppression. Proud combinations against the laws of
humanity and the providence of God shall be broken as tow. The builders of
Babel were confounded. The conspiracies of Voltaire and his infidel school have
been overthrown. In our day all sovial compacts and private bargains in the
cause of injustice will be crushed by the irresistible power of God. “Though
hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished.” IV. Debauchery in
social conduct. “Let us drink.” Men reap a poor harvest from cruelty and
oppression when they spend it to gratify their lusts. Making merry at the cost of
extortion will only mingle bitterness with wine. Tyrants to the poor are often
slaves to their own passions. “Cruelty and sensuality are well matched. Inflamed
passions crave for inflaming drink, and this again sets on fire the whole course of
nature, and disposes to deeds of violence and shame. Nor must it be forgotten
that men and women naturally mild and kind commit the most ferocious (other-
wise unaccountable) acts under the influence of alcoholic drink, which exerts all
the foreign tyranny of diabolical possession.” V. Life terminating in great
calamities. Consider the end of these proud oppressors. ‘‘So the days shall
come upon you that he will take you away with hooks and your children with fish-
hooks.” Led as an ox to the slaughter, taken as fish out of the water, neither .
power nor number can keep them from sudden and violent destruction. 1.
Calamities flzed in time. The days hold on their steady course and advance
closer and closer to the sinner. They are determined in God’s purpose and will
ve fitted in God’s providence. 2. Calamities with great sacrifice. From security
they shall violently be taken away to a land of oppression. Their stores of violence
would be cast away from their palaces. When life is at stake, treasures of goid
are of no worth. “A thousand pounds for any one who will save my life,” cried
a young lady in the wreck of the London. It is too late often, and none can flee
away. 3. Calamities from which none can escape. They shall rush from one
palace to ancther. Some think to be the meaning, cast themselves into one place
after another and find no shelter. In wild confusion, without help and hope,
they will run through the breach of the city, like a herd of cows through a fence.
4, Calamities entailed upon posterity. “ Your children with fish-hooks,” People
may survive in their descendants sometimes, but reckless must be that life which
sweeps away posterity. Sinners entangle themselves in their own devices, and
bring the judgments of God upon their families. Riches are small, and strong
palaces are defenceless in the hour of death. Those who boast of wealth, and aci
in cruelty towards others, will be carried away without ransom and without hope


“To the vile dust from whence they s rung
Uawept, unhonour’d. and ieee :


CHAP. IV.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ABW. ya





HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTi INES.


Ver. 1. God’s intimate acquaintance
with men. 1. He discerns their charac-
ter. “Ye kine of Bashan.” Pride,
wantonness, and effeminacy. 2. He de-
tects their sins. Specifies one by one.
3. He knows their residence. “In the
mountain of Samaria.” “God knows
where men live. Let us seek to make
our houses such as he will look on with
pleasure” [Hall in loco]. “I know thy
abode, and thy going out and thy com-
ing in, and thy rage against me” (Is.
XXXVii. 28).

Vers, 2,3. 1. Destruction inevitable,
“Saith the Lord.” 2. Destruction by
meanest instruments, Fish dragged by
the hook, Herod destroyed by worms.
3. Destruction vindicated by God’s cha-
racter. Holiness is offended by sin,
and pledged to vindicate its own hon-


which they had profaned in themselves,
and which they had caused to be pro-
faned in others God sware by him-
self. For he is \he supreme uncreated
Justice and Holiness. This justice
each, in his degree, should imitate and
maintain on earth, and these they had
sacrilegiously violated and overthrown”
[Pusey].

Vers. 1—3. From the whole leam—
1. In proportion to the prosperity here
will be the misery of the wicked here-
after. 2. In proportion to their luxury
here will be their poverty hereafter. 3.
In proportion to their sins here, will be


‘their punishment hereafter [Treasury


of David].


“O luxury!
Bane of elated life, of affluent states,
What dreary change, what ruin is not thine?”


our. “God swears by that holiness [Dyer.]


HOMILETICS.


Uneopty Lirg anp FormaL Worsuir.— Verees 4, 5.


The prophet again turns to the people, and in bitter irvuy bids them pursue
their course. The words describe the worship of Israel, and afford a specimen of
address to desperate sinners.

I. The spirit in which they are uttered. 1. A spirit of trony. ‘Come to
Bethel,” offer your sacrifices, and go on in your sin. It is sometimes right to
cherish this spirit. Elijah to the prophets of Baal (1 Kings xviii. 27); Micaiah
to tiie priests of Ahab (xxii. 15); and Christ himself (Matt. vi. 2) found it neces-
sary. ‘Scorns and taunts are the best answers for serious idolatry,” says Bishop
Hall. “ Holiness will bear us out, in disdainful scoffs and bitterness, against wil-
ful superstition.” 2. A spirit of reproof. Multiply your sacrifices, and what
better will you be? What will they avail you in the day of adversity? When
will you learn wisdom? ‘You shall be ashamed of Bethel, your confidence.” ITI,
The moral condition which they indicate. Their conduct was in direct opposi-
tion to God’s will. They thought great devotion would make up for ungodly life.
1. A self-righteous spirit. They boasted of their ritual, and proclaimed their zeal
and offerings. ‘So well did they count themselves to stand with God, that there
is no mention of sin-offering or trespass-offering.” They sought the praise of men,
and not the approval of God. Their motives to goodness were derived from their
fellow-creatures and not from their Maker. Like the scribes and Pharisees, they
worshipped to be seenof men. 2. An infatuated mind. Go on; you are resolved
to have your own way, whatever God and conscience say; and you may take it.
Thus some darken their foolish minds, befool themselves, and are given up to
strong delusions, to believe a lie. 3. An incorrigible life. Goon; neither judg-
ment nor mercy has any influence upon you; take the consequences. They seemed
judicially given up to sin, “ Ephraim is joined to idols; let him alone.” This
is an awful condition, but only a type of that just sentence which will at last be
passed against all transgressors. “ He that ic unjust let him be unjust still, and


272 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOB, (oHar. TH








he who is filthy Jet him be filthy still.” III. The character of the worship they
describe. The most wicked do not entirely abandon Christian worship. Fashion
and the force of habit constrain them. Israel kept up thank-offerings, but clung te
their sins. 1. Corrupt worship. The worship of God was mixed with that of
‘idols. The altar of God and the altar at Bethel had each their gifts. So now the
adoration of self and graven images is combined with the worship of the sanctuary.
Money, pleasure, and popularity rival God. Unworthv motives and glaring errors
are cherished in his service. But God will not permit contamination. We must
worship him in the beauty of holiness. 2. Yormal worship. They were devout
in sacrifices of thanksgiving and free-will offerings; zealous in their tithes, pune
tual in their ritual, and superabundant in their diligence. They were precise in
their formalities, but insincere in their hearts. They kept the letter but violated
the spirit. Mint and cummin were paid, but the weightier matters of the law,
judgment and mercy, were neglected. Sacrifices to God are an insult when the
heart is alienated and withheld. ‘Thou desirest truth in the inward parts.” 3.
Will-worship.. They did what God commanded, but in their own way, and at
their own places. The preference for Bethel and Gilgal, for priests of the people
instead of the sons of Levi, the setting up of the golden calves, and the use of
leaven in their worship, made it mere will-worship, unacceptable and dishonouring
to God. The end of true worship is to please God, but if we please ourselves we
offend him. ‘The command, therefore, to please themselves, as they will have it
so, marks the utter rejection of the worshippers.” 4. Sinful worship. All their
work was transgression, and the repetition of their service was a multiplying of

nsgression: their worship only added more sin to their violence and frauds.
vurtupt religion aggravates guilt; diligence in superstitious devotions ripen w:
destruction ; and self-will in anti-scriptural forms leads to utter rejection of God.
= Though ye offer me burnt-offerings and your meat-offerings, I will not accept
them.”


** The holier worship which he deigns to bless
Restores the lost, and binds the spirit broken,
And feeds the widow and the fatherless”’ [ Whettier].


THe Corrective Measures oF Gop’s Provipence.— Verses 6—11.


In these verses God describes the different corrective measures which he em
ployed for the purpose of effecting a change in the Israelites, and at the close ot
each mentioned in the series, the obstinate impenitence, under the influence of
which they persisted in their wicked courses, is emphatically marked by the de
claration, Yet ye have not returned unto me, saith the Lord ; such repetition gives
great force to the zeprehension [Hizas]. The verses naturally suggest the divisions
of the outline.

I. Famine. Cleanness of teeth and want of bread indicate scarcity of flesh
and dearth of corn. The famine was everywhere, “in all your places,” This was
no accidental failure of crops, nor owing to a combination of second causes. [1
was the work of God himself, who gives daily bread. “ Man’s life,” says Calvin
‘is not shut up in bread, but hangs on the sovereign will and good pleasure of
God.” II. Dearth and scarcity of water. They would remember times of
plenty, when they had water “every man from his own well and from his own
cistern.” Howminute the circumstances of the calamity. 1. The time is specified.
“Three months to the harvest.” A time when most needed to ripen corn and
grain. “This is utterly ruinous to the hopes of the farmer. A little earlier or a
little later would not be so fatal, but drought three months before harvest is entirely
destructive” [The Land and the Book], 2. The inequality is given. In one city
and not in another ; upon one field to fertilize it; not upon another, which
remainec unproductive. Thus were they urged to reflect upon God. In sovereign


GHAP. Iy.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 278








od


mercy he holds the key of the clouds, to open and shut at pleasure. Every drop
of rain is measured and sent by Divine direction to its destination. He gives rain
from heaven and fruitful seasons (Acts xiv. 17). 3. The distress is noticed. In-
nabitants in some places were frustrated in their hopes; necessitated to go far
away to seek for water, and found only a scanty and insufficient supply. Water,
free to all now, was withheld from them. In trembling fear, and weak through
toil, they begged from city to city. God can wither our harvests, withheld Divine
influence from our schools and churches, and create natural and spiritual distress
throughout the nation. “Thou art the land that is not cleansed, nor zained upon
in the day of indignation.” III. Blasting and mildew. Blight would follow
from scarcity of rain. 1. Vegetation suffered. The gardens which they cultivated
in neglect of God, the fruit which was appearing to reward their toil, and the
olive trees which they watched with care, were smitten by the blast. 2. Insects
abounded. “The palmer-worm” and putrefaction devoured the fruits of the
ground. Malignant air and voracious animals destroyed fruitful fields and pros-
perous vineyards, “The Lord shall smite thee... with blasting and with mil-
dew; and they shall pursue thee until thou perish” (Deut. xxviii. 22). IV.
Pestilence and sword. Pestilence such as visited Egypt fell upon them. Young
men, the hope of the country, were slain in war. Horses on which they de-
pended were taken from them by a victorious foe, The mighty hosts which they
assembled in pride were like sheep for the slaughter. The stench of men and
horses, unburied on the field, poisoned the air and polluted the land, Yet this
did not humble nor reclaim them. ‘ He made a way to his anger; he spared not
their soul from death, but gave their life over to the pestilence” (Ps. Ixxviii. 50).
V. Total overthrow by earthquake. hey seemed insensible, but the solid
ground beneath them trembled with unwonted motion. The houses above their
heads fell in utter confusion. Some of the inhabitants were buried in the ruins
or smitten by the lightning. Others who narrowly escaped were like brands
plucked out of the fire. Some were overthrown like the people in Sodom; but
few, like Lot, were rescued from the danger. Yet notwithstanding these terrible
judgments and displays of Divine anger Israel did not return to God. These
last chastisements, which typify more than anything else tho great judgment-day,
have failed. Therefore.they must prepare to meet God as the Judge and Ruler
of the Universe.


“ Not thou, O Lord, from us, but we
Withdraw ourselves from thee” [French].


CHASTISEMENTS WITHOUT RzerorMaATION.— Verse ]1.


“Yet have ye not returned unto me,” is the cry full of grief and tenderness
repeatedly uttered. God designed to bring them to repeniance, but they were in-
corrigible and chastised in vain.

I. Man is distant from God. This is not a natural fact merely. Estrange-
ment from God is a state of mind. The miser loving gold, the worldling drinking
pleasure, and the atheist denying God—each has a specific state of mind character-
ized by the distinct evil. In the heart is fixed opposition to God. The will and
the word of God are distasteful to the sinner. The lower sentiments and nobler
faculties are influenced by his apostasy. The mind is ingrossed with things like
our nature. Men talk of fancied reverence and adoration for God ; but spiritually
they live “having no hope, and without God in the world.” II. God seeks te
bring man to himself. The Scriptures abound with facts and figures to illustrate
this truth. God seeks to recover the fallen and save the lost. 1. By mercy.
Mercies given in Christ and multiplied day by day. Good beyond desert and
degree to bring to God. “The goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance.”
2. By judgment. Judgments national and personal, severe, many and long-con-
tinued. God chastens in body and mind, is: social and family circumstances, that


24 AOMVAETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


we may not go astray.


appointments and suiting himself to them,” says Scott.
III. Man is often chastised without returning to God. The in-


consider.”


numerable judgments of Israel begot no repentance.
us wise without due improvement of it.
“T will at this time send all my plagues upon thy heart.”


sorrow of heart another.


(CHAP, Iv.


“Man’s wisdom consists in observing God’s unalterable


“Tn the day of adversity


Nothing external will make
Sensibility to bodily pain is one thing,


God visits us in many ways, sends bereavement in the family and disappointment


in business.


And perhaps there is room for repetition day by day.


The same


cadgments have continued and new ones been inflicted, but we have not returned


vo God. This proves—l. Great guilt.


unto me,”


2. Great provocation.
‘fhe voice resounds still in Scripture and providence.


3. Great danger.
“ Yet ye have not returned


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 1—11l. The three charges.
t. Oppression of the poor (vers. 1—3).
Ul. Corruption of worship (vers. 4, 5).
{IL. Incorrigibleness under Divine judg-
ments (vers, 6—11). Learn—1l. That
God has various judgments to exercise
a sinful nation, 2. That judgments
are changed, not removed, until a return
to God. 3. That God is earnest in
bringing men to repentance, “ A course
of sin will not prove a thriving way in
the end to any, but especially to the
Church, which the Lord will eitkur
make a theatre of mercy, or a field of
blood, and he hath many rods for that
end ; for as they liked their way of sin
(ver. 5), so he also chooseth their judg-
ments and pours out a quiver-full of
them upon them” [Hutcheson].

Ver. 7. Withered. So will it ever be
n the Church, which is God’s vineyard,
if ministers give no doctrine and God
no blessing, fitly resembled to rain
on regard, 1. of cooling heat; 2.
quenching thirst ; 3. cleansing the air;
4, allaying the winds; 5. mollifying
and mellowing the parched earth;
§. causing all things to grow and
fructify. This rain of righteousness
goes sometimes by coasts as here ; God


withholding showers, though clouds be
full and likely enough to drop down ir
abundance (see Ezek. iii. 26; Hos, ix.
7; Prov. xvi. 1) [Trapp].

Ver. 10. After the manner of Egypt.
1. Slaughter of young men. 2. The
land filled with pestilence and locusts.
3. Harassed in this defenceless con-
dition by the incursions from Assyria.


Ver. 11. A firebrand plucked. 1. A
scene of danger—“ burning.” 2. An


act of mercy—“ plucked.” 3. A present
uncertainty. Once in danger, now res-
cued. Will you continue where you are,
or escape entirely to refuge ?

The words will apply—l. Tempor-
ally, ‘They may recall a striking de-
liverance in God’s providence, when
others were taken and they were left.
A shipwreck—a battle—an awful acci-
dent involving loss of human life—a
sickness from which many others
around them died” [Ryan]. 2. Spirit-
ually. Every sinner saved is a fire-
brand plucked from the burning. This
should prompt—l. To gratitude. 2. To
earnestness in rescuing others from
“the wrath of God,” which “is revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men.”


HOMILETICS.


Tag Firemen or Gop, on THE SrraNnGe PARALLEL BETWEEN Fire anp SIN.


Fire—what is there in the moral world to which it answers? But one thing,
that is, wickedness—sin against God—sin in a man’s life. Against this evil God calls


all his servants to be firemen,


“ Put out the fires of sin,” is a nobler motto than


any blazoned on the symbols of commerce and art.
L Consider the analogy between fire and sin. 1. You cannot weigh


CHAP. IV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. Kad’





the scales. You cannot grasp it, yet it exists—you can feel and see it work.
You cannot rate sin by horse power, but you feel its withering, burning influence
in the soul. 2. Fire becomes sometimes almost invisible. So with sin. In the
glare and noon-day of busy life some fail to see it. The dimness of religious truth
to the mind is a terrible monitor of what sin is doing in the heart. 3. Sin is like
fire tn its attractions. A child loves to play with fire, unconscious of danger.
Men toy with sin, which has indulgence for appetite, mirth to amuse, feasts for
gluttons, and revelry for the reckless, 4. Sin consumes like fire. It burns down
men instead of houses; the man vanishes, and only the animal, the brute, the
sensualist is left. 5. Sin spreads like a fire. Wicked thoughts, evil suggestions,
are the sparks that kindle the fires of sin in the soul and set communities in a
blaze. 6. Sin inflicts pain like a fire. It burns, stings, and agonizes its victira.
Here, in the naked conscience and despairing death, is the germ of the fire that is
never quenched. 7. Sin, like fire, defaces what it touches. 8. Sin must be resisted
ike fire. It is anevil to be put out in heartand life. 9. Sin, like fire, if you wait
too long to put tt out, will render attempts useless. The soul should not be left till
sin has mastery. In this world men are often beyond reasonable prospect of
repentance. II. Sin is the fire, but the sinner is the fuel. Ye were as a fire-
brand. 1. A firebrand 7s combustible, or it never would have been a firebrand.
So with the sinner’s heart. 2. A firebrand has been already exposed to the fire.
It is charred and blackened, and bears the marks of sin. Sothesinner. 3. A fire-
brand has offered no effectual resistance to the flames. The sinner has not resisted
sin. He is bound, and by the grace of God can resist. 4. A firebrand is ready to
be kindled anew, after it has been once quenched. A spark may kindle the soul.
5. A firebrand is in the process of being consumed, and a little longer will finish it.
So with the sinful heart. 6. A firebrand only needs to be let alone, and it will
burn to ashes. Leave the soul to sin—the ruinous power of its own lusts—and its
ruin will be complete. 7. A firebrand is a dangerous thing, if its sparks and
coals come in contact with anything else. The sinner destroyeth much good.
III. But even firebrands may be saved. Sinners are sometimes plucked out of
a desperate condition—Mary Magdalen, the thief on the cross, Saul of Tarsus—
but the work is God’s. A converted soul is a miracle of grace. Firemen!
guardians of our dwellings against 1 subtle and dangerous foe, be ready to rush to
the scene of conflagration, when the ‘larm is given, night or day! The fires of sin
burn all around, and perhaps within you unchecked. Be God’s firemen, and help to
quench it, Nothing but the blood of Christ can put out the fires. Repent and
believe, and you shall be saved. [From The Preacher's Treasury. ]


THREATENED Evin ESCAPED BY Return To Gop.—Verse 12.


“ When he has said, ‘ This will I do to thee,’ he is silent as to what he will do,
in order that whilst Israel is left in uncertainty as to the particular kind of
punishment (which is all the more terrible because all kinds of things are imagined),
it may repent of its sins, and so avert the things which God threatens here”
[Jerome]. The words indicate— Bia

I. An expression of anger. “ Therefore,” since ye persist in rebellion, regard-
less of former judgments an? respites, “thus will I do.” Judgment must follow
judgment until there is a full end. God’s hand is still lifted up, and the threat
is the more severe, because nothing is mentioned. If a smitten people continue
impenitent, and will not be corrected nor reclaimed, God will prosecute his work
and inflict more plagues. His judgments are sadder or lighter according to our
conduct under them, and terrible are those strokes which follow inflicted chastise-
ment. ‘Thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so that in
the day of the Lord’s anger none escaped nor remained” (Lam. ii. 22). II. An
exhortation to repentance. When God is about to strike he waits to be pre


aii HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. (cHar. Iv.








vented. Though hardened in sin, and insensible under Divine correction, men may
repent, and are exhorted to return to God. Repentance is not impossible. Set about
it, prepare to meet God, and he will pardon you. “ If then their uncircumcised
hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: then
will I remember my covenant.” III. A motive to reconciliation. God can still
be met—though punishment is threatened, God’s design and feelings may be seen
in it. He chastens to restore. Sins may abound, but ‘His mercy endureth for
aver.” He is willing to be thy God. He waits to be gracious and to be reconciled
to thee. ‘Noah, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house.”
Josiah endeavoured to ward off the threatened judgment by humiliation before
God. But some foresee impending evil and escape not (Prov. xxii. 3). There
is a hiding-place in Christ. Let chastisements awaken you from slumber, and urge
you to lay hold of the hope set before you. ‘‘ We pray you in Christ’s stead, be ye
reconciled to God.”


PREPARATION TO MEET GoODs


I. The solemn event. Not an ordinary event, not the meeting of man with
man, but of man with his Maker. We have to meet God on earth, and especially
at the judgment-day, when the atheist and the scorner, the righteous and the
wicked, each one will see him for himself and not for another. II. The needfal
preparation. If in judgment, prepare, for how can we contend against him? If
in penitence, prepare, for he will meet us in forgiveness, A preparation of heart and
life are necessary. The sinner must be reconciled; the soul must be renewed and
the life be holy. ‘Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.”
III. The motives to enforce the preparation. 1. The greztness of God.
Tf be be such as here described, what folly to oppose him, and what an argument
to make our peace with him. 2. The providence of God. “ Because i wu do
this, therefore prepare ;” that is, God’s providential dealings with us are a motive
to urge preparation to meet him. God comes near in judgments and great
events. We should consider our ways. The doctrines of the gospel and the
providences of life often fail to rouse attention. Men sleep unconscious of the
presence of (tod and the impending danger. If we @ not meet him as a Friend
we shall have to meet him asa Judge. “ Prepare to meet thy God.”


PREPARE TO MEET THY Gop.—Verses 12, 13.


Man forgets God. Scripture denounces this, and the great aim of its precepts,
aistory, threatenings, and promises, is to produce and cherish the habit of remember-
ing ‘rod. The text calls to remember God, is often applied exclusively to ihe
n.2eting of God in another world ; but from the context it applies to what goes on
in this world also. Consider, therefore, how to meet God as he comes near.
i. Buring our time of probation on earth. It is common for those who dispute
the reality of God’s coming to assert that he is too highly exalted to notice insig-
nificant creatures. But in Scripture God’s greatness and man’s littleness often
combine to illustrate this truth. 1. In the way of repentance. A sinful course is
turning back from God, fleeing from a God of mercy to a God of anger. He calls
the careless and impenitent to meet him. (1) Quickly. Now a day of grace in
which outward calls combine with inward connections. This time is precious, and
will be succeeded by “a night wherein no man can work.” (2) Carefully. “Let
us search and try our ways.” Rush not carelessly and without thought to the
throne of God. ‘ Take with you words.” (3) Decidedly. With the firm conviction
that in no other way can peace and salvation be found. 2. In the way of temporal
blessings. It may please him to let our life pass peaceably on—to keep off appre
bended danger—to make the cup of sorrow pass from us, that we drink it not
4 wful accidents and fuarfal calamities may have plunged others into misery, but we


#HAP. IV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. a7"





go on from day to day in security and peace. Meet God in a spirit of gratitude:
and praise. 3. In the way of temporal sorrow. (1) Endeavour to turn judgment
aside by humble prayer (Amos vii. 2—6). (2) To hear it as coming from God.
We do not meet God if we look to second causes; nor profit if we do not see his
hand and will. 4. In the use of the means of grace God meets his people. There
is no peradventure like Balaam’s in the believing use of means. Special blessings
rest upon family worship, social and public worship, and when we obey the in-
junction “this do in remembrance of me.” But we lose much from not pre-
paring to meet God in ordinances. Prepare with reverence and godly fear, and with
earnest expectation. 5, We meet God in the works of righteousness (Is, lxiv. 5).
Thus we see it our duty to meet God during the time of probation. In Christ we
meet him in repentance, and find him reconciled—in prosperity he calls for gratitude
and praise—in judgment we bow with submission and endeavour to turn it aside
—in the means of grace we should meet him with glad reverence, and earnest
expectation of good things from his Fatherly bounty. II. Prepare to meet him
after the time of trial is over. 1. Very solemn and awakening is the thought of
meeting God then. Here we meet him in his works and ways, there we shall meet
God himself. Remember this in the engrossing concerns of uncertain life.
Eternity, and not time, is the stage of our existence. 2. After death cometh the
judgment, when we must “ be made manifest” before the tribunal of Christ. Some
will meet God in anger, and cry for rocks to fall on them ; others will meet a God
in mercy. No righteousness will stand them but “the righteousness of God.”
Have we that righteousness? Is the thought of that day a part of your daily
meditation? Give diligence to be found in him in peace and security. ‘“ Keep
yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life.” This waiting frame of mind will be one of the greatest helps to
prepare, and one of the surest signs that you are prepared to “meet your God”
[Ryan].


Ian DisrpENsAaTIONS oF PROVIDENCE CARRYING OUT THE Designs oF GRACE.
—Verse 13.


In true repentance we must have right views of God and his claims. The
prophet here describes God in the resources of creation and the wonders of pro-
vidence to induce Israel to think of him and prepare to meet him. “ For” if
mercy move not, let majesty. God is great, and can carry out his designs of love—

I. By his mighty power in creation. “He that formeth the mountains,” &c.
1. Power in the past. Before the mountains were brought forth God was. He
created the solid parts of the earth, and reared the everlasting hills. ‘“ Which by
his strength setteth fast the mountains.” They owe firmness and stability to him.
The Alps and the Andes are “girded” and preserved from falling down by his
power. 2. Power in the present. “And createth the wind.” The heathens
believed in an inferior God, whom Jupiter appointed a store-keeper to raise and
still the winds at pleasure. But God “bringeth forth the wind out of his
treasuries ” (Jer. x. 12). The winds and the seas obey him. ‘‘ He commandeth
and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof. He maketh the
storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.” The most solid and the most
subtle, the mildest and the most terrific, agents were created by God. If we read
rightly we see not only power but mind in the works of God. Men are thus
encouraged to flee unto him. The salvation expected from the hills typifies
deliverance from sin and. protection in Christ (Ps. lxxxix. 11, 12). Control over
winds sets forth his dominion over minds. All creation manifests his beneficence te
men. II. By his unceasing activity in providence. ‘That maketh the morn-
ing darkness.” God not only created, but governs all things according to the
counsel of his will. He is unceasingly active for the good of his creatures. “ My


278 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [CHaP. «Vv


a  ———————


Father worketh hitherto and I work.” 1. Literally God makes the morning dark.
He spreads the clouds and overcasts the sky. He creates light and darkness,
and gives day and night. 2. Providentially God makes the morning dark. The
morning of joy and prosperity is turned into the night of sorrow and distress. The
wunshine of Divine favour may be followed by retributive judgments. It is folly
to trust in any means of deliverance but his. Our expectations may be darkened
by unlooked-for changes. Everything that is joyous and beautiful may be effaced
by darkness. “ Seek hin. ‘ha’ ... turneth the shadow of death into the morning,
and maketh the day dark wit? ight.”


‘¢ For we have also our evening and our morn,”


III. By his omniscient presence with men. “ And declareth unto man what is his
thought.” He can read the heart and understand the thought afar off (Ps. cxxxix.
2). We hide our sins and do not wish to know our hearts; but “God is greater
than our heart, and knoweth all things.” He reads and reveals us to ourselves and
gets our sins in order before us. “The thought of God as a Creator or Preserver
without,” says Pusey, “affects man but little. To mana sinner, far more impress-
ive than all majesty of creative power, is the thought that God knows his in-
most soul. God knows our thoughts more truly than we know ourselves.” There
is no deceiving him in our conduct. We have to do with One who searches the
heart. “I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins” (Jer. xvii. 10; Ps. vii. 9). Tne
moral government of God is ever administered on the principle that man is account-
able for his thoughts) The law of God weighs the purposes of men and the
dispensations of God. ‘‘Give to every man according to his ways, and aceording te
the fruit of his doings.” ;
“On human hearts he bends a jealous eye.”


IV. By his supreme control in all things. “The Lord, the God of hosts, is his
name.” Not only the God of Israel, but the supreme Ruler of men and Disposer
of all things. 1. He ¢e supreme in the universe. “The Lord of hosts.” Head
over all principalities and powers in heaven and earth. He has being in himself,
and. is the fountain of being and blessedness to others. ‘ Who is over all, God
blessed for ever.” 2. He makes all things subservient to his purpose. ‘Treadeth
upon the high places of the earth.” He walks on the sea (Job ix. 8), and on the
wings of the wind (Ps. civ. 3). He subdues the proud and dethrones the mighty.
Whatever is eminent and exalts itself against him he will put down. He reigns
above all creatures, controls the highest spheres of power, and everything around
him stands ready to execute his will. Thus the prophet sees in the course of nature
the will of God, links the physical with the moral events, and makes the one find
its loftiest end in the other. National calamities are revelations of God’s wrath.
But these only endanger the material welfare of a people. A God of transcendant
greatness sends them to draw us to himself. Nothing will avail before him but
righteousness and truth. Prepare to meet him with joy and not with grief.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IV.


Ver. 1. There is not a word in our


‘anguage which expresses more detest-
able wickedness than oppression | But-
ler]. Mr Cecil says that he often “ had
a sleepless night from having seen an
instance of cruelty in the day.”
‘ My ear is pain’d,
My heart is sick with every day’s report
Of wrong and outrage with which earth is
filled,”


Vers. 4, 5. What a sting is there—
“this liketh you !” how it should pierce
the conscience of every sinner—-“ for
this liketh you, O ye children of Israel!”
Far indeed was everything like levity
from the prophet’s mind in treating such
a subject as the sinfulness of the people ;
far enough was he from making a mock
of sin as fools do. It was holy sorrow


CHAP. IV.]





that prompted the irony; it was with
deep solemnity of soul that he wielded
that cutting weapon—and withal he
could be touching and tender in expos-
tulation [Stoughton].

Vers. 6—10. We look to second causes
and impute our years of dearth to wet
and cold, to hot and parching seasons,
to cycles of weather, to comets, and
many other accidents, some real and
others imaginary, and thus wilfully con-
ceal from our view the power of God,
who blesseth a land and maketh it to
bring forth fruit abundantly, and who
“turneth a fruitful field into barrenness
for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.” The acts of God’s providence
are as certainly a part of his administra-
tion now as in former ages, and as directly
affect each individual of the race as they
did the children of Abraham. It is
to those who are subdued under his re-
bukes that he sends his word to heal
them. They who watch the ruling
hand of God shall become wiser in
reading his purposes and their own
necessities [ Duncan].

Vers. 12,13. The Rev. Mr Madan
was desired one evening, by some of his
companions who were with him at a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : AMOS.


279





coffee-house, to go and bear Mr John
Wesley, who they were told was tao
preach in the neighbourhood, and te
return and exhibit his manners and dis-
course for their entertainment. Mr M.,
educated for the bar, went with that in-
tention, and just as he entered the place,
Wesley named his text, ‘‘ Prepare to
meet thy God,” with a solemnity of ac-
cent which struck him, and which in-
spired a seriousness that increased as the
good man exhorted his hearers to repent-
ance. Mr M. returned to the coffee-
room, and was asked, ‘‘if he had taken
off the old Methodist?” “No, gentle-
men,” said he, “but he has taken me
off ;” and from that time he left their
company and became a converted man
[ Whitecross].

Ver. 13. “I never had a sight of my
soul,” said the Emperor Aurelius, “ and
yet I have a great value for it, because
it is discoverable by its operations ; and


‘by my constant experience of the power


of God, I have a proof of his being, and
a reason for my veneration” [ White-
cross|. Let us incessantly bear in mind,
that the only thing we have really to be
afraid of, is fearing anything more than
God [Book of the Fathers].





CHAPTER V.


Criricat Notes.] This word] A mournful song (2 Sam. i. 17—27).
as if to cast down upon them. 2. Virgin] The Israelite state unsubdued by foreigners.


Take up} Lit. lift up
Fallen |


Violent death (2 Sam. i. 19—25), a figure of the overthrow of the kingdom. Rise] in the ee


order. 8. Went] to war.


Live] Not only remain alive, but possess real favour.

derived from the predicted fall of the objects and
threatened. Like fire] consuming everything before it
God in his omnipotence in contrast with the un
should be feared. Wormwood] Justice embittered,


xxix. 17).
like Job ix. 9.


gate who put down injustice (Is. xxix. 21: Jer xvii. 19).


from the wheat of the needy to pamper the lusts of the great [Henderson]. }
wed the rich murderer to purchase exemption from


money, whilst they bowed down the right of the
] «« A chosen silence t»wards vile corrupters of law


price to deliver from sentence.


“ The judges allo
capital punishment by the payment of atonement
poor.” This illegal (Num. xxxv. 31). 13. Silence


The depopulated city is touchingly described (Deut. xxviii. 62).


5. Bethel] “A strong dissuasive from idolatry
ylaces of false worsl.ip.” 6. Lest] Danger
pede iv. 24: Is, x. 17: Lam. ii. 3). 7—9.]


godly people, indicating that he who can destroy
corrupted, and made hateful (cf. ch. vi. 12: Deut.
8.] God in creation, moral government, and:judicial procedure described atmost in words


10. Hate] the reprover who condemns their sins; Amos himself, or juceee at the


11. Take] Burdensome taxes levied in kind
12. Bribe] Lit. a


and justice who will nothing mend though reproved; or silence before God, owning his justice in


punishing such sinners” [ Poole}.


14. Spoken] They fancied that God was with them by virtue of


289 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [wren





the covenant with Abraham (John viii. 39), 15. Perhaps] indicates difficulty in their case, not un
certainty with God (cf. Gen. xvi. 2; Joel ii, 13), Peradventure (Ex. xxxii. 3). Remnant] pre-
cerved in the approaching judgment, as Joel iii. 5; Is, vi. 13; x. 21—23. 16, Therefore] if ye
seek not God, there will be lamentation not only by professional mourners, but in the streets of the
city, in all towns of the kingdom, and in places where joy is expected. 17, Pass through] as in
Egypt (Ex. xii. 12; Nah. i, 12), taking vengeance and creating death wail. 18. Woe] to the con-
fident who deceive themselves with false hopes. Desire] Deriding the prediction of the prophet
(Jer. xvii, 15; Ezek. xii. 22), “It was an impious daring of God to do his worst” [Hizas]. 19.]}
Two figures from pastoral life illustrate the false hope of escape. Fleeing from a lion to meet a
bear means that whoever escapes one danger will fall into another, The bear spares none, and the
serpent’s bite in the hand is fatal. ‘In that day every place is full of danger and death; neither
in-doors nor out-of-doors is any one safe; for out-of-doors lions and bears prowl about and in-doors
snakes lie hidden, even in the holes of the walls” (Corn. d Lap.]. 20. Bright.] ¢. e. to those who do
not turn from evil, 21.] Festivals and sacrifices will not avert judgments. Your feasts] of human
origin, not Divine appointment (Is, i. 10—15); the expression of Divine abhorrence is most em-
ghatic, 28. Noise] as singing is contemptuously called. 24. Run] judgments like a flood over the
and [Keil], Others take it as an exhortation to practise justice and truth, 25. Have] Lit. Did ye,
equivalent to denial, some; others, not entire suspension of sacrifice, but mixed with idolatry. From
of old they had been recreant to God, Their present offensive worship was only a continuation of the
idolatry in the wilderness, Their sins were the very sins of their forefathers (Ezek, xx. 39). 26.
Borne] aloft in pomp, the portable shrine or model tabernacle, The idolatry censured is of Egyp-
tian origin, A literal god of stars cannot be proved [Lange], 27.] Banishment of the people far
beyond the borders of their own land, Beyond] the capital of Syria, in which you trust for help
instead of me (Acts vii. 43): combines into one the several passages from prophecy. A most un-
Skely event then; but Thus saith the Lord indicates its certainty.


HOMILETICS.


Tun Funeral Dines.-—Verees 1—3,


-‘{n order to impress Israel the more, Amos begins this his third appeal by «
dirge over its destruction, mourning over those who were full of life and’ thought
themselves safe. A dirge like that of David over Saul and Jonathan, over what
once was lovely and mighty, but which had perished” [Pusey].

I. The death of the nation. Israel was spiritually dead and debased. Like
a virgin, she had lost her purity and fealty to God. 1. The state was destroyed.
‘She hath fallen.” Fallen by her sins and from her dignity. (1) Inwardly de-
stroyed. ‘She is forsaken upon her land.” Her true interests were neglected by
her friends. She was forsaken by her own rulers and guides. With all her
strength and resources she was morally helpless and none could defend her. (2)
Violently destroyed. “Cast down upon her soil.” She was prostrated by inward
tendency and outward force. ‘Then will I leave thee upon the land, I will cast
thee forth upon the open field” (Ezek. xxix. 5 ; xxxii. 4). (3) Hopelessly destroyed.
“There is none to raise her up.” Weakened by moral corruption and intestine
strife ; despised by men and forsaken by God, she could rise no more. Nothing
can prop up a rotten nation, nor save a doomed people. Ichabod may be written
when God has departed from us. 2, The people were decimated. ‘The city from
which thousands went equipped for war could scarcely muster one hundred. The
people, cut off by sword and pestilence, could not furnish more than a tithe of their
population. One common doom befell larger and smaller cities. The whole king-
dom was helpless and ruined. ‘ And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye
were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the
voice of the Lord thy God.”


“Tl fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay.”


II. The mourning for the nation. God is gracious in showing to us our sins,
end if we heed the accusation we may escape the lamentation. But people are
obstinate and opposed to God. 1. The prophet mourned. “This word which ]
ke up against you.” He views the zetion as dead, and he attends the funeral


met SE HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS 281
a ee


He mourns not in poetic words, but in deep feeling. Every faithful minister at
some time or other does the same. Samuel mourned over Saul ; David wept
because men kept not the law of God; Jeremiah grieved, and Paul had “ great
heaviness and continual sorrow.” Lamentations over fallen churches and wails
over lost souls are most touching and too common! “I will weep bitterly ; labour
not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people.” 2. The
people mourned. Sad was the change and most distressing the condition of Israel.
Sorrow entered every family; the state was deprived of its subjects; and there
was none to help in her degraded condition. “If,” says a writer on this book, “ an
enemy who had depopulated our towns, and killed our fathers and mothers, were
to come to our abodes, how would all rise to ruin such an enemy. We should do
as the Jews did by Paul when they looked on him as an enemy (Acts xxi. 27, 28) :
“they stirred up all the people and laid hands on him, crying out, Men of Israel,
help!’ So should we encourage each other against sin and suppress it, saying:—
‘ Magistrates, ministers, men and brethren, help; sin is what destroys our people,
wastes our cities, unpeoples our towns, opposeth the laws, and brings confusion
everywhere.’ ”


SEEKING GOD AND RENOUNCING SIN.—Verses 4—6.


Departure from God is the root of all sorrow. Reformation therefore must be
radical and not formal. God has not utterly abandoned Israel. He speaks as
“our God,” ready on our return to him to deliver and bless. ‘“ Seek ye me and
ye shall live.”

I. The urgent request. The prophet repeatedly urges them to seek God
(vers. 4, 6, 14), from whom they had wandered and whom they had offended.
1. God is the object sought. We must seek him not for any selfish ends, not for
gifts, nor for anything out of him. What is the world without him? All
may be found and enjoyed in him. Some pursue pleasure, riches, and
wealth, others find in God their chief good. ‘Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee.” 2. God must
be sought earnestly. The seeking is diligent and anxious. Infinite good is more
desirable than created good. We must not seek God anyhow, but with earnest-
ness and perseverance. The pursuit is not an indefinite desire, the mere natural
working of the mind, but an intense longing for God. ‘‘ Ye shall seek me and
find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.” II. The needful
caution. “ But seek not Bethel,” &c. Israel sought God at Bethel; but idolatry
is opposed to seeking God, and must be renounced. The worship of God cannot
be reconciled with the worship of Baal. 1. Outward forms will not avail. Gilgal
and Bethel were ancient places, but empty forms. The truth once taught there
had become powerless, and Israel had ceased to obey. Men may plead beauty,
antiquity, and prevalence of forms; but we are admonished to abandon them all
and trust to the living God. Idolatrous customs will ensure and increase our con-
demnation. They are an abomination to God. “ Seek ye me,” and “ pass not to
Beersheba.” 2. False hopes will disappoint. Bethel was not the house of God.
Gilgal would go into captivity, and Beersheba would soon be in ruins. The
pleasant things of Gilgal passed into the hands of the enemy. All hopes of resi-
dence there were disappointed, and bitter was the remorse of the people. Schemes
of worldly happiness and forms of idolatry will utterly fail. False confidences
allure men to destruction, do not avert danger nor quench the fire of Divine anger
against sin. Idols of every kind are vanity. An idol is nothing in the world
(1 Cor. viii. 4; x. 19) ; and “they that observe lying vanities forsake their own
mercy.” III. The encouraging promise. ‘And ye shall live.” 1. Ye shall
escape danger. If the fire broke out none could quench it. Bethel, the centre of
idolatry, would be consumed. But if they sought God, they would escape and be


982 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. (cmap. v.








delivered from calamities. The sinner can only be saved from eternal death in
Christ. For “who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings!” 2. Ye
shall obtain God's favour. We may be delivered from outward danger, from sick-
ness and distress, yet not redeemed from sin—preserved in natural existence, but
deprived of real enjoyment. Life in any sense is good, for “a living dog is better
than a dead lion!” The soul can only live when converted, refreshed, and oured of
its ills, ‘ Your heart shall live that seek God.” In his favour is life, and “ thy
lovingkindness is better than life.”


Divine Justics a Consuming Firzg.—Verse 6,


This verse is an awful picture of sin and Divine retribution which breaks forth
in violence upon ungodly nations,

I. The fuel. “The house of Joseph.” Sinners make themselves fuel for the
flame, ripen themselves for destruction. Rotten and unfruitful branches of the
Church will be burned. ‘ Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn
them, they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame.” II. The
conflagration. ‘Lest he break out like fire.” 1. The Divine nature is like fire.
“ Our God is a consuming fire” (Heb, xii. 28, 29; Is. xxxiii. 14). Holy anger
and holy love are found in God. He that is light and love may become, by the
power of his wrath, a consuming fire. “A fire goeth before him and burneth his
enemies round about” (Ps. xcvii. 3: Deut. iv. 24). 2. The Divine procedure is
like a fire. When God is provoked to anger judgments will burn the wicked like
chaff. Pestilence and war ravage and waste like fire. ‘The material of sorrow
and distress accumulates from period to period. Violation of God’s laws, followed
by disregard for social duties, prepares both governments and people for tumult and
war. The spark of discontent falls on some portion of the mass, suddenly it
blazes forth, and is rapidly communicated from one part to another, till everywhere


the signs of woe are seen, ‘ blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke.


v0


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 4. Such as find a distance and
are seeking to make it up, may not
speed at first, yet that should not weaken
their hands, nor will they be accounted
less penitent, or be further from accept-
ance, that they are but pursuers and not
enjoyers; for, approven repentance
here is not to find God, but to seek
him, and these get the promise, Seek
ye me, and ye shall live [Hutcheson].
Seek and live. Equally simple and
definite are the monition and the pro-
mise. Man knows what he has to do,
and what to expect. Not merely is
warning given, but also promise and the
reverse. ‘he gain is certain if one ful-
fils the condition, but the condition is
indispensable [Lange]. Ye shall tive.
God’s gracious promises must be held
before sinners, jest in despair they go
from sin to sin. For how can one feel


genuine repentance if he has no hope
Tb.}.
er. 5. This is the law of God’s
dealings with man; He “curses our
blessings,” if we do not use them aright
(Mal. ii. 2). Christ, the Corner Stone,
will break to pieces those who fall upon
it; and it will grind to powder those
on whom it falls (Matt. xxi. 44). Our
holiest Gilgals—our Sacraments, our
Scriptures, our Sermons, our Sundays
—which were designed by God to roll
away from us the reproach of Egypt,
will be rolled away from us, if we do not
use them aright, and will roll us down-
ward into our destruction [ Wordsworth |.
Ver. 6. Seek. The oft pressing of a
duty imports: 1. The excellency; 2.
The necessity; 3. The difficulty of
doing it: else what need so many
words? [Trapp].


CHAP. V.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: 4MO8.





HOMILETICS.


JUDGMENT TURNED TO WorMwoop.—Verse 7.


The proper place for these words, many think, is after verse 9. They might be
taken in connection with the charges there, or separately as here.

I, The impartial administration of justice is pleasant. Justice is one of
the four cardinal virtues, and regarded by Plato as including all human duty. It
was made of first importance in the Hebrew code. Laws were given to protect
life and property, to secure rich and poor against violence and wrong. It was the
duty of the judges to interpret and administer, not to make or give laws. When
just laws are obeyed by kings and princes, confidence is strengthened, peace pre-
vails, and judgment is in sweet odour. ‘For law guards the people and magis-
trates guard the law,” says Bacon. ‘“‘ National happiness must be produced through
the influence of religious laws,” says South. ‘The king by judgment establisheth
the land.” II. The partial administration of justice is bitter. Let justice be
done though the heavens fall is often the cry. But many cast it down from its
lofty position and trample it under-foot. As God’s vicegerent it is dethroned in
the laws of the nation and the hearts of the people. Partiality and injustice make
void the best laws, increase the burdens, and embitter the toils of life. They rob
man, disorder society, and offend God. They turn judgment to wormwood. Good
laws are a blessing or a curse, a corrupt spring or a fountain of life, as they are
administered. ‘One foul sentence doth more hurt than many foul examples,”
says Bacon, “for these do but corrupt the stream, the other corrupteth the foun-
tain.” ‘Ye have turned judgment into gall and the fruit of righteousness into
_ bemlock.”

* Laws grind the poor and rich men make the law’’ [Goldsmith].


Gop GREATLY To BE FraRED.— Verses 9, 10.


Israel were exhorted to forsake unrighteousness and seek God. The prophet

tells them who God is and what he does, that they might know him. He is the
’ Creator and Governor of the universe, infinite in resources and omnipotent in power.

How can they contend with him? Seek him in penitence, despise not judgment,

for he is great and greatly to be feared. or three reasons God is to be sought.

I. God displays omnipotence in the creation of the world, “Seek him
that maketh the seven stars and Orion.” Amos read the power of God in the
stars and names those well known to shepherds, The Pleiades were arranged in
their splendour and Orion was bound in its place by him (Job ix. 9). He created
the heavens and all the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth. He keeps the
planets and directs their motions. Tempests and fogs, judgments and earthquakes,
may darken the sky, but do not hide the power of God. ‘The Divine edict is still
in force (Gen. i. 3), preserves and marshals the constellations of heaven. “ Canst
thow bind the sweet influences of Pleiades or loose the bands of Orion” (Job
xxxviii. 31)? II. God displays omnipotence in the government of the world.
He is seen in all its vicissitudes. In multitude and magnitude, in minuteness and
mystery, his works are unsearchable. 1. In changing seasons. Literally he turns
night into day by the rising, and day into night by the setting, sun. ; We find a
constant presence, an abiding power, in the seasons of the year. Creation ‘‘is but
the projected shadow of a throne that overlooks the high places of the universe,
filling them with the changeless splendour of a Moral Presence.” In all move-
ments there is no caprice but unchanging law. “(He appointeth the moon for
seasons, the sun knoweth his going down.” 2. In benevolent designs. Light and
darkness are both necessary. Day and night indicate the perfection of Divine


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [cHaP. v.


284





arrangement. God has “set the one over against the other” that we may appreci-
ate both. In all changes of nature we have benevolent design. So in spiritual
seasons, in prosperity and adversity ; we have shadows of death and days of Te.
joicing ; “the morning of hope, the noon of enjoyment, and the night of sorrow.
Each is given in proportion to our faith and the sovereign will of God, whose
work is perfect (Deut. xxxii. 4), 3. In great calamities. The flood may not again
destroy, but it typified fearful inundations which God “pours out upon the face
of the earth.” He sends rain in mercy and in judgment. He permits the clouds
to send their torrents and the sea to burst its bounds. His power is employed to
bless or to punish, to turn the sorrow of the penitent to joy, or the light of the
wicked into darkness. Amos predicts a future calamity like that in which God
brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly. “Fear ye not me? saith the
Lord ; will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand for the
bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it, and though the waves
thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they
not pass over it?” III. God displays omnipotence in the retributions of the
world. ‘Those that are strong with sinful strength, that defend their spoil, shall
be overcome. Desolation will attack every place that was deemed inaccessible. Man’s
might is perfect weakness with God. He prevails against the strong, rescues the
weakest saint, and destroys all vain confidence. Then if man’s strength cannot
defend him when God is angry—if God’s power in creation and in providence is
employed in giving retribution to men—what will be the fate of those who trust
to their own fortress and rebel against God? Learn—1l. How ruinous to resist a
God of such majesty and power. 2. To submit to his chastening rod. 3. To seek
and adore him in the most severe and hopeless trials, For “there is no wisdom,
nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 8. The shadow of death into
morning. This typifies redemption—
1. From sin, which is darkness of
heart and life. 2. From spiritual
misery (Is. ix. 1). 3. From sorrow
and suffering (Job xvi. 16; Jer. xiii. 16 ;
Ps, xxiv. 4). 4. From the grave (Job
iii, 5; xxxiv. 22; xxxviii. 17). “Amos
first sets forth the power of God, then
his goodness. Out of every extremity
of ill God can, will, does deliver. He
who said, let there be light, and there
was light, at once changeth any depth
of darkness into light, the death dark-
ness of sin into the dawn of grace, the
hopeless night of ignorance into the day-
star from on high; the night of the
grave into the eternal morn of the
resurrection which knoweth no setting ”
[Pusey]. Sor light, when abused or
neglected, He so withdraws it, as at
times to leave no trace or gleam of it.
Conscience becomes benighted, so as to
sin undoubtingly : faith is darkened, so
that the soul no more even suspects the
truth. Hell has no light [Z0.].


It is not enough to see God in nature
and providence or second causes; but
we ought so to see him in them as to
commend piety to our hearts and press
us to it, therefore the exhortation runs,
“seek him that maketh,” &. First, it
is an argument to seek him, that he
“maketh the seven stars,” &c. Itis held
out—l. That God is worthy and ought
to be sought and served, who is not
only above men and creatures on earth,
but his power is inthe heavens. 2. He
is able either to ruin or refresh men by
means and second causes, which are at
a great distance from them, even by the
influence of the stars. 3. The very
vicissitudes and change of seasons and
weather are God’s works wherein he is
to be seen, and which should invite us to
seek him. Secondly, his turning the
shadow of death into morning and
making the day dark with clouds,
teacheth that God can change or settle
conditions, as he pleasetl; and if he
settle, none can shake, and if he shake,
none can establish. And therefore the


CHAP. V. |


short path to well-being is to seek him.
Thirdly, his calling for the waters of the
sea and pouring them out, &c., teacheth
that God hath showers of comforts and
deluges of miseries to pour out as he
pleaseth [Hutcheson].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: 4MOS.


285





remarkable a way, that when the weak
have been spoiled by their oppressors,
and their oppressors have entrenched
themselves in fortified places, even then
he causes “the spoiled to come against
the fortress.” Hence—l. Let the im-


Ver. 9. He employs his pewer and
wisdom in vindicating the cause of those
who cannot help themselves, and in so


penitent tremble. 2, Let the righteous
“be still.” 3. Let those who are moved
with fear repent and be saved [Ryan].


HOMILETICS.
Manirotp anp Mieuty Sins.— Verses 10—13.


The duty pressed from consideration of God’s power is still urged on account of
Israel’s sins and God’s judgments upon them. These sins are “ manifold” and
“mighty,” countless in number and aggravating in nature.

I. They hated the public monitor. “They hate him that rebuketh at the
gate.” Those who reproved in God’s house, in courts of justice or in places of
concourse, were despised. When wisdom lifted up her voice she was not heard
(Prov. i. 21). When men are impatient under reproof and deaf to good counsel
it is an evil sign. 1. They detested the rebuker. Judges were so wicked, that
they could not endure those who opposed or rebuked their unrighteous decisions.
Claimants and witnesses who pleaded for equity were insulted. Men who defended
innocence and cried against injustice were hated beyond degree. 2. Zhey abhorred
the upright. Amid general corruption some few, like Noah, witnessed for God
and were exposed to ridicule and contempt. Veracity is the bond of society, and
all who value the interests of mankind will esteem a truthful man. The example,
prayers, and life of the upright are a blessing to any community (Prov. xi. 11).
To hate them and put them to silence is the way to ruin. Yet men love darkness
rather than light, and cannot endure those who reprove their sins. Ministers be-
come enemies because they tell the truth. They “make a man an offender for a
word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for
a thing of nought.” II. They practised shameful oppression. “ Your treading
18 upon the poor.” The poor were persecuted as if enemies to the State. If they
sued for justice they could not get it. “ He remembered not to show mercy, but
persecuted the poor and needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.”
1, Judges took unlawful bribes. ‘They take a bribe.” Injustice and violence
were connived at; the helpless were trampled in the dust, and the rich unjustly
acquitted. He that rules over men must be just and rule in the fearof God. “A
bad magistrate deprives us of the blessing of just laws.” Sir Matt. Hale could
not be corrupted, and Paul would not bribe his judge for freedom (Acts xxiv. 26).
“A gift perverteth the ways of judgment.” 2. Judges indulged in unbounded
selfishness. They imprisoned the righteous, and would only release him for money.
They robbed the poor to build houses, plant vineyards, and minister to their own
luxury. Their mansions of hewn stone were monuments of extortion. They
might preserve from disease (Lev. xiv. 34—38), and be free from decay. But
men who secure themselves and enlarge their possessions by injustice will destroy
both. Those who ruin others to live in grandeur and state will find that they
build on false foundations and will be robbed of their possessions. “ Thou shalt
build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein ; thou shalt plant a vineyard, and
shalt not gather the grapes thereof.” III. They necessitated prudent silence.
“Therefore the prudent shall keep silence.” We must bear open testimony to
holiness and truth ; but there is “a time to keep silence and a time to speak.”


286 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. LOHR,





When pearls are cast before swine, when men are deaf to reproof and all warning
is useless, then servants of God keep solemn silence. In times of iniquity and
judgment, of danger and distress, silence to man may be a duty ; but the prudent
will speak to God in secret prayer. “ For the Lord our God hath put us to silence
and given us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against the Lord.”


“ Bedewed and silent as a summer's night ”


Times oF PrupEent S1LENcH.— Verse 13.


The prudent man will be well disciplined in mind and speech, will carefully
watch for opportunities and improve them. Great wisdom is required to know
when and how to speak. It is a time to be silent—

I. When reproof is ridiculed. In the treatment of a fool we must restrain our-
selves, and neither indulge his folly nor cherish his spirit. Pride should never be
reproved with pride, nor passion checked with passion. Discretion is needful in
rebuke, ‘ Wise mariners do not hoist sails in every wind,” says Bp Hall. Jere-
miah turned away from false prophets in silence (xxviii. 11). Christ sets us an
example in giving kind answers to rude speeches. “Speak not in the ears of
a fool ; for he will despise the wisdom of thy words.” II. When reproof would
increase guilt. Men are often hardened and infatuated ; deliberately shut their
ears and refuse instruction. Reproof would then only add to their guilt and misery.
Christ in mercy withheld his tongue before such persons. It is best to “let them
alone.” Rebuke might stir up a torrent of abuse and frustrate the design in view.
A conceited man needs no direction, thinks his own way right, and follows it to
hisruin. ‘The way of a fool is right in his own eyes.” III. When reproof is
silenced by calamities. God’s dealings in personal affliction and public judgments
call for silence. “It is an evil time.” We are perhaps to blame and cannot
reprove others. Under his frown we must hold our peace (Lev. x. 3). In his
mysterious providence we learn to be still (Ps. xlvi. 10). Whatever social or
national yoke is put upon us we must “sit alone and keep silence” (Lam. iii. 28),
There are times when we must reverently adore God and submit to his chastisements ;
when the pride of the wicked and the pleading of the righteous are put to silence.
“Twas dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou didst it” (Ps. xxxix. 9;
Neh. ix. 33; Heb, xii. 9).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 7—13. To seek God and re-
nounce unrighteousness and oppression.
To enforce this exhortation three pic-
tures are made to passin rapid succes-
sion before the eye. 1. The righteous
Judge. They are reminded that Jeho-
vah, whose omnipotent power, as mani-
fested in the heavens and on the earth,
is described in majestic terms, selects as
the special object of his vengeance the
strong oppressor (vers. 8, 9). Ver. 9.
Literally, “That fiasheth forth destruc-
tion upon the strong, and destruction
cometh upon the fortress.” 2. The sin
judged. The flagrant maladministration
of justice. Claimants or others who
sought to maintain the cause of right


in the gate, or place of public trial,


were rebuked. Truthful witnesses were
frowned upon. The poor were trodden
under-foot, and justice was sold for
burdens, or, as it should rather be
rendered, “ presents of wheat” (vers. 10,
11 a). 3. The judgment to be inflicted.
Deprivation of all the fruits of their
unjust gains and oppressions. They are
reminded that though the prudent foun?
it necessary to keep silence in so evi' a
time, and their deeds thus escaped public
exposure, God was acquainted with
their “manifold” and “mighty” sins
(vers. 11 0, 12) [The Preacher's
Lantern).

Ver. 12. “I know your manifold
transgressions,” &c. 1. The sins of some
men. Manifold and mighty. Sins


Omar. 'V.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


331





committed with a mighty hand anda
haughty spirit. The disobedience of
Pharaoh, the “rage” of Sennacherib, and
the pride of Herod the Great. Sins in-
jurious to men and offensive to God.
The mighty sins of the text and those
mentioned by James (v. 7—10). 2.
God's intimate knowledge of these sins.
“T know your” sins. You may try to
conceal them, darkness and dissimula-
tion may hide them from the gaze of
men: but I know them. Nothing can
be hidden from the eye of the great
Judge. He knows though he does not
avenge. We should not flatter ourselves
that God sees not and will not punish
our sins. All things shall one day be
made manifest, ‘There is nothing
covered that shall not be revealed, and


hid that shall not be known.”

Ver. 13. This may be applied to ab
stinence from speaking in three ways.
1. From reviling. When injury is in-
flicted the natural impulse is to return
it. Other weapons failing, the tongue is
always ready. It must be restrained if
we would be disciples of Christ. Vin-
dictive words are absolutely forbidden.
2. From reproof. It is indeed an evil
time with the sinner when reproof is
not to be used (Hos. iv. 17; Ezek. iii.
26). 3. From explanation. The best
course is to commit our cause to God.
The devil, who in an evil time forges the
accusations which are often made against
the people of God, can suborn the wit
nesses too [Ryan].


HOMILETICS.
Szexina Goop anp Ensoyine Gov.—Verses 14, 15.


These words supplement the previous paragraph, in which Israel were exhorted
to renounce idolatry, an offence to God, a crime against man. Now the order is
reversed. Good must be sought and evil avoided, that mercy may yet be shown
to a remnant of the people.

I. The course recommended. “Seek good and not evil.” The negative and
positive side of human duty. 1. Seek the good. Good is needful, and all men
seek it. ‘* Who will show us any good?” The soul is formed to know and love
the good. As the plant turns towards the sun, so the soul seeks for good. But
men seek in the wrong direction. They seek gratification in earthly things,
and exclude God from their pursuits. They have a desire for him, a capacity to
enjoy him, but move not in the direction to him. Seeking good is defined as loving
the good. ‘The right affection must be cherished. Depraved appetites and vitiated
tastes must be renewed. A change of disposition is necessary to reformation of
life. ‘Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind.” 2. Hate the evil.
Aversion is needful as well as affection. We have something to hate and something
to love. Our sympathies and antipathies are not at variance, they differ in in-
tensity, gain power according to their objects, and greatly influence our conduct. We
evince the soundness of conversion by loathing and forsaking what God hates.
We cannot love God without hating evil. The fear of the Lord is seen by depart-
ing from evil. “ Positive virtue,” says one, “ promotes negative virtue.” “Ye that
love the Lord, hate evil.” 3. Practise justice. ‘‘ Establish judgment in the gate.”
Israel must raise up and firmly support what they had thrown down. In their
courts of law and in common practice they must be truthful. Neither bribe nor
self-interest should divert men from judgment. The penitent will be just to man.
In words and deeds he will give to all their due. Profession without principle is
an insult to God. ‘What a man is in private duties, that he is in the sight of
God, and no more,” says Dr Owen. We cannot serve God, unless we are right
with men. ‘“ Put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes ; cease to do
evil ; learn to do well.”


“ Be what thou seemest, live thy creed,
old up to earth the torch Divine,


288 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [cmar. Vv.








Be what thou prayest to be made,
Let thy great Master’s steps be thine.”


IL. The benefits of adopting this course. Self-interest is not always the right
motive to urge; but the benefits of serving God are manifold. 1. Human life is
preserved. ‘Ye shall live.” Calamity would take away their life, but deliverance
would preserve it. In general, sin by its own nature and by the judgments of God
upon it brings men to an untimely end. The wicked do not live out half their
days. Worldliness wears out the spring; but piety contributes to the length and
enjoyments of life. Religion promotes temperance and self-control. It redeems
body and soul from morbid excitement and moral disease. “ Righteousness tendoth
to life.” 2. God’s grace is received. ‘‘The Lord God of Hosts will be gracious,”
&c. The sinner is not only delivered from present danger, but blessed with grace
to live a holy life. God’s grace is infinite and free. Former displeasures will not
hinder him from bestowing it upon those who seek it. Penitent nations and feeble
churches may hope for his returning favour. ‘God is no respecter of persons ;
but in every nation, he that feareth him and worketh righteousness is accepted with
him.” 3. God’s presence is enjoyed. He “shall be with you as ye have spoken.”
Israel boasted of being God’s people, and desired God to be with them in sin.
But the “righteous Lord” cannot dwell with an unrighteous people. It is a de-
lusion to talk of God if we do not seek him, to expect his presence when we do


not walk in his commands.
of Abraham.”
favour.
Hosts.”
remember thee in thy ways.”


“Tf ye were Abraham’s seed ye would do the works
It is only when we repent and return to God that we enjoy his
God is always present to protect in the way of duty, as “the God of
“Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those that


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 15. Lt may be. I. If so, for what
* reasons? 1. Men do not deserve de-
liverance. ‘“‘The expression ‘ perhaps
he will show favour’ indicates that the
measure of Israel’s sins was full, and no
deliverance could be hoped for if God
were to proceed to act according to his
righteousness” [Keil]. 2. God in so-
vereign mercy has promised it. This
is not the language of uxcertainty.
The difficulty is not with God, but with
man, “Except ye repent,” &. II. If
30, on what conditions? Negatively and
rositively stated. 1. Not by presuming
on outward relation to God. God must
be sought and found. 2. By pursuing
right. (a) Right towards God. “ Hate
the evil and love the good.” (6) Right
fowards man. “ Establish judgment.”
To these conditions the hope, though
humiliating to carnal security, is at-
tached: perhaps God will then be
gracious to a remnant of Joseph.


Pinte


The verse sets forth—The relation
between the negative and positive duties
of life; or—1. The nature of true peni-
tence—seeking God, 2. The evidence
of true penitence—hating evil. 3.
The reward of true penitence—God’s
protection and favour in life ; or, 1. God
the object sought. 2. Evil the diffi-
culty in the way. 38. Divine favour
and blessings the motive to urge the
pursuit.

“ God gives encouragement to such as
sincerely seek him; yet he would not
have them absolutely expect deliverance
in temporal judgments, when provoca-
tions are come to a height: and he seeth
it meet to exercise them with uncertain-
ties that they may be yet more diligent,
and prove their rea] piety by submission
in those things” [Hutcheson].

“Temporal promises are made with
an, It may be; and our prayers mast be
made accordingly.”


car, ¥.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 289








HOMILETICS.
Tas Day or Tue Lorp.—Verses 16—20,


Ver. 16. “Therefore.” God foreseeing that they will not forsake sin continues
the threatening (ver. 13). Israel misapplied the words of Joel (ii. 31; iii 4),
thought that the day of the Lord would be deliverance to them and destruction to
their enemies. The prophet warns them of false security. In blind infatuation
they long for its approach, but it would be a day of unmitigated evil.

I. The day of the Lord described. A day of universal darkness and distress.
The judgments were extensive as the manifold guilt. 1. A day of Divine dis-
pleasure. God would be with them not in the way they expected and boasted ; in
judgment, not mercy. “I will pass through thee.” There would be a repetition
of the events in Egypt. He would not pass over them in forgiving love, as the
angel passed by the blood-stained doors; but through them in punishment severe
and exact. Some as stubble or wood are ripe for Divine judgments (Nah. i. 10;
Jas. il. 5), God may have passed by them, but soon will pass through them.
Nations may escape at one time and fearfully suffer at another. ‘ For there was
not a house where there was not one dead” (Ex. xii. 12, 30). 2. A day of universal
mourning. ‘ Wailing shall be in all the streets.” (a) Mourning in all places.
In the streets of the city, the vineyards of the fields, and the highways of the
country ; in centres of business and scenes of joy, would be lamentation and wailing.
The hum of men and the mirth of children were turned into grief. There was “1
vintage not of wine, but of woe.” God’s displeasure turns joy into mourning ane
robes all things with darkness and death. (+) Mourning by all persons. “The
skilful,” the professionals of lamentation, and the real mourners, the husbandmen
called from the country, blended their cries together. Alas! Alas! The punish-
ment was unequalled and the grief beyond expression. Sorrow will find all that
are guilty, and nonecan escape. ‘Take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run
down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters. For a voice of wailing is
heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled!” 3. A day of darkness without light
(vers. 18—-20). Calamities darken the brightest day. The day of present trouble
is often without light. But no day so gloomy to impenitent sinners as the day of
judgment. The word of God and the voice of conscience darken the prospects of
the wicked. Unless they flee to Christ the future will be “ even very dark, and no
brightness in it.” 4. A day of calamity without escape. Two comparisons illus-
trate this. (a) No escape by flight. To flee from the lion would only be to meet
a bear. To escape from one danger was only to fall into another (cf. Jer. xlviii. 44 ;
Is. xxiv. 18). “He shall fiee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall]
strike him through.” (b) No escape by shelter. If a man rushed into a house
and leaned in confidence upon the wall a serpent would bite him. Men often
meet with destruction where they expect safety. “ Evil shall hunt the wicked man
to overthrow him.” If men escape present they cannot the future judgment. It
is vain to expect mercy at that day if we despise it now. Come to God instead of
fleeing from him, ‘ Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand
when he appeareth?” II. The day of the Lord threatened. “The Lord saith
thus "—1. Though long delayed it will come. To prove his love and give time for
repentance God delays his promise. But he is not slack and forgetful. Threaten-
ing may not suddenly be executed, for “he is long-suffering to usward, not willing
that any should perish.” Remember the nature of God and his determination to
punish. ‘Beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.” 2. Though appar-
ently far off it will come. All things continue as they were, but may unexpectedly
change. ‘The flood interrupted the order of nature. If we realize the past, it will
help us to believe the future. “The day of the Lord wil’ some as a thief in the
night.” 3. Though ridiculed by ungodly men it will come. “Scoffers walking

19


290 HOMILELTIC COMMENTARY; AMOS. {CHAP V,





after their own lusts” cry, “ Where is the promise of his coming?” Join not their
ranks. Heed not their ridicule. The promise is uttered and cannot be retracted.
The coming is gradual, certain, and will soon be felt. Atheists should beware and
presumptuous sinners should fear. The primeval world has changed, the deluge of
Noah swept the earth, and a terrible day awaits impenitent sinners. “A little
while, and he that shall come will come and will not tarry.” III. The day of the
Lord desired. ‘You that desire the day of the Lord.” Their previous history
would lead them to desire this time, and their subsequent life proved the spirit in
which they did so. 1. The day may be desired in a wrong spirit. Israel applied
the glowing descriptions of future times in a carnal sense. They expected a tem-
poral Messiah, and knew neither their own character nor the nature of the day
coming. They were not prepared for it, and what should have been a blessing
turned out to be a woe to the nation. ‘‘ Darkness and not light.” Men desire the
day—(a) In a spirit of contempt. The Israelites sarcastically might wish for the
day (Is. v. 19; Jer. xvii. 15). Who cares for the day? let it come. (b) Ina
spirit of delusion. They desired some change, and thought the next would be for
the better. The prophet seeks to undeceive them. Self-deluded sinners will find
out their mistake at last. (c) In a spirit of folly. “To what end is it for you?”
What will it profit you? Are you ready for it? Many would be glad to leave
this world who are not fit for the next. They have but little reason to desire
what will be darkness and not light to them. 2. The day may be desired in a
right spirit. Some are ready for the day, delighting themselves in God and his
service. They are preparing for death and waiting for the coming of Christ. In
the common events and mysterious providences of life they pray not in scorn,
“Let him make speed and hasten his work that we may see it; and let the counsel
of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it.” Woe to
him who desires when he should dread the day of the Lord! “ Blessed is that
servant” who is ready and waiting, “‘and whom his lord when he cometh shall find
so doing.”


Derata Not aLtways Duzsirantz.— Verse 18.


We may apply this to the day of death. Often in trouble and disappointment
men express a wish that God would take away their life, supposing that it is
better for them to die than to live. We cannot be sure of the sincerity of their
desire ; and they may not be sure of it themselves. Under the pressure of present
feeling, they imagine death would be welcome, and perhaps if it actually came
they would decline its aid. If they would not they ought. For their fleeing from
trouble is as if a man did flee from a lion and a bear met him, &c. Let me beg
these sons of sorrow to inquire—Whether the event they long for will be a real
remedy for their complaints. Are they sure that death will be annihilation?
perfectly sure that there is nothing beyond the grave? Can they prove that there
is no future? or that in this state there is only happiness and no misery? Judas
hanged himself, went to his own place, which was worse than his former condition,
with all the horrors of its remorse. If Scripture be true all are not happy at death ;
none are then happy without a title to heaven and a meetness for it. Have you
this title? this meetness? Do you love holiness? Without this could you be
happy in a holy place? ina holy state? in holy employments, &c.% Is the Redeemer
precious to your souls? Nothing can make us happy but what relieves our wants,
fulfils our desires, and satisfies our hope. Without holiness no man can see the
Lord.

How absurd, then, to wish to leave this world for another, before you are sure
the exchange will be for your advantage. For advantage it cannot be if you die
unpardoned and unrenewed. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord. Out of
him, vut of refuge, and the avenger of blood is upon you. Out of him, you are out
of the Aik and exposed to the Deluge, The day of your death is not better than


Gaap. V.1 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 291


the day of your birth. Your privations and distresses here are only the beginnings
of sorrow, a drop to the ocean compared with hell. And once gone from time, no
return, Therefore instead of wishing this important period ended, be thankful
that it is prolonged, even in a vale of tears ; account that the long-suffering of God
is your salvation, for he is not willing that any should perish,

Remember also that disappointment and sorrow, which make you impatient,
may prove the greatest blessing; the valley of Achor a door of hope. God does
not afflict willingly. He renders earth desolate to induce you to seek a better
country. Away, then, with every thought of desperation. Arise and go unto your
Father, waiting to receive graciously and love freely. If tempted to despair, cry,
‘ Lord, Lam oppressed ; undertake forme.” ‘ Come unto me, all ye that labour,” &c.
The Athenian said, ‘I should have been lost, if I had not been lost.” In affliction
Manasseh found his father’s God. We often pity those who have seen better days.
But if they forgot God in prosperity, and in their adversity have thrown themselves
into his arms—these are the best days they ever saw. This will be your case,
suffering friend, if you seek God and commit your cause to him. He will turn the
shadow of death into the morning, and you shall join the multitude who say—ZJt is
good for me that I have been afflicted [Jay].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 16. It costs men nothing to Self-examination would teach — that


own God as a Creator, the Cause of
causes, the Orderer of all things by
certain fixed laws. It satisfies certain
intellects so to own him. What man,
a sinner, shrinks from, is that God is
Lord, the absolute disposer and master
of his sinful self [Pusey].

Woe, woe, going up from every street

of a metropolis, in one unmitigated,
unchanging, ever-repeated monotony of
grief. Such were the present fruits of
sin. Yet what a mere shadow of the
inward grief is its outward utterance
Tb.].
Ver. 17. If there were joy in any
place it would be in the vineyards ;
vineyards are places of mirth and re-
freshing, grapes make the wine, which
makes glad the heart of man, There-
fore when he threatens, that in all vine-
yards there shall be wailing, it is as
much as if he said, There shall be sorrow
in those places where usually the great-
est joy is found, or there shall be sorrow
in every place, Joy shall dislodge and
give place to sorrow, for I will pass
through thee, saith the Lord [Caryl].

Vers. 17,18. I. The certainty of
the day. “Saith the Lord.” II. The
method of its approach. ‘I will pass
through.” III. The consequences of its
arrival. “ Darkness and not light.”

Ver. 18. To what end is it for you?


they would gaim nothing in the day—
that it should be delayed, rather than
desired, if not prepared for it—that the
evil spirit in which it is longed for
should be eradicated, and that men
should seriously consider their ways and
submit to God.

Ver. 19. The path of light would
prove a path of increased danger—the
place of confidence, expected shelter
and repose, would become the place of
pain and wounding unto death [Ryan].
From both lion and bear there might be
escape by flight. When the man had
leaned his hand trustfully on the wall
of his own house, and the serpent bit
him, there was no escape. He had fied
from death to death, from peril to
destruction [ Pusey].

Ver. 20. Shallnot? He appeals to
their own consciences, “Is it not so,
as I have said?” Men’s consciences
are truer than their intellects. How-
ever they may employ the subtlety of
their intellect to dull their conscience,
they feel, in their heart of hearts, that
there is a Judge, that guilt is punished,
that they are guilty. The soul is a
witness to its own deathlessness, its
own accountableaess, and its own
punishableness [ Pusey].

The godly will have some light in
trouble (though temptation hide it from


292 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. LCHAP. V





them, Is, 1. 10), and may sometimes dreadful a day of vengeance will be to
attain to some measure of allowance the wicked, how grieving and perplex-
(Ps, cxii. 4); and may certainly expect ing their miseries will be, and how
that there will be a clear and comfort- destitute of present comfort and future
able issue from their troubles (Mic. vii. hope they are [ Hutcheson].

8); yet it is terrible to think how’


HOMILETICS.
Tue Ritvay witout tHE Morau.—Verses 21—23,


The judgments threatened will not be averted by feasts and sacrifices. God ex-
presses his abhorrence to mere ceremonial observances, and will not accept heartless
worship. ‘TI hate, I despise,” &c. Notice—

I. Religious assemblies without true worship. Israel had feast days, to ab-
stain from servile work and rejoice in God ; solemn assemblies, to worship God and
put themselves under some restraint. But in these things they followed their own
device, or imitated the worship at Jerusalem ; substituted human inventions for
Divine institutions; ‘your feast days,” not mine; and thus prefigured many more
who call themselves Christians. Men uphold the means of grace, attend the wor-
ship of God, but the name of God they will not adore. They defend religion,
appoint ordinances, and put formal for spiritual service. They pervert the times
and the places in which they should meet God. Solemn assemblies, social and
private prayer, may prove a curse and not a blessing. Outward worship and
superior privileges may increase our condemnation, and cause rejection in the sight
of God. “I despise your feast days.” II. Daily sacrifices without true
obedience. They offered burnt-offerings, tokens of self-sacrifice ; peace-offerings,
signs of gratitude, from fat beasts, the best they could get; but they were not re-
garded. ‘Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices as in
obeying the voice of the Lord?” 1. Their ritual was external. The grandeur
of the gift is nothing without the heart of the giver. Costly offerings are of no
value without love. God hates dissembled worship. It is double iniquity. “The
sacrifice of the wicked is abomination; how much more when he bringeth it
with a wicked mind?” 2. Their conduct was immoral. They despised the poor
and neglected judgment; cherished uncharitable feelings, and had no desire to do
right. Love to God must be seen in right conduct towards men ; true worship, in
pure morality ; and faith, in good works. God smells not the savour of splendid
rituals without consistent lives (Lev. xxvi. 31). He may accept the moral without
the ritual, but never the ritual without the moral. ‘To do justice and judgment
is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.” III. Instrumental music with-
out true melody. It was noise, not melody; pleasing to man, but distasteful
to God. Church-music is often mere display—intoned with energy, and ending in
self, Music is the expression of emotion, the outburst of praise to God. When
rightly conducted it will be attractive to man and honouring to God. In times of
revival it has elevated the heart and quickened the life. But the best gifts of
nature and art may be made instruments of evil. Music is abused when joined
with immoral poetry and allurements of sin. When grace is not in the heart
we do not sing with the spirit and with the understanding. If the life is not im
tane with the.lips, God says, ‘Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs.”


CHAP. V.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


293





HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 21, 22. Israel had feasts of
solemn joy and the restraint of solemn
assemblies. They offered whole burnt-
offerings, the token of self-sacrifice, in
which the sacrificer retained nothing to
himself, but gave them freely to God.
They offered also peace -offerings, as
tokens of the willing thankfulness of
souls at peace with God. What they
offered was the best of its kind, fatted
beasts. Hymns of praise, full-toned
chorus, instrumental music! What was
wanting, Israel thought, to secure them
the favour of God? Love and obedi-
ence. If ye love me, keep my command-
ments. And so those things, whereby
they hoped to propitiate God, were the
object of his displeasure [Pusey]. Here
is a warning to all who think to please
God by elaborate musical services in
his house ; while they do not take heed
to worship him with their hearts, and
to obey him in their daily life
[ Wordsworth].

Ver. 24. The sound of music, rolling
in full chorus, will not profit in a
drought of justice and righteousness.
“ Praise is not seemly in the mouth of


a sinner, for it was not sent him of the
Lord” (Kceclus. xv. 9).

When justice is duly administered it
is said to run down as waters, &ce.
Now waters and streams run not to one
man’s house, or door, but the stream
offers itself to every man, it runs down
to the poor man’s door as well as to the
rich man’s door, it runs by the meanest
cottage as well as by the princely palace.
Righteousness must run like a stream ;
it must be a common, a universal good
[Caryl].

The first outward step m conversion
is to break off sin. He bids them Jet
judgment, which had hitherto been per-
verted in its course, roli on like a
mighty tide of waters, sweeping before
it all hindrances, obstructed by no
power, turned aside by nc bribery, but
pouring on in one perpetual flow, reach-
ing all, refreshing all, and righteous-
ness like a mighty (or ceaseless) stream.
True righteousness is not fitful, like an
intermitting stream, vehement at one
time, then disappearing, but continuous,
unfailing [ Pusey].


HOMILETICS.


JUDGMENTS LIKE A FLoop.—Verse 24.


The verse is to be explained according to Is. x. 22, and threatens the flooding


of the land with judgment, and the punitive righteousness of God [ Kei/].


In this


sense the judgments of God are like a flood.


I. In the method of coming.
waters in Scripture.
in sin and carnal security.
upon them.
them.
waters.”
to their place.


‘God hath broken in upon mine enemies .
3. They come violently. They carry away all opposition, and roll direct
4, They come abundantly. One after another in dreadful succes-


Terrors and troubles are often compared te
1. They come suddenly. All at once they burst upon men
When they say peace then sudden destruction cometh
2. They come supernaturally, God, and not any second cause, sends


. . like the breaking forth of


sion upon individuals and nations, until the purpose of God is accomplished. II.


In the mischief they create.


Floods and mighty streams are fearful in them-


selves, but when sent by Almighty power to chastise who can resist them? 1.
They create consternation, Men are terrified and seek every possible way of escape.
The late floods in England and France illustrate this, Divine judgments are in-
tended to rouse men from slumber and lead them to God. “For when thy
judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.”
2. They cause universal devastation. They sweep the city and the country, and
spread destruction on every hand. The mansions of the rich and the dwellings of
the poor are overcome with the rolling stream. So God's fierce anger goes over men


294 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. LOHAP. ¥.





as mighty waters, to drown their possessions and take their comforts. ‘“ Deep
calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts; all thy waves and thy billows
are gone over me.”
“Wide o’er misfortune’s surging tide
Billows succeeding billows spread ;
Should one, its. fury spent, subside,
Another lifts its boisterous head.”


HerepITaRY SINS AND GRiEvoUS PuNIsHMENT.—Jerses 25—27,


. Hereditary sin was the second reason why the day of the Lord would be to them
a day of distress, From the earliest period their hearts had been alienated. As
heirs to the guilt and imitators of the ways of their fathers, they must be car-
ried into a far country. Continued provocation will bring greater punishment
than ever.

I. The same system of idolatry was practised. If we carefully compare the
text with Deut. xxxii. 17, Josh. xxiv. 14, and Ezek. xx. 26, we find that Israel
were guilty of idolatry in the wilderness. 1. They misrepresented the true God.
They made images for themselves in direct opposition to God’s command. In
the very tabernacle of Jehovah they bore the shrines of Moloch and Remphap
Amos declared the men of his day to be addicted to the same sins and identi
fied with the same disgrace. Some men inherit the lusts as well as the lands
of their ancestors. The idolatry of the fathers is seen in the worship of the
sons. Thus we forfeit the distinction which God gives and entail one of om
own. “I will cause you to go into captivity.” 2. They worshipped false gods.
“Have ye offered unto me?” Here lies the emphasis. Notwithstanding all
their pretensions and sacrifices they offered not to God. ‘They sacrificed unto
devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new gods, whom you
fathers feared not.” We are not safe because we have a Protestant Bible and
orthodox creeds, abundant churches, and religious privileges. The same tendency
is in our hearts to forget the revealed character and despise the claims of Ged --t
create and honour other gods, and amid constraining reasons for cleaving to God,
make images of things in heaven above or in earth beneath. ‘Their heart was net
right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant.” II. The same per-
verse spirit was cherished. Stephen quotes this charge against the people, as
a signal proof of perverseness of heart which had always been shown by the nation.
Even in days of wonderful deliverance and multiplied acts of Divine favour they
cherished a rebellious heart. Men are found now resisting the Holy Spirit as
their fathers from generations before them have done. . They partake of the sins of
their progenitors. 1. In copying their example; 2. In commending their errors ;
and 3. In cherishing their spirit. Thus we may identify ourselves with sins which
we do not really commit. ‘“ Neither be partaker of other men’s sins: keep thyself
pure.” III. The same kind of punishment was inflicted. If we partake of
other men’s guilt we are liable to the same punishment. Israel suffered in a simi-
lar way to those in ancient days. 1. They fell under severe displeasure. Mur-
muring and rebellion brought upon a former race the judgments of God. Their
carcases fell in the wilderness, a warning to all generations of idolatry and un-
belief. 2. They were excluded from the land of promise. One race did not enter
Canaan; the other was driven out of it into exile. Instead of warding off the
curse, they secured its reversion. The day came when they presumptuously de-
sired and brought darkness, not light; judgment, not deliverance. They were car-
ried “ beyond Damascus,” beyond all hope of return (2 Kings xvii. 6). Learn—1.
That God gives a record and warning from the punishment of men’s sins. 2. That
he who commits and cherishes a sin, puts himself in the company of those who
have been guilty of it from the beginning of the world. 3. That it is a principle
with God to punish more severely, if less judgment do not work the end for whick


CHAP. V., HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


re


296


they are sent. 4. If men would seriously meditate upon God’s greatness and


power, they would not sleep securely under his awful threatenings. Thus “saith
the Lord, whose name is the God of Hosts.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER V.


Vers. 1—3. In a piteous lamentation
of the miserable state of the Church of
Christ in England in the reign of Queen
Mary, written by that worthy martyr
of God Nicholas Ridley (Works, Parker
Society), we meet with most affecting
reasons for sorrow and tears [Ryan].
“Tf you have tears, prepare to shed them now.”

[ Shakespeare. |

Vers.4—6. Jeroboam pretended that
it was too much for Israel to go up to
Jerusalem. Yet Israel thought it not
too much to go to the extremest point
of Judah towards Idumeza, perhaps four
times as far south of Jerusalem as
Jerusalem lay from Bethel. For Beer-
sheba is thought to have lain some 30
miles south of Hebron, which is 22
miles south of Jerusalem ; while Bethel
is but 12 to the north. So much pains
will men take in self-willed service, and
yet not see that it takes away the ex-
cuse for neglecting the true [ Pusey].

Ver. 6. “Justice is the great but
simple principle, and the whole secret
of success in all government. It is as
essential in the training of an infant as
in the government of a mighty nation.”


“ Justice, like lightning, ever should appear
To few men’s ruin, but to all men’s fear.”’
[Stvenam. ]
Vers. 8, 9. Power is that glorious
attribute of God Almighty which
furnishes the rest of his perfections:
’Twas power which made his ideas
fruitful, and struck the world out of his
thoughts, ’Tis this which is the basis
of all things; which constitutes the
vigour of second causes, and keeps the
sun and moon in repair. Omniscience
and goodness, without a corresponding
power, would be strangely short of satis-
faction; to know everything without
being able to supply defects and remedy
disorders, must be a grievance; but
when omnipotence comes into the
nation the grandeur is perfect (Jer.
Collier}.


Vers, 9—11.


“Tt often falls, in course of common life,
That right sometimes is overborne of wrong,
The avarice of power, or guile, or strife,
That weakens her and makes her party strong.
But Justice, though her doom she do prolong,
Yet at the last will make her own cause right.”
[Spenser]
Ver. 10. Who is there that some-
times does not merit a check? and yet
how few will endure one [Feltham].
Ver. 11. “ Built houses,” §c.


“You take my house when you do take the pro
That doth sustain my house; you take my lie
‘When you do take the means whereby I live.”

[Shakespeare.]

Ver. 13. Keep silence. Euler lived
at Petersburg during the administration
of Biron, one of the most tyrannical
ministers that ever breathed. On the
philosopher’s coming to Berlin, after the
tyrant’s death, the late queen of Prussia,
who could hardly get a word out of
him, asked him the reason of his silence,

“ Because,” said he, ‘“‘I come from a

place where if a man says a word he is

hanged” [ Whitecross].

Vers. 14,15. We must not envy the
doers ot evil, but depart from their
spirit andexample. As Lot left Sodom
without casting a look behind, so must
we leave sin. No time or parley is to
be held with sin, we must turn away
from it without hesitation, and set our-
selves practically to work in the oppo-
site direction [Spurgeon].

Vers. 16—20, Ill-gotten gains are a
dangerous and uncertain possession.
God can easily take them away, and
turn our joy into mourning. ‘That
which is dyed with many dippings is
in the grain, and can very hardly be
washed out” [Jer. Taylor]. Men do
not love to be brought into contact with
realities, or be reminded of coming
“days of darkness.” There is an un-
welcome message to the conscience,
Art thou ready to meet this solemn—-
this hastening season? If you regard


298


death as a friend, prepare to entertain
it ; if an enemy, prepare to overcome it.

Vers. 21—23. A man is not what he
saith, but what he doeth. To say what
we do, and not to do what we say, is
but to undo ourselves by doing [Dyer].
Hypocrisy is filling up some radical
defect with some shallowy pretence
[ Binney].

“Tis mad idolatry


To make the service greater than the God.”
[Shakespeare.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : AMOS.


{cuaP. VL


Vers. 25—27. The fact that physical,
mental, and moral qualities are heredi-
tary, is proved in the persistent charac-
teristics of races and nations. Jewish
and negro types, Chinese and Japanese,
have had the same characteristics for
centuries. So features of morality are
stamped upon descendants. By walk-
ing in the steps of their fathers, nations
and families reap the same harvest. We
have hereditary transmission of sins and
punishment.





CHAPTER VL


Criticat Norss.} Second woe denounced. Ease] Recklessly and carelessly. Mount.] not m
God. Sam.] Strong, which resisted for 3 years, and was the last city of Israel taken (2 Kings
xvii. 5, 6). Chief] in influence and office, Heb. men designated (Num. i. 17: 1 Chron. xii. 31).
Came] for decision and help. Israel was the chief of nations, and these princes the distinguished
of Israel. Sadly degenerate now! 2. Pass] Survey three neighbouring kingdoms, ‘‘If these
kingdoms are not better and greater than yours, why do ye worship theer gods and forsake the true
God?” [Elzas]. 3. Woe] Charge first from a general and then a special view. Put off) Lit. with
aversion, the day of retribution, though declared near (Ezek. xii. 21—28), Bring near] Suffer
oppression to be enthroned among you. 4.] Luxury added to oppression. Stretch] Lit. pour
themselves out, ‘dissolved, unnerved, in luxury and sloth.” Beds] inlaid with ivory. Lambs]
Choice and delicious in the East. 5.] Like David they employ themselves with music, but for a
different aim. 6.] Not satisfied with small cups, they took the dowds used for sprinkling of blood, to
indulge in excess, and used the most costly oils, not for health and cleanliness, but wanton luxury,
Grieved] not for calamities suffered in the past, or threatened in future. 7. Head] Chiefs in trans-
gression must be fist in the procession to captivity. Banquet] Lit. making merry with shouts.
8. Sworn] “Like ch, iv. 2, except that it is by Azmself instead of by Ais holiness, but the sense is
the same, for the nephesh of Jehovah, z. e. his inmost self or being, is his holiness ’’ [Ke77]. 9. Ten]
A rare case (ch. v. 3). 10. Uncle] Any relative who had to bury the dead (Gen. xxv. 9: Judg.
xvi. 31). Burn.] in case of necessity. Bones] 7. ¢. the dead body (Gen. 1, 25: Ex, xiii. 19). Say]
Ask one discovered if he is the only survivor. Hold] The burier bids the survivor be silent, lest by
invocation God should make him a victim of death. All hope from God has utterly gone. 11.]


Smite] by earthquake, or by pestilence and sword during siege; every house, great and small, 12.]
As horses and oxen are useless on a rock, so ye are incapable of fulfilling justice [Grotius]. The
The in-


comparison indicates the folly of expecting prosperity while committing acts of injustice.
terrogative form gives strength to the representation. 18. Nought] Their growing empire, or
imaginary strength. Horns] A symbol of power; dominion rescued by Jeroboam from the
Syrians (2 Kings xiv. 25). 14.] God’s answer to this presumption. A people] Not named, per-
haps to awaken attention; probably Assyria, Afflict] Oppress, crush down; the whole extent of
territory said to have been recovered by Jeroboam II., the region of triumphs a scene of woe.


: HOMILETICS.
At Kase 1n Zion.—Verse 1.


In the first part of this chapter woe is uttered against the careless chiefs of the
nation, for profane security, contempt of Divine judgments, and heartless oppres-
sion, Special allusion is made to the leaders, but the whole nation had sunk int«
godless conduct and shameful debauchery.


CHAP. VI.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 297





I. At ease in eminent responsibility. ‘At ease in Zion.” Israel was ex
alted as a nation above others. Israel’s princes were men of rank and authority ;
ss renowned of the congregation,” and consulted by the people. Ali were blessed
with eminent privileges and great responsibility. But the honour was not recog-
nized. The highest motive to action did not confirm them in fidelity to God.
They carelessly indulged themselves and forgot their responsibilities. Where
much is given, much will be required. To be “at ease in Zion,” in the midst of
religious ordinances and gospel light, is especial danger. If we neglect or despise
our eminent position, we aggravate our guilt, and increase the greatness of our
downiall—“ Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida!” &c. II. At
ease in carnal security. ‘“ And trust in the mountain of Samaria.” Zion, the centre
of religion, and Samaria, the metropolis of a powerful kingdom, were the security of
Israel. Our own strength and resources will prove a broken reed. Men may
boast of the places in which they live, glory in their eminence, and secure them-
selves in ease; but vain confidence in the means of grace will awfully disappoint.
We must trust to no great men, no high hills. “Our help cometh from the Lord,
which made heaven and earth,” III. At ease in great pride. Connected with
ease and carnal security was a haughty spirit. Israel prided themselves in their
relation to God, and disdained other nations. “The chief of the nations to whom
the house of Israel came” would think themselves, and expect others to call them,
great men. ‘‘ Haughty because of my holy mountain.” Many are puffed up with
pride, and rock themselves to sleep in religious privileges. They cry “The temple
of the Lord are we” (Jer. vii. 4), and doubt not but God’s sanctuary will secure
them from judgments to come. But pride never gives true rest, and those who
delude themselves in superior holiness and distinguished titles shall be utterly for-
gotten (Ps. cix. 13). The greater their glory, the more shameful their punishment.
“How much she hath glorified herself and lived deliciously, so much torment and
sorrow give her.” IV. At ease in threatened judgments. ‘Woe to them.”
When God is angry men have no reason to sleep. Reckless indifference, in busi-
ness and religion, is a forerunner of certain ruin. Careless sinners, sleepers in
Zion, ave in danger of eternal destruction. When they rouse not at the call of the
gospel, when deaf to the thunders of Divine judgments, they sleep where God will
come first and be most severe; where the calls are loudest and the doom most hope-
less. Wake up at the sound of ‘“ Woe,” before you feel its dreadful reality.
“ What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise and call upon thy God.”


Scourge FoR SLUMBERING SOULS.


in itself considered it is no ill thing, but a great blessing, to be at ease in Zion,
in a healthy sense of the word. But there is an ill sense in which it is used, “ Woe
to them,” &c: the ease of one grown callous, hardened, and sullen, a sleep which
if not broken will bring to the bed of hell.

I. First, to rouse the many at ease in Zion, we will call out their names—
which are found in the chapter before us. The name of the first sleeper in Zion is
Presumptuous. His character is described in the first verse, “They trust in the
mountain,” &c.—boast of their morality and self-righteousness. ‘I am rich and
increased in good,” &c. A second is Not-now, or Procrastination. “Ye that put
far away the evil day” (ver. 3). The third name is Evil-doer, or Sin-lover. “They
cause the seat of violence to come near.” The next is Love-self. ‘They lie upon
beds of ivory,” &e. Among those at ease was one called Careless, an individual
who belongs to a large family. We may give him another name, giddy, light-
hearted. “That chant to the sound of the viol.” The last name is Crossless.
“They are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.” II. Now having men-
tioned their names we shed some light upon these sleepers’ eyes. A hopeless
errand! for they sleep with the sun of heaven shining upon their eyelids. “ At
ease in Zion,’ Not in Ethiopia, where they have never heard the gospel ; not in


298 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : AMOS. [CHAP. VI.





Sheba or the ends of the earth, where no warning prophets had been sent. In the
first place you are asleep, but you know your danger. You have frequent arousings.
Everything in this place cries out against you. To be at ease when the House,
the Gospel, and the Sabbath are crying out against us, is to be at ease while God is
making ready his sword against us. III. The last point is, to sound the trumpet
in the ears of the sleepers. My trumpet has but one note, “ Woe! woe! woe!”
Not a living man knows the full meaning of that word. Bring out the gentler
parts of the note ; and first, woe to you, for now is it at all likely that you ever will
be saved? In the innumerable cases in this place of conversion the majority
were persons who had not long heard the word. I think Christmas Evans used
the simile of the blacksmith’s dog, which was very frightened with the sparks at
first, but at last got so accustomed to them that he went to sleep under the anvil.
“ And go,” said the good preacher, ‘there be many that go to sleep under the’
gospel, with the sparks of damnation flying about their nostrils.” Remember you
are asleep in a place where Justice deals its heaviest blow. Do you tremble? You
are saved the moment you believe in Christ. ‘‘There is therefore now no con-
demnation,” &c. [Spurgeon].


INGRATITUDE FOR THE PRESENCE AND INDIFFERENCE TO THE WARNINGS
or Gop.— Verses 2, 3.

To prove the ingratitude of the nation, Amos shows that Israel was not inferior
to any heathen state in greatness and prosperity—that this honour involved serious
responsibility, and that to despise the warnings of God who had thus blessed
them would bring great punishment. I. Ingratitude for God’s presence. Israel
were ungrateful to God for the original gift and the continued preservation of the
land. The heathens had suffered, they had been spared, yet they forgot God.
1. In national prosperity. ‘‘ Pass ye,” &c., look everywhere and see if any kingdom
has a “ border greater than your border.” We boast of our rank and pre-eminence ;
talk of our colonies and dependencies, and exclaim, “ Great and mighty England !”
But empire is not greatness. The history of Gath and Hamath, of Greece and
Rome, remind us that we stand by God’s providence alone—that we fall when
we rely on our own might and prosperity. If we trust to our insular position, our
popular platform, and our natural resources, we forget the real and extract the wrong
causes. 2. In national morality. We pride ourselves in national worth, and point
to other nations, are “they betéer than these kingdoms?” Education and govern-
ment, society and public sentiment, are intoned and controlled by the spirit of
Christianity. But morally we are far from being what we ought. Boasting is ex-
cluded by non-recognition of God and prevalent evils. Weare often extravagant and
haughty. Vice and intemperance abound. Bacchus and Mammon have temples
in every town, and votaries in every street. There are spots in our sun and dirt
upon our pedestal. Let us not be unthankful to God, not forgetful of other
nations. “ Art thou better than populous No, that was situate among the rivers,
that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea,” &c. (Nah. iii. 8, 9) :
II. Indifference to God’s warning. ‘You put away the evil day.” As Israel
despised the judgments, so men now put away the warnings of God’s providence.
The evil day frightens the ungodly, and in different ways they push it from them
and assign it to a distance. 1. In carelessness. Sentence against sin is not ex-
ecuted speedily, and men grow indifferent. Space for escape is given, the long-
suffering of God is seen, and they take liberties. Sin blinds the mind and hardens
the heart Impressions wear away, proofs of judgments grow weaker, and sinners
Ns things with inverted glance. Duty is delayed and death is put out of their
minds.

: ‘* All men think all men mortal, but themselves.”


2. In unbelief. Amid culture and science scepticism abounds, infidelity spreads,
snd warnings are unheeded. Indulgence in sin opens up avenues to unbelief. Led


CHAP. VI.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : AMOS. 299








to believe against all moral evidence, men speak as they feel, and make evil days
small and distant. ‘Therefore do men take judgment to be far off from them,”
says one, “because they take sin to be near them.” Truth looked at from a dis-
tance will gradually fade away, and lose its authority over life. It will be put
farther and farther from us until it is denied altogether, and we sleep in false
security. 3. In contempt. Israel neither feared nor believed approaching danger.
In scorn they might tell the prophet it was delayed, and would therefore not come
near them. Instead of preparing for it, they grew harder and more eager in sin.
“They cause violence to come near.” The farther they put away judgment the
nearer they brought oppression. Under colour of justice and law the wicked fix
up the throne of iniquity, disregard the voice of God, and hasten on that last de-
struction which they dream will never come. Death is but a step off, and “ the
Judge standeth before the door.” Retribution follows judgment, and if retri-
bution were only temporal and mutable that would be alarming. But it is eternal
and irreversible. Are we prepared for the change? ‘ Who may abide the day of
his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth ?”


A Recxiess Community.—Verses 4—6.


Israel not only put away the day of Divine retribution, but multiplied the
causes which produced it. Violence within will bring violence from without the
land. When we put away God we invite destruction. Luxury, revelry, and de-
bauchery describe a reckless community and reign in the present day. The special
sins condemned are depicted in a peculiar manner.

I. Self-indulgence. Men betray their feelings and abuse their gifts, show they
live like epicures, and pamper themselves like beasts. This selfish indulgence is
seen—l. In luxurious ease. ‘‘ That lie upon beds of ivory.” Beds most expensive
and scarce, splendid and far-fetched. They unnerved and relaxed themselves upon
couches. They humoured themselves in idleness and wealth ; indulged in personal
gratification, abounded in superfluities, and robbed the poor of necessities. 2. In
effeminate diet. ‘The choicest lambs and calves fed out of the stall only satisfied
their appetite. Some live to eat, and do not eat to live; feed without gratitude, and
indul:- in lust without restraint. ‘ Whose God is their belly, and whose glory is
in ther shame.” II. Profane revelry. ‘That chant to the sound of the viol.”
They tned to lead a merry life and a happy one. They displayed ingenuity by in-
venting instruments to drive away dull care. As David improved and introduced
musical instruments into the service of God, so these men devised and fitted them
for luxury and sensuality. But artificial music creates no Divine harmony. It
weakens the nature and ministers to the folly of men. ‘When men sing instead of
weeping, when mirth is unseasonable, unbridled, and licentious, it is void of every-
thing that dignifies the mind and elevates the soul to God. ‘‘ Admonishing one
another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your heart
to the Lord.”


“ There’s not a string attuned to mirth
But has its chord in melancholy.”


III. Shameful debauchery. Luxury and selfishness lead to excess; sensuality
and mirth, to irreverence. This is seen—l. In profane conduct. They were not
satisfied with ordinary vessels, but robbed the altars to “drink wine in bowls.” In
former times princes of Israel manifested zeal in consecrating silver bowls to God,
now they drink in honour of idolatry. They profaned the vessels of the sanctuary,
and devoted to selfish what should have been for sacred uses. 2. In riotous ex-
cess. They drank out of large, not small cups. This they did habitually without
measure or stint. They spent their wealth in pleasure and dissipation ; employed
their ingenuity to discover new methods of self-gratification, and drank wine to
silence conscience, banish reflection, and harden the heart. IV. Sinful apathy.


300 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. {cHAP. ¥I








They had no concern whatever for the nation sinking into decay and suffering
under the judgement of God. 1. Their joy is unbridled. Their extravagance is
seen in “the chief ointments with which they anoint themselves,” not for health
and comfort, but wanton luxury. The custom of anointing was suspended in time
of mourning (2 Sam. xiv. 2), but these neither grieve for themselves nor for the
ruin of their country. 2. Their indifference is stolid. Bent on personal gratifi-
eation of the most debasing kind, they were devoid of all patriotism and concern
for the injury to the kingdom. “They are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.”
‘They indulged in the heartless conduct of the sons of Jacob towards their brother,
eating bread when Joseph was in the pit (Gen. xxxvii. 24). Wrath had broken “out
like a fire in the house of Joseph” (ch. v. 6), but they were deaf to the warnings
of God and the remonstrance of the poor. They spent their time in beds of
indolence and ease; pampered their bodies with delicious viands; and de-
lighted their souls in strains of music, excess of wine, and costly perfumes.
Sensuality results in unnatural feeling for kindred and country ; shuts out the
sufferings of others, and leads to greater indulgence. ‘“ We are verily guilty con-
cerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us
and we would not hear.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 5. The use and abuse of music.
‘1. Its use, when devoted to the worship
of God and the welfare of men. Vocal
and instrumental music may be of im-
mense service in the culture of the
heart and the training of the young.
Our nature is adapted to harmony, and
God has bestowed means for improve-
ment,


“ There is in souls a sympathy with sounds,
And as the mind is pitched the ear is pleased.”


2. Its abuse when employed in the serv-
ice of Satan and ministering to licen-
tiousness and lust. How often found in
midnight reveis and scenes of intemper-
ance! ‘‘Debased music is a mark of a
nation’s decay and promotes it,” says
one. The constitution of nations may
be affected by changing national music.
“Give me the making of the nation’s
ballads,” said Lord Chatham, “and I care
not who makes the laws.” David conse-
erated lyre and harp to the service of
God, now men gain reputation by comic
songs and immodest dancing. “Bid


+


lute and harp to awake to the glory of
God.”

Inke David. Men abuse gifts of God
by the examples of saints. They
stumble in their infirmities, and copy
their actions in a wrong spirit. David
a great lover of music, and employed it
in the praise of God. Imitators use it
for carnal pleasure.

Ver. 6. True patriotism, grieving for
Joseph. 1. A country is often deeply
afflicted by inward calamities and out-
ward dangers, 2. A lover of his country
will grieve for its affliction. David
and Jeremiah noble examples. 3. Self-
ish indulgence deprives men of sym-
pathy with others, renders them un-
grateful and unpatriotic. “How many
dwell in ceiled houses, and sing to the
sound of the harp, and feast on the
richest dainties, and care nothing for
the sorrows of Christ, and his Church,
nay, rather rejoice in them!” (Rev.
xi. 10) [Wordsworth].

“ Breathes there a man with soul so dead,

Who never to himself hath said,
This is my own, my native land!” [Scott.]


HOMILETICS.
Nationat Rerrisution veon Sinrut InpULGENOER.— Verses 7—11.
The punishment is now threatened. Their “mighty sins” would bring heavy


retribution.


ligious privileges would not avert it.


Those pre-eminent in crime would be pre-eminent in captivity. The
nation must suffer by pestilence and plague.


The ruin will be universal, and re


Gwar. VI.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 303








I. National captivity. Those who live in luxury often lose their liberty,
and the most dignified are reduced to servitude. 1. Dis. raceful captivity.
The chief in rank were chief in sin, and first to go into captivity. Their
disgrace was most conspicuous. Those who delight only in the pleasures
of sense shall be removed from them. Those who think themselves secure,
and put the evil day from them, will find it nearer than they imagine. The
banquets of luxury and wantonness will be removed, and men who give themselves
to mirth when God calls them to mourn will not go unpunished in their sin
(Is, xxi 14). 2. Mournful captivity. The shouting of wine-bibbers would cease.
Feasting would end in weeping, and desolation would spread throughout the land.
Carnal ease and sinful excess often end in hopeless misery. II. National rejec-
tion. The cities and kingdom with all their wealth would be delivered into the
hands of the enemy. 1. National glory abhorred. “I abhor the excellency of
Jacob.” The house of God, rightly valued and properly used, was their glory and
defence. Their priesthood, temple, and religious privileges raised them above
other nations. But these were polluted and despised. God was dishonoured by
idolatry and provoked to anger. The strength of “the city ” and splendour of the
“palaces” availed not. The glory departed. When God abhors he will soon aban-
don. External services are mere mockery. When national glory rivals God,and men
blessed with distinguished excellency take pleasure in things base and inferior,
God will reject them. ‘Therefore will I deliver up the city, with all that is
therein.” 2. Dreadful mortality abounded. The inmates of some houses would
be entirely swept away. ‘Ten men in one house shall die.” Fewif any domestics
were left to bury the dead. The uncle or distant relatives must bury or burn
them. God’s arrows were so piercing, and his anger so fierce, that relatives and
survivors were agreed to keep solemn silence under the rod. Pestilence overtook
those who escaped the sword. Hopeless despair seized men. Cut off from God,
there was no help in man. They had to submit to appointed doom. 3. Universal
destruction prevailed. (1) Destruction of the population. “In the multitude of
the people is the strength of the prince,” and God Almighty cut off that strength.
(2) Destruction of the capital. The city or chief cities of the kingdom would be
destroyed. They would therefore be robbed of defence, open to danger, and become
an object of pity and contempt. “Like a city that is broken down, and without
walls.” (3) Destruction most terrible. ‘He will smite the great house with
breaches,” &c. The mighty and the mean have sinned and must be punished.
God will smite not some, but all families and societies. “ Princes’ palaces are not
above, the poor man’s cottage is not beneath the judgment of God.” (4) Destruc-
tion most certain. “God hath sworn by himself” (ver. 7). Sensuality produces
stupidity. God seeks to rouse men by an oath to end the controversy. ‘‘The
Lord commandeth.” We should see God’s hand and purpose in great distress.
He makes it effectual and irresistible. When nations are ripe for judgment foreign
armies are only Divine instruments. How hopeless the condition of those who
harden themselves under Divine chastisements, and whose ruin God has sworn to
accomplish !


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Mark the gradation of consequences ‘The Lord hath given a commandment


in the whole paragraph. First the
chiefs are punished. Then the people,
influenced by their example, are drawn
into captivity. The present generation
are carried off by death, appointed ordin-
ances are taken away, and the rod of
Ged smites families great and small.


concerning thee, that no more of thy
name be sown” (Nah. i. 14: Jer.
xlvii. 6).

Ver. 10. What asad condition when
men tremble at the name of God!
What an exhibition of power upon an
evil conscierte, when men flee from


302





instead of turning to God. Ten right-
eous men would have saved Sodom, but
here all were destroyed.

He who has obstinately abused the


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


(CHAP. VL


to cavil against God’s truth, will ba
foraaken by him at the last, and wil
not be able to utter his name [ Words
worth].


intellectual powers given him by God


HOMILETICS.
A Horsuuss Pzorte.—Verses 12—14.


These verses are rather abrupt, and generally taken to show how useless and
impossible it is to reform the people. Their perversion of right and their inditfer-
ence to threatening rendered punishment inevitable, and foolish confidence in ther
own power could not avert it.

I. Punishment was most inevitable. Two illustrations prove this. Their
conduct was perilous and preposterous. Horses cannot run with safety, nor can
oxen plough, upon rocks: so in their self-chosen way they will wound themselves
and be disappointed. 1. Former attempts to reform had failed. God had sent
judgment after judgment, prophet after prophet, butin vain. They had not broken
up their fallow ground, but were hard and uncultivated as a rock. They hindered
the work of God and acted most perversely. ‘Those who will not be tilled as
fields shall be abandoned as rocks,” says Calvin. 2. Special sins were not forsaken.
“ Ye have turned judgment into gall,” &c. Power was still abused, oppression ap 1
injustice practised, and righteousness turned into hemlock. Men who pervert jus
tice, and despise ordinances in hope of advantage, will neither preserve the natior
nor escape punishment. They turn the hearts of men and the providence of God
against themselves. It is as impossible for them to prosper as to reap a harvest
from the rock. 3. The judgments of God were disregarded, They continued to
rejoice in their idols and wealth; boasted of their own valour, and thought to
defend themselves with their own strength. ‘‘ Have we not taken to us horns?”
t, e, acquired power and dominion. Premeditated injustice, wilful opposition to the
word of God, will lead to judicial blindness and destruction. Those who exalt
themselves in pride shall be abased. II. Punishment was most destructive.
What they took for their greatest gain would be their greatest loss. 1. Their own
strength could not defend them. It was ‘a thing of nought.” There was no sub-
stance, no reality in it. Victory and dominion, courage and prosperity, are non-
entities. Empire decays and riches flee away. God only is real and satisfying
good. 2. The whole country would be desolated. Under Jeroboam II. they had
recovered their lands, “from the entering in of Hamath,” &c. (2 Kings xiv. 25). |
They were boasting of their success and securing themselves m their dominions,
But the scene of their triumph would be the scene of their fall. When men give
not God the glory of their possessions, in justice will he take them away. 3. The
whole people would be oppressed. ‘‘ They shall afflict you.” Conquerors would take
the riches in which they gloried, treat them with indignity and afflict them with
shame. Neither Judah nor Israel would bespared. It is easier to turn the course of
nature than to change God’s law from rewarding the righteous and punishing the


wicked. When God commands it must be done, and the scourge will be prevalent
as the evil.


+


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.
12. Horses upon a rock, &c. The


course of the sinner—1. Most foolish,
2. Most dangerous. 3. Most useless.
Horses stumble and wound themselves.
No harvest is reaped from such plough-


ing. The course of sin, turning equity
into poison, will grievously disappoint.
13. Taken tous horns. The language
of arrogance and self-confidence. 1.
Men apt to ascribe possessions to their


CHAP. VI.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


303


LL ST A


own efforts. They have done everything
and God nothing. 2. To overvalue
them in the enjoyment. How many
things in which we trust are things of
nought. 3, Hence, when we think more
of the gifts than the Giver, we are taught
our folly. To glory in anything, what-
ever it may promise, will delude. God
will strip men of every false, that he


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver, 1. Ease. This is carnal ease, a
fleshly security ; it is not the confidence
of a man who is pardoned, but the ease
of a hardened wretch who has learned
to despise the gibbet. It is not the
calm of a soul at peace with God, but
the ease of a madman, who because he
has hidden his sin from his own eyes,
thinks he has concealed it from God
[Spurgeon].

Vers, 2, 3. He that is graceless in a
day of grace will be speechless in a day
of judgment [Mead].

“‘ Heaven gives the needful, but neglected call.
What day, what hour, but knocks at human
hearts,
To wake the sout te sense of future scenes.”
[Young.]

Vers. 4—6. Pleasure. Would you
judge of the lawfulness or unlawfulness
of pleasures, take this rule :—Whatever
weakens your reason, impairs the tender-
ness of your conscience, obscures your
sense of God, or takes off the relish of
spiritual things; in short, whatever
increases the strength and authority of
your body over your mind, that thing
is sin to you, however innocent it may
be in itself [Southey].

“Tn this fool’s paradise he drank delight.”
[G@. Crabbe.]
Ver. 7. Banquet.


“ So comes a reckoning when the banquet’s o'er,
The dreadful reckoning, and men smile no more.’


| [Guy.]

Ver. 9. Die. How terrible the fea-
tures of this plague! The entire sweep-
ing away of all the inmates of some
houses. A solemn spectacle for others
to witness, displaying the fierceness and
power of God’s anger. In the great
plague of Marseilles, 1720, and in that


may become their true glory.

14. [will raise up. No foe could ever
invade us if the Lord did not raise him
up. War therefore is not an accident,
but a providential dispensation. Pha-
raoh, Hadad, Rezon, the Chaldees, are
all expressly said to have been raised up
by the Lord (Ex. ix. 16: 1 Kings xi
14, 23: Hab. i. 6) [Lange].


TO CHAPTER III.


of the village of Eyam, 1666, we have
similar scenes. “In 1813,” says one,
“such was the violence with which the
plague raged at Malta, such the certain
destruction which attended the slightest
contact with the infected, that at last
every better feeling of the heart was
extinguished in a desire of self-préserva-
tion, and nobody could be procured to
perform the melancholy offices which
make up the funeral train of sickness and
death.”
Ver. 11. Great and small.


* With equal pace impartial fate
Knocks at the palace as the cottage gate.”
[ Horace. ]

Ver. 12, The blessings of just admin-
istration are emphatically set forth by
terms used to describe the opposite.
Injustice is gall and poison, bitterness
and death. How should it commend to
us the kingdom of Christ, that he is to
reign in righteousness, to judge in
equity [Ryan].

Ver. 13. Nought. The more I exag-
gerate these ideal joys, the more do I
treasure up subjects of woe. Oh what
vanity has God written upon all things
under the sun! Adored be the never
failing mercy of God! He has made
my happiness to depend, not on the
uncertain connections of this life, but
upon his own most blessed self—a por-
tion that never faileth [Martyn].

Ver. 14. Captivity. Sell not your
liberty to gratify your luxury [Matt.
Henry}.


‘ There is a paradise that fears .

No forfeiture, and of its fruit He sends
Large prelibations oft to saints below.”
[ Cowper.)


an4 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. (CHAP. VII.





CHAPTER VIL


Cuitican Norzs.] Showed] three visions in thisch. Loeusts (vers. 1—3) the first; “all inward
tuitions produced by the Spirit of God, which set forth the primitive judgments of God” [Xeil]. Begiu.]
Time defined, as the springing up of a second crop, and this crop after the king’s mowings. Some take
Jehovah as King, the mowing the judgments executed upon Israel. ‘Ihe period is most un-
favourable, One crop had been taken and the second threatened. But this danger averted b
intercession. 2. Small] Reduced in number and strength, poor in means and hope, unable to stand,
Vers. 4—6—The devouring fire. Contend] with Israel by war, of which fire is a symbol (Ezek.
Xxxvili. 22) ; represented as drying up waters (many people, Rev. xvii. 15) and devouring on dr
land (Is. ix. 1). 6. For this] as well as threatenings of vision first. Vers. 7—9—The third
vision. Plumb.] applied expressly to Israel. Pass by] ¢. ¢. forgive them any more (Proy. xix. 11:
Mic. vii. 18). God’s patience is exhausted. The prophet intercedes no more, 9. Places] of idol-
worship ; the royal family and the monarchy to be overthrown. 10.] The prophet opposed at
Bethel on account of these predictions, Conspired] Heb. banded, implying that others joined.
There is a charge of conspiracy and sedition ; insinuates that Amos prophesies for bread (vers. 10,
11), and in pretended courtesy advises him to remove. Say nothing against the king, let us alone
in our customs, or we will suppress you by force. 14, Said] Indignantly repudiated the charge
against himself, He wasno scholar ; as a herdsman he was content with a little, did not seek a mere
livelihood, but as the messenger of God he spoke with dignity and authority. 17. Therefore] in
return for this opposition Amaziah must bear his own doom. Wife] will be violently taken by the
enemy, The city] publicly and openly: she would be dishonoured at the storming of the city.
Land] possessed or assigned to others. Sons] Children slain by the foe; he himself would die in
exile among the heathen, and the whole nation would be carried away into captivitv.


HOMILETICS.
Tus Scouraine Loocusts.— Verses 1—3


The second half of Amos begins with visions; not mere warnings, but solemn
predictions, adapted to the moral condition of the people. The impenitence of
Israel is confirmed, their doom is fixed, and the sentence is irrevocable.

I. The judgment prepared. ‘He formed grasshoppers.” 1. Divine in its
origin. God prepared the affliction. The prophet is most emphatic on this point.
“ Evil in the city ” is from the Lord. “ He maketh the day dark with night.” But
such is our stupidity and ignorance, that we have need continually to be told. We
require sensible evidence to show God’s hand inour lot. Affliction comes not from
the dust, nor trouble from the ground (Job v. 6). 2. Specific in its character.
Locusts are the creatures of God, and perfectly under his commands. Creatures
magnificent and minute display his power and execute his design (Joel i 4). 3.
Special in its design. God formed grasshoppers. There was not only power in the
act, wisdom in the shape, but purpose in the end for which they were sent. God
is said to frame evil against a sinful people (Jer. xviii. 11). These creatures were
prepared and specially sent to eat up the grass. In his moral government, Je-
hovah prepares instruments, specially forms judgments for the correction of his
people. (1) On account of disobedience, (2) With adesign to restore. “Therefore
despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty.” II. The judgment timed.
“In the beginning of the shooting,” &c. It might have been sent earlier and been
more severe. The former might have been devoured with the latfer growth. There
was mercy as well as fitness in the time of affliction. ‘‘To everything there is a
season,” a fixed time, and a determined purpose. “As exactly and exquisitely
suited to your case and mine,” writes one, “every instant, as if it had been ap.
pointed and contrived only for that single case and that single moment.” Every
dispensation is most fitly chosen. ‘To common observers it may appear untimely,
for men see not the judgments prepared. In Israel thera might be signs of abund-


CHAP. VII. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 505





ant crops, and some who ridiculed the calamity threatened. Men watch the
rising corn, but forget the blight that may blast the harvests. Business may
flourish, youth may bloom in beauty and strength, but God may consume the fresh
and verdant scene. The messengers may be formed, and only waiting the com-
mand of their Creator to destroy the fruit of hand and mind. “ Known unto God
are all his works from the beginning of the world.” III. The judgment arrested.
“Tt shall not be, saith the Lord.” 1. By the intercession of the prophet. “Then
said I, O Lord God, cease.” The prophet saw God in “ the affliction of Joseph,”
and, unlike his countrymen, was grieved and interceded with God. How few that
are smitten are concerned in the judgments of God! Amos is a type in spirit and
practice of all the godly who pray for their kindred and country in public calamity.
Our best friends, our true patriots, are those who feel deeply and pray earnestly
under Divine chastisement. ‘And Jehoahaz besought the Lord, and tke Lord
hearkened unto him: for he saw the oppression of Israel, because the king of Syria
oppressed them.” 2. By the mercy of God. ‘The Lord repented for this ;” in
mercy heard the prayer and warded off the danger. Whatever be the conduct of
men in public distress God alone can take distress away. But if we confess our
sins, humble ourselves in petition before him, he will be gracious. If we stand in
the breach, the ruin shall not happen. Prayer has often preserved nations, averted
judgments, and changed the course of events. God has not only formed calamities,
but fitted a place for prayer. He repents of the evil and takesitaway. ‘‘ For the
Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he seeth
that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left.”


Gop ConTENDING witH Firt.—Verse 4.


If we take this fire literally or metaphorically it indicates the anger of God
against his people and the judgments which should consume them.

I. God’s action against men. Man has challenged God, denied his authority
and broken his law. Sin begets contention, creates a controversy between God
and man (Hos. iv. 1), God enters into judgment with him ; pleads by insignificant
creatures and terrible calamities, and executes fierce anger upon all workers of
iniquity. Famine, fire, and sword, devour rich and poor, money and health, and
consume everything before them (Ezek. xxxviii. 22). “The Lord standeth up to
plead, and standeth to judge the people. By fire and by sword will the Lord
plead with all flesh” (Is. xvi. 13, 16), II. Men’s obstinacy before God. We
do not law or contend with men until we have tried other means. War and law
should be the last resource. Judgment is God’s strange work. But when all
means have failed to win a people, then he contends with them in severest
measures. He will vindicate his cause and character. To strive against him is—1.
Foolish, 2. Guilty, and 3. Vain. Terrible will be the consequence of resistance.
“ Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee,
and every dry tree... And all flesh shall see that I the Lord have kindled it: it
shall not be quenched” (Ezek. xx. 47, 48).


Tur MzasvRING PLUMBLINE.—Verses 7—9.


In this vision we have the third stage of Divine judgments ; God, the builder of
the nation, tests and finds it degenerate. He will no longer spare nor seek to
reform it. Retribution is neither removed nor mitigated by prayer. ‘The day of
decision has come, and the kingdom, except a remnant, must be destroyed. In
the vision we have the trial and the verdict.

I. The trial presented. ‘ Thus he showed me.” The judgment is pictured
and then explained. 1. The nation is Divinely tested. “ Behold, I will set a
plumbline.” God himself stands upon the wall, plumbline in hand, fixed in
purpose and exact in procedure. He had built them up, blessed them with holy
laws and good rulers, and formed them pa } 7s praise and glory. But they were


306 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. (CHAP. VIE


examined, found irregular, and judged fit to be pulled down. The hand which
builds our families and estates can destroy them, if we deviate froin rectitude.
“Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet.”
2. The nation universally tested. ‘In the midst,” in the very centre of the king-
dom. Inwardly as distinguished from outward judgment ; wholly as distinguished
from any part. In its religious and civil capacity, in its priesthood and govern:
ment, God measures a nation. Our worship and conduct are weighed in the
balance and found wanting. He condemns in proportion to our guilt. “ He shall
stretch out upon it the line of confusion and the stones of emptiness” (Is. xxxiv.
11). 3. The nation justly condemned. ‘I will not again pass by them.” God
had exercised great care and kindness towards Israel, had been their bulwark and
salvation: but since neither mercy nor judgment will mend them he will forbear
no longer. He built them up in mercy and will ruin them in justice. The works
and ways of men are tested by the word and providence of God; if discovered
unequal, bending to the right or left, if they can no more be set upright, they
will be demolished. All sin is transgression of law. The clearer the law and the
greater the grace of the lawgiver, the more severe the punishment of guilt. God
is justified when he speaks and clear when he judges (Ps. li. 4). II. The verdict
given. “The punishment is specified in its two chief effects—the overthrow of
their idolatrous sanctuaries and the extinction of the dynasty of Jeroboam, which
was in effect the overthrow of the kingdom. In other words, their whole polity,
ecclesiastical and civil, was to be subverted.” 1. The destruction of the idolatrous
sanctuaries. The centre and sanctuaries of a nation are its life and worth. If
these be rotten or diseased the people will be corrupt. The great names of Isaac
and Israel could not protect the high places and temples of the land. The altars
at Bethel, Dan, and Gilgal were to be laid waste. If men obey not Jehovah, but
sacrifice on their own hills and altars, they must expect the overthrow of their
high places. Specious imitations of godly progenitors in Christian worship will
not justify, but hasten the punishment of idolatry. 2. The extinction of the royal
dynasty. Jeroboam II. died in peace. “ The house of Jeroboam ” is threatened in its .
prosperity and splendour. The kings of Israel were idolaters and drew the people
from God. The court exerted an evil influence upon the sanctuary and corrupted
the people. Its guilt was the greater and its judgment more certain. Princes and
people had sinned and must be punished together. The prediction of Samuel
came to pass. “If ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and
your king.” 3. The dissolution of the whole kingdom. The destruction of the
ruling family was the prelude to the ruin of the entire kingdom. The stroke fell
upon the family of Jeroboam (2 Kings xv. 8—10); after that the kingdom
decayed daily and speedily came to ruin. All kind of idolatry provokes God,
destroys its votaries, and ruins the land in which it is practised (Ps. evi. 29: Amos
ii. 4, 5.)
HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 8. The vision seen and explained.
I. It is our duty to attend to what God
has revealed. 1. It is worthy of atten-
tion—Behold. 2. We have need to be
quickened in our attention, even when
the message most concerns us and the
people. What seest thou? II. In all
our attention we have need of Divine
aid to explain the revelation. We may
see the vision, give an account of it,
but cannot understand until God inter-
prets it to our hearts and minds,


Ver. 7. The plumbline. 1. Applied
to the body, which must be kept healthy
and erect. It is the work of God, and
should be the temple of the Holy
Ghost. 2. Applied to the soul, which
God made upright and should not fall
into sin. 3. Appiied to the life, which
should be regulated by the law of God,
the standard of right.

This is an emblem of God’s mercy
and justice, who is the Master-builder
of the Church. 1. It denotes his


CHAP. VII. ]


mercy, in that he made this Church
right and firm like a perpendicular wall,
made exactly by line and rule, he had
curiously built it, and as carefully de-
fended it. 2. It is an emblem of his
justice. He stands upon the wall of his
Church, continually trying and examin-
ing whether it continue right or not,
bearing with its defects, until, like a wall
quite bending and belching out, he
resolves to throw down all (Is. xxx. 13)
{ Hall]. The wall of Israel had been
built by God with a plumbline, and now


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


307


(cf. 2 Kings xxi. 13: Is. xxxv. 2: Lam.
ii, 8); that is, there was, so to gpeak,
an architectural design and plan in God’s
work of destroying Israel, no less
than in his former favour to Israel in
building himup. God does everything
according to measure, number, and
weight (Wisdom xi. 20). As one said
of old, “The Deity is a perfect Geome-
trician,” and the plumbline of destruc-
tion was to be co-extensive with the
plumbline of construction—it was to be
total [ Wordsworth].


‘t would be destroyed with a plumbline


HOMILETICS.


Tas First Tuoree Vistons.—Verses 1—9.


These visions are closely related and mutually dependent one upon another.
They may be classified under three heads. We shall compare them.

I. They are corrective in their design. God chastens whom he loves.
ments and mercies are sent to discipline our hearts.
than mercies, and others more mercies than judgments. Both are mixed in life and
regulated by infinite wisdom and human conduct. II, They are graduated ac-
cording to moral condition. Progressive in their series, they display God’s justice
in the successive stages of sin. The underlying idea of the first is external visita-
tion ; of the second, inward decay by removal of Divine blessings and restraint ; of
the third, consummation of sin which lays the nation prostrate. Declension in
communities and individuals is first punished with outward chastisements. If these
fail heavier judgments follow. If judgments and mercies are unheeded, and de-
clension merges into apostasy, nothing remains but destruction. When repeated
acts of sin have produced confirmed habits of wickedness, God says, “I will not
again pass by them any more.” III. They are conditional in their issue. In
the first and second, judgment is arrested by prayer. The prophet was encouraged
in duty and the nation reprieved in sorrow. If we saw sin as rebellion against
God, and productive of impending danger, we should be more earnest in prayer that
God would forgive and pass by. But “reprieves are not pardons.” Many are
spared, but not reclaimed ; reduced to straits, but never return toGod. They neg-
lect advantages, sin away the day of grace, until prayer does not avail. Total de-
struction will come upon impenitent sinners. ‘Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people: cast them out of my
sight and let them go forth.”


Judg-
Some have more judgments


Tue ENCOUNTER BETWEEN Priest AND PropHet.— Verses 10—17.


These verses contain an interesting episode, and present the prophet of God un-
daunted in danger. We see the issue of his preaching and the requital for his
pains. Amaziah, the idolatrous priest of Bethel, is greatly incensed, resolves by
force and fraud to get rid of Amos.

I. The conduct of the priest. Amaziah must be viewed as representative of
the system of which he was no doubt the ecclesiastical head. 1. He seeks to silence
the prophet by civil power. He seems to have been intimate with the king, pre-
tends great kindness to him, when really he consulted his own interests. If Amos
prevailed, his gods would starve, and Jerusalem would have all the custom. False
teachers prove most cruel persecutors. Their authority is based on the patronage


808 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. [cHaP. VIL


of the great and the support of the state. They are uncharitable in feeling and
impotent in power. Flattery may find friends, but truth alone will stand. 2. He
brings false charges against the prophet’s conduct. Every word has weight, like
so many daggers, to stab the prophet. (1) He makes false accusation against the
character of the prophet. He was the proud pompous hierarch of a popular religion,
a system upheld by prestige and patronage. Amos in his estimation was a needy
vagrant, a contemptuous “seer.” (2) He makes false accusation against the mo-
tives of the prophet. He insinuates Amos to be a mean, self-interested person,
plying his vocation to “ eat bread.” Self-interested persons, worldly priests, mea-
sure others by their own motives. Those who make godliness a gain, and are
governed by hopes of preferment and wealth, understand not the aims of God’s
servants, and think to rule others by inducements which influence them. (3) He
makes false accusation against the conduct of the prophet. He charges him with
conspiracy. ‘ Amos hath conspired against thee.” This was a most dangerous
- accusation, in the unsettled condition of the kingdom. This spirit has character-
ized a false priesthood in every age. Prophets and apostles, martyrs and reform-
ers, and Christ himself, were all subject to the same persecution—the same artful
and malicious design to excite the temporal power against them. 3. He brings
false charges against the prophet’s preaching. In whatever spirit Amaziah reports
the words of the prophet, he keeps back or perverts the truth. He artfully frames
the language to establish his charge. He makes a base slander. The prophet had
uttered the downfall of the house of Jeroboam, but not in a spirit of rebellion and
treason. ‘Amos hath conspired against thee.” This was done openly at Bethel—
think of that! “In the midst of thy people Israel.” ‘“ Commotions of the people
are dangerous, O king! The people resent this. If thou dost not act they will.”
“‘ The land is not able to bear all his words.” God’s people have often been repre-
sented as enemies to the state and disloyal to princes. The true power of Chris-
tian character has been felt and hated. But “unable to resist the wisdom and the
spirit ” with which servants of God have spoken, recourse has been had to illegal
methods, and men have not dared to appeal to reason and the word of God (Acts
vi. 10). “ Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.” 4. He advises the prophet to
consult his own safety. ‘Flee thee away.” As a seeming friend he requests him
to flee away from danger. (1) He urges him in the language of terror. It is not
safe to prophesy here against the king. This is Bethel, the centre of worship and
the seat of government. He could expect no encouragement or sanction in the
court. He was too blunt, too faithful, to be heard. Goto Judah. (2) He urges
him in the language of threats. As a haughty prelate he assumes authority.
“ Prophesy not again any more,” in my parish and jurisdiction. We have enough
of schism and sedition. I am resolved to suspend and silence thee. Prohibition
from man will not destroy the authority of God. Peter and John were forbidden
to preach, Luther and Knox were threatened, but they could not but speak.
“We ought to obey God rather than men.” II. The behaviour of the prophet.
Amos was too deeply impressed with a sense of duty to be swayed by arguments
like these. 1. He repudiates the personal charge. ‘I was no prophet,” &c. He
was a humble shepherd, neither a prophet nor the son of a prophet by profession,
Content to cultivate and gather figs, he would never have thrust himself into office.
He was a labouring man, neither ashamed of his origin nor employ. Others may
boast of rank and authority, but God chooses the weak and foolish things of the
world to confound the wise and mighty. 2. He asserts his Divine commission.
“The Lord took me.” What the priest forbade, God commanded. “Go, pro-
phesy.” Amaziah was in direct rebellion against God, Amos was acting in obedience
to God. God often calls men from flocks and herds to stand before priests and
princes. They may not be recognized by the learned scribe, the proud prelate, and
the king’s court : but they are conscious of a Divine mission, an are determined to


CHAP, VIL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 309
es aN ee eee SRS ee ee ee eae


fulfil it. 3. He refuses to leave the path of duty. Amaziah might be influenced
by the fear of man, Jonah may escape from Nineveh, but Amos fears not the wrath
of a king. God sent him to Israel, not to Judah, and from Israel he would not go.
If we are conscious of God’s sanction we shall be supported in trial and courageous
in danger. This made Amos resolute against Amaziah; Nathan free with David;
Elijah bold with Anab; John faithful with Herod; and the apostles confident
before the world. One prophet sent by God shall overcome the hosts of Baal, though
backed by the power of king and queen. “Should such a man as I flee?” 4.
He repeats his solemn message. He is not terrified by priest or king. Though
forbidden to prophesy, he desists not, but denounces God’s words and bids the
priest attend to the awful sentence. (1) His wife would be dishonowred. She
would be openly and publicly insulted at the storming of the city. (2) His chil-
dren would be slain by the sword. He had trained them up, and God would cut
them off, in idolatry. (3) His lands would be taken by the enemy. They would
be allotted to others by line (Deut. xxxii. 9: 2 Sam. viii, 2: Ps. xvi. 6). Thus
he would lose his heirs and his inheritance also. (4) He would die a captive in a
foreign land. He who now gloried in priesthood and position should become an
exile and die in a land polluted by idols. The greatest misery that could happen
to one expecting a grave in the land of promise. (5) The kingdom itself would be
destroyed. ‘ And Israel shall surely go into captivity.” The prediction is in the
very words of the priest himself (ver. 11), and a warning to all who oppose the
servants and abuse the gifts of God. If we pollute the people of God, we
shall be dishonoured ourselves, Wicked parents and ungodly ministers reap
what they sow and bring a curse upon posterity. Sinners and seducers can
never make void the threatening of God. The most haughty and powerful cannot
defy judgments which offend them. Opposition may provoke God to contend with
them as individuals, and bring ruin upon their families and estates, upon body and
soul, for time and eternity.


A PouiticaL Priest anp a Trug PrRopuet.


Let us view the transactions of this high priest, and we shall find a complete
character of a false prophet, or the perfect picture of a politician. 1. They wse to
flatter and delude great ones, making them to believe that none are their friends
but such as say as they say, do whatever they would have them do, and humour
them in their sins ;—that they are their foes that, like Amos, deal faithfully and
plainly with them; and this is no small part of great men’s misery, that they
have few about them that dare or will deal faithfully with them. They may
use the Litany (in this sense) with that alteration which the poor curate used,
when he saw his lord come into the Church, O God the Father of Heaven,
have mercy upon us Right Honourable sinners. Their state is worse (in this
respect) than that of inferior persons, who are plainly and truly told of their sins,
when these are soothed up to their destruction. 2. They calumniate and belie
the true prophets. They observe the rule of Machiavel—Lie lustily, somewhat
will stick though it be never so false. 3. They labour with might and main to
suppress and silence the true prophets. They know that their kingdom cannot long
stand, if once the faithful ministers of Christ be countenanced ; light and darkness,
the ark and Dagon, Christ and Belial, can never subsist together. This made
Amaziah use both force and fraud torid the landof Amos. 4. They labour to sup-
press good men before they can be heard, They must not speak nor dispute the
ease. Thus Amaziah clandestinely accuseth Amos to the king, when he could make
no defence for himself. 5. They usually mingle some truth with their lies. As fowlers
do mix some wheat with their chaff, to catch the birds the sooner; so did Amaziah
mix some truth with his lies. Amos hath said Jeroboam shall die by the sword
(that wag false), and Israel shall surely go into captivity (that was true) [ HaiZ).


310


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


(cHaP. VI.





Let us now view the.true prophet of God. He is the very opposite of a time-


serving, conventional priest.


1, He is Divinely called to his work. He is no mere professional servant.
does not assume office for his own interests, nor does he run before he is sent.


He
He


does not always belong to the regular order of prophets, nor is he always qualified
by human learning, but God has appeared to him and uttered the word, ‘ Go


prophesy to my people.”


predicts judgments which some cannot bear.


2. He is often persecuted and opposed in his work. He


He is called an enthusiast and “a


mover of sedition,” denounced, reproached, and hindered in his work. If open vio-


lence does not answer, secret fraud is devised (Jer. xi. 19; xii. 6).
display their personal spite and vile ingratitude.


Hence men
But they will find it perilous to


fight against God and persecute his servants. 3. He is always faithful in doing


his work. Truthful men are valiant.


servants stand their ground and are faithful to their trust.
Fidelity to conscience and God often costs
“The wicked flee when no man pursueth, but the righteous are
“If God be for us, who can be against us 4”


by false friends nor threatening foes.
them their life.
bold as s lion.”


Cowards fear and creep behind. God’s


They are not deterred


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


The sins of Amaziah. 1. Contra-
dicting God’s command. ‘“ Prophesy
not against Israel.” 2. Slanderous report
of God’s servant. “Touch not mine
anointed, and do my prophets no harm.”
3. Frustrating God’s purpose. (a.) In
seeking to crush the truth. (d.) In
tempting the messenger to flee from
duty. The prophet’s defence proved
the nature of the charge. Amaziah
hears his doom, like Peter telling
Ananias, “‘ Thou hast not lied unto men,
but unto God.”

Ver. 10. Not able to bear all his
words. Truth often an offence—always
a power in the land. The world is
compelled to confess their impotence
against it.

Ver. 12. Worldly advice to God’s
servants, “Flee,” &c. This given by
Pharisees to Christ (Luke xiii. 31). It
is folly to declare alarming truths be-
fore the great; impiety to oppose
established customs and eminent dig-
nitaries ; and insolent to preach the
gospel in king’s chapels. Smooth
things and popular heresies must pass
current with some, and royalty must
pass undisturbed to destruction.

This was fit advice*for the priest of
Bethel. Carnal men do not rise above
carnal motives; but true prophets con-
sult not flesh and blood, have higher
motives than safety, bread, &c. Apostles,
Reformers, and Missionaries took no


counsel with advisers like Amaziah.
Duty before temporal interests. Pray
for help to discharge it. This advice
proves —1. Selfishness, 2. Timidity,
and 3. Disobedience.

Ver. 13. Observe, this priest of
Bethel claims honour for it, not because
it is the Lord’s sanctuary, but because it
is the King’s sanctuary, and not because
it is the house of God, but the house
of Jeroboam. All claims of reverence
for a Church simply and merely as a
national establishment, independently of
Divine institution, are no better than
these assertions of Amaziah. The first
royal propounder of what is now called
Erastianism, as far as we know, was
Jeroboam I. ; the first priestly advocate
of it, as far as we know, was Amaziah
[ Wordsworth).

Ver. 14. Herdman. One of that
class to which Abraham, and Moses, and
David had belonged; but not rich in
fields and herds, in men-servants and
maid-servants, like the first ; nor learned
in the wisdom of the Egyptians, like
the second; nor with any, the most
distant, intimations that he might one
day be the shepherd of a people, like the
third [F. D. Maurice].

1. God loves to appear to men dili-
gent in their calling. Moses keeping
sheep, David following the ewes, and
Saul seeking the asses, &c. 2. When
God calls we must be ready to forsake


CHAP. VIZ.)


all. Amos leaves his herds, disciples
their nets, and Abraham his country.
Grace makes men able to do and
willing to suffer what God commands.
3. The sphere must be left with God to
appoint. Whatever the lot may be, we
must be satisfied. Other places may
seem better, but God knows best. 4.
When once the place is fixed we must
not quit it without Divine guidance.
Nothing warrants unlawful fear in the
performance of duty or neglect of it.
Providence must never be construed to
sanction flight or withdraw us from our
work. We may apparently do little
good, be permitted to prophesy in an-
other place and be more successful:
But we must abide in our calling, never


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : AMOS.


$11


give way to corrupt principles, and shuu
not to declare the whole counsel of God.

Ver. 17. Opposers of God’s word ex-
amples of his justice and indignation.
Amaziah led God’s people into idolatry,
and his wife is an harlot in the city,
He destroyed the souls of the people,
and his own family fall by the sword.
Given to the world, he was the chief
cause why Israel was despoiled of their
inheritance, and his land is divided
among the conquerors. He was the
chief cause of Israel’s exile, and would
not let them believe it, the threatening
was verified upon himself, and with-
out recovery died in a polluted land
[ Hutcheson].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER VII.


Vers. 1—3. Locusts. God hath
armies of insects and little contemptible
creatures wherewith to punish disobe-
dient people. He needs not men to
destroy us, he hath frogs and flies, lice
and locusts, and these shall do it (Ex.
x. 14: 2 Chron. vii, 13: Ps. Ixxviii.
46). Much of God’s might is seen in
these little armies, they all fulfil the
word of God’s commands. Let none,
then, murmur at second causes, but still
look up to the first, lest by fretting at
our troubles we double them [Hail].

Vers, 4—6. Fire. The power of this
fire showed it to be a fire of God; it
was a precursor of the great conflagration
which will consume the world—even the
sea itself—at the Great Day (2 Pet. 1.
10). Compare Jer. li. 32, where the fire
of God burning Babylon is described
as burning its lakes and moats [ Words-
worth }.


“On Prague’s proud arch the fires of ruin glow,
His blood-dyed waters murmuring far below.”
{ Campbell. |
By whom? The time is come when
men will ask this question in relation to
the Church. How can it stand? The
numbers are decreasing viewed in rela-
tion to the growth of the population. By
whom shall it arise? Not by statesmen,
scientists, ritualists, and priests. A new
order of men are required to enable the


Church to stand, Heaven raise them

up [Dr Thomas] |
‘More things are wrought by prayei
Than ths world arene of } F Tennyson),

Vers. 7—9. Judgments. They are all
exactly framed as it were by line and
measure (Dan. v. 27). Justice is
essential to God ; he may as soon cease
to be God, as cease to be just ; hence he
is called the righteous judge (Gen. xviii.
25), and the just Lord, who will do no
iniquity (Zeph. iii. 5). He is just in
and of himself, and just in his
laws, just in his decrees, just in the
execution of those decrees, just in the
government of the world, just in his re-
wards, and just in his judgments ; he is
not only righteous in some, but in all
his ways (Ps. exlv. 17) [ail].

Vers. 10, 11. Latimer spoke his mind
before Henry VIII. and was complained
of by his enemies. One of them
kneeled before the king and accused him
of seditious doctrines. Latimer turned
first to his accuser and asked, ‘“‘ What
form of preaching would you appoint
me to preach before a king?” No
answer was given to this and several
other questions, Then he turned to the
king, confessed his unworthiness to
preach, declared that he was called to
it, but would give way to his betters.
“But if your Grace allow me fox a


$12


ee pa


preacher, I would desire your Grace to
discharge my conscience, give me leave
to frame my discourse according to mine
audience.” The king was pleased with
Latimer’s words, who was congratulated
by his friends, and told with tears in
their eyes that they looked for nothing


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : AMOS.


(CHAP. VIII.





but confinement in the Tower for him
[ Whitecross].

Ver, 14. Herdman. In Palestine
at the present day none but the very
poor consent to be herdmen, and only
such gather sycamore fruit or use it
[The Land and Book].





CHAPTER VIIL


Critican Nores.] The visions cuntinued from ch. vii. 9. 2. Summer] Late fruit, fully mpe
(2 Sam. xvi. 1: Mic. vii. 1); asymbol of a people ripe for judgment. 8. Howl.] Songs of jo
(ch. vi. 5: 2 Sam. xix. 36) would be turned into lamentation on account of the dea
Silence] Lit. silently, not with customary rites and professional mourners ; the terror of God and
dread of the enemy would make them afraid to speak. ‘An admonition to bow beneath the over-
whelming severity of the judgment of God, as in Zeph. i. 7 (cf. Heb. ii. 20 and Zech. ii. 17).”
4. Hear] The nobles hated reproof. Swallow] Heb. gape after, earnestly desire (Job vii. 2); pant
after goods as wild beasts for prey. They sought to rid the land of all the poor. 65 and 6 describe
the method of doing this. New moon] Festivals were impatiently kept ; they begrudged the regu-
lar holiday and suspension of trade (Num. xxviii. 11: 2 Kings iv. 23). Set forth] Lit. open out
to sell. Falsifying] Heb. perverting the balances of deceit (Hos. xii. 7). Money was weighed. They
increased the price both ways, dishonestly trading and breaking the command (Deut. xxv. 13—15).
6. Poor] Made so poor that he was necessitated to sell himself for silver, which he owed, or a pair of
shoes, which he could not pay for. 7% Sworn] to punish such conduct, by the pride, by Himself
(Hos. v. 5; vii. 10), Forget, ¢. ¢. leave unpunished, 8, Punishment] will be so great that the earth
shall quake, its inhabitants mourn, and the globe will rise and fall like a flood, 9. Ncon] Darkness
then an emblem of great calamities (Jer. xv. 9: Ezek. xxxii. 7—10); a type of judgments upon
ungodly people and of the great day of accounts. 10. Feasts] will be turned into mourning ; bald-
ness as a sign of it (Is, iii, 24: Jer. xlviii. 37). Mourning deep as that for the death of an only son
(Jer. vi, 26: Zech, xii, 10), 11, Famine] The light and comfort of God’s word shall fail; they de-
spise now what they shall look for in vain then. 12. Wander] Lit. reel, like drunken men, Seek]
under pressure of calamity. 138,] Hunger and thirst so great that the strongest give way and faint,
how much more the weak (Is. xl, 30). 14. Sin] The calves by which Samaria sins. God] The other
golden calf at Dan (1 Kings xii, 26—30). Liveth] Formula of the oath. Swearing by these objects
shows that young men and maidens journeyed to Beersheba and worshipped idols. The ground of
all their misery was forsaking God, who commands all appeals to be made to Himself as the Creator
and Governor of all things (Deut, vi. 13; x. 20).


HOMILETICS.
A Basket or Summer Fruitr.— Verses 1, 2.


Under a new type the final subversion of the state is represented. As summer
fruits portend ripe harvests, so the sins of Israel ripened them for destruction.
Taking the basket of fruit as an emblem of ripeness for judgment, notice—

I. A ripeness which is gradual. Nothing is matured at once. There must
be seed-time before harvests; buds and flowers before fruits. Individual cha-
racter is of slow growth. Seeds of national ills ripen secretly. The interval
between the spring and the reaping time is defined in nature and religion. II. A
ripeness which is ruinous. Men grow in wickedness as well as in holiness;
ripen for destruction as well as for salvation. God’s dealings influence according
to moral condition, The sun which melts the wax hardens the clay. The dew


CHAP. VIII.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 318





and rain water the earth, but injure the fruit. God’s mercies and judgments
ripen for glory or for shame. A condition which is spiritually rotten can produce
nothing but decay and untimely end. Some people are like stubble laid out to
dry in the sun and ripen for the fire. ‘They shall be devoured as stubble fully
dry.” III. A ripeness which terminates existence. “The end is come upon
my people.” In summer nothing more is to be done but reap the crops. Good or
bad, the time is come and it must be cut down. God’s dealings with Israel were
completed. They had neglected to reform. Their harvest was past and their sum-
mer ended, A period comes when God no longer spares a people. The fruit
must be gathered and devoured by the enemy. The days are fulfilled and the
end is come (Lam. iv. 18). “An end is come, the-end is come; it watcheth
for thee ; behold, it is come.”


Fruit FRom THE HwavENLY ORCHARD.


We may derive from these words the following lessons. 1. God gives fruit.
“The fruit of the Spirit,” &c. “The tree of Life that beareth all manner of precious
fruit.” 2. God’s fruit is ripe. “It is swmmer fruit.” The fruit of sin is sour;
sweet to the taste, but bitter afterwards—“ pleasures of sin for a season.” Hence—
3. God’s fruit is wholesome, like all ripe fruit, regulating and adjusting food of
other sort. Christianity is a grand controlling and regulating force. The soil
that grows the fruits of the Spirit cannot nourish growths of an opposite charac-
ter. 4, God’s fruit is satisfying. Even ripe fruit is not long satisfying. Law-
ful pleasures do not bring contentment. The fruit that the soul craves grows not
in earthly orchards. 5. God’s fruit is sustaining. Certain kinds of fruit will
appease appetite for awhile without any sustentation. The fruit of God imparts
strength that is permanent; in care, sickness, bereavement, and death. 6. God’s
fruit is stimulating. It is the fruit of the vine, “ the true vine,” yielding “the
best wine.” It is the stimulus of waning powers; prompts to action where
energies would otherwise be dormant. 7. God’s fruit is plentiful. ‘“ A basket of
fruit,” always replenished, multiplying in the use, like the “twelve baskets” of
fragments, &c. The basket always filled. Thereis no dearth in God’s orchard ; no
grudging in his supplies; enough for all, everywhere, at all times. 8. God’s fruit
is cheap. ‘“ Wine and milk, without money and without price,” &. [The Study].


A Day or Sapness.—Verse 3.


The prophet now describes the greatness of approaching judgments to rouse
attention to a sense of danger—universal mourning and universal death would
afflict the land. 1. Temple musie would be turned into grief. The songs and
sacred solemnities of the temple would cease. Mirthful music would end in
grievous misery. Sin turns the greatest joy into the greatest heaviness, the loudest
music into the bitterest howlings. If men do not sing in a day of grace, they will
howl in a time of wrath. “ Those that will not serve God with gladness of heart,”
says an old author, “in the abundance of all things, shall serve him in sadness of
heart in the want of all things (Deut. xxviii. 47, 48).” 2. Mortality would be pre-
valent in every place. Sin brings sword, pestilence, and famine (Ezek. xiv. 21) ;
sweeps away its thousands, and fills the land with lamentation and mourning.
History tells of populations carried away by Divine judgments like leaves before
the wind (Is. lxiv. 6). The picture in Israel is a type of many a fact in providence.
Many dead—dead in every place and buried in common pits, without customary
rites. Grief could find no vent to relieve itself. The sorrow could not wear away
in utterance. The burden was intolerable and the silence universal. The living
and the dead were solemn as the grave. How sad that everlasting death which


awaits an ungodly race !
“ Death loves a shining mark, a signal blow” [ Young)


314


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


(CHAP. ViIL


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. A basket, &. 1. A type
of God’s goodness in nature. He gives
fruit in due season, in rich abundance,
&c. He never left himself without a
witness (Acts xiv. 17). 2. A type of
human diligence in co-operating with
God. Beasts eat without industry.
Man has to till the ground and cultivate
the trees. The fruit must be gathered
and the basket made. If we do not
work, neither can we eat. “There is a
basket of fruit which is so ripe, that it
has been gathered, and it is a sort of
fruit—-summer fruit—which will not
keep, which will not lay by until
winter, but must be eaten at once. It
teaches—1. That there is a ripeness in
God’s purposes. God always times his
decrees. In the jirst and second advent
of Jesus Christ. In our own personal
affairs God gives deliverance not in thy
time, but in Ais. Trust him for mercy
in its time, &c. 2. That nations have
their ripeness, and that when they come
to their ripeness they must be destroyed.
Sceptics may entertain doubts concern-
ing individual transgression and _per-
sonal punishment, but history proves
that national judgments have been sent
from God. Take Babylon, Greece, and
Rome. We asa people are guilty, and
should not be proud and self-righteous.
3. That there is a@ ripeness of men as
well. as of summer fruit. With the
righteous a time of ripening for heaven,
a ripening in knowledge, experience, and
spirituality. With the ungodly a ripen-
ing in the love of sin and hardness of
heart, a ripening for eternal judgment!
Take heed! Be renewed in heart and
tipened for eternal glory ” [Spurgeon].

Vers. 1, 2. The manner in which
the truth is conveyed to the prophet’s
mind by different representations re-


+


minds us of the course pursued towards
the apostles by the Lord, and teaches
that we should endeavour to answer
the purpose of God, and to let the truth
sink deeply into our minds, that being
clearly understood it may powerfully
affect us, and make us ready to impart
it to others [Ryan].

First, those nearest destruction are
often the most negligent and stupid.
They need to be told often of their
danger and roused to diligence. God
warns them often and leaves them with-
out excuse. Second, the servants of
God have need to be instructed that
they may warn others. Attention to the
revelation must be quickened. Behold.
The vision itself must be seen and ex-
plained. ‘“ What seest thou?” They
must declare nothing but what they
have received. ‘“ Thus bath the Lord
God showed unto me.”

Meditate carefully on the object pre-
sented to view. It suggests the idea of
a tree which had been planted, tended,
watered with the rain and dew; it had
blossomed, budded, brought forth fruit ;
its work was done; the fruit was
gathered ; no pains of the gardener, no
change in the season, no influence of
the sun, could now alter the character
of that fruit. At previous times, when
the leaves and blossom came forth, there
would be room for anxiety or hope;
there would afterwards be room for
doubt as to its future size and goodness,
according to its progress during the
weeks of its growth,—but now all was
over. They were either apples of Sodom,
or pleasant to the eye and good for food.
Now was the time not to cherish their
growth, but to try their quality. “The
end is come” [Ryan]. .


HOMILETICS.


Tue Dersps or CovetousnEss.— Verses 4—6.


After describing the calamities, Amos now sets forth the ground of these calami-
ties. Israel had broken both tables of the law and sinned against great light and


lova.


They sought to secure themselves in irreligion towards God and unright


omar. VIIL) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 316


eous conduct towards men. In their oppressive and covetous rapacity they are
summoned to hear threatenings against their cruel deeds. “ Hear this.” Their
sovetousness is seen—

I. In cruelty to men. An avaricious man is naturally a selfish man. He
makes laws of his own and regards not the interests of others. He isolates him-
self from the common brotherhood, and constitutes himself an all-absorbing and
enlarging circle. 1. Oppression of the poor. “O ye that swallow up the needy.”
They panted for the needy as wild beasts for prey, and sought to rid the land of
the poor. Those who devour the poor without pity or compassion are inhuman
in their disposition. They have iron teeth, vent their wantonness where there is
no power to resist, and eat up the people “as they eat bread” (Ps. xiv. 4). “There
is a generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw-teeth as knives, to devour
the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men.” 2. Selling and en-
slaving the poor. ‘‘ Buy the poor for silver.” The nobles of Israel oppressed the
needy, that they might eventually trade in them. They gained the purses, and
then sought the persons of their bondmen, Corn was dear, and they resolved to
make merchandise of men. The mean and selfish estimate their fellows at a cor-
temptible price. “A little silver or a pair of shoes.” Human nature is insulteu.
the rights of property disregarded, and the laws of liberty trampled upon, by greedy
oppressors, ‘‘He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker; but he that
honoureth him hath mercy on the poor.” II. In contempt for the worship of God.
“When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn?” They kept the
Sabbath with a weary, impatient spirit. Religious services were too great restraints
upon them. ‘When will this service be over, that we may attend to business
again?” Covetous men are formal and hypocritical in their devotion. Their
hearts are in the mart, the field, and the ways of ‘“ buying, and selling, and getting
gain.” The world does not tire them, they are not anxious for a day of rest.
Religion isirksome. It interrupts worldly pursuits and is often turned into means
of traffic. Men crowd the temple with tables like the money-changers, and con-
vert the Sanctuary into a palace of Mammon. They reject the true God and
worship a false one. They begrudge time for Christian worship, and like Doeg are
detained before the Lord, when they long to be in the counting-house. “Ye said
also, Behold, what a weariness is it!” III. In fraudent trade with men. If
men grudge time for God, they will grudge right to man; if they resist the claims
of piety, they will soon fall into tricks of dishonesty. These tricks are manifold.
A few are given in the text. 1. False weights and measures. In two ways they
defrauded the poor—(a) diminishing the measure, “making the ephah small ;” and
(b) increasing the price, “and the shekel great.” ‘They doubly deceived, by paring
down the quantity and by uneven balances obtained more silver for what they
sold. This was disobedience to the law (Lev. xix. 35, 36), and violation of the
conditions on which they held the land (Deut. xxv. 13—15). In robbing God
you indulge a propensity to injure man ; in giving less and taking more than you
ought you bring a double curse—deprivation of blessing and increase of pains
which pierce the soul with many sorrows. “Take heed and beware of covetous
ness.” 2. Aduiteration of food. ‘Sell the refuse of the wheat.” The bran ox
unfilled grain which fell through the sieve. The worst was sold and the best paid
for. The poor are victimized now. Short weight and short measure are too com-
mon in England. Almost every article of food is adulterated, and even poison
sold for bread! Men are hard-hearted, dishonest, inexorable as the taskmasters of
Egypt, in driving bargains! We are influenced by the spirit of gain, and worship
too much in the temple of Mammon. Every nation has its idol, and money is our
god. ‘The love of money is the root of all evil”


Tue Cursz or Covstousness.— Verses 7—10.
Good men would rather be poor by providence than rich by sin. He that


316 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY + AMOS. [CHAP. VIIL





A —





becomes rich by unlawful means, that hasteth to be rich, may haste to his ruin,
and shall not be innocent or unpunished (Prov. xxviii. 20: 1 Tim, vi. 9—11).
Covetousness, more than any other sin, brings its own punishment. But in addit-
tion to this God often visits it with positive infliction, as in the text.

I. The certainty of the curse. ‘(The Lord hath sworn.” If oaths among
men confirm a promise, does not God’s oath indicate immutable purpose? He
swears that he will never forget any of their works. All men’s doings are known
to God. No lapse of times nor change of circumstances veil them from his omni-
scient glance, Iniquity is never forgotten until forgiven in Christ. Flight of
years may efface the memory, but cannot ward off the fruit of transgression. God
can sooner cease to be, than forget to punish the wickedness of men. He may
seem to forget, but a faithful record is kept, an immutable purpose is formed, and
eventually justice will give its reward. ‘Woe, and a thousand woes, to the man
who is cut off by an oath of God, from all benefit of pardoning mercy.” II. The
terribleness of the curse. Mark the emphasis of the question—“ shall not?” The
appeal is to human consciences. How can it be otherwise? Great sins bring
grievous judgments. 1. Curse like an earthquake—will bring terror and consterna-
tion. ‘The land is represented as shaking, returning to primeval chaos, and suffer-
irg under the weight of sin. Wicked men are a curse to the earth, and all
creatures testify indignation against their conduct (Ps. lx. 1, 2: Rom. viii 22).
“ For this shall the earth mourn and the heavens above be black.” 2. Curse like
a flood—will rise up and deluge the land ; calamities shall overflow them. Judg-
ments will be like the breaking forth of waters. Floods of sorrow, like the deluge
of old, sweep impenitent sinners from the earth. General calamities affect insensate
earth, until it casts out or drowns its wicked inhabitants. ‘The Lord God of
Hosts is he that toucheth the land and it shall melt, and all that dwell therein
shall mourn; and it shall rise up wholly like a flood, and shall be drowned as by
the flood of Egypt.” III. The suddenness of the curse. ‘The sun to go down
at noon.” It is not a gradual, a natural, but unlooked-for, untimely sinking. So
the sun of prosperity rises and shines upon the wicked in all its splendour; but
God darkens the sky in the clear day. The darkness is blacker in contrast with
the light; the sorrow the sadder when it succeeds festive joy. Thus prosperity
ends in ruin and sinful prospects fade away. ‘‘ Her sun is gone down while it was
yet day : she hath been ashamed and confounded.” IV. The consequences of the
curse. Prosperity is turned into misery, and mirth into mourning. Their com-
mon and holy feasts, their domestic and temple songs, into lamentation. 1. Mourn-
ing universal. “ Every one mourn” (ver. 8). Rich and pour without exception.
Judgments were prevalent as the sins (Hos. iv. 3), penetrated all ranks and suffered
none to escape. 2. Mourning with ceremonial rites, Instead of gay attire they
would put on sackcloth. It was not the time for ornaments and fine clothing.
Baldness would be upon every head. They would either shave iv sorrow, or pull
the hair off their heads in anguish (Ezra ix. 3). Inward distress reveaied itself in
outward signs. 3. Mourning most bitter. “As the mourning of an only son.”
The death of an only son was regarded as the most mournful of events. In Egypt
one universal cry arose from the death of the firsthorn. Parents may lose one out
of many and be comforted in the possession of others. But the loss of an on/i
child can never be repaired. ‘‘Make thee mourning as for an only son, most
bitter lamentation : for the spoiler shail suddenly come upon us.” 4. Mourning
without relief. It is not an eclipse, but a going down of the sun. The duration
of sorrow is unto posterity, the end of the kingdom. The clouds will not vanish
soun away. ‘The wrath of God would abide upon them. When they looked for
an end, the day would still he bitter. At evening time sometimes light will arise ;
but to the impenitent the day grows darker, and the night will be darkest of all.
Bitterness will be the issue, and the end the beginning of sorrows. “ What will
ye do in the end thereof?” (Jer. v. 31). ‘This shall ye have at my hand, you


shall lie down in sorrow,”


CHAP, VIII, |


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


AMOS. 317


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 4—6. Covetous men. 1. Are
eruel to others. 2. Selfish in their aims.
3. Dishonest in their conduct. 4. Weary
in religious worship. They are never
at rest in their minds, never satisfied in
their possessions, and never idle in their
pursuits,

The value worldly men set upon the
poor, Dross and dung, the filth and
otfscouring of society (1 Cor. iv. 13).
Contrast this with God's judgment of
the poor. He esteems them the excel-
lent of the earth (Ps, xvi. 3) ; the glory
of the world (Is. iv. 5); and too good
for ungrateful men (Heb. xi. 38). If
men make a prey of the poor, God will
make an example of them.

Sin in wrong measures once begun
is unbroken. All sin perpetuates itself.
It is done again because it has been
‘lone before. But sins of a man’s daily
occupation are continued of necessity,
beyond the simple force of habit and
the ever-increasing dropsy of covetous-
ness. To interrupt sin is to risk detec-
tion. But then how countless the sins
which their poor slaves must needs
commit hourly, whenever the. occasion
comes! And yet, although among us
human law recognizes the Divine law,
and annexes punishment to its breach,
covetousness sets both at nought.
When human law was enforced in a
city after a time of negligence scarcely
a weight was found to be honest. Prayer
went up to God on the Sabbath and
fraud up to God on the other six days
[Pusey]. ;

Ver. 7. The excellency of Jacob. By
this title he would teach—1. That
nothing beside God can make a people
truly excellent, enjoy what dignity and
excellency they will. 2. That it is
great ingratitude of a people, when being
excellent through him, they do not
acknowledge him, nor walk answerable
[Hutcheson].

The favour and presence of God with
a people is the glory and excellency of
a people. It is not corn, wine, women,
health, wealth, or multitude, that make
a nation happy for then Turks and


Tartars, Barbarians and Indians, would
excel God’s people, for they abound in
these external comforts ; but happy is
that people whose God ts the Lord (Ps.
evi. 20; cxlviii. 14: Jer. ii, 11: Luke
ii. 32). Hence Moses glories in this
above all other privileges (Deut. iv. 7,
8). The fruition and enjoyment of God’s
favour is the life of our lives, and the
honour of our honours; without this we
may write Ichabod upon all that we
have. Hence the greater is their sin
who dishonour him with sin and turn
the glory which he hath put upon
them into shame. This makes the Lord
to swear that he will strip them of
their privileges, and make them naked
as in the day when they were born
[ Hall}.

Vers. 8—10. This will be a sudden
ruin, a check in the midst of apparent
prosperity, irresistible as the waters of
a flood, sudden as the setting of the sun
at noon, gloomy and dreadful as a dark-
ness which should at once succeed to
the light of a clear day. Those feasts,
which had been the instruments of their
pleasure and the cause of much of their
sin, would be succeeded by mourning ;
luxurious and licentious music would
give place to sounds of bitter lamenta-
tion. Instead of purple and fine linen,
sackcloth would be their clothing, and
delicious ointments and costly tiaras
would be followed by baldness [Ryan].

1. To any man the sun sets at noon,
when he is suddenly snatched away by
death in the very midst of his life.
2. When he is suddenly destroyed in
the midst of earthly prosperity. 3. “ But
it has still wider application. When
the Lord shall come to judgment, at a
time when the world, in its self-se
curity, looketh not for him (cf. Matt.
xxiv. 37), this earth’s sun will set at
noon, and the earth be covered with
darkness in bright daylight. Every
judgment that falls upon an ungodly
people or kingdom, as the ages roll away,
is a harbinger of the approach of the
final judgment ” [Keil].

Changes in human destiny and ex


$18 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. (cHar. vil





perience. Clear days, dark days, and sure and brings pain ; liberty, and brings
bitter days. bondage; happiness, and brings misery.

Sin is a bitter thing. Bitter in itself Its misery is personal and eternal, dark-
and its consequences. It promises plea- ness without day, so11ow without relief.


HOMILETICS.
A Famine oF THE Worp.—Verses 11—14.


The prophet now predicts far greater evils than temporal judgments. A famine
of the word, one of the saddest events that could happen a Divinely taught people.
This is the last and sorest of all calamities. When God will not speak to men by
his servants and word it is a sign that he will punish and reject them.

oI. The word of God is the true nourishment of man. Every kind of life
requires nutriment. Man has a higher life than appetite and sensation. His
spiritual nature is sustained by the word of God alone. A real communication
from God is essential to life. Man has ever longed for this. Speak, Lord! has
always been the cry of humanity. God has spoken. His word satisfies the crav-
ings of the heart and solves the problems of life. Here is wisdom for the ignorant
and righteousness for the guilty ; comfort for the sorrowful and redemption for the
lost ; milk for babes and strong meat for mature age. It is meat indeed and drink
indeed. ‘‘I have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.”
“Thy words were found and I did eat them.” II. Contempt of the word of
God may bring a famine of the word. “I will send a famine.” God had
raised up and sent prophets to the people ; but they despised religious instruction,
profaned God's sanctuary, and persecuted his servants. God can withhold religious
privileges and leave people in darkness according to his good pleasure. But when
they despise the word he will withdraw it. He will cease to give when his gifts
are scorned; to love, when his love is contemned. 1. With individuals there
is often a famine of the word. A person for a long time enjoys gospel light and
hears the Scriptures explained and enforced. He trifles with these advantages and
heeds not the word. Circumstances change, business calls elsewhere, and in foreign
lands or distant colonies he finds no provision. He is not fed with the bread of
life. Many a sick chamber has been embittered and many a dying hour darkened
by the remembrance of warnings despised. ‘They would none of my counsel :
they despised all my reproof” (Prov. i. 24—31). 2. In the sanctuary there is
often a famine of the word. When the gospel is rejected and ministers silenced ;
when the temple is profaned by worldly influences, and religious worship becomes
a wearisome toil ; God will take his blessings away, and men shall know the price
by seeking them and shall not find them. The seven Churches of Asia Minor and
the desolate shore of Northern Africa are solemn examples of this. 3. In the
nation God can send a famine of the word. Unto the Jews were committed the
oracles of God. They were highly exalted and Divinely instructed. But ungod-
liness crept into the temple, corruption tainted the king, and violence filled the
land. Direction from God was a part of their blessedness. The want of that
direction has now left them a wandering, helpless people. In their distress they
ery as of old, ‘‘ We see not our tokens, there is not one prophet more, not one is
there among us that understandeth any more.” III. A famine of the word is
the sorest judgment upon any nation. It is a miserable state to cry for bread
and have none. 1. A famine of the word is a greater evil than a famine of bread.
The soul is superior to the body, and knowledge, love, and truth are more necessary
than bread. Man does not live by bread alone. The mind requires food and can-
not feed upon husks. If hunger and thirst be painful, how much more lack of
spiritual sustenance! Men have hanger, though not always conscious of it. Appe-
tite will be quickened in trouble, and like Saul they will be sore distressed. ‘* God


CHAP. VIII.) HOMILETIC COMMENT J!) /\/08. 319





is departed from me and answereth me no mow, neither by prophets, nor by dreams.”
2. A famine of the word will cause the strongest to succumb. “ The fair virgins
and the young men faint for thirst. The beauty of the virgin and the vigour of
youth decay without knowledge.” All flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof as
the flower of the field. But God’s word abides in its blessed nature and permanent


results.
things.
suffering will follow spiritual famine.


stroyed ; yea, poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth instruction.”
famine of the word will leave a nation in a deplorable condition.
When men faint and thirst they are helpless.
scorched with the wrath of God without, who can stand ?


condition.


Our choicest privileges and fairest sex, our education and wealth, are vain
The withdrawment of God will cause them to wither away. Physical
“ Whoso despiseth the word shall be de-


3. A
(1) In a weak

Hungry within and
The wicked faint and


sink under their burdens, and have not a shower of rain to quench their burning


thirst (Ezek. xxii. 24).


(2) In a fallen condition.
danger and the darkness of idolatry and superstition.


“ They shall fall.” Fall into
Men who forsake God will


eventually, like Saul, consult wrong sources of comfort and shall not find it. (3)


In a hopeless condition.


saken him ; persecute and take him.”


“ Never rise up again.”
out bread and without strength ; without comfort and without hope.
word goes, God himself departs, and there is none to deliver us.


Without the word we are with-
When the
“(Jod hath for-


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 11, 12. The judgment. 1. Its
Author. “JZ will send.” 2. Its cer-
tainty. “Thus saith the Lord.” 3. Its


period, ‘‘The days come,” suddenly
and presently. 4. Its consequences. (a)
Hunger and thirst. (b) Exile and
anxiety. (c) Unsuccessful search. 5,
Its importance.
tention to its direful and dreadful nature.
“ Not a famine of bread, nor a thirst
for water,” &c.

Ver. 13. Natural strength falls far
short of the strength God gives to his
weak people (Is. x]. 29—31) ; it cannot
endure nor carry us through calamities
and judgments for sin. Young men
shall faint, and those whose condition
pleads for pity and respect shall not be
spared. “In this hopelessness as to all
relief, those too shall fail and sink under
their sufferings, in whom life is freshest
and strongest, and hope most buoyant.
Hope mitigates any sufferings. When
hope is gone, the powers of life which
it sustains give way” [Pusey].

Ver. 14. 1. The calamity. ‘“Taey
shall fall and never rise again.” Though
a man fall, if he has hope of rising
again, it brings a certain degree of com-
fort and strength: but Israel fell into
o.ptivity and were not restored. If
gentle means cure not, God will make a


“‘ Behold,” calling at-—


final end. 2. The reason of the calamity.
Idolatry in the form of oaths and as-
criptions of powers of life to the golden
calves. They sware—l. By the sin of
Samaria. 2. By the god of Dan. 3.
By the manner of Beersheba. By strange
gods which they had set up in these
places. The whole land was infected
by a popular, degrading system which
they had set up, and which was the cause
of their final overthrow.

The judgment of men and the judg-
ment of God differ much. That which
man calls here by way of honour a god,
that God calls by way of dishonour and
detestation a sin and abominable (Jer.
xvi. 18; xliv. 4). Thus the world calls
riches substance, goods happiness (Ps.
iv. 6), but the Holy Ghost calls them
vanities, thorns, husks, unrighteous
mammon. That which is highly es
teemed in the sight of carnal, super-
stitious men is an abomination in the
sight of God [Hall].

Fall fatally, irrecoverably, as old Eli
did when his neck was broken, but first
his heart. The ten trses for their
idolatry and contempt of the word
never returned out of captivity. From
the famine foretold what could follow
but irreparable ruin, though for a time
things might flourish (Prov. xxix. 1)?


Of that spiritual famine let us be most
impatient, and say as Luther did, I
would not live in paradise without the
word ; but with it I could make a shift
to live in hell [Trapp].

Two subjects in this chap. attract
our notice. 1. God's ordinances slighted.
Let those who turn the Sabbath into a
day of trade, and rob their fellow-men
of their comforts by their extortions,
as they rob God of his honour by their
heartless worship, see their own portraits
in the address of the prophet; blush
for shame, and tremble at the destiny
of those who continue in such a state.
2. Religious instruction withdrawn. It


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


CHAP. VIII





may not be now exactly with them as
with Israel. They may not be wholiy
excluded from the warning voice of the
prophets of God; but the time ap-
proaches when repentance will no more
be preached to, or be available for, them.
When no deliverer will be exhibited to
their view, as exalted to be a Prince and
a Saviour, to give repentance and remis-
sion of sins, their souls will die of an
eternal famine. No “bread of life”
shall be presented to them for food!
No water of life shall quench the flame
which guilt shall enkindle in their con-
sciences [ Cobbin].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER VIII.


Vers. 1, 2, God hath done more for
Britain, or certainly as much, as he did
for Abraham’s race, and even if we have
not rebelled as often as Israel in the
wilderness, yet our little rebellions are
great because of the greatness of God’s
goodness. Oh, Christians, be in earnest
that the land may be filled with grace ;
that the torrent of our iniquities may
be dried up, lest haply that supposi-
tion of a great historian should at last
‘become a fact, and the New Zealander
should yet sit on the broken arch of
London Bridge, wondering that so great
a city could have passed away [Spur-
geon|.

Ver. 3. Mirth. Many a sigh is
heaved amid the loud laughter of folly.
Take the fullest cup of earth’s best joys.
What is this to satisfy desire, to allay
trouble, to meet eternity? Even the
present end of this short-lived mirth is
heaviness, sometimes so intolerable, that
death is fled to as the cure of anguish ;
and to avoid the fear of hell the
wretched sinner leaps into it. At best
eternity will change this mirth, when
that will remain which would be the
most desirable riddance—the sting of
conscience, as enduring as the pleasures
of sin were momentary [Bridge].

Ver. 4. Oppression.


“ Press not a falling man too far” [Shakespeare].
Deliver him that euffereth wrong from


' but thine eyes shut.


the hand of the oppressor; and be not
faint-hearted when thou sittest in judg-
ment (Kecles. iv. 11).

Ver. 5. Sabbath. In God’s house
and business forget thine own; be there
as a member of the Church, not of the
commonwealth. Empty thyself of this
world, thou art conversant with the
next. Let all thy senses have no other
object but God ; let thine ears be open,
Remember God
regards the heart of the worshipper.
We are never safe till we love him
with our whole heart whom we pretend
to worship [Bp Henshawe]. Deceit.
Commerce is a providential appoint
ment for our social intercourse and
mutual helpfulness, It is grounded
with men upon human faith, as with
God upon Divine faith. Balances,
weights, money, are its necessary ma-
terials. Impositions, double-dealings ;
the hard bargain struck with self-com-
placent shrewdness—this is the fulse
balance forbidden alike by law (Lev.
xix. 35) and gospel (Matt. vii. 12). Men
may commend its wisdom; God not
only forbids, but abominates it [ Bridge].
A straight line is the shortest in morals
as in geometry [Rahal]. Honesty is
the best policy.

Vers. 4—6. Covetvusness. The man
who sets his heart on riches must
necessarily be a stranger to peace and
enjoyment. Fear, care, anxiety, sus


CHAP. Vitt.}





picion, and jealousy place him on a
constant rack. To the toil of getting is
added the trouble of keeping his pelf.
Avarice is insatiable as the grave, or
rather as a gulf without bottom. The
more this passion is supplied with fresh
fuel the more vehement the flame
[ Rusticus].

Vers. 9,10. Go down. So use pros-
perity that adversity may not abuse
thee. If, in the one, security admits
oo fears, in the other, despair will afford
no hopes. He that in prosperity can
foretell a danger, can in adversity fore-
see deliverance [F. Quarles].

Vers, 11—14. When Divine judg-
ments come upon a race which has for-
gotten and forsaken God, the once de-
spised and hated word is appreciated
again. Men “hunger and thirst” for
it, but often at first not in the right
way. They desire as speedily as pos-
sible to hear of promises and consola-





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 321


tions, and to these every ear is open.
But it isin vain, We now need expect
no new revelation from God. We have
“his word” in the Scripture. But
when this is a long time despised, it fol
lows at last that there is no one to
preach it, and without a living preacher
it is finally lost. Or if it is preached it
has no power to console, and men fail
to find what they seek. Thus ensues
a longing which is not satisfied. The
result is otherwise only when men bow
in penitence under the Divine threaten-
ing as deserved, and under the Divine
Spirit inwardly blame themselves for
previous apostasy. But who knows
whether man will find room for repent-
ance? Before he reaches that point,
while he is in the midst of his vain
longing for comfort, he may be snatched
away [Lange}.

“There ’s not a joy the world can give like that

it takes away.”





CHAPTER IX.


‘CaiticaL Nores,] Amos sees God standing, fixed in purpose, by the altar. Posts) Thresholds
(Is. vi. 4). Cut] Human victims demanded; wounded with fragments of broken columns (cf. Ps,
xviii. 21; Hab. iii, 18). Last] Those left cannot escape. 2,] The Lord everywhere will pursue
‘and destroy them (ch. ii. 14). Hell] Though they hide themselves in the deepest holes and caverns
of earth, Climb] the greatest heights (Job xx. 6, 7; Jer. li. 53). 3. Carmel] One of the highest
mountains, full of caves and forests (Judg. vi. 2; 1 Sam. xiii. 6). Serpent] A great sea-monster
(Is. xxvii. 1). 4. Go] willingly into captivity; the sword shall slay them. Set] ‘‘ God has fixed His
‘eye upon them, 7. ¢. has taken them under His special superintendence (cf. Jer. xxxix. 12) ; not to
‘shelter, protect, and bless, but for evil, ¢.¢. to punish them” [Kez/]. 5.] God is omnipotent, able to
‘execute judgment. Toucheth] Dissolves the stability of the earth (Ps. xlvi. 7; lxxv. 4). 6.
‘Stories] Lit. steps, perhaps in allusion to Solomon’s throne (1 Kings x. 18, 19). Troop] Lit. @ band
dividing the waters above from those beneath the heavens (cf. Gen. vii. 11). Others, all the ele-
ments and living creatures, called the host (Gen. ii. 1). God has bound the waters by perpetual
‘decrees, and all creatures are subject to his control (Ps, ciii, 20, 21), 7%. As children] No longer
highly favoured Israelites, but acting like Cushites. Their election of no avail. They had become
like ie heathen, accursed as Ham, black as Ethiopians, whose skin symbolized spiritual darkness
(Jer. xiii. sie Bronght up] Israel’s deliverance from Egypt no more than the bringing of As-
‘syrians out of former dwelling-places. 8.] Election therefore will not save the idolatrous nation,
‘God’s eye turned upon them, watched in order to punish them (Ps, xxxiv. 14). Not utterly]
‘Threatening is mitigated; grace saves a few. 9.] The figure explains how. For] God will dis-
perse Israel, shake them with other nations. Wheat and chaff are mixed together. The wicked,
chaff and dust, fall through the sieve and perish; the grain (solid grain), the godly, will be pre-
‘served, every one shall be saved (Matt. xxii. 12; Luke xxii. 31). 10. Sinners] who say in self-con-
‘fidence. Prevent] To meet one round about, ¢, ¢. to come from every side. All self-secured sinners shall
perish, but the righteous shall be delivered. History proves, that the kingdom of Jsrae/, the most
‘profane and idolatrous, fell first by the Assyrians; that Judah continued long after, enjoyed con-
isiderable prosperity under Hezekiah and Josiah; that a remnant of ee by Assyrians, were


323 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. ~ {CHaP. IX,


united to Judah, and that others joined them. After the sifting-time comes the prosperity. 11.
The booth] The fallen shepherd, hut (not the palace), indicating the feeble condition of the family
and nation, ‘Wall up] the rents; the two divided nations should become one. Raise up] Enlarge
and finish the building as of old (2 Sam. vii. 1I—16). 12. They] God’s people possess Edom,
the enemies of the Church, as the gift of God: some, “the remnant of Edom and of all the
heathen that are or shall be called by My name, shall possess Me, the Lord.” ‘There shall be a
rand future restoration. 138.] The land shall be blessed, The plowman overtakes the reaper. One

arvest shall scarcely be gathered before preparation shall be made for another; a fulfilment of Lev.
xxyvi. 5. Eminences themselves shall drop dowr ‘n rich juice of grape. 14.] The kingdom shall be
prosperous; fallen cities rebuilt; vines planted and enjoyed no longer by the enemy. Reviving
activity would be seeneverywhere. 15.] All this perpetual. Plant] Firm and lasting establishment
of them; trees not torn up, but firmly rooted and eternally flourishing in joy and peace (Jer. xxxii.
41). This is a beautiful type of the building up, enlargement, and establishment of the Christian
Church through Christ. ie Him earth will become an Eden, and the Lord will again dwell with
a holy people.


HOMILETICS.
Tag Finat Cauamity.—Verses 1—4.


In previous visions we see the ripeness of the people and the nearness of judg-
ment. In this God himself is engaged to execute it. The temple at Bethel is a
fitting emblem of the nation, which gathers round it. The command is given to
smite. It shakes, falls, and buries the multitude under its ruins. The sanctuary
was overthrown by the judgment of God, and the kingdom of Israel totally
destroyed.

I. The nature of the calamity. 1. I¢ ts moral. God stands upon the altar
and smites the idolatrous temple. He is ready to depart from them and punish
them for apostasy. He was forsaking his people because they had forsaken him.
God warns men, before he departs from them. But idolatry provokes him, and
turns the place of sacrifice into a throne of vengeance. The posts and pillars of the
temple are smitten. ‘“ Begin at my sanctuary” (Ezek. ix. 6). The nearer to God,
the greater the provocations; the higher the privileges, the nearer to judgment
(Dan. ix. 12; 1 Pet. iv. 17). 2. It ts complete. It involves the utter destruction
of the kingdom, the overthrow of the nation in its corporate existence. (1) The
heads of the people. ‘Cut them in the head, all of them.” Civil and religious
leaders had neglected their duty, forgotten their dignity, and disregarded the good
of the nation. God is no respecter of persons. Head or heel they cannot escape.
“He is terrible to the kings of the earth.” (2) The posterity of the people. “TI
will slay the last of them with the sword.” God will slay all the remainder, their
families and their posterity, all that are left, unto the very last. Justice is un-
sparing. Great and small, kings and common people, must suffer. Universality in
sin brings universality in punishment. Neither pre-eminence nor poverty can
protect from guilt. When the head is smitten, the body faints, and every member
suffers with it. II. The certainty of the calamity. None can escape, for God
is Omniscient (verses 2—4), and God is Omnipotent. 1. God has determined to
punish. He appears in an attitude of judgment; fixed in purpose, to prohibit
sacrifices and avenge his honour. Israel’s iniquity was like that of the house of
Eli, which “could not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever” (1 Sam. iii.
14). 2. It is impossible to escape punishment. (1) The loftiest heights cannot
protect them. (a) Carmel,with its caves and its forests, a hiding-place for robbers
and runaways, could afford no refuge. ‘I will search ard take them out thence.”
() Heaven itself could not hide them. If they fixed their throne in the stars,
and climbed the highest regions of space, they would fall into the hands of God.
From thence would he humble, judge, and condemn them. ‘Thence will J bring
them down.” (2) The greatest depths cannot hide them. (a) If they were to
“dig in Hell,” m the deepest and most secret places of the earth, God would find
them. ‘Thence shall my hand take them.” (b) “Though they be hid in the


OHAP. Ix.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS $23





bottom of the sea,” the deadly serpent would bite them (Is. xxvii. 1). Diving
would avail no more than climbing. Height and depth, light and darkness are
alike open to the Omnipresent God. Men would gladly hide themselves from God’s
presence but they cannot. (3) The longest distance cannot shelter them. Cap
tivity might seem safe, for men do not often slay those whom they carry away.
But God would discover them among their enemies, and remotest countries could
not befriend them. Sinners would gladly dig into hell or climb up to heaven to


escape from God’s presence ; but God is everywhere.
thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there.


“Tf I ascend up into heaven,
If I take the


wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea ; even there .
shall thy hand lead me” (Ps. exxxix. 7—11).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. Standing upon the altar.
The place of mercy turned into judg-
ment. The Bible, the means of grace,
and every altar of idolatry, literal or
spiritual, will be smitten by God.
Abused altars will be turned into seats
of justice, and cry for vengeance, not
sacrifice. ‘They were in counterfeit of
the sacrifices which God had appointed,
they offered would-be-atoning sacrifices,
and sinned in them; God appeared stand-
ing, to behold, to judge, to condemn”
| Pusey].

Vers. 2—4. 1. The power of Divine
judgments. 2. The subservience of
God’s attributes in their execution. 3.
The impossibility of escaping them.
“Every syllable is important, even
though at first it may seem otherwise.
The Holy Spirit designs to shake off our
self-flatteries and rouse our innate torpor,
that we may not think of God as of our-
selves, but know that his power extends
to all hiding-places” [Calvin].

I. Desperate efforts of sinners to escape.
They dig, they climb, and “they go
into captivity,” willingly, in presump-
tion and fear. In presence of danger
men are roused to most strer uous efforts.
They multiply endless means, and think
they can get out of every trouble by
turning away from God. II. Fruitless
efforts of sinners to escape. What the
Psalmist says of God’s omnipresence
(Ps. cxxxix.) the Prophet declares con-


cerning his justice. All refuge is hope-
less and ruin is inevitable. No depth
of delusion nor human devices can se-
cure the sinner from the serpent-bite of
conscience here, and no mountains nor
hills can hide from the presence of God
hereafter. Only in Christ can refuge be
found. Escape for thy life.

He contrasts Mount Carmel, which
rises abruptly out of the sea, with depths
of that ocean which it overhangs. Car-
mel was in two ways a hiding-place.
1. Through its caves (some say 1000,
some 2000) with which it is perfora‘ed,
whose entrance sometimes scarcely ad- -
mits a single man ; so close to each other
that a pursuer would not discern into
which the fugitive had vanished; so
serpentine within, that 10 steps apart,
says a traveller, we could hear each
others’ voices, but could not see each
other. 2. Its summit, about 1800 feet
above the sea, is covered with pines and
oaks, and lower down with olive and
laurel trees. These forests furnished
hiding-places to robber-hordes at the
time of our Lord. In those caves Elijah
probably at times was hidden from the
persecution of Ahab and Jezebel. Car-
mel, as the western extremity of the
land, projecting into the sea, was the last
place which a fugitive would reach. If
he found no safetv there, there was none
in his whole land. Nor was there by
sea [ Pusey]


HOMILETICS.


Gop’s Eyre Fixep on Srnners.—Verse 4.


This is a figurative expression setting forth a solemn thought.


As we indicate


pleasure or anger by the look of the eye, or the form of our countenance, so God


824 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. (cHaP. Ix


in providence fixes his “eyes over the righteous,” but his “face is against them
that do evil” (Ps. xxxiv. 15). 1. In displeasure at his guilt. God is not indif-
ferent to human conduct. He sets his eye upon all wicked deeds, and will give them
no countenance nor support. If men obstinately rebel against him, he will show
his displeasure against them. “TI will set my face against that man” (Ezex. xiv.
8: Lev. xx.3; xxvi.17). 2. In tracking his steps. ‘TI will search and take them
out thence.” God discovers the hypocrisy and finds out the hiding-place of men.
They are watched as by spies, guarded as by sentinels; hemmed in and forbidden
to escape. In repose and occupation, by night and by day, alone and with others,
God narrowly looks into all their paths (Job xiii. 27). 3. In determination to
punish his sin. “For evil and not for good.” The evil man is checkmated in
life, followed by Nemesis, the prediction and in part the experience of justice. He
flees from himself, from conscience, from God, and meets them all! His punish-
ment is everywhere below, how then can he escape hereafter? If the eyes of Tsmer-
lane had such power that men could hardly endure to behold them, what u-vst the
eyes of God be? If the frown of Augustus Cesar or Queen Elizabeth was death,
who can endure the anger of God? “For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and
he seeth all his goings” (Job xxxiv. 21, 22).


“ So writhes the mind remorse hath riven,
Unfit for earth, undoomed for heaven,
Darkness above, despair beneath,

Around it flame, within it ceath ’ [Byron].


Gon’s Power a GuARANTEE oF His Truta.—Versee 5, 6.


These words confirm the threat in the preceding verses; describe the nature and
the works of God; and present him in majesty and might, able and determined
to administer justice.

I. He created the universe. ‘“ He that buildeth his stories in the heaven.”
1. He made the heavens. He arranged them in their place and fixed them in their
distance. The clouds, the aérial heavens, are balanced by his hand (Job xxxvii. 16).
He suspends, condenses, and pours out their contents at his pleasure. The starry
heavens derive their glory from him. The heaven of heavens is the palace of the
Great King. Like a stately building, God has reared (artistically and beautifully
put in order, arranged, Heb. xi. 3) the celestial spheres in stories one above another ;
the lowest, like steps, leads to the highest, the material to the spiritual, earth to heaven.
“ Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things,” &c. 2. He
founded the earth. He drew the plan and prepared the place, provided the
materials and laid the foundation. ‘“ Thou hast also founded the earth,” given it
order, beginning, and firmness. The “éroop in the earth,” all the elements of
nature and all the creatures of the world, are linked together as bands of men
(2 Sam. ii. 25), or yoked in submission to his will (Is. lviii. 6). “When I call
unto them they stand up together.” II. He governs the universe. He sits
above earth and heaven, ruling all creatures and directing all agencies. Men only
see law in the evaporation of water from the sea, the electric agency which binds
it in the cloud, and in the current of air which wafts it to the land. But God
creates rain and disperses it over the earth. “He calleth for the waters of the sea,
and poureth them out upon the face of the earth.” He creates the earthquake and
the flood. Fire and frost, thunder and lightning, promptly obey his command.
“‘ He sendeth out his word and melteth them: he causeth his wind to blow, and
the waters flow.” III. He can destroy the universe. ‘The Lord God of Hosts,
is he that toucheth the land.” 1. The ability with which he executes his word.
Threats are formidable according to the power of him that threatens. We laugh at
impotence and fear omnipotence. The power which reared the world is irresistible.
How hopeless the case of those who have the powers of all creation against them !
“Who knoweth the power of thine anger? .even according tc thy fear, so is thy


CHaP. IX.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 325
gE a) Sa RE a SS SE ee BY


wrath.” 2. The ease with which he executes his word. He only touches the land
and it melts ; the lightness of the effort indicating the might of the power. The
blast of God’s breath melts the mightiest armies like wax before the fire (Ps. xviii.
1, 2). The highest and most solid parts of the earth feel his glance. “He
toucheth the hills, and they smoke.” He merely breathes, and men perish (Job iv. 9).
Sinai trembled ; and should we be more insensible than material creation? With
one touch the earth would reel before him, or return to chaos. “He uttered his
voice ; the earth melted.” 3. The method in which he executes his word. He
turns the land into a sea by rain or inundations; drowns it like the deluge of Noah
or “the flood of Egypt.” Think of the disaster in Chili in 1868. God, enthroned
above, “ calleth for the waters of the sea.” They rise at his bid. “He pours them
out upon the face of the earth,” and “all that dwell therein shall mourn.” The
prophet wonders why men do not fear God, whose power is displayed in heaven,
earth, and sea, and with a word of his mouth can melt the wicked like snow before
the sun. “ Fear ye not me? saith the Lord: will ye not tremble at my presence ?”
&e. (Jer. v. 22).


‘“ How dare they, then, offend, when God shall see ;
That must alone both judge and jury be?” [7. Randolf]


CREATION THE MriRROoR AND THE Minp oF Gop.


Men forget with whom they have to do and against whom they sin. The
prophet therefore sets forth the majesty and power of God, who was able to do
whatever he uttered against them. Sinners should fear to offend him, and speedily
make their peace with him.

I. Creation reveals the nature of God. Every act of God is a manifestation
of God; an egress of his nature. Power is seen in the creation and upholding of
the universe in all its wonderful changes and combinations; wisdom, in its design
and beauty, the adaptation of means to ends; benevolence, in its arrangements and
enjoyments. Everywhere we have signs of the existence of a Being of intelligence
and goodness. The heavens “ declare his glory,” and the earth affirms his “ eternal
power and Godhead.” How strange to be unmindful of “ goodness beyond thought,
and power Divine!” Why not discern him,


“ Who plann’d, and built, and still upholds a world
So clothed with beauty, for rebellious man?”


II. Creation reveals the mind of God. It has been called Adam’s library. The
prophet read the mind of God in the Book of Nature, and discovered laws for the
guidance of man. 1. The works of God subserve the purpose of God. God is not
merely present in “laws,” “ phenomena,” or “second causes.” He does not govern
the world by proxy, like ancient monarchs ruling their empires. All things are
made to subserve the design for which they were created, never cease to obey his
will and reflect his power and goodness. The earth trembles, the floods rise, and
calamities happen to fulfil the ends of his administration. 2. The works of God
reprove the indifference of man. Israel had despised the word of God, and are
directed to the ways of God, to rouse attention to his will. . Sensible evidence
should affect us. God teaches us by signs in heaven above and earth beneath.
We should be stirred up to praise him (Prov. xvi. 4), warned of the danger of
offending him, and led to fear him. If he can alter the course of nature, and turn
established laws into scourges for sin, we should not rebel against him. ‘“ Because
they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall
destroy them and not build them up.”





826 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: 4MOS8. (omar. rx.
HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.

Vers. 5,6. 1. God’sname. 2.God’s Governor of the universe. To think of

works — Creation and _ providence. him at a distance, or judge of his purpose


3. God’s judgments—Earthquakes and
floods. 4. God’s design. “All that
dwell therein shall mourn.”

God not seen in his works. I. Great
indifference exists. Men see, but do not
observe. Like Hamlet’s ghost, they have
“no speculation in their eyes.” Hence
they know nothing of the grandeurs by
which they are surrounded, and never
rise from Nature up to Nature’s God.
II. Defective knowledge abounds. God
is seen by many in his wisdom and
power, acknowledged to be the Creator
and Governor of the world, but not as a
God of truth and justice, rewarding
virtue and punishing sin. Divine per-
fections cannot be separated. Power is
linked with holiness, and justice with
truth, The Creator is the Moral


by one attribute of his being, is unreason-
able. We cannot shun his presence.
We only escape his anger by forsaking
sin which causes it. ‘ Because there is
wrath, beware lest he take thee away
with his stroke: then a great ransom
cannot deliver thee.”


Lessons. 1. God a Being of infinite
perfection. 2. All things are under his
control. 3. Nothing can hinder the


accomplishment of his purpose. 4. It
is ruinous to rebel against such a Being
of almighty power and majesty. 5. It
is blessed to have him for our Saviour
and Friend.


“Take heed: for God holds vengeance in His


an
To hurl upon their heads that break His law.”
(Shakespeare.]


HOMILETICS.


Gop’s CovENANT DOES NOT InvaLIDATE His Worp.— Verses 7, 8.


In these words Amos confirms the certainty of punishment. Israel were a sinful
nation, and neither pious ancestors nor covenant relations could prevent their
destruction.

I. God’s covenant may be undervalued and violated. Israel professed to be
God’s people, and boasted of descent from holy progenitors, A noble ancestry is
of no worth unless we follow their example. The piety of predecessors does not
justify, but aggravates our sin. With good patterns before them men should live
better. But they degenerate into heathens and idolaters. God values them no
more than the most contemptible nations of the world. Their sins had made them
like other people. The gold becomes dim; the children of Israel become children
of the Ethiopians, We may boast of our election, and be esteemed by others for
our profession ; but if we break God’s covenant, we cannot expect God’s protection.
What the Apostle says of circumcision applies to election. It isa benefit to none
but those who keep the law (Rom. ii. 25). It will not avail us to say “ Abraham
is our Father,” unless we do “the works of Abraham” (John viii. 39; Rom. ix.
7,8). II. God’s special providences in fulfilling his covenant may be abused.
The plea was that God would not cast off his people; for he delivered them from
bondage and pledged himself to be their God. ‘True, God chose them that they
might love him, and so long as they kept his law he protected and saved them.
Special favours do not exempt from Divine justice. They lay us under greater ob-
ligation to obey ; >for those who have much will be punished more severely for their
sins, aud from them much will be required. Special deliverances may become com-
mon providences. Redemption from Egypt was no more to Israel than the leading
of the Philistines and Syrians out of their former into their present dwelling-places
Those who neglect or abuse their privileges are guilty—1. Of great ingratitude. 2.
Of great rebellion. When men abuse their mercies, and despise the God of mercy,
it is only just with him to strip them of their honours and visit their s‘us.


omar. Ix.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


NL


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


1. External privileges no ground for
bousting before God. Others may pos-
sess them. They may be taken from us,
What was designed as a favour may lose
its result bv our conduct. 2. External
privileges wonot preserve from degenerate
conduct. Israel lost their character and
were esteemed as heathens. Conven-
tional Christians and corrupt Churches


are as bad as Infidels and Turks. 3.
External privileges are no guarantee
against punishment for sin. God ac-
counts sin under such circumstances all
the baser. Instead of hiding the guilty,
such gifts abused expose them to greater
condemnation. If we live not up to the
obligation of God’s mercies, we forfeit
the honour of them,


HOMILETICS.


Tue Sirtina Procrss.—Verses 8—10.


Punishment is again threatened, but mitigated. All shall not be destroyed. A
remnant shall be sifted and preserved. But the impious and proud will be cut off


with the sword.
I. The nature of the process.
purified and fitted for use.


shaken.


no light measures to wean us from the world.


1. It is a violent process.
them to be moved, shaken, or jostled about by other nations.
We get deeply rooted in our pursuits, confirmed in our sins, and require


Like precious grain, God’s people have to be


“T will sift,” 7. e. cause
We have need to be


2. It is an extensive process. Is-


rael were not to be unsettled among one nation, but many. ‘Their life was to be


spent “among all nations.”
globe almost.
his people.

from sin and prepare for service.
fear not God.”
the wicked destroyed.
fall upon the earth.”


Like a refiner of gold, he sits watching the process.
history prove that this sifting results not in destruction, but purification.
present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace.”
“Tt is not the will of your heavenly Father that one
2. The chaff is destroyed.
The same process to one will be salvation, to
Like chaff, the wicked are worthless in their character and


precious seed shall be lost.
of these little ones should perish.”
my people shall die by the sword.”
another destruction.


doom, blown away with the wind or burned in the fire (Ps. i. 4).
wicked for the sake of the godly now; but a separation will come.
to the place for which he is fitted and destined.


II. The results of the process.
1. The grain is preserved.
God’s eye is upon every one of his people, in their trials.


The Jews have been found in every country of the

The whole earth in the design of God has thus become a sieve to
Each change in business and residence may be a sifting to preserve
‘‘ Because they have no changes, therefore they


The righteous shall be saved and
“Yet shall not the least grain


Jewish history and Church
“ At the
Not one


“The sinners of
God spares the


Each will go
“He will throughly purge his


floor, and gather his wheat into the garner; but he will burn up the chaff with un-


quenchable fire.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 8. The eyes of the Lord are in
every place, especially, 1. Observing sin-
ners, 2. Scrutinizing character, and 3.
dealing out justice.

Ver. 9. I will sift. 1. God the sifter
of his people. 2. Making Divine pur-
poses real facts. ‘I will command.”
He wills and it is done.


“‘ When God commands, who dare oppose,
Or ask Him why, or what He does?”

God’s people are sifted—l. By God.
Abraham, the Centurion, and the Syro-
phenician were tried and approved. 2.
By Satan. As Peter, saved by the
prayer of Christ (Luke xxii. 31, 32).
“The blast of temptation struck dewn


328


—


the leaves ; but the root stood fast.” 3.
By the world. (a) Its infidelities, (0)
Its persecutions, (c) Its opinions. “In
the world ye shall have tribulation,” &c.


“This concise prophecy contains a.


draught of determinate history: the
kingdom, the body poiitic, to be destroyed
from off the face of the earth; but the
people, the stock, not to be destroyed.
The people to be sifted through all
nations; but the seed so sifted not to
perish, nor its least grain to fall to the
earth. It has a history made up of oppo-
site particulars; destruction and preserva-
tion, scattering and particular custody,
combined. It is the true outline of .Jew-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


{cuar. 1X.





ish history. Is it of any other what-
ever?” [Davidson on Prophecy}.

Ver. 10. Which say. 1. The impious
spirit of sinners. Ignorant, false, con-
fident, and presumptive. 2. The great
disappointment of sinners. Their say-
ings do not make facts. Punishment
does overtake them, suddenly and griev-
ously. ‘ Evil is often nearest those that
put it at the greatest distance from
them.” Hope of impunity is only the
refuge of the proud and rebellious ; God
by his judgments will change their ver-
dict, and prove it to be a refuge of lies
(Is. xxviii. 15). Flee to Christ, and ke
will be your hiding-place in the storm.


HOMILETICS.
Tae Fauten TaBeRNACLE ReEARED AND ENLARGED.— Verses 11, 12.


The book which began with dreadful judgments ends in sublime visions. The
prophet has bewailed the sins of different cities and denounced the wrath of
God against them. Now we find him predicting blessings for the heathen. The
funeral dirge is turned into a song of mercy. The prophet is rewarded for faith-
ful service, and is comforted with the thought, that after the destruction of ungodly
elements, Divine grace shall rear, enlarge, and prosper a kingdom which shall never
be destroyed. Verses 11—15 might be taken together as including the vision, but
we shall treat them separately. From verses 11, 12, we get a description of the
restored tabernacle.

I. The fallen tabernacle shall be reared up. ‘In that day will I raise up the
tabernacle of David.” 1. Raised from its fallen condition. It was not a mag-
nificent palace, but “the fallen hut.” It had been rent and ruined by divisions
and wars. Sin will cause any kingdom to decay and any Church to fall. It im-
poverishes royalty, impairs human dignity, and throws into the lowest condition.
But Divine grace can build up and beautify what sin has pulled down. In the
human heart, the Christian Church, and the heathen world God is building up a holy
temple for the perpetual residence of His Spirit (Eph. ii. 22). 2. Repaired in ite
breaches. “ And close up the breaches thereof.” Sin breaks down moral barriers,
creates divisions in the family and the fold. God sets up new stones in the walls,
heals divisions, and unites men in love and loyalty to himself. 3. Completed in its
original design. ‘TI will build it as in the days of old.” God will finish and cum-
plete the building according to its ancient grandeur in the days of David and Solo-
mon (2 Sam. vii. 11—16) ; and in harmony with his purpose. The kingdom of
David is a type of the kingdom of Christ, the Son of David. The Christian Church
may be reduced in circumstances, and almost ruined in prospect; but that is no
reason for despair. The humble cot, the shattered tent, may be raised to greater
worth and adorned with greater beauty than the temple of old. ‘Thou shalt arise
and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea, the set time is come.”
II. The fallen tabernacle shall be greatly enlarged. “That they may possess
the remnant of Edom,” &c. Formerly the Church was confined in narrow limits,
but now it shall spread itself over all nations. 1. he Hdomites, near neigh-
bours, yet bitter enemies, shall become peaceful citizens. 2. The heathens, the Gen-
tiles, should be called. The prophet pronounced woe upon these nations at first,
but now he speaks of them as callea by the name of Jehovah. ‘he most desper-
ate and the most distant may be converted to Christ. We ehould be glad at the


CHAP. IX. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS. 329





conversion of others, and remember that the promise is unto us and our children,
an as many as the Lord our God shall call. There is a bright vision for the
future. God is daily increasing the number of his people. Jew and Gentile shall
be called, enrolled in one family, and be distinguished by one name. “ Ask of Me,
and I shali give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for thy possession.”


Tae SprrituaL Guory or THE RaisepD TaBERNacLE.— Verses 13—15.


Behold, the days come, there are more blessings in store yet. From the fulfilment
of verses 11, 12, shall result abundance of produce in the land, verse 13, great
prosperity in the nation, and perpetual duration of the kingdom [ Keil].

I. The land shall be blessed with the greatest fertility. No more curse, nor
failing crops. We have in this scene—l. Earnest activity. The seedsman, the
ploughman, and the reaper are all engaged in their special duties. 2. Abundant
crops. So rich and productive is the land, that the mountains drop down sweet
wine, and all the hills melt (Joel iii. 18). 3. Wonderful rapidity. The harvest
lasts unto the vintage, and the vintage continues to the seed-time. There is one
continuous produce, one perpetual round of toil and success. II. The inhabitants
shall enjoy the greatest privileges. As the land of Israel shall be no more
smitten with drought, so the citizens shall enjoy the rich benefits of their peace
ful labour. 1. Joy would be restored. “I will bring again the captivity of my
people.” Misfortune and misery should once more be turned into prosperity. 2.
Freedom would be reclaimed. ‘They shall build the waste cities.” Delivered
from the fear of the enemy, they are active for God. Men are captives, and only
made free in Christ. In the gospel Christian Churches are chartered with liberty
of worship and action. Hence they build waste places, and inhabit them with re-
newed blessings. 3. The fruits of labour would be enjoyed. Wicked men toil for
others, and not for themselves. The Jews would no longer sow and others reap.
They would build cities, plant vineyards, and make gardens, and enjoy the fruits
of their efforts. ‘“ My servants shall build houses and inhabit them, and plant vine-
vards and eat the fruit of them.” 4. Perpetual security would be granted. They
would be no longer a homeless, wandering people. God would fix them, perpetu-
ally establish them in the land. When God plants, man cannot uproot or destroy.
“T will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and my whole
soul ”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 12. The restoration was not to
be for themselves alone. No gifts of
God end in the immediate object of his
bounty and love. They were restored
in order that they, the first objects of
God’s mercies, might win others to God ;
not Edom only, but all nations upon
whom God says my name is called
[Pusey].

The call of the Gentiles. 1. The call
of a remnant as in Edom; so Scripture
everywhere speaks of the converted as a
residue. 2. The call of those specially


related to God. Those who sincerely
invoke his name and seek his covenanted
mercy (Acts xv. 15—17).

Ver. 13. Mountains. Symbols of
barrenness, idolatry, and difficulty of cul-
tivation set forth the fertility and fulness
of the Christian Church.

Ver. 15. 1. The prosperity of the
Church. “I will plantthem.” 2. The
security of the Church. “ Saith the Lord


thy God.” 3. The perpetuity of the
Church. “ They shall vo more be pullel
up.”





MOMILETIC COMMENTARY: AMOS.


[CHAP Ix


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER LX.


Vers. 1—4. Hide themselves. God is
everywhere, not as the air is everywhere.
The air is part in one place and part in
another; God isallinevery place. God
is wholly in the height of heaven, and
wholly in the depth of hell; wholly in
the length of the earth, and wholly in
the breadth of the sea. All God is in
all things, and all God is without all
things; He is without all things, and
not shut out of anything. He is in all
things, and not included in anything.
So the ancients speak of this wonderful
mystery of God’s omnipresence [ Cary/].

God’s Hye—Sentences—

“Heaven hath its countless eyes to view men’s
acts.

Can we outrun the heavens ?

However wickedness outstrips men, it has no
wings to fv from God” [Shakespeare].
Vers. 5,6. Creation. How close does

it bring the Creator to us, to regard him,
not so much as having made the world,
as still engaged in making it; 7. e. by
supplying the life on which its laws, and
thus its being and incidents, depend.
“Depend upon it (says an eloquent
preacher} it is not the want of greater
miracles, but of the soul to perceive such
as are allowed us still, that makes us push
all the sanctities into the far spaces we
cannot reach. The devout feel that wher-
ever God’s hand is there is miracle ; and it
issimply an undevoutness which imagines
that only where miracle is, there can be
the real hand of God” [ Grindon].

Much of the glory of God in creation
is hid by a train of second causes, through
which few look to the jirst [Howe].

Ver. 7. Kthiopians. Inconsistency


has been execrated in every age, as the
assassin of religious character and peace,
introducing anarchy and confusion into
the repose of Christian Churches, casting
stains upon garments which ought to be
kept unspotted from the world, and by
evil influence directly and bad example
indirectly, throwing a reproach upon the
cause of Christianity, and making the
tongues of its enemies to blaspheme
[W. S. M.].


“ Like—but oh! how different” [ Wordsorth}.


Vers. 8—10. Sift. Gold in the ore
isa treasure ; but itis when it has passed
through the refiner’s hands, and has re-
ceived the stamp of currency, that it be-
comes of acknowledged value, and fit for
adaptation to all the circumstances and
conveniences of life [W. S. I/.].

Fiery trials make golden Christians ;
sanctified afflictions are spiritual promo-
tion [ Dyer].

Vers. 11—15. Future days. Nothing
good bursts forth all at once. The
lightning may dart out of a black cloud ;
out the day sends his bright heralds he
fore him, to prepare the world for kis
coming [ Hare].

The brightest day has not yet dawnea,
the widest conquests have not yet been
achieved. Is not the Church challenged
to nerve herself for greater effort, and to
array herself in a more imposing habit!
“Put on thy strength, O Zion, put on
thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem |”
‘““O! scene surpassing fable, and yet true,
Scene of accomplished bliss, hak who can sée,


Though Lut in distant prospect, and not feel
His soul refreshed with foretaste of the joy f”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


OBADIAH.


INTRODUCTION.


Tus bvok consists only of twenty-one verses, and is the shortest in the Bible.

The Author. Obadiah (Servant of Jehovah) is a proper name frequently met
with, but little is known concerning our Author. Some identify him with the
pious courtier in the palace of Ahab (1 Kings xviii. 3); some with the overseer of
the workmen in 2 Chron. xxxiv. 12; but the silence of Scripture is in significant
contrast with the anxiety of men to know something of him.

The Time, ‘Tn all probability the prophecy was delivered betweeu the year
B.c. 588, wnen Jerusalem was taken by the Chaldeans, and the termination of the
siege of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar. During this interval, that monarch subdued the
Idumeans and other neighbouring tuations” [A. Hizaz]. The contents of the book
and its relation to the prophecy of Jeremiah seem to confirm this view.

The Book. “The subjects <f t:2 prophecy are the judgments to be inflicted upca
the Idumeans on account of theit wanton and cruel conduct towards the Jews at
the time of the Chaldean invasion, and the restoration of the latter from captivity.
The book may therefore be fitly divided into two parts ; the first comprising verses
1—16, which contain a reprehension of the pride, self-confidence, and unfeeling
cruelty of the former people, and definite predictions of their destruction ; the latter
verses 17-21, in which it is promised that the Jews should not only be restored
to their own land, but possess the territories of the surrounding nations, especially
Idumea” [Zizaz].

The style is original and fresh. ‘“ Vividness, connectedness, power, are charac-
teristics of it. As it begins so it continues and ends. It has no breaks, nor in-
terruptions. Thought follows on thor:ght, as wave rolls upon wave, but all mar-
shalled to one end, marching on, column after column, to the goal which God hath
appointed for them. Tach verse grows out of that which was before it, and carries
on its thought. The cadence of the words in the original is a singular blending of
ythos and strength. The pathos of the cadence consists in a somewhat long-sus-
tained measure, in which the Prophet dwells on the one thought which he wishes
to unpress ; the force, in the few brief words in which he sums 1p some sentence”


82 INTKODUCTION,


OO





Pusey). ‘“ Amony all the prophets,” says one, “te is the briefest in number of
words ; in the grace of mysteries he is their equal.”

“The reason why the book occupies its present unchronological position in the
Hebrew Bible is supposed to be the connection between the subjects of which it
treats and the mention made of ‘the residue of Edom,’ at the conclusion of the
preceding book of Amos” [Hizaz] “The chronological position of Obadiah illus-
trates an important truth concerning God’s dealings with mankind, viz. that he never
executes a judgment, or inflicts a punishment, on a nation or individual, without
having given some previous warning as to the hateful character and dangerous con-
sequences of the sins for which the judgments are inflicted. He did not denounce
his judgments on Nineveh by Nahum, before he had given warning to Nineveh by
Jonah; and he did not denounce his judgment upon Edom by Jeremiah, before
he had given warning of the approaching visitation by Obadiah” { Wordeworth].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : OBADIAH.





OBADIAH.


Criticat Nores.] Amb.] God is represented as summoning armies and setting them in battle
array, after the custom of earthly kings. 8. Clefts] Jer. xlix. 16. See Stanley for description.
The position, strong by nature and by art, was thought impregnable, hence their proud confidence
and insolence. 4.] Who ? is the boast; “thence will J” isthe answer. God can dislodge the high-
est, §.] Spoliation shall be complete ; not such as thieves or grape-gatherers make, who leave
the rest when they have had enough. 6, Hidden] places explored; all treasures searched out, lit.
diligent and earnest tracking out (Zeph. i, 12), 7,] Edom would be forsaken by those in whom they
put confidence. Confederates] Allies would drive back (brought) fugitives to the frontier. Men at
peace] with them, neighbouring states, would deceive them (Ps. xli. 9), They that eat bread, lit. men
of bread, their dependents, lay snares to wound. Treachery everywhere. None] of the wisdom
and tact for which Edom was famous is left to extricate himself. 8, Wise men] shall be bereft of
discernment. 9, Thy mighty] heroes are dismayed, or fall into despair. 10. Cause of ruin] Vio-
lence against the seed of Jacob. In different ways. 11.] Fortaking a position, Stoodest] notasa
looker-on, but as an enemy; an attitude of hostility, not sympathy, 12.] For maxcious pleasure
in three forms—/ooking on with delight; rejoiced without reserve; boasting, spoken proudly, lit.
to make the mouth broad or open; a gesture of contempt and derision (Ps. xxxv. 21; Is. lvii. 4: ef.
Ezek. xxxv. 13, and Rev. xiii. 6). 18.] For plundering Jerusalem. Gate] City (Mic. i.9). 14.]
For seizing Judean captives, to murder them or deliver them up totheenemy. 15. For] Resumptive
from ver. 10. Righteous retribution in kind. 16.] The greatest crime the desecration of the
holy mountain by drinking carousals, for which all nations are to drink of God’s wrath till utterly
destroyed. Not been] (Job x. 19); not a trace of national existence left (Ps. xxxvii. 36; Ezek,
xxvi. 21). 17.] Yet this Mount shall become a sanctuary for God and his people, who will possess,
regain their possessions, 18. ] Israel, again united and unassailed, shall execute judgment upon others,
A fire] Numb. xxi. 28; Is. v. 24. 19,] Extend its territory to every region under heaven. 20,
Captivity] Exiles among the Canaanites shall possess the country of the Canaanites; and those
whom the Edomites had enslaved shall possess the cities of their masters. See Lowth. 21. Saviours]
Deliverers (see 1 Mac. v. 3—5); Jewish leaders and conquerors (Judges iii. 9; Is, xix, 20); or
spiritually, preachers of salvation (cf. ver. 17 and Amosix, 12). Judge] 4 ¢. to punish (1 3am.
iti. 13), Kingdom] shall become universal under the Messiah (Ps. xxii. 28), “The fulfilment of
vers, 17—21 can only belong to the Messianic times, and in such a way that it commenced with the
founding of the kingdom of Christ on earth, advances with its extension among all nations, and will
terminate in a complete fulfilment at the second coming of our Lord” [Ker/],


HOMILETICS.
Tue Sotemn Mussace.—Verses 1, 2.


Obadiah prophesies against Edom, whose conduct towards Jacob typifies the
general attitude of hostile nations to God’s people, and threatens retribution for all
its crimes. These ‘verses are introductory.

I. The nature of the message. God speaks in manifold ways and divers forms
to adapt his revelations to men. 1. A vision. God first opens their eyes, and if
they have not real visions, they have fresh light and new iife poured into the soul.
All God’s servants have heard and seen God in Christ; have enlarged views of
truth and duty ; and rejoice in spiritual illumination. ‘We speak that we know,
and testify that we have seen.” 2. A report. ‘To impress our minds God often
appeals to the senses, speaks to the eye and ear. (a) A true report, not a mere
rumour originating with men; but authentic and Divine. “From the Lord.” (6)
A prevalent report. “ We have heard.” The prophet identifies others, of earlier
or those of his own date, with himself. God’s judgments are known in the earth
by various means. Men are not kept in the dark. If the wicked despise them
the righteous shall be warned. “Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he revealeth
his secret to his servants the prophets.” 3. A judgment. Those who desert God
and renounce spiritual interests to gratify animal passions will be disgraced. And


334 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OBADIAH.


when posterity indulge the spirit, perpetuate and multiply the sins, of their ances-
tors, as Edomites walked in the steps of Esau, then God will make an example of
them. “And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom, by the hand of my people
Israel.” II. The execution of the message. God’s word is not empty sound.
God changes not, and his servants must not alter their message. “Thus saith the
Lord God concerning Edom.” 1. Byan ambassador. “ An ambassador is sent.”
Whether this ambassador be the prophet himself, or another servant, or celestial
messenger, matters little. God has agents visible and invisible. vil spirits and
wicked men are permitted to stir up nations to battle. We are ambassadors from
God to beseech you to take heed and escape the judgment. 2. By other nations.
There is first a rumour, then the ambassador, followed by the gathering of nations.
Though eager to accomplish their own ends, and engrossed in their own pursuits,
yet when God calls, “ Arise ye,” they respond, “ Let us rise up against her in
battle.” The Medes and Persians, the Russians and Turks, are under the control of
God Almighty. He can create war or cause it to cease. He has absolute dominion
over the human heart, and can turn it at his pleasure. One wicked man punishes
another ; one sinful nation administers justice to another. “‘ He maketh the wrath
of man to praise him.” III. The consequences of this execution. ‘Behold, ]
have made thee small among the heathen.” The greatness of the calamity is set
forth by its effects. 1. Small in territory. Edom extended from Dedan of Arabia
to Bozrah in the north (Jer. xlix. 8—13). But the enemy “laid his mountains
and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness”’ (Mal. i. 3). He was
robbed of his dominions, and subdued by the heathen. 2. Small in number.
They were noted for riches and power (Gen, xxxvi. 7—31); blessed with men and
possessions: but were made small and sadly reduced in war (2 Kings xiv. 7). 3.
Small in honour. Not merely despised, but “ greatly despised.” This mighty na-
tion was made insignificant in itself, and despicable in the sight of others. Proud
men are worthless in character, and ridiculed by inferiors. They wrongly estimate
themselves, and are lightly esteemed by others. Humiliation and shame will ever
be the result of their pride and defiance of God. God exalts and abases, makes
great and makes small. “ For lo, I will make thee small among the heathen, and
despised among men.”


“My pride fell with my fortunes” [Shakespeare].


Prive or Haarr.— Verses 3, 4.


Edom’s dwelling on the rock which seemed impregnable, fostered his pride and
arrogant self-confidence. But this natural fortification afforded no shelter. God
brought them down from their lofty heights, and retribution found its victims.

I. That pride of heart is deceptive. ‘The pride of thine heart hath deceived
thee.” Edom imagined that they were secure in their elevated rocks—that they
were out of the reach of the enemy, and that they occupied an impregnable fortress.
They were deceived. National fortifications avail not against the Divine hand. 1.
Pride of heart deceives men in the commercial sphere of life. There are godless
merchants who build their nests in bright stars—pride themselves on strong finan-
cial fortifications—have a large capital, a good stock, and a fine commercial reputa-
tion. They have no need to be religious, or introduce religious sentiments in busi-
ness life; they can do without it. They say, “Who shall bring me down?”
God sees their pride of heart, and causes unexpected calamity to work their ruin
(Ps. xxxvii. 35, 36). 2. Pride of heart deceives men in reference to their intellec-
tual thinkings. Many proud thinkers reject the word of God, imagine that they
are safe in the invincible battlements of logic, and their ability to resist truth and
God. 3. Pride of heart deceives men in reference to their moral safety. Men pur.
sue a oe life of sin, openly blaspheme the name of God, and imagine that they
are safe in the fortifications of social position and wealth. They vainly imagine that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : OBADIAH. bs)








natural qualifications and favourable circumstances will enable them to conduct. life
afely and well in defiance of the Great Ruler of the Universe. They are deceived.
The rocky places are no refuge for the retributive providence of God. They mav
shield from the assaults of men, but not when God is Captain of the assailing army-
M1. Pride of heart is presumptive. “Who shall bring me down to the ground?”
1. Zt presumes unduly unon the natural, temporal, and secondary advantages it may
possess. The Edomites presumed unduly upon the natural position of their city,
and upon their high fortification. They trusted exclusively in these for protection
against the foe. So many favoured with natural, intellectual, and social advan-
tages of life, are glad in the enjoyment of these gifts, but their folly consists in
placing undue confidence in them. The true fortifications of life are not in stones
und rocks, but in love and purity of soul. 2. It presumes ignorantly, without tak-
ing into view the access which God has to men, notwithstanding their temporal for-
tifications. Edom thought only of elevated position, and not the power of God to
touch them at unknown points, and by unexpected agencies. No device can avert
God’s retributive touch. He can send angels on his errands, who are not hindered
by the battlements of men. How often do men of social position and intellectual
ability—men naturally gifted—look at their own fortress unmindful of God, and
become presumptuous. 3. It presumes unwarrantably upon the inability of men
to achieve its ruin. Edom never imagined for a moment that God would interfere
to work their ruin—did not see the Divine purpose in the armies coming against
them, and scorned the idea of men reaching their altitudes. So men enjoy the
protective advantages of life, underrate the power of their fellows, and hold in con-
tempt the feeble instrumentalities which shall ultimately work their ruin. IIT
Pride of heart is destructive. ‘I will bring thee down, saith the Lord.” Men
who boast of human fortifications which protect them from injury are ignorant of
the power of God, or vainly imagine they can elude it—make lawful things the
subject of unlawful boasting—invite the scorn of men and the retribution of God.
God can send darkness on the noblest intellect, distress into the most joyous home,
failure into the most successful business, and will do, if pride of heart be indulged.
Pride is the herald of ruin. 1. Such men are often brought to humiliation by
commercial failure. Their best schemes fail. Their largest speculations are un-
successful. 2. Such men are often brought to humiliation by domestic bereavement.
Their fortifications are sealed by the stern foe Death; and the brightest lights of
their homes are put out. Thus are they brought to the ground. 3. Such men are
often brought down by social slander. Rumours get about concerning the conduct
of the proud, which endanger their reputation, and bring the haughty to the dust
of social execration. 4. Such men are often brougit down by death. They shall
surely be brought down from their nests in the s‘ars, by the last great enemy of
humanity. Their destruction is—l. Certain. %. Lameniable. 3. Humiliating.
4. Unexpected. 5. Irreparable [The Study and ihe Pulpit].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


1. Natural advantages often beget
pride. 2. Pride leads to insolent defiance
of God. 3. Insolent defiance of God
leads to awful ruin.

Pride is the great enemy of God. It
strikes at his throne and glory, provokes
him to oppose and punish it. God re-
sisteth (setteth himself in battle array
against) the proud (Jas. iv. 6; Gen. xi.
4; cf. x. 8—10). Pride has tts root in
the practical denial of God. The proud


think that there is none above them
(Ps. xii. 14). God's honour ts concerned
in putting down pride. “I will bring
thee down.” “ Asop, when asked ‘ What
doeth God?’ said, ‘He humbles the
proud and exalts the humble.’ And
another,

‘Whom morning’s dawn beholdeth proud,

The setting sun beholdeth bowed.’ ”’
[ Pusey. |

No exaltation and power can secure





those whom God in honour is concerned
to bring down.

Fortifications may be constructed and
made due use of, but must not be de-
pended upon. For no fortification is
too strong or too high when God is angry,
and will punish. And he has various
ways of bringing them into the hands of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : OBADIAH.





fail; or a spark to fall in a powder
magazine; water may be wanting; there
may be pestilence, dysentery, or mutiny
among the soldiers, or bribes may be used
as scaling ladders. Then all is in vain.
What the world calls protection, cannot
protect against God’s judgment; death
mounts over all rocks [| Lange].


the enemies. He can cause provisions to


HOMILETICS.


Tae IrnrePaRaBLE Loss.— Verses 5, 6.


The prophet now depicts the utter overthrow of Edom. The material wealth on
which they relied shall be taken away, and nothing shall remain or be recovered.

I. Their treasures are searched out. ‘“ How are the things of Esau searched
out!” The most secret places, the most hidden things, are diligently tracked out.
Everything safely stored up in holes of the rock was sought after and discovered.
No place can hide from God. No wealth can protect from retribution. Nothing
can be concealed and kept on earth. Our best treasures are searched out, stolen by
thieves or corroded by time. In the judgment day the hidden things of all men
will be brought to light, every hiding-place of sin exposed, and sinners stripped of
their pride and self-confidence. II. Their treasures are taken away. The
grape-gatherer leaves some gleanings, thieves and robbers retreat with what they
can carry with them: but the enemy would act much worse than ordinary plunder-
ers. Nothing shall escape them. The devastation should be complete. A glean-
ing was left in Israel (Is. xvii. 6; xxiv. 13), but Edom was utterly spoiled.
Treasures ensure not from the invader, aggrandize not the possessors, but become
the spoil of the conqueror. Nations may trust to their defences and individuals to
their wealth, but God can take themall away. ‘I have made Esau bare. I have
uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be able to hide himself.” III. The
regret at the loss is great. “ How art thou cut off!” This parenthetic sentence
indicates the amazement of the prophet at the great destruction of the ungodly.
Sad to see men lose reputation and happiness, the health of the body and the
fortunes of the family, without the least hope of recovery. What a sight to behold
men exposed to judgment, robbed of all defence, and stupefied in theirsin. 1. God
pities such. Judgment is strange work to him. He desires not the death of any
sinner, QO Jerusalem, how oftep would I have gathered thee! 2. God’s servants
pity such. Amos mourns over the destruction which he announces in the name of
God. David and Jeremiah wept because men kept not the law. All true prophets
are in sympathy with the people for whom they labour. A lost soul should cause
tears to flow like rivers of water. ‘Oh that they were wise, that they understood
this |”


Reviance on Broken Resps.— Verses 7—9.


The destruction threatened could not be warded off by dependence upon allied
armies, renowned wisdom, and heroic valour. Every object of confidence is de-
stroyed. Those very projects by which they seek to protect themselves and secure
their treasures become the ruin of both.

I. Human alliances disappoint. Those who forsake God often flee in vain
confidence to man. But as Edom had deceived and persecuted his brother Jacob,
so in turn he is deceived and punished by his friends. 1. Confederates are worth-
less, When Edom seeks for help and support from them, ambassadors and fugi
tives are sent back to the frontier or delivered into the hands of the enemy.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OBADIAH. 337





Allies will not entangle themselves in the fate of Edom. 2. Neighbours are treach-
erous. They deceive or overpower them. Men hide their malice under a pretence
ot peace. Their friendship is deceitful as a brook in summer, false and perfidious.
Hence cried the heathen, “‘ Friends! there is no friend to be found.” The man of
my peace, with whom I had no difference, in whom I trusted, proved treacherous.
“For it was not an enemy that reproached me; then I could have borne it” (Ps.
lv. 12, 13). 3. Dependents forsake them. Those who had bread with them;
those entertained by them and who lived by them, laid plots for their overthrow.
While they professed to aid they secretly desired to wound them. Unkind acts
from those in whom we put confidence are most severe. To spurn those from
whom we derive our bread and being is the height of ingratitude and malice.
“ All my friends have forsaken me,” cried a Prime Minister of England. “ And
thou, O Brutus!” said the dying Cesar, “yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom
I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me.” Thus
the help of man proves to be vain. When nations are united in fear, they may be
severed and turned against one another. ‘Every experiment by multitudes or
by individuals that has a sensual and selfish aim will fail,” says Emerson. The
giants in old time succeeded not in confederacy against the gods. The firmest
friendship, the strongest armies, are broken reeds, ‘“‘ Cursed be the man that trusteth
in man and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord.” II.
Worldly wisdom failed. The prophet makes an appeal to Edom, “Shall I not?”
God will turn their knowledge into ignorance, and their wisdom into folly. 1.
Wise men will be destroyed. They will not have wit or wisdom enough to preserve
themselves. A wise man, though poor, may defend a city (Prov. ix. 14, 15). A
woman’s wisdom defeated the purpose of Joab (2 Sam. xx. 14—22). Archimedes
saved Syracuse from Roman plunder. Wisdom is better than strength, and its
merits often more brilliant. Sad therefore is the loss of wise men. 2. Wisdom
itself shall perish. ‘“ And understanding out of the mount of Esau.” ‘“ Know-
ledge is power,” and in “the multitude of counsellors there is safety.” But “there
is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord.” Pharaoh’s device
was frustrated. Ahithophel’s counsel was befooled when it was thought to be like
“the oracle of God.” Worldly policy is weak, begets suspicion and leads to ruin.
“The best-laid schemes” are often overturned by accident, and the wisdom of
legislators “‘ made foolish” by the providence of God. Trust not to human wisdom.
It can neither prevent the treachery of men, nor ward off the judgment of God.
When we seek protection in “the wisdom of men,” from national distress and per-
sonal evil, we shall be disappointed. ‘‘ There is no understanding in them ;” they
are bereft of all prudenceand help. ‘The wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.” III. Martial valour
availed not. “Thy mighty men, O Teman! shall be dismayed.” Their courage
turned pale. Heroes and valiant men were cowards. Their last hope was cut off,
brave warriors were dismayed and trembled in despair. If the mighty fall, what
becomes of the weak? “ Howl, fir-trees, if the cedars be shaken.” When armies
and fleets fail, the people are defenceless, and “every one of the mount of Esau
may be cut off by slaughter.” The nation is panic-stricken, and the rigour of death
strikes them helpless (Ps. lxxvi. 5). How terrible was the overthrow of Edom!
Its wealth and confederacies, its renown and its valour, availed not in the day of
calamity. “Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he
to be accounted of?”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7. Edom is a type of worldly both respects the punishment of Edom
wisdom and secular policy, as well as of is a warning to all Machiavellian politi
anbrotherly enmity to God’s people. In cians in these latter days [ Wordsworth

bg


Ver. 8. 1. The judgment. I will
‘destroy the wise men.” 2. The time.
“In that day.” 3. The certainty of it.
“ Saith the Lord.”

Edom’s destruction.
cause. 2. Its moral necessity in God’s
purpose. ‘‘ The prophet sums up briefly
God’s end in all this. The immediate
means were man’s treachery, man’s vio-
lence, the failure of wisdom in the wise,
and of courage in the brave. The end
of all in God’s will, was their destruction.
All things work together to good to
those who love God, and to evil to those
who hate him” [Pusey].

Understanding out of Mount of Esau.
God will justly deny those understand-
ing to keep out of the way of danger,


1. Its outward .


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OBADIAA.





that will not use their understanding to
keep out of the way of sin. He that
will be foolish, let him be foolish still
[ Lange}.

1. Carnal confidences of men. Good
situations, abundant treasures, powerful
allies, prudence, and mighty men to de-
liver in extremity.

2. The destruction of these confidences.
Every one is threatened, and the terror
is only the forerunner of the judgment
of God. “The death or disunity of the
mighty often proves the death and de
struction of the many ; and it is in vain


‘to depend upon mighty men for our _


protection, if we have not an Almighty
God for us, much less if we have an
Almighty God against us” [ Lange].


HOMILETICS.


UNBROTHERLY ConpucT AND ITs ConsEQquENoES.— Verses 10, 11.


The prophet shows the equity and the cause of the judgment pronounced against
Edom. ‘The sentence. increases in severity as special sins are more aggravated
in their quality. Edom was guilty of many sins, but none so great as unnatural
conduct and vindictive spirit towards his brother Jacob. This violence is mentioned
in general terms (ver. 10), and in particular descriptions (vers. 11—14). In vers.
10, 11 we have—

I. A brother in circumstances of distress. It was a day of calamity with
Judah, calamity mentioned three times to indicate its depth (ver. 13). All are ex-
posed to danger and distress, require sympathy and aid. “A brother is born for
adversity.” Three clauses form a climax. 1. Judah's possessions were taken.
“Strangers carried away his forces,” or substance. The country was probably
cleared of its produce, cattle, and treasures. 2. Judah’s cities were destroyed.
“ Foreigners entered into his gates.” The gates were fortified and defended; yet
they were carried by the enemy. The capital was taken and the temple destroyed
by the Edomites (2 Esdras iv. 45). 3. Judah's population were made captives.
“ And cast lots upon Jerusalem.” When the city was taken, the conquerors di-
vided the booty, slew some of the prisoners, aud took the others captive. Such
distress should have excited the pity and prompted the help of the Edomites: but
“in the day of Jerusalem they cried, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation there-
of.” II. Unnatural conduct towards a brother in distress. ‘Thy violence
against thy brother Jacob.” ‘“* Violence includes all sorts of ill-treatment, from one
with whom might is right.” 1. They took up hostile attitude towards their brother.
“Thou stoodest on the other side.” Not mere spectators of the calamities of Jacob,
but intensely opposed to him. There was lack of sympathy and positive cruelty.
All this towards a brother, and a twin brother! Edom acted with the enemy, and
took the contrary side to the dictates of nature; feasted his eyes with the misery,
and eagerly sought the destruction of Jacob. ‘“ Thou wast as one of them.” <A
man should be more affectionate towards a brother than a stranger. But often the
closer the relationship the greater the cruelty. Ingratitude is always black, but
doubly black ina brother. “ Love as brethren.” This conduct is—(1) Most repre
hensible ; (2) Most inhuman ; (3) Most guilty. III. Righteous punishment for
unnatural conduct towards a brother in distress. Edom helped the Babylonians


HOMILATIC COMMENTARY : OBALDIAR. 338





in the overthrow of Jerusalem, exulted in the downfall of Jacob, and thought te
secure his own safety and prosperity. They were disappointed. God in righteous
retribution visited them with the punishment they inflicted on others. Two periods
of ignominy are mentioned in their history. They would suffer as a conquered people.
and at length ts utterly extinct. 1. They would suffer as a conquered people.
“‘ Shame shall cover thee.” Not the shame of penitence, but the shame of dishonour.
Jacob was not ruined as they expected. They were humbled and made contempt-
ible, and the judgment of God confounded them for taking part against those whom
they should have loved. Shame will ever be the robe and the result of social
cruelty. ‘“ Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover ther:
selves with their own confusion, as with a mantle.” 2. They would be cut off asa a
nation. ‘The sentence was centuries in fulfilment; but after repeated trials the end
came and God cut them off. Justice without mitigation, and ruin without recovery,
will come upon nations and individuals, who rejoice in a brother’s affliction, and
do what they can to increase it (Lev. xxii. 3). Ages abate not the force of God’s
word, and years change not the sinner’s doom. ‘TI will make thee perpetual deso.
lations, and thy cities shall not return: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.”


VIOLATION OF Soorau Duty.— Verses 12—14.


These words describe what the conduct of Edom towards his brother ought to
have been; and by implied contrast with his actual conduct condemns his violence,
rapacity, and murder. They not only neglected social duty, but acted with invete-
rate cruelty

I. In taking malicious pleasure at a brother’s misfortune. The various ways
are minutely specified. 1. With insolent looks. “Thou shouldest not have looked,”
(a) With a look of total indifference. Distressed neighbours require relief, and we
should not be unconcerned in their sorrows. ‘The priest and the Levite looked on
the wounded Samaritan and passed by. Forgetfulness of our common origin and
our constant exposure to evil is another form of human hatred. (6) With a look
of malignant joy. They looked with scornful eye. They looked and delighted in
the affliction of Jacob. The Saviour was pained by the impudent gaze of the
multitude. ‘They look and stare upon me.” Those who make mirth at other
men’s misery, dishonour their nature and insult their God. This selfish cruelty is
a fearful provocation (Prov. xvii. 5). “ Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth,
and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth.” 2. In blasphemous words.
“‘ Neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly.” They enlarged the mouth (margin)
with s flow of haughty words. They magnified themselves against God’s people
(Job xix. 5); and mocked them in sorrow. This spirit of Edom exists yet; men
add insolence to pride, and affliction to affliction. Mockery of God’s people is
mockery to God himself. ‘Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me,
and have multiplied your words against me: I have heard them.” 3. In cruel acts.
(a) Acts of selfishness. (b) Acts of robbery. “Nor have laid hands on their sub-
stance.” They were drawn into the cities, “entering the gate of God’s people to share
the conqueror’s triumphant gaze on his calamity.” Then they laid violent hands upon
the spoil. Keep away from sin if you wish toescape it. Enter no place to enrich
yourself by the prey of another, lest you be ruined yourself. Wealth, so gained, will
prove like the gold of Toulouse, an evil to all that meddle with it—‘ A burdensome
stone for all people ; all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces.” IT.
In making common cause with theenemy. Instead of helping their brother, they
aided the enemy. 1. By secret ambush. They stood in the cross-way, the fork
where the roads met, or narrow mountain passes, to intercept the fugitives (2 Kings
xxv. 4). The Chaldeans were not so well acquainted with the ways and passes as
the Edomites. Hence they took the cruel part to help the foe and seek the com-
plete destruction of their brethren. 2. By cruel murder. They cut off those that
escaped and delivered up all that they caught Every assoviation with thieves and


340 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OBADIAH.





robbers is a breach of the commandment; and those who join with others in seek-
ing the life of man are not mere accessaries, but murderers. Paul charged the murder
of Stephen upon himself. Malice in any form contains the seeds of all evil, and if
not overcome by grace, will reign and ripen for destruction. Edom did not com-
mence the war, but aided those who did, and hence were guilty of making common
cause with the enemy. ‘“Shouldest thou help the ungodly and love them that
hate the Lord?” III. This neglect of duty was at a time when there was
every inducement to performit. ‘In the day of their calamity” (ver. 13). “In
the day of distress.” Such a time should awaken sympathy and tender feeling for
our brother. ‘To increase the burdens and conspire against the interests of men
is bloodthirsty. If you cannot relieve the distressed, do not display your insolence
and satiate your vengeance by increasing their misery. This is fratricidal and will


bring down the judgment of Heaven.
humanity.
xxiv. 18).


One burns with indignation at such in-
God will turn the current of his wrath upon such offenders (Prov.


“This deep disgrace of brotherhood
Touches me deeper than you can imagine”’ [Shakespeare].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 12—14. Cruelty. They were
charged with cruelty. 1. Cruelty of the
eye. 2. Cruelty of heart. 3. Cruelty
of tongue. (1) In their anger they
spake cruelly, instigating their enemies
to destroy them. (2) In their pride
they spake insolently, expressing inward
joy at their ruin, by speeches of scorn
and disdain, and of triumph over them.
4, Cruelty of hands. ‘Two things aggra-
vate this cruelty of Edom. (1) Against
a brother. (2) And in the time in which
it was done. For a Turk to oppress a
Christian, an infidel a believer, is but a
trespass against humanity ; for Hebrews
to strive, and one Christian to afflict
another, woundeth religion. Brethren
by nation, brethren by religion, should
live as brethren by nature; live as
brethren, and our Father will be angry
if we do not, and the God of peace will
fight against us [Adapted from Marbury].

Nothing is more hateful to God than
unnaturalness. ‘A brother is born to
adversity ” (Prov. xvii. 17); his birth
binds him to it; and he must first offer
violence to himself that is unkind to his
distressed brother; he must tear the
dictates of nature out of his own heart
[ Trapp].

Violence, bloodshed, unrelenting
deadly hatred agaivst the whole people,
a longing for their extermination, had
been inveterate characteristics of Esau.
Joel and Amos had already denounced


God’s judgments against them for two
forms of this hatred—the murder of
settlers in their own land, or of those
who were sold to them (Joel iii. 19:
Am. i.6; ix.11). Obadiah warns them
against yet a third—intercepting their
fugitives in their escape from the more
powerful enemy. Stand not in the cross
way. Whoso puts himself in the situa-
tion to commit an old sin, does, in fact,
will to renew it, and will, unless hindered
from without, certainly doit. Probably
he will, through sin’s inherent power of
growth, do worse [ Pusey].

Sin proceeds by degrees; neither is any
man at his worst at first. First they
looked at the Church’s calamity, and then
they laughed, and then they insulted, and
spoke big words, and then they plunder-
ed, and lastly they butchered some and
imprisoned some [ Trapp].

Ver. 12. The day that he became a
stranger. 1. Judah (the Christian
Church) chastised. Not treated as a
privileged people, but as strangers, and
exercised with strange lots. (1) Chas-
tised by God. (2) Persecuted by men.
2. Judah defended. The Church may
be deeply fallen and deserve to be chas-
tised ; but God undertakes for her,
checks the cruelty, and punishes the in-
solence of the enemy. (od is faithful
though men are unfaithful.

However wicked men walk after the
lusts and passions of their own hearts,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OBADIAH.


341





and stick at nothing which they will,
and have power to effect, yet the Lord
will let them know, that they stand
obliged by a law to duty, the violation
whereof he will remark, aggravate, and
punish ; for, though Edom satisfied him-
self and his passion in what he did


against Jacob, yet the Lord tells him,
thou shouldest not have done thus and
thus, but wast obliged by the law to do
otherwise, being both’a brother and a
neighbour [ Hutcheson].


“ So many laws argue so many sins’’ [Milton].


HOMILETICS.


Tus Day or Rerrisution.—Verses 15, 16.


Another warning of judgment to come.


All men are amenable to law. God


notices violations of law and duty. He is present in the affairs and will adminis-


ter justice on the sins of men.


“ For the day of the Lord is near.”
I. God governs men by a law of requital.


Human life appears confused,


but God has plan and design. The wicked may triumph and the righteous suffer,


but God will rectify matters.
but cannot escape it.
end bad repute.
God. 1. This retribution may be near.


is fixed in time.


tion will be in equity.
is the lex taltonis.
their works.


(Jud. i. 7).


“The day of the Lord.”
“Vengeance is mine: I will repay, saith the Lord.”
“ As thou hast done it shall be done unto thee.” It
God renders exactly to nations and individuals according to
Adonibezek confessed, “As I have done so God hath requited me”
With the froward God is froward (Ps. xviii. 26); with the cruel he


Men may disregard and deny the day of retribution,
They often suffer here in loss of property, thwarted plans,
Look not then upon the wrath of man, but the judgment of


“The day of the Lord is near.” 2. It
3. It is certain. “They shall drink.”
II. This law of retribu-


is strict, as with Agag and Edom. Men are filled with their own ways (Prov.


xiv. 14), and reap exactly what they sow in quality and quantity.
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.”
“Thy reward shall be upon thine own head.”
3. In long duration,


drink and swallow down.”


“ With what
1. In personal experience.
2. In bitter degree. “‘ They shall


“Drink continually.” “ His


mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealings shall come down


upon his own pate.”


“‘ Heaven is above all, yet there sits a Judge
That no king can corrupt” [Shakespeare].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 15. Thy reward, &. 1. Then
take not the law in your own hands.
2. Be encouraged in a good cause. 3.
Fear in a bad cause.

Ver. 16. As ye have drunk. A me
taphor found in Scripture and heathen
writers, in allusion to the cup of poison
given to criminals, or to feasts where
the governor gave to each guest (John
ii. 9). As God’s people had drunk the
cup of affliction, so must the heathen
drink of it. The cup of sorrow. 1. To
God’s people—(a) mixed with sweet-
ness ; (b) it will soon be over. 2. To
the wicked—(a) full of wrath ; (6) will
last for ever. ‘“ When God’s people


have drunk the red wine in the cup, the
wicked must drink the dregs; the cup
passeth from place to place till all be
drank off.”

All nations are, in the first instance,
all who had been leagued against God’s
people; but the wide term comprehends
all who, in time, become like them. It
is a rule of God’s justice for all times,
Each in turn drank continuously, until
it became as though it had never been.
To swallow up, and be swallowed up in
turn, is the world’s history [ Pusey].

1. The Hill of Zion God’s holy mount.
2. This mount polluted by the carousals
of men, 3. This mount vindicated and


843 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: OBADIAH.








purified by God. The Church may be unholy; punish the spoiler and defend
laid waste and made desolate, but God the worshipper. “Here will I dwell,
will purify it and revenge its enemies; for I have a delight therein.”

will make a difference between holy and


HOMILETICS.


Tae Kinapom an AsyLum in Jup@ment.— Verse 17.


Mount Zion is a type of the Church of God. While heathen nations suffer in
judgment it shall be restored, enlarged, and beautified. It will become the seat of
empire, and God shall reign over a redeemed race for ever (vers. 17—21).

I. The Church of God is a centre of refuge. ‘Upon Mount Zion shall be
deliverance.” The return of the Jews is a type of redemption. The Church of
God consists of those who have fled for refuge in Christ. They are delivered from
self and sin’s dominion. The city of God is a sanctuary undefiled and free
(Joel iii. 17). It is built upon a rock, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against
it. Its citizens are those ‘‘ who have escaped of Israel,” those who claim its pri-
vileges through Divine grace. “In Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be de
liverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.”
II. The Church of God is a moral beauty. ‘There shall be holiness.”
Physical beauty is seen in creation, moral in the Christian Church. In Christian
life we see “the beauty of holiness.” 1. Holiness ts promised. ‘‘ There shall be.”
God will complete his work. First, deliverance; then holiness, redemption, adorn-
ment, and service. ‘That we, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies,
might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the
days of our life.” 2. Holiness should be pursued. By this we are qualified for
enjoyments on earth and in heaven. In this consists the dignity of our character
and the consummation of our bliss. ‘ Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord.” III. The Church of God is a secure inheritance. ‘The house of
Jacob shall possess their possessions.” 1. They shall regain their own inheritance.
Recover their possessions from the hands of Edom and Syria. 2. They shall
possess the territories of their enemies. The world is the inheritance of the Church.
“ All things are yours.” Ungodly nations will be judged and their dominions
taken from them; but the Church will regain its privileges, enlarge its bounds,
and enjoy perpetual security. ‘I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy
hoofs brass; and thou shalt beat in pieces many people; and I will consecrate
their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth.”


Tae Krnepom Regamep and Enuaresp.— Verses 18—21.


The holy land would be repossessed, and adjoining regions annexed.

I. The kingdom regained. 1. The exiles should return. ‘The captivity,”
prisoners of war, would be reclaimed, and wandering exiles owned as sons of Israel.
2. The enemies would be subdued. ‘There shall not be any remaining of the house
of Esau.” The victory of the Church is not by physical, but moral power; not
by carnal, but spiritual weapons. The word of God, the gospel, like a spirit of
judgment and a spirit of burning, melts the penitent and consumes the impenitent ;
restores the sinner and confirms the saint. Multitudes shall be converted, and
truth, like an unquenchable fire, shall burn up error and superstition. Most distant
tribes shall be brought to Christ, and most unlikely things shall come to pass.
“For, behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea,
and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble.” II. The kingdom enlarged. Judahand
Israel shall become one, and extend their boundaries to the four quarters of the globe.
1. Union of the tribes. All feuds and divisions shall cease, and Jew and Gentile
become one in Christ. 2. Conquest of other nations (ver. 20). The prophet locks


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OBADIAH. 3





beyond the return from captivity and conquest of Canaan. He points to the ori-
ginal promise (Gen. xxviii. 14). The gospel is aggressive in spirit and purpose. All
nations are to be conquered, and Christ must have the heathen for his inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. III. The kingdom supreme.
When Israel takes possession of the border nations, judges will ascend Mount Zion


to defend it and govern their enemies.
other lands in contrast to Zion.
to exercise dominion.


The mountains of Esau express the idea of
To judge means not simply to settle disputes, but
Hence the kingdom will be supreme ard Jehovah will de-
clare himself to be the Ruler of the universe.


His royal sceptre does not yet sway


all the world. The Saviour, of whom others are only types, is still ruling his


people and gaining his dominions.
curse,
force, they must submit.


Soon shall his blessings extend, remote as the
He must reign till he hath put all things under him. Willingly or by
“The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms


of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 18. The flame and the stubble.
Cf. Is. v. 24; x. 17. I. God's people
like a fire. “Jacob a fire and Joseph a
flame.” 1. In their personal love to
Christ. This is the fire that he kindles
in the earth. It burns upon the altar
within, and like the fire of old, never
goes out. “The love of Christ constrain-
eth us.” 2. In their personal zeal for
Christ. They burn themselves, and seek
to excite others to love and good works.
The Psalmist and the Saviour were con-
sumed by the zeal of their master’s house.
Brainerd wished to be a flame of fire in
the cause of God. Basil was represent-
ed as a pillar of fire, and Latimer longed
for the spark of the Spirit in the preach-
ing of the day. IL. The wicked like
stubble. ‘‘Esau for stubble.” Vital
force has forsaken them. They are
empty and worthless; ready for the
touch of the flame. 1. In their moral
character, and 2. In their moral condi-
tion. This fire shall eventually consume
all hypocrisy, infidelity, and opposition.
“The light of Israel shall be for a fire,
and his Holy One for a flame; and it
shall burn and devour his thorns and
his briers in one day” (Is. x. 17, 18).

Opposers and meddlers will be de-
stroyed. ‘‘There shall not be any re-
maining of the house of Esau.” Perse-
cution fans the flame. Stubble can
never quench the fire. Let all enemies


beware. ‘‘ Our God isa consuming fire.”

Ver. 21. Mount Zion. The perpe-
tuity of the Church. Mount Zion. 1.
The residence of God. 2. The seat of
universal government. God the Head ;
Saviour’s temporal and spiritual vice-
gerents.

God will raise up rulers for his
people. These rulers judge and con-
demn the world, but defend and save
the Church. But Jehovah is supreme,
and executes his judgments by all agen-
cies and instrumentalities. Let none
contest his power, for his glory will be
revealed in the defeat of his enemies
und the salvation of his people. His
kingdom can never be destroyed. ‘The
Lord shall reign over them in Mount


‘Zion from henceforth, even for ever”


(Mic. iv. 7: Ps. xciii. 97: Zech. xiv. 9).

Majestic, comprehensive simplicity of
prophecy! All time and eternity, the
struggles of time and the rest of eternity,
are summed up in those three words ;
Zion and Edom retire from sight; both
are comprehended in that one kingdom,
and “God is all in all.” The strife is
ended ; not that ancient strife only be-
tween the evil and the good, the op-
pressor and the oppressed, the subduer
and the subdued; but the whole strife
and disobedience of the creature towards
the Creator, man against his God [ Pusey].








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OBADIAH.


TE


ILLUSTRATIONS TO THE CHAPTER.


Vers. 1, 2. The circumstances of
Obadiah’s country and family are de-
signedly passed over, that we may not
rest and depend upon the outward
respectability of men, but derive the
authority of such prophecy, and the
certainty of its issues, from God alone.
Preachers must be, not in name alone,
but also in fact, Obadiahs, 7. e. servants
of God (1 Cor. iv. 1) [Starke].

Vers. 3, 4. Pride. God hath a spe-
cial indignation at pride above all sins
[Bp Hall]. “He that would build
lastingly must lay his foundation low.”
When pride cometh, then cometh shame
(Prov. xi. 2; xxix. 23).

“Tn pride, in reasoning pride, our error lies ;
All quit their sphere, and rush into the skies.


Pride still is aiming at the bless’d abodes ;
Men would be angels, angels would be gods.”


[ Pope. ]


Vers. 5, 6. Thieves. Paulinus, when
he was told that the Goths had sacked
Nola and plundered him of all he had,
lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said,
“Lord, thou knowest where I have laid
up my treasure” [ Bib. Museum].

Ver. 7. Fickleness. Clocks will go
as they are set; but man, irregular man,
is never certain [ Massinger].

Ver. 8. Many had proved themselves
wise if they had not thought themselves
so [Bp Hall]. He that is not wise will
not be taught; but there is a wisdom
which multiplieth bitterness (Ecclus.
xxi. 12),

“ Heaven is for thee too high; be lowly wise.”
[Milton.}
Ver. 9.


“ Wherefore should not strength and might

There fai) where virtue fails?” [ Milton. ]
Vers. 10O—14. Neither shouldest thou.
There is a debt of mercy and pity, of
cnarity and compassion, of relief and
euccour, due to human nature, and pay-
able from one man to another; and such
as deny to pay it the distressed in the
time of their abundance may justly ex-
pact it will be denied themselves in


time of want [Burkitt]. “ Be more glad
to see a man’s amendment than his
punishment.” He that is not concerned
that his brother should perish, is in
great danger of perishing himself [Bp
Wilson].

Vers. 15, 16. Retribution. To the
revengeful God will be robed in venge-
ance, and to the merciful he will be a
God of love. Thus our own characters,
whether good or bad, will be thrown
back upon ourselves, with the conscious
force of Divinity. What is hell but
sin’s reflections of the Divine character—
the rays of the Eternal falling upon the
soul through the combustible medium
of the moral corruption, and thus setting
all on fire? Let us remember, then,
that there is to be a Divine reflection of
ourselves, and that exactly with what
measure we mete, tt will be measured to
us again [Dr Thomas}.

Vers. 17—21. The earth is to come
under the dominion of Christ, and is
given to Him for this purpose. It is
thus to Him as Canaan was to the Jews.
All opposition will be as vain as it is
unreasonable. His enemies shall lick
the dust. The word is gone out of
God’s mouth and shall not return, that
to Him every knee shall bow and every
tongue confess [Jay]. We see Jeru-
salem emerging from her ashes and
standing more beautiful than ever.
From Zion goes forth the law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and
in the Christ of the Jew all nations are
blessed. The mountain of the Lord’s
house is established on the top of the
mountains, and all people are flowing
into it. In other words—just as the
nations owe their conversion instrument-
ally to the Jews, so do they look to the
Jewish Church as the heart and centre
of Christian life, and seek communion
with it. It is thus that the union
and unity of the whole catholic Church
will be consummated and perfected
| Ferguson


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


JONAH.


INTRODUCTION


Intropuotion. Jonah was the author and is the principal subject of the book
which bears hisname. He was the son of Amittai, born at Gath-Hepher, a village of
Zebulun (2 Kings xiv. 25), and lived in the reign of Jeroboam II. In his youth he
was probably contemporary with Elisha, and afterward with Hosea and Amos, pro-
phets of the kingdom of the ten tribes. He prophesied when Israel were oppressed
by Syria. “The word of Jonah to Jeroboam appears as the last sun-gleam with which
Jehovah’s countenance had beamed on Israel” [Baumgarten]. Living among the
revolted tribes, testifying to their iniquity and the patience of God, he never
thought of exercising his ministry among the heathen. The commission to
Nineveh was a special and extraordinary event. In love with his own country
and prejudiced against others, he naturally shrunk from it. (Jonah =a dove.) Inhis
sentiments he is an image of the people to whom he belonged. Like him they
declined to fulfil their commission to the Gentiles, but had to obey and set forth
the mercy of God to the heathen world. The events of his life were not myths,
but realities, and typical of the Saviour’s death and resurrection, the great facts of
our redemption (Matt. xii. 49- Luxs xi. 30).

The Book is a simple narrative, with the exception of (ch. ii.) a prayer or thanks-
giving. This prayer contains imagery peculiar to itself, and ideas which would
naturally be suggested to a Jew in danger (cf. Ps. xlii. 59). The style is vivid and
vigorous, “It is pure and simple Hebrew, corresponding to the simplicity of the
narrative and the Prophet’s character. Although written in prose, it has poetic ©
language, not in the thanksgiving only, but whenever it suits the subject. The
thought of the verb is carried on by a noun formed from it. ‘The men feared
great fear,’ &c. But in the narrative every phrase is vivid and graphic. There is
not a word which does not advance the history. There is no reflection. All
hastens on to the completion, and when God has given the key to the whole, the
book closes, with His words of exceeding tenderness lingering in our ears ” [ Pusey]
The design of Jonah’s mission partakes of the Christian character. For when we


846 INTRODUCTION








see that he is sent not only to carry the tidings of the Divine judgment, but alac to
exemplify the grant of Divine mercy to a great heathen city; that is, to be a
preacher of repentance; and that the repentance of the Ninevites through his
mission brings them to know “a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repenting Him of the evil” (Jonah iv. 2); without staying to
discuss whether all this be a formal type of the genius of the Christian religion, it
is plainly a real example of some of its chief properties, in the manifested efficacy
of repentance, the grant of pardon, and the communication of God’s mercy to the
heathen world [Davison on Prophecy, pp. 200, 201]. The book of Jonah is like
a beautiful rainbow of hope set by God’s hand in the dark cloud of sin and
suffering It shows that whatever judgments are executed by him on his bitterest
enemies, are not consequences of any desire on his part to punish, but are due to
tieeir sins, evoking and arming the Divine justice against themselves [ Wordsworth}.


CHAP. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JONAH. 347


TN








CHAPTER I,


Criticau Notes.] And (now)]a continuation of the Hebrew writings, notan independent part.
2. That] Heb. the city, the great, the art, a demonstrative force. Nineveh] Cf. Gen. x. 1],
Smith's Bib. Dict. Arise] A term of excitement. 8, Tarshish] Tartessus in Spain ; others,
Carthage; probably Tarsus in Cilicia. Presence] Lit. from being in the presence, 7. e. from
standing in the presence of the Lord as His servant and minister (cf. Gen. iv. 16: Deut. x. 8).
Joppa] Now Jaifa. 4, Sent out] Lit. to cast or hurl, passive, to be thrown prostrate. ‘God
throws the wind down upon the surface of the sea.’’ “Hurled a greate wynde into the see”
[ Coverdale}. Was like] Lit. thoughtto be broken. Theship personified ; ship and crew identified
in the writer’s mind. 5 Afraid] Though accustomed to storms. Lighten] The sailors and ship
under a burden. Fast] A heavy sleep, from a word to snore. 6, What] He sleeps, they pray (Ps.
cevii. 28). God] Lit. the God; other gods powerless (perhaps the language of hope) ; Jonah’s God
could help them. 7, Lots] A heathen mode of decision, often permitted byGod. ‘‘ Lots were for
(1) dividing; (2) consulting; (3) divining’? [Pusey]. Fell upon] Prov. xvi. 33. 8, Tell] How
urgent and earnest thisexamination! Fit questions forour own hearts! 9, Hebrew] A name by
which an Israelite was known to foreigners (Gen. xl. 15: Ex. iii. 18). The God] Heathens had
distinct gods for heaven, earth, andsea 10, Afraid] They had heard of, now they felt the power
of Jehovah. 11, TheSea] ‘‘ Not only increasingly tempestuous, but, like a thing alive and obeying
its Master’s will, it was holding on its course, its wild waves tossing themselves and marching on in
battalions arrayed forthe end for which they were sent, pursuing and demanding therunaway slave
of God” [P.sey]. 12,] Jonah reads out his doom, conscious of being the cause of suffering and
peril. Cast me| Suicide and guilt to have done it himself. I know] 7. e.«m wellaware, 18.
Rowed hard] Lit. dug, intense effort with the oars; hence ‘‘ploughed the main” [Pusey]. 14.
Beseech | Kepetitions which indicate earnestness anda sense of dependence. 15, Ceased} Lit. stood
hushed immediately, anc like a servant obeyed its commander (Job xxxviii. 11). 16. Offered]
present sacrifice ; and voy ed more when they landed. 17, Fish] Sea-monster (Gen. i. 21 : Job vii.
12: Ps. Ixxiv. 18); awhale (Matt. xii. 40). The fact divinely attested. Independent of this there is
no improbabilityin the swallowing up of Jonah. Sharks swallow and retain a grown man in their
stomach, and follow vessels many days for what may be thrown overboard. Three} Significant
time! ‘A hidden prophecy.” The miracle is justified by the end in view, to chastise and recover
a disobedient prophet, to shadow forth the greater miracle of one laying down his life and taking
it up again for us.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Great Commission.— Verses 1, 2.


<< The word’’ came suddenly, unexpectedly, and authoritatively to Jonah. He
thought of quietly. remaining in his own land. For ages God had confined his
revelations to Israel. But he is the Ruler of all nations. His kingdom is not
local and geographical like the gods of the heathens. Among the Gentiles the
gospel must be preached (Rom. iii. 28) ; and Jonah is sent to the most renowned
city of the Gentile world.

I, The commission of Jonah. <‘‘ Go to Nineveh, that great city.’’ 1. lt was
sovereign. The word came to Jonah, apparently the most unlikely for the work.
God elects his own agents, appoints their duty and their place, and gives no
account of his matters to us. Some have more work to do and more honour than
others. Let all be content in their sphere, instead of longing for greater dis-
tinction and condemning the less privileged. Greater service would bring greater
responsibility, and greater failure greater condemnation. God gives to every one
according to his ability, and in sovereign authority demands implicit obedience.
‘« Arise, go.’? 2. It was arduous, There was great danger. Jonah might be
ridiculed, It was a new and unheard-of enterprise, Nineveh was great in pride
and splendour, wealth and population. For centuries it had been growing in power
and population, The monarchs of Assyria had filled it with the spoils of empires.
It had no equal, and satasa queen in splendour. Nahum predicted the destruction


348 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JONAH. (CHAP. 1.





of the city from a distance, but Jonah must go énto it. It requires self-denial to
go as a missionary to heathens now, with higher civilization and greater adventages.
Jonah’s mission was more difficult and trying. Social relations and selfish pursuits
musi give way to every command of God. 3. It was clear. Though brief and
without explanation, the call was definite. With military precision the word is
uttered—“ Go ;” the field is revealed —‘ Nineveh ;” and obedience is expected—
“ Ayise.” The word often comes to us with positive demands upon our time and purse.
There has been no doubt or uncertainty. Let us feel its convincing and confirming
power. 4. liwasurgent. Arise. Delay strengthens doubt and increases difficulty.
Carnal reasoning and natural reluctance have few better counsellors than procrasti-
nation. If we loiter, we may desert the duty, and the enemy be encouraged to
tempt again. Go—the city is exposed to judgment, and men may perish. The
King’s business requires haste. “ Aun, speak to that young man.” II. The reason
for Jonah’s commission. ‘“ For the wickedness,” &c. 1. Great cities are often
jilled with wickedness. Power gives license and custom begets authority. Examples
are pernicious, and evil communications corrupt good manners. Nineveh was filled
with pride and alienated from God. She oppressed the poor and helpless (Jon.
iii. 8: Nah. iii, 1—3). Blood and robbery, idolatry and witchcraft, stained her
glory. “She drew not near to God.” Are our great cities and towns free from
luxury and pomp, irreligion and injustice? 2. God sees the wickedness of great
cities. They are not too great for the omniscient eye of the Great Judge. All
sins go up before him, and are registered for judgment in his book of remembrance.
Enormous guilt erdes like the blood of Abel for interference. God specially takes
cognizance of places above human restraint, and manifests holy indignation at
their wickedness. Sodom and Gomorrah, Babylon and unburied Nineveh, are
warnings to this generation. 3. The wickedness of great cities must be exposed.
“Cry against it.” Individuals cannot hide themselves in communities, nor cities
throw their responsibility upon nations. Every sin is searched out, found, and
reproved, Jonah was not to go and teach philosophy, palliate, or compromise with
sin, but to ery aguinst it. Denounce the idolatry and predict the ruin of Nineveh.
With intense feeling and earnestness he must give the alarm ; proclaim with the
voice of the herald the danger. ‘Many people cannot cry ; they have not force
of soul; they are not endowed for extreme effort,” says one. We must wink at
no sin; expose drunkenness and profligacy ; with lip and life, amid insult and in-
difference, cry aloud and spare not. God may conceal the danger of our duty, and
touch our most sensitive feelings to test our faith and discipline our hearts, but never
flee away, lest he punish you. “Fear not; certainly I will be with thee.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


The word. This phrase seems to
represent the “word of the Lord,” as
an atmosphere of kindling holy thought,
a sphere of spiritual truth encompassing
the Prophet, illuminating and moving
his whole soul, and finally taking shape in
language of exhortation, or prediction,
or teaching, or resolve, as the case might
be [Liddon]. >

Wickedness. God is brought before
us in these words as he sits above this
waterfiood of crime, as he remaineth in
the moral world, a King for ever. He
is the Great Judge, unseen by man, but
witnessing all human acts, and words,
and motives; seated now upon his


throne of judgment: and each crime of
each member of that vast community
mounts upwards, and is registered in his
heavenly court [ Wordsworth].

Let us call on our souls, when plain
duty is before us, to arise and go about
it : speedily, if we do not wish Satan to
stop us from it (1 Sam. xxi. 8: Ps. cxix.
60) ; heartily, if we desire God to accept
our service (Ecc. ix. 10) ; and cheerfully,
if we would have comfort in doing it
(Rom. xii. 8). Jonah was called to
immediate and hearty service. Such
should be our obedience to every com-
mand of our Divine Master [Sibthorp].


Omar. I. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. 9





HOMILETICS.
THE DiseraceruL Fuicut.— Verse 3.


Jonah arose but to depart from duty. He might be influenced by fear, indolence,
and unbelief. But the chief reason for his flight seems to be intense love for his
own, and deep hatred to a heathen country. He was reluctant to offer mercy to
Nineveh, and desired its destruction as an enemy. Whatever leads to prejudice
blinds the mind, sours the temper, and degrades the man of God.

I. Flight from duty is not departure from God’s control. Jonah believed in
the Divine omnipresence (Ps. exxxix. 7, 12), did not cast off all regard for God
but sought to relieve himself of duty by quitting the land of light and religious
ordinances. He did not expect to go where God was not, but where God would
let him alone. His creed was better than his conduct. THe left the field of action
for the place of retirement. Many are of Jonah’s temper, try his experiment, and
feel the presence of God too painful for them. A scholar leaves the Sabbath
school to avoid the contact of truth with conscience. A young man brought up
under religious influence quits home and native country. An ungodly man feels
miserable, shuns godly company, and stifles impressions by fleeing into business,
worldly society, and amusements. The believer knows his duty, but will not do it
Such efforts often succeed in spite of the restraints of providence and the voice of
conscience. But fear gets hold of men at length, God meets them in the way, and
it is impossible to escape. “Lo, they that be far from thee shall perish.” II.
Favourable circumstances in departing from God do not always lead to a
successful issue. Circumstances favoured Jonah’s design, and gave him an oppor-
tunity of escape. ‘He founda ship going to Tarshish.” The vessel quickly sailed.
Jonah thought he was leaving his trouble by leaving his native shore, but vain hope
(Amos ix. 2—4:; Is. ii, 19—22: Jer. xvi. 16—21). “The ready way is not always
the right way,” says anold author. The greatest hurry the least speed in a path of
disobedience. The worst plans may prosper fora time, but such prosperity ends in
storms and darkness. Talk not of Providence in an evil course—say not when tempted
that you are tempted of God. God might miraculously interfere with men’s conduct,
but this would change the government of the world, render our probation useless.
and afford no opportunity for human action and Divine justice. If he thwart the
ways of selfish men, you hear no more of Providence. Departure from God is
departure from his love and protection—from Divine dignity and unbounded bliss.
Follow the directions of the word, and you will enjoy the leadings of Providence.
“The Lord meeteth him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness.” III.
Departure from God is more expensive than obedience to God. Jonah paid the
fare, like many who scruple not to spend their money on selfish projects, but with-
hold from the cause of God. Sin is always expensive, and draws upon our purse
and time. Sinners pay their fare, 1. In bitter experience. ‘There is peace in
pleasing God, but conscious opposition to him brings an uneasy mind. Jonah
could not stay at home. Everything reminded him of God and duty, and such
thoughts are painful. Men seek a new country, try fresh experiments, to drown
the warnings of conscience, but do not succeed. 2. in moral loss. The loss of
Divine favour and a servant's dignity. The Sabbath-breaker, the pleasure-seeker,
and the drunkard, pay their fare. Blasted prospects, shattered constitutions, and
ruined families indicate the awful price of sin. The pleasures of sin are dearly
bought, never last, and always bring disappointment.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Jonah's disobedienee. 1. It was life into his own hands. 2. It was
foolish ; for he took the difficulties of wilful. He deliberately paid his money.


350





3. It was ungrateful; for he refused the
honour of the commission. 4. It was
continuous. 5. It was criminal [Adapted
from Hell}.

There is in the conduct of Jonah a
twofold sin,—disobedience to God and
flight from God. What God appoints
thee to do, do without gainsaying. He
who gives the burden, gives the shoulders
to bear it. He who flees increases the
burden and commits folly [Lange].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


‘flection.


[CHar. &





takes in consummation of his purpose,
and each following fast on the back of
its predecessor, without repentance anc,
as it would almost seem, without re-
(1) He “rose up to flee.”
(2) He “went to Joppa.” (3) He
“found a ship.” (4) He “paid the
fare.” (5) He “went down into it.”
The words are like relentless, consecu-
tive, fast-falling blows, under which his
whole character as an obedient man of


God is beaten to death and trampled
under-foot of Satan [Hugh Martin].

Man’s own wisdom is a worthless
guide. He is often more diligent in
working his ruin than in seeking his
salvation.


Take the task he gives you gladly,
Let his work your pleasure be;
Answer quickly when he calleth,
‘¢ Here am 1, send me, send me!”


Step by step the disobedient prophet
HOMILETICS.


Tae RerrisutiveE Storm.— Verses 4, 5.


Sin is not only an expensive pleasure, but a disturbing element. In the human
heart, the domestic circle, and the Christian Church, it creates storms. Some are
permitted to escape from Ged, not so Jonah. Perverse and self-willed as he may
be, God’s grace abounds. God sends a messenger to recover him.

I. The storm and its lessons. Learn—l. The operations of nature are under
Divine control. (1) In their origin. It is distinctly said, “the Lord sent out a
great wind.” Nature is created and dependent; has neither force nor will of her
own. All the elements are God’s messengers and obey him (Ps. exlvii. 15—18).
Mark the perfect ease and mighty power displayed. He wills, he speaks, and calm
and tempest, sunshine and shower, are cast forth upon us (Gen. i. 3: Job xxxvii.
1—7). When we expect rest, lo, a messenger to rouse us to a sense of danger !
“Winds and tempests fulfil his pleasure.” (2) In their strength. “A mighty
tempest fell upon Jonah.” Storms often swept that sea, were known by special
names, a8 Euroclydon off Crete, but none like this. God gives force to matter and
motion to winds. He whispers in the breeze and thunders in the hurricane ; he
gives strength to the floods.and direction to thestorm. Regularity does not exclude
supreme aud personal control. The sudden change in the financial weather which
melts our fortune like ice before the spring-time—the rains which frustrate our
plans, and the clouds that enter our dwellings, are sent by God. “For he com-
mandeth and raiseth the stormy wind which lifteth up the waves thereof.” 2.
The operations of nature are moral in their design. The wind was sent after
Jonah and fell upon him. It had a special end, a moral design. God is accom-
plishing many purposes in daily providence. By the same process he can punish
the sinner and reclaim the backslider. We may see mischief in the storm. One
thing may engross our attention, but nothing deranges God’s design. Individual
circumstances are adapted to individual character, and national calamities to national]
morality. The elements are messengers of mercy and judgment. Fire and water,
wind and malaria, are sent to reach the disobedient. Fugitives from God will be
caught in their transgression. It is better to be recovered by a tempest than perish
in a calm. II. The storm and its effects. God’s efforts are not powerless.
Nature roused to fury speaks with no small voice. 1. Its effect upon the ship.

‘“‘ The ship was like to be broken.” Often had it ploughed the sea, but never
tossed about as then. What are works of man when seized by the hand of God!
Who can contend with the Almighty? Our merchant fleet and men of war are


CHAP. 1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAB. 351








ee


helpless in the raging of the sea. It is needful for all, especially for those. who
do business on great waters, to own dependence upon God and thank him for
a prosperous voyage. 2. Its effect upon the mariners. (1) They feared. “The
mariners were afraid.” Men of careless and jovial spirit matured in peril, trembled
im fear. God can damp the most buoyant spirit and rouse the most secure. (2)
They prayed. “ And cried each to his God.” Perhaps of different nations each
had his favourite idol. ‘They were sensible men, knew that their own power and
wisdom would not avail in that tempest. Prayer is a law of our constitution and
the most sensible part of our conduct. But many do not pray until they get on
the sea. In a calm they forget God; in a storm, alarmed by danger, roused by
affliction, they feel conscious of sin, and cry to God for help. But better late than
never. When forced to feel that we cannot flee from God, it may be acceptable to
return in prayer to him (Ps. evii.). “Lord, in trouble have they visited thee ;
they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.” (3) They cast out
their wares. God’s purpose does not excuse man’s neglect. Men risk life some-
times to get wealth; but when life is in danger they will part with the most
valuable treasures to keep it. “All that a man hath will he give for his life.”
Spiritually we should be anxious to save the soul. Every besetting sin in the race,
every cumber in the voyage, must be cast away. Worldly cares and pursuits which
endanger the soul and raise the anger of God must be forsaken. The crew with
Paul threw overboard all the merchandise. Lay aside all encumbrance. Life is
more value than cargo. Forsake all sin, and you will pray with greater speed than
Jonah’s mariners. “ What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and
lose his own soul?”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Fear brings many recruits into the
army of Christ, who afterwards fight
under his banner from Jove of his service.
The cry of sorrow often turns into the
pleading of true contrition and filial
dependence (Acts xvi. 27—34: Is.
xxvi. 16—18). To his grace be the
glory. It is well to find these heathen
sailors not sunk into a stupid insensi-
bility, nor bewildered with extreme
terror, two common effects of imminent
danger on bold and irreligious minds,
especially in their profession. But one
thing alone gives true peace in danger :
assurance of God’s love (2 Cor. v. 5—8).
Do we enjoy it? do we seek it [Sib-
thorp|?

In the prayer of the mariners notice,
1. The light of nature which instructed
them to recognize a Supreme Being.
2. The power of conscience to hear him


speak in anger in the storm. 3. The
impotence of idolatry in distress. Their
prayers were earnest, though ignorant.
But we learn that the deities of pagan
lands and sentimental religionists are
deaf and dumb like the gods of Baal.
“The natural light of reason extends
thus far, that it considers God kind, gra-
cious, merciful, and mild. This isa great
light; but it fails in two particulars.
In the jirst place, it believes that God
has power and knowledge to do and to
give; but that he is willing also to do
such things for it, it knows not; there-
fore it does not continue steadfast in its
opinion. In the second place, reason
cannot correctly bestow the predicate of
Deity upon that being to whom it be-
longs. It knows that God is; but who
and what he is who has a right to be
called God it knows not” [Lange].—


HOMILETICS.


ConTRASTS IN THE VOYAGE OF Lire.—Verse 5.


Fatigue and sorrow had some influence upon Jonah (Matt. xxvi. 40—45); but
he seemed to be stzpefied by sin, and fora time composed himseif into deep sleep.
The praying sailors and the sleeping servant indicate great contrasts in moral life.


352 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAA. (CHAP.





I. Contrasts in the family. Diligent and idle, godly and ungodly children.
Some pray, and others live regardless of God. The parents are asleep when they
ought to be alive to every duty, and set an example to their converted children.
Children are careless when mothers and fathers continually pray for them. II.
Contrasts in the Christian Church. Many Christians are active and energetic,
praying for the Holy Spirit and the revival of God’s work : others murmur and do
little or nothing. They are asleep in Zion. III. Contrasts in the world. We
have Pagan piety reproving Christian indifference ; Roman Catholic and ritualistic
zeal shaming Protestant faith; heathens and Mohammedans provoking us to good
works. ‘Let us not sleep as do others.”


Tur SieererR Rovsep.—Verse 6.


God had other messengers beside wind and storm. He often uses rough and
uncouth means, very unlikely instruments. It was not a pious minister, but a
wicked woman, wno rebuked Bunyan for his profanity. Jonah was roused, not by
a prophet of God, but a heathen captain, who suffered no one in common danger
to desert his duty or hinder others from performing it. ‘ What meanest thou?” &c.

I. “What meanest thou?” It is most unreasonable to sleep. The bird, the
beast, and the insect, know their own interest better; flee from danger, and prepare
for coming difficulty (Is. i. 3: Prov. vi. 5—11: Jer. viii. 7). Surely intelligent
beings, Christian believers, may learn much from animal creation. II. “What
meanest thou?” Itis most risky to sleep. The ship isin danger of sinking. Thy
own life and the lives of others are at stake. All hands must beat work. It is no
time for sleep when the house is on fire. We should never sleep in self-security
when men are perishing around us. III. “ What meanest thou?” when others are
asking thy prayers. Every man is longing for deliverance. 1. Asked by those
who have prayed to their gods in vain. Each has looked to his idol, and depended
upon resources which have disappointed. Men turn to you in penitence and bitter
experience, and ask an interest in your prayers. Intercessory prayer is genuine
charity. 2. Asked by those who believe that your God can help. The ship-master
was convinced that Jonah’s God might possibly be more powerful than any of the
gods of the crew. ‘This is the language of hope and earnestness. ‘‘ Perhaps God
may think upon us.” The faith of awakened sinners should reprove our unbelief
and neglect. We come not to a God unknown and unrevealed. There is more
than “ perhaps” upon which to ground our faith. We have warrant to pray, for God
will hear; we are roused by circumstances around us to call upon our God in per-
sopal united supplication. ‘“ Let us not sleep as do others.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 5. Jonah was in a deep sleep, a
sleep by which he was fast held and
bound; a sleep as deep as that from
which Sisera never woke. (The same
Heb. word is used, Judg. iv. 21.) Had
God allowed the ship to sink, the
memory of Jonah would have been that
of a fugitive prophet. As it is, his deep
sleep stands as an image of the lethargy
of sin [Pusey].

1. A child of God may so miscarry
through infirmity, negligence, and
temptation, that he may be blame-
worthy and reprovable by a Pagan in
the light of nature. 2. It is deeply


censurable and absurd even to the eye of
nature to be secure in trouble. 3. Na-
ture’s light will acknowledge that he who
is the true God hath power to deliver in
extreme danger [ Hutcheson].

Ver. 6. What meanest thou? Apply
the words to the sinner. J. The con-
dition indicated. Sleep a state of—1.
Darkness ; 2. Danger; 3. Insensibility ;
4, and Death. Yet theawful condition
of many. The anger of God is upon
them. Death and judgment are draw-
ing nigh. Yet they sleep on, wish not
to be aisturbed and roused to a con-


esiousness of danger. IT. T’he question


CMAP, I.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


S83





pressed. ‘What meanest thou?” To
avoid the danger and run away from
God? Is sleep better than anxiety, and
sin than salvation? Do you mean to
sleep as long as God and man will let
you, and then just when the ship is
sinking try to save yourselves? Will
you rob God of your love and obedience,
and expect him to interpose at last to
save yout “What meanest thou?”
“‘ Awake, thou that sleepest, and Christ


We see in this instance the great dan-
ger in which unconscious sinners are
often involved—that thesolace sought by
them often departs from them—that a
deep sleep remains, and that in the per-
formance of duty the godly are some-
times more slothful than the ungodly
[ Lange].

A salutary admonition, from whatever
quarter it may come, ought never to be
despised [Lange].


shall give thee light.”
HOMILETICS.


Is THERE Not a Causet—Verse 7.


When great judgments happen there must be great guilt. Whena nation, city,
or family is brought into danger, it is wise to inquire into the cause. Here we
notice—

I. Social danger caused by individual sin. Nature teaches a connection betweer
sin and suffering. They are bound together under God’s government. The con-
nection is not casual. All misery is the result of sin. But while each individual
stands for himself, he is also related to others. Nations suffer for the sins of
rulers ; families, for the sins of parents ; and the crew for the sins of its passenger.
“This man perished not alone in his iniquity.” II. Social danger prompting
socialsympathy. “They said one to another, Come.” Great calamity begets great
sympathy. Common sufferings knit kindred feelings and hearts in one. “ There
was no independent member, no mutinous spirit amongst the crew,” says Mr
Exell ; ‘no one suggested another way of relief; all, as though animated by one
common impulse, at once accept this test of innocence.” III. Social danger re-
moved by the providence of God. “ Nature forces on our heart a Creator, history
a providence,” says Richter. In this narrative we discern the power of God over
the elements of nature and the destinies of men. 1. Providence over the phe-
nomena of nature. The storm—no ordinary one—was traced to a cause. The
mariners, though not true believers, were not atheists. Their gods could do nothing ;
perhaps Jonah’s God could help them, whom they called “the God.” Jonah is
reproved for want of devotion to him and lackness of duty to his fellow-passengers
in peril. Among heathen nations there was a general admission of one supreme
ruler over earth and sea; a remnant of the primitive knowledge by which Jehovah
left not himself without a witness. 2. Providence over the conduct of men. There
must be a cause for this evil; they must find it out, and if possible remove it.
They believe some one is guilty, and do not expect that the culprit will tell of
himself. They appeal to the higher power, in the only way they know, by lot.
The evil is thought of, and not so much the storm. Behind natural phenomena,
law, sequence, or cause, they discern moral designs. Man cannot escape his God—
(a) In discovering their guilt. Jonah expected to escape, but was found out and his
guilt made known. No darkness nor distance can hide the sinner. Murder will
out ; and it is true in a measure with all sin. Sin tries to deceive with secrecy and
then betrays to others. “There is nothing that shall not be revealed.” “ God will
bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing.” (b) In deciding their
destiny. No event can escape the eye of God, and no step in life be taken without
his pertaission. God overruled the lot, and it fell upon Jonah. How completely
are we in the hands of God. Believers trying to forget neglect of duty, and un-
believers refusing to follow Christ, can hide nothing from his all-searching eye.
“ My times are in thy hand.” “The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole dis:
posing thereof is of the Lord.” .


' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. [cmaP, f.





Castine Lots.— Verse 7.


The mariners have now recourse to other means of safety than their exertions cr
prayers.—Observe in their conduct, First, both the power and defectiveness of con-
science. They saw themselves deserving of Divine anger; yet each thought him-
self less guilty than his fellow. ‘The lanthorn light of conscience in a natural
man, gives a general view of some prominent truths sufficient to cause him to pass
sentence of condemnation on himself, but it searches not the soul’s recesses, so ag
to show sin in its extent and sinfulness. Ignorance and pride are impenetrable,
and these effects are produced by the powerful aid of the Spirit. When that shines
into the soul, a man will make St Paul’s confession his own. Secondly, the light
uf nature. As conscience shined inwardly, so this outwardly, testifying to a con-
nection between guilt and punishment (Acts xxviii. 4). They saw in the tempest
an extraordinary judgment, and surmised (rightly) an extraordinary cause. Per-
haps herein the light of nature was aided by that of tradition and some faint
glimmerings of Scriptural truth. We are very slow to admit a connection between
sin and suffering. We are apt to lay the blame of the latter anywhere but where
it should be, on our own transgressions. Thirdly, the influence of superstition.
Lots have sometimes been used by Divine appointment. Here is a far less clear
warrant for them. Yet we may admit some right principle among these sailors, of
referring to a higher Being what seemed beyond the reach of human knowledge to
decide. But among the heathen Satan abused them (as other things of a similar
kind, such as divination) to an execrable superstition, and the establishment of his
own dominion (Esth. iii. 7: Ezek. xxi. 21: Is. xx. 3). Both in ancient and modern
times they have been abused to serve the avarice and evil passions of men, and
have proved the source of misery, contention, and bloodshed (Joel iii. 3: Obad. 11:
John xix. 23). We are seldom if ever warranted to have recourse to lots. We
have a full and sufficient guide in the Scriptures, and can never be justified in
using this guide, as some do, in the way of a lottery [Sibthorp].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


This evil. Suffering, penal and social.
Guilt disowned and discovered in the
lot. “In this procedure, there are two
things to be attended to:—Wirst, the
' fact that each man by making this pro-
posal and going into it disowns the
guilt: and second, the method by which
they propose to discover it [Martin].
Upon Jonah. 1. Who is to be pitied
for his guilt and humiliation. 2. He-
joiced over, because stopped in his wan-
dering from God and about to be re-
stored.
God's


controversy is sometimes


greater with his people and more
severely prosecuted than against Pagans
and gross idolaters. For—1. Rebellion
is idolatry (1 Sam. xv. 23), and so much
the grosser as it isin a child. 2. Though
they worshipped that which was no god,


yet none of them had so behaved to-


wards a supposed Deity, as he had done
towards the true God. 3. God may
wink at sins in Pagans, but will not let
his own children go on unreclaimed
(Am. iil. 2), it being mercy to pursue
them for their folly and amend them
[ Hutcheson}.


HOMILETICS.


Urcent Quxstions.— Verse 8.


Most admirable is the dealing of these heathens with the prophet of God. They
are in great danger, but press not his ruin ; do not condemn him without oppor-
tunity to clear himself. They inquire concerning him—(a) mildly, (v) minutely,
(c) briefly, and (d) urgently. Their patience was greater than many Christians
would have displayed in similar circumstances.

I. Apply the questions to Jonah. ‘These questions must have gone home te


>


CHAP. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. — 3565








Jonah’s conscience. What is thy business? The office of a prophet which he had
left. Whence comest thou? From standing before God as his minister. What
thy country? Of what people art thou? The people of God whom he had
quitted for heathen ; not to win them to God, as he commanded ; but not knowing
what they did to abet him in his flight” [Pusey]. II. Apply the questions to our-
selves. Pause amid the excitements, hurry, and concerns of life, and ask what is our
present business—the work of God, or the service of Satan? What our cowntry—the
world, or the kingdom of Christ? Are we content with earth, or do we seek “a
better country”? Of what people? Of the people of God, or those living with-
out God? Some live in holmess and others in sin; some by faith and others by
sense. Whom dost thou join now, for they are thine, and with them thou shalt
have thy portion? And whence comest thou? Trace thy origin from God as a
holy being, from thy parents as born in sin. If saved, thou comest out of dark-
ness into light, from the power of Satan unto God. But whither goest thou ?
What is your aim, and what will be the end of your life?


ConFEssion oF Fata anp oF Guiut.— Verses 9, 10.


I. Jonah confesses his faith. A confession as unreserved as his guilt was ag-
gravating. 1. He was a Hebrew. A name designating Abraham’s descendants,
and indicating great privileges and advantages. One of the peculiar people. We
have been adopted into Israel’s position. To us belong the oracles of God. Our
sins are more dishonouring to God than those of Pagans. 2. He was a servant of
God. “TI fear Jehovah.” He distinctly avows his religion besides his nationality.
He thus confirms the light and condemns the practice of the sailors; candidly
confesses his own guilt, and puts to shame many professors, who hide their light
and disown their Master. He feared ; though his conduct belied his profession, yet
he reverently feared and worshipped Jehovah. (1) His God was the Creator of
heaven and earth. He exalts him above the local deities of heaven, sea, and land ;
directs the mariners’ thoughts from their own lying vanities to the living and true
God. His God did not partition the universe into provinces, but governed all
things and could help them in the storm. (2) His God was Jehovah. The great
and significant name by which God (according to his own use of it) revealed Him-
self as the covenant-making and covenant-keeping God of a chosen people. One
God and only One, Maker and Ruler of the universe; Guide and Saviour of men.
Thus he invites all to come and put their trust under the shadow of his wing (Ex.
vi. 2—8: Ps. lxviii. 4: Rom. iii. 1, 2). II. Jonah confesses his guilt. What
a change in the prophet. 1. He makes a do/d confession. He shrank from dis-
tant danger at first, now lays himself open to reproach, contempt, and death.
2. He makes a full confession. He has no reserve, but severely condemns himself
in the presence of the crew. “It is easy to keep the flag up when it is nailed to
the mast; but to hoist it in the face of the enemy after we have been sailing with
him, yard-arm and yard-arm, under false colours, is hard—so hard that many sur-
render—are long led captive by Satan at his will, and delivered only through severe
affliction or deep disgrace.” 3. He madea difficult confession. He had neglected
his duty and hid his religion ; he had refused to help the crew and told them that
he was in conflict with Jehovah; that his conduct was wicked, not a revolt
against the arbitrary rule of a local divinity, but against his Maker and theirs, and
had involved them in contest with his infinite power and truth. This was hard,
but he did it, and proved the sincerity of his penitence and the reality of God’s
gracious work in his heart. “Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his
help, whose hope is in the Lord his God: which made heaven and earth, the sea,
and all that therein is: which keepeth truth for ever.”





AGGRAVATIONS oF THE GuitT or BaoKsiipine.— Verses 9, 10.
Are you a true worshipper and servant of God? Are you like Jonah overtaken


356 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. (cHar. t.





by Divine displeasure in a course of disobedience? And are you at last humbled
to own your guilt? Then you will acknowledge these three things in the exceeding
sinfulness of your sin—the three elements which appear in the guilt of Jonah and
expressly owned by himself. 1. Against what God is in himself. Jonah owns that
he has sinned ; against “‘ Jehovah, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea
and the dry land.” 2. Against what God has been to him. Jonah confesses that
he has sinned; “I am an Hebrew:” a member of the people whose God Jehovah
is, for whom Jehovah hath done great things; to whom he hath given “the
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the law, and the service of God,
and the promises, whose are the fathers,” &c. 3. Against what he himself has
been to God. Jonah owns that he had sinned: “I fear Jehovah;” I am one of
his servants; I have been enrolled among the true Israel—a true child of the
covenant—a messenger of it also, standing in the counsel and in the secret of the
Most High ; for “ the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him.” By all these
three considerations Jonah ought to have been restrained from sinning and retained
in his loyalty to God. The glory of God—the God of heaven, of the sea, and of
the dry land—ought to have restrained him. The graciousness of God towards
himself ought to have restrained him. And the grace of God in himself ought to
have restrained him. And when, in the face of all these three considerations,
his disobedience breaks forth and carries him impetuously away, do they not all go
to aggravate the guilt which he contracts [Hugh Martin]?


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 8. Public insight into private
life [Ewell].

Ver. 10. Feared. By receiving Jonah,
they had opposed God, whose power and
supremacy they now perceived. Notice
that God glorifies himself above idols,
and often constrains men to render
homage,—that the more men see of
God’s judgments for sin, the more they
should fear him; that “such fear is the
beginning of conversion, when men turn
from dwelling on the distresses’ which
surround them to God who sent them.”

Why hast thou done this? 1. Words
of amazement. The worshipper of Je-
hovah thinking to escape by flight!
Convinced sinners often marvel at the
inconsistencies of professed believers.


2. Words of humanity. They expostu-
late instead of punishing him. 3. Words
of rebuke. None injure us so much as
those who bring us under the wrath of
God. Let us not add the blood of
others to the guilt of our own sin.

The question for the backslider. “Why
hast thou done this?” Did you not like
the work God gave you to do? Did
not religion answer your expectations?
After trial, have you found that the
world is better than Christ? Let all
take the warning against disobedience,
and learn that happiness consists only in
walking with God and obeying his com-
mands. “If his anger be kindled, yea,
but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in him.”


HOMILETICS.
THe RequireD Sacririce.— Verses 11, 12.


The sea still raged and testified to the anger of God. The light of nature and
the dictates of conscience taught the sailors, the law and the history of his nation
taught Jonah, that God was just and must be satisfied. Hence the anxiety of the
crew and the submission of the prophet. Learn :—

I. That sin confessed does not always bring immediate relief in distress.
Jonah had honestly confessed his guilt and felt deep remorse, but something more
was requisite. God’s purpose is not accomplished by mere acknowled ment of wrong.
Great storms never come from small sins. The servant of Jehovah must be cor-
rected and the guilty feel God’s displeasure. The longer we remain in sin and the


CHAP. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAR. 387





greater our reluctance to duty, the more tempestuous will be the sea. II. That
men truly humbled in distress are anxious to follow the revealed will of God.
The mariners had solemnly appealed to God and knew Jonah to be his servant. They
fear God, do not take the matter into their own hands, but ask counsel through
Jonah. Tenderness, humanity, and subjection are the kindly fruits of affliction.
The anxious enquirer and the restored servant desire to know the revealed will of
God, and do nothing without his guidance. “ Lead me in thy truth and teach me.”
III. That those sensible of their own desert are not willing to involve others
in distress. Jonah felt that he was the cause of suffering and peril to his fellow-
creatures—that God’s justice should take him and spare them. “Cast me forth into
the sea; and the sea shall be calm to you.” A true penitent submits to be chastised
for his iniquity ; but when others suffer with him, he is concerned. In the provi-
dence of God we often involve others in danger by our sin, and are called upon to
endure risk and self-sacrifice to savethem. “It is I that have sinned and done evil
indeed ; but as for these sheep, what haye they done?”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 11. What shall we do? The that both as a penitent offender and a


moral demeanour of these men indicates,
1. Kindly feeling towards Jonah. 2.
Solemn awe of Jehovah. 3. Natural
horror against taking away human life.
It was treatment unexpected and unde-
served, a pattern to many in more fa-
vourable circumstances. ‘ With the
well-advised there is wisdom.”

Ver. 12. Jonah’s reply. ‘Could
anything be more noble, upright, honour-
able? There is, first, a renewed acknow-
ledgment—frank, free, and full—of his
own obnoxiousness to the Divine anger,
and of himself as the source and occasion
of the present danger. ‘For I know
that for my sake this great tempest is
upon you.’ There is, secondly, an un-
reserved surrender or appointment of
himself to death, as the means of solving
the appalling difficulty, and stilling the
raging of the deep. ‘Take me up and
cast me forth into the sea.’ And there
is, thirdly,—what may be valued as
coming from a prophet of that God
‘which made the sea and the dry land’
—a prediction that the expedient will
be efficacious ; ‘so shall the sea be calm
unto you’” [Hugh Martin].

Jonah reads out his own doom, and


prophet of the Lord. As the former,
conscious that he was the cause of the
sufferings and peril of his fellow-
creatures, he felt it just that the venge-
ance of God should light on him, if
haply his mercy might spate them. As
the latter, he opens out the Divine will
respecting himself, and unconsciously
instructs us respecting that great pro-
pitiation for the sins of the world of
which he was to be a remarkable type
(Is. liii. 5; Matt. xii. 40: John xi. 50)
[Sibthorp]. We see more and more
the working of grace in the prophet’s
soul; (1) in his acknowledgment of
merited judgment ; (2) his patient sub-
mission, and (3) tender regard for others.
But in the two latter respects how was
he surpassed by Jesus! Observe an-
other resemblance between Jonah and
Christ: both gave up themselves to
still the storm of God’s wrath against
sin; yet herein is a great difference
between them. This storm was of the
prophet’s own raising; not so that for
which Christ gave himself to death.
We caused that tempest ; he, being inno-
cent, allayed it by his own blood [Jbid.}.


HOMILETICS.
Lasour In Vain.—Verses 12, 13.
We shall translate Jonah’s history into spiritual illustrations of man’s experience


and action with regard to Christ and his gospel.


We have here a picture of what


most men do before they resort to God’s remedy ; that remedy is fairly imaged in
the deliverance of the ship’s company by the sacrifice of one on their behalf.


358 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. (CHAP. 1.





I. Our first observation is, that sinners when they are tossed upon the sea of
conviction, make desperate efforts to save themselves. The men rowed hard,
strained every sinew, and laboured by violence. No language can express the earnest
action with which awakened sinners unlawfully struggle to obtain eternal life.
They try moral reformation. Others add to their reformation a superstitious regard
to the outward of religion. Many persons row hard to get the ship to land by a
national belief in orthodox doctrine. Many are resting upon their own incessant
prayers. Others are toiling by a sort of mental torture. II. Like these mariners,
the fleshy efforts of awakened sinners must inevitably fail. ‘They could not.”
With all man’s rowing after mercy and salvation, he can never find it by his own
efforts. First of all, i is contrary to God’s law for a sinner to get comfort by any-
thing he can do for and by himself. Because in what he ts doing he is insulting
God. He is also in the way of the curse. III. The soul’s sorrow will continue
to increase so long as it relies upon its own efforts. It may be overruled for
good, but the effect of all that the creature does before it believes is mischievous.
The good effect lies in this: the more a man strives to save himself, the more con-
vinced will he become of his own impotence. Another good result follows, that a
man striving to save himself by law, jinds out the spirituality of that law, a
spirituality which he never saw before. But much of this toil is mischievous. It
makes unbelief take a firmer grip. Giant Despair’s prisoners do not all escape; he
has a yard full of bones, the relics of willing prisoners who would not be com-
forted. Some sinners make excuses for themselves out of their despair, and let
their doubts and fears grow till they cast a thick shadow over them. IV. We will
try to explain God’s plan. The way of safety for sinners is to be found in the
sacrifice of another on their behalf. Leave out the fact that Jonah was sinful,
and he becomes an eminent type of Christ. Substitution saves the mariners:
substitution saves sinners. Jesus dies, and there is a calm. Conscience accuses nc
longer. Judgment decides for and not against the sinner. Memory looks back
with sorrow for sin, but with no dread of penalty to come. Let us enjoy the peace
‘that passeth all understanding.” Then go to work for God, not to win life and
heaven, for they are ours already ; but loved by him, let us love and serve him with
perfect heart [Spurgeon].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 12. Because of me. ‘True
conviction of sin will produce honest
confession of sin sometimes to our fellow-
creatures ; always before God. Let it
ad to those bitter herbs of repentance
with which we feast on our Passover (1
Cor. v. 7, 8), to reflect how often and
largely our iniquity has aided to make
the mass of human guilt more offensive
and of huiman misery more grievous.”

Ver. 13. Here we find, Z. Compassion
dieplayed when undeserved. 1. In pity
for the sufferer., 2. In regard to his
God. 3. In fear of bloodguiltiness.
II. Conscience overcoming self-interest.
The men were assured of calm by getting
rid of Jonah; but perhaps the force of
conscience showed that the guilt of
murder would rest upon them if they
threw him overboard Listen to con-


science when duty and self-interest seem
to conflict. JI. The servant spared
from fear of the master. “Do my
prophets no harm.” If we fear God,
men feel that they offend him by injuring
us. “He that toucheth you, toucheth
the apple of mine eye.”

We have here an admirable example
of dealing with an offending brother.
They dreaded to punish after his guilt
was proved; and they could not tell
how far he was restored again into God's
favour as a penitent. Let us walk by
the same rule towards fallen brethren
[ Jones]. .

Learn also—1. The benefits of affliction.
Jonah is no longer perverse and dis-
obedient, and the mariners are brought
to call upon thetrue God. 2. The folly
of fighting against God. Providence


CHAP, 1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JONAH. 359
eS EE


was adverse. They rowed against the tending with the storm. “There is no
stream. No success in opposition to wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel
God. Without his help all schemes against the Lord.”

are like ploughing the deep and con-


HOMILETICS.


Pagan Prayers.— Verses 13, 14.


The men ceased to row, their labour was in vain. They only increased their own
danger and prolonged the suffering of one they endeavoured to save—
“ At once they plough the brine; and all the deep
Yawns wide” [Virg. neid].
They recognized the hand of God in the storm, and believed the power of God
supreme. They lay down thei oars and appeal to God.

I. Prayer connected withlabour. “It is well to labour, and it is well to pray,”
said Luther. Prayer strengthens and directs in labour. It sweetens toil and brings
success. Jupiter gave no help to the waggoner till he put his own shoulders to the
wheel. The fable is abused when men despise prayer and dependance upon God.
IT. Prayer in trouble. They had done all they could, but were not relieved.
For the first time probably these heathens prayed to the God of Israel. Sorrow
and danger give speciality and intensity to supplication (Gen xxxii. 9: Is, xxxvii.
{5—20). Pressing trouble forces itself from the heart to the lips. We cry to
God in distress, when we have failed without him. Prayer is our first and last
refuge in trouble. It should ever be the first means we use for deliverance. “Call
upon me in the day of trouble.”

“The man is praying who doth press with might
Out of his darkness into God’s own light” [ Zrench].
III. Prayer in the emergencies of life. There are not only troubles, but special
difficulties and dangers in life. These men were perplexed. The storm demands
the prophet, but the justice of God might require his blood at their hands. What-
ever be our difficulties, prayer offers help and leads us to the great Disposer of all
things (Prov. ili. 6: 1 Pet. v. 7). “He that prays despairs not; but sad is the
condition of him that cannot pray,” says Jeremy Taylor.


“As when the last sentence of the law is carried out on land, the offices of
religion are performed in the presence and on behalf of the culprit, so here there
is prayer, most earnest and most appropriate, preceding the last sad act that shall
part them and their passenger for ever” [Raleigh].

I. The object of their prayer. ‘“O Jehovah.” The storm and the confession
of Jonah have weaned them from their idols. They take in the idea of God, dis-
cern his power, and believe him—1. To be “ the hearer of prayer.” 2. To be the
Supreme Ruler of all events. ‘‘ They had but just known God,” says Pusey, ‘“ and
they resolve the whole mystery of man’s agency and God’s providence into three
simple words, ‘ As (thou) willedst (thou) didst.’” All things, however adverse, were
traced to God’s sovereign disposal. The storm and the lot, the direction of the
prophet and the impossibility to land him. ‘Our God is in the heavens: he hath
done whatsoever he hath pleased.” II. The nature of their prayer. 1. [¢ was
intensely earnest. ‘They cried.” The language is that of earnest supplication,
the particle expressive of entreaty being repeated. There was no time for formal
prayer. We deal not in general petitions in trouble like this ; such tribulation
becomes the tutor of prayer, and leads to maturity of knowledge and experience
2. It was wonderfully submissive. Till we can say “ Thy will be done,” we have
need of more prayer and submission. If God please himself let us be satisfied.
We cannot alter circumstances. But when the will of God is clearly made known


360 HOMILGTIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. (oHaP. L


let us ever follow it. III. The purpose of their prayer. They think of
themselves and their passenger. 1. They pray for the preservation of their own
life. ‘Let us not perish for the life of this man.” They were not prompted by
fear, nor by selfishness, for then would they have cast Jonah into the sea. Truth
has beamed upon them and God is recognized. They felt his anger and became
executioners of his justice. In a short time they learned much of the true God,
and were gradually led to worship him. 2. They pray that the guilt of murder
may not rest upon them. ‘ Lay notupon us innocent blood.” The light of nature,
the teaching of tradition, and the laws of their country, taught that they forfeited
life when they took life. Conscience speaks, the providence of God seems to con-
firm the confession of his servant, yet they are reluctant to cast him out. If it
must be done, they pray to be forgiven. ‘The people of God were shedding
innocent blood like water, in the cities of Palestine (2 Kings ix. 7: 2 Chron. xxiv.
20: Matt. xxiii. 35): these heathen sailors fear to pour that of one guilty man
into the recesses of the deep. The offences of professors of religion are often
made to stand out in awful prominency by the restraints which nature and
conscience put on those of others (Rom. ii. 27: 1 Cor. v. 1: Matt. xxvii. 24, 25).”
‘At the hand of every man’s brother will I require the life of man” (Gen. ix. 5, 6).


THe SacRIFICE AND THE Catm.— Verse 15.


A funeral at sea is a solemn event. It is a trying hour when the remains of a
friend or comrade have to be cast into the deep. But no funeral service like that
of Jonah. Not in haste and desperation, but in solemn silence and respect they
lift him up and cast him into the sea. The yawning deep engulfs the unresisting
prophet and the angry ocean smooths her face.

I. The sacrifice offered. After they had done all they could, something else
was required. 1. A sacrifice caused by sin. Jonah’s disobedience caused Jonah’s
death. When men run into sin, they run into ruin here and hereafter. God’s
favour and heaven are cast away by the wicked. Whatever sin is the Jonah, it
must be cast away or it will drown us in perdition. 2. A sacrifice required by the
will of God. The sea did not cease from raging. Jonah had told them what was
required, and the providence of God confirmed the prediction. God’s law must be
honoured and sin punished. 3. A sacrifice offered for the safety of others. Jonah
was submissive in the face of death, and far more concerned for the lives of others
than for his own. He thus becomes a type of Jesus, who was offered a sacrifice for
our sins, “a ransom for many.” If he had not suffered for us, the waterfloods of
guilt and the waves of grief would have compassed us and carried us away. II.
The calm which followed. “The sea stayed from her raging.” 1. A proof of
God’s power over the elements of nature. The wind ceases, the billows rest, and
danger is past. ‘The lower is subject to the higher, nature to moral providence,
and providence to God.” ‘Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves
thereof arise, thou stillest them” (Ps. lxxxix. 9; xciii. 3; cvii. 29). 2. A con-
firmation of right conduct. The men would hesitate and doubt, but God gives
them immediate comfort. They have obeyed his will, and he will make them know
and feel it, by outward calm and inward peace. When we submit to God’s will
he will not any longer contend with us. 3. A type of peace through Christ.
When he was cast forth and sank into the sea that threatened the world with ruin
there was a universal calm. God’s justice was satisfied and his anger ceased.
“ Fury is not in me.” We may have peace with God if we cast out of our hearts
the sin which provokes his wrath (Jer. iv. 1: Is. lvii. 20, 21). ‘“ God hath recon-
ciled us to himself by Jesus Christ.”


Tue ConverteD Heatuen.—Verses 14 and 16.


Perhaps these men were more candid and less depraved than heathen generally.
They seem at any rate to be prepared by education and discipline to receive the


CHAP. I.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. 381





truth. But under the guidance of the Spirit they were converted through the
teaching of Jonah.

I. What led to their conversion? God prepared the way by the presence of
his servant on board. But Jonah would not have spoken to them, nor would they
have listened to him, but for the storm, the danger, and the lot. Perhaps, as in
many cases, some antecedent preparation may be traced. In Christian countries
many can trace the leadings of Divine providence in bringing them to Christ. In
heathen nations God has prepared tribes and individuals to believe the gospel when
it has reached them. There are preparations in language, changes of government,
corruption and decay of heathenism. “A great door and effectual is opened.”
II. What was the evidence of their conversion? When a Divine principle
is implanted in the heart, then life is reformed and actions changed. 1. They
forsake idolatry. Their former gods are abandoned, and now they seek to know
the true God. Every soul born of God turns from lying vanities, and is drawn out
to God in supplication and praise. 2. They pray to Jehovah. Prayer is the first
act of a converted sinner. “ Lord, what wilt thou have me todo?” Afterwards
it is “the native air” in which he lives, moves, and has his being. If gratitude
for God’s goodness fills the heart, it will be expressed in acts of devotion. Special
revelations of God in acts of grace or providence will beget true fearin us. “The
men feared the Lord exceedingly.” III. What were the fruits of their con-
version? When storms are over and men are delivered it is common for them
to return to indifference or ridicule. The only sure and permanent sign of
conversion is holy life. 1. These men feared Jehovah. The storm was over, and
they were delivered from death; but they return not after affliction to their former
ways. Wonderful events had happened. Wind and storm had fulfilled the word
of Jehovah, and they felt a great awe. “Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God for
thy good always” (Deut. vi. 13, 24). 2. They offered sacrifice. Not an offering
in general, but a slaughtering of some lamb or fowl on board, as a victim to express
their faith. They might not comprehend the full meaning of the Jewish rite. It
was forgotten and obscured by heathen superstitions. “ But a conscience could not
be quickened to a sense of guilt before God, nor a hope of salvation from the just
punis. ment of sin be cherished by a penitent heart, without its finding a natural
expressi n in this ancient and once universal form of religious worship.” Ignorant
of Jewish customs, they fell back upon that of their ancestors, and God accepted
their offering. 3. They vowed vows, They combine faith and works. ‘They are
not only moved in present gratitude, but think of the future. Many who escape
danger, vow and forget their vows. Months pass, and they evince that fear was
only a superficial thawing and no real opening of the heart. God requires present
promise and future performance, a dedication of the whole life to him. If we do
not fulfil our voluntary vows it is clear that our gratitude is not real and that our
service is not a cleaving to God with all our hearts. ‘“ Vow and pay unto the
Lord your God: let all that be round about him bring presents unto him that


ought to be feared.”


“But when your ships rest, wafted o’er the main,
And you, on altars raised along the shore,
Pay your vow’d offerings” [_Hneid].


Tue Great Mrracis.— Verse 17.


By the mariners Jonah was thought to be drowned ; but the providence of God
had provided a living tomb for his servant. He is hurried through the depths of
the sea, in judgment and mercy. He owned the hand and submitted to the will
of God: he prayed for help, and was cast out of his sepulchre, a monument of
Yod’s merey and a type of the Saviour of men. In this verse we have

I. Providential anticipation. ‘(The Lord had prepared a great fish.” This
prepacation was (1) miraculous, and (2) merciful in its nature and design. It alse





362 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. (CHAP. I.





illwstrates a principle which we find in all God’s dealings with men, viz. Anticipa-
tions of providence. 1. In the scheme of redemption there was no after-thought.
God provided a remedy before the fall. 2. In the conversion of sinners goodness
and grace are prepared beforehand. 3. In the exigencies of Christian life God
meets us ready to help. In prayer, trouble, and death he prepares, goes before
us, and stands ready to bless. ‘The God of my mercy shall prevent (go before)
me.” II, Typical events. God had more places to send Jonah than to Nineveh.
The course of things starts out in strange deviation from that uniformity
which philosophers insist upon. We rest simply upon the Divine power
which miraculously preserved the vital economy under the suspension of one of
its greatest functions. If men like to deny or ridicule attested facts let them
“sport themselves with their own deceivings,” says one. In “the three days and
three nights’” imprisonment of Jonah Christ sees a type of himself (Matt. xii. 40).
1. The analogies are his confinement to the deep and the grave that others might
be saved. 2. The same duration of time in this dark retirement; and 3. The
coming to light and life again for the reformation of mankind. Learn from the
fact—1. The presence of God in history. 2. The purpose of God in controlling
its events. 3. The powerof God in making all things subservient to this purpose.
“With the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


When the servants of God run away
from an easy service, their Master fre-
quently appoints them a harder task.
If Jonah will not preach up and down
the streets of Nineveh, he shall preach
from the bottom of the sea [Jones].

1. When God pursues his rebellious
children in a severe way, yet he doth not
altogether cast off his mercy to them,
but moderates their affliction. 2. God
may have a mercy and proof of love
waiting upon his people in a time and
place where they would be least expected.
For Jonah meets a mercy in the raging
sea, into which he was cast in anger, as
to be destroyed. 3. Although God’s
mercy will not destroy his guilty people
in their afflictions, yet his wisdom sees
fit not to deliver them at first, but to
exercise their faith and heart [ Hutche-
son].

ie, 17. “From how many un-
thought-of, unimaginable situations the
Sovereign of the world has drawn de-
votional aspirations! but never, except
once, from a situation like this” [John
Foster]! .

The sea and her inhabitants are God’s
and lie at his will (Luke v.6: John
xxi. 6). The mightiest and meanest
ereatures subserve his purposes, and are
auxiliaries or adversaries to man as he
chooses (Josh. xxiv. 12: 2 Kings xvii.
25) [Sibthorp]. :


The Type. Three days and three
nights (Matt. xii. 40. Cf. Rom. iv. 25;
vi. 4). In comparing the two—these
two great interpositions of Godhead with
Jonah and Jesus respectively —the type
will illustrate the antitype. But there
are points in which our clear knowledge
of the antitype may be carried back to
illustrate the type. This is the case in
the very first resemblance. I. In both
cases there is a death and a resurrection.
Jonah speaks of his burial in terms in
which the Messiah speaks of his “ hell”
and “corruption.” In both cases it is
the language of burial and resurrection.
II. But secondly: in both cases, the
death and burial are judicial processes.
Each of the processes is an atonement
and expiation, pacifying the Divine
Judge, satisfying Divine justice, abol-
ishing guilt, restoring peace. III. The
burial and resurrection of Jonah con-
stituted the gate by which the word of
Jehovah passed forth from the Jewish
to the Gentile world. In like manner
the death and resurrection of Christ
was the breaking down of the middle
wall of partition. IV. The analogy
holds further in this respect, that the
experiences of Jonah and Christ consti-
tute, each in its own sphere, an enforce-
ment of the message which each brings
to the Gentiles. V. Jonah’s experience
was his preparation for new loyalty and


CHAP. I, |


obedience; and in the kingdom of Christ,
Christ’s risen life is the source of new-
ness of life and service. Jonah was
a new man on dry land, with a new life
and a new career opening before him.
O believer in a risen Christ, is not this
the type and fashion of your life of


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. The name Jonah signifies “a
dove.” But there is not much of
“mourning love,” of which the dove has
always been taken as the symbol in the
record. The name might express his
father’s feeling ; as applied to himself it
seems a misnomer. The hawk, the
raven, or the vulture would seem to be
more truly symbolical. But let us not
forget that he tells his own tale, after
the things recorded are past: that he
tells it very expressly to the glory of
God’s mercy, with which designedly he
sets his own hardness and thoughtless
eruelty in contrast [Raleigh]. There is
but one reason for the mission stated
here; but several others in reserve—
some gently hinted, some unrevealed
until after ages [ Raleigh].

Ver. 2. “Jonah and his ‘ arise’ giveth
a warning to us all, for we have all a
Nineveh to go into. Magistrates, arise
and go to the gate to execute God’s judg-
ments. Ministers, arise and go to the
gospel to do the works of evangelists.
People, arise and go to your trades,” &.
[King].

Ver. 3. To leave the presence of God
is to “go down;” and the history of
many a day might, in the evening, be
written too faithfully in the sad record,
“T have been going down.” Down from
communion, from a conscious faith, from
quietness, and firm, steady obedience.
Down into strife without victory, into
toil without fruit; into mere money-
making, mere pleasure-seeking, mere
time-wasting. The success and glory of
true life can only be found in keeping
the upward road—in hearing and fol-
lowing the voice which perpetually says,
“Come up hither” [Raleigh] !

Vers. 4, 5. Storm. Some years ago
an infidel embarked at Buffalo with a
printing-press, to set up an infidel pub-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


——


faith? With what freshness—as of the
morning light of an eternal Sabbath; and
with what force—as of the eternal power
of Messiah’s resurrection; may that
blessed appeal be made to us, “If ye
then be risen” (Col. iii. 1) [H. Martin].





TO CHAPTER I.


lication in Cleveland. He annoyed the
passengers by his zeal to discuss the
subject of religion. When a storm
arose and threatened them with de-
struction, he was not only willing to
throw overboard his press, but was con-
spicuous for his prayers and cries for
mercy. Whenthe storm was over, and
he found himself a laughing-stock among
the wicked and an object of pity to the
pious, he went back to his infidelity and
blamed his early education in supersti-
tion, as he called it, for his fright and
prayers [Mitahell].

Ver. 6. Sleeper. The saint’s sleeping-
time is Satan’s tempting-time. No
temptation so weak but is strong enough
to foil a Christian that is napping in
security. Samson asleep, and Delilah
cut his locks. Noah asleep, and his
graceless son has a fit time to discover
his father’s nakedness. Thus the
Christian asleep in security may soon be
surprised, so as to lose much of his
spiritual strength [An old Divine}.

Ver. 7. Lots. Religion, even in its
rudest forms, has always been faithful to
ita general principle thus far, that when
the anger of the Divinity has been appre-
hended, it has been understood to be
against sins and crimes; and also that
the Divinity was believed to know who
was the criminal. The mariners, there-
fore, referred it to the avenging Power to
point owt the criminal by a common
ancient practice. A reference this not to
chance, but to a superior intelligence.
Could our prophet have any doubt where
the lot would fall? No: his conscience
must have been a prophet to him [John
Foster}.

Ver. 8. How natural the questions !


“Say, strangers, for what cause é
Explore your ways unknown f or whither tends


364


Your voyage here? Whence come you? From
what race
Derived ? And bring you hither peace or war?”
[ Zrapp’s Virgil.]


Vers. 10, 11. Let God be clearly ,


known as he is revealed, and with few
exceptions men cannot but believe in
him. A few philosophers will reason
and refine, and abide in intellectual dis-
belief. A few very wicked men will
“believe a lie,” that they may work un-
righteousness: but the great mass of
men, like these sailors from Tarshish,
will quickly yield, at least by intellectual
assent, to the influence of the truth
{ Raleigh].

Vers. 12, 13. Take me up, neverthe-
less the men rowed hard. Man has no
right to take away his own life. We
should also be careful of the life of
others. The sailors thought it could
not be right nor pleasing to God to cast
Jonah into the deep. It would be a loss
of goodness, thought, and self-denying
regard for them. They were actuated
by human motives, and illustrated the
principle of moral life that our spirit
and conduct have a tendency to repro-
duce themselves in others. Men have
responsive feelings, answer heart to
heart, and thus make life beautiful.

“ All life is sacred in its kind te heaven,


And all things holy, beautiful, and good.”
[Bailey.]}


Ver, 12. Be calm unto you.


“ Tmmortal hope,
Takes comfort from the foaming billows rage,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


(cHar. 1.


And makes a welcome harbour of the tomb.”
[ Young.)

Vers. 15,17. The men must have
talked about the voyage and its issues,
especially about what took place after
Jonah was in the sea. He knew nothing
about that, and could only record it here
because he had been told it by others.
By whom? No doubt that story was
told far and near, and he might have
heard it from any one. But most
probably he heard it from their own
lips—from captain and ship’s company,
gathered together, perhaps, on the deck
of that very vessel. It isnot improbable
that the prophet took a journey to Joppa
on purpose; that he went to the old
place; that he stood once more on the
deck of the ship—captain and crew
around him—to tell and hear their
mutual stories of preservation. You
can fancy the meeting. You can see
the man. You can imagine how the
whole matter would be bruited abroad
even as far as Nineveh; and how the
story told there, and well authenticated,
would prepare that great and guilty city
for receiving the message of the prophet
when he actually came [ Raleigh].

Remember, therefore, this advice:
Never let the advantages with which you
begin life’s voyage lull youinto confidence
and negligence, nor difficulties lead you
to despair ; persevere in that path which
reason and justice point out, and then
despair not of reaching your desired
port [Hamlain}.





CHAPTER IL


Critica Notes]. Prayed] Really praised. His] not only to Jehovah ag the sailors did. “He
shows his fasth by adoring Him as his God” [Burk]. The structure of this hymn, composed like
many Psalms, and filled with allusions to them, falls into three strophes (vers. 4, 6, and 8) ; each of
which rises from distress to deliverance and hope [cf. Lange]. 2. Cried] More definite than Pa.
xvi. 1, and cxx. 1. Belly) Womb of Sheol, ¢, ¢. the peril of death ; snares of death (Ps. xviii. 5);
deliverance out of Sheol (Ps. xxx. 3), 8. Deep] abyss (Ps. xlii. 7). Midst) Heart of the seas, in
the fathomless depth, away from the shores, Floods] The stream or current of the sea which
sweeps along, as Ps, xxiv. 2. Waves] from Strabar, to break; thy breakers and thy billows roll.
“ Thy billows, because he felt in his conscience that the sea with its waves and billows was the serv-
ent af God apd of his wrath to pun‘sh sin” [Luther]. 4. Said] in wy heart, ¢. ¢. I thought that I


CHAP, IT.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JONAH. 365





was banished from thy protection and care (Ps. xxxi. 23). Look] Lit. look intently, an assurance
that he will yet appear in the temple to praise God (Ps. v. 8). 5] This strophe opens like the first,
sets forth the peril of death, and describes the thought of miraculous deliverance. Surrounded]
Pressed even to the soul (Ps, lxix. 2; xviii. 5). Weeds] Sea-weeds, vast quantities of which were
found in the Mediterranean, were bound about his head “like a grave band. A peril even to thestrong
swimmer, entangling him the more he struggles to extricate himself. But to one below, powerless
to struggle, it was as his winding-sheet ” Nace 6. Bottoms] Cuttings off, ends or extremities,
hence foundations (cf. Ps. xviii. 7—15). It seemed as if the earth itself formed the vault, the living
coffin into which he was shut up (Deut. iii.5: Job xxxviii. 10). “The bolts of the sea are the walls
of the sea-basin, which set bounds to the sea that it cannot pass over” [Keil]. Corruption] Lit. the
pit (Is. xxviii. 17: Job xvii, 4). 7% Fainted] Heb, to cover one’s self or to veil, then to sink,
to pine away: Qem. the triumph of faith over sense. Temple] from which prayers are heard (Ps.
xlil. 6; lxxiii, 26). 8.] When prayer reaches to God he helps and saves. Salvation is only from
Him. Idolaters forfeit their mercy. Observe] Lit. regard, hold to, an intensive form: “ pay asloceins
to vourt, sue vanity of vanities, vain things which prove ruin at last’’ [Pusey]. Mercy] Lit. their
goodness, %. €. God, their Benefactor, the Author of all mercies (Ps. cxliv. 2). 9, I will] The vow
of a pious man as ~pposed to the life of apostates, As the mariners ended their sacrifice with vows,
so Jonah ends nis yrayer with thanksgiving. Sal.] Lit. a mighty salvation (an intensive form) which
God gives to his people after affliction, ‘is wholly His; all beiongs to Him, so that none can share
in bestowing it’” [Pusey]. 40. Snake} His uttered veice produces everything. In heaven, earth,
and sea, all things submit to him. Zand] Probably the coast of Palestine. This circumstance
cee ee : more wonderful event, when death will be swailowed up of victory (Is, xxvi, 19: 1
or. xv. 64).


HOMILETICS.
In tae Dzsr.—Chap. IT.


As soon as the prophet was entombed, he knew that he was in a living grava
Then began that new and bitter experience recorded in the prayer of this chapter.
We have no eaternal history of those days. But we have a very intense and
clear history of his inward life. Speaking generally, there was evidently a great
and sudden quickening of consciousness. Tne man who speaks in this holy psalm
hardly seems the same person whom we have seen in fiight—dark, moody, silent,
despairing. Beneath the waves the whole man reveals himself to God. Men
rescued from drowning have told of guickened consciousness in danger—how they
have lived again through years of past moments, estimated possible means of
escape, and pierced with anticipative thought into the two possible futures—that of
time, and that of eternity. Then rapidly this new consciousness became distressful.
His soul fills itself fuller than the sea with “affliction.” The reserved sorrow of
sinning comes all at once. Tf sinners knew the fruitage of their ungodliness, what
the universe would be when Divine presence is darkened out of them, and what
the bitterness of that moment when the soul awakes in the thought, “God is now
away, perhaps for ever,” they would stay the beginnings of departure as men keep
back from a slippery precipice. Then he began to “ look”—upwards to earth,
eastwards to the temple, where he knew that the lost presence was richly mani-
fested. This is one of the most characteristic acts of faith—to look, although
death may come in the looking. This is a tough battle. It is hard to fight above-
ground; but to fight as deep as ever plummet sounded, where stretches the
shadow of death, is grand. The look soon became a cry. It may have been
literally a vocal ery. . The voice was much used by Jews in gladness, sorrow, and
worship—especially by great and impassioned souls. This may have been J onah’s
habit on land, the means of preserving his life in the deep, and may have so acted

‘upon the sensations of his submarine custodian as to induce at length the disgorge-
ment. But it was the cry of the soul, which rose from farthest depths in one in-
stant, without injuring natural law, above all heights, to the primal springs of power
and earthly providence. He began to be grateful. Some measure of gratitude
mingled with his distress from the first, but as he felt himself still alive as time
rolled on, then would come a feeling of thankfulness. There was daybreak in the
land of the shadow of death. ‘Then, apparently, his soul passed into a more active
state of renewed versonal consciousness to God. Religious thankfulness nearly


386 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAB. (Omar. IX,





always grows into that. The voice of thanksgiving begins with the act of sacri-
fice. Vows when truly madeare paid. The prophet resolved “I will”; acted when
deliverance came. ‘The final state of his mind—that into which all other feelings
subside and resolve themselves—s a state of entire dependence, involving a quiet
and trustful surrender of himself to God. I have done all I can, need not cry any
more. If God will accept me for active service I shall be delivered. If not, I
shall trust in him: “ Salvation is of the Lord” [Raleigh].


PRAYER AND DistrEss.— Verses 1—4.


Jonah now describes his mournful and dismal condition. Let us notice his
sorrows, prayers, and hopes.

I. The great distress. ‘I cried by reason of my distress.” 1. Distress in the
deep. Pharaoh’s army sank into the deep; and the sea is often as the grave.
(a) Into the heart of the seas, far away from the shores, and down into the fathom-
less bottom. (6) Encircled by the floods. “The floods have compassed me” (cf.
Ps. xlvi. 3; lxix. 1, 2; Ixxxviii. 6). (c) Swept by the billows. The broken surges
and mountain-billows rolled over his head. Sin casts into darkness and dismal
culfs. The punishment of God is often intense, but love is seen in it all. “ Thy
waves.” 2. Distress in Sheol. ‘From the belly of hell.” His confinement was
like the lower world, the region of ghosts. But no abyss of grief is beyond Divine
help. God can keep alive and deliver from the pit. “O Lord, thou hast brought
up my soul from the grave, thou hast kept me alive that I should not go down to
the pit.” 3. Distress away from Gtod’s presence. ‘I am driven out of thy sight.”
This was the worst of all, yet only a just retribution for one who had fled from
the presence of God. Jonah’s sin, and the Divine judgment upon it, pierced his
soul, darkened his prospect, and led him to despair. Hope of deliverance for
body or soul seemed no longer cherished. But man’s extremity is God’s oppor.
tunity. Bradford said the prison can be made the palace of the Great King
Seek to be near God, and feel distressed at distance which is (a) a penal conse
quence of sin; (d) a sad complaint with God’s people. “ Why standest thou afar
off, O Lord?” II. The earnest prayer. Sorrows within, around, and above
him, led him to cry out toGod. The Church is indebted for its best men, and the
world for its best sayings, to affliction. Many of God’s children have first prayed
by reason of distress. Backsliders have been reclaimed, and prayers quickened
into cries, by poignant grief. 1. Its intensity. ‘I cried.” Prosperity tends to
negligence, formality, and deadness in prayer; distress makes it earnest and ardent
(Jas. v. 13). “Many, silent with their lips, have cried aloud with their heart,”
says Augustine. “Many, noisy with their lips, could, with heart turned away,
obtain nothing.” 2. Its directness. ‘Unto Jehovah, and Jehovah as his God”
(ver. 1). Away from himself, and up to the throne of the Eternal, were his con-
fidence and desire fixed. He was yet the servant of God, linked to him by past
discipline and future hope. The covenant of God stands firm, and brighter than
stars does it shine in the depths of sorrow. “This God is our God.” 3. Jts place.
“The fish’s belly.” What an oratory! No place is amiss for prayer. The
wilderness and the den, the prison, and “the belly of hell.” The voice of a child
is heard wherever he cries in distress. ‘Call upon me in the day of trouble,” &c.
3. Its language. Most of its expressions are found in the Psalms. It is well to
be conversant with Scripture, which gives consolation and aids devotion in all cir-
cumstances. Our prayers would be more refreshing to others, and more acceptable
to God, if offered in words of inspiration. 4. Iés speed. “Thou heardest my
voice.” God, who cast him down, lifted him up ; inspired his heart, and answered
his petition. God had called upon Jonah, and often calls to us, without response.
But when we turn in penitence and prayer to him he listens. There is a voice in
faith and prayer which God quickly hears, for “he delighteth in mercy.”


“Prayer ardent opens heaven” [ Young].


cHap. IT.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAR. 964





Revivep Frevine.— Verse 4.


By degrees Jonah gained strength to hope and pray. His despondency was
only momentary. A ray of light pierced the darkness, and blessed his heart. “I
will look again,” &c. Learn—

I. That a servant of God may be overcome with fear. Not only assaulted
with temptation and despair, but overcome by them fora time. Men change in
feeling, rejoice to-day, and doubt to-morrow. Light and darkness alternate in the
spiritual as in the natural world. But resist temptation, seek to gather strength,
and look again. ‘Cast not away, therefore, your confidence.” II. That the
weakest act of faith may be mighty in overcoming fear. Faith in God will
sustain us in extremest sufferings, and find a way in greatest impediments. To
remain in unbelief, rest under the waves, or trust in anything but the promise, is
folly. Jonah looked not at probabilities, at things as they really were, but with
fixed eye toward the holy temple. His faith pierced the darkness, and pictured
the mercy-seat and the Divine presence. A true retrospeet of God’s house will
tinge the present with hope, and dissipate the clouds that darken our horizon.
“ All things are possible to him that believeth.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 2. The affliction. 1. Its ac- that he preserved him alive. For he


seemed to himself forsaken of God.


knowledged source. Neither himself
nor the mariners were considered. All
comes from God. ‘“ Thou hast cast me
into the deep.” “Thy waves,” &c.
“It was not you, but God, that sent me
here.” 2. Its benevolent design. De-
sign there was, and that design not
malevolent. “God is love.” He does
not afflict willingly, but for our future
good and his glory.

«6 Now let us thank the Eternal Power, convinced


That heaven but tries our virtue by affliction :
That oft the cloud which wraps the present


hour,
Serves but to brighten all our future days.”


Vers. 2, 3. The right use of the
Psalter. Even holy men of God, who
were partakers of the Holy Ghost, have
not refused to appeal to, and to cite
formally, the books of Scripture, which
existed already in their time. A strong
argument for the authority of the Holy
Scriptures es

Depths. 1. Sorrow.
3. Desertion.

“One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,

So fast they follow” [Shakespeare].

“Thus woe succeeds woe, as wave a wave.”


2. Despair.


[Herrick.]
Look again. 1. A determination to
remember God in future. 2. An ex-


pression of encouragement derived from
displays of Divine providence and
mercy. ‘God gave him no hope save


Wonderful pattern of faith which gains
strength even from God’s seeming de-
sertion ” [ Pusey].


Again, past experience in God’s
house. 1. When improved. (a) A
source of comfort in distress. (b) A


ground of hope for future blessings.
2. When abused. (a) Taken an evi-
dence of present grace. (b) Made an
excuse for further effort. If you have
not force enough to contemplate God
in heaven, try again by fresh exer-
cises of faith and prayer; you may
be refreshed with a more excellent view
and better hope than Moses had on
Nebo’s summit. The hasty conclusion.
“Then I said, 1 am cast out.” I. Its
cause. 1. Consciousness of guilt. 2.
Calamity interpreted as visitations of
God. II. Its folly. God reproves, and
often severely, but never casts away
his children. When we speak in haste
we do not consider. Our minds are
then disturbed, and we distrust God.
(Cf. David, 1 Sam. xxvii. 1: Ps, xxi.
22.) ‘ Hasty words,” says one, ‘are but
for a moment on the tongue, but they
often lie for years on the conscience.”
The mischief of hasty conclusions is
great. ‘ Waters flowed over mine head ;
then I said, I am cut off. I called
upon thy name, O Lord, out of the low
dungeon.”


368 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. (cmap. I.





HOMILETICS.
THE HORRIBLE Pit.— Verses 5, 6.


The prophet again enlarges on his terrible and apparently hopeless condition,
reviews the awful deep from whence he was delivered, and admires the power of
God in his salvation.

I. The depth of the pit. The poet or the painter can add nothing to the de-
scription here given of the prisoner in the deep. He was cast down into a dark,
fearful dungeon, amid horrible gloom and rushing torrents. Forgotten of mankind ;
confined in anguish and hell. Sin always casts men into extremity and death.
II. The dangers of the pit. His peril was imminent. The terrors of the Al-
mighty, the elements of nature, set themselves in array against him. 1. He was
encompassed by waters. Excluded from the atmosphere and light on the surface,
he felt almost suffocated beneath the waves. His very soul was submerged, and
pressed by the floods so that life was almost extinct. ‘Encompassed me even to
the soul.” 2. He was barred by the earth. He was carried to the base of the
rocks, the roots of the mountains, whose summits overtopped the waves. 3. He
was enclosed in the deep. ‘The deep closed me in.” He could sink no lower, and
it was impossible to rise higher. He was confined on all sides. LEarth and sea
formed the vault within which he was for ever shut. 4. He was wrapped round
with sea-weeds. The alga or weed was bound about his head, and made it like a
state of death or living corruption. ‘As the monster within which he was
caverned glided through the vast submarine forests, they seemed to enclose him
in their green and slippery coverts, or portions of sea-weed, swallowed by the fish,
wrapped itself around him.” III. The deliverance from the pit. “Thou hast
brought up my life.” His rescue was like a resurrection of the body, and displayed
the grace and power of Jehovah. God delivered him from snfferings described
and recorded when he was on dry land. His soul also was recovered to true
penitence, and the light of God’s countenance. He could now say, “‘O Lord, my
God.” ‘A sweet renewed sense of pardoning love is often the pleasant shoré on
which we step out of the deep mire of our sorrowful troubles.” IV. The grati-
tude to the deliverer. It is a good thing to give thanks to God for blessings
received. It is common with God to deliver when nobody else can. Every mercy
is the expression of a thought, the manifestation of a purpose. God’s mercies are
innumerable, and must be publicly acknowledged to quicken our own hearts and
those of others (Is. xxxvili. 17). ‘He brought me up also out of an horrible pit
out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings’
(Ps. xl. 2, 3).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 5. Trials like water. Deep, phet. 3. It was Divinely wrought.
heavy, and overwhelming. Itissad to ‘ Yet hast thou.” 4. It was recognized
be perfectly sensible of your situation, and appreciated by Jonah. “O Lord,
yet not able to do anything for relief; to my God.” These words are full of
struggle, and become more fettered by meaning, and express the faith and joy
the effort. S of the Prophet [Hell].

The deliverance. 1. This deliverance Vers. 5,6. Bringing up and preserv-
was, humanly speaking, most unlikely. ation. Two great blessings traced to
2. It was highly benevolent. “Brought the hand of God, and prompting te
up my life.” It was a treasure beyond gratitude on account of the evils de
all price that was restored to the pro- scribed.


CHAP. IL.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. 869





HOMILETICS.


REMEMBRANCE oF Gop.— Verse 7.


Jonah continues his reflections, and calls to mind his past experience in the deep.

I. Remembrance of God an antidote to fainting. Men faint through heat,
thirst, and exhaustion ; but the worst fainting is in the mind (Heb. xii. 3). If the
mind keeps strong we can bear up, but if that gives way we succumb to sorrow.
Natural infirmities, trouble and temptation, may overcome the stoutest. The soul
is filled with doubt, the heart grows weak, and faintsaway. Above all, guilt brings
fear and drives away God, and casts dark shadows over our path. But if we are
humble and turn to God in our despondency our souls will revive, and hope will
dawn in regions of despair. Remembrance of (a) God’s power, (b) God’s promise,
and (c) God’s readiness to save, will renew our strength. “God will help and that
right early.” II. Remembrance of God a stimulant to prayer. “And my ©
prayer came unto thee.” Much depends upon what men look at in trouble. Ac-
cording to the object in view will be the direction of the thoughts. Some look at
their situation, with its attendant evils, and faint. Others trust to wrong sources
for help, and are disappointed. But remembrance of God will invigorate faith, and
prompt to prayer. Constant thoughts of God would make life more devout and
successful. Continual prayer to him would secure his presence, and turn the depths
of death into a temple of praise. III. Remembrance of God a proof of God’s
remembrance of us. When we truly remember and pray to God in sorrow, it is
an evidence that we are not forsaken by him. The spirit of prayer is given to be
cultivated, and offered to him in hearty petitions. No greater mercy can we have
in trial than to be kept prayerful and dependent upon God. Contrite prayer and
enjoyment of God’s favour are closely connected. Let us not forget God whatever
else is forgotten.


THe Morat Contrasts In Lirn— Verses 8, 9.


Jonah now expresses his feelings in sacrifice and praise, resolves to lead a new
life, and pay his vows to God. This conduct stands in marked contrast to the
ungodly who forget God, and forsake their own interests.

I. God is the highest good of men. What is the chief good of humanity has
been the problem of ages, the aim of all religion and philosophy. Many have
been the theories concerning it; but the declaration of God’s word decides the
question. 1. God is the supreme good in himself. David calls him, my goodness
(Ps. cxliv. 2), my kindness or benignity; the God of my mercy (lix. 17). What
is comprehended in the summum bonum of man—wisdom and justice, beauty and
love—belong to him. He is the infinite excellence and the ultimate good of all
men. 2. God is the source of goodness to others. He is good in himself, and his
tender mercies are over all his works. He is the source and fountain of all our
enjoyments. When he relieves the miserable it is mercy ; when he bestows favour
upon the unworthy it is grace ; when he supplies the indigent it is bounty. God’s
mercy includes all the forms of his kindness shown to men ; whether considered as
creatures, as sinners, or as believers. ‘The earth is full of the goodness of the
Lord.” II. The wicked forsake God, their highest good. 1. This conduct is
wilful. God does not forsake them. They voluntarily forsake him, and therefore
should not blame him. Examples warn, hindrances check them, but they go on.
In opposition to light and known results they obstinately choose death rather than
life. 2. This conduct is injurious. ‘They forsake their own mercy.” They take
nothing from God, but rob themselves of natural enjoyments, Divine favour which
is better than life, and commit moral suicide. Sinners put God from them, who
would be their life, and destroy themselves (Hos. xiii. 9). ‘He that sinneth
against me wrongeth his own soul; all eH that hate me love death.” 3. This

2


370 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JONAH. LCHAP. It,








conduct is foolish. ‘They observe lying vanities.” They forsake the true for the
false. (1) Idols are vanities. The gods of the heathen, or the idols of modern
days, are empty and vain. The worship of mammon and the desire of fame, the
gods of intellect and superstitions, are worthless things. (2) Idols are lying
vanities. They are both vanity and falsehood. They deceive by vain show, and
in the end disappoint. (3) Yet men observe idols. They guard and love them,
depend upon them, and pursue them with eagerness. Falsehood can neither feed
the mind nor calm the conscience. Everything apart from God is vanity and lies.
““Q ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanity?” III. The righteous serve
God, their highest good. The grace that had called forth prayer now ends in
praise. Jonah vows, and pays his vows. 1. They offer thanksgiving to God.
“The voice of praise.” When we drink of the stream we should lift up our head
to heaven. ‘The least mercies are great when viewed as coming from God. Let
this be felt, then we shall enjoy them, and gladly offer the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving. Our gratitude will be (a) sincere, (6) devout, and (c) continual.
“Let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually ; that is, the fruit of our lips,
giving thanks to his name.” 2. They dedicate their lives to God. They renew
their vows, and bind their treacherous heart the faster to God and duty. Jonah
was ready to go and preach at Nineveh, or serve God anywhere, now. God’s
loving correction had made him great and bold. Let our oath of allegiance be
renewed in every deliverance from trouble. Do not show coldness and ingratitude,
which sense of duty and natural shame allow not to an earthly benefactor. Our
future life should be a hymn of praise and a living sacrifice. Let the power
derived from discipline, the gratitude prompted by mercy, be practical and abiding.
“ Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me; and to him that ordereth his conversation
aright will I show the salvation of God.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.
Ver. 8. Such were actual idols in Ver. 9. Praise. It must be noticed


which men openly professed that they
trusted. Such are all things in which
men trust out of God. One is not more
vain than another. All have this com-
mon principle of vanity. It is, then,
one general maxim, including all men’s
idols—idols of the. flesh, idols of intel-
lect, idols of ambition, idols of pride,
idols of self and self-will. Men observe
them as gods; watch them, hang upon
them, never lose sight of them, guard
them as though they could keep them.
But what are they? Lying vanities ;
breath and wind which none can grasp
or detain, vanishing like air into air.
And what do they who so observe
them? All alike forsake their own
mercy, t. 6. God, whose property is
always to have mercy, and who would
be mercy to them if they wanted


[ Pusey).


here that the worship of God especially
consists in praises, as it is said in Ps.
1.; for there God shows that he re
gards as nothing all sacrifices except
they answer this end—to set forth the
praise of his name [ Calvin].

Sacrifice. Now to offer a sacrifice at
such a confession or thanksgiving added
much to the solemnity thereof; and
made it more honourable in itself and
more acceptable to God [Trapp].

Vow. The Hebrew word seemeth to
imply two things: First, that his vow
till paid was incomplete ; it was an im-
perfect thing ; the better part of it was
yet wanting. Net, till that were done
he could not be at peace within him-
self; for vows are debts; and debts
till they be paid .are a burden to an
honest mind, and do much disease it
[ Ibid. }.


HOMILETICS.
SatvaTion or THE Lorp.—Verse 9.
By salvation here we do not understand Jonah’s deliverance from death merety.


CHAP. II.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. 371


Dr Gill says there is something so special in the original, the word having one
more letter than it usually has when it only refers to temporal deliverance, that
we must understand it here as relating to the great work of the soul which en-
dureth for ever. That salvation I shall try to show as best I can.

_I. Expound the doctrine that salvation is of Jehovah. To begin at the be-
ginning, the plan of salvation is entirely of God. And as in planning, so it was
of the Lord in execution. Salvation, in the application of it, is from God. As to
the sustaining of the work in a man’s heart, salvation is of the Lord. II. God
has hedged this doctrine about to prevent mistake. Some say, salvation in
some cases is the result of natural temperament. Others, that the minister converts
them. God takes care that salvation is not of man, for usually he blesses those who
seem most unlikely to be useful. ILI. What is, what should be, the influence
of this doctrine upon men? First, with sinners this doctrine is a great battering-
ram against their pride. What influence upon the saint? Why, it is the key-
stone of all Divinity. I will defy you to be heterodox if you believe it ; proud, if
you feel it, you cannot be. You will not be distrustful. You may always be
joyful if you keep it in mind. This may, by grace, nerve you to work for God.
Go and preach the gospel everywhere, recollecting that God is more than a mateh
for man’s sin ; and will ye be master over the earth t [Spurgeon].


Tae Great Detiveranon.— Verses 9, 10.


These words were the result of recent experience, penned in grateful feeling, and
adapted to all ages.

I. The inestimable blessing. ‘ Salvation.” 1. Its magnitude. In the inten-
sive form it denotes a mighty salvation. The force of the Hebrew may include
temporal and eternal salvation. Jonah’s deliverance was unknown in history,
unparalleled in God’s dealings with men. God’s power is drawn out by the
emergencies of his people, often reserved for great occasions, and unlimited in its
nature. ‘So great a salvation” is offered in Christ, that men should receive it and
glorify him. 2. Its fulness. It was a complete salvation. Jonah was not left in
the deep, nor sent to the surface toswim to land. The fish vomited out and cast him
on dry land. He was left in no danger, but enjoyed a perfect rescue. “ His work
is honourable and glorious.” II. The Divine source from which it comes. “ Sal-
vation is of the Lord.” It is wholly his; and not part his, and part ours. It is
specially and peculiarly his. It belongs to him, and no other. Hence understand
the words, 1. Affirmatively. “To Jehovah beascribed salvation.” “Thine is the king-
dom, the power, and the glory, for ever.” 2. Negatively. There is salvation from no
other source. “Beside me there is no Saviour.” III. The wonderful method of
its accomplishment. God “spake unto the fish.” Some deny an active will and
a personal presence in nature. They recognize nothing but matter and force. All
creatures are controlled by law and instinct, say they. But Creation is subject to
God’s will. A fish was prepared for Jonah, and at the bidding of Jehovah it dis-
gorged him. Hence, noticeo—l. The power of God over all creatures. The beasts
of the field, and the fish of the sea; “all cattle, creeping things, and flying fowl,”
are governed by him. 2. The ease with which God governs all creatures. He
has only to speak—the world is created, the storm is stilled, and the dead are
raised. In heaven above, and in the remotest bounds of space, the highest arch-
angel and the smallest atom, hearken and obey the voice of God. 3. The times
in which God accomplishes his purpose in reference to all creatures. The time of
the prophet’s deliverance was come, and the sea-monster in whose belly he had
traversed the deep, could not retain him. With unerring precision it bore him
through the trackless ocean to the destined shore. Events are subservient to God,
and at his pleasure carry believers to appointed duty, needful trial, and purchased
rest. However dark your position or agitated your course, let faith realize, and


372


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


{cHaP. I,





prayer ask for, the overruling will of God, and all will be well. ‘“ My times are in


thy hand.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 9. Salvation of God. 1. The
fecling of assurance. 2. The expression
of gratitude. 3. The ground of en-
couragement to others, ‘Turn the prison
of the world into the temple of God
and it will not be able to detain thee
[ Lange].

Ver. 10. That time might not efface
his impressions, he would hasten to
record, under the teaching of the Holy
Spirit, for the instruction of his own
countrymen and the Israel of God in
all ages, the trials, mercies, and ex-
perience of the last few eventful days.
The record has reached us, and besides
other instruction, may remind us—First,
That the troubles of believers have an
appointed end, and a joyful one: the
rod of their correction is not for ever
(Ps. Ixxvii. 7—11: Is. xlix. 14, 15).


Let them, then, believe, submit, and
wait. Secondly, That trust in God is
that grace which it is their privilege
and duty to exercise under all circum-
stances, even under manifest chastise-
ments for admitted sins. The issue of
such trust shall be good, truly and
thoroughly good, and often, beyond all
expectation, blessed and joyful. Thirdly,
That Christians should not sorrow over
departed Christians, as they who are
without hope. This extraordinary cir-
cumstance in Jonah’s history was typical
of the far more wonderful and glorious
event of the resurrection of Christ, and
those who sleep with him. The grave
shall disgorge her temporary prey, and
then shall be brought to pass the say-
ing, Death is swallowed up of victory
[Stbthorp].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER II.


Vers. 1—4. Affliction. Sorrow
sanctifies the soul that has passed through
it, renders it supple and sweet, prompt
with gentle sympathy. Larger  self-
knowledge has been acquired. One can
date from such seasons deeper emotions,
broader lines of thought, a stronger
character, and enlarged experience. As
Rodgers sings—

“The good are better made by ill,
As odours crushed are sweeter still.”

Vers. 5, 6. Here his cry might be
as dolorous as that of David in Ps.
lxix. Some of the tried children of
God have found cause to make it theirs ;
and so would all, if he gave the reins
to their soul’s enemies or dealt with
them as their iniquities deserve. Let us
look at the sufferings of Abraham,
Joseph, Job, David, Jeremiah, Paul,
and others of God’s ancient saints, and
adore his mercy toward us. But let us
look from them at the Saviour, and at
the deep and stormy waters he passed
through [Sibthorp].

“Night brings out stars, as sorrow teaches
truth.”


Ver. 7. Remembered. As God doth
plant and actuate grace in the soul, so
he is pleased to come in with seasonable
supplies and reinforcements to the weak
and decayed graces of his people. Thus
he feeds the believer's lamp with fresh
oil ; gives in more faith, more love, more
hope, and more desires ; and hereby he
gives power to the faint, and strengthens
the things which remain and are ready
to die [John Willison].

This truth the poet sings—

“That a sorrow’s crown of sorrow is remember-
ing happier things”’ [ Tennyson].

Ver. 8. Vanity. As well try to
fill the yawning chasm with a few
grains of sand as satisfy the gulf of the
soul’s desires with the pleasure of an
empty world [Macduff].

Ver. 9. Vowed. The Archbishop of
Cologne, being asked by the Emperor
Sigismund how to attain true happi-
ness, replied, ‘“‘ Perform when thou art
well what thou promised when thou wast
sick.”

Ver. 10. Providence. We are not
able to account for the method of Divine


CHAP. III.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. 373





providence in many instances. We talk human life is one grand providence and

of special and general providence; but purpose.

it would be better if we could see that “ Each man’s life is all men’s lessons.”
[Lord Lytton. }





CHAPTER IT.


OrrrioaL N oie 2. Arise] J. might not imagine that God would send him again. But he appears
to have some settled home, and an interval seems te have elapsed before the second commission, to
give time for the report to spread. Preach] Lit. proclaim. 8. Went] I am made wiser by correc-
tion. Great city] Lit. great to God. Some great through God, §.¢, through his favour ; others
great before God. “It was most natural to refer the size of a city, of which the Hebrews could
form no adequate conception, to the Divine estimation. I have accordingly rendered the words
literally, as our preposition éo is often used to note opinion, or estimate” [Henderson]. The Hebrews
expressed superlative ideas by using the name of God, ¢. g. “ mountains of God,’’ “cedars of God,”
&c. Three days] in circumference, or the length of Jonah’s journey through it. Expositors differ.
4. A day’s journey] commenced, when he found opportunity to preach. No time to loiter, nor
gratify curiosity. Cried] asa herald. Forty days] The measure of delays in God’s visitations, A
number of frequent use in Scripture. Overth.] Lit. overturned (evertere), turning upside down, total
destruction, as Sodom (Gen, xix. 25: Is.i. 7). 5. Believed] Lit. in God, in his word; trusted in
him. Sackcloth] The attire of deep mourning, irritating to the body. Fasting and sackcloth cus-
tomary in humiliation (1 Kings xxi, 27: Joel i, 13), Penitence universal. 6. Word] The
matter; report of Jonah’s preaching, and its effects in the city. Nineveh never so moved and
shaken. Laid aside] The king approved the proclaimed fast, disdained not to follow the example
of the people, but humbled himself with them in common peril. Some think that Sardanapalus
was the king, whose motto was— Hat, drink, play: after death there ts no pleasure.”’ 7. Nobles} The
government of Nineveh was not an absolute monarchy. The nobles probably originated the decree,
and the king confirmed it (cf. Dan. vi.). Beast] ‘It was no arbitrary, nor wanton, nor careless
act of the king of Nineveh to make the dumb animals share in the common fast. It proceeded pro-
bably from an indistinct consciousness that God cared for them also and that they were not guilty”
[Hizaz]. 8.] Two remedies suggested. Cry] to God in prayer. Turn] Reform; for prayer, without
amendment of life, is a mockery (Ps. lvi. 18: Is. lviii. 6). Violence] Nineveh’s chief sin (Nah,
iii. 1). The Assyrian records are nothing but a register of military campaigns, spoliations, and
cruelties [Layard]. ‘Nineveh and Babylon.” 9, Tell] (cf. Joel ii. 14): to act on a mere possi-
bility of mercy, an instance of strong faith in idolaters. We have better hope of pers (Job
xxxili. 27; Jer, xxxi. 18). 10.] God saw and removed judgment threatened; but there was no
change in him (Num. xxiii, 19: Jas. i, 17). This repentance showed a susceptibility in the
Ninevites for the word of God, and a willingness to forsake ungodly ways. ‘They reprove and con-
demn many more highly privileged (Luke xi. 82).


HOMILETICS.


JonaH a Sian To THE Ninevites.—Chap. II. 1, and Luke xi. 30.


Jonah would obey the second commission with renewed strength and Divine
authority. He would appear in Nineveh as a sign, an outward proof of a Divine
purpose in his life and work (cf. Luke xi. 30). ;

I. A sign of God’s mercy towards men. As in a mirror, we see much of God
and men, of sin and grace, in the history of Jonah. God proved that he was
reconciled. 1. In forgiving sin. 2. In restoring a backslider. 3. In reinstating
a runaway prophet. If we abuse the confidence of our fellow-creatures, they
eeldom forgive and employ us again. But God freely forgives, restores to favour
after rebellion, and grants commission to unworthy servants. ‘‘I have blotted out
as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins; return unto me, for I
have redeemed thee.” II. A sign of God’s inflexible justice towards men. God's
servant must be punished and corrected. The sincerity of his penitence, and the
honour of his God, must be vindicated. Nineveh must be threatened, and her sin


374 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JONAH. [cHaP. IT.


forsaken. Pardon gives no licence to disobedience. Neither the righteous nor
the wicked can sin with impunity. God will be glorified in the life of his people,
and the law magnified in the destiny of nations. III. A sign of God’s un-
changeable purpose towards men. God’s plans are made in wisdom, and must
be accomplished. He does not alter them to gratify the whims and caprice of
man. “He is of one mind, and who can turn him?” Nineveh must be warned,
and Jonah must go. All pleas and excuses are in vain. God gives to every one
his work, and expects him to do it. If he runs away he must be fetched back.
Treachery and cowardice God has determined to scourge. “He that knoweth his
Master’s will, and doeth it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.”


Tue Seconp Catu.—Verses 1, 2.


If Jonah doubted whether after sin like his he would ever be restored to
favour and service again, he had not long to wait for an answer ; for “The word of
the Lord came unto Jonah the second time.” This second call was—

I. Divinely given. The prophet might be ready, but he had need to be certain
that God required him to go. If we are willing, we require instruction in duty.
The spring of action is not mere religious feeling, but apprehension of God’s word.
Emotion will not ensure consistent life, without faith in Divine truth. God had
to speak again. ‘“‘The first verse,” says Luther, “is therefore written that we may
bear in mind that nothing is to be undertaken without God’s word and command.
For the first command of God having been violated by disobedience, had not God
renewed it, Jonah would not have known whether he should do it or not.” II.
Urgent to immediate service. ‘Arise, go,” are terms of incitement, and indi-
eate that he was not girded for work, but resting in contentment and ease. 1. The
duty was imperative. The more quickly we perform, the better for our souls.
Delays are signs of distrust, and impeachment of Divine wisdom. We must prove
the sincerity of our profession by prompt obedience. “Be ready to every good
work.” 2. The communication was suspended. The exact message seems not to
be given at first. Immediate departure to Nineveh was required, and further
revelations were delayed. God thus cultivates the dependence and tries the faith
of his servants. His own authority in prescribing duty must be sufficient. His
simple word is entitled to respect and compliance. Present duty should be enough
for us. God will give enlarged views, greater strength, and more consolation, if
we practise what we already know. “If any man will do the will of God, he
shall know,” &c. III. Specific in directions. 1. The destination was still the
sume. “To Nineveh, that great city.” The trial is not abated, the dangers are
not hidden. He is again reminded that it was a great, proud, and heathen city, to
which he was sent. A city whose inhabitants were pre-eminently wicked and
violent, and whom he was to threaten with speedy and complete ruin. But God
had given Jonah proofs of his love, and Jonah should give not less evidence of his
obedience. 2. The message would be given him. “The denunciation that I shall
speak to thee.” He was not to concern himself about his message and its results.
That would be given to him when he was ready for it. He is to add nothing, nor
diminish nothing. The Christian minister is not left to his own discretion, nor
must he study to gratify the taste of the people. He must preach the Word—the
message from God to him—earnestly and faithfully. If he tries to explain away
or soften down what is severe to the ungodly, “ he takes upon himself a double
responsibility—responsibility for the salvation of the souls entrusted to him, and
responsibility for his own disobedience.” Many may speak to us smooth things,
but we must not please men, for how can we then be servants of God? Jonah
must be faithful: (1) In the matter of his preaching. The unwelcome message
must be delivered. Nineveh was to be denounced for sin. (2) In the manner of
his preaching. He was to “cry.” Cry in compassion for perishing men, as a
proof of his own sincerity, to rouse a careless and sinful people. “ Proclaim the


CHAP. OI.)





preaching that I shall bid thee.”
and failure had disgraced his conduct.


man we must receive it ourselves.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.





(3) A second call summoned him.


376





Ingratitude


\ ¢ But God had chastised and forgiven him.
His experience was a preparation for service.


Before we can proclaim mercy to


Profound repentance and perfect restoration to


Divine favour will qualify us for a proper discharge of duty. Repeated acts of


grace to us are a ground of hope for others.
often forerunners of great trust and high distinction.
of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit.


Severe trials and deep sorrow are
“ Restore unto me the joy
Then will I teach trans-


gressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. God does not utterly reject
him who has failed once; but he rather
gives him a new opportunity of correct-
ing former faults [ Lange}.

The most prominent lesson in this
verse is that God gives to men successive
opportunities for the accomplishment of
their life-work. We are not crushed
by the weight of our first sin or failure.
If so, few would have anything like
hope for the future. Life would be a
dreary foreboding, lest any message
committed to our care should be neg-
lected, and entail final condemnation.
The world would be full of wretched
mortals, upon whom would rest the
woe of unfulfilled mission | £zell].

Ver. 2. Jonah would resume his
work with a new obedience. 1. Asa
sinful man, whose sin had been emi-
nently forgiven. He would accept his
mission in a spirit of gratitude, rever-
ence, and submission. 2. As a prayer-
ful man, whose prayer had been emi-
nently answered. Prayer answered was
(a) a testimony to him of his sincerity


and integrity ; (>) It would inspire him
with the assurance that he was not
returning alone—that he had One who
would carry him through all danger,
and give him success in his work. 3.
As an afflicted man, whose affliction
had been eminently blessed. Like the
Psalmist, before he was afflicted, he went
astray, but was chastened and subdued.
He knew the “ goodness and severity of
God,” and was fitted to teach them to
others [H. Martin].

The preaching. Nothing should be
more sacred to the preacher of God’s
word than truth, and simplicity, and
inviolable sanctity in delivering it
[Pusey]. The grand doctrines of the
New Testament are eternally fixed. We
must preach them all, faithfully and
fully ; should we alter, add, or diminish,
we do not preach unto the people the
preaching which the Lord bids us. If,
instead of this, we preach another
gospel, we shall bring down upon us a
curse and not a blessing [Jones].


HOMILETICS.


JonaH’s OBEDIENCE.— Verses 3, 4.


God’s chastisement brings forth fruit, and secures dutiful obedience.


Weak


parents correct their children, and leave them to please themselves afterwards.


The results of discipline are lost.
obedience.

I. Jonah’s obedience was prompt.
arose.”


less, turbulent spirit.


He consulted not his own interests as before.
of God, and the obligation of his vows, he promptly obeys.
He is hearty and enthusiastic.


Chastisement is an evil unless it produces


“ Happy is the man whom God correcteth.”
The command was “arise,” and ‘“ Jonah


Impressed with the mercies
He goes in no rest
We are commonly re-


luctant, especially when danger threatens. We are too formal and time-serving.


True, ready obedience to God is liberty and blessedness.
delayed not to keep thy commandments.” Jone
He neither delayed nor stopped short of his destination.


“T made haste, and
II. Jonah’s obedience was complete.
‘“ He went to Nineveh,”


When he got there he lingered not at the gates, nor gratified curiosity by survey:


ane,


376 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. {cHaP. IIL


ing the lofty towers, the gorgeous temples, and the princely palaces. Neither did
he modify his message, nor falter in its delivery. Before the mansion of the rich,
and the doors of the poor, in the marts, and in the streets, he gave the alarm
(Prov. i. 20). Like Caleb, we must follow the Lord fully (Num. xiv. 24), or wholly.
This requires (a) decision of character, (0) unreserved obedience, (c) undaunted
fortitude, (d) unwearied perseverance. “ My foot hath held his steps, his ways
have I kept and not declined.” III. Jonah’s obedience was divinely directed.
“ According to the word of the Lord.” Fear, self-will, and prejudice had in-
fluenced him before ; now God’s law is supreme in his heart and life. Religion is
the same now ; for no man can guide himself, nor be a law to another. We require
a rule, (a) Divine in its sanctions, (b) practicable in its requirements, (c) plain in
its directions, and (d) beneficial in its results. God’s “commands are not
grievous.” but easy and delightful ; ‘‘in keeping them there is a great reward.”


‘* His adorable will let us gladly fulfil,


And our talents improve,
By the patience of hope, and the labour of love.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 3. According, &e. Did you
ever pass through a painful crisis, a
sore probation of patience, faith, or
constancy, keeping in view all the while
that your purpose and procedure, your
temper and policy, should be “ accord-
ing to the word of the Lord”? And
did you fail? No; and you never will
fail while the desire of your heart, and
the doing of your hand, are ruled and
ordered thus. This is the essence of
Christianity —the essence of faith
[ Martin].

Great city. Great cities have mani-
fested the pride of man, in their erection,
enlargement, strength, and splendour;
the corruption of human nature, in the
enormous mass of sin which they foster,
having often proved moral pests ;
vortexes swallowing up the wealth of a
nation, and vomiting out the crimes of
mankind; and the power, justice, and
holiness of God, in their total annihila-
tion (Nah. iii. 8: Is. xiii. 19: Ezek.


xxvii. 32—36) [Sibthorp]. Nineveh,
the city of God. God cares also for
the heathen (2 Kings v. 1: Jer. xxv.
9) [Luther].

Ver. 4. Speak promptly, and delay
not. In God’s kingdom every moment
is precious. The time when he puts
his word in thy mouth is the right
time ; not that which thou fanciest for
thyself [Lange].

1. God is able to reach and overthrow
the greatest persons or places when he
has a controversy against them. 2. The
Lord often sees it fit, in great wisdom,
to conceal any thoughts of love to a
people, and holds out only threatenings
and severity to induce them more
seriously to repent [ Hutcheson].

If God had meant unconditionally to
overthrow them, he would have over-
thrown them without notice. Yet,
always denotes some longsuffering of
God” [Pusey].


HOMILETICS.
h JONAH’s PreacHING.— Verses 4, 5.


We linger not on the stir and excitement which the preaching of Jonah would
create. Business would be suspended, and crowds would gather round him. The
brief and alarming cry would toll forth, yet forty days and Nineveh shall be ovar-
thrown. Here we have a description of Jonah’s ministry.

I. It was divinely suggested in its matter. ‘The preaching that I bid thee.”
He carried no philosophy or scientific theories, no inventions of his own; but
uttered the denunciation given him. The minister may not be specially guided


CHAP. IIT] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. 877





like the prophet and the apostles, but a revelation is given from God. “If any man
speak, let him speak as the oracles of God.” The mind of God is discovered in
the Scriptures. Here “God speaks much, and man little,” says Chrysostom. We
must preach not morality, but the gospel. II. It was intensely earnest in its
spirit. Jonah was no statue in the streets, but a living man. “The spirit and
manner of a minister often affect more than the matter,” says Cecil. ‘To feel is
the readiest way to the hearts of others.” ‘ All men are orators when they feel ;
the language of the heart has an unction and an energy which no eloquence or
sublimity can reach,” says Bishop Hopkins. The words of Channing are weighty—
“‘ Karnestness should characterize the ministry; and by this I mean, not a louder
voice or a more vehement gesture ; I mean no tricks of oratory; but a solemn con-
viction that religion is a great concern, and a solemn purpose that its claims shall
be felt by others. The life and sensibility which we would spread should be
strong in our own breasts. This is the only genuine, unfailing spring of an earn-
est ministry.” There must be no weakness of heart, no feebleness of effort. “ Cry
against it.” III. It was wisely practical in its aim. Jonah intended and
earnestly desired to produce a reformation of life. If the preacher is to be a man
of power he must arrange his thoughts, point his language, and embue his spirit
with unction. He must get at the consciences of men. An ancient father wept at
the applause given to his sermons, felt that his words had not gone deep enough,
and exclaimed, “ Would to God they had rather gone away silent and thoughtful.”
Nathan said to David, “ Thou art the man.” The truth must be driven home, the
heart searched, and men roused to repentance. The word must strike and stick.
One remarks that “every action is done by the touch.” In preaching, this doctrine
is true. Massillon’s hearers carried away the arrows fastened in their consciences,
thought themselves to be singled out, and never regarded others. Peter’s audience
‘were pricked to the heart” by his earnest practical appeal. IV. It was wonder-
fully successful in its results. Nineveh penitent is not only a splendid specimen
of the power of the Divine word, but a wonderful achievement of an earnest man
in proclaiming it. What Demosthenes did in the Athenian Senate, what
Augustine, Chrysostom, and Luther achieved in days of old, may be done yet by
the right men. The revivals of Pentecost, of Whitfield and Wesley, are not to be
regarded as isolated facts beyond accomplishment now. The moral need is the
same, and the word of God can satisfy it. Multitudes remain untouched by the
most successful preacher. In our largest cities are people living in idleness and
vice. The preacher must go forth to warn and urge men to repentance, lest while
they “cry peace and safety, sudden destruction come upon them.”


“The great proclaimer, with a voice
More awful than the sound of trumpet, ery’d
Repentance, and heaven’s kingdom nigh at hand
To all baptized” [Milton].


Nineven Warnep anp Ninsvend Rerormep.— Verses 4—8.


Jonah’s message was like a thunderbolt in the guilty city. It was a short,
most impressive, and successful sermon. It produced results which the preaching
of Noah for 120 years did not produce, and which have never been equalled since.

I. Nineveh warned. Jonah had no long address to give, nor many persuasions
to offer. He had ouly to repeat one terrible denunciation. “ Yet forty days, and
Nineveh overthrown.” 1. The judgment was great. ‘“Overthrown.” Overthrown
by neighbouring nations whom they had made enemies by oppression? by con-
spiracy, revolt, and massacre within? by floods, fire, or brimstone from heaven 4 by
earthquake shivering its defences, overturning its proud palaces, and burying
everything in ruins? None can tell. God has evils to let loose, arrows in his quiver,
which men know nothing of. A guilty conscience forebodes the worst of judg-


378 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY.: JONAH. {cHaP. I)





—


ments. No plan can defend, and no city escape, when he determines to punish.
2. The judgment was imminent. Only “forty days.” It may begin before they are
over, but destruction will be complete at the end of them. It is a fact that great
cities and kingdoms have been unexpectedly and suddenly overthrown. Sodom
and Gomorrah, Nineveh and Babylon, are solemn warnings in history. Shortness
of time between threatening and execution should give weight to the message, and
motives to repentance. 3. The judgment was morally necessary. Nineveh was
reaping what she had sown. This death suspended over the heads of nearly a
million people was not a physical nor political necessity. It was God’s righteous
act and vindication of moral law. ‘The violence” of Nineveh demanded a moral
check, a Divine judgment. ‘Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.”
“ Justice, like lightning, ever should appear
To few men’s ruin, but to all men’s fear” [Swenam].


II. Nineveh reformed. Sometimes searching appeals, solemn warnings, and
striking events, leave no influence behind them. But, in Nineveh, a revolution
happened without bloodshed and strife, memorable in its history. 1. I¢ was re-
pentance springing from a right principle. They “believed God.” Believed in his
existence and government over the universe ; believed in his purpose and power
to carry it out. They believed in his justice and mercy towards men. They
believed Jonah’s word to be a message from God to them. The approaching
judgment was real, and though no promise of mercy was expressed, yet they
looked to God in faith. If men would believe in God, social corruption would be
checked ; selfishness and ambition would cease to rule; hatred, violence, and
murder would be cured. 2. J¢ was repentance encouraged by the royal court.
Alarm and sorrow may fill the city, and the king and courtiers be exempt. But
mighty potentates cannot always be secure. In the greatest despotism, a popular
movement cannot be altogether disregarded. The word must come to the king.
Truth will besiege the palace-gates, and the monarch who defies it will lose his
kingdom and crown. This king was the most powerful and despotic of the day.
But he is subdued by a greater power than his own. He joins the people’in con-
fession and prayer, sets an example in reformation, and robes himself in “the
king-becoming graces.” 3. It was repentance prevalent in all ranks. “From the
greatest of them even to the least ;” “both man and beast” were influenced by the
messenger. Kings and common people, serfs and priests, were moved, and bowed
in humiliation before their offended God. The city was one in sin, and one in
sorrow. Individual opinion and acts must be restrained for the common good.
The earnest cries of the people, and the lowing of the hungry cattle, adds
solemnity to the scene (Esther iv. 1—4; 2 Chron. xx. 13), “Say unto the king
and to the queen, Humble yourselves, sit down: for your principalities shall come
down, even to the crown of your glory.” 4. It was repentance marked by signs of
sincerity. Faith will produce works, true penitence will evidence itself in amend-
ment of life. (1) It was accompanied by fasting. Man and beast were to abstain
from food. The irrational creatures which share the effects of sin, and minister to
the wants of man, were to excite him to mourning, and add to the general depres-
sion. Nineveh was to learn, as we should, not to sin by ill-treatment of them, nor
to forget that in their present condition we find a memorial of guilt, and a reason
for humiliation, This fast (a) was universal, (b) and publicly proclaimed. If
fasts are not specially enjoined by God, yet cities and nations may find it helpful
to set apart days of fasting and prayer. (2) J¢ was aceompanied by putting on
sackcloth and ashes. All classes united in religious duties, confessed guilt, laid
aside their ornaments, and prayed to God for deliverance. There was a visible ex-
pression of sorrow in the rough, dark, coarse garb which reproves mourning
apparel fashionable in cut, elaborate in ornament, and unsuitable in colour. (3) I¢
was accompanied by outward reformation. They did not think of mocking God
by merely abstaining from food, and changing their dress. Outward forms convict


CHAP. IIT. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH 379


of hypocrisy if not followed by change of heart and conduct. “Let them turn
every one from his evil way,” &c. Every one had an evil way, and the proclama-
tion was a general acknowledgment of it. The king and the court specify one
notorious sin. “ The violence that is in their hand” (cf. Nah. ii. 11, 12; iii. 19).
Special iniquity, “ besetting sins,” must be given up. All are exhorted to individual
repentance and amendment of life. ‘Cease to do evil, and learn to do well.” (4) It
was accompanied by earnest prayer. (a) They were to cry. Feeling, not form, was
required. (b) To cry vehemently with all their strength and soul. (c) To God, not
to idols, which they worshipped ; to the true God who alone can help them. Sloth
and indifference are unbecoming in fasting and prayer. Some professed Christians
depend upon punctual attendance, formal ceremonies, and ecstatic feelings. ‘“ Rend
your hearts, and not your garments.” Religious duties should be serious and earn-
est, sincere, and acceptable.


Nineven’s RepentTanog: [ts Onicin anpD Naturs.— Verses 5—9.


The repentance of Nineveh is one of the most singular events in history. A
great and proud city suddenly smitten into the most profound humiliation, from
the greatest of its inhabitants to the least—from the king on the throne to the
meanest citizen,—is a spectacle to which history affords no parallel. Cities,
countries, and communities have oftentimes, with not a little unanimity, given
themselves to humiliation and fasting. But there is no event on record that can
at all be compared with the fast and repentance of Nineveh. The repentance of
Nineveh may be considered—irst, in its essentials; and secondly, in its circum-
stantials. We confine our attention to the essentials. Here the origin and nature
of this repentance calls for consideration.

I. The origin of Nineveh’s repentance. 1. First, This repentance was prompted
by faith. They believed Jonah to be a messenger from God ; and they believed his
message. The hand of God is seen in this, and his power and gracious influence
on their hearts. Observe how their faith wrought in a manner suitable to the
position in which they were placed. ‘“ They proclaimed a fast.” Generally, faith
worketh according to the nature of the thing believed. If that which is believed
be something dreadful and alarming, it worketh by fear ; and if any possibility of
escape seem left, it prompts to the embracing of whatever means may realize it.
This element of fear was the leading element in the repentance of Nineveh.
“Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger,
that we perish not?” 2. Secondly, an element of hope mingled to bestir them to
exertion. Absence of hope excludes possibility of repentance. Had they viewed
their doom as inevitable they would have been paralysed, infuriated, or still more
estranged from God. Some faint hope remained. “ Who can tell if God will
turn?” &. The Ninevites might gather hope,—(1) From the general considera-'
tion that all threatenings are warnings ; uttered, in order, if possible, not to be
executed. (2) From the history of Jonah himself. They knew of his original
commission, disobedience, pursuit, punishment, and forgiveness. He was a sign to
them. They saw in his deliverance hope of forgiveness through penitence and
prayer. II. The nature of their repentance. The city underwent a sudden and
striking reformation. Their haughtiness and pride were abased ; their contempt of
God abandoned ; their luxury, cruelty, violence, and unrighteousness were given
up. And God looked on with approbation. Such is the fast that the Lord calls
for; not a formal, ceremonious, outward solemnity; but a spiritual and moral re-
formation, outwardly evidenced and certified by new obedience. This affords a .
proof of God’s unspeakable goodness, and an encouragement to sinners to repent
and turn to God [Martin].


580





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH,


[CHAP. EXT.





HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 6. The humbled court. The


rich and the great are not often penitent,


before God. Those who enjoy the good
things of this life feel no need of re-
ligion. Not many mighty, not many
noble, are called (1 Cor. i. 26). It is
said that the Countess of Huntingdon
thanked God for the letter “m” in this
text. I. A court influenced by the
preaching of the Word. The Word has
strange effects in places, and upon men,
that are most unlikely. Where we look
for little, God can create much. The
successor of a proud race of tyrants feels
the truth proclaimed by a forlorn man,
trembles in spite of walls and guards, in
the presence of courtiers and nobles (Ps.
Ixxvi. 12: Jer. xiii, 18). II. A court
setting the example in self-reformation.
In all kinds of governments the court
has a mighty influence. Its fashions
and etiquette prevail, its laws and re-
ligion are the standard of the people.
Here the court was in harmony with the
spirit of the people. Rank, station, and
wealth were nothing to the safety of the
city. The authority of God was supreme
in the palace; and in the fast and the
prayers the king and princes took the
lead in its acknowledgment. Rank is
truly kingly when ennobled by Divine
grace.

This great king could not but know
himself to be a great sinner; and that
his sins had done much hurt :—l. By
imputation: for the people oft pray for
their rulers’ follies, as in David’s days
(2 Sam. xxiv.). 2. By imitation: for
magnates are magnets, they draw many
by their example; and as bad humours
fiow from the head to the body, so do
bad rulers corrupt the rest [Trapp].

Ver. 8. Man in his luxury and pride
would have everything reflect his
glory, and minister to pomp. Self-


humiliation would have everything re-
flect its lowliness. Sorrow would have
everything answer to its sorrow. Men
think it strange that the horses at
Nineveh were covered with sackcloth,
and forget how, at the funerals of the
rich, black horses are chosen, and are
clothed with black velvet [Pusey].

The mighty cry. The Easterns are
given to expressions of feeling in anger,
sorrow, or devotion. But this cry de-
notes—1. Intense earnestness : not merely
asking or seeking, butacry. An agony,
as one in deep distress, or intently en-
gaged in solemn pursuit (Gen. xxxii. 24
—26). 2. Deep fervour. It was not
only acry, but a mighty cry. There was
deep contrition for sin, and strong desire
for pardon. Faintheartedness and feeble
prayers gain no blessing. The effectual
fervent prayer availsmuch. The prayer
that stirs and labours for its ends (Jas.
v. 16: Heb.v. 7). 3. Great confidence.
They believed that God could and would
help them. They turn away from idols,
and look to the God of mercy. 4. Great
perseverance. Not once, but continually,
did they cry, and felt the necessity of
Divine protection day by day. We
must always come to God humbly,
fervently, and incessantly. ‘O Lord, to


Thee will I cry.”
Nineveh’s repentance. Its nation-
ality. Its expressions. Its efficacy


[ Martin].

The repentance of the Ninevites a
model of a genuine national repentance.
1. It hears God’s proclamation, and asks
not why? (vers. 1—4). 2. It springs
from faith, and is accompanied by faith
(vers. 5—9). 3. It bows itself under
the curse of the common guilt, and not
a single person asks, “ How much have
I deserved?” (ver. 6). 4. It is united
with the purpose of amendment [Lange].


HOMILETICS.


WHo Gan TELL*—Verse 9.


This was the forlorn hope of Nineveh.


I shall notice three things.


I. The miserable plight in which the men of Nineveh found themselves
They were like those in the days of Noah; ate and drank, builded and planted


OHAP. III } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. 381
a ee


They fell into abominable sins, and their vices probably rivalled those of Sodom.
But their boasting was cut off, and the sound of their mirth ceased. They
discovered their great sin. Added to this, they had information as fo the shortness
of their days. ‘Forty days.” The shortness of time should rouse us from
slumber. The third thing was the terrible character of the judgment. II. The
scanty reasons they had for their hope. Notice in Jonah’s message, there was
no proclamation of mercy. It was one short sentence of doom. Another thing
would cut off their hope—they knew nothing of God except, it may be, some
dreadful legends they had heard of his terrible acts. They lacked another
encouragement which you and [I have. They had never heard of the Cross.
Jonah’s preaching was very powerful, but there was no Christ in it. III. We
have stronger reasons to compel us to pray, and more comfortable argu-
ments to urge us to trust. Refer to the Scriptures. Remember David,
Manasseh, and Saul of Tarsus. Your only hope lies in the mercy of God,
Cling to it tenaciously. Remember, for your encouragement, God delights to
save. Men object not to an expensive thing if it bring them honour; but if
honour goes with a thing they are ready enough to do it. If God saves you, it
will honour him. In prayer you ask for that which glorifies God and benefits
yourself. Come, humble sinner, and cry to Christ, and he will have mercy upon
thee [Spurgeon].


Niveveu’s Horse anp Nineven’s Reprizve.— Verses 9—10.


Hope is the gift of God, and a powerful principle in the human mind. It is tke
ground of support in trouble, and the mainspring of all effort. Fill the earth with
hope, you fill it with light, life, and exertion. Where hope dies a man is buried
in gloom; where it lives he looks forward, and strives for better things. ‘I do
hope good days,” says Shakespeare.

I. Nineveh’s hope. ‘“ Who can tell?” are words which express some faint nope.
But hope rests on some foundation, If not, it is rather presumption, and will
disappoint. What were the grounds of Nineveh’s hope? 1. The light of nature
would prompt them to hope. It is something not to despair. Nil desperandum
we cry. There is hope in a peradventure. But there are human feelings from
which to judge of the feelings of God towards us. The tender parent is reluctant
to punish the penitent child. We argue from the knowledge of God within us
that he may be merciful.


“The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope.” (Shakespeare. ]


“ Hope springs eternal in the human breast.” [Pope.]


2. Jonah’s message might encourage hope. Why forty days? If God had been
determined to destroy us, would he have given any time, any respite at all?
There must be some secret thoughts of mercy, though not revealed to us. If
God’s messenger speaks of only judgment, God’s conduct indicates forbearance.
Let us indulge hope, improve our time, and seek deliverance by fasting and prayer.
“Who can tell?” 3. Jonah’s history would encourage hope. Here is a man
whom they knew to have been disobedient, punished and saved. If God had
mercy upon him, why not upon us? The forgiveness of some is a ground of hope
to others. Paul was a pattern of God’s mercy to men. Jonah was a sign, an
outward symbol of hope, to Nineveh. At any rate, if they must perish, it could
be no worse to perish in repentance than in wickedness. Who knows? was the
anxious question. God only knew. If they acted thus in the darkness of heathen
idolatry, what will become of many living in the light of gospel day? You have
better hope than Nineveh. “If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he
hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
vight, he shall surely live, he eball not die.” II. Nineveh’s reprieve. The


382 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. {[CHar ity.





night begins to wear away, and the day to dawn on thecity. They repent, and God
repents of the evil which he had threatened. Nineveh guilty was destroyed by
the penitence of its inhabitants, and Nineveh reformed was preserved by the
mercy of God. “God repented of the evil,” &c. This is not the place for the
discussion of different questions concerning the character and the government of
God. There is no change in his purpose, and no contradiction in his word. We
are repeatedly assured that if we turn to him, he will be gracious to us (Job |
xxxiii. 27: Jer. xxxi. 18: Ezek. xviii. 27). Luther says: “I stick to this rule,
to avoid such questions as entangle us with the throne of the Divine majesty as
much as I can. It is much better and safer for me to stay down by the cradle of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who has become man, than to puzzle one’s self with the
Deity.” 1. God observed the conduct of the Ninevites. “God saw their works.”
He discerned their feelings, and noticed theiracting. Their repentance, prayer, and
fasting were approved by him. Though the amendment might be temporary and
external with many, yet this showed some faith in his word, fear of his name, and
desire for his mercy. He honoured, accepted, and rewarded it. There is no im-
posing upon God. He knows the heart, and observes the life. The finest pro-
fession without practice provokes him to anger; but the penitent suppliant moves
him to mercy. ‘Return unto me, and [ will return to you.” 2. God granted a
reprieve to the Ninevites. The whole city was preserved, and not one was put to
death. “It was not his repentance altering their predicted fate, but their repent-
ance accomplishing his compassionate purpose.” For God to destroy a penitent,
reformed people, would have been apparently as inconsistent as to save the wicked
city in its impenitence. ‘That the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far
from thee; shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?” When Nineveh after-
wards filled up the cup of its iniquity, the threatened destruction came, and so
complete was the overthrow that we are only now learning that the shapeless
mounds of the desert covered the palaces of mighty kings. In its repentance
Nineveh is an encouragement to seek God’s mercy; in its overthrow a warning to
all those who provoke his wrath. “ At what instant I shall speak concerning a
nation and concerning a kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, to destroy it; if
that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil that I thought to do them.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 2 Who can tell? In the
developi:.ent of this hope within the
heart of Nineveh we behold the truest


true to fact, and their reformatiun of
character not according to the circum-
stances of the case. They believed in a


exercise of faith in God. It was not
speculation, but a true confidence in the
Supreme Being, as arbiter of the moral
destiny of men, that inspired and re-
tained this hope. In the development
of this hope we behold the first dawn of
a new life. The Ninevites are true to
their better nature, humble and expect-
ant. They work out in their conduct
convictions placed by God in their hearts.
Their characters rise into new light, and
receive the beauty of a heavenly life.
In the deveiopment of this hope we be-
hold a due recognition of the anger of
God. Wad they not credited the Divine
wrath, their faith would have been un-


Deity capable of anger and destruction;
the former of which they had excited,
and the latter of which they had
narrowly escaped [ Exell].

As soon as prayer took possession of
them, it both made them righteous, and
forthwith corrected the city which had
been habituated to live with profligacy,
and wickedness, and lawlessness. More
powerful was prayer than the long usage
of sin. It filled that city with heavenly
laws, and brought along with it temper-
ance, loving-kindness, gentleness, and
care of the poor [ Chrysostom].

Ver. 10. The repentance of God is
included in his gracious desree. It is


CHAP, ITI. |


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


$83





the harmonizing of wrath and forgive-
ness, justice and love. Wrath is not the
final end; but it has for its end and
object, love. Woe to him who makes
light of the wrath of God: he can
never taste of love [Lange].

Works. 1. God looks not at outward
performance. ‘ Bring forth fruits meet
for repentances.” 2. To be acceptable to
God we must renounce all sins. The
sins of the city and the sins of indi-
viduals. If we regard iniquity in our
hearts, God will disregard us (Ps. lxvi.
18). 3. God will bless feeble efforts to
forsake sin and reform life. Temporal
favours are a type of spiritual blessings,
and temporary repentance an image of
true penitence. If men through fear of


judgment depart from evil and avert
temporal evils, what will repentance
unto life gain ?

Learn :—1. That God may intend
mercy amid darkness and judgment.
2. But men, sensible of their sins and
desert, are often uncertain whether he
will have mercy or not. The Christian in
affliction and the penitent sinner seeking
mercy, put the question, “ Who can tell?”
3. By keeping the mind in suspense
between hope and fear, judgment and
mercy, God stirs up to greater diligence.
Be not disheartened nor deterred from
duty in trouble. God will hear prayer.
The answer will be (a) certain, (0) season-
able, and (c) compassionate.

“Repentant tears.” [Shakespeare. |


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER III.


Vers. 1—3. This is substantially the
same commission, and yet different. The
’ “second” call to a man is never exactly
the same as the first. The third is
never a repetition of the second. Another
tone is in the voice of the speaker, firmer
or milder. Other shades of meaning are
in the message. If it is “the second
time,” still more if it is the seventh time,
or the seventy-and-seventh time, there
will be changes in the message corre-
sponding with changes which time has
brought in circumstances and in charac-
ter. It may seem a refinement, but, pro-
perly understood, it is but a simple truth,
that he never receives exactly the same
command or invitation from God more
than once. “If slighted once, the season
fair can never be renewed ” [ Raleigh].

A great city. Nineveh covered a
great extent of ground. Historians say
that its walls were 480 stadia, or 60
miles, in circumference. It was great in
population, Jonah mentions 120,000
who could not discern between their
right hand and their left. It was great
in splendour and power. “The re-
searches in the mounds have astonished
Europe with the barbaric grandeur of the
statuary, and the full details of life and
history sculptured on marble, or stamped
in arrow-headed characters upon the
bricks.” But it was morally great to


God on account of the human souls, and
their spiritual condition. In God’s sight,
grandeur, territory, and architectural
beauty, are nothing to immortal souls,
and the influence which they exert. The
material worlds, the sun with its satel-
lites, are not so great as a man. Try to
realize how great you are in the sight of
God.

Ver. 4. Yet forty days. Delay in
the execution of sentence is sometimes
an encouragement to sin (Kee. viii. 11) ;
but gives space for repentance, and dis-
plays the long-suffering of God (see Ex.
xxxiv. 5,6: Ps. ciil., viii.: Joel ii, 13,
14: 1 Pet. iii. 20).

Ver. 5. Fast. They did not wait
for supreme authority. Time was urgent,
and they would lose none of it. In this
imminent peril of God’s displeasure, they
acted as men would in a conflagration.
Men do not wait for orders to put out a
fire, or to prevent it from spreading.
Whoever proclaimed a fast, it seems to
have been done by acclamation; one
common cry out of the one common
terror [Pusey].

Vers. 5, 6. The message first kindles
in the humbler hearts. Poor men, and
humble men, do not think what immense
compensation they thus have for poverty,
straits, and toils, in being kept, as to
natural condition, so much nearer God


and the powers of his gracious kingdom.
God’s messengers reach them easily.
Rich men, and those standing on the
elevated places of society, do not think
how the earthly advancement is apt to be
counterbalanced by the spiritual disad-
vantage [ Raleigh].

“ The pride of kingly sway.” [Shakespeare.]

Vers. 7, 8. We double the greater
part of our faults by the excuses which
we make use of to justify them—excuses
which are a kind of patches when a rent
is made, far more unseemly and misbe-
coming than the rent itself [Seed].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


[cuaP. 1.





Violence.
“Grieved at his heart when, looking down, he


saw
The whole earth filled with violence ” [ Mitton.]
Ver. 9. Who can tell ?


“ They have more in them than mortal know-
ledge.” [Shakespeare. |


Ver. 10. Doom changed. This is
ever God’s manner, when men change
their deeds to change his doom ; when
they renounce their sins, to recall his
sentence ; when they repent of the evil
they have done against him, to repent
of the evil he had said he would do
against them. Never was a man truly


“Tf hearty sorrow
Be a sufficient ransom for offence,
I tender it here ; I do as truly suffer
As e’er I did commit.” [Shakespeare.]


and inwardly humbled, but God in the
riches of his special mercy (in Christ)
truly pardoned him [ Bp. Sanderson].





CHAPTER IV.


Criricat Norrs.] Angry] Lit. hot with anger; to burn inwardly: the verb usually
restricted to anger, but (vers. 4 and 9) rendered to grieve. Jonah’s vexation grew to anger.
Nineveh’s destruction would have been a warning to Israel, but God had preserved it, and he
appeared to have no hope for the reformation of his country. 2. Word] Saying or cogitation, 4. ¢.
Did I not say to myself? Land] Palestine. Fled] I prevented to flee, ¢.¢, I endeavoured by flight to

revent. Gracious] (cf. Ex. xxxiv. 6; xxxii. 14: Joel ii. 13). 8. Take] ef. Elijah’s prayer (1
Rings xix. 4). Better] than live under the imputation of being a false prophet. 4. Well] The
Heb. adverbial, ‘Is thine anger justly kindled?” Art thou greatly or much angry? [ZXX. and Fwir-
bairn]. 5. Went out] Some time before the forty days expire. East side] Definiteness in the
picture. See] Watch what would happen, expecting Nineveh to fall by earthquake, or be burned like
Sodom [Puszy]. 6. Gourd] The ‘‘ricinus” or ‘‘ palma Christi;’’ the word sig. an artificial cevert,
as a telt or oct sometimes a shelter, in the preparation of which no art is used (Jer. xxv. 38:
Job xxxviii. 40). Exceeding] Lit. glad with great gladness. 7. Worm] Taken collectively for worms
in Deut. xxviii. 39: Is. xiv. 11: may behere. The palma Christi ina short time produces caterpil-
lars, ana where these abound they strip the tree of its leaves in one night, and take away the shade,
8. This not sufficient discipline. Vehement] Silent, ¢. ¢. deadly sultry east wind. Wished] Lit. he
asked, as to his soul, to die. 9, Doest thou ?] ‘his question comprises the meaning of vers, 9—11.
I do] To the bottom of my soul, to weariness of life (cf. Matt. xxvi, 38). ‘I am very much grieved
even to death” [Fairbairn]. 10, Jonab’s attention is directed to the contradiction in which he has
fallen, by feeling compassion for the withering of the miraculous tree, and at the same time mur-
muring because God has had compassion upon Nineveh with its many thousands of living beings
[Keil]. The shrub was the son of a night, and perished in a night: if he pitied this which he
neither planted nor cultured, has God not greater right to pity creatures whom he has made? &c.
Pity] Spared the pourd. 11. Spare] Pity; Lit to be affected by the sight of a thing; then to
be concerned ; take pity or compassion upon one, Nineveh contained an immense a ese a
great number of children; and “if this did not produce a suitable impression upon the mind of
the prophet, the number even of irrational animals is adverted to, the latter being far superior in
peint of mechanism and utility to the shrub for which he was so much concerned” [Eizaz].
“What could Jonah say to this? He was obliged to keep silence, defeated, as it were, by his own
sentence ”’ Rates The history breaks off abruptly, but an insight of God’s compassion for all
nations is gained. Mercy is the last notesounded. Let us attend to the sign of the prophet, and love
him who said, “ Behold, a greater than Jonas is here!”


cHar Iy,} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY > JONAH. 38e


ER ee ee EE


HOMILETICS.
Tas Srraner Dispieasurn.—Verses 1—4


God’s servants should rejoice in the increase of his people and the success of
their labours. Nineveh had repented, was saved and filled with rejoicing, but one
individual was differently affected by the display of Divine mercy towards a guilty
city. Sin lurks in those that have suffered most, that have undergone the severest
discipline to wean them from it. A fretful man is—1l. At discord with the joy of
his fellow-creatures. 2. Opposed to the benevolent designs of God. Notice
Jonah’s strange displeasure. “It displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very
angry.”

I. He sets the welfare of his own country above the interests of humanity.
“He is an Israelite and a patriot. He loved his own people better than the
Ninevites, and had no idea of God chosing more than one nation. He thought
Nineveh the chief enemy which threatened his country. Behold it is spared, and
likely to prosper! What will become of his brethren now? His Jewish pride
rebelled, and he was angry.” Professing Christians often cheris!: the same spirit,
idolize their sect and creed. The sinof Jonah is a common sin. It is seen in the
world’s patriotism and the Church’s bigotry ; in all sectarianism and narrow-mind-
edness ; in reluctance to missionary effort, and envy at the success of others. We
ery, “ Charity begins at home ;” refuse to do God’s work ourselves, and do not like
it done by others. The disciples glorified God on Peter's report. “Then hath
God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.” II. He frets at the mercy
of God to others. He would rather have his own will. God’s dealings with
Nineveh did not please him. When self is exalted, and God’s Providence thwarts
our wishes, we are displeased. God does not gratify our whims, hence we fret and
complain ; we get peevish and angry with everything about us. ‘The times are
out of joint.” This temper darkens sunshine, corrodes enjoyment, scorns gratitude.
and banishes happiness from every place. Is God’s will not right, and are his ways
not perfect? ‘Should it be according to thy mind?” III. He attempts to justify
his past conduct. ‘Was not this my saying?” &c. We have here the reason for
his flight to Tarshish which he is ready to excuse. He hastened, tried to be
beforehand with God, to circumvent and defeat his designs. What folly and
impiety to justify this! Why should we be ashamed to acknowledge error, and
forsake a wrong when detected in it? The true penitent will sink self, think
more of God’s truth than his credit ; be ready to confess all and excuse nothing.
But for the belief that he would have mercy upon Nineveh, Jonah tells God that
he would have obeyed the first commission. When men insist that they have done
right, and call up sins which should have been forgotten, and for which they
have been chastised, they display ignorance, pride, and self-conceit. 1. They make
themselves disagreeable. Everybody dislikes a man that always claims to be right,
that can never be taught nor corrected. 2. They are a curse to society. Their
example and influence are pernicious. They are never satisfied with the ways of
Providence. God’s plans are always wrong, and his mercy upon others throwp
away. How abominable is self-assertion, self-justification, and self-will, “1
knew beforehand what would happen, therefore I shall please myself now!’
IV. He becomes impatient of life itself. ‘Take, I pray thee, my life from me,’
&c. This is the impatient wish of petulance and discontent, not the pious desir
of Paul and God’s people (Luke ii, 29: 1 Cor. v. 1—3: Phil. i, 18—23). Butir
this rash petition the Prophet stands not alone. Failure in business, cisappoint-
ment in love, treachery of friends, and perplexing providences, cover the sky with
clouds, and oppress the spirit with gloom. Moses and Elijah, Job and Jeremiah,
prove that temptations to such desires are powerful in the best of men. Men pray
for death when not prepared to die. If an is not appreciated, death is not desir


386 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. (cmap. tv


able. This desire chills our best affections, and cherishes our meanest interests.
It indicated—1l. Lack of faith in God. God’s plans were better than Jonah’s.
He should have believed in the wisdom of God. 2. Ingratitude for his own forgive
ness, God’s mercy towards himself should have made him tender-hearted to others,
and glad to see their repentance.


““ Anger is a short fit of madness” [ T#Jotson].


A Gracious Gop.— Verse 2.


Jonah seems to think that God was more merciful than just. But the justice
of God is a proof and an exhibition of his love. Mercy and truth bleua together
like rays from the sun, to give life and light to men. This character of God is
described in law, prophets, and psalms. It is a memorial and manifestation of God
to all generations.

I. God is gracious in essence. ‘Thou art a gracious God.” God has the
disposition to goodness. He is gratuitously benevolent. This sheds lustre upon his
nature and light upon a fallen world. He seeks to subdue the enmity of man, and
allure wanderers back. He needs nothing to excite his love. His very nature is
gracious. ‘“ God is love.” Moses wondered how God could show mercy and do justly ;
desired some greater insight into the Eternal Mind, and longed to do his duty toa
disobedient people (Exod. xxxiii. 17—19). But Jonah made the revealed character of
God a ground for upbraiding men and neglecting duty. How sublime the contrast
between God’s mercy and man’s ways. “ My ways are not as your ways,” &c. II. God
is gracious in acts. As the fountain, so the streams. ‘The acts of God partake of
' the character of God. Benevolent in nature, he is benevolent in act and design.
He wills not that any should perish. We are apt to measure him by our own
feelings, and picture him as malevolent and vindictive. 1. He is merciful.
Merciful to the miserable and undeserving. Ever disposed to relieve the suffering,
pardon the guilty, and dispense happiness. 2. He is slow te anger. He is not
passionate and easily provoked. He restraims his wrath, and many a time turns
away his anger. He deals not with men according to their iniquity, nor rewards
them according to their sins. He is reluctant to execute sentence, and spares
offenders. 3. He is of great kindness. Having long patience and forbearance; allows
time for repentance, and seeks to pardon and save. Great kindness is seen in
great patience in provocation ; in great gifts upon the unworthy, and innumerable
blessings upon the just and unjust. ‘“‘His mercy endureth for ever.” 4. He
repents of the evil. Though he threatens, he does not often strike. When the
evil has been wholly or partially inflicted, he will repent of it and replace it with
good if the sinner returns to him. Thus all patience and long-suffering, all mercy
and forgiveness, are traced up to God. He finds reason in himself alone for
sparing the guilty and saving the penitent. ‘“ Not for your sakes do I this, be it
known unto you, O house of Israel, but for mine own name’s sake.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


what we have known. 3. Lack of love
to men. Jonah might not be grieved to
see that mercy displayed to others, of
which he shared so greatly himself—
might not with the ungodly pine away


Ver. 1. Displeased. Displeasure in-
licates—1. Lack of self-government.
It was a proverbial saying of the pious
Mede that “he who cannot hold his
tongue, can hold nothing.” 2. Lack of


reverence towards God. We should con-
sider what God requires from us, and
not what he wants to do with us. Do
we honour God in feeling and action $
We have known him, but * # practised


becanse God was honoured in the re
pentance of Nineveh ; but he was not in
harmony with the interests of his fellow:
creatures, God pardoned the city, “ but


it displeased Jonah.”


omar. rv.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


a8?





Jonah’s sin—1. Sin against the bright-
est illumination. He “knew,” but sin-
ned against the light of nature, the voice
of conscience, and the revealed will of
God. 2. Sin against the greatest mercies.
His life was crowned with loving-kind-
ness and tender mercies. The pre-
eminent mercies of God fail to persuade
men to forsake sin and serve God.
3. Sin against the greatest judgments.
Judgments had blended with mercy,
but corrections had not conquered his
corruptions. How hard to overcome
pride and petulance within us! But to
this day men, like Pharaoh, harden them-
selves against God. ‘“ Who is the Lord,
that I should obey him?”

Ver. 2. Jonah’s prayer. I. Its spirit.
Petulant and unsubmissive ; most un-
vrateful and selfish. It is a miserable
temper, painful to one’s self, and dis-
agreeable to others. The greatest debtors
should be the most thankful men. JZ.
Its purpose. “Take away my life.”
What for? Is it of no more service?
Let God judge of that. He bestows it;
give it to him inreturn. There is grace
enough for us and others. When we
work in a good cause, and save great
cities, life is noble, and should be dig-
nified and preserved. Those who wish
to leave life because they cannot have
their own way are not fit to meet God.
Here is Jcnah’s integrity and Jonah’s
safety. 1. Integrity. He is no enemy,
but a friend and child of God, notwith-
standing his perplexity. He cannot
rest in distance from God. Sick at
heart, he pours out complaint to him.
In every prayer of God’s children there is
a mixture of sin. The mixture here is
conspicuous and alarming. There is,
however, an element of grace, a secret
seed of faith and submission in making
God the counsellor and referee. 2.
Safety. But for this he would mentally
and spiritually have fled again from God
as before. Now he flees to God. He
does not seek a refuge; he makes God
his refuge; tells him the grounds of
alarm ; expostulates and seeks to make
his case clear before God. Though there
is excess, violence, and inexcusable haste
and passion, yet God condescends to his
prayer, stained as it is by grievous in-


firmity [H. Martin}. He prayed in a
tumult, as if reproving God. We must
necessarily recognise a certain amount of
piety in this prayer of Jonah, and at the
same time many faults. There was so
far piety in it, that he directed his com-
plaints to God; for hypocrites, even
when they address God, are nevertheless
hostile to him. But Jonah, when he
complains, although he does not keep
within proper bounds, but is carried
away by a blind and vicious impulse,
is nevertheless prepared to submit him-
self to God [Calvin].

Ver. 3. It is better to die, &c. Death
as a remedy for the ills of life, in weari-
ness, impatience, disappointments, and
perplexing providences. 1. Jt is only
an imaginary remedy. 2. It would only
increase the evil. It would not relieve
distress, nor bring extinction. The grave
cannot calm the soul, and hush its
sorrows. ‘Hence death,” says one,
“would only have led Jonah from the
shadow of his trouble to its very centre,
where its sad meaning would have been
known to him.” Paul had “ great
heaviness and continual sorrow,” de-
sired to be with Christ, which was
better than remaining here; but he did
not pray for death in all his labours and
persecutions, for his life seemed needful
to the Church on earth.


“He sing against this life who slights the next.”
[ Young.]


Here is at least no craven love of life!
no clinging to meat and drink, and mere
foothold on the ground. This wounded
spirit, realising its mortality amid change
and adversity, rises disdainfully above
the mortal pathway, and asks to be
liberated for the last flight to immortality
and heaven. Hezekiah “ wept sore”
when the message came to him, “Thou
shalt die and not live.” Jonah here
prays, “ Let me die—of life I have had
enough. Life is nothing to me without
its uses.” The Prophet’s attitude is
nobler than the king’s [Raleigh].


‘What is’t to die?
To leave all disappointment, cares, and sorrow,
To leave all falsehood, treachery, and unkindness
All ignominy, suffering, and despair,
And be at rest for ever’ [Longfelow}


388 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JONAH. [cltay. I¥.








HOMILETICS.
Divine Reproor.—Verse 4.


Jonah had ground for joy and not for grief. God expostulates with him and
leads him to reflection. The interrogative form proves the condescension and
wisdom of God.

I. The condescension of God. God did not upbraid the prophet for ingratitude
and self-will. But he sought to relieve an overburdened spirit, rouse a dormant
conscience, and melt an impenitent heart. When we retire from duty in fretfulness,
God reasons with us. “ What doest thou here, Elijah?” When we indulge in
envious thoughts of Providence, and hatch imaginary ills, a voice speaks, “‘ Doest
thou well to be angry?” God cares for his servants, and seeks to relieve them.
“The Lord thinketh on me.” II. The wisdom of God. Jehovah did not give
the verdict, but called upon Jonah to assign a cause for anger, or by silence
condemn himself. On earth men are left to judge themselves, to pass sentence on
their own conduct. They are completely in the power of God, and he need not
condemn now. He requires voluntary obedience. To secure this, and prepare us
for the day of account, he enlightens the mind, quickens the conscience, and con-
tinually appeals to each—“ Doest thou well?”


Tas Fouity or a Frerrutn Minp.—Verses 4 and 9.


There is here no condemnation of lawful anger. As a natural emotion, anger is
legitimate and useful. ‘Be ye angry and sin not.” The blame is against the
cause of it. It was the zeal of false patriotism ; passionate grief excited by an act
of Divine mercy.

I. Doest thou well to be angry without any real cause for thine anger?
The ground is imaginary. Thy grief is unnecessary and unreasonable, unjust and
wicked. One half of trouble rises from groundless causes. We picture the worst,
and our jealousy is needless. Our reason for displeasure is future, of our own
portending, such as events may negative and disappoint. Think seriously whether
you do right in being angry. Control indignation in principle, purpose, and degree.
“The wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God.” II. Doest thon well
to be angry when the dealings of God with thee teach thee to be thankful ?
Jonah’s temper was at variance with his mercies and position as God’s servant.
We might have expected gratitude from one so highly favoured. But thankfulness
seldom keeps pace with mercies. Those who receive most do not always make the
best return. God’s grace should dilute or remove the acid in our temper, teach us
to bear with those who are reformed, and make us conscious how rough and sinful
we ourselves are in the sight of God. III. Doest thou well to be angry when
the consequences before God and man are most serious? 1. It excites the anger
of God. It is presumption and self-assertion, disobedience to his will, and
impatience under: his rule. The ungrateful can have no enjoyment of God’s
favours. They provoke him to take away what they have, and to give less in the
future. Their fretfulness cannot improve their circumstances. God’s will is
supreme, and must be done. “Is thine eye evil because Iam good?” 2. It ia
never beneficial to man. If anger is not good and just toward God, what can it
profit man? It proves a man to be of narrow views and weak morals. (a) Never
beneficial to one who indulges in it. An ill-temper is an affliction to its possessor,
spoils his peace, prayers, and business. It distracts from his strength and beauty,
ana disqualifies for Christian blessing and work. (b) Never beneficial to others.
It seems to be owing to temper that Ed. Burke quarrelled with Wilberforce and
Fox, and gained the title of ‘‘the inconsistent and incomprehensible Burke.”
Exhibitions of passion delight the enemy and wound the friends, dishonour Christ
and give false impressions of his religion, It leads us to imitate, repeat, and


omar. Iv.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. 889
ie WE


perpetuate wrong. It should be checked, for it is both mischievous to oneself and
to others. ‘“ Doest thou well to be angry?”


“ When anger rushes unrestrained to action
Like a hot steed, it stumbles in its way” [Savage].


Jonan’s RetiremMent.— Verse 5.


As soon as Jonah had delivered his message he left the city, remained outside on
the east side, and built himself a temporary shelter. The report of the city’s
repentance reached him; dissatisfied with himself, and displeased with God’s
dealings, he had neither comfort in duty nor retirement.

I. The place of retirement. ‘The east side of the city, and there made him a
booth.” He was not unmindful of personal ease, takes time and bestows trouble
to build a hut. We are often more concerned for our own comfort than for the
interests of men. Selfishness is graven in the heart, drives men to grasp at
shadows and not substance. It leads them to resign duty, quit the field of labour,
and expect more than they get. Adam parted with his holy robe, lost the presence
of his God, and tried to make up for the loss with his own device. Selfish ends and
worldly devices are nothing more than booths in which men can never rest and
find shelter. The path of obedience alone is the path of happiness. II. The
spirit of retirement. Here we have a noble man, a servant of God, blind to the
interests of men and the claims of duty through pride and personal feeling! Dis-
appointed in labour, he wished to resign it; tired of life, he prayed to leave it.
There he sat, in silence and disgust. Heaven smiles on the city, joy and gladness
fills its streets, but Jonah walks into solitude with a sullen temper. He is at
variance with God, regardless of man, and shut up in selfish aims. ‘Ob what a
blessed thing it is to lose one’s will,” said Dr. Payson; “since I have lost my
will I have found happiness. There can be no such thing as disappointment to
me, for I have no desire but that God’s will may be accomplished.” III. The
purpose of retirement. ‘Till he might see what would become of their city.”
Perhaps he did not wish its entire destruction, but he watched to see what would
be done—if its repentance would last, and if after all God would fulfil the threat.
Abraham interceded for Sodom, Christ wept over Jerusalem, and we should
resemble these eminent patterns of compassion. But if our views of sin and God
are clouded, if we value not the soul, and limit the mercy of God, we shall be
indifferent to the moral condition of men. If, Nero-like, we do not play while the
city burns, thousands may perish without a sigh or a prayer for their escape. We
should have pity upon offenders, and haste to reclaim them. “ Pulling them out


of the fire.”
Tue Divine Correction oF a Fretrut Man.—Verses 6—10.


God teaches not as man teaches. In God’s school the lessons are mercifully
given, and wonderfully adapted to vur mind and circumstances. Here we have
the Divine rebuke of Jonah’s petulant temper.

I. God corrects by refreshing the physical nature. The gourd was prepared
“to be a shadow over his head.” ‘The first lesson and cure of despondency is to
remove fatigue and bodily weariness from over-work. Elijah’s despondency was
partly physical, and the angel brought him refreshment. Food and rest are
required, and God seeks to quiet the mind by cooling the body. There is an
intimate connection between both, and we often get at one through the other.
Regard for the body is urged from the lofty nature and the important use of the
soul. They are helpmates in God’s service now, and will be in his kingdom above.
Fretfulness, petulance, and irritability oftener spring from physical weakness than
moral unloveliness. If God in providence deals mercifully we should not be
harsh with such feelings. II. God corrects by influencing the moral nature.
The method taken is worthy of special attention. Sensible signs teach spiritual


399 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. {cHap. Iv.


truths. A parable worked into the form of facts is given and interpreted by God
himself. 1. God speaks by symbol. “The Lord prepared a gourd,” for all the
steps in the discipline of a good man are divinely ordered. Words merely might
not have been sufficient. The lesson is brought home by means of symbol. Man
has sympathy with nature, and God often touches this sympathy. Spring and
autuiun, summer and wiuter, beget kindred feelings in our hearts.) When flowers
bloom and trees shelter us, we rejoice ; when beauty decays and plants perish, we
grieve. God prepared a worm which devoured the gourd, exposed Jonah to the
burning sun and the vehement wind, then there was a change of feeling. He
fainted, complained to God, defended excessive grief, and enforced his preference
of death to life. “I do well to be angry, even unto death” Jonah is now
prepared, his moral nature is truly touched and displayed, and if he cannot rejoice
in Nineveh’s joy he must understand that God does. 2. God speaks by verbal
communications. God now speaks to the Prophet, argues with him, and reasons
from the less to the greater. Anything to break sullen silence is a blessing. The
song of a bird, the voice of a child, and the ripple of a stream are often music to
the soul ; raise our thoughts from self to God. God holds up Jonah’s feeling,
makes his pity, not the life of the plant, the symbol of his love. Pity ona gourd
for which he did not labour, the son of a night, and the existence of a day !
because it pleased his fancy and served his wish! Did he want to spare this
short-lived little shrub? shall not God, then, spare immortal souls, the work of
his hands, and rejoice over the humbled, penitent city? Our sympathies with
the beautiful and good may be right, while our moral nature is wrong. God trains
this instinctive feeling of the mind, sanctions its validity, and exercises and makes
it the type of his own procedure. “If ye, being evil, know how to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give good
things to them that ask him ?”


WiItTHERED Joys.— Verse 7.


Man is capable of joy. True joys are only found in God. The worm of
destruction gnaws the root of our best and most loved earthly joy. Every creature
has its enemy, and death smites every gourd of life. Joys which specially decay
may be noticed.

I. Joys which are sinful in their basis. If we regard our own ease and
comfort, disregard the interests of men, and disapprove of God’s ways, our joy is
selfish and will soon decay. If we depend for happiness on anything beneath the
soul we shall come to grief. II. Joys which are gained without labour. Jonah
neither planted nor watered the tree which gave him shelter. Men often seize that
which is cheap, and trust to that which costs them nothing. God is constantly
teaching that nothing valuable is obtained without labour. The acquisition of
lasting joy is not easy. It results, not from sulky labour and melancholy feeling,
but from earnest duty and a peaceful heart.

“ Heaven sells pleasure ; effort is the price ;
The joys of conquest are the joys of man ”’ [{ Young],
III. Joys which are deceitful in their results. Jonah’s joy sprang from bodily
ease and sensual feeling. The comforts which removed his troubles were carnal
and dying comforts. Our joys are often shadows of our sorrows. Whatever be
their effect upon us, if they exclude God, and submission to him, all creation is
ready to destroy them. It is not chance, but God in justice and love, who smites
the gourd to free the heart. Wealth, friendships, and honours seem to quicken
our joy and cause it to bloom in beauty and vigour; but they bring decay and
vexation. When we expect shelter and rest, lo, a worm at the root!
‘ Of joys departed
Not to return, how painful the remembrance”’ [ Pobt, Bleir}


CHAP. IV.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH


391





HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 6. “ Exceedingly glad,” and
“exceedingly grieved.” Extremes in
human feelings—their causes and con-
sequences. It is a law of the mind,
verified in ourselves and others, to
be susceptible of sudden transitions,
elevated to-day and depressed to-mor-
row.

Ver. 7. Destruction is “‘ prepared ”
by God as well as life; trouble as well
as joy. And both are Divinely ruled
with a view to the education and _ puri-
fication of human souls. Here are em-
blems of the closely-linked joy and
sorrow of this mortal life. The fine
plant, leafy green, types so well our
comforts, successes, joys. The single
day of shade it furnished to the heated
Prophet speaks touchingly of the tran-
sciency of our pleasures. The worm
reminds us that a small and mean
creature may be a formidable enemy.
The place of its operation, probably
under the soil, shows us how powers
and agents, invisible and unknown to
us, can touch and smite in secret the
springs of outward prosperity. The
time when decay began—at the rising of
the morning—makes us think mourn-
fully how human helps and comforts
often wither at the very season when
they are most needed. How often
when “the morning” of family life is
“rising” are comforts swept away!
Ah! how often is there removal of
sheltering fatherhood, or nourishing
motherhood, or both! The utter loss
of what had given such intense enjoy-
ment warns us not to set our affections
passionately upon anything which can
be utterly lost, but to lift our supreme
affections to things above the sphere of
the “worm” and the “moth,” beyond
the reach of the “rust” and the “thief”
[ Raleigh}.

The worm teaches—l. That things
which destroy our gourds are often
little things. 2. That things which
destroy our gourds are often invisible
things. 3. That things which destroy
our gourds are always prepared by God.
Under his control the meanest and most
invisible creatures can accomplish the


most wonderful purposes, They destroy
the largest armies, and demolish the
strongest fortresses; they overturn
thrones, and lay waste empires.

Earthly joys. It is kind in God to
remove them, when he sees that his
gifts are occupying our affections to the
exclusion of the Giver. It is lawful for
him to take them at any time. It will
be just to do so, if we abuse and pervert
them. Let us receive them with thank-
ful acknowledgments of their Author,
hold them with a readiness to relinquish
them any moment, use them with care-
fulness and moderation to his glory, and
seek that, whatever they are in kind
and number, our affections may be set
on things above [Sibthorp].

Ver. 8. In this verse we have ex-
emplified the conduct of some good
people under afiliction. We find that
the afflictions which come upon men are
Divinely commissioned—that they are
often very severe. ‘A vehement east
wind.” They are often complicated.
Not only the “wind,” but “the sun,”
beating upon Jonah’s head. They often
happen at the most inopportune time,
and have often a most exhaustive effect
upon those to whom they come. “ He
fainted.” These afflictions often oc-
casion a complaining spirit. Itis better
for me to die than to live [Zzell].

Ver. 9. Doest thou well? I. The
question put. 1. To reprove Jonah.
2. To convince him of his error; and 3
To bring him to a humble and obedient
spirit. II. The answer given. Jonah
had not dared to speak before verse 4,
now he answers and defends his wicked
spirit and conduct. We see the old
spirit and pride with more actual sin
and provocation. “I do well,” &c. A
fearful outburst! Resist passion at the
first rising, else who knows whither it
may transport us? “Passions,” saith
Fuller, “like heavy bodies down steep
hills, once in motion, move themselves,
and know no ground but the bottom.”


“We oft by lightning read in darkest nights;
And by your passions I read all your natures,
Tho’ you at other times can keep them dark.”

[John Crowne, }


392 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH. (cHar. Iv





HOMILETICS.
Gon’s Care ror CHInpREN.—Verse 11.


The mention of children and cattle in the description of the city indicates more
than its greatness, proves the tender mercy of God, and affords no ground for the
defence of his innocent shrub. God estimates cities, not according to wealth and
splendour, but the character of its population. ‘‘ Here,” says one, “ was a reason
for sparing the city, and for bringing the adults to repentance in order to
save it.”

I. Children have a distinct rank assigned to them. They are distinguished
from matter, and raised higher than brutes. Hence they must not be looked upon
as cumber or hindrance to the welfare of humanity. Many regard them in the
mass, and give them no distinct rank in the scale of being. Christianity differs
in sublime distinction from ancient Polytheism and modern materialism in its
loving aspect towards little children—teaches that they are not to be regarded as
incipient organisms in human form, but as immortal beings, and of celestial beauty.
“For of such is the kingdom of heaven.” II. Children have special claims upon
us. Men talk of them as “ Jitile children,” so many incarnate trifles or common-
places of humanity. Such treatment is neither justified by religion nor reason.
Life in its lowest forms involves mystery ; but if we recognize infants as manifesting
a Divine purpose, and taking a definite rank in creation, we shall feel that certain
reverence is due to them. Their innocency is pleasing, and their influence powerful.
Upon their character and training depend the happiness of society and the destiny
of nations. Few parents are base enough to injure their children, but parental
neglect and sinful apathy prevail in every home. Children’s claims are forgotten
or ignored, and we are still under the moral implication of Christ—“Take heed
that ye despise not one of these little ones.” III. God’s mercy to children is an
example to us. Priority and prominence are given to the children, and God appeals
strongly to Jonah’s human sympathy. That heart must be desperately hard that
cannot feel for the injury and death of infants. Herod’s outrage brands him with
infamy in every age. But God does not play merely upon Jonah’s feelings. He
shows his regard for children, and reveals his true character as a gracious God.
Christ displayed Divine love by taking them into his arms and blessing them.
God’s providence over children should urge us to care for them. His pity for
them in pain and danger should be a model for parental conduct, and an
encouragement to cultivate true disposition of heart. Christ recommended true
virtues ; set a child in the midst of his disciples, and taught that Christian life was
a life of childhood. ‘Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.”


Gop’s Care ror Oxren.—Verse 11.


In addition to children there were also ‘“‘ much cattle,” of infinitely more value
than Jonah’s gourd, and perfectly innocent of the crimes of which the Ninevites
were guilty.

I. Here we have an argument for mercy to beasts. The city must be spared
for the sake of the cattle even. — Little children and dumb creatures intercede for
man and must be pitied. ‘Doth God take care for oxen?” Yes, to teach ws to be
merciful to them (1 Cor. ix. 9: Deut. xxv. 4). How unlike God are those who
neglect them and inflict needless sufferings upon them. Men whom God preserves
daily from the punishment of sin wreak their rage upon their beasts, starve and
torture them for selfish ends, or kill them in sport and cruelty. “A righteous man
regardeth the life of his beast; but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.”
II. Here we have an argument for mercy to men. God's care for cattle suggests
his greater mercy to men. It is a perversion of sympathy when persons bestow


CHAP, Iv.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


393


a ae a aS Serre


upon brutes an extravagance of kindness which they refuse to children and men.
Stables and kennels are often more comfortable than cottages ; animals are petted


while the poor starve.


“God would have us love and pity not merely our own


gourds, but all his creatures—men, women, children, and even cattle—according


to their respective worth in his sight.”


The selfish man shrinks up in envy and


cold indifference, but “blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Here we have a picture of the weak
protecting the strong, infants shielding
the parents. Ungodly families are often
spared for the sake of the little ones in
them. Justice calls for the punishment
of the wicked, but mercy delays lest
the innocent should suffer with the
guilty.

Many great and fruitful truths lie
couchant here. It is manifest, for ex-
ample, that infants are regarded by God
as personally innocent. They inherit
many of the consequences, but do not
share the guilt of Adam’s sin. God here
seems to say: “ What have they done?”
They have had no part in the guilt of
the city. Would you bring a storm of
judgment upon them? It is manifest,
also, that unconscious beings may have,
really have, a great moral power and
place in the universe. When men or
women all through the city were “ cry-
ing mightily to God,” there was a cry
mightier, although inarticulate, going up
from six-score thousand unconscious
suppliants. The infants of Nineveh
did what all her armed men could not
do—they helped to turn away the wrath
of God, and to draw down his mercy.
This reference to the infants tells us
that life is good. It is implied that it
is in itself a blessing—a thing to be de-
sired to make one wise. The Prophet
had said, “It is better for me to die
than to live.” In an indirect manner
God says, “It is better to live than to
die,” better even for infants to live,
although they might die without tast-
ing the bitterness of death. Better to


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. Displeased. Anger begins
with folly and ends with repentance
[Maunder]. Anger aud haste hinder
good counsel [Fielding]. Be on your


live, even in a place like Nineveh, where
the wickedness is only arrested for a
little, and not extinguished, than not to
live at all [Raleigh].

The whole chapter is a wonderful ex-
hibition of Divine mercy. I. Mercy is
displayed. Displayed to Jew and
Gentile, young and old. Mercy to-
wards a guilty city, and an ungrate-
ful servant. II. Mercy is vindicated.
1. Against the ignorance of man.
2. Against the selfishness of man. We
substitute justice for Jove. It is true
that God hates sin; but he is merciful,
and prefers pity to punishment. As we
do not see the world in the blackness of
a thunder-storm, so we do not know
God in the outpouring of his wrath.
“Fear never made the childish nature
good. March winds never made the
buds blossom—only April showers ; it is
not the father’s severity, but the mother’s
love, that makes the child repent.”

The mercy of God concerns us in-
finitely. We are personally interested
in this argument and in this demonstra-
tion, as much as Jonah, as much as the
Ninevites. Is there anything else in
which we have half the interest that we
all have in this? This is the very
foundation of our hope; it is the
bright charter of our salvation. We
enter only by this door. Without the
mercy of God we are clean gone for
ever. By this mercy we are spared.
By this mercy, in its forms of forbear-
ance, and forgiveness, and renewal, we
hope one day to reach complete redemp-
tion [Raleigh].


TO CHAPTER IV.


guard against your temper. It will
frustrate all your designs if you listen
to it. It will make you lose the most
important opportunities, and will inspire


394





you with the inclinations and aversions
of a child, to the prejudice of your
greatest interests [Fenelon].

Ver. 2, 3. Life.
my lord, and you cannot die too soon,
nor live too long [Lady Rachel Russel].

“So weak is man,

So ignorant and blind, that did not God

Sometimes withhold in mercy what we ask

We should be ruined at our own request.”

[H. More.]

Ver. 4, 5. Dost thou well? It would
check our angry complainings under the
afflictive hand of God, and turn them
into praises for the very moderate
measure of trial with which he visits
us, to review our own vileness and desert
of wrath, and the great grace shown to-
wards us (Ezra ix. 13; Ps. ciii. 10; Job
xi. 6) [Sibthorp]. The Divine Being
does not always like to use extreme
penalties, but the more gentle, that men
may not only be disciplined by pain,
but also by moral conviction. Hence
God frequently comes to the human
soul in the language of this verse, and
says, “Dost thou well to be angry?”
And this quiet method of correction is
frequently effective, awaking in the soul
thoughts that end in a return to reason
and purity [Bell].

Ver. 7—9. The Lord’s servants are
under a continual course of instruction.
Every circumstance of every day and
hour has its proper lesson for them,
which it is their duty, wisdom, and
privilege to learn. The end of their
instruction is entire sanctification and
meetness for glory through conformity
to the image of God. When they are
refractory, as Jonah now was, God takes
commonly some special method to recall
them to duty, and pursue his object of
their growth in grace [Sibthorp].

Ver. 9—11. The teachings of Nature,
which unbelievers vaunt as all-sufficient,
have never led mankind to a correct


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JONAH.


Live virtuously,,


[cHaP. IV.





knowledge of God, nor produced holy
feeling ; and they never can. But they
may prepare for the Word, and be used
to convey it, illustrate it, and fix it in
the memory. God schooling Jonah in
patient, tender love, and through him
preparing instruction for Israel and for
us, uses Nature to prepare the way for
the lessons wf the Word. As when he
sent Nathan to David with a parable, to
make David condemn himself out of his
own mouth, so to Jonah he sends the .
gourd and the worm, the wind and the
sunshine, to prepare the way for making
his better feelings condemn His worse.
He will make his pity for the plant ex-
plain God’s pity for Nineveh, and con-
demn Jonah’s want of pity for that
multitude of souls [Mitchel].

This wonderful book of Jonah has
given us a picture of the human heart,
not in its lowest degradation, but taught
by revelation, restrained by conscience,
influenced more or less by piety, but
stripped of its disguises and company
dress. God takes us behind the scenes
to show us how in Nature his hand and
purpose are working by storm and sun-
shine, fish and worm, and so puts a
window for us in the heart of, man.
Jonah speaks out to God, and acts out
before us, and writes down for us to
read, without suppression, palliation, or
extenuation, the sinful thoughts which
other men have, but do not make known.
We hav at once a picture of God’s
character, and a mirror in which to be-
hold our own [bid]. In the book of
Jonah we have thus a panorama of
historical facts, pregnant with the most
important instruction. Its lessons con-
stitute the staple of the teaching of the
later prophets, and contain the leading
thoughts which were developed in their
writings, imbedded in the mind of
Israel, and expounded by Christ and
his apostles.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


Male Ac.


INTRODUCTION.


Tue Propuzt. Micah is an abbreviated form of Micaiah, mentione? in Jer.
zxvi. 18. He was a native of Moresheth-Gath, prophesied in Judea, and must be
distinguished from Micaiah, son of Imlah, in 1 Kings xxii. 8. Of his life we
know nothing but what may be gathered from his book. The Prophet himself
aeems to allude to his name (ch. vii. 18); tradition has many stories about him,
but we can only affirm that he belongs to the critical time in the latter half of tne
8th century B. 0.

Tau Prriop in which Micah lived may be gathered from the superscription.
The reigns of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah are given, ¢.e. 727—698 B.o. “At
that time the Assyrian kingdom, just prior to its fall, recovered its power, under
Salmanassar, and with irresistible might carried the profound commotions of God’s
iudgments, predicted by Amos (chs. i. and ii.), over the peoples of Western Asia and
even to Africa” [Lange]. “The Prophet’s lively rebukes, together with the
corres, nding picture of Isaiah and other writers, give a description of the sins of
the age He lingers in his prophecy among the towns of the maritime plain (the
Shephélah), where his birth-place lay. Among the few places of that neighbour-
hood, which he selects for warning and for example of the universal captivity, is
his native village, ‘the home he loved.’ But the chief scene of his ministry was
Jerusalem. He names it in the beginning of his prophecy as the place where the
idolatries, and with the idolatries all the other sins of Judah, were concentrated.
The two capitals, Samaria and Jerusalem, were the chief objects of the Word of
God to him, because the corruption of each kingdom streamed forth fiom them
The sins which he rebukes are chiefly those of the capital. Extreme oppression,
violence among the rich, bribing among judges, priests, prophets ; building up the
capital even by cost of life, or actual bloodshed; spoliation, expulsion of the
powerless women and children from their homes; covetousness, cheating in
dealings, pride. These, of course, may be manifoldly repeated in lesser places of
resort and of judgment. But it is Zion and Jerusalem which are so built up with
blood, and must be ploughed as afield. Especially they are the heads and princes
of the people whom he upbraids for the perversion of justice, and for oppression.
Even the good kings of Judah seem to have been powerless to restrain the general


oppression ” [ Pusey).


396 ; INTRODUCTION.


Tre Boox. Isaiah sweeps over all history, and sheds the tight of prophecy
over all nations; but Micah fixes on his own people, and prophesies against Israel
(Samaria) and against Judah (Jerusalem). God will temper judgment with
mercy. He will chasten Zion, but the Redeemer will come to Zion as a man
“from Bethlehem of Judah,” and as a Mighty Conqueror to subdue his enemies,
and ‘Jerusalem will be the Mother Church of Christendom.” The temple will be
destroyed, but a nobler building shall rise out of its ruins, and the law shall be
fulfilled in the gospel. ts analysis. It is divided into three parts, all beginning
with Hear ye. (1st) Chs.i.andii. (2nd) Chas. iii.,iv., v. (3rd) Chs. vi., vii. “In
the first the threatening of judgment predominates ; in the second the announce-
ment of the Messianic salvation; in the third there follows the parcenesis or
admonition to repentance and humiliation under the chastening hand of the Lord,
in order to participate in the promised salvation. As this admonition rests upon
the threat of judgment and promise of salvation in the two previous addresses, so
does the allusion to the judgment contained in the words, “ Then will they cry to
Jehovah,” &c. (ch. iii. 4), presuppose the announcement in chap. i. of the judgment
about to burst upon the land, without which it would be perfectly unintelligible.
Consequently there can be no doubt whatever that Micah has simply concentrated
the quintessence of his oral discourses into the addresses contained in his book.
This quintessence, moreover, shows clearly enough that our Prophet was not at all
behind his contemporary Isaiah, either in the clearness and distinctness of his
Messianic announcements, or in the power and energy with which he combated the
sins and vices of the nation” [Keil]. Its style. “He stands next to Isaiah in
force and freshness, continuity of expression, and in the plastic choice of words,
In the arrangement of his thoughts, however, abrupt and fond of sharp contrasts,
he reminds us more of his older contemporary, Hosea. The beautiful plan of his
discourse is admirable” [Lange]. The diction is rigorous and clear, varied in rich
figures, and derived from pastoral and rural life. The changes are sudden,
frequently hidden by our version, for the simple connective (vav) is often rendered
by some logical term as “therefore” (i. 6), “then” (iii. 7), “but” (iv. 1), &e.
Intercourse with northern nations had not debased his language. ‘‘ An undertone
of deep earnestness pervades the book ; everywhere are discerned the workings of
an intensely honourable and patriotic soul. Micah is successful in the use of the
dialogue, and his prophecies are penetrated by the purest spirit of morality and
piety.” ‘‘ His prophecy sank so deep, that above a century afterwards, just when
it was about to have its fulfilment, it was the prophecy which was remembered.
But the sufferings of time disappeared in the light of eternal truth. Above seven
centuries rolled by, and Micah reappears as the herald, not of sorrow, but of
salvation, Wise men from afar, in the nobility of their simple belief, asked,
‘Where is he that is born King of the Jews?’ The answer was given unhesitatingly,
as a well-known truth of God, in the words of Micah, When he was born, he
was pointed out as the object of worship to the first converts fr m the heathen on

ugh Micah” [Pusey].


CHAP. I. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. 397
| SSD


CHAPTER L


Critica, Norzs. 2. Hear] Lit. Hear, ye peoples all of them. ‘Some 140 or 150 years had
flowed by since Micaiah, son of Imlah, had ‘closed his prophecy in these words. Now t¢ ey burst
out anew. From age to age the Word of God holds its course, ever receiving new fulfilments, never
dying out, until the end shall come” [Pusey]. All therein] Heb. the fulness thereof (Ps. xxiv. 1).
Similar appeals in Isa. i. 2, and Deut. xxxii. 1. Witness] ina hostile sense, in judgment, as 1 Sam.
xii, 5: Mal. iii. 6. Temple] ¢.¢. from heaven where he is enthroned (Ps. xi. 4), and from whence
wrath is revealed (Rom. i. 18). 8. Tread} upon the proud and idolatrous (high places) people, as
Ruler over all the earth. 4.] Imagery from storms and earthquakes, to describe the terrors of God’s
judgments (Ps, xviii. 8). The similes, “like wax” (as in Ps. Ixviii. 3), and “like water,” are
intended to express the complete dissolution of mountains and valleys. ‘The actual facts answering
to this description are the destructive influences exerted upon nature by great national judgments”
[Keil]. 5. Trans.] as the cause of this judgment, Samaria and Jerusalem, the capitals of Israel
and Judah, are the centres and source of corruption which has filled the kingdoms. 6. Heap]
Samaria, judged first, will be destroyed—not a trace of the city will be left—and become like a
heap of stones gathered from the field. Pour] Dash down the stones of the city into the valley
beneath. “The stones of the temples and palaces of Samaria have been carefully removed from the
rich soil, thrown together in heaps, built up in the rude walls of terraces, and rolled down into the
valley below” [Porter’s Handbook}. 't.] Her treasures were gathered from the hire of a harlot,
and to the hire of a harlot must they return, Literal prostitution was practised in Babylon and
Syria, and the Aire was dedicated to the support of the priesthood, and idolatrous worship. 8.] The
Prophet first laments himself, that he may touch others. Stripped] 1. ¢. of shoes or sandals,
Naked] ¢.e. without upper garment (1 Sam, xix. 24). This representation accords with Isa. xx. 2,
and symbolizes what would befall the people. Dragons] Jackals or wolves (Job xxx. 29), whose
howlings are at night most lamentable. Ostrich] Remarkable for its peculiar shrieks in pain.
9. Wounds] Lit. the strokes inflicted upon her, Public calamities are often compared to diseases
(Isa. i, 5). Gate] “Because in it, par excellence, the people went out and in.” Even the capital
would not be spared. 10,] The Prophet thinks now of the malicious joy of heathen neighbours.
Ten places are mentioned in verses 10—15 to depict what would happen in them. In most cases
the things said of each city are a play upon the name of that city, a method of writing well adapted
to impress the memory [Cowles]. 11. Forth] To console others (Jer. vi. 25). Standing] ¢.¢. the
sustenance of the foe. 12. Waited] for better fortune, but in vain [Calvin]. 18. Bind] Flee as
fast as possible from the advancing enemy. Begin.] The first to introduce false gods. 14. Thou]
Israel would renounce all claim to Mor. and give it up to the foe; and Ach. would answer to its
name, and disappoint Israel’s hopes. 15. Heir] A new possessor, viz., the Assyrian shall occupy
the place, as they expelled former inhabitants, and Israel’s glory (Adul/am) shall decay. 16. Bald]
A token of deep mourning (Job i. 20: Isa. xv. 2: Jer. xvi. 6). Children] wept for, as the loss of
a mother. Eagle] Not the common eagle, but the bearded or carrion vulture, Judgments in
general are described, not particular definite punishments, without precise methods of accomplish-
ment, so that the predictions embrace all the judgments against Judah which took place from the
Assyrian invasion until the Roman catastrophe [ Kei/].


HOMILETICS.
Tue Propuetio Mzssace.— Verses 1, 2.


“The Prophet’s first address is throughout of a threatening and punitive
character ; it is not till quite the close, that the sun of Divine grace breaks brightly
through the thunder-clouds of judgment” [etl]. In these words we have an appeal
to all nations to observe the message of the Prophet.

I. A message from God. “The word of the Lord.” All prophets have the
same truth to assert. Their message is Divine and not from “the will of man.”
It declares the purpose, reveals the mercy and the judgment of God. It is seen in
prophetic vision, felt and known to be certain and true. It bears witness to God
in the hearts of men and in the nations of the earth, IL A message from God
through man. “That came to Micah.” ‘The Prophet and no other man of his
day was specially chosen to declare the word of the Lord. He was qualified by
vision and spiritual intercourse with God. There is a human as well as a Divine


398 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. [CHAYF. 1.





element in the’ spoken or written word. God acts not on, but in and through, mau.
Vital energy was no? lost ina passive state, and growth reduced to mere existence.
The prophets spoke not by mechanical impulse or dictation. Their natural and
spiritual gifts were not set aside. They had sympathy with truth and men. Their
intellect and heart were fixed on the same pursuit, and God’s word found them in
a waiting position. III. A message from God through man for all people. For
the people of the present and the future generations. 1. The present. Samaria
and Jerusalem were immediately concerned, the chief cities of the two kingdoms.
Judgment first begins at the house of God. Jerusalem, God’s people, must not be
spared. But other people are often prominent in sin and punishment. Samaria
is put first as chief in provocation. God deals in equity with men and chastises
according to desert. Some are threatened and comforted ; others judged without
mercy. We expect equity in our intercourse with each other. Shall not the Judge
of the earth do right, mete justice to each individually and to all men in every-
thing? At last all ranks will be adjusted, and to every one will be given his due.
2. The future. “Hear, all ye people.” God warns the future through the present
generations. Angels and men, heaven and earth, are cited to witness the solemn
scene. The whole creation stands in court, to reprove the sins of men, and testify
to the justice of Divine pleading. The guilty cannot escape. The “holy temple”
will not protect the hypocrite, as tutelar deities were thought to protect the heathen.
The majesty of God from heaven will overawe and silence the sinner. God will
purge his floor, and discern between his nominal and real people. ‘“ He shall call
to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. The Word. Micaiah son of of his conduct. He warns before the
Imlah closed his prophecy with these stroke. Seek to be saved, and rest not
words (1 Kings xxii. 28). The minis- in holy places and carnal security.
trations of one prophet are a continua- Hearken, O earth. 1. The trial of
tion of his predecessors. They are not the Great Judge. 2. The parties ac-
parts or parcels, but connected with cused. 3. The witnesses called. 4.
Divine revelation in every age, and fill The seat of the Judge—The Judgment
up one grand design. Hence learn, 1. of the visible Church. It is Divine,
The benevolence of the Word. 2. The public, searching, solemn, and righteous.
adaptation of the Word. 3. The per- Holy temple. The elevation, suprem-
petuity of the Word. acy, and invisibility of God’s throne

Hear, all people. The judgment of [Spurgeon]. ‘The Lord is in his holy
Israel] 1. A warning to all people. temple, the Lord’s throne is in heaven :
2. A type of final judgment. God by his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the
the fulfilment of this word is a “wit- children of men.”
ness” to the guilt of sin and the equity


HOMILETICS.
Tue AwFuL Jupament.— Verses 3—7.


To quicken attention to his message, the Prophet declares God’s purpose to
humble the most eminent and manifest his justice to all.

I. The seat of judgment. “The Lord cometh forth out of his place.” If the
place means either the temple or heaven itself, the procedure is not ordinary. God
quits the temple, and turns the mercy-seat into a throne of judgment. He has not
retired from the goverument of the world, but rends the heavens and comes down
in awful justice to sinful nations. His daily providence affords no rule to guide
1s when he ‘comes out of his place.” He manifests himself in surprising
wrath (Isa. xxvi. 21), and performs “terrible things which we looked not for.”
II. The circumstances of judgment. ‘The mountains shall be molten unde


“HAP. LJ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAR. 395


eee.


him,” &c. This may be figurative language, but it conveys a zeal truth. Nature
trembles, and its stability dissolves at God’s presence. The hills melt like wax
before the fire, the mountains pour down like floods into the valley. ‘The earth in
its lowest depths feels the indignation of a righteous God. Nature often realizes
the destructive power of Divine judgments. History proves that all her forces are
yoked to accomplish God’s purposes. The hardest will melt, the strongest cannot
resist ; “for, behold, the Lord will come with fire, to render his anger with fury,
and his rebuke with flames of fire.” III. The cause of judgment. “ For the
transgressions of Jacob, is all this.” Jerusalem, the centre of holiness, and the
residence of Jehovah, was the seat of idols, and the fountain of uncleanness (2 Chron.
xxvili. 24). The unity, the claims, and the being of God were denied in the worship
of Baal (Ezek. xvi. 31: 2 Chron. xxviii. 24, 25). Samaria, the rival capital, was the
seat of injustice, and the corrupter of the country. The sins of these places were
obstinate and aggravating. Sir is the cause of all ruin, material and moral.
Multiplied sins (transgressions) will bring severe strokes. External rites and out
ward profession will not secure “the house of Israel.” Wealth and population
cannot defend Samaria. All have provoked God to anger, and must feel his
severity. Those who take no warning and feel no shame, ought to learn that
shame and warning are a desert and a presage to ruin. “They are all of them
unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.” IV. The effects of
judgment. ‘“ The order of the sin was the order of the punishment,” says one.
1. High places would be overturned. God will “tread upon the high places of the
earth.” Men of eminence, scenes of idolatry, and military fortifications ; every-
thing set in opposition to him would be trampled down and levelled in the dust.
The lofty and the proud, the mighty and the secure, will be cast down. Those
who trust in the height of the mountain or in the fertility of the valley, the muni-
tions of rocks or the abundance of wealth, will be disappointed. There is no
security against Divine judgment but in Christ Jesus. 2. Idolatry would be
demolished. The édols themselves would be stripped by the foe and destroyed. All
graven images would be beaten to pieces. Gross superstitions and refined idolatry
are spiritual adultery, and provoke God to jealousy. The Aire and support of
idolatry would be taken away. Micah adopts the language of Hosea (Hosea il. 5—
8; ix. 1; x. 6). The wealth or rewards received for worshipping idols, the gifts
and votive offerings laid upon the altars, would enrich another nation. They had
been gathered as the hire of a harlot, “and they shall return to the hire of a
harlot.” Riches gained without God will be scattered away. Cursed in their
origin, cursed in their end. “ Ill got, ill spent.” ‘“ Whatever material prosnerity is
gained by ignoring or dethroning God is the hire, the price of the soul, and shall
be burned out with fire.” Men shall be put to shame that abuse their gifts, and
their sinful gain shall turn to everlasting loss. 3. The city wouid be destroyed.
Samaria, the crown of pride (Isa. xxviii. 1), was to be reduced to its original mean-
ness, the site of vine-plantings. Its gorgeous palaces and noble temples would be
destroyed. The stones would be rolled down the hills, and gathered into heaps as
monuments of ruin. The foundations would be laid bare, and not one stone left
upon another. The destruction would be complete ; fragments of human habita-
tions, emblems of man’s labour and luxury, should lie amid the beauty and fertility
of nature. Traces of sin and punishment are written in commercial ruin, naticual
disgrace, and natural scenery. Whatever we build without God, church systems
or family fortunes, and cement by strongest sins, will be hurled down with the
storm ; great will be their fall and eternal their ruins. “ See ye not all these
things? verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another


that shall not be thrown down.”


Tas IncuraBLe Wounp.— Verses 8, 9.
The strokes inflicted by God are most severe. The wound is incurable. Morally


400 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH, (onaP. 1


and politically individually and generally, the case is desperate. Hence tne
Prophet is moved to bitter sorrow.

I. The moral disease of men is incurable. Obstinacy in sin will bring Divine
judgments, and no hand can cure the wounds that God inflicts but his own. 1. [¢
is a deadly disease. ‘“ Her wound is incurable,” lit. she is grievously sick of her
wounds. The centre, the vital parts of the kingdom, are tainted, the capital is cor-
rupted. 2. It is a universal disease. The calamity begins with Samaria and
comes to Jerusalem, the seat of justice and of religion. 3. Jt is a hopeless disease.
The Prophet saw no remedy in the present state of things. This is a sad picture
of the condition of the sinner. He is not simply in distress, but morally diseased
and morally incurable. ‘There are anodynes that may deaden their pains, and
death will relieve them of their torture,” says a writer; “but a morally incurable
soul is destined to pass into anguish, intense and more intense as existence runs on,
and peradventure without end.” ‘ Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous,”
II. This morally incurable wound should create intense sorrow. The
Prophet vents his grief in all ways of expressing grief. He goes stripped, “ half-
naked,” as we say, without garments of beauty, despoiled, plundered by an enemy.
He wails like the pitiable cry of a jackal in the night, or an ostrich bereaved of her
young. He mourns with increasing feeling for the chastisement, and as an example
to his people. We should lament not only the sufferings of saints but the punish-
ments of sinners. Ministers themselves must be affected with the message they
deliver to others. ‘To win souls they must be men of sympathy. The impending
ruin of the ungodly must move them to tears before God. “I will grieve from
the heart over those who perish,” said one. ‘ Who is weak, and I am not weak ?
Who is offended, and I burn not?” “ Why is my pain perpetual and my wound
incurable, which refuseth to be healed 1”


THe PropHet’s LAMENTATION.— Verse 10,


The calamity of God’s people and the sorrow of the Prophet were such that
snould be unknown to the enemy, lest he should indulge in malignant joy, and add
to affliction. Hence, in language borrowed from 2 Sam. i. 20, they are urged to
conceal distress, suppress weeping, lest the Philistines in Gath should hear.

Learn, I. That some rejoice in the affliction of God’s people. “Declare it not,”
&c. Many would be glad to see the Church in deepest misery. Strange to say
that nearest neighbours are often bitterest enemies. Gath was next to the borders,
but did not partake of the spirit of Judah. But God’s servants have great
sympathy with his people, and constant jealousy for his honour. “ Let none that
wait on thee be ashamed.” II. That God’s people cannot always hide their
affliction. ‘ Weep not,” it will be of no avail. Sometimes grief may be smothered
by concealing it. At other times it is impossible to hide it. God will publish it
as a discipline to his people and a warning to the world. Our afflictions must be
noted by men, and under them they may be permitted to insult and reproach us.
But God will defend his honour and his church. ‘ Remember, Lord, the reproach
of thy servants” (Cf. Ps. lxxxix. 50: 1 Pet. ii. 20). IIT. That God’s people
should humble themselves under their affliction. ‘Roll thyself in the dust.’
It not to mourn in Gath, they may in Aphrah. Silent before the wicked, they
may grieve in private. Noisy lamentation may be imprudent, but silent tears are
becoming. When weeping would be the joy and laughter of God’s enemies it is
often acceptable to God. From the dust we sprang, to the dust we must return,
and affliction is designed to remind us of this. ‘“O daughter of my people, gird
thee with sackcloth, and wallow thyself in ashes: make thee mourning, as for an
only son, most bitter lamentation.”


Great Citizs anD Great Ruin.—Verses 11—16.


Whether the following places be figurative or real, they set forth the greatness
of the calamity which falls upon them by their names, qualities, and condition.


CHAP, I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. 401





_ I. Great cities are often guilty of great sins. Proximity and commercial
Intercourse corrupt. Popular sins spring from certain ranks and certain places.
Each has its special sin, and all are involved in idolatry and its miseries. II. In
the punishment of great cities God deals to each its due. Each city of Judah
received its due. Saphir with its beauty would be clothed with shame; Zaanan
with its flocks and population would be the encampment of the enemy, and unable
to sympathize with Beth-ezel, its nearest neighbour. ‘The inhabitants of Muroth
would expect good and receive evil ; Lachis# would be strong only to flee, “like
a brook that fails and deceives; her inheritance (Mareshah) inherited ; herself
taking refuge in dens and caves of the earth, yet even there found and bereft of
her glory.” God weighs truly the responsibilities of each, and foremost in privi-
leges will be foremost in punishment for the neglect of those privileges. III. Ne
earthly power can ward off the punishment of great cities. It may be lawful
to defend ourselves in danger; but against God’s fierce anger none can prevail.
1. Human helps will be in vain. Maroth waited anxiously for good, but were dis-
appointed (ver. 12). Beauty and strength, splendid positions and large populations,
will not succour those who trust to them. Men who hope in sin will find bitter-
ness in the end; and this bitterness may only be the beginning of a greater
calamity. “Unto the gate of Jerusalem.” 2. Flight cannot save (ver. 13).
Lachish had chariots and swift beasts, but where are they now? Shut up in the
hand of the enemy, and unable to escape. “The horse is prepared against the day
of battle, but safety is of the Lord.” 3. Presents cannot bribe. Lachish would
send gifts to some town or country in Gath to purchase aid against the invader,
but would be disappointed. Wicked men employ any means rather than seek
God in trouble. They might learn from those whose sins are written on their
foreheads, and whose name and nature are a lie. ‘ The houses of Achzib shall be
a lie to the king of Israel.” 4. Great distance will not secure. Adullam was the
remotest border to Assyria (ver. 15). Distance, if such there be, can never exempt
from God’s judgments. He will find out and chastise the guilty wherever they be.
Christ is the only security, and heaven the only abiding inheritance. Secure those
blessings from which no enemy can drive you. IV. Universal mourning results
from the ruin of great cities. The body of the people, the mother cities, are
called upon to mourn. The people will be taken captive.and diminished, or if left
behind will be weakened and despised. Sin in the end will turn mirth into
bitterness, deprive of liberty, plunge into misery and everlasting lamentation.
“ And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning,
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth.”


Tue INHABITANT OF Marotu.— Verse 12.


This refers to the invasion of the Assyrian, the rod of God’s anger. He had
subdued and ravaged Israel, and now entered Judah. The Prophet laments the
horrors of the scene, and describes the effects of them upon the places in the line
of march. Maroth was very interior, and situated nigh Jerusalem ; and probably
the inhabitants thought on that account they were safer than those who lived on the
borders. This may remind us of the disappointments of life, the source of calamity,
and the season of deliverance. They “ waited carefully for good ;” but in vain :
“evil came.” Is sucha disappointment a strange or unusual thing? What is there
in life that is not uncertain, and does not expose the hope resting upon it? Is it Sub-
stance? Health? Children? Friends? Does the Scripture only cry, “‘ All is vanity ;”
and, ‘Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils”? Does not all history,
observation, and experience tell us the same? Let the young, and all, be sober in
expectation of earthly things. It is the way tc escape the surprise and anguish of
disappointment. Make the Lord your hope. He will not deceive us: he cannot
fail us. ‘‘ Bleased are all they that put pee trust in him.” See also the source of


sgt!


402 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. [CHAaP. a





calamity. “Evil came down from the Lord.” This seems strange when we are
assured that “every good and every perfect gift” comes down from him. Micah
speaks of natural evil, or the evil of suffering. And what calamity is there that
Scripture has not ascribed to God? A'storm at sea? “He breaketh the ships of
Tarshish.” Barrenness of soil? ‘He turneth a fruitful land into barrenness.”
The loss of connections? ‘Lover and friend hast thou put far from me.” We
oftener connect war with the follies and passions of men than other evils; but he
has “created the waster to destroy.” Never view sufferings, public or private,
personal or relative, abstractedly from God. Let not the instruments lead us to
overlook his agency. They could have no power at all against us except it was
given them from above. But how does this evil come from him? Some view
mercy as separate from justice; and others justice as separate from mercy: one of
these partial views genders presumption, the other despair. Extremes should be
avoided in considering God as the righteous governor and the tender father.
Everything in his present administration is adapted to show the union of holiness
and goodness, to awaken fear and hope. The evils he sends are the effects of sin;
the fruits to take away sin. We deserve them and need them; the one shows that
we have no right to murmur, the other that we have no reason to complain. Cheer-
ful submission is required ; but this can only be given when we see the relation
that affliction has to our desert and improvement. Mark also the time of deliver-
ance. Though God saves his people he may permit destruction to draw very nigh.
In this case he could have hindered the calamity at the frontier, but evil came
“unto the gate of Jerusalem.” So far, but no farther, did the insulting foe come.
Here were his proud waves stayed. Here his power and triumph ended. Heze-
kiah conquered him on his knees, and the Lord put his bridle into his jaws and drew
him back. The angel made a great slaughter in the camp that night, showing that
God can not only deliver in the greatest straits, but that he frequently does not
interfere till the evil has reached its extremity. The delay is not abandonment.
He waits to be gracious, and the season in which he will appear will display his
glory and draw forth our praise. It is often darkest just before the break of day.
“In the mount it shall be seen” [Jay].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 10. To be indifferent to the
honour of God, and to dave no sorrow
at reproach being brought on the cause
of religion through the fall of its pro-
fessors, is the mark of the carnal, unre-
generate mind [ Fausset].

Ver. 11. Selfish men are often so
taken up with their own sorrows that
they have no sympathy for others. ‘“‘ The
inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in
the mourning of Beth-ezel.”

Ver. 13. Beginning of sin. What a
world of evil lies in the three words!
[Pusey]. To be the first occasion and
chief stumbling-block in a land’s defec-
tiun brings on exemplary judgment
[ Hutcheson].

Ver. 14. Learn-—I. That in trouble
men often flee to human help. Treaties,
presents, and bribes are all tried rather
than God. II. That God warns men


against trusting to human help. 1.
By their own experience. 2. By the
experience of others. ‘The houses of
Achzib” might have taught wisdom,
for they are “a lie.” III. The failure
of all human helps is conspicuous.
They are known by their names, natures,
and results. They deceive, they are “a
lie.”

Ver. 15, All possessions, houses,
lands, and families are insecure when
God is provoked—may be taken from
us, and another may be the heir to them.
“TI will bring an heir unto thee.”

The glory of Israel. 1. Religious privi-
leges are the glory of a nation. 2. This
glory may depart through a nation’s sin.
When religious ordinances are neglected
or abused, and God is provoked, they
cannot ward off judgment. A nation’s
glory may then be laid in the dust.


cHaP, 1.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH.


403


nn


Ver. 16. 1. The signs of sorrow.
Baldness, enlarged baldness. In other
eases baldness forbidden Israel, but in
sorrow for sin they were called to it
(Isa. xxii. 12). As the eagle, which not
only loses its feathers, but its beauty,
swiftness, and courage with them. 2.
The causes of sorrow. The captivity of


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. Word. The Word of God
is the bodying forth of his mind, the
incarnation of his thought, the vehicle
of his will; by which he would bring
himself near to us, to woo us and awe
us, to attract us by his love or terrify us
by his judgments. It is the sum of all
that the world knows of him. It is the
expression of his character, the history
of his procedure [Legge].

Ver. 3, 4. Harth. Inanimate nature
knows its Creator, and worships him in
its own fashion, ‘States and kingdoms
which stand out upon the world like
mountains are utterly dissolved when
he decrees their end. Systems as ancient
and firmly-rooted as the hills pass away
when he does but look upon them”
[Spurgeon].

“‘ Macbeth is ripe for shaking, and the powers

above
Put on their instruments ” [Shakespeare].

Ver. 5. Transgression. God’s justice on
offenders goes not alwaysin thesame path,
nor the same pace; and he is not par-
doned for the fault who is for a while
reprieved from the punishment Deen

Ver. 6—8. Heap. Travellers spea
of the site of Samaria as strewed with
masses of ruins; of its rich soil now
cultivated in terraces ; and of the stones
that are collected together into heaps.
The whole face of this part of the hill
suggests the idea that the buildings of
the ancient city had been thrown down
from the brow of the hill. Ascending
to the top, we went round the whole
summit, and found marks of the same
process everywhere [Narrative of
Scottish Mission).

Ver. 7. Broken. Its idols in whom
she trusts, so far from protecting her,
shall themselves go into captivity,
broken up for the gold and silver


children. Indulgent fathers may be
come parricides, not parents. ‘Those
who give themselves up to luxury are
at least given up to miserable slavery.
When a man makes his children effemin-
ate he makes for himself grief and
heart-pangs ” [Lange].


TO CHAPTER I.


whereof they were made. The wars of
the Assyrians being religious wars, the
idolatry of Assyria destroyed the idol-
atry and idols of Israel [Pusey].

Ver. 9. Incwrable. Moral disorgan-
ization can never be remedied by intel-
lectual culture. Social reforms may
alter circumstances, but the gospel only
can remove the evils of society.

‘*Pause not ; for the present time’s so sick
That present medicine must be ministered,
Or overthrow incurable ensues” [Shakespeare],

Ver. 10—16. God's providences
illustrate his word. Nations are punished
for their sins. ‘“‘ History is a practical
comment upon revelation, and revelation
is a sure key to many parts of history.”

This passage of Micah (ver. 10—16)
is to be compared with that noble one
in Isaiah (x. 28—32), where the Prophet
describes the panic which spreads from
one town to another near Jerusalem,
when the Assyrian army under Sen-
nacherib invaded Judah, and took all
its fenced cities (xxxvi. 1). Micah
continues the prophetic description of
Isaiah. Isaiah represents the panic,
alarm, and havoc produced in the days
of Hezekiah by the Assyrian army
under Sennacherib invading Jerusalem
from the north-east. Micah represents
his career to the south-west, even to
Lachish, mentioned by both the pro-
phets (See ver. 13).

We know from Jeremiah (xxvi. 18)
that the prophetic warnings and reproofs
of Micah wrought powerfully on the
mind of the good king Hezekiah; and
that for a time the judgments impend-
ing over Jerusalem were averted by his
repentance. Similar results appear to
have been produced on him by the cheer-
ing voice of Isaiah, who completed the
work of Micah, by inspiring the king


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. (cHaP. I.


rr


with faith and hope; and God blessed people, and by destroying the army of
the work of the two prophets, and Sennacherib, when it returned from
the prayers of the penitent king, who at Egypt in triumph, beneath the walls of
first had faltered (See 2 Kings xviii, Jerusalem. (See above, on Isa. XXXViL
14—16), by delivering him and his 36.) [Wordsworth.]





. CHAPTER I.


Critica Notes.] Judgment has been pronounced in general, now special sins are deseribed.
The conduct of the nobility is denounced. Devise] Heb. to form plans (Ps, xxxvi. 5). Work]
Fabricate, mature the plan (Ps. lviii. 2), Practise] To execute (Is. xli. 4). Beds] ¢. e. by night
(Cf. Ps, iv. 6: Job iv, 13). Morning] 7. ¢. at break of day. Hand] Their hand is their God;
right is overruled by might. 2. Covet] Ci. Ex, xx. 14: Deut. v. 18. Oppress] Defraud. 3.
Family] Nation. Devise] Cf. ver. 1, “to set clearly before our eyes the jus ¢alionis prevalent in
God’s providence ’’ (Ex. xxi. 28: Is. xxxili. 1) [Lange]. Necks] You cannot shake off punishment
as ye have done law. Haughtily] Stiff necks will have to bend; they will not carry themselves
loftily (Ps. lviii. 9), for their iniquity causes an evil time, 4. Par-] Wickedness and punishment
will be subjects of common conversation. Doleful] Lit. laments with a lamentation of lamentations,
t. e. a mournfully mournful song. Say] ‘‘ Actwm est ! it is all over! an exclamation of despair.”
Turning] #. ¢. causes the inheritance to pass to the heathen ; some, “ to a rebel, our fields he divideth.”
5. Cast] No possession left for the usual mode of division. 6, Prophesy] Lit. to drip, to cause
words to flow, prophesying (Am. vii. 16). “The people, the false prophets, the politicians, forbade
God and Micah to prophesy. Prophesy not] God, by Micah, recites their prohibition to themselves,
and forewarns them of the consequences’’ [Pusey]. Shame] Lit. shames, manifold shame (cf. Am.
vii. 16). 7%. Straitened] ¢. ¢. shortened, impatient, These] 7. e. the punishments threatened; a
speech which claims for itself the promises regardless of moral condition. God not less merciful
than formerly (Ex. xxxiv. 6); but their sins have changed his proceedings towards them. 8. Late
Lit. yesterday = not long since; or again, recently, the people stood up, took an hostile attitude.
Pull off] Not content with the outer garment, they rob passers-by of the ornamental robe, strip
them of their habiliments as spoils of war. 9. Women] Widows, unprotected (Is. x. 2), were driven
from houses to which they were attached, and which they inherited from their husbands. Children]
Orphans of widows not spared. Glory] My ornament, ¢. e. garment or upper-coat. For ever] No
repentance, no return of the coat according to law (Ex. xxii. 25—27). 10. Arise] As you have cast
out others, so must you be cast out. Canaan was no longer a rest to them. 11. Spirit] Lit. walk
in the wind, sig. what is vain or worthless (Is. xxvi. 18; xli. 29); some, ‘the man of spirit, 7. ¢.
claiming inspiration.” Prophesy] Soothe you in gluttony and drunkenness; he would be listened
to because he flattered you. 12.] A sudden transition from judgment to joy. The remnant of Israel
after sifting shall be gathered together, multiplied, aad governed by Jehovah as their king. Bozrah]
Rich in pastures and flocks. 18. Breaker] ‘‘ A traditional Messianic expression,” will break a way
for them in every hindrance and enemy, Cyrus delivering from Babylon is an eminent type of
Christ redeeming from sin. Gate] of the city of captivity. Before] them, as in going up out of
Egypt (Ex. xiii, 21: Deut. i. 30, 33), to lead the way. ‘The fulfilment of this prophecy com-
menced with the gathering together of Israel to its God and King by the preaching of the Gospel,
and will be completed at some future time when the Lord shall redeem Israel, which is now pining
in dispersion, out of the fetters of its unbelief and life of sin ” [Kor].


HOMILETICS.


Tas Concertion anD Practice oF Insustice.— Verses 1, 2.


Special sins are now condemned. The injustice and oppression of the rich are
denounced and threatened with punishment.

I. Injustice in its purpose. “That devise iniquity.” Iniquity is first con-
ceived, purposed, or planned. They plot and forecast before they act it. Actions
are traced to principles. Devising is the incipient working of the principle.
The thought is the fountain of the deed. God calls it the work of evil, and holds
us responsibla for it (Prov. xiv. 22: Matt ix. 3, 4). It is bad enough to be.


CHAP, IL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH. 105








led into wickedness by others, but to devise, to scheme it is the depravity
of “inventors of evil things” (Rom. i, 30). II. Injustice in its maturity.
They “work evil,” mature it in thoughts and desires. 1. Jt is matured in the
night, “upon their beds.” In the rest and stillness of night when they should
commune with their own hearts and their God. They turn the chamber of
sleep into a place for plotting, and abuse retirement by wicked designs. “He
deviseth mischief upon his bed; he setteth himself in a way that is not good.”.
2. It is matured in the day. ‘ When the morning is light.” arly, very soon
after conception it is perfected. On their bed, and in their waking hours; no
leisure between deliberation and practice. It is done (1) Openly, in the light. (2)
Deliberately, in full light. (3) Shamefully, against knowledge and conscience. 3.
It is matured by might. “ Because it is in the power of their hand.” Might, not
right, regulated their conduct. The lust for power increases in strength and law-
lessness, until it becomes a law to itself, the master passion of the soul. Then no
sacrifices are too costly, no measures too atrocious, for the attainment of its object.
“ This they begin to do, and now nothing will be restrained from them which. they
have imagined to do.” III. Injustice in its practice. ‘They practise it.” There
is a gradation in evil. First they sin in thought, then desire, and afterwards in act.
To covet and to rob, to desire and to take, were the same thing with them, 1. Z
is a forbidden practice. They covet, disregard law, and seek to add field to field.
2. It is a violent practice. ‘‘Take them by violence.” Grossly and openly, by
force and fraud, did they seize the property of others. 3. It is an inhuman practice.
“They oppress a man and his house.” They took away houses and heritages, and
ruined whole families and their offspring. Human life was not held sacred. Like
Ahab, they first coveted, then sought to destroy their fellow-men by violence and
false accusation. ‘Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours.” 4. Jt
is a cursed practice. ‘ Woe to them!” Woe in Hebrew means all kind of pain,
sorrow, and misery. Covetousness is the root of all evil to ourselves and others
(1 Tim. vi. 9, 10). A covetous man is cursed in this life and in that to come.
‘“‘ Beware of covetousness.”
‘© You take my house when you do take the pro


That doth sustain my house; you take my life
When you do take the means whereby I live” [Shakespeare].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


The reign of selfishness, 1. Kach
one strives and plans for himself alone.
2. Each one trusts in his own strength.


what a man has been occupied with even
on his bed [Zdid.]. 1. Notice the
gradation of the evil. Conception,


3. Each one disregards the law [Lange
(adapted)]. What a temptation it is to
have the power to do what evil spite
suggests! What would many a one do
if the power of the hand were as great
as the boldness of the heart! As it is,
however, God judges according to the
counsel of the heart, and brings to light


earnest preparation, and execution by
force. ‘They say, they coveted, they
took,” like Achan. 2. The relation
between .wicked thoughts and wicked
deeds. The oppressor in his bed, in his
heart, and in his life. Resist the first
attacks of sin lest ye be eventually
overcome.


HOMILETICS


Retrisutive PunisHMENt.— Verses 3—5.


Sentence is now pronounced against the sins specified, and the 1006 threatened
(ver. 1) is explained. God will inflict such judgments, and bring such times, that
will effectually humble their pride and recompense their wickedness.

I. Punishment in kind. God is not an idle spectator of oppression, and delay


206 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. [cHaP. 11





in punishment is not disregard. 1. They devised evil against others, and evil is
devised against them. ‘ Against this family do I devise an evil.” Retribution is
measured and planned against wicked men. Infinite wisdom will frustrate and
punish human designs. 2. They took the lands of others, and their own land shall
be taken from them. The inheritance was given to the foe and would never be
divided by lot again. Mercies given by special providence may be removed in
righteous Judgment for our sin. If we forsake God he will forsake us. Riches,
honour, and pleasure he can turn into captivity, and unjust gain will pass into the
hands of others. Words are not sown in the wind, and actions written in the
dust ; but like imperishable seed they spring up and fructify in human life,
“‘ Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap.” II. Punishment most
humiliating. 1. They would be humbled in their pride. “ Neither shall ye
go haughtily.” Men dream that if they cannot avoid judgments they will be
undaunted and courageous under them. God can humble the proud, subdue the
self-willed, and throw the mightiest into captivity and sorrow. 2. They would
become a by-word in their sufferings. ‘In that day shall one take up a parable
against you.” The calamity was not an ordinary one, but a common proverb in the
mouth of others. Sinners are often an example of God’s justice and a warning to
others. When others insult and jest at our grief it is most bitter to endure. The
most haughty and prosperous will then be dejected and sad. 3. Their condition
would be most lamentable. ‘ Lament with a doleful lamentation.” (a) Because
the change was so great. God had taken their possessions and fixed others in
them. ‘He hath changed the portion of my people.” (5) Because their case
was so hopeless. ‘We be utterly spoiled.” What reverses in life to prove the
folly of men and the providence of God. “Son, remember that thou in thy life-
time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things ; but now he is
comforted and thou art tormented.” III. Punishment most irretrievable. “ An
evil from which ye shall not remove your necks.” It was a yoke they could
neither avoid nor shake off. From the two tribes the yoke was removed, but the
ten were never able to withdraw their necks. The punishment was most severe
and proportioned in justice to the sins. Those that will not be ruled by grace will
be overcome by judgment. Prefer the easy to the iron yoke. Flee now from sin
that you may be saved from judgment at last. ‘ For this time is evil.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 4. The dirge which follows is
purposely in abrupt brief words, as
those in trouble speak, with scarce a
breath for utterance. rst, in two
words, with perhaps a softened inflec-
tion, they express the utterness of their
desolation. Zhen, in a threefold sen-
tence, each close consisting of three
short words, they say what God has
done, but name him not because they
are angry with him. God’s chastise-
ments irritate those whom they do not
subdue (Amos vi. 10) [Pusey].

Spoiled. Joel spoke of the parting of
their land, under this same term, as a
sin of the heathen (iii. 2). Now they
say God divideth our fields, not to us,
but to the heathen, whose lands he
gave us. It was a change of act; in


impenitence they think it a change of
purpose or will, But what lies in that
we be utterly despoiled ? Despoiled of
everything ; of what they felt, tem-
poral things; and of what they did not
feel, spiritual things. Despoiled of the
land of promise, the good things of this
life, but also of the presence of God in his
temple, the grace of the Lord, the image
of God and everlasting glory [Pusey].

Blessings abused are at last removed
by the Almighty Giver.

None by lot. Wickedness casting
out a people, 1. From the protection
and blessings of God; 2. Will cast out
from the presence of God _ hereafter.
Neither part nor lot in this matter
(Acts viii. 21),


CHAP. IL} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. 407








HOMILETICS.
Opposition To Gon’s Worp anv ITs ConsequENons.— Verses 6, 7.


A second accusation is brought against them, for contempt of God’s Word and
opposition to his servants. The wicked could not endure the threatening of judg-
ment, sought to silence the Prophet (Amos vii. 10—12), or make him preach to
please only, as their false prophets did. This conduct adds to their sins, leaves
them without true teachers, and throws them into deeper shame.

I. Man’s opposition to God’s Word. “Prophesy ye not, say they to them that
prophesy.” Opposition to God’s Word is an insult to his character, and a denial of
his authority. 1. Men are offended with the faithful preaching of the Wocd.
The truth is unwelcome to those who live in sin. Judgment terrifies thew and
conscience accuses them in guilt. The cross is an offence, and the gospel a
stumbling-block to many. They want the preacher to please them, withhold the
truth, and speak peace when there is no peace. “ Prophesy not unto us right
things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits.” 2. Men are offended
with the constant preaching of the Word. “Drop not,” distil not; indicating
habitual and unceasing warning and lamentation. Occasional appeals may be
overlook3d ; but to be constantly threatened is disagreeable and offensive. It is
vinegar and nitre dropped in the conscience instead of dew and refreshment to the
heart. It argues an ungodly life and a degenerate age to resist the warnings of the
gospel. “Did we not straitly command you, that ye should not teach in this
name?” II. God’s purpose to fulfil His Word. When the wicked said prophesy
not, the Lord answered, they shall prophesy. The Word must be published. Men
must be warned whether they hear or forbear. 1. God’s servants must obey their
commission. Persecuted and opposed, they must be faithful to their trust and to their
God. “Of a truth the Lord hath sent me unto you to speak all these words in
your ears” (Jer. xxvi. 1O—15). 2. God’s Spirit cannot be restruined. “Is the
Spirit of the Lord straitened ?” Can you overcome God by opposing his servants 4
Can you restrain the Spirit from uttering the truth, or resolve its purpose to what
you please? Can you quench the sun or imprison the light? Then you may
limit the Holy Spirit in its operations. If God thunders in judgment, it is not
because he cannot give mercy. His power is not diminished, and his mercy is
from everlasting to everlasting (Cf. Isa. 1. 2: Ps. ciii. 17). But sins and iniquities
hide his face from you, hinder his word, and procure your punishment. III. The
awful consequences of opposing God’s Word. God takes them at their word.
They shall not prophesy, and their shame shall not be removed. 1. This will deprive
them of the faithful ministry. If men silence God’s ministers and hinder God’s
word, God will leave them without light and reproof. They will have their wish
and be righteously punished for their choice, Ephraim is joined to his idols, let
him alone. 2. This will offend the Spirit of God. Im silencing the prophets
they did what they could to silence and limit the Spirit. “Is the Lord’s Spirit
straitened ?” But impenitence cannot shut out conviction from the heart. Human
sinfulness cannot frustrate Divine purposes. 3. This will rob them of religious
privileges. “Thou art named the house of Jacob,” but this conduct is most un-
reasonable for such dignity. Men study to keep up a name, but it is only a name,
without anything to answer to it in life. God discerns between show and sub-
stance, fair titles and truth. Men may boast of descent, rely on false security,
and flatter themselves that they are Abraham’s children ; but God will reject them,
call them a sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity. Their privileges will be
taken away, and their profession will bring a curse and nota blessing. “ Thon
hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.”


Tar Apvantaaes or RaveLation.—Verse 7.
The Word of God must operate according to the principles and dispositions


408 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH. (cHar. {2


within us. If it be food, it is nothing to the dead, but to the living only. The
benefit is only to them that walk by it. We are not to expect that his words will
do us good mechanically, that is, without our consciousness or activity ; or that
they will act in us as physical causes operate in the body, where the concoction of
the food and the circulation of the fluids go on when we are asleep as well as when
we are awake, being independent of our volitions and thoughts. The Scriptures can
only affect us morally, in a way of motive, in the exercises of the mind, and in the
use of the means which God has appointed. This is the only way in which we are
authorized to look for it to work. We must read, hear, and understand them; we
must pray over them, speak of them, and reflect upon them. It is endless to describe
the benefit they will then do for us. They will do us good in a way of information.
For the soul to be without knowledge it is not good. There is no knowledge like
that of the Scriptures. It is clear, full, and blessed. It gives life to them that have
it. It is an advantage in duty and perplexity to hear the voice: This is the way,


_ walk ye in it. They will do us good in a way of excitement. We get dull and formal,


have a name to live, but are dead. God quickens us according to his Word,
endears it to us, and enables us to remember it. “I will never forget thy pre-
cepts; for with them thou hast quickened me.” They will do us good in a way of
rebuke. They never flatter, but deal truly with us, and frequently reprove us, If
we are concerned for our welfare we shall not esteem them our enemy because
they tell us the truth. It is improper to limit the benefit of the Word to encourage-
ment, to suppose that we have never a good opportunity, unless it comforts us. It
is a blessing to be humbled and emptied of self, to see our vileness, and cry “ God
be merciful to me a sinner.” We talk of benefactors! What good has the Bible
done! What millions has it blessed! How much do we owe it! Thanks be
unto God for his unspeakable gift [Jay].


Gopv’s APPEAL TO ExpERIENOE.— Verse 7.


God’s Word does good and not harm. It is folly, therefore, to oppose it. You
are then acting not merely in opposition to God, but against your own benefit and
the best interests of your country.

I. The words of God design to do good. Words express mind. CGod’s Word
reveals God’s will and design, and this design is merciful. There are mysteries, but
no proofs of malevolent feelings, in the world. Benevolence predominates in nature,
notwithstanding sin. Providence wears a benign aspect. The sun shines and the
rain falls on the just and the unjust. But in the gospel we have the purpose of
God to save, the words of God to bless. ‘God having raised up his Son Jesus,
sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.” IT.
The words of God have done good in human experience. Their truth has been
confirmed within us. The greatest sinners have received good. Saul of Tarsus,
Bunyan, and Newton have been forgiven and saved. We can point to trophies of
its power in characters most sinful and profligate. ‘‘ Such were some of you; but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified,” &c. III. But the


good which the words of God effect depends upon our moral condition. To


him that walketh uprightly. They operate not on outward but moral nature,
and influence us according to our relation to them. The sun that melts the wax
will harden the clay. Good must be within us before good can come to us. An
evil disposition Will bring a curse and not a blessing. “To the one we are the
savour of death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 6. The words are very emphatic shall not depart [Pusey]. I. Opposition
in Hebrew, from their briefness: Pro- to God. 1. In his servants. 2, In his
phesy not ; they shall indeed prophesy ; Word. II. Consequences of opposition.
they shall not prophesy to these ; shame 1. Shame shall rest uponthem. 2. The


OWAP. It]


Word shall be proclaimed to others.
“God would have turned away the
shame from them ; but they, despising
his warnings, drew it to themselves. It
was the natural fruit of their doings ; it
was in its natural home with them.
The sinner hath but to remain as he is;
the shame encompasseth him already,
and only departeth not. The wrath of
God is already upon him and abideth
on him [Pusey].

Ver. 7. Named. The name is belied,
1. By conduct which contradicts pro-
fession. 2. By claiming the promises
of God regardless of moral condition
before God. Jacob was not copied in
spirit and example by those who
boasted of his name, a name which re-
minded of favours, which they abused,
and of which they were deprived.

Is the Spirit of the Lord straitened ?
No, for that would—1l. Contradict his


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH.


SY


and unfettered, gracious and abundant
in its operations (Cf. Mal. ii. 15: 2 Tim.
ii, 9: 2 Thess. ii. 9). “Turn you at
my reproof : behold, I will pour out my
Spirit unto you, I will make known my
words unto you.”

My words. 1. The benevolent nature
of God’s words, “do good.” 2. The
power of God’s words, “do good.” 3.
The persons who enjoy the benefits,
“the upright.” Those who return to
the way of righteousness and do not for-
sake it (Prov. iv. 26, 27).

That is the old and still practised
way of avoiding God’s threatenings,
namely, that men so readily form con-
ceptions of God, and imagine that he
cannot be angry because he is merciful.
Let one learn, first of all, to understand
God from his own sayings. He who
hates the light may for a while resort to
imaginary comfort, but it cannot help


Word. 2. Be at variance with the him [Lange].
facts of human experience. It is free
HOMILETICS.


Grizvous Sins anp Rieutzous Rerrisution.— Verses 8—10.


The Prophet describes the sad change that had come over the people. Their
“athers were famous in war, heroic in the defence of their country against the
enemy, and humane towards others. But they had barbarously treated peaceful
subjects and innocent women and children. God threatens to do to them as they
had done to others.

I. What are the sins denounced? 1. Rebellion against God. “My people
is risen up as an enemy.” (a) This rebellion was recent. ‘Even of late;”
only yesterday you have added to former sins. When men cast off the restraints
of God’s Word and God’s Spirit they will commit greater folly. No bonds will
check the ungodly and rebellious. (6) This rebellion was unprovoked. God
was not their enemy, but designed their good. They had risen up vehemently
(Cf. Micah v. 4; vii. 14: 1 Kings xi. 14) against God and man, and become
Ishmaelites rather than Israelites. (c) This rebellion was universal. They rose
up as one man. Whatever their profession, they were one in their sympathies
and conduct. Sin is determined opposition to God. Those who assume this
attitude are enemies to God and their country, put themselves away from the
benefits of God’s Word, and prefer darkness to light because their deeds are
svil. 2 Hostility to man. Casting off the fear of God, they had no regard for
man. (a) They robbed peaceful travellers. Men averse from war and strife were
hindered in their journey, stripped of their comely dress, and violently treated as
prisoners of war. What injustice to permit this! What inhumanity to man!
“‘ Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked ; out of the hand of the
unrighteous and erwel man.” (b) They abused defenceless women. “The women
of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses.” God, the preserver of
men, has tender regard for the weaker sex, and will punish aggravations against
them. “They devoured widows’ houses.” (c) They maltreated innocent children.


410 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. {cHaP. I





They robbed them of the fitting apparel which God had given them, kept the
garments for ever which they had taken, and never made restitution. They sold
into captivity, and never ceased their oppression. Sex did not save the women,
nor age the children. Human rights ‘and human happiness were disregarded.
Thus they provoked God, who is a husband to the widow and a father to the
fatherless. II. What is the punishment threatened? 1. They were treated as
enemies. They had set upon quiet citizens as if they were suspicious characters ;
ill used friends as if they had been enemies. God now considers them as
enemies. ‘¢ My people is risen up as an enemy.” 2. They were deprived of their
possessions. As they had driven helpless widows from their homes, so God
gives them corresponding punishment. The land shall not be their rest ; they
must quit it by force, for it is polluted by their sin. “Arise ye and depart.”
There can be no resting-place in sin. A place polluted hy guilt will soon
become “the sore destruction” of its inhabitants. ‘He that leadeth into cap
tivity shall go into captivity; he that killeth with the sword must be killed
with the sword.”


Tue Curistian’s Catt rrom Earta.—Verse 10.


We may take these words as a call to Christians to arise from the world with all
its attractions—an admonition not to live too much for earth. For everything
proclaims the transitory nature of things below, and reminds us that “here we
have no continuing city.” Every condition justifies the sentiment of the poet—


“ Too low they build who build beneath the skies.”


I. Earth is not the scene of repose. “This is not your rest.” We get no
repose physically. Outward circumstances, however smooth, get upset and
changed. Intellectually we get no satisfaction. The more we know, the more we
desire to know. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the intellect with know-
ing. But spiritually rest is impossible on earth. arth is an inn, not a home;
our passage, not our portion. Only at the end of our journey will be “ quietness
and assurance for ever.” II. Earth is not the place of destination. Many
idolize the world, and live as if they had not to depart hence ; but the Christian
is a stranger and a pilgrim on the earth. “I am a citizen of the whole world,”
said Diogenes, when asked what countryman he was. Our citizenship is in
heaven, and, like Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, we look “ for a city which hath
foundations, whose builderand maker is God,” “a better country, even a heavenly.”
III. Earth is not suitable for our residence. “It is good for pilgrimage, but
miserable for residence,” says one. With all its beauties and pleasures it is
polluted. Sin and death abound and blacken its fair skies. Sin defiles the land
in which it is committed. ‘Corruption in the world through lust.” If you do
not keep yourselves unspotted from the world, but settle down in it and make it
your rest, you will be overturned “ with a sore destruction.”


‘*Tt is not for me to be seeking my bliss,
Or building my hopes in a region like this;
I look for a city that hands have not piled,
I pant for a country by sin undefiled.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


I. The description of the world. 1. It Avoid its company. “The fmendship
is polluted. 2. It is dangerous. “It of the world is enmity with God.”
shall destroy you.” 3. Hence it is not Renounce its maxims and conversations.
a rest. II. The command to depart ‘Those who are bound for Canaan
from it. “ Arise,” &. 1. It is compre- must not speak the language of Ash-
hensive. Separate yourselves from the dod,” says Philip Henry. Live above
world, and touch not the unclean. the ellurements and pleasures, the


cHaP IL}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


411


Se eS et


anxieties and cares of the world. Set
your affections on thingsabove. 2. It is
urgent. “Arise and depart.” Like Israel
from Egypt, and the pilgrim from the
city of destruction, we must hasten and
delay not. 3. It is needed. We are
apt to grow careless, settle down and
say, “In my prosperity I shall never
be moved,” but God wakens us by his
providence and Word, “ Arise, and de-
part.”

The present is not our rest.
not designed to be our rest. It is not
fit to be our rest. If we are Chris-


It was


Reuben and Gad, prefer an inheritance
on this side Jordan. The godly them-
selves have need to have their pure
minds stirred up by way of remem-
brance. God sends them therefore the
message, “ Arise ye,” &. There are
five ways by which he sends it. The
first is his Word. The second is afflic-
tion. The third is worldly success.
The fourth is the earnests and foretastes
of a better world. The last is death.
This orders us to depart really as well
as morally. Every apprehension and
approach of it cries, “It is high time


tians we have relinquished it and


to awake out of sleep,” &c. [From Jay]
chosen another rest. But many, like


HOMILETICS.
Tue Mryistay or Fause Tracusrs.— Verse 11.


Predictions of judgment ‘sere unwelcome to corrupt men. They opposed the
true, but would listen to false prophets who flattered them in sin and declared
lies. The ministry of such is here described.

I. It is lying in its nature. Falsehood and lies. It misrepresents God and
his Word, the gospel and its claims. It is not purity, light, and power, but false
and misleading. It ignores or sacrifices truth, and springs not from the Spirit of
God, but the spirit of man. They pretend inspiration, but walk in delusion and
believe a lie. ‘‘ Woe unto the foolish prophets that follow their own spirit and have
seen nothing.” II. It is sensual in its purpose. Its great design is to minister
to the sensual enjoyments of the people. “I will prophesy unto thee of wine and
of strong drink.” The false prophets pleased the rich and emboldened the self-
indulgence of all by promising abundant harvests and rich vintage. The promises
of God are often emphasized, but the conditions of those promises are forgotten.
Congregations are assured that without exception and without penitence they
will be free from judgment and sure of salvation. False teachers pander to
vitiated tastes, sanction sinful customs, and disturb not the consciences of the
people. But true ministers strike the prejudices, condemn the carnal gratifications,
and seek to save the souls of men. They handle not the Word of God deceitfully,
but by manifestation of the truth commend themselves to every man’s conscience
in the sight of God. III. It is pleasing to the people in its method. Unwel-
come truths would not be heard, but a prophet of lies would be popular. ‘ He
shall even be the prophet of this people.” Spiritual appetites crave for food,
conscience is dissatisfied, and the heart restless. Men want rest and God. If any
come in God’s name to set them at ease in sensual pleasures, him will they receive
with joy (Jer. v. 43). All they desire is freedom from reproof and licence to sin.
“They teach their teachers how they wish to be mistaught,” says a writer, “and
receive the echo of their wishes as the voice of God.” ‘The prophets prophesy
falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means ; and my people love to have it
so; and what will ye do in the end thereof?” IV. It is disappointing in its
results. It is “walking in the spirit,” or “ walking with the wind,” as the margin
gives. 1. There is no nutriment for the soul. It is a ministry empty and un-
substantial as the wind, mixed with error and falsehood, not “ sound speech that
cannot be condemned.” 2. There is no efficacy in the word. It is not truth
spoken in tenderness, love, and concern for the hearers. None are enJightened in


(CHaP. 1


413 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.








ee


mind, guickened in conscience, and converted from sin. The words are mere
echoes of the wind, devoid of results in heart and life, barren to God and man.
“Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind ; he daily increaseth
lies and desolation.”


Tus Gioriovs Furure oF Israru.— Verses 12, 13.


There is now a sudden transition from threatening to promise. Mercy is the end
of all punishment to the peniteft. A remnant shall be delivered and gathered
together, increased and governed by Jehovah their Shepherd and King.

I. Israel shall be delivered. The captivity threatened will come ; but, as of
old, they shall be delivered from it. Babylon, no more than Egypt, can detain
them in slavery. Iron gates and massive walls will give way before the Breaker’s
power. An entrance will be made into the city. The Conqueror will go in, and
the captives go out through it into liberty and joy. The prison shall open
and set them free. This deliverance from earthly Babylon is a type and
pledge of redemption from spiritual bondage, by Christ Jesus. Men are bound
in ignorance, prejudice, and sin. Christ gives light and redemption to the
soul, and opens the prison to them that are bound. “He redeemed them
from the hand of the enemy.” II. Israel shall be united again. “TI will
surely assemble Jacob.” They shall be gathered together in tenderness and
care, in families and social privileges. God will bring his people from the
greatest distance, and gather them into his fold. Public calamities and vicissitudes
of fortunes hide not his face nor obliterate his covenant. Under the law believers
could foresee, and under the gospel we may enjoy, this promise. 1. This gather-
ing is certain. I will surely gather. 2. It is constant. The repetition indicates
the progressive and persistent nature of the work. 3. It is extensive. Though
God’s people are a remnant, yet all shall be gathered, and not one forgotten. “ A/l
of thee.” III. Israel shall be increased. Not a small number, but “the multi-
tude of men.” God can turn remnants into multitudes, and multiply his people
as a flock. In the Church it shall be said, “The place is too strait for me: give
place to me that I may dwell,” &c. (Isa. xlix. 20). At last angels will gathér the
elect from the four winds into that “great multitude which no man could
number, of all nations, and people, and tongues.” IV. Israel shall be defended.
They will not be united and left to themselves or to others. God will possess
them and rule them by his love. 1. They will be secured as a flock. ‘“ As the
flock in the midst of the fold,” in perfect peace and safety. 2. They will be
guided as a people. ‘Their king shall pass before them.” As in olden time, his
presence shall go with them and make an easy passage through death and the
grave to eternal life. 3. They will be governed as a nation. “The Lord on (at)
the head of them.” As a captain and conqueror to lead and rule them ; to over-
come all opposition, to “ break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the
bars of iron.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


The Breaker. Notice—1. The object
in view. To set free. 2. The oppos-
ition to God’s work. 3. The destruc-
tion of this opposition. Complete and
utter ruin—Breaker.

The words present Christ as—1l. The
Redeemer. 2. The Guide. 3. The
Defender of his people. “A magnifi-
eent transition from Cyrus to Christ, as


in Isa. xl 1—5. The Prophet sees
the conqueror Cyrus breaking into
Babylon, smiting asunder the bars
which kept Israel captive, as in a
prison; and how they went forth, after
the issuing of his decree, in joy and
triumph to their own land. And from
this prophetical view of Cyrus and his
victory, and its blessed consequences,


CHAP. II.]


he passes on by a rapid prophetic flight
to speak of the Divine Cyrus, Jesus
Christ, and of his triumph over death
and the grave [Wordsworth]. There is
no passing on, nor going forth, without
Christ our King, who is both King
and Lord [Jerome].


HOMILETIC COMVENTARY: MICAH.


413





Broken up. ‘The three verbs—they
break through, they march through,
they go out— describe in a pictorial
manner progress which cannot be stop
ped by any human power [Hengsten-
berg}.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER II.


Ver. 1, 2. Covet fields. No passion
so deeply agitates and degrades, so
effectually enslaves and destroys, the
soul as covetousness. The man who
sets his heart upon riches must be a
stranger to peace and enjoyment. Fear,
care, anxiety, suspicion, and jealousy
place him on a constant rack. To the
toil of getting is added the trouble of
keeping his pelf. Avarice is insatiable
as the grave, or rather as a gulf without
bottom. The more this passion is sup-
plied with fresh fuel the more vehe-
ment is the flame [Rusticus]. No houses,
no fields content those who cannot rest
in the lust of concupiscence. Yet only
seven feet of earth will suffice them at
last.

Ver. 4. He hath divided our fields.
The land was but the outward symbol
of the inward heritage. Unjust gain
kept back is restored with usury ; it
taketh away the life of the owners
thereof (Prov. i. 19). The vineyard
whereof the Jews said, the inheritance
shall be ours, was taken from them and
given to others. So now is that awful
change begun when Christians, leaving
God, their only unchanging good, turn
to earthly vanities, and for the grace of
God which he withdraws have these
only for their fleeting portion, until it
shall be finally exchanged in the day of
judgment [Pusey].

Ver. 7. My words. They do evil
and injury to many. Thousands will
curse for ever the hour they became
acquainted with the Scriptures, for
they derive from them only an increase
of guilt and condemnation. But this


is not the effect of design or of natural -


tendency in them, for the Bible is


intended and adapted to do us good
only, but is the accidental result of
depravity ; and therefore it is confined
to those who pervert it, abuse it, neglect
it, and thus turn the blessing into a
curse [Jay].

Ver. 8, 9. Women and children.


“ The cries of orphans, and the oppressor’s rage
Doth reach the stars” [Dryden].


Ver. 10. Not your rest.


“ This is the scene of combat, not of rest: ;
Man’s is laborious happiness at best ;
On this side death his dangers never cease,
His joys are joys of conquest, not of peace.”
Ver. 11. The horrible subtlety of
false teaching in each age or country is
to meet its own favourite requirements,
without calling for self-sacrifice or self-
oblation, to give it a god, such as it
would have, such as might content it.
‘The people willeth to be deceived, be
it deceived,” is a true proverb [Pusey].
Ver. 12, 13. As the flock. Now
the sheep are scattered in all lands; but
the shepherd shall search them out and
bring them into the fold, where they
shall be (a) constantly supplied, and
(b) eternally safe from beasts of prey.
Breaker, The image is not of conquest,
but deliverance. They break through,
not to enter in, but tc pass through the
gate, and go forth. The wall of the
city is ordinarily broken through in
order to make an entrance, or to secure
to a conqueror the power of entering in
at any time, or by age and decay. But
here the object is expressed to go forth.
Plainly they were confined before, as in
a prison; and the gate of the prison
was burst open to set them free (Cf.
Isa, xliii. 6; xlviii. 20; li, 11, 12
[Pusey].


Ee, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; MICAH. (CHAP. IL
a EI EE OAL EA IT A IES OES AT LAE EID ED


CHAPTER IIL


Currroat Nores.] Punishment is threatened against the heads and leaders of Isrwel. 2.
Princes xdininistrators of justice: You] Above every one. To know] To regard justice (Is,
xlii, 245 2. Pluck] Proverbial for the greatest injustice and inhumanity (Ezek. xxii. 27: Zeph.
iii. 2), 3. Flay] Sets forth still more their barbarity and cruelty. 4. Then] Time of punish-
ment certain, seen and expressed, Ill] Lit. have made their deeds evil, reversing the call of the
prophets (Jer. xxxv. 15). 5. Prophets] False prophets flatter and promise security from judg-
ment. Bite] Like serpents; cry, Peace] When they are doing mischief. Prepare] Lit. “sane.
tify war against him (ef. Joel iii. 9); as if the cause of their own appetite were the cause of
Heaven!” [Words]. 6. Night] Calamities like a dark night would come upon them (Is. viii.
22; Amos v. 18; vill. 9). 7%. Ashamed] Because their predictions proved lies, Confounded]
False prophets had no visions from God. ‘“ Their lying being punished in its results, they become,
since God by no word of revelation helps them out of their necessity, entirely disgraced ” [ Hitzig],
Cover] ¢. ¢. to cover the face up to the nose, a sign of sorrow (Lev. xiii. 45); here of shame (Ezek.
xxiv. 17). With their lips they had lied, now they are dumb and covered with shame. “ They
shall be so ashamed of themselves as not to dare to open their mouths, or boast of the name of
prophet ” [Calin]. 8. I] In contrast to false prophets, am filled with power. Judgment] A
sense of justice (Acts i. 8). Might] ‘Moral imtrepidity in speaking the truth at all costs”? (2 Tim.
i. 7). Sin] Not to flatter with false promises of peace. 9. Hear] Resumed from ver. 1. Heads]
Whose ungodly conduct is briefly summed up again. Abhor} As a thing loathsome and abominable
(Heb.) 10. Build] Lit. building with wealth and money obtained by bribes and murder of the
imnocent (Jer, xxii, 13 ; Ezek. xxii. 27: Hab. ii. 12). ‘Or by blood he may mean that they in-
directly took away life, in that, through wrong judgments, extortion, usury, fraud, oppression,
reducing wages, or detaining them, they took away what was necessary to support life’? [Pusey].
11. Reward] Take bribes, when they should teach gratuitously (Lev. x. 11; Deut, xvii. 11).
Prophets] False prophets. Money] ‘‘Giving the answer which their employers, the rich men,
wanted, as if it were an answer from God” [Pusey.]| Among us] Enthroned in the temple to
protect us from calamity. 12. Therefore] Culminating the threats of ver. 8, a great contrast te
the conclusion of chapter II. They thought to build, when by their conduct they destroy Zion;
“for your sake be plowed.” ‘The predicates are divided rhetorically, and the thought is this:
the royal palace, the city, and the temple shall be so utterly destroyed, that of all the houses and
palaces only heaps of rubbish will remain, and the ground upon which the city stood will be partly
used as a ploughed field, and partly overgrown with bushes ’’ (cf. Is, xxxii. 13,14) [Keil]. Heze-
kiah’s repentance delayed the execution of the judgment for more than a hundred years; but
Jerusalem was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar and by ‘Titus.


HOMILETICS.
THe PUNISHMENT oF UNGoDLY Macaistratses.— Verses 1—4.


The prophet had denounced the sins of the people, now he threatens the civil
rulers and religious teachers of the nation. The Judges of the law should have
been exemplary in knowledge and virtue, but they were corrupt in thought, and
ungodly in conduct.

I. The sins of which they were guilty. They are specially challenged by
the prophet, and accused of no ordinary guilt. ‘Hear, I pray you.” 1. Sins
against superior light. They were expected to know and love the right. From
the law of God, and the customs of the country, they knew the rules of equity.
They had means of ascertaining the right, to administer impartial justice, and could
not plead excuses for ignorance (Jer. v. 4). Affected ignorance and wilful neglect
only aggravate God. Civil rulers sin against superior privileges, public sentiment,
and moral law, when they pervert justice. “Is it not for you to know judgment ?”
2. Sins against responsible office. They were the heads, the rulers of the
people, wut abused their authority and dishonoured their position. Instead of
doing good, they loved evil. When teachers corrupt doctrine, and preachers with-
hold the gospel ; when rulers and princes pervert equity, and neglect special duties
for the defence of which they are put in office; they poison the stream of life and


CHa. UL) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


Se ea ee ee


415





turn it into deadly fountains. 3. Sins against the claims of humanity. They
robbed the innocent, and devoured the helpless. Their furious rapacity sur-
mounted every tie of humanity. Instead of feeding they fleeced the sheep, and
sucked out the very blood of the people. The words indicate (a) Their intense
greed ; and (’) Their inhuman cruelty in satisfying it. But great men who
oppress the poor, and hold themselves above law, will be accountable for their
deeds and condemned for their cruelty. “Woe to the shepherds of Israel that do
feed themselves; should not the shepherd feed the flock,” &. (Ezek. xxxiv.
2—4). II. The punishment with which they are threatened. Men cannot
fare well if they do ill. A just God rules over all things, whom they wickedly
forget. 1. Punishment is certain. ‘“ Then,” predicts the prophet, with solemn
certainty. A day of retribution was before his mind. He warns them of it,
Though unseen, it is fixed in the purpose of God, and will surely come upon them.
2. Punishment is proportioned to their guilt. ‘ As they behaved themselves ill
in their doings.” God’s law is unchangeable ; those who show no mercy shall have
judgment without mercy. (a) They will cry and not be heard in their distress.
If the cries of the poor are disregarded by us, they will be heard against us (Ex.
xxii. 23). Men should havea feeling heart and a helping hand ; should count it
not charity, but a duty and a privilege, to defend the poor. But covetousness
hardens the heart and makes the ear deaf. A time is coming when the scorner and
the oppressor will cry to God in vain. ‘ Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the
poor, he also shall cry bimself, but shall not be heard” (Prov. xxi. 13, 18, 41).
(0) They will be forsaken of God in their distress. “He will even hide his face
from them at that time.” They cared not for others ; God will, therefore, withhold
his kindness and presence from them. Forsaken in heart and office, bereft of
power and protection, they will be undone for ever. Before God, kings and
paupers, priests and people, are treated according to their character and deserts.
He is above all principalities and powers, and impartial in his rule. Usurped
power shall be dethroned, and with the froward God will show himself froward.
“Lo, this is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors
which they shall receive of the Almighty.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Hate God and love evil, This
is an awful transformation of moral
character. Man at first loves good,
though he pursues evil. There is con-
stant strife in the soul, to end which
many quieten conscience and blind
judgment. ‘“ Then they hate the truth
or good with a bitter hatred, because it
disturbs the darkness of the false peace
with which they would envelop them-
selves.” ‘Love of evil is always con-
nected with hatred toward the good,
although men commonly in practising
evil keep up a semblance of love for the
good” [Lange].

Ver. 3. He heaps up their guilt act
by act. First they flay, 7. e take away
their outer zoods ; then they break their
bones in pi>ces, the most solid parts, on
which the whole frame of their body


depends, to get at the very marrow of
their life, and so feed themselves upon
them [Pusey]. Alas that kings and
ecclesiastics should do the same things
now! Men are robbed of the means of
subsistence, cut to pieces, and treated
like cattle—


“And he that stands upon a slippery place,
Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up.”
[ Shakespeare. |


Ver. 4. As they behaved. ‘Measure
for measure ” will ever be meted out to
the evil-doer. ‘As I have done, so
God hath requited me” (Judg. i. 7).

Vers. 1—4. A warning to judges.
1. Their responsibility as possessors of
knowledge. 2. Their sin: violation of
duty and self-seeking. 3. Their punish-


‘ment [Langel.


416 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. [CHaAc. su





HOMILETICS.
Tue Description oF Fause TracHers.— Verses 5—7.


From unjust judges Micah turns to false prophets, who are accused of flattering
in sin and seducing by error. Corruption and crime in the nation will always
endanger the Church. It is bad enough to be under ungodly rulers, but worse to
be guided by false teachers.

I. They are mercenary in their purpose. Their chief end and only desire
is gam. Rents and tithes, preferment and honour, govern their lives. Their god
is their belly, filthy lucre their aim, and their “ gospel is their maw ”—supplied
with fwod, they are satisfied and promise peace; but when no one puts anything
into their mouths they are offended and intolerant. “ They are greedy dogs which
can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand ; they all
look to their own way, every one for his gain.” II. They are deceptive in their
teaching. They flatter and mislead the people. ‘They make my people err.”
An unfaithful ministry carries the people from God and leaves them to perish in
sin. “For the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are led of
them are destroyed.” 1. They deceive by predicting prosperity when there is
danger. Yhey cry peace when God threatens judgment. They bite with treachery
and deadly poison in their mouths 2. They deceive hy flattering rebellion when
they should urge to repentance. They rebuked no extortion and excess. They
soothed and smoothed the people, and fawned like greedy dogs to those who
fed them. ‘ Will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for
pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive
that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your lies?” III. They
are hypocritical in their spirit. ‘‘ They even sanctify war against him ” that
withholds their due. Acting professedly on the authority of God, they abuse the
word of God. Men now are denounced as “atheists” and “ infidels,” condemned
as “disloyal” and “traitors,” if they obey not the behests of the priest. Eccle-
siastics threaten and discountenance, bless or curse, to get what they require. They
rebuke only when their gains are disturbed, and comfort others to promote their
own ends, IV. They are judged in their ministry. They promise what never
comes to pass. Instead of peace they have calamity. 1. They are darkened in
their minds. “Therefore, night shal] be unto you.” Moral obliquity shuts out
the light, darkens the understanding, and brings judicial blindness. When
teachers are dark, how can light be expected? “If the blind lead the blind,” &c.
2. They are silenced in their pretensions. They pretended to do good, but sinned
against light and were condemned by their own consciences. Deprived of power
to divine, and robbed of an answer of God ; they had neither vision nor courage
to speak. They were seen in their true colours, and deciphered before the world.
3. They were confounded in their ways. Events put them to shame, reputation
waned, and confidence failed them. They kept others in the dark ; God kept them
in the dark, and perplexed them with their own devices. When God’s providence
contradicts the religious teacher, he is seen to be opposed to God’s will, and proved
not to be sent of God. 4. They were overwhelmed in their circumstances. They
preached falsehood, walked in darkness, and stumbled in distress. There was
darkness without and darkness within, a night of sorrow and calamity. Their sun
went down, and dark cold night settled upon them. They had to cover their lips
and hold their tongue.


Tue True Minister.— Verse 8.
Micah now contrasts himself with the false prophets, sets forth the nature of the
true ministry, which is one of Divine power, earnest appeal, and pure aim.
I. It is a ministry of power. ‘I am filled with power.” 1. Personal power.
Power lodged in him, controlling heart and life. 2. Power exerted upon others,


OHAP, If] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH. 417





Power must be in the soul, before it can be expressed in the doctrine. This will
prove the Divine calling and vindicate the real character of a minister. 3. Power
of the highest nature. ‘“ By the Spirit of the Lord.” Not the power of intellect
and gifts, but “power from on high.” “The power of God unto salvation.” 4.
Power in the greatest degree. ‘ Filled with power.” Here is no stint nor mea-
sure, except moral capacity. This is most needful, and the best furniture to the
minister. Mr. Gladstone recently said that we had nothing to depend upon but
moral power. “ Tarry ye, until ye be endued with power from on high.” Power
in yourselves, power in your words, and power in the hearts of men. “Ye shall
receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you.” II. It isa ministry
of light. “And of judgment.” 1. The minister himself is enlightened. He is
endowed with “a spirit of wisdom and knowledge.” He has judgment to discern
things that differ, to speak a word in season, from a sense of justice, a regard to
truth, and not to please men. 2. The doctrine which he preaches enlightens others.
It is judgment; an impartial view of God’s word, righteous indignation against
sin, and mercy to the penitent. He has an ardent love for souls, and great zeal for
the glory of God. Under such a ministry, sinners are convinced, inquirers en-
lightened, and saints edified. III. It is a ministry of courage. “ And of might.”
He feared not the wrath, nor flattered the sins of man. He had courage to brave
danger, adhere to truth, and reprove the mighty. He was manly in his utter-
ances, endued with spiritual boldness, and steeled against all opposition in declar-
ing “ unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin.”


“Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful” [Shakespeare].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. Here we have a pattern
ministry by which to test all others.
Israel’s prophets were demoralized, and
had sadly declined from the dignity of
the days of Samuel. The entrance of
the earthly-minded and unspiritual into
the sacred calling will be a curse to the
nation. Here we perceive the distinc-
tion between a false and a true prophet,
between a converted and an uncon-
verted teacher, and the different ground,
nature, and object of their office. There
is with the true man, spirit, power, light,
self-denial, wise temperance, pure, un-
corrupted delivery of God’s plan of
salvation; and with the false, envy,
imagination, self-love, which puffs up,
personal gain, respect of persons, decep-
tion, &c. [Lange].

The Three Gifts of a true ministry.
1. Their Divine source. 2. Their human
necessity. 3. Their practical design.


All the fruits of one Spirit, all to qualify
for the discharge of one duty, “to declare
unto Jacob,” &c. “So, then, of these
three gifts power expresses the Divine
might lodged in him; judgment, the
substance of what he had to deliver ;
might or courage, the strength to deliver
it in face of human power, persecution,
ridicule, death” [Pusey]. z

Vers. 5—-8. Warning tothe Heralds
of God’s Word. 1. Their ideal character
(ver. 8). 2. Their danger of darkening
God’s Word through self-seeking, in that
eitherthey for personal advantage preach
what the ears of people lust after, or
brand their personal enemies as God’s
enemies. 3. The aggravation of their
sin ; desecration of the Word ; confusion
of God’s congregation. 4, Their pun-
ishment ; they lose the capacity to dis-
cern God’s Word, and speak to the dis-
gust of others and of themselves [Lange].


HOMILETICS.
Guitty Lrapers.— Verses 9—11.


The prophet gives a proof of his fidelity in reproving the rulers of the nation,
civil and religious ; briefly sums up the sins of which they were guilty, and which
brought their ruin ; and shows that all who are confident of God’s favour will not


escape his judgmenta


27


418 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. {[cHaP. II,


I. Civil rulers perverted law for selfish aggrandisement. Rulers of the
State should have been patterns of justice, but they despised it. 1. They abhorred
judgment. Loathed it as abominable. Plato taught that if virtue could be seen
by men, it would be attractive; but these judges knew and hated it. 2. They
perverted judgment. They twisted and distorted it. Not only crushed individuals,
but destroyed the foundation of justice. 3. They perverted all judgment, “all.
equity.” Whatever was right and straight they made crooked. Natural conscience
and God’s law were both defied. They neither governed themselves by right, nor
gave right to others. They encouraged others by their practice, and, as in the age
of Nero, made nothing unlawful. 4. Their aim was to bucld up Zion. The rich
built their palaces with wealth gained by fraud and oppression. ‘he city was
adorned with streets built by rapine and blood. The Lord looked “' tor judgment,
but behold oppression ; for righteousness, but beholda cry.” II. Religious teachers
expounded law for gain. All are accused of bribery and mercenary conduct.
Princes, priests, and prophets loved the wages of unrighteousness. 1. Priests
tuught for hire. They had maintenance assigned to them by God, had much by
gratuity (1 Sam. ix. 7, 8). and should have made a difference between holy and
unholy (Lev. x. 10, 11: Deut. xvii. 10, 11). But they sold what they should
have given, and combined with the heads of the nation, with injustice. One
class abused their power, another their knowledge ; the judge perverted law, the
priest misinterpreted it. 2. Prophets divined for money. False prophets gave
answers to please those who paid them. As the oracles of Apollo were corrupted
by the gold of Philip, so the law of God was sold for money. All sought their
own, not the things of Christ, nor the interests of the people... “Thou shalt
take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the
righteous.”


Vain ConFiIpENcE DestroreD.—Verses 11, 12.


Notwithstanding their abominable conduct, yet the judges, priests, and prophets
presume upon God’s favour, and think that no evil will befall them. The prophet
seeks to rouse them from their vain confidence.

I. They were confident of God’s favour. “Is not the Lord among us?” Pre-
sumption feeds men with delusion. External privileges, outward reformation,
ritual worship, will save noman. Thvuse who lean upon these will dishonour “tod
and destroy themselves. Perversion of truth and abuse of ordinances will drive
God from us. “Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the Lord,
The temple of the Lord are wa.” II. They were confident of security from evil.
“No evil can come upon us.” We are perfectly safe whatever others say. Thus
men are deluded in sin, and rocked to sleep in fatal security. If men are not
restrained from evil by religious privileges, they can never be protected by them.
Shake off carnal security, fear the Lord, and depart from evil. III. They were
doomed to destruction in their confidence. ‘There shall Zion,” &. 1. The
city would be destroyed. Its stately buildings were demolished, and its proud
palaces reduced to heaps. The ground on which it stood was ploughed as a
common field, and the site of the temple became wild as a forest. 2. Their own
sins had procured this ruin. “For your sake.” Sin will ever draw calamity in
Church and State. Corrupt rulers and teachers involve the people in defection,
and hasten on the judgment. They may think that they build, when they only
destroy ; that they secure prosperity, when they rain it. Every sanctuary desecrated
by hypocrisy will be demolished by the wrath of God. Instead of protecting, it
will fall upon its worshippers, and great will be the fall of it. ‘“ Woe to him thas
buildeth a town with blood!”


CHAP, 11.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


419





HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 9. 1. Persons in eminency, ac-
customed to sin, are generally deaf to
what the Lord saith 2. The mes-
sengers of the Lord must not give up
when their message is not received, but
cry till either they get audience or have
delivered their souls. Hear, I pray
you. 3. It is the duty of faithful min-
isters, in reproving the faults of rulers,
to be courteous, and not contemn au-
thority. Hear, ye heads, &c. [Adapted
from Hutcheson).

Ver. 10. Building Zion by wrong
means is the way to pull it down. It
can never stand erected by sinful ma-
terials, and for a selfish end. ‘Truly
we build up Zion with blood when we
cheapen luxuries and comforts at the
price of souls, use Christian toil like
brute strength, tempt men to dishonesty
and women to other sin, to eke out the
scanty wages which alone our selfish
thirst for cheapness allows, heedless of
everything save of our individual grati-
fication, or of the commercial prosperity
which we have made our god” [ Pusey].
Righteousness builds up because it


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1—4. Judgment. It is neither
the great man’s power, nor the poor
man’s meanness, that a judge is to mind
in judgment. A judge, a justice, must
never cry out, “Oh, he is a poor man !”
nor yet out of base fear cry out, “Oh, he
is a great man!” The judges in Egypt
were portrayed without hands and with-
out eyes, to signify that they were not
to take bribes, nor to accept men’s
persons [Brooks].

Ver. 3. Hat flesh.


“Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions” [Shakespeare].


Vers. 5—7. It shall be dark. Misery
assails riches as lightning does the
highest towers; or as a tree that is
heavy laden with fruit breaks its own
boughs, so do riches destroy the virtue
of their possessor [Burton].

Ver. 8. Power. The crowning power


brings God’s protection and blessing
unrighteousness tears down because it
brings God’s curse [Hengstenberg].

Ver. 11. Leaning. 1. Holy men
sometimes rest on official relationship
with God, pollute the holiest things,
and become a warning to others, 2,
Guilty men will often lean upon the
Lord, claim his protection, and flatter
themselves into false security. “The
sacred office is a grievous snare to un-
sanctified hearts,” says one. ‘No un-
godliness, pride secularity, and hypocrisy
are so great as those which stand before
God in association with the teaching of
his Word.”

Vers. 11, 12. False confidence in
God. 1. Its ground, an outward temple—
sacraments. 2. Jts danger, disregard cf
the distant future, indifference, indulg-
ence given to the natural man. 3, Jts
end. Fate of the Jewish state; the
holy city becomes as the world, and
shares the fate of the world. So like-
wise we. If we forsake God he will
forsake 1s [Lange!


TO CHAPTER Ii.


of the messenger of God is power over
the moral man ; power which, whether
it approaches the soul through the
avenue of the intellect or of the affec-
tions, does reach into the soul. The
sphere of the Christian power is the
heart,—the moral man; and the result
of its action is not to be surely distin-
guished from that of mere eloquence by
instantaneous emotion, but by subse
quent moral fruit. Power which cleanses
the heart and produces holy living is
the power of the Holy Ghost [Wm.
Arthur).

Vers. 9,10. Build. The crimes of
the people of England are not denounced
by the pulpit as they should be; the
abominations of royalty, the injustices
perpetrated in the courts of justice, the
cupidity of traders, the swindlings of
joint-stock company men, by which they
become millionnaires and win a seat ip


420





the parliament of the nation. These
things are not held up, as they should
be, for public execration, in the broad
sunlight of eternal truth [Dr. Thomas].

Ver. 11. Money. The priests of
Rome aim but at two things—to get
power from the king and money from
the subject [Selden]. Gold is the fool’s
curtain, which hides all his defects from
the world [Feltham].

“They all the sacred mysteries of heav’n


To their own vile advantages shall turn
Of lucre and ambition” [Milton].


Ver. 12. Zion ploughed. At the
time I visited this saered ground, one


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAR.





[| CHAP. Iv.





part of it supported a crop of barley,
another was undergoing the labour of
the plough, and the soil turned up con-
sisted of stone and lime, filled with
earth, such as is usually met with in the
foundations of ruined cities. It is
nearly a mile in circumference [Rich-
ardson’s Travels}. On the S.E. Zion
slopes down, in a series of cultivated
terraces, sharply, though not abruptly,
to the sites of the king’s gardens. Here
and round to the S. the whole declivi-
ties are sprinkled with olive trees, which
grow luxuriantly among the narrow
slips of corn [Porter].


CHAPTER IV.


Ozrecau Norss.}] The salvation of Zion is closely connected with its destruction, and a future
poe awaits the ce which is a wild forest. Last] The days of Messiah, the completion of
all things. Mountain] ¢.e. the whole city; its elevation, moral dignity, not local situation.
Estab.] A permanent foundation. Heb. abidingly established, “ An expression denoting con-
tinuance and perpetuity, that it shall continually remain on its settlement.” 2, Many| A// nations
(Isa. ii, 2: Matt. xxiv. 14); a powerful movement in the heathen world, For] The reason for
such intense zeal in going up. Law] 4. ¢, instruction in the ways of God; the law asa rule of holy
life; the Word as the source of salvation. 8. Judge] Instead of nations going to war (Isa. ii. 4).
Rebuke] Convict (Jer. xvi. 8, 9); lit. to set right, settle disputes. Many] iz contrast to one
nation, which formerly acknowledged Jehovah ; “who were hitherto for the most part inclined of
their own will to grasp the sword”’ [ Hengst.]. Beat]implements of war into implements of peace, 4,
Sit] An image of safety even in open fields (cf. 1 Kings iv. 25 : Lev. xxvi. 6). 5. Name] 7. é. profession,
and in the strength of Jehovah (cf. 1 Sam. xvii. 45: Zech, x. 12: Prov. xviii. 10). Heathen gods can
do nothing for them. 6. Halteth] Like sheep wearied in a Journey.‘ Limping denotes the
miserable condition into which the dispersed have been brought” (cf. Psal. xxxv. 15; xxxviii. 18).
[Keil]. This salvation will not fail, for all the miserable and scattered shall be assembled. Vie
Reign] Expresses a perfect monarchy, as it never existed in present or past. ‘“ Micah does not
mention the descendants of David here, but Jehovah himself, not to exclude the kingdom of David,
but to show that God will prove that he was the author of that kingdom, and that all power is his.
The prophet therefore indicates a certain difference here between that shadowy kingdom and the
new kingdom which God will openly manifest at the advent of the Messiah” [Calvin]. 8. Tower]
Keeping up the metaphor from sheep, Jerusalem is the tower from which the king guards the flock.
Messiah the Shepherd (chap. v. 3); Israel the sheep (chap. vii. 14). Unto thee] Affirms more than
to thee; expressing the conquest of every obstacle that blocks up the way to the goal [Kei/]. 9.]
Zion will lose her king, wander into captivity, but will be redeemed from her enemies. King] Loss
of royal government, the cause of lamentation, more painful to Israel than other people ; the king
a sign of God’s presence, &c. 10. Pain] Fig. of a woman with child (cf. Jer. iv. 31). Out of the
city, &c.] Set forth the greatness and certainty of the calamity. There . . thee] Emphatic
declaration ; the scene of distress, the place of deliverance. 11.] Distant sunlight overclouded by
present cloud, Now] Nations gathered not to hear the law (ver. 2), but for war. _ Defiled] Like a
virgin, 12. Gather them] To be punished in turn when they have answered his purpose, when
fully ripe, like sheaves, lit. sheaf. However great the numbers of the foe, all are but as one sheaf
ready to be threshed [Calvin]. 18. Arise] Deut.xxv.4. Horn] To push the enemies (1 Kings xxii.
11). Gain] Goods collected by robbery (Judges v. 19). Lord] Not for Zion’s selfish ends (Isa. Ix,
6, 9). Whole earth] Who through subjugating the heathen has proved to be such (Ps. xciii., xcvi.),


CHAP. Iv. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH. 421





HOMILETICS.
Tue CuuroH oF THE FuTuRE.—Verses 1—4.


Mount Zion is not doomed to be a perpetual waste. A glory is here predicted
which it has not yet realized ; but its chastisement shall end in mercy and moral
dignity. It will become the residence of God and the centre of nations,

I. The moral elevation of the Church. The elevation here is not physical,
but moral ; a spiritual exaltation. 1. Its eminent site. ‘The tops of the moun-
tains,” &c., ‘exalted above the hills.” It is pre-eminently above all worldly
heights. Above earthly potentates and above idols. Other eminences are insiz
nificant compared to this mountain. Its doctrine and design, its author and its
life, are above the wisdom of men. Small in its beginning, it shall grow and shine
with greater lustre than kingdoms of this world. Lower than they, it will rise
above and overtop them all. “ A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid.” 2
Its impregnable nature. It shall “be established.” Exalted, it shall be estab-
lished above human institutions. Human elevation is unstable. This is built
upon a rock, and the gates of hell cannot prevail against it. Its foundations
are in the holy mountains (Psal. lxxxvii 1); its head stands securely aloft,
between heaven and earth, and it rests, unassailable and serene, upon the
purpose of God. “Mount Zion cannot be removed, but abideth for ever.”
II. The attractive power of the Church. As a dominant, supreme power, it
will be attractive to all nations. 1. As the centre of numbers. “ Many nations
shall come.” It shall not be confined to one people nor locality. ‘I will make
of thee a great nation.” “People shall flow into it ;” indicating multitude and eager-
ness. Like a river, distant peoples shall come and throng in one continuous stream.
A flood once covered the highest mountains and destroyed everything on the face
of the earth. But this river shall bring spiritual life and fertilize the univeise
“They shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the
goodness of the Lord.” 2. As the place of instruction. They go to know God and
to learn his ways; not to be amused with idle speculations and novel theories. .
They go for grace, to practise what they know, to “hear of heaven and learn the
way.” Religious instruction has ever been connected with Divine worship. The
more we know of God, the more anxious shall we be to praise and please him. ‘“ He
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.” 3. As the residence 0/
God. “The house of the God of Jacob.” More glorious than the tabernacle ari
the temple of old, This is the pavilion of God’s splendour, the place where his
honour dwelleth. Here he dwells and displays special signs of grace. “ Tle
glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former, saith the Lord of
hosts.” 4, As the seat of empire. “And he shall judge among many people.”
God will here fix his throne and exercise spiritual rule over the world. He will
rebuke the proud, convict the sinner, and subdue all things to himself. Tyrants
and thrones, idolatries and superstitions, shall fall before the power of the Gospe’
‘For the law shall go forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from J erusalem.”
III. The abiding prosperity of the Church. The Gospel is a rule of order and
peace ; brings tranquillity and prosperity to all people. 1. Wars shall cease. In
the best governed states we see restlessness, suspicion, and insecurity. Kingdoms
have been torn by civil and subdued by foreign wars. But here Jew shall not
hate Gentile ; implements of strife shall be instruments of peace ; and nations shall
learn war no more. 2. Social quietness shall be enjoyed. Vineyards shall be
possessed by the poor ; the fig, the characteristic fruitfulness of Palestine, shall not
decay ; and every one shall sit in domestic harmony. Each will be content and
undisturbed in his lot, Abundance of peace shall mark the future Church. In
eecrecy men will sit securely, and openly walk in perfect safety. “ None shall
make them afraid.” This glorious future seems almost impossible, judging from


#22


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


{cHar. Iv.





' the present.
of the Lord hath spoken it.”


But God has purposed, and will bring it to pass.


* For the mouth


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. Flow. The metaphor of
flowing importeth the coming of people
to Christ by the preaching of the Gospel.
1. Freely (Psal. ex. 3). 2. Swiftly, as
the waters of the river Tigris ; swift as
an arrow out of a bow (see Isa. lx. 8). 3.
Plentifully, by whole nations turned to
the faith, and giving up their names to
Christ. 4. Jointly, as ver. 2 (Zech.
viii. 21). 5. Zealously, bearing down
all obstacles that would dam up their
way. 6. Constantly and continually,
as rivers run perpetually, by reason of
the perennity of their fountains; and
are never dried up, though sometimes
fuller than others; as rivers swell oft
with sudden showers and overflow the
banks, so, beyond all expectation, many
times doth God propagate his truth,
enlarging the bounds of his Church
with new confluxes of converts [7rapp].

Ver. 2. Let us go up. 1. The object
of their journey. “The mountain of
the Lord.” 2. The spirit in which they
undertake it. ‘“ And say, Come, let us,”
&e. (1) A spirit of fervour. (2) A
spirit of mutual love. ‘ Exhorting one
another, as Andrew exhorted his brother
Simon, and Philip Nathaniel, and the
woman of Samaria those of her city, to
come to Christ; and so all since, who
have been won by him, by word or
example, by preaching or by deed, in
public or in private, bring along with
them others to seek him whom they
themselves have found” ,Puseyj. 3.
The worthy end they have in view.
“ He will teach us of his ways.” “ They
come in holy simplicity to learn what-


ever he will condescend to teach them ;
in holy confidence, that he, the Infalli-
ble Truth, will teach them infallibly.”
4. The practical result. “ We will walk
in his paths.”

Law out of Zion. 1. The blessing
issued. ‘‘ Law.” Not mere doctrine or
religion ; not the Jewish law: but law
(without the article) as the rule of life
(Prov. vi. 23; xxviii. 4), which should
be revealed to heathen nations (Lam.
i 9: Isa. ii. 3). 2. The method of its
issuing. ‘‘ Go forth.” A personal, direct
act of God; a continual influence of the
Gospel and the Holy Spirit in the
Church and Christian experience. 3.
The centre from which it issues. Out
of Zion and Jerusalem.

Vers. 3, 4. The universal spread
of the Gospel. Modern theories of
the future exposed and refuted. The
guarantees for the fulfilment of this
prediction and its benefits described.
This prophecy is fulfiled—(1) In
the character of the Gospel. (2) The
prophecy has been fulfilled, within and
without, among individuals or bodies
of men, in body or mind, in temper or
in deed, as far as the Gospel has pre-
vailed | Pusey].

The cessation of war an effect of the
prevalence of Christianity {Woster’s
Lectures, vol. ii.].

“No more shall nation against nation rise,

Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes,

Nor fields with gleaming steel be covered o’er,

Nor brazen trumpets kindle rage no more:

But useless lances into scythes shall bend,


And the broad falchion in a ploughshare end ’’
[ Pope—The Messiah}.


HOMILETICS.
CHRISTIANITY THE ONLY GUARANTEE FOR Berrer Days.—Versae 5.
The prophet has just predicted a bright future for the Church. But Jehovah


alone can bring it to pass.


“ For” idols are impotent, and those who worship


them can do nothing. Christianity is the only hope of mankind. Human systems


can never accomplish the work of God.


I. Ancient systems did not bring better days.
What did the religions of Greece and Rome


Egypt, Persia, and India done ?


What have the myths of


accomplish? Many nations exeelled in wealth, intell’zence, and refinement, but


CHAP. Iv.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH. 4238





were degraded in morals. Religion is always more potent than philosophy and
culture. The latter can never affect the former. An inferior never changes the
character of a superior power. Hence false religions become worse, gravitate to
the centre of evil, and lose all influence to elevate and bless the world. II. Modern
systems cannot bring better days. If history and experience determine the fate
of nations in the past; if Christianity has been the only power to cope with
heathenism and eradicate evil, will the verdict for the future differ from the past?
We may advance in commercial prosperity, education, and civilization, without
improvement and elevation in morals. The religions of intellect and of emotion,
of imagination and sentiment, the theories of philosophy and utility—which are
the boast of the present day—will never abolish war and bring the anticipated
millennium. In man we cannot trust. In systems balf-human and half-divine
we have no guarantee for the future. Our faith must stand not in the wisdom of
man, but in the power of God. With this we shall be safe, happy, and triumph-
ant. God has promised, and will accomplish better days.
“Tis coming on the hills of time,
And this old world is growing brighter ;


We may not see its dawn sublime,
But high hopes make the heart throb lighter.”


Tas ZEAL oF [poLaTeRS AN INCENTIVE TO CHRISTIAN Lire


We may take ver. 5 as a resolution of Jewish and Gentile converts to cling to
God and walk in his ways, exciting themselves by the example and spirii of
idolaters, who were zealous and pertinacious in their ungodly course.

I. Every one has a god. It is a trite but true saying that man will worship.
If he does not love the true, he will a false god—an idol. Under the Gospel,
and in heathen nations, idolatry is prevalent. II. Every one makes a pro-
fession of his god. “Every one in the name of his god”—that is, under
the law and in conformity to the will of his god. 1. It is an open profession.
They are not afraid nor ashamed of their profession. 2. It is a consistent
profession. They “walk” in the fear, and not against the authority, of their
god. Their moral conduct does not contradict their religions faith 3. It
is a stedfast profession. They “will walk.” They were constant and persevering
in their practice. They were determined not to forsake their worship; for a
nation will seldom change its gods (Jer. ii. 11). 4. It isa wniversal profession.
For all will walk, “every one,” &c. Hence if these idolaters were so earnest and
resolute, what should we do? says the prophet. Their ardour should kindle our
indifference ; their exactness shame our inconsistency ; and their numbers provoke
our efforts. Our confession and resolution should be, “ We will walk in the name
of the Lord our God.” This not occasionally, for since there is nothing unreason-
able or wearying in this service, it should be “for ever and ever.”


Tus Kinepom or Curist.— Verses 6—8.


From the salvation promised even these that are scattered abroad and dwelling
in misery will not be excluded. God will finally remove all impediments and
bring his people together into one glorious and perpetual kingdom in Christ Jesus.

I. The seat of the kingdom. ‘The Lord shall reign over them in Mount
Zion.” Zion is the place from which the law went out (ver. 2), and a type of the
Christian Church (Isa. xl. 9; lii. 7). Jerusalem was the special abode of J ehovah,
the seat of theocratic government, and the centre of prescribed worship. The
Church now is the Mount of God, for elevation and dignity. Here he deigns to
dwell, to bless his people, and rule the world. “The city of the Great King.
II. The subjects of the kingdom. Jew and Gentile, the distant and most
degraded, will be gathered together, Persons that are despised and forgotten by


424 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. [CHAP. IV





human governments, the indigent, and the poor, will become citizens of the Great
King. 1. The morally weak. “ Her that halteth.” Men are spiritually tired,
maimed, and disjointed. Moral halting had been the chief sin of Israel, serving
God and Baal (1 Kings xviii. 21). Men halt, hesitate, and counterfeit in God’s
service now. 2. The hopelessly scattered. ‘Her that is driven out.” Jews
carried away by force, and Gentiles led by dumb idols (1 Cor. xii. 2). Ail that
are dispersed like a flock from the fold of God. “TI will save her that halteth,
and gather her that was driven out” (Zeph. iii. 16). 3. The grievously distressed.
‘“‘ Her that I have afflicted.” Men are not merely driven out from God, but are
sick and afflicted in body and mind. When God afflicts them they are specially
dear to him. All grievances shall be redressed, and all distempers healed. “I
will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and
will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick ”
(Ezek. xxxiv. 13—16). III. The glory of the kingdom. The glory of the
theocracy was obscured by the sins of kings and priests. Earthly monarchies
decay and undergo eclipse; but the glory of this kingdom excelleth. 1. I¢ will be
dignified. The kingdom will come to the Church with a glory exceeding “ even
the first dominion.” It will shine with a greater lustre than the reigns of David
and Solomoxr 2. J¢ will be strong. “A strong nation.” (a) Strong in numbers.
The remnant scattered and depressed shall be restored and multiplied, like the
stars cf heaven or the sands on the seashore. (0) Strong in victory. It will no
more be subdued by petty monarchs or neighbouring confederacies. But its
strength is not human might, temporal greatness; but strong in spiritual warfare,
in faith, and achievements. ‘A little one shall become a thousand, and a small
one a strong nation.” 3. It will be perpetual. The Lord shall reign over them,
“even for ever.” The valour and strength of David, the honour and wisdom of
Solomon, were but shadows of this kingdom. The King eternal is not subject to
mortality, nor exposed to danger. ‘The glory of the Church and the height of its
felicity are the constant presence and prerogatives of Christ Jesus. ‘The Lord
God shall give unto him the throne of his father David; and he shall reign over
the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


strength. ‘“Atthat time they shall call
Jerusalem the throne of the Lord ; and


Ver. 5. Contrasts in worship. 1.
Men of the world reject God. 2. Men


of the world worship their own god
3. But Christians are determined to love
and serve Jehovah. That which is the
scandal to the world, to them is a motive
to firmness and to union. There are
different persuasions in the world, let
us be true and cleave together in the
right way. ‘We will walk in the name
of the Lord.”

ers. 6—8. The flock of Christ. 1.
The flock in a state of helplessness. Halt,
scattered, and afflicted. 2. The flock
gathered together by the Good Shep-
herd. Gathered by providence and
found by grace. 3. The flock defended.
From the “tower of the flock,” they
are—(1) inspected ; (2) environed ; (3)
shielded. The Church is designed to
be a defence and tower of spiritual


all the nations shall be gathered together
unto it, to the name of the Lord, to
Jerusalem.”

Ver. 7. The Lord shall reign. As
King, he-—1. Of rebels makes them sub-
jects, willing to be ruled by him. 2.
He preserves them in that privilege by
dis Spirit. 3. He gives them laws far
better than those of the twelve tables in
Rome, which yet far exceeded (saith
Cicero) all the learned libraries of the
philosophers in worth and weight. 4.
He sweetly inclineth their wills to yield
universal obedience thereunto, and to
cross themselves so they may please
him. 5. He rewards them with com-
fort and peace here, and with life eternal
hereafter. 6. He destroys all the ene
mies of his Church, and then, at last.


omAP, Iv.)





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


425





delivers up the kingdom to his Father
(1 Cor. xv. 24); not his essential king-
dom as God, but his economical kingdom
as mediator [7rapp].

Ver, 8. The world is a field, the
Church a fold in that field; and a
strong fold (strong as a tower), yea, a
stronghold ; Ophel, as it is styled in the
next words ; and that of the daughter
of Zion, that is, of the Christian Church,
the inviolable security whereof is here
noted [ Jbid.].

Come and arrive. He twice repeats
the assurance, in equivalent words, for





tidings the :gladder by repeating and
enforcing them” [Pusey].

Vers. 1—8. The kingdom of God. 1.
Its central point : the glorified and ex.
alted Zion, the source of the statutes
and revelations ; and through grace, the
ancient, chosen seat of God’s dominion.
2. Its citizens: those who flow towards
it thirsting for righteousness, longing
for salvation. 3. Its order: God’s law
and God’s peace (ver. 3). 4. Its blessed-
ness ; rest, security, prosperity (ver. 4).
5. Its duration: eternal, like God him-
self (ver. 5) [Lange].


their fuller assurance, “to make the good


HOMILETICS.


Tue SoFFYERING aND TRIUMPH oF Gop’s PropLe.— Verses 9—13.

Israel’s history, like human life, has its dark and its bright side. Before the
glory promised is ever gained, sorrow and trial must be endured. This is—l. A
constant rule ; and—2. A necessary order in God's discipline. But the scene of
trial was to be the place of deliverance. The sufferings shall be over-ruled for the
salvation of his people and the destruction of their enemies. Notice :—

I. The bitterness of the affliction. “ Pangs have taken thee,” &c. Pangs with-
out remedy, and painful as a woman in travail. 1. The loss of kings. “Is there no
king in thee?” A visible king was a protection, and a symbol of God’s presence
to them. ‘The loss was most serious and irreparable. It was a condition of
helplessness and shame. 2. The loss of counsellors. “Is thy counsellor
perished?” Kings and judges were their counsellors and guides; but they were
bereft. of wisdom to direct, left in the hands of the enemy, and governed by
captive nations. 3. The loss of liberties. ‘“ Now shalt thou go forth out of the
city,” which shall be captured ; “dwell in the field” exposed to danger; and be
carried “even to Babylon” into long captivity. This was a sad exchange of
liberty and luxury for bondage and misery. But it is the picture of many a soul
reduced to slavery, bereft of God and writhing in agony. II. The comforts under
the affliction. AJ) is not lost, though they have neither king nor counsellor.
God will make up for everything. 1. Affliction will end in good. “ Jerusalem’s
pangs are not as dying agonies, but as travailing throes, which after a while will be
forgotten for joy that a child is born into the world.” Weeping may endure for a
night, but joy cometh in the morning (Ps. xxx. 6; lxxiii. 24: Jer. x. 24). 2.
Deliverance will be granted. ‘There shalt thou be delivered.” There, where
sorrow is greatest and hope is faintest—even in Babylon, the most unlikely place,
“‘the Lord shall redeem thee.” The utmost degree of affliction is often the nearest
to the end, and help is not in the holy city, but in the stronghold of the foe.
““Man’s extremity is God’s opportunity.” The Red Sea must: be the scene of
sriumph to Israel, and the prison the place of deliverance to Joseph and Peter.
This magnifies God’s grace and power. “When the Lord turned again the
captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream.” 3. Enemies will be subdued.
“Thou shalt beat in pieces many people.” In their weakness, God will be their
strength, and make them victorious over confederate nations. Their horns shall be
iron, to push their enemies; and their hoofs brass, to tread them down. The
destruction is universal and complete. All enemies shall be put under their feet,
as conquered foes, or willing subjects. “Fear not, thou worm Jacob. Behold, I
will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument, having teeth: thou shalt thresh


426 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. [cHar. IV.





the mountains and beat them small, and shalt. make the hills as chaff” (Is. xi.
13—15). III. The spirit in which they should bear the affliction. If such be
their prospects in the trial, how should they demean themselves? 1. They should
cherish a patient spirit. “Why dost thou cry out aloud?” Calm fear and hush
grief ; though afiliction be grievous at present, it shall afterward yield the fruits of
joy and peace. Patience defeats the menace of the foe, but passion takes his part


“ Patience doth conquer by out-suffering all” [Pee/].


2. They should cherish a submissive spirit. “Be in pain,” &c. Grieve, but
remember excessive grief, fretfulness, and rebellion, are unreasonable. Resistance
is folly, submission is triumph.
“ By not opposing, thou dost ills destroy,
And wear thy conquered sorrows into joy ” [ Young].


3. They should cherish a spirit of hope. What a bright prospect opens up before
them! Why doubt or despair? God will accomplish his word. Hope will sweeten
trial, and, like the sun, paint the rainbow on the clouds. “ Black though our side
of the canvas be,” said Sir Harry Vane, in going to be executed, “the Divine
hand paints a beautiful picture on the unseen side.”


Tur Destruction or Zion’s Fors.— Verses 11—13.


Those who exult in Israel’s fall, and seek to defile and outrage her, will be dis-
appointed. Inscrutable wisdom will correct the children with the foe, and then
destroy the foe with the children.

I. They are frustrated in their design. “Let her be defiled,” &. 1.
They sought her injury. They desired to defile her with blood, and condemn
her in guilt. The wicked delight in the fall and inconsistencies of God’s
people. They often become tempters, then accusers; “first desecrators, then
sanctimonious justiciaries,” says one. 2. They feasted their eyes on her
misery. ‘Let our eye look upon Zion.” The world always hates the Church
and rejoices in its sorrow. Edom delighted in the chastisement of Israel
(Obad. 12.) ; and the sufferings of the martyrs were a spectacle to the heathen.
Malice is blind to all virtue, and eyes can always see what hearts can wish. “ Yea,
they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye hath seen
it.” II. They are crushed in their efforts. ‘‘ Many nations are gathered against
thes.” The powers of earth and hell are sometimes arrayed against the Church,
but all in vain. They are against God when against his people. They may have
wickedness to imagine, craft to devise, but are not able to perform (Ps. xxi.). God
knows their thoughts, but they cannot defeat his purpose. Pharaoh’s counsel to
extinguish issued in the increase of the chosen people. The wisdom, power, and
counsel of man signify nothing, if they oppose the decrees of God. “He taketh
the wise in their craftiness.” Learn—l. The folly of designing against God. 2.
The security of obedience to God. IIT. They are ruined in their numbers.
“Many nations” combined against Zion. The armies of Babylon, with their
subject nations, the forces of Edom, Ammon, Moab, and others, who exulted in
Judah’s fall, were types of the anti-Christian powers of the latter days. Neither
numbers nor ‘craft avail before God. They only ripen themselves for God to
“gather them as the sheaves into the floor.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers.9, 10. [ The moral condition of the privileges of that city, whose builder
men. Kingless and restless, in captivity and maker is God ; exposed to danger,
and misery. Unable to cope with sin, tumult, and the distractions of life, ILI.
evil habits, and the world. Without The purpose of Gor concerning men. T3


euar. Iv.)





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


42)





redeem, to govern, to guide, and to
exalt above all misery and opposition.
He will shortly bruise Satan under their
feet, and every power of body and mind
shall be consecrated to him.

Vers. 11, 12. The enemies of. Zion.
1, Their number. 2. Their purpose,—
to defile and rejoice. 3. Their spirit—
proud and determined. 4, Their help-
lessness. ‘They know not the thoughts
of God.” 5. Theirruin. “He shall gather
them,” &c. God’s people begin, and he
will finish, the work.

Gather them as sheaves. Persecutors.
1, Ripened by their own conduct. 2.
Gathered by the providence of God. 3,
Threshed by the judgments of God.
“This prophecy received a primary and
partial fulfilment in the victories of the
Maccabees (1 Macc. v. 1). But its
adequate accomplishment is in Christ.
It is to be applied to the work of the
apostles, and apostolic men, missionaries
of Christ, who are compared by St.
Paul to oxen treading out the corn (1
Cor, ix..9: 1 Tim. vy. 18: cf. Is. xxxti.
20). Their work is indeed one of
bringing the nations into subjection (2
Cor. ii. 14; x. 5: Eph. vi. 12); but it
is in subjection to the law of love, in
order that the good grain winnowed
from the sheaves on the floor may be
gathered into the garner of heaven” (cf.
Ps, exlix. 8) [Wordsworth].

Ver. 13. The very image of the
threshing implies that this is no mere
destruction. While the stubble is beaten
or bruised to small pieces, and the chaff
is far more than the wheat, and is


carried out of the floor, there yet re-
mains the seed-corn. So in the great
judgments of God, while most is refuse,
there yet remains over what is severed
from the lost heap, and wholly conse-
crated to him {| Pusey].

The Lord of the whole earth. 1. God
the supreme ruler of the world. Not
merely the God of Israel, but ruler
“of the whole earth.” 2. All things
governed in the interests of the Church.
The nations subject to Zion, not for
selfish aggrandisement, but for her good
and his glory (Isa. lx. 6, 9; xxiii. 18).
3. The glory of victory should be given
to God. All gains of merchandise, all
achievements of intellect, all success of
spiritual efforts, spring from him, and
should be consecrated to him. Holiness
to the Lord should be written on all
things we do.

Vers. 9—13. Of the struggles of
God’s congregation. They must be
maintained : 1, Under heavy sorrow,
in secure expectation of their finai re-
demption (vers. 9,10). 2. Under the
mighty assaults of the foe, in sure con-
fidence that the Lord sits upon the
throne (vers. 11, 12). 3. In constant
self-examination. For although the
victory must certainly be given to God’s
cause (ver. 13), nevertheless, until Christ
is born in the congregation (and in each
individual, ver. 1), the result of every
contest is deserved disaster and disgrace
(ver. 13) [Lange].

The whole chapter sets forth—1. The
glory ; 2. The peace ; 3. The dominion ;
and, 4. The victory of the Church.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IV.


Vers. 1, 2. Last days. God’s pro-
mises are dated, but with a mysteri-
ous character; and for want of skill in
God’s chronology, we are prone to think
God forgets us, when, indeed, we forget
ourselves in being so bold to set God a
time of our own, and in being angry
that he comes not just then to us
[Gurnall].

Ver. 3. War. There must be peace
when the art of war is laid by as useless,
and shall be learned no more. That
will be a blessed time, indeed, when the


art military shall be out of date, and
(being itself the greatest interrupter of
learning) shall be learned no more,
When soldiers shall turn husbandmen
and vine-dressers. When a man casts
away his sword we may well conclude
he intends to be quiet. Thus the Lord
gives quiet to nations which have been
engaged in war, by causing wars to
cease [ Caryl].
Ver. 4. Peace of country life.


“Tn all things grew his wisdom and his wealth
And folk beholding the fair state and health


Wherein his lard was, said that now at last
A fragment of the Golden Age was cast
Over the place, for there was no debate,
And men forgot the very name of hate.”
[Wm. Morris.]
Vers. 6—8. As the pleasures of the
future will be spiritual and pure, the
object of a good and wise man in this
transitory state of existence should be
to fit himself for a better, by controlling
the unworthy propensities of his nature
and improving all his better aspirations ;
to do his duty, first to God, then to his
neighbour; to promote the happiness
and welfare of those who are in any
degree dependent upon him, or whom
he has the means of assisting; never
wantonly to injure the meanest thing
that lives; to encourage, as far as he
can, whatever is useful and tends to
refine and exalt humanity ; to store his
mind with such knowledge as it is fitted
to receive, and he is able to attain; and
so to employ the talents committed to
his care that, when the account is re-
quired, he may hope to have his stew-
ardship approved [Southey].
Ver. 9. King.
“ Kings are like stars—they rise and set—they
have
The worship of the world, but no repose.’’
[Shelley.]
Vers. 8—10. The kingdom shall come.
Observe, it is a kingdom that is to come
to us; we are not to go to it. Also, it
is not to be a kingdom of the dead, but
of the living. Also, it is not to come all


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


[CHaAP. IV


at once, but quietly; nobody knows
how. ‘The kingdom cometh not with
observation ” [Ruskin].

Vers. 10, 11. It belongs, in truth, te
the Church of God to suffer blows, not
to strike them. But at the same time
let it be remembered that the Church is
an anvil which has worn out many a
hammer [ Beza].

Ver. 12. Thoughts of the Lord. To
those, the eyes of whose understandings
are enlightened, and the avenues of their
hearts opened to discern and adore the
perfections of God, how manifold are
the instances which occur of the provi-
dence of God interfering to direct the
course of human events towards a salu-
tary end; to make afflictions of men the
by-path to enjoyment; out of evils,
temporal and transitory, to produce
substantial and permanent good [Bp.
Mant}.

Ver. 13. Hope doth three things : it
assures good things to come ; it disposes
us for them ; it waits for them unto the
end, each of which will be of singular
use to fit us for pious sufferings [| Polhill].

Arise. When God has conquering
work for his people to do, he will furn-
ish them with strength and ability for
it; will make the horn iron and the
hoofs brass : and, when he does so, they
must exert the power he gives them,
and execute the commission ; even the
daughter of Zion must arise and thresh
[ Matt. Henry].


CHAPTER V.


CRITICAL NoTES. Thou] invading army (not Judah). Us] The prophet identifies himself with


the nation.
(Amos ii. 3).


Smite] The greatest insult (Lam. iii. 30: Matt. v. 39: xxvii. 30).
2. Beth.] 'the ensuing prophecy (vers. 1—5) combined with what goes before and


Judge] or king


what follows, consummates the witness of the O. T. concerning Christ, and is the groundwork of


his history in the New [Words.].
10, 15).


‘ Eph.] To distinguisb it from another Beth. in Zebulon (Josh. xix.
Little] So insignificant in size and population that it was not enumerated among the


cities of Judah (Josh. xv. 21); nor in the list (Neh. xi. 25); it became a city under Rehoboam
(2 Chron. xi. 6). Thous.] Tribes divided into thousands, over which a leader presided, and com-
manded them in war (Ex. xviii. 21, 25: Num. i. 16): Deut. i. 15). ‘Family’ is given, Judg. vi. 15.
Out] Lit. shall one come forth to me to be ruler. Out of] Beth., as his native place, antithetic to.
From of old] Lit. from the days of eternity; expressing the eternity of Christ’s Divine nature and


oHAP, Y.| HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. 429


ge a A ea





person [Gi]; and the displays of his power of old from everlasting, which may be referred to his
covenant engagements, and to the work of creation {Boothr.]. 3. Therefore] On account of this
fixed plan of God, his people will be given up to suffer, until she] “the virgin’? mother of
Jesus (Isa, vii. 14); or the people of Judah, from whom a ruler was to come forth (Gen. xlix. 10).
Suffering is the necessary travail-pain which precedes the joy of birth. Then] Blessings described
which result from the Messiah’s birth. Rem.] The remainder, not only inhabitants of Judah left
from the judgment, but members of the revolted ten tribes; all Israelites dispersed in foreign lands.
Only brethren, sons of Israel, his race, have the right to return. 4. Feed] Lit. rule (Matt. ii. 6)
[margin]; (Isa. xl. 11). Stand] Persevering and diligent, in the attributes and name of his God,
?.¢, one in relation and purpose with Jehovah (Isa. ix. 5), They] Returned remnant. Abide
Dwell in perfect peace and security (cf. chap. iv. 4: Isa, xiv. 30). Now] in the fulfilment, tel
Alone (ef. Joel ii. 20, 21: Luke i, 32), 5. Man] Heb. this, emphatic (Gen. v. 29); the cause or
author of peace between God and man (Zech. ix.10: Eph. ii. 14,17: Col. i. 20). Seven and
eight] Numbers complete, victorious, and contrasted with the enemy (Job v. 19: Prov, vi. 16).
Prin. ] Shepherds equivalent to princes or rulers (Jer. vi. 3: Nahum iii. 18), 6. Entrances] The
borders where garrisons and its chief strength lie (2 Kings iii 21). Waste] Lit. eat up; the
metaphor of shepherds (Num, xxii. 4), Sword] With her own naked swords (Ps. lv. 21). He]
Messiah. 7. Rem.] Shall quicken and have the same influence as imperceptible dew] (Deut.
xxxii. 2: Ps, Ixxii. 6). An earnest of greater blessings hereafter (Isa. Ixvi. 19: Zech. viil. 13).
Showers] From dabdr, to multiply, multitudes of drops; from God, and independent of human
agency, as dew and rain, 8. Lion] ‘lo take vengeance on her enemies (Isa. Ixvi. 15, 16: Zech.
xil. 8—6; xiv. 17, 18); and strike terror into all opponents. A prediction of victory under the
Maccabees and after-times, 9.] Exultant feeling; High be thy hand (Isa, xxvi. 11) to destroy the
foe (Exod, xiii.9). 10, Horses) All human resources on which to depend (Isa. ii. 6—-8: Ps, xx. 7).
“The Church will never be safe till she is stripped of ail creature-trusts, and rests on Jehovah
alone” [Calvin]. 11. Cities] Salvation so complete that neither forces nor strongholds would be
wanted. 12. Witch.] Such offences would be no more found amongst them (cf. Isa, ii. 6—8).
Sooth.] Signmongers by hand and observations of the sky. 18. Images] Graven idols made of
wood or metal. Stand.] Statues, stone images, or stones dedicated to idols (1 Kings xiv. 23). “ Thou
shalt no more be an idolatrous people”’ [.4. Clarke]. 14. Groves] Lit. “‘ Stems of trees, or poste
standing upright, or set up as idols, which were dedicated to the Canaanitish goddess of nature”
(cf. Ex. xxxiv. 13) [Kez]. Cities] In or near which idolatrous groves were planted (2 Kings x. 26).
“ These two rather subordinate objects are mentioned instar omnium, to express the entire abolition
of war and idolatry”? [Kei?]. 15.] The Lord will take vengeance upon nations that have not heard,
t. e, not hearkened or obeyed his voice. ‘“ In other words, he will exterminate every ungodly power
by a fierce judgment, so that nothing will ever be able to disturb the peace of his people and
kingdom again” [ Kei].


HOMILETICS.


Tue Cuurcn Mimitant—Verse 1.


Calamities are to precede prosperity. Lest Israel should fall into carnal security,
she is warned of her danger, and roused to defend herself. Zion, in her warlike
attitude, is a type of the Church militant.

I. She is endangered by the foe. ‘He hath laid siege against us.” In
this world the Christian Church is engaged in conflict and exposed to suffering.
The powers of evil have arrayed themselves against her. Infidelity, popery.
and persecution have besieged her gates. Sin threatens her character, liberty,
and existence. The foes are numerous, strong, disciplined to arms, and
possessing manifold advantages, ‘We wrestle not against flesh and_ blood,”
&c. II. She is often deprived of earthly leaders. “They shall smite
the judge of Israel.” Hengstenberg thinks this expression indicates a time
when no king of the house of David reigned. Deplorable is the city with an
enemy at the walls, and without a commander within to help. In early days
the Church has been without leaders to teach and guide. Apostles were im-
prisoned and martyrs put to death. Men were determined to destroy the very
existence of Christianity. Hence the great persecutions through which it has
passed. But when the godly men cease and the faithful fail, then God will help
(Ps. xii. 1), “For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our law-giver, the Lord is
our king; he will save us.” III. She is roused to action. “ Now gather thyself
in troops.” 1. Immediate action. “Now.” very Christian, weak or strong, 1s
commanded to arise and be ready. The present is the day for exertion, and those


430 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. (cHap. V.





who work should do it with vigour. 2. United action. “Gather thyself in
troops.” Dangers are great. United and personal action are required. Stragylers
may be taken prisoners. Never let the enemies’ watchword prevail—“ Divide
and conquer.” Close thy ranks, and let each soldier keep his place. Supported
by the promise and presence of God we should fear no evil and shun no duty.
“The people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.”


THe Ruwer or Israri.—Verses 2, 3.


In the greatest danger and the deepest degradation of Zion a ruler shall arise to
deliver her, and raise her to be a dreaded power in the world.

I. The place from which the ruler came. Bethlehem, the most insig-
nificant, nut Jerusalem, the royal, city, gave birth to Jesus. Little, in a
worldly sense, it was not the least among the cities of Judah; but eclipsed
them all in spiritual dignity. God perfects strength out of seeming weakness,
and immortalizes obscure places by the events of his providence. Some
men derive honours from, and others confer celebrity upon, the place in
which they were born. Many cities have striven for the honour of Homer’s
birth. In Bethlehem we see the Divine purpose to choose “the base things
of the world, and to bring to nought things that are.” II. The method in
which the ruler came. 1. He was promised. ‘Out of thee shall he come
forth.” Chief priests and scribes gave the right answer to Herod’s questions
(Matt. ii, 4—6). When it was rumoured that he would come out of Galilee, his
enemies could say, “ Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of
Bethlehem, where David was.” When we think that the promise has failed, God
is arranging events, choosing agents, and fulfilling his word. 2. He was appointed.
In the purpose of God he was set apart, and according to the command of God he
came. He came not of himself, but the Father sent and sealed him (John vi. 27).
“Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me” (Ps.
xl. 7, 8). 3. He was born af a woman. ‘She which travaileth hath brought
forth.” He was born of a woman; the virgin conceived and bore a son (Isa. vii.
14). His goings forth were of old, but his birth was in time. He was real God
and true man. God was manifest in the flesh ; and in the coming of the Messiah
we may read the truth of God, and discern the purpose and presence of God.
“Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which has come to pass,”
III. The purpose for which the ruler came. ‘ Who shall be ruler in Israel ?”
The circumstances of his birth and life seemed to bespeak anything rather than
royal dominion. Pilate put the question, “ Art thou a king, then?” The answer
was, “Iamaking. But my kingdom is not of this world.” He had no temporal
dominions, but he governs the hearts and lives of his people. He rules the nations
of the earth, and will rule to the end of time. The judge of Israel was smitten,
the empire of Cxsar came to nought, but the reign of Christ shall endure for ever.
Napoleon rose with rapidity to boundless inheritance, but finished his course in
disgraceful exile ; contrasted empires founded on force with that of Jesus founded
upon love, and exclaimed, ‘What an abyss between my deep misery and the
eternal kingdom of Christ, which is proclaimed, loved, and adored, and is extend-
ing over the whole earth!” IV. The results which spring from the ruler’s
coming. ‘‘ Then the remnant of his brethren shall return unto the children of
israel.” 1. Deliverance from captivity. They shall return from bondage to
Canaan and to Jehovah. The remnant shall become genuine sons of Israel, people
again in covenant with God. 2. Restoration to unity. Exiled Jews, Gentiles of
heathen nations, shall be united as brethren under his reign, and incorporated into
a spiritual commonwealth. Then men become Israelites not in name, but in spirit
and truth. Grace makes all sons vf God. The promise is not only to Israel after
the flesh, but to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall cal
(Acts ii. 39%.


CHAP, V.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MIUAH. 431





THe INCARNATION AND Birta or Carist.


I. Who it was that sent Christ forth. “Out of thee shall he come forth to
me.” J esus Christ did not come forth without his Father’s permission, authority.
and assistance. We are too apt to forget that while there are distinctions as to the
persons in the Trinity, there are no distinctions of honour; and we frequently
ascribe the honour of our salvation, or at least the depths of its mercy and the
extremity of its benevolence, more to Jesus Christ than we do to the Father.
Contemplate that the Father sent him, and in every period of his life think that
he suffered what the Father willed; that every step of his life was marked with
the approval of the great J Am. II. Where did he come to at the time of his
incarnation? First, it seemed necessary that Christ should be born in Bethlehem,
because of Bethlehem’s history. Again, there is something in the name of the place.
The word Bethlehem has a double meaning. It signifies “the house of bread,”
and “the house of war.” Jesus is the bread of his people on which they feed.
Here the bread of life was first given to man to eat. It is also called ‘‘the house
of war,” because Christ is to every man “the house of bread” or “ the house of
war.” Ephratah signifies “ fruitfulness” or “abundance.” All our fruitfulness-
is from Christ. His incarnation fattens the soil of our hearts. Next, notice the
position of Bethlehem. “ Little among the thousands of Judah.” There are many
little ones, unknown and dwelling in obscurity. Christ is always born among the
little ones ; lieth not in great hearts, but in little ones. A broken heart and a low
spirit shall have the Saviour, and none else. Another thought, how wonderfully
mysterious was that providence which brought Jesus Christ's mother to Bethlehem
at the very time when she was to be delivered. III. What did Jesus come for ?
“To be ruler in Israel.” He was “born the King of the Jews.” Men are born
princes, but seldom born kings. But he is not ruler of Israel after the flesh, but
after the spirit. Hast thou submitted to the sway of Christ? IV. Did Jesus
ever come before? ‘ Whose goings forth have been ever of old.” First, Christ
has had his goings forth in his Godhead. ‘From everlasting.” He has not been
a secret and a silent person up to this moment. That new-born child is the infant
of to-day, but the ancient of eternity. 1. Of old he went forth as our covenant-
head in election. 2. He had goings forth for his people, as their representative
before the throne, even before they were begotten in the world. Secondly, we
believe that Christ has come forth of old, even to men, so that men have beheld
him. He appeared to Abraham, to Jacob, to Joshua, and to the three youths in
the fiery furnace. Observe that each of these four great occurrences happened to
the saints, when they were engaged in very eminent duty, or when they were about to

be engaged in it. When Abraham interceded for Sodom, Jacob engaged in
wrestling, Joshua exercising bravery, and Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were
in high places of persecution. Christ hath not left going forth yet. Recollect he
goes to Bethlehem. Are you little? He will go forth to meet you. He will
come to your poor house,—wretched heart. Trust him, and he will go forth to


abide with you for ever [Spurgeon].


Tur SHEPHERD Kina.—Veree 4.


The government of this ruler is further described under the similitude of a
shepherd feeding and defending his flock, establishing and extending his kingdom
in all the earth.

I. The work of the shepherd king. He shall “feed”—a word which
indicates to feed by ruling, as in the Greek in Matt. ii 6, “ Out of thee
shall come a governor that shall rule (feed marg.) my people Israel.” 1. He will
feed has flock. The soul is hungry, and men crave for food. The word of c hrist
can feed the soul, and satisfy the wants of humanity. Those who believe in him
shall not hunger nor thirst” any more. 2. He will rule his flock. He will


432 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY . MICAH. [ CHAP. V





teach and guide, rule and provide. We require control as well as nourishment.
All his sheep “ follow him, for they know his voice. And a stranger will they
not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers.”
II. The qualifications of the shepherd king. Israel’s princes had no power, but
he shall stand, clad in the strength and displaying the glory of the Lord. 1. He
has Divine power. ‘Rule in the strength of the Lord.” He is invested with
power to defend his flock against wolves and robbers (John x. 11, 12). Care would
be in vain if the sheep could not be secured from danger. . ‘“‘ No man is able to
pluck them out of my Father’s hand.” 2. He has Divine tenderness. His power is
not tyrannical, He loves where he feeds. His might is used to protect, not to
destroy the flock. He does not flee away like an hireling, but lays down his own
life for the sheep. “He shall feed his flock like a shepherd; he shall gather the
lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that
are with young.” 3. He has Divine majesty. ‘In the majesty of the name of
the Lord his God.” All power in earth and heaven is given to him. Majesty is
displayed in his love and teaching, in his nature and work. He is invested with
more dignity than ordinary kings. He bears the name of God (Isa. ix.5; x. 21);
the spirit of might rests upon him (xi. 1); and in the greatness of his majesty he
overthrows every enemy (Ex. xiv. 7). III. The attitude of the shepherd king.
“ He shall stand and feed.” 1. He is actively engaged. To sit is the attitude of
a judge, to stand is the position of one ready to succour and defend. He defended
Israel from the attack of heathen nations. He will watch and feed his Church to
the end of time. He is always present and vigilant. ‘‘ Behold, he that keepeth
Israel shall neither sleep nor slumber.” 2. He is constantly engaged. He never
sits down in ease and neglect. He stands fixed in purpose, and none can hinder
or remove him. He endures, surveys, and guards his flock on every side. “ He
shall not fail nor be discouraged until he hath set judgment in the earth.” IV. The
blessings which flow from the work of the shepherd king. Through the care
and providence of Christ his people shall be increased, established, and acquire
greatness and dominion. 1. The perpetual existence of the Church. “ And they
shall abide.” His people shall not wander to and fro, as hitherto. They shall
rest and abide in permanent security and peace. None can hurt or destroy them.
Because he lives they shall live. The original promise, often forfeited through
disobedience, shall be fulfilled: “ Ye shall dwell in your land safely. And I will
give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid ”
(Lev. xxvi. 6: Isa, xiv. 30). 2. The increasing greatness of the Church. “ Fer
now shall he be great.” A “little flock” only follow him now, but this flock
shall be great in numbers and influence. Its king shall become famous, precious,
wid attractive to others. “I have made thee a great name, like the name of the
great that are in the earth.” 3. The universal dominion of the Church. “ He
shall be great unto the ends of the earth.” There shall be no end to the increase,
no limit to the power of his empire. Souls shall be converted, nations brought
under the yoke of Christ, thus the greatness of his love and grace shall be set
forth to the very ends of the world. ‘I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.”


’ HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


ver. 1. 1. Christ’s ordinary har-
biagers and forerunners, when he is to
come with mercies to his Church, are
afflictions to fit them for such mani-
festations. 2. These afflictions are often
very grievous. The contempt and injury
done to authority and magistrates, under


whom a people may be kept from con-
fusion and the Church protected, is a
special ingredient in the affliction of
the visible Church. See Hutcheson.
To be smitten on the face betokens
shame ; to smite with a rod betokens
destruction. Now both shall meet in


OHAP. V.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


433





one; as in the Great Day, the wicked
shall awake to shame and everlasting
contempt, and shall perish for ever
[Pusey].

Ver. 2. Bethlehem. God orders all
in the continuous course of his wisdom.
All lies in perfect harmony in the Divine
mind. ach event is the sequel of
what went before. So here the prophet
joins on, what to us stands in such con-
trast with that simple and. Yet he
describes the two conditions as bearing
one another. He had said that the
judge was smitten, and that Israel had
no counsellor nor king ; now he speaks
of the Ruler in Israel. He had said that
the rule was to come to the tower of the
flock ; now, retaining the word, he
speaks of the ruler in whom it was to
be established. But he has greater
things to say, so he pauses—And thou /
People have admired the brief appeal
of the murdered Cesar, “Thou too,
Brutus.” The like energetic conciseness
lies in the words, And thou/ Bethlehem
Ephratah [Pusey].

Goings forth. 1. In the purposes of
eternity. 2. In the creation of the
world. 3. In the manifestations of Old
Testament. 4. In human birth. 5. In
the events of providence.

Ver. 4. The shepherd character of
Jesus indicates :—1. The helpless and
lost condition of man. 2. The love of
God in assuming the character and office


of ashepherd. 3. The benevolent de
sign in redeeming mankind,

Feed. This expression shows how
Christ stands towards his own, the sheep
that have been intrusted to him. He
does not rule over them like a dreadful
tyrant, who oppresses his subjects with
fear, but he is a shepherd, and cares for
his sheep with all the gentleness that
can be desired. But since we are sur-
rounded with enemies, the prophet
adds: He works with power ; that is,
with all the power there is in God, all
the protection there is in Christ, as soon
as there is need to protect the Church.
We should learn, therefore, to expect
from Christ just as much salvation as
there is power in God [Calvin]. But
neither feed nor rule conveys the full
idea of the original expression (Matt. i1.
6). The full idea is, who shall act the
part of a shepherd to my people Israel,—
who shall at once protect, and guide,
and feed, and govern or rule them
[ Morrison}.

“ As the good shepherd tends his fleecy care,
Seeks freshest pasture and the purest air,
Explores the lost, the wandering sheep directs,
By day o’ersees them, and by night protects ;
The tender lambs he raises in his arms,

Feeds from his hand, and in his bosom warms;

Thus shall mankind his guardian care engage,

The promised Father of the future age.”

[ Pope. ]
The world hates the Church, and feasts
its eyes upon its misery.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Pracerut Rute or Carist.— Verses 5, 6.


This one just mentioned will bring peace within his kingdom, and bestow means


sufficient to secure it when given.


Literally and spiritually this promise belongs


to the whole Church, and indicates tae peaceful reign of Christ over men, I. He


will give peace to His people.
the gift of God.
The soul is dissatisfied and restless ;


The inner life of men is a prayer for peace.
Christ reconciles to God, gives peace with God, and peace
He is “the Prince of peace, and sends peace on earth ” where
He “came and preached peace to you who were far off, and to them


sufficient satisfaction.
with conscience.
all is strife.


that were nigh.” 2. Peace by his own agencies. ‘ seve
; Whatever number this may signify, the soldiers of Christ in


shepherds,” &c.


themselves are weaker than the armies of the world.


1. Peace in his own person.
filled with fear, anxiety, and a sense of guilt.


Peace to the individual and to the Church is


“This man shall be the peace.”
Everything points to God as the only


“Then shall he raise up seven


But the feeblest become


i i iant achieve-

heroes in Christ to conquer the enemy and secure the Church. Valian ;

ments have been made by the shepherds and princes of the Church. God requires
28


434 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH. {cuap. V.


not numbers nor prowess. His instrumentalities are feeble and more than enough.
Grace is stronger than sin. God is mightier than man. The weapons of our
warfare are “not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong-
holds.” II. He will defend the peace which He has given to His people.
The Church is in danger, the peace of the Christian is often disturbed, and “ in
the world ye shall have tribulation.” But this man gives and secures peace to the
individual, the Church, and the country. 1. He delivers fromthe enemy. “ Asshur
is a type of the nations of the world by which the people of the Lord are attacked,
because in the time of the prophet this power was the imperial power by which
Israel was endangered.” Nimrod was the founder of the empire, Gen. x. 9, and
indicates the hostility of this power. Notice—(1) The imminent danger. The
enemy treads within the borders—prevails in the land, and enters their palaces.
Sennacherib’s army entered Judah, took defenced cities, and besieged Jerusalem
itself, Is. xxxvi. 1; xxxvii. 3. (2) The complete deliverance. Asshur was driven
back, confined, and wasted in his own territory with the sword. He was defeated
and crushed at his own gates. 2. He defends from the enemy. When defeated
once the attack is often renewed. But the Church will carry the battle into the
dominions of sin and Satan. Those who try to waste her shall be foiled and wasted
themselves. ‘‘ Nowahall this company lick up all that are round about us, as the
ox licketh up the grass of the field.”


Our Peace 1n Trousite.—Verse 5.


The Messiah is here intended. The word maz, in Italics, is not in the original.
The translators should rather have put in the word Ruler or Shepherd. But if
he, himself be understood, it is all the same, whatever be the supplement. The
Assyrian is used metaphorically, for some enemy. It is common for sacred writers
to express any significant adversary by the name of Egypt, Assyria, or Babylon ;
for these powers distinguished themselves by their hatred, oppression, and enslaving
of the Jews. We may include everything that annoys and alarms, that would
injure and destroy. Be the case what it may, he is our relief. He does not ex-
empt us from conflict, but affords help, comfort, and deliverance. Enemies assail,
but he keeps our minds stayed upon him in perfect peace. Let us think of
several Assyrians, and see how he is our peace, when they invade and would
swallow us up. Does the broken law of God threaten us? A man has nothing to
fear from the law when perfectly kept. The curse enters through every breach of
transgression. Who is not therefore exposed? The commandment coming—si
reviving—hope dying—and nothing expected but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment! But he is our peace, who died for our sins and rose again for our
justification. Does our adversary the Devil terrify? When you think of his wiles
and strength, and consider yourself, you are filled with despair. You are no more
than a worm toa mountain. The promise is, “ Fear not, thou worm Jacob ; for thou
shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small as dust.” In the Lord you have
righteousness and strength. In all these things you are more than conquerors,
through him that loved you. Do we complain of the sin that dwelleth in us?
A Christian must feel and ought to feel it, and be deeply humbled. “ O wretched
man that I am!” &c, But where does he find relief? ‘1 thank God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.” He has begun and will finish the good work in me. My
sanctification wild be as complete as my justification now is. He is not only able
to keep me from falling, but to present me faultless. Do we consider the troudles
of life? In the world ye shall have tribulstion, but in me ye shall have peace.
“As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by
Christ.” Modern Christians may not be. called to suffer persecution as the dis-
ciples did ; but they may be subjects of the same personal and relative trials, which
require the same support and solace: they equally belong to him, and are never


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH.
a


dearer to his heart than in the hour of affliction. He will not leave them comfort-
less. But death/ Death is called the king of terrors. Where would be the
triumph of faith if we did not feel its approach? But it is possible to rise above
this enemy. We know it from Scripture and observation. Whence comes the
victory? ‘There is only one relief when this Assyrian comes—to see Him that has
“abolished death.” The enemy is not only disarmed by him but turned into a
friend—the curse converted intoa blessing. To die is gain. “Yea, though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death,” &¢. From Jay.


CHAP. V.) 438





HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 5. This Man. Christ is our joined with the crook. Cf. Ps. exlix.
peace, because through him we have 6—9 [Wordsworth]. The more widely


peace above us with God, within us in
‘our conscience, around us with other
men, and under us with Satan [Lange].
Ver. 6. Seven shepherds. Feeble
instrumentality. Contrasted with the
powers of evil. Its work. Its strength.
Its exploits. In the Church of God
the work of pastoral teaching is always
a work of warfare against error. In the
escutcheon of the Church the sword is


the Gospel spreads itself among the
nations of the world, the more bitter
will be the spirit of unbelief and un-
godliness [ Keil].

Princes of men. Victorious army of
believers and preachers [ Wordsworth].

Shall waste. Note, says one, those
that threaten ruin to the Church of God
hasten ruin to themselves; and theiz
destruction is the Church’s salvation.


HOMILETICS.


IsRaEL aS THE Dew.—Verse 7.


The remnant of Jacob through participation in the Messiah’s work shall have a
beneficent power, and spiritually influence surrounding nations, as rain and dew
revive withering grass.

I. The Divine origin of dew. “As a dew from the Lord.” Israel’s re-
storation and increase here entirely from the Lord. This “orient pearl” glistens
with Divine light. Itis one of “the precious things of heaven” (Deut. xxxiii. 13).
Everything that quickens and invigorates spiritual life, every influence that pre-
serves it from corruption and decay, comes from God. “I will be as the dew unto
Israel.” II. The sovereign laws of dew. ‘That tarrieth not for man,” &. It
is independent of the contrivance of man. It does not originate by human
caprice and calculation. Man with all his science and skill can neither make
nor hinder it. God supplies it according to his own purpose and law. ‘Hath
tne rain a father? or who hath begotten the drops of dew?” III. The blessed
influence of dew. Distilled in the silent night by the influences of heaven
and earth, it bathes and refreshes each blade and flower with stainless moisture,
and becomes an image of choicest blessing. 1. It is quickening in its influence.
Without rain a Christian or an ungodly community is like grass dry and withered
in appearance. “All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the
flower of the field.” 2. It is gentle in its influence. The word showers implies
multitude of drops. “Drops as the gentle dew from heaven.” Imagine sheets
of water falling at once. What destruction to life and vegetation! God breaks
the force by its distribution in the needed showers, aud each shower into
countless drops. Not even the tenderest plant is injured. It descends noiselessly |
and penetrates deeply. Herbs grow and flourish under the soft influence which
waiteth not for the sons of men. ‘“‘ My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech
shall distil as the dew ; as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers
upon the grass.” 3. 1t 1s copious in its influence. “ As the showers. Multitude
of drops in falling rain we call a shower. Showers are dispersed in drops over the


436 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAR. {cuap. Vv.


face of the earth. “God hath divided a watercourse for the overflowings of water”
(Job xxxviii. 35). Pentecost and times of revivals illustrate this. Thus the in-
fluence of the Church upon the world should be like the effects of rain upon dry
fields and withering plants. It should quicken and strengthen, make fruitful and
fragrant. The godly should mitigate God’s anger which burns up the ungodly; draw
blessings from heaven in personal and social life; and be as the dew “in the midst
of many people.”


“ Now sliding streams their thirsty plants renew,
And feed their fibres with reviving dew” [Pope].


IsrazL as A Lion.— Verses 8, 9.


God and his people have not only a benignant but a terrible aspect towards men,
—as dew to the well-disposed, and as a lion to the assailants. In many respects
the Church may be like the lion.

I. In that religious awe which they exercise over the minds of ungodly
men. The lion among beasts of the forest and the young lion among flocks
of sheep are feared beyond description. The good examples and consistent
lives of pious men often strike terror into the conscience, and check the evil
practices of the wicked. They are awed by them and dare not harm them.
Herod feared John because he was a holy man (Mark vi. 20). II. In the
courage with which they attack antagonists. ‘If he go through, both
treadeth down and teareth in pieces.” It boldly faces and braves the force of
arms. Wounds rather provoke than repress its fierceness. It is not daunted by
numbers ; will often attack an entire caravan, and if overpowered in the combat,
jiustead of flying, will gradually retreat with its face to the enemy until it dies.
Luther and Latimer were the lions of the Church. Christians now through God
are Coeur-de-lions, and endued with invincible power. “ Terrible as an army with
banners.” III. In the victory which they gain over the enemy. “Lifted up
upon thine adversaries.” 1. The victory is resistless. ‘None can deliver,” how-
ever strong and determined. 2. The victory is complete. “ All thine enemies
shall be cut off.” Ceasing to be enemies or destroyed in their opposition. The
victories of the Maccabees were earnests of future glories. The hand of the Church
shall be strengthened hy the might of Jehovah. All adversaries will shortly be
bruised under her feet. ‘And he went forth conquering and to conquer.”


EXTERMINATION OF WaR AND InouatRy.— Verses 10—15.


Jehovah will secure the peace of his people by the destruction of war instruments,
the extermination of idolatry, and the infliction of judgment upon resisting nations.
Appliances of war will not be required in universal peace and security.

I. War abolished. God wil! deprive them of everything to make war, that they
may depend upon him alone. 1. Human aids will be taken away. Men multiply
horses and chariots, and trust in them (Ps. xx. 7). Israel was accustomed to rely
on Egypt and Assyria (cf. Is. xxxi. 1—3; Hos. xiv. 3), but the time will come
when the Vhurch of God wiil not lean on an arm of flesh. 2. Outward defences
will be destroyed. Strongholds and fortified cities will be demolished. “ And
throw down all thy strongholds.” God will teach his people not to look to war-
chariots and secular allies, not to seek refuge in temporal support. He will be
their garrison and deliverer. Cities have been provisioned and besieged for years
and yet have fallen: but God defends his people, “all of them dwelling without
walls, and having neither bars nor gates.” II. Idolatry destroyed. In the
Church of God there may be illicit intercourse with idols. When men are im-
patient in affliction, restless in their mind, and curious to know the future, they
set up gods and groves of theirown, 1. Systems of diviviation will be destroyed.
Witchcraft, conjuring, and fortune-telling will be cut off. ‘The work of men’s hands
shaii not be worshipped. Necromancy, pyromancy, and astrology are diabolical


cia?. V.!





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.
ee ey ee ee


437


——


arts. Such tricks are abomination to God, who will judge them in his wrath.
2. Idolatrous worship destroyed. Graven images will be demolished. Groves
and plantations will be plucked up, and not a remnant of idolatry left behind.
God will cut off whatever hinders his purpose and corrupts his people. Confidence
in creatures is idolatry. Holiness before God is essential to victory over the foe.


Every curious art and devilish
the cross (Acts xix. 19).


practice is destined to fall before the preaching of


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers, 10—14. The purification of
the Church. Everything of an ungodly
and idolatrous nature must be taken
away before it can conquer the world
and be fit for God’s residence. This is,
1. A necessary work. 2. A painful
work. 3. A Divine work. “The
greater the glory and purity of the
Church, the less it needs or hangs upon
human aid. The more it is reft of human
aid, the more it hangs upon God. So
God promises, as a blessing, that he
will remove from her all mere human
resources, both what was in itself evil
and what, although good, had been
abused” [Pusey].

Ver. 15. The doom of heathen
nations and ungodly opponents. 1.
Vengeance without mercy. 2. Venge-
ance unprecedented. ‘‘Such as they
have not heard.” “In like way, the
woe on those who obey not the truth,
also looks on to the end. It too is
final, There is nothing to soften it.
Punishments in the course of life are
medicinal. Here no mention is made
of mercy, but only of executing venge-
ance; and that with wrath and fury;
and that such as they have not heard.


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 2. Bethlehem. By a remark-
able interposition of providence, inter-
woven, however, with the course of
events in the world, was it brought
about that the promised King should be
born in Bethlehem (as Micah the pro-
phet had foretold), the very place where
the house of David had its origin;
while, at the same time, the lowly cir-
cumstances of his birth were in strikin,
contrast with the inherent dignity an
glory that were veiled in the new-born
child [Meander]. Both names were
derived from “ fruitfulness,” “ House of


For as eye hath not seen. nor heart
conceived, the good things laid up- in
store for those who love God, so neither
the evil things prepared for those who
in act show that they hate him”
[ Pusey].

The Prince of peace. 1. His coming.
(a) In lowly guise, ver. 1; humble. (8)
And yet to the throne, ver. 1; glorious.
(ce) Because he was appointed to this
form of old; eternal. (d) At the ap-
pointed fulness of time, ver. 2; tem-
poral.

2. His work. (a) To seek and save
that which was lost, ver. 2. (6) To be
a shepherd in truth, ver. 3. (c) To
prepare God’s kingdom even to the ends
of the world, ver. 3. (d) To give peace
to his followers through the protection
which he will afford and the bestow-
ment of power, ver. 4. (e) To judge
the world, vers. 5, 14. ‘

3. His congregation.
congregation, ver. 6. (b) A powerful
congregation, vers. 7, 8. (c) A holy
congregation: (1) trusts in God alone,
vers. 9, 10; (2) inquires after God’s
will alone, ver. 11; (3) fears God alone,
vers. 12, 13 [Lange].


(a) A spiritual


TO CHAPTER V.


Bread” and “ fruitfulness ;” and despite
of centuries of Mohammedan oppression,
it is fertile still, It had been rich
in the fruitfulness of this world ; rich,
thrice rich, should it be in spiritual fruit-
fulness [Pusey].

Ver. 3. Give them up. (1) Into the
hands of their enemies. Indeed the far
greater part never returned from the
captivity, but remained, although will-
ingly, in the enemy’s land, outwardly
shut out from the land of the promise
and the hope of their fathers. But (2)
all were, more than before, given up to


438





follow their own ways. God was less
visibly present among them. Prophecy
ceased soon after the return from cap-
tivity, and many tokens of the nearness
of God and means of his communica-
tions with them,—the Ark and the Urim
and Thummim,—were gone. It was a
time of pause and waiting, wherein the
fulness of God’s gifts was withdrawn,
that they might look on to Him who
was to come. Until the time that she
which travaileth hath brought forth, 1. e.
until the Virgin should conceive and
bear a Son [Pusey].

Vers. 5, 6. Peace. How like a
paradise the world would be, flourishing
in joy and rest, if men would cheerfully
conspire in affection, and hopefully con-
tribute to each other’s content. Holy
Scripture itself in that one term of
“peace” most usually comprehends all
joy and. contents, all felicity and pro-
sperity ; so that the heavenly consort of
angels, when they agree most highly to
bless and to wish the greatest happiness
to mankind, could not better express
their sense than by saying, “Be on
earth peace, and good-will among men”
|Z. Barrow].


“ Peace hath her victories
Not lese renowned than war.’’—[Milton.]


Ver. 7. Dew comes down from
neaven, is of heavenly, not earthly,
origin, transparent, glistening with
light, reflecting the hues of heaven ;
gentle, slight, weak in itself, refreshing,
cooling the strong heats of the day; con-
sumed itself, yet thereby preserving
life; falling on the dry and withered
grass, wherein all nature droops, and
recalling it to freshness of life. And
still more in those lands, where from
the beginning of April to the end of
October, the close of the latter and the
beginning of the early rain, during all
the hot montlis of summer, the life of
all herbage depends upon the dew alone
[Pusey].

Vers. 8, 9. The lion was the emblem
_of strength and sovereignty (The Lion of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH.


(omar. Vv.





England). Illustrative ot Israel (Num.
xxiv. 9), and Judah (Gen. xlix. 9);
the courage of brave men (2 Sam. i. 23;
xxiii, 20), and the boldness of saints
(Prov. xxviii. 1). The lion is fearless
of men (Is. xxxi 4; Nah. ii. 11).
What can a javelin do against his
strength! But even the king of the
forest can read the eye and the language
of man. Moral force is greater than
physical force. What then must be the
strength of the Christian Church under
the leadership of “The Lion of the
tribe of Judah” !

Vers. 10—15. Christianity is by its
nature adapted to effect these and similar
changes in the physical, intellectual,
and social state of our world, and by
the decree of the Eternal it is hastening
their accomplishment. It came into
the world not only to reinstate man in
his proper relationship to God, but to
restore to him the forfeited inheritance
of earth. It has already done much.
Europe has been indebted to it for
most of its civilization. England owes to
it most of its elements of happiness and
security, Within our own time it has
achieved much good in the enfranchise-
ment of the slave, in the partial civiliza-
tion of Polynesia, in a thousand in-
strumentalities of blessing that are now
at work in almost every quarter of the
globe. It shall go on until it has at-
tained all its happy and benign results.~
It shall yet enter, penetrate, and suffuse
the entire frame of mind and existence,
The Church shall become an eternal ex-
cellence, and a joy of many generations.
The field of the world shali present the
aspect as of a paradise regained. The
race of man shall appear as the ransomed
of the Lord, joy and gladness on their
heads, sorrow and sighing for ever fled
away | Legge].

“O scenes surpassing fable and yet true,

Scenes of accomplished bliss, which who can sea,
Though but in distant prospect, and not feel
The soul refreshed with foretaste of the joy,—


The joy of an assembly such as earth
Saw never; such as heaven stoops down tosee!’”


Har. V1.J HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH 439





CHAPTER VL


Criricau Norges.) The third division now begins, after declaration of judgment and salvation
which awaits the future remnant, Hear] Plead with God in controversy, Mts.) Witness and
murmur with the echo (Deut. xxxii,1: Is, i. 2). Contend] in strife or quarrel (Judg. viii, 1: Is.
1.8. 2. His] Emphatic intentionally to indicate Jehovah’s right to contend, and to sharpen their con-
science by pointing to their calling [Ke7/]. 8. What] opens thesuit. Israel, tired with the dealings
of God, had backslided from him. Wearied] By demanding what is irksome (Is. xliii. 23: 1 John v.
8); or failing to perform what is promised (Jer. ii. 31), 4. For] God had done good only, deliver-
ance from Egypt and guidance by Moses the chief proofs of it. 5. Now] A very tender word, like
our “do now remember,” or “do remember,” beseeching instead of commanding [Pusey]. The
speci: period mentioned and the wonderful acts performed in it display the justice, mercy, and
righteousness or God (Judg, v. 11: Ps. xxiv, 5). 6] Remembrance calls ingratitude to minc, and leads
to inquiries, Q me] (Deut. xxiii, 5.) God enthroned on high (Is. lvii, 15: Ps. cxv. 8, Burnt]
Prescribed Lev.i, Calves] Thought to be most important (Lev. ix. 2,3). 7.] ‘‘ In case of calves
value is heightened by quality, in rams by quantity’? [Ke7/]. Climax culminates in jrrst-born, But
this only, of external, heathen origin, atones for sin by sin. 8.] God has showed them in the moral
law that he requires ; not outward sacrifices of any kind; but the fulfilment of moral obligations in
three ways—-do justly, love mercy (which are the sum of the second table;, and walk humbly, ¢.¢. asa
holy nation should, in fellowship with God (cf, Deut. viii, 14; x. 12: 1 Sam. xv. 22), 9] Israel
lacks these virtues. Crieth] Earnestly and loudly in Jerusalem, Wisdom] Wise men will hear
and discover God’s authority in the message, ‘Thy name sees wisdom, t.¢., has the true wisdom of
life in sight ” { Keil], Thy name looks out, the holy manifestation of thyself in judgment (Is, xxx,
27: cf. Ps, xiv, 2) [Lange]. Rod] Judgment threatened (Is, ix, 13), 10. Yet] notwithstanding
warnings, treasures acquired by fraud and oppression. Scant] Lit. lean ephah, the measure
forbidden (too small), not the right measure (Deut, xxv, 15, 16: Lev. xix. 36). Abom.] Smitten
by God (Prov. xxii, 14); cursed (Num, xxiii, 7; Prov, xxiv. 24), 11, Pure] Men dream that
they can be clean by sacrifices to God, in spite of daily sins, The prophet destroys this hope,
reproves the rich for violence and the people for deceit. Bag] In which money and weights were
carried (Deut, xxv. 18: Prov. xvi. 11). 18, Sick] é.¢. 1 smite thee mortally (cf, for expression,
Nah, iii. 29; for matter, Mic. i. 9). 14, Satis.) Fulfilment of Lev. xxvi. 26. Food would not be
enough, nor sustain. Midst] Cast down in borders and in the metropolis, people will flee into the
fortress, but only to die, not to be delivered, What goods and families are carried away will be
given to the sword (cf. Jer. 1. 37; xiii 16), 15. Reap] The enemy will reap the harvests and
plunder the stcres (Lev. xxvi. 16: Deut, xxviil. 38—40). 16.] This punishment brought upon them-
selves. Omr!) [he conspirator and regicide (1 Kings xvi. 16—28). Statutes] By which this
abandoned dynasty had disgraced the throne of Israel ; human ordinances, not God’s commands
(Lev. xx. 23). Bear] “The present generation is ripe for the curse, which the Lord had cast forth
‘in the law for the future of his people” (Is. lxv. 7) [Lange].


HOMILETICS.
A Listuess Prorte Repuxep.— Verses 1, 2.


“These words are an introduction to what follows, an expostulation to an un-
grateful people. God wishes them to see their guilt, and hear his voice in the
controversy. A sinful people are obstinate and listless. But they must be roused
and reproved : | fn ah

I. By the voice of God. ‘Hear ye nuw what the Lord saith. God speaks
to us and reasons with us in his word. He pleads with his people in con-
descension and grace, requires them to justify, if possible, their cause, and seeks
to prove the equity of his dealings. ‘‘Put me in remembrance : let us plead ,
gether ; declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.” II. By the earnestness :
the Prophet. The Prophet was reluctant to herald woe to his people, but 8
command was urgent. Arise. 1. He was earnest in his tone. “O my people,’
ver. 3, Bedewed with the spirit of his message. 2. He was earnest in his ee
tude. Arise, stand wp as one having authority to rebuke, ready and undaunte
before men. He must rouse himself that he may rouse his hearers. A cold trosty
heart can never touch and kindle others into a flame. 3. He was earnest in his
method. “Let the hills hear thy voice”—any way to stir up @ careless people.


ant


&40 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH, (OHaP. VI.


III. By the stability of creation. ‘“ Hear, O ye mountains.” Mountains remain
steadfast and hills are not carried from their place. The earth changes in its
surface and its inhabitants pass away, but rocks endure for ever. Yet Nature is
subject to its Creator and trembles at his voice, but men are stupefied and hardened
by sin. ‘Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth; for the Lord hath spoken, I
have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.”


Tur CONTROVERSY BETWEEN Gop and Man.—Verse 2.


I. Man’s complaints against God. He complains, 1. Of a corrupt nature;
2. Of the power of temptation; 3. Of the dealings of Providence. II. God’s com-
plaints against man. 1. Mercies despised. 2. Grace refused.+ 3. Calls neglected.
4, Judgments sent in vain [F'. Wagstaff}.


WEaRINEss IN Gop’s Service Unsustir1aBLe.— Verses 3—5.


Many, like Israel, are weary in the service of God, complain of their lot, and seek
to return to the world. God pleads with such, proves that thir conduct is un-
justifiable. No wrong has been done to them ; on the other han 1, they have sinned
against God. ‘ Wherein have I wearied thee?”

I. God’s claims upon men are just. “O my people.” Israel were God’s
people by covenant relationship. God chose them and they promised to serve
him, All men are God’s by creation and providence, They are raised to this
rank and gifted in their mind by him. Hence God has a just claim upon their
homage and life. To refuse is ingratitude and insult. II. God’s commands are
reasonable. God does not demand what is impossible or unreasonable. He does
not, like an Eastern tyrant, compel men to serve him with rigour and hardships.
God might weary them by unlawful requirements (Is. xliii. 23); or unfulfilled
promises (Jer. ii. 31); but they weary him with their iniquities (Is. xliii, 24).
“ His commands are not grievous,” why then complain or get wearied? ‘“ What
iniquity have your fathers found in me?” IIT. God’s kindness is remarkable.
“T brought thee up out of the land of Egypt,” &c. Israel were specially blessed.
1. They were redeemed from bondage. ‘ And redeemed thee out of the house of
servants.” Instead of a nation of slaves they were priests to God. 2. They were
guided in the wilderness. ‘I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.” They
had instruction, intercession, and praise. 3. They were defended in their progress.
The power of Balak and the device of Balaam were frustrated, and the curse was
turned into a blessing. From Shittim to Gilgal their progress was safe and tri-
umphant, God could have done no more for them, yet they “forgot God their
Saviour, who had done great things in Egypt; wondrous things in the land of
Ham.” In the review of our life we see goodness and mercy, and abundant reason
for gratitude. In deliverance from trouble and the destruction of the enemy, we
may read the fulfilment of the promise and the display of the righteousness of
God. ‘Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonder-
ful works to the children of men |”


Man’s QuEstions AND Gop’s Answers.— Verses 6—8.


Come before God not merely with respect, like bowing to a superior—but come
with acceptance, in honour and duty (Deut. xxiii. 5: Ps. cv. 2). In whatever
spirit these words were uttered, they indicate the importance and necessity of
coming to God. They are the recurring question, pressing upon all ages and ail
individuals—“ How shall man be just with God?” They set forth God’s answer
to the question and specify the way of acceptance before him.

¥, Man’s questions. “ Wherewith shall I come,” &c. Convicted by the previous
appeal the people inquire how Jehovah may be appeased. 1. By external forms}
“With burnt offerings—with calves of a year old?” Men naturally cling first to


CHAP, VI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. 44)
a
outward forms, trust to customary rites to heal the schism of the soul. They are
liberal in their offerings, zealous in their profession, and realy to sacrifice anything for
peace of conscience. But the blood of bulls and of goats cannot take away sin.
2. By human sacrifices? “Shall I give my firstborn?” Nations have “ burnt their
children in the fire” (2 Kings xvii. 31). They have been driven to desperation
in their sin and superstitions, and sought to please God by inventions of their
own. Jewish rites and heathen sacrifices were alike in vain. No spotless beast
nor human blood could quench the fire of the soul. “There was wanting,” says
Porphyry, “some universal method of delivering men’s souls, which no sect of
philosophy had ever yet found out.” II. God’s answer to man’s questions. God
has revealed his will to man and showed what is required from him. 1. J¢ is
revealed in the written word of God. “ He hath showed thee, O man.” In the
Scriptures we have an answer to the questions of the soul and the problems of life.
Without the Bible man is in the dark. The world by wisdom knew not God.
The Sight of nature is insufficient, and the doings of providence say, It is not in
me. We have no need to guess nor grope the way, “the word is nigh unto thee.”
2. It ts deciared by the servants of God. The prophet plainly declares what God
requires. Nothing ceremonial, nothing impracticable. ‘Three things are specially
mentioned. (1) To do justly. Not mere profession, but practice. Justice to
God and integrity to man in all our dealings. God’s religion destroys injustice
and oppression. We must do injury to none, but right to all. Render to all their
due. (2) To love mercy. We must not only be just, but kind to all Our mercy,
like God’s, must be allied with equity. We must not merely show mercy but
love and delight in mercy. Mercy gives more than justice demands. The hard
exacting man is nota child of God. “Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father
also is merciful.” (3) To walk humbly with God. To walk with God implies
reconciliation, faith, and constant intercourse (Gen. xvii. 1: Heb. xi. 5). This is
the essence of religion and the whole duty of man (Kcc:. xii. 13). This is what
God requires from us. The heart, not outward forms; sincerity and truth, not
fair profession, ‘ And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee,
but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul?”


Is rr not Trun.— Verses 6—8.


Our knowledge of good and evil comes from God. Conscience uninstructed by
him is useless. Some things which only seem to be good are sought after most
diligently by men who are strictly conscientious. Other things good in them-
selves, which seem undesirable, are eschewed by the same persons. Human con-
science is a depraved conscience. In the text we read the doctrine that God has
showed to man that which is both acceptable to himself and profitable to us.

I. The revelation. He hath showed, |. “ What he has revealed. Himself as
the chief good. His attributes a subject {cr praise. - His service delightful em-
ployment. His favour of infinite value, 2. How he has revealed these things.
(1) By nature. Here he faintly exhibit: .saewhet of himself. (2) By history,
especially inspired history. (3) By Jesus Unrist. Whatever nature or history
has taught, by Jesus is amplified and confirmed. By him we behold the Father’s
loving-kindness, tender mercy, forbearing grace. (4) By our own experience.
We are convinced of the blessedness of holiness, of justice, of a humble walk
with God; indeed of everything the Lord has declared is good. II. The re-
quisition. God does not show us what is good merely to enlarge our knowledge,
but to insure our service. Every good thing if rightly used redounds to his glory
1. He requires us to demonstrate our knowledge. The light must not be put under
a bushel. The man who hid his Lord’s money was condemned. 2. He requires
us to display this in a purticular way. (1) To do justly. It is not enough to
speak fairly, Uunpractical religion is unscriptural religion. (2) To love mercy.


442


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


(CHAP. VI





It is not enough to do merely from a sense of duty. We must delight in the


things of God. (3) To walk humbly with thy God.


Nor does God require deeds


of justice and love of mercy, without dispensing that grace without which these


things can exist.


In order to do justly we are invited to walk with God, deserving


his justice, receiving his mercy. As a little child, observe the Father's practice,
and as far as you can do like him [Stems and Twigs].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 4,5. Remember, &c. I. God’s
dealings with his people attest—1l. His
love; 2. His faithfulness ; and 3. His
power. IJ. These dealings are often
forgotten. This displays, 1. Thought-
lessness, and 2. Ingratitude. ‘ Micah
speaks by a rare idiom of the righteous-
nesses of the Lord, each act of mercy being
a separate effluence of his righteousness.
The very names of the places suggest the
righteous acts of God, the unrighteous
of Israel” [Pusey].

Ver. 8. Showed good. 1. The thing
desired. Good. “Who will show us
any good?” Righteousness, love, justice,
and humility. II. The method of get-
ting it. God reveals it, hath showed
thee. It is not a discovery of man, &c.
“Do justly. To do judgment are, chiefly,
all acts of equity; to love mercy,
all deeds of love. Judgment is what
right requires; mercy, what love. Yet,
secondarily, to do judgment is to pass
righteous judgment in all cases ; and so,
as to others, judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judg-
ment; and as to one’s self also. Judge
equitably and kindly of others, humbly
of thyself. He addeth, love mercy ;
being merciful out of love, not of ne-
cessity, for God loveth a cheerful giver
(2 Cor. ix. 7). These acts contain the
whole duty of man, corresponding with
and formed upon the mercy and justice
of God (Ps. ci. 1; lxi. 7). All which
is due, any how, or in any way, is of
judgment; all which is free toward
man, although not free toward God, is
of mercy. There remains, walk lumbly
with thy God; not bow thyself only
before him, as they had offered (ver. 6);
nor, again, walk with him only, as did
Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Job; but walk
humbly (lit. bow down the going). Yet
still with thy God; never lifting up
thyself, never sleeping, never standing


still, but ever walking on, yet ever
casting thyself down ; and the more thou
goest on in grace, the more cast thyself
down, as our Lord saith, Luke xvii. 10”
[Pusey].

A good man, like a good angel, is
ever in God’s presence, and must there-
fore walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith he is called (Eph. iv. 1, 2),
with all modesty of demeanour, especi-
ally when he draweth nigh to God
in holy exercises. Then it must be
his care to exercise three-fold humility
First precedent: before he sets upcr
God’s service, he must in heart devote
and dedicate all that he is and hath as
a due debt to the Almighty, saying with
David, It is of thine own, Lord (1
Chron. xxix. 14), The second is con-
comitant ; when in the performance
of good duties he hath grace (this lovely
grace of humility especially), “whereby
he may serve God acceptably ” (Heb. xii.
28); which is an awful respect to the
Divine Majesty with whom we have to
do (Heb. iv. 13). The third is swbdse-
quent ; when having done his best he is
dejected with a sense ot his failings, and
looking on his plumes he is abashed
before God. As many as walk accord-
ing to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God
(Trapp).

Walk humbly. 1. In prosperity ; for
God is our benefactor. Everything
comes from him, 2. In adversity ; for
he corrects in wisdom and truth. 3. In
all circumstances of life ; for he disposes
our lot. We are dependent creatures.
Our times are in his hands. Wait upon
God. He will renew your strength and
guide your life.


To doubt thy goodness would be base
Ingratitude in me:

Past favours shall renew my hopes,
And fix my faith in thee,


CHAP, VL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH. S43











HOMILETICS.
Tue Voice or Gop In tHe Dispsensations oF His Provipenos.— Verse 9,


These words refer to the solemn warnings given to Israel by the ministry of the
prophets, and to the judgments about to fall upon Samaria and Jerusalem, becaus
of their sins. Ws

First. In what way may it be said that “the Lord’s voice crieth” unto
cities and nations. God has spoken by the prophets (Heb. i. 1); by his Son and
by his Spirit in Apostles and teachers. In an indirect way the voice of God is
heard in his works (Rom. i. 20; Ps, xix. 12; Acts xiv. 17). But especially in -
providential dispensations, of mercy or judgment, in events of an aflictive
nature. He speaks to cities and nations when he exposes them io war and their
young men fall by the sword—when the fruits of the earth are blasted or rot in
the ground—when famine succeeds and thousands pine away with hunger. In
pestilence, in dreaded cholera, the voice of God is distinctly heard. Secondly.
Mark the impression which the voice of God produces upon different classes of
individuals. Some boldly deny that he has ever spoken to men, except perhaps
by the voice of natural conscience, and treat the doctrine of providence as super-
stitious (2 Pet. iii. 3, 4). Others are insensible to what is passing around them
(Is. xxvi. 11). Others brave the threatenings of the Almighty, as if secure
against all attacks (Is. v. 19; xxviii. 15). On some only a temporary impres-
sion is made: it alarms but fails to convert (Is. xxvi. 16). Others lay claim to
superior wisdom, think in the discovery of the proximate or second vauses of
ealamity that they have solved the mystery, and exclude the great First Cause that
moves and regulates the whole. “The man of wisdom,” the enlightened and con-
sistent believer, “hears a voice they cannot hear, and sees a hand they cannot see.”
Thirdly. Notice the proper improvement to be made of such afflictive dispensations.
“Hear ye the rod and who hath appointed it.” View it not merely as a national
calamity, but as a chastisement from the hand of God. While others treat it with
mute surprise or affected indifference, and refuse to acknowledge a Divine hand
in it, beware of such a pernicious course. Let us search and try our ways and
turn to the Lord. Deep humiliation and sincere repentance should be accom-
panied with proofs of active and self-denying works (Is. viii. 6—8), in nations
and individuals [Scottish Cong. Mag. 1847].


“Tae Men or Wispom.”—Verse 9.


Wise men are here contrasted with ignorant, careless, and wicked men. Wis
dom here signifies essence, and the men of wisdom are the men of essence, not men
of emptiness and folly. They hear the voice of the rod and understand the pur-
pose for which it is sent.

I. Wise men discern the providence of God in the calamities of life. “The
Lord’s voice crieth unto: the city.” 1. The rod of God speaks to men. It hasa
voice and cries aloud. Scourges and calamities speak of the neglect and sins of
men. They are the voice of God speaking in power and authority. Awful judg-
ments and visitations are a rod to check and chastise for sin, to prevent folly and
further misery. Yet many see but hear them not. God speaks once, yea twice, yet
men perceive it not (Job xxxiii 14). 2. The rod of God is appointed for men.
“Who hath appointed it.” Hume in his English History ascribes famines and
desolating events, to the ignorance of the people, the rude methods of agriculture
practised by our forefathers, and affirms that the progress of science and art will
prevent calamities eventually. Men ascribe them to chance or to second causes, and
ridicule the idea of Divine appointment. But these men recognize Divine purpose
and direct interposition—believe in a fixed time and place; hear the rod and know
it for their good (Job v. 6). “ For he performeth the thing that is appointed for me;
and many such things are with him” (xxiii 14). II. Wise men learn the lessons


444 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICA. [CHAP. v1





of God in the calamities of life. ‘The man of wisdom shall see thy name.”
They hear the voice and discern the majesty of God. They see the name of God,
the power and presence of God in his dealings with men. The glory of the Diviue
attributes is displayed in the administrations of providence. 1. They understand
affictive dispensations. They hear and read what is spoken. They see the mind,
the word of the Lord (Jer. ii. 31). Few are wise and understand these things.
But wise men discern the truth of the rod in its reports of evil deeds and God’s
displeasure. ‘The knowledge of the Holy (One) is understanding.” 2. They sub-
mit to afflictive dispensations. God’s voice cries to all men, but the wise only hear
and obey. They bow to the rod as under the command of God. They mourn for
sin, learn righteousness (Is. xxviii. 21), and find that “the school of the cross is the
school of light.” By humiliation they seek to avoid or mitigate the stroke. When
the blow has fallen they look to God “who hath appointed it,” and learn the
lessons of spiritual profit for which it was sent. ‘Lord, when thy hand is lifted
up, they will not see: but they shall see.” ‘ Doth not wisdom cry? and under-
standing put forth her voice?”


ComMEROIAL [MMorALIty.— Verses 10—12.


Here we have a special accusation of sins which procure the rod. Sins which
are common in all ranks and committed after many admonitions. In social inter-
course and business transactions covetousness, violence, and deceit prevailed.
Riches were sought and acquired by cruel and unlawful means.

I. Fraud in the shops. Trickery has never lacked its representatives in all
departments of trade. 1. Dishonest dealings. ‘‘ Wicked balances, and with the
bag of deceitful weights.” Rich sellers gave scant measure and short weight. They
cheated and deceived the poor in the necessities of life. The law is violated in
the present day. Are grocers, drapers, and corn-merchants always honest in busi-
ness transactions? Why so many fines for “ colouring,’ “adulteration,” and
fraud? ‘ Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in mete-yard, in weight, or in
measure, Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin shall ye have.”
2, Ill-gotten gains. ‘The treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked.”
Wealth was sought by wickedness. The house was a store-room of vanity, a
monument of injustice, and an abomination to God. To heap up wickedness is to
treasure up wrath (Rom. ii. 5). ‘‘ Treasures of wickedness profit nothing” (Prov.
x. 2). II. Oppression in the market-place. “For the rich men thereof are
full of violence:” not the poor out of distress, but the rich in covetousness and
luxury, lived by violence. Dishonest bargains, hard dealings, and rapacity were
daily events. Equity was ignored. Justice, the foundation of the state and the
right of the citizen, was openly defied. Commerce was a means of gain, not of
mutual help. National injustice was the fundamental sin of commercial life.
Rank and power used in violence will crush the possessor. Robbery with authority
will bring a curse. “ Envy thou not the oppressor (a man of violence, marg.), and
choose none of his ways.” III. Falsehood in the mouth of the poor. “The in-
habitants thereof have spoken lies.” 1, This was a common practice. As often as
they speak, in daily intercourse and conversation, “their tongue is deceitful (lit.
deceit) in their mouth.” Nothing but deceit, and deceit to ruin others and enrich
themselves. »2. This was a universal practice. No exception is made, ‘ A popul-
ation of liars,” says one, “It cannot be wrong for it is always done,” “It would
be impossible to carry on business in any other way,” are pleas to justify the con
duct of some in trade. Christianity requires no concealment, no misrepresentation,
but strict adherence to truth. No earthly tribunal, no ancient custom, can exempt
from eternal justice. An honest man will be guilty of no fraud. “The obliga
tion of an honest man can never die,” said De Foe. ‘Bread of deceit is sweet te
1 man; but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.”


OMAP. VE. J








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


445





HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 10. Treasures of wickedness. I.
legal in their acquisition. Gained, 1.
By dishonest means; 2. In opposition
to Divine warning. II. Risky in their
position. “In the house of the wicked,”
which is exposed to danger and decay.
III. Unsatisfactory in their nature. 1V.
Doomed in their existence. No power
or combination of circumstances can

keep them from the judgment of God.

- Ver. 11. He also has a false weight
who judges not his neighbour with the
same measure as himself [Lange]. God
requires exact justice in all our dealings,
and therefore it is our duty to take care
that the weights and the balance be
just [Wells]. Impositions; double
dealings ; the hard bargain struck with
self-complacent shrewdness (Prov. xx.
14)—this is the false balance forbidden


alike by law (Lev. xix. 35, 36), and
gospel (Matt. vii. 12: Phil. iv. 8). Men
may “commend its wisdom” (Luke xvi.
1—8) ; God not only forbids, but he
abominates it (Prov. xi. 1) | Bridge].

Ver. 10—12. I. Men ary apt to sin
even after many admoniticns. ‘Are
there yet treasures,” &c. II. Men are
apt to dream of God’s approbation in
their sinful ways. Hence the challenge,
“Shall I count them pure?” III. After
they have enriched themselves by sinful
ways they grow worse and openly op-
press. “ Full of violence.” But God is
a righteous judge, and will not acquit
the guilty (Ex. xxxiv. 7). As men deal
towards their fellow-men, so God deals
with them. “ Neither will he help the
evil-doers” (Job viii. 20).


HOMILETICS.
Morat Consumprion.— Verses 13, 14.


God threatens to smite Israel with mortal sickness; not so much bodily sick-
ness, as desolation of land. By oppression they had made others weak, so Divine


judgments will crush them by famine and invasion.
The origin, seat, and consequences of this moral consumption are plainly


sickness.
described.
I. Sickness in the centre.


“Tn the midst of thee,”


Their calamity is a wasting


The sinking down, the


wasting away, was in the very centre of the country. The capital, the seat of
their wickedness and treasures, was smitten, and the plague spread among the
people. Inward decay always begins at the heart. And when the vital parts are
affected what can arrest its progress? II. Sickness with sufficiency. ‘Thou
shalt eat, but not be satisfied.” They had abundance of wealth, an insatiable
appetite, but their food did not nourish them. Their desires were a disease, not a
moral strength. Like the deadly wasting that assails the human frame, there may
be a spiritual atrophy to derange and emaciate the soul. The victim cries out
with Job, “Thou hast filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against me, and
my leanness, rising up in me, beareth witness to my face.” III. Sickness aided
by outward circumstances. (God’s judgments only hastened on the end, The
moral atmosphere was foetid, and all their surroundings unfavourable to health.
In God’s favour is life ; but he withdrew the fruit of the fields, and the blessings
of the skies, When God departs from a people nothing will be left but inherent
emptiness and pining consumption. “Their flesh shall consume away while they
stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their
tongue shall consume away in their mouth.” IV. Sickness morally incurable.
‘I will make thee sick in smiting thee.” The sickness was the result of the
smiting. “Thy wound is grievous,” lit. makessick. It was an incurable wound ;
“There is no healing of thy bruise” (Nah. iii, 4). Robbed of their families,
smitten in their vineyards, and helpless in their condition, what hope of recovery
was left! Spiritual leanness is the greatest calamity that can befall the Church.
If God withdraws his help everything will decay. Life, light, and power, hope,


446 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. [CHAP. VI.





joy, and peace, will die away. Creeds and ceremonies will only hasten the ruin.
Nothing can survive the death, the moral consumption, of true religion. “ My
leanness! my leanness! Woe unto me!”


Lasour witHout Prorit.— Verses 14, 15.


The judgments are further enumerated by which God would make them sick
and desolate. They would sow and plant for others to reap. They would not be
able to rescue what they had lost, nor preserve what they possessed from the foe.
One stroke would follow another until the land was desolated, and its inhabitants
put to shame. |

I. Fields would be sown, but no harvest reaped. ‘Thou shalt sow, but thou
shalt not reap.” The crops would be blasted and withered, or the enemy would
reap them for himself. They reaped where they sowed not; so they must sow for
others to reap. Sin provokes God to frustrate man’s efforts to subsist. He takes
‘from the covetous and unjust the fruit of their efforts just when it is within their
grasp. If we wish to enjey the results of our physical and intellectual labours, we
must fear God and love justice. 1. The necessities, and 2. ’ ‘he luxuries of life, the
fruit of the field, the oil, and the wine, depend upon the providence of God, and
may be taken away in his anger. ‘Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them,
but shalt neither drink of the wine nor gather the grapes.” II. Goods would be
rescued, but delivered up to the enemy. “That which thou deliverest will I
give up to the sword.” Children on whose account they got their wealth, goods
and substance for which they had toiled, would be suddenly taken from them. If
anything at all was rescued, it was only for a time, and could not be held. No
effort can deliver from the power of God’s executioners. What we hold to be
most precious is often most unsafe, and what we are determined not to lose that
we lose suddenly. III. Men would take flight, but could not escape. “Thou
shalt take hold,” to rescue or remove to a safe place, but in vain, “ but shalt not
deliver.” How can men flee from God’s vengeance? No human hand can rescue
from God’s power. No harbour can hide from his presence. Heaven is the seat
of his glory, earth the scene of his power, and hell the place of his wrath.


“What can 'scape the eye of God all seeing,
Or deceive his heart omniscient!”’ [ Milton, j


Sins anp PunISHMENT: AN UNBROKEN LinK.—Verse 16.


This judgment the people brought upon themselves by their ungodly conduct.
Their calamities were the results of their sins.

I. What were the sins of which they were guilty. First. They had broken
the covenant of God and observed the statutes of men. “ For the statutes of Omri
are kept.” By every motive of hope and fear they were commanded to obey God.
This was the purpose of their existence, and the ground on which they held their
privileges and country. But the Baal-worship of Omri was patronized and raised
into the popular religion (1 Kings xvi. 31, 32). Secondly. They observed the
doings of Ahab. Ahab’s idolatry and persecuting spirit were commended. The
luxury, wickedness, and oppression of the court were sanctioned. Yea, men more
wicked than others, men who sold themselves “ to work wickedness in the sight of
the Lord,” were their examples (1 Kings xxi. 25). 1. These customs were dili-
gently observed. ‘The margin gives, He doth keep diligently. One and all were
kept as religious acts, in earnestness and diligence. 2. These customs were univers-
ally observed. Judah was at variance with Israel in many things, but they were
one in apostasy. 3. These customs were continually observed. They had been
introduced ages before Micah’s time, yet he found them prevalent and all-power-
ful. Custom is the deposit of the past in the life of the present; the link which
binds the present ' the future. Thus evils are preserved and perpetnated from


‘CHAP. VI. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH. 447


aa


one generation to another. II. What was the punishment which followed these
sins? The actual results were very different from the expected fruits. Their con-
duct was so framed as if they had purposely desired the punishment. “That I
should make thee a desolation.” 1. A privileged nation was made desolate. They
were deprived of their privileges and honour. Sin will desolate the richest nation
and the most flourishing Church; make people an astonishment to some, and a
hissing to others. 2. An exalted nation was made a reproach, “You shall bear
the reproach of my people.” They would have been God’s people if they had kept
his covenant, but their sins brought shame and reproach. The God whom they had
forsaken and offended left them in the hands of the heathen. ‘The conduct which
they deemed wise and expedient proved fatal to its originators and imitators.
True honour is only found in God’s service. Sin and disgrace are bound together
by an unbroken link. ‘“ We are become a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and
derision to them that are round about us.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 14,15. 1. The law of God is


quity and priestly or princely authority
the standard of right in all ages. The


are of no force against the command


threatenings of the law of Moses were in
force in the days of Micah (Lev. xxvi.
16: Deut. xxviii. 30). 2. The execu-
tion of the law in the history of a
nation is not always a warning to a
people. 3. The punishment of the law
to such as continually violate it is most
bitter. Disappointment in labour, de-
privation of the necessities of life,
troubles in the family and the nation.
‘When our services of God are soured
with sin,” says a quaint author, “his
providences will justly be embittered to
us.”

Ver. 16. Statutes of Omri.  Idol-
atrous customs. 1. Originated by great
men. 2. Sanctioned by a wicked court.
3. Observed by a religious people. Anti-


of God. Fashion rules with an iron
sceptre, and those who ought to stand
up for God, often bow to the law of man.


“ Custom’s the world’s great idol we adore,
And knowing this, we seek to know no more.”
: [Pomfret.]


Reproach. Sin in God’s people is
especially great. And as they have
peculiar privileges, so their reproach or
punishment is proportionable to their
profaning of their privileges (Ezek.
xxxvi. 20, 23) [Hutcheson]. “If pro-
fessors of religion ruin themselves, their
ruin will be the most reproachful of
any; an:l they in a special manner will
rise at the last day to everlasting shame
and contempt.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER VI.


Vers. 1,2. Hear. If Adam needed
to hear his Father’s voice, sounding
amid the fair bowers and the unshaded
glory of Paradise, surely much more
does this prodigal world, that has gone
astray from him, need to hear a Father’s
voice asking after us, and the first inti-
mations of a Father’s desire that the
lost may be found, and the dead at
length become alive [Dr Cumming].

Vers. 3—5. Well fare their hearts
who will not only wear out their shoes,
but also their feet, in God’s service, and

et gain not a shoe-latchet thereby
Thos. Fuller).


Remember, Wherever thou be, let the
voice of God be still in thine ear. My
son, return inwardly to thy heart, ab-
stract thyself from all things, and mind
me only [Leighton].

Vers, 6—8. God desires not merely
outward virtue, but inward purity, and
the penitent’s sense of sin is greatly
deepened as with astonishment he dis-
covers this truth, and how far he is from
satisfying the Divine command. Always
nas the Holy One estimated men by
their inner nature, and not by their out-
ward professions; to him the inward is
as visible as the outward, and he rightly


«48





judges that the essential character of an
action lies in the motive of him who
works it [Spurgeon]. .

Ver. 9. Rod. The rod hath a voice
that is in the hands of earthly fathers,
but children hear it not, they under-
stand it not till they are hushed and
quiet, and brought to kiss it, and sit
silently under it ; no more shall we hear
or understand the voice of the rod that
is in our heavenly Father’s hand, till we
come to kiss it, and sit silently under it
[Brooks].

Vers. 10, 11. Upright simplicity is
the deepest wisdom, and perverse craft
the merest shallowness [Barrow]. “No
man is wise or safe but he that is
honest.” An upright posture is easier
than a stooping one, because it is more
natural, and one part is better supported


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH.


[CHAP. V3





by another; so it is easier to be an
honest man than a knave [Skelton].

Vers. 12—15. Crafty counsels are
joyful in the expectation, difficult in the
management, and sad in the event
[Tacitus]. “There is no law more
just than that the contrivers of de-
struction should perish by their own
acts.” “The deceiver is often ruined
by deceit.”

Ver. 16. ‘The essence of wickedness
is forsaking God.” ‘Those are marked
for ruin that are deaf to reproof and
good counsel.” Those that prefer the
rules of carnal policy before Divine pre-
cepts, and the allurements of the world
and the flesh before God’s promises and
comforts, despise His word, giving the
preference to those things which stand
in competition with it [Matt. Henry].





CHAPTER VII.


Criticat Notes. The Church now mourns itself, and confesses that its condition is like a vintage
after gleaning. No lester) to be found. Ripe fruit] of excellent flavour chiefly desired. 2.
Good] Heb. merciful and good to man (Ps. xii. 1); delivered from the evil to come (Is. lvii. 1) ; or
cut off by those in wait for blood—lit. bloods, 7. e. blood-shedding. Net] used for hunting (Hab. i.
15). Brother] Bound by law to love another as himself (Lev. xix. 18). 8. Evil] Lit. Their hands
are for evil, that they may do it earnestly, ¢. e. well, cleverly. Great] man. He] Emphatic, expresses
desire, lit. the lust of his soul. They] Veual judges are ready to wrap, Heb. to weave or twist to-
gether; they pervert the cause of the poor. 4. Best] The prince asks, the judge grants, and the rich
co-operate ; all resemble the drier and thorn-bush, which only prick and injure. Visit.} Corruption
is so high that judgment will break in upon them. Perplex.] They will be caught as victims, and
not know what todo. 5, Trust] All are treacherous and pervert justice (Jer. ix. 2—6); confidence
will be unsafe. Guide] And heads of families to whom we naturally look, unworthy of confidence. 6.
Dishon.] Treats the father as a fool (Deut. xxxii.15: Jer. xiv. 21). Daughter] witnesses against her
mother (Ps. xxvii. 12). Treachery and faithlessness reach. the nearest friends, and dissolve every
family tie (ef. Matt. xxiv. 10—12), 7.| Having no hope from man, the prophet looks to God, and
speaks in the name of the Church. Salv.] 7. e. from whom all help comes, 8. Rejoice] The enemy
must not think this condition to be perpetual; light will break through the darkness, 9.] Hence dear
patiently the inflicted punishment (Lam. iii. 39), until] the promise of ver. 8 is fulfilled. 10.
Then] the enemy, will Aever her mistake, be covered with shame, and be prostrated in the dust
(Is. x. 6). 11.] This confidence rises. Day] Fences willbe built up. Decree] The law imposed
upon Israel by heathens, some; others, the decree of God for her captivity. 12. That day] when
the walls are built, there shall come to thee. He] 7. ¢. many from Assyria, &c., scattered believers
and heathen nations, From sea] ¢. ¢. from the Mediterranean to the Persian Sea, Mtn.] i. ¢. from
Sinai in the south to Lebanon in the north. 18. Notwith.] Glorious the prospect of restoration,
yet remember judgment. Land] @. e. the earth as opposed to the Church of God m Zion alone
will be deliverar.ce, outside will be desoiation, 14. Feed] Lit. rule; a prayer in tne name of the
people, to be fed on the fruitful mountain-range (Carmel) of the western sea-coast (Is. x. 18;
xxxvil, 24), and by Bashan and Gilead, the rich pasture-land east of Jordan (Num. xxxii. 1;
Beut, xxx. 14: Jer. 1,19). 15. Marvellous] Wonders of grace, special manifestations »f God's
mercy, which will be repeated in the days of Messiah, will confound and silence the enemy (Ps. ovii.


CHAP. VII. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. MICAR. 449


ee,





42: Js. lit. 5). 16. Deaf.] They shall be afraid of hearing them, because they continually fear rew
disasters, when they see the God of Israel to be so powertal [Calvin]. 17. Tiel) Abjest ree
tion as suppliants (cf. Is, xlix. 23: Ixv. 25); an allusion to Gen. iii. 14. Worms] Earth-creepers
(Deut. xxxii. 24). Like snakes driven out of their hiding-place, or when charmed out of their holes,
so nations come trembling out of their castles (Ps. xvili. 46), and tremble, flee to Jehovah with
trembling, as alone able to help [cf. Kei/]. 18.] In allusion to his own name, Micah praises God,
and closes the book. Who.) The rescue from Egypt and the restoration predicted, exalt Jehovah
above other gods, and reveal his incomparable grace and compassion (ef. Ex. xv. 11), Passeth] Not
conniving at it, but forgiving it; not choosing to look into it (Prov. xix. 11: ef, Ps. exxx. 3).
Heritage] Surviving judgment, and typifying the remnant of grace (ch. iv. 7). 19. Subdue] Lit.
tread underfoot as something deadly ; guilt and power of sin, both taken away. Depths) Like Egyp-
tians into the Red Sea. All} not some; pardon, full and free. 20, Truth] Faithful promise. Mercy]
from which promises spring. Fathers] (Ps. cv. 9, 10), Mercy and truth are the scarlet threads which
run through the unity of God’s plan from beginning to end [Lange]. The seed of the patriarchs should
never perish, but would be restored as often as they turned to God. The mystery of this purpose is
revealed by the Apostle (Rom. xi, 25, sqq.). “There is no prophetic denunciation of judgment
against Israel, which is not concluded with promises of mercy” [LAbdarbinel],


HOMILETICS.


Tae Soarcity or Gopty Mren.—Verses 1, 2.


The prophet mourns that he lives ina degenerate age. Good men have perished.
Instead of finding the nation like a ripe vintage, there is not ‘‘a cluster to eat.” It
is gleaned of the best and filled with the worst of men.

I. Godly men are scarce upon the earth. ‘The good man is perished out of
the earth.” We should not complain, like Elijah, for we are not left alone in the
present day. Yet good men are few. 1. Some are removed by cruelty. They
are cut off by those who “lie in wait for blood.” In all ages the blood of martyrs
has been freely spilt. The wicked plot and persecute, lie in ambuscade for the
reputation and life of the godly now. All malice is cruelty, and would put to
death those whom,it hates. ‘Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save
me from bloody men.” 2. Others perish by moral defection. Iniquity abounds,
and the love of many grows cold. Difficulties and dangers terrify some, others
are not sincere, get disappointed, and “draw back unto perdition.” ‘“‘ They went out
from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us no doubt they would
have continued with us.” 3. Many are taken away by death. Good men ripen
on earth for the blessedness of heaven. They are gathered like the summer fruits,
and thus escape the severity of winter. ‘Merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.” II. The
scarcity of godly men upon the earth is a cause of regret. “Woe is me!”
Godly men are precious and profitable as the first ripe fruits; useful to the
Christian Church and the world. 1. They are a loss to the Christian Church.
Their presence and example adorn and streagthen the Church. They are pillars.
“the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof.” We require the wisdom and
zeal, the faith and power, of former ages. Every death seems to diminish the
faithful, and make them “as the grape-gleanings of the vintage.” 2. They are a
loss to the world. As lights their influence is diffusive and blessed. “Like the
sun,” says Hume, “they cheer, invigorate, and sustain the surrounding world.”
As salt they preserve the earth from corruption, and quicken men to higher life.
Their prayers draw blessings from heaven, and ward off jadgments from men.
They refresh and fructify the place in which they dwell. When they die, justice,
benevolence, and beauty depart. ‘The world is upheld by the veracity of good
men,” says Emerson; “they make the earth wholesome. They who lived with
them found life glad and nutritious.” “The saints that are in the earth, and te
the excellent in whom is all my Ces egl


450


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY :


MICAH. | CHAP. VIE.


Maturity RequireD By Gop.—Verse 1.


These words may be taken as expressing God’s desire for ripeness or maturity in


grace.


I. God requires maturity in human experience.


ripe fruit,”
adorn their conduct.


Hence they relate to our experience, character, and efforts.


“My soul desired the first


1. The unconverted must be renewed. No clusters of grace and beauty
They are like trees without foliage and fruit. Barren and
unfruitful in the works and ways of God.


** Here elements have lost their uses,
Air ripens not, nor earth produces ’’ [Swift].


2. The penitent must ripen in humility.
fruits meet for repentance must be produced.
“First the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn
II. God requires maturity in Christian character.
In this growth are seed time and harvest ;
There are babes, but we must come to the full stature, not the mere
outline, but the perfect likeness in Christ.
Christian who hath not the life of a Christian,”


holiness, must be visible.
in the ear.”
character grows.
and holiness.


Not mere blossoms of sorrow, but
Penitence and pardon, faith and


Christian
progress in knowledge


“He is but the counterfeit of a
says one. All the virtues of


Christian conduct must ripen. God is glorified, and ministers glad, when we bring


forth much fruit.
requires maturity in personal effort.
everything.


first ripe fruit.
unripe.


we shall reap no harvest (Prov. xi. 24:
will secure overflowing vintage.
the first-fruits of all thine increase :


‘“T desire fruit that may abound to your account.”


IIt. God


There must be thought and maturity in
1. In efforts we must put forth our strength and work earnestly.
Whatsoever our hands find to do, nust be done with all our might.
energy must be thrown into every undertaking.


Decision and
2. In offerings we must give the


In sacred worship and daily life let there be nothing sour and
In the Sunday-school and the sick-room, think, prepare, and do your best.
David would not offer to God of that which cost nothing.
2 Cor. ix. 6
“Honour the Lord with thy substance, and with
so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and


if we spare the seed
); but thorough consecration


thy presses shall burst out with new wine.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. The moral contrast or, 1.
What is desired. “The first ripe fruit.”
2. What is really found. “There is no
cluster to eat” (ver. 1).

Ver. 2. The picture of a good man.
1. The good man in his character. Good
here means merciful, actively good and
benevolent to men. 2. The good man
in his influence. He upholds justice,
checks corruptions, and testifies to Gud.
When merciful men die, uprightness
goes and cruelty enters the ‘land. “The
good man is perished, and there is none
upright.” 3. The good man in his
death. The Church and the servants of
God lament the loss, ‘‘ Woe is me!”


“A combination, and a form, indeed,
Where every god did seem to set his seal,
To give the world assurance of a man,”
[Shakespeare.]


Brotherly cruelty. ‘They hunt every
man his brother.” 1. Wicked men plan
to assail others. 2. These plans are
crafty. Nets of various kinds laid to
ensnare. 3. These crafty plans often
succeed. Fraud is adued to force, and
craft to cruelty. The guilt is greater
because a brother, by race or grace, is
humbled. Nearest friends are often
entrapped like birds by the fowler.

Every man is the brother of every
man, because he is a man, born of the
same first parent, children of the same
Father: yet they lay wait for one another,
as hunters for wild beasts (cf. Ps. xxxv.
7; lvii. 7: Jer. v. 26) [Pusey].

“O what are these?

Death’s ministers, not men: who thus deal death
Inhumanly to men; and multiply
Ten thousandfold the sin of him who alew
His brother” [Médton}.


JHAP. VII. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. 451


———————————————————e————— eee


HOMILETICS.


Wire Bora Hanns Earnestity.— Verse 3.


There is little of excellence in mere earnestness. The more earnest a man is in
vital error, he inflicts, of necessity, the deeper injury on the interests of truth and
men, The wicked men, in this picture of the prophet, stand in the very attitude
which every good man should assume in the work of God.

I, Without hands. Some good men seem to be without hands. “They have
hands, but they handle not; feet have they, but they walk not.” They work
with hands in other things; strive manfully in a political struggle, or in a
question of social right. They are diligent in business, but in Christian work idle,
both hands drop down and there they stand—without hands. “Curse ye Meroz,
curse ye bitterly!” Why? What had Meroz done to merit the curse? Nothing.
That was the sin, that she had “ot come up to the help of the Lord.” II. With
one hand. This is the second state in which many serve God. This is well to
begin with, but a little more must be added, and so the service must grow into
fulness. The Apostles were grand workers, learned by watching and following
him who went about doing good. They were but one-handed men, made many
mistakes, but got the use of both hands in time. The Master has always a great
company of young workers, some young in life, some young in toil, but all learning
and needing the word of encouragement from those of more experience. If you
are speaking for Christ, anywhere, at any time, doing but a little service in a quiet
way ; God speed you in your work. III. With both hands we say to all one
handed men; for there is no perfection, even of a relative kind, with one. Both
hands are given for use; the other will not be idle, but will grasp at something,
raise up another force of evil to balance Christian activity ; so life in a little while
will be in poise, not in motion; then in a little longer there will be motion, but in
a wrong way. ‘ With both hands” for safety. With all the powers and with all
the talents given. None of them must rust, all must go out in use. How few things
there are in the house, in labour, in business, that we can do with one hand!
David’s men “ were mighty men, helpers of the war; they were armed with bows,
and could use both the right hand and the left.” These are the men whom Christ
needs ‘to fight his battles and do his work ; “ workmen needing not to be ashamed ”
of the work they do, or of the way in which they do it. IV. There is a higher,
the highest stage of obedience, expressed by all the words of the text, with both
hands earnestly. It is not enough that the talents be laid out; they must be laid
out to the best advantage. Every power and passion must be enlisted, baptized,
inspired and energized in Christian service. This is just the thing to make some
happy, heroic, and victorious. They work with both hands—the mechanism is
perfect and the action steady—but it is mechanical not vital action. Christian
earnestness ig not mere vehemence and heat: it is “zeal according to knowledge.’
Many reasons might be urged for an earnest life: Self-preservation requires i.
Our faculties and senses cannot be kept bright and clear without use. The rust of
moral decay will be within us unless we work “with our might.” Honesty
requires it. We have undertaken a great service—if at all—on certain terms, clear
conditions laid down by the Master. We must fulfil them or we do not live
fairly. Benevolence requires it. If we love our fellow-men, the one thing we can
do for them above all other things in value is, to live truly and intensely before
them. Gratitude requires it. This is all we can do for Christ. He will take
nothing from us but this. Time requires it. Not one of us would go out of the
world without having lived for some time in it in this way. The future ie
unknown. and carries secrets undisclosed. We are not fully matched with the
day unless working “with both hands earnestly ” [aleigh |.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. (cHAP. Vil.


452





UNIVERSAL CORRUPTION AND UNIVERSAL JUDGMENT.—Verses 3—6.


Corruption is prevalent in all ranks of the community, rests upon a compromise
of the ruling classes, and thus the foundations of morality are destroyed.

I. Universal corruption. Sin was veiled under the name of virtue, or com-
mitted in the pretence of justice. 1. In official ranks. Men in authority expose
justice for sale and avow bribery. They play into the hands of others to strengthen
themselves in evil. (1.) The prince asks for gifts. (2.) The judge seeks reward. (3.)
The nobleman utters his mischievous desires. 2. In religous professions. ‘The
best of them is as a briar.” The most upright and moral were carried away with
the sins of the day. They were crooked in their dispositions, and sharper than
thorns in their ways. Instead of being a protection to others, they were positively
injurious and oppressive. 3. In social circles. Faith was not kept anywhere; all
to a man were treacherous (Jer. ix. 2—6). (1.) A friend was not to be trusted.
(2.) The heads of families would not help and advise. The guide or counsellor, and
the wife of his bosom (Deut. xiii. 6), were alike guilty. (3.) The members of
families were in astate of lawlessness and impiety. Natural relationship was
perverted. ‘The son called the father a fool. The daughter testifies against her
mother, and a man’s foes were found in his own household. Oppression was
followed by inhumanity. The strongest ties of nature and religion were dissolved.
A moral condition descriptive of the last times of the gospel dispensation (Luke
xxi. 16: 2 Tim. iii. 1—3). II. Universal judgment. When men become
oppressive and dangerous, and moral disease becomes universal, it is a sign of
approaching ruin. 1. There will be a day of visitation. “Thy visitation cometh.”
Men’s actions and lives are seen by God. God will reckon with them and visit
them with punishment for sin. 2. This day of visitation is foretold. Watchmen
and prophets foresee it and warn men of its speedy approach. 3. When it comes
and finds men unprepared it is terrible. “ Now shall be their perplexity.” Sinners
are heedless, and the day breaks suddenly upon them. They will be caught in
their own snatés and, as they entangled others, they will not be able to escape
their own retribution. “For it is a day of trouble and of treading down, and of
perplexity by the Lord God of Hosts.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 3. The triple alliance for evil. each from the other, and disjoints the


Union is good, is necessary and advan-
tageous, but alliance for evil is disgrace-
ful and injurious. 1. The Prince asks i.e.
for the condemnation of the righteous
and innocent. 2. The Judge grants for
recompense or reward. 3. The great
man co-operates with both. “So they
wrap it up,” turn and twist their efforts
into a threefold cord which cannot easily
be broken. y

Ver. 4. Men as briers. Giving grief
for help, and fleecing when they ought
to protect. Hard and sharp in their
dealings ; piercing and injurious in their
conduct. “ Folden together as thorns”
(Nah. i. 10).

Vers. 5, 6. Itis a part of the perplexity
of crooked ways, that all relationships
are put out of joint. Selfishness rends


whole frame of society. Passions and
sin break every band of friendship,
kindred, gratitude, nature. The words
describe partly the inward corruption,
partly the outward causes which shall
call it forth. There is no real trust in
any, where all are corrupt. The words
deepen as they go on. First, the friend,
or neighbour, the common band of man
and man; then the guide (or, as the
word also means, one familiar, united
by intimacy, to whom by continual
intercourse the soul was used); then
the wife who lay in the bosom, nearest
to the secrets of the heart ; then those
to whom also reverence is due, father
and mother [ Pusey].

1. There is no sure hold upon any
man, however strict'y he be bound, who


OHAP. VII. ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


453





is declining from God, and hath not a
tender conscience standing in awe of
him ; for in this declining time, friends,
guides, wives, &ec., are not to be trusted


not easily take prejudice, and to walk
warily and prudently; Trust not, saith
he, put no confidence, keep the doors of
thy mouth, especially trust in or look


in. 2. In times of defection and back- to none for help, but only in God
sliding, the godly out of love should [Hutcheson].
believe all things (1 Cor. xiii. 7), and ,

HOMILETICS.


THREE ReEsoLurions.— Verse 7.


The prophet is predicting a period which marvellously corresponds to the first
age of the Christian era. For, he says, the day of thy watchmen and thy visita-
tion cometh, the time our Lord foretold, when Jerusalem was destroyed. Then the
Church was as sheep among wolves. Princes indeed did evil with both hands
earnestly. Judges like Pilate could pronounce in a breath, that the accused was
innocent and yet condemn. ‘Treachery crept into every home. Hypocrisy pre-
vailed the land over. The Church was in the midst of uncompromising enemies.
The nearest of their relatives, as fathers and sons, betrayed them to persecution
and death. ‘There was no help for them in man. Seo the eyes of faith turned to
God alone. He would not fail them. ach of us should adopt these resolutions.
Many reasons indicate the wisdom of so doing.

I. The resolution of faith. “TI will look.” 1. The promises encourage me,
2. Experience teaches me. 3. The Lord commands me. 4. The engagement will
comfort me. II. The resolution of patience. “I will wait.” 1. For his time
is best. 2. For his blessing is worth waiting for. 3. For I shall not be
disappointed. III. The confidence of hope. ‘God will hear.” 1. Though my
cry be feeble and my faith weak. 2. Though my request be great. 3. Though
others disdain me. 4. Though I am alone. Few pleaders in Israel. 5. For
he is near [Stems and Twigs].

He turned away from creatures, knowing they were broken cisterns that could
hold no water ; and turned towards God “the fountain of living waters.” ‘There-
fore,” he says, “I will look unto the Lord.” Observe, first, that this is a
designed experience, and not a casual one, on God’s side. God is more concerned
for our welfare than we are ourselves—does not wait for our application, but
excites it. For this purpose He has given the Sabbath, the Scriptures, the
sanctuary, and the preaching of the Gospel. All these dispensations are arranged
in subserviency to the purpose of his grace and our afflictions. He therefore says,
“IT will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offences and seek
my face.” Elihu, reviewing afflictive dispensations, says, “ All these things worketh
God oftentimes with man, to bring back his soul from the pit,” &. Observe,
secondly, it is a necessary experience on our part. God does nothing needlessly,
and we may be assured that he doth not “afflict willingly.” We have a strong
propensity to turn away, to make flesh our arm, and earth our home; but “the
prosperity of fools destroys them,” the things ordained for their welfare prove “a
trap.” Hence, though trying, these dispensations improve us by the goodness of
God. He “hedges up our way with thorns,” that we may not be able to “find our
paths.” He embitters earth, that heaven may be endeared, and verifies the language
of Dr. Young: “Our hearts are fasten’d to the world,” &. Oh! it is a blessed
experience when, with the Church, we are thrown from ourselves and from creatures
upon the Divine resources [Jay].


GoD MAINTAINING THE INTERESTS AND SECURING THE TRIUMPH OF His
Prorie.— Verses 8—-10.


Now the Prophet holds out hope, and gives special grounds of consolation and


254 : HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. (omar. VIL





encouragement. God watches over his people, and will not suffer them to be
destroyed.

I. The sad condition of God’s people. 1. Cast into trouble, ‘“ When I fall.”
The strongest saint is infirm and liable to fall. Sin within and temptation
without overcome us. Disasters may strip us of everything, and sorrow bring to
the grave. But the fall shall not be fatal. “Though he fall he shall not be utterly


cast down.” 2. Sitting in darkyess. “I sit in darkness.” The darkness of
doubt, captivity, and mysterious providence. Clouds hang over us, friends desert
us, and shadows hide God from us. ‘ We walk in darkness and have no light”


(Isa. 1.10). 3. Mocked by the enemy. The enemy has advantage sometimes over
God’s people, and treats them with insult and reproach. The world exults at the
fall of a godly man. “ Malice is folly,” says one, “and when it holds a festival its
tones and gestures far exceed all the freaks and mummeries of the lord of misrule.”
“They opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, Aha, our eye hath
seen it.” II. The blessed hope of God’s people. God chastises his children, but
does not give them up to despair. Neither despond nor mistrust him. “He shall
deliver thee in six troubles, yea, in seven shall no evil touch thee.” 1. Lifted
up from trouble. “TI shall rise.” Trials have their limits and design. If we
“have the will to rise, he is at hand who will cause thee to rise,” says a Father.
The sinner lies when he falls, and perishes without recovery. ‘For a just man
falleth seven times, and riseth again: but the wicked shall fall into mischief.” 2.
Enlightened in darkness. ‘The Lord a light unte me.” Shadows disperse; joy
and brightness beam upon our lot. Darkness of sorrow and ill-repute flee away,
and noon-day splendours shine again. ‘“ The Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting
light.” 3. Restoration to lost privileges. God will declare the right of his people,
make their glury conspicuous, and restore them to former dignities. They shall be
publicly honoured and greatly enriched with the covenant blessings. “I shall
behold his righteousness.” III. The sure triumph of God’s people. The truly
godly man has been subject to derision in every age. Men have asked in scorn,
“ Where is the Lord thy God?” But the triumph of the wicked is short. 1. Joy
will be turned to shame. The enemy rejoiced in God’s apparent forgetfulness of
his people, and laughed at their profession of confidence in him, But God
punished the blasphemy cast upon his name and the calumny heaped upon his
children. ‘The enemy was disappointed, confounded, and covered with shame. 2.
Deliverance from the enemy will be complete. Judgment will be executed upon
the enemy. He will be treated as straw, and trodden as mire in the streets.
“‘ And they shall be as mighty men which tread down their enemies in the mire of
the streets in the battle; and they shall fight because the Lord is with them.”


Lieut in Darxness.— Verse 7.


1. In dark spiritual experience God will be a light unto us. When sin is strong
and grace is weak—when comforts fail and sorrows multiply—when faith yields -
and unbelief prevails—when we search for God and find him not—then he will
succour and fill our hearts with light and gladness. 2. In dark providential
dispensations God will be a light unto us. When the clouds are black above, and
our way is dark, and we know not where to go—when every fresh turn of events
serves to increase our perplexity—when the scenes through which we pass defy all
mortal wisdom—then he will disperse the gloom and reveal our way before us. 3.
In the darkness of death God will be a light unto us. When we enter the damp
thick shades of the tomb—when all earthly lights, even those that have burned
with the steadiest and purest lustre, will be extinguished—then the Lord will be
our light. He will guide our feet, we shall pass through the dark valley without
danger, and enter the regions of eternal day.


CHAP. VII.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. 456
Sr a


“Then let me not despairing mourn,
Though gloomy darkness spread the sky ;
My glorious Sun will yet return,
And night with ali its horrors fly” | 4dapted}.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. When I fall, I shall rise. A  chastisement. If we murmur and get
strange event anda strong hope. ‘Trials impatient, the end has not been yet
a must be expected, (b) are temporary, answered. “ Wherefore doth a living
c) have their results, and (d) must be ran complain, a man for the punishment
endured in hope. These words contain of his sins?” 3. Such as bear Divine
sweet comfort for slandered saints. indignation in the right spirit will be

Ver. 9. 1. Sin is the cause of Divine delivered. Bear it patiently, hopefully.
indignation. Men make themselves rods The time is short, “until he plead.”
by their own guilt. ‘Because I have His promise is good. ‘He will bring
sinned against him.” 2. This Divine me forth.”
indignation must be received as fatherly


HOMILETICS.
A Guorious Day.—Verses 11, 12.


The Prophet predicts a glorious time, when Jerusalem shall be divested of
enclosures and narrowness; when the Church shall be enlarged by the return of
captives and the conversion of nations.

I. A day of deliverance from ‘bondage. “In that day shall the decree be
far removed.” God’s decree to punish, and the decree of Nebuchadnezzar to
retain in captivity. Tyrannical rule would be destroyed, and perfect freedom
enjoyed. No power on earth can detain God’s people in bondage when he intends
to deliver, II. A day of gathering together the scattered tribes. From
fortress and fortified cities ; from sea to sea, and from the utmost bounds of the
earth, shall captive Jews return. As proselytes from all nations came to Jerusalem
‘of old, so shall converts from north and south flow into the Christian Church.
“In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian
shall come into Egypt,” &c. (Isa. xix. 23). IIT. A day of peaceful restoration.
The walls of Zion shall no longer bein ruins. ‘They shall be reared for a habitation
and defence. Sin pulls down the walls and creates mischief. God alone can
prosper and establish the Church. Without his aid we buildin vain. Our prayer
should ever be, “ Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion: build thou the walla


of Jerusalem.”
Tae Lanp CursEeD BY THE Sins or ITs [NHABITANTS.— Verse 13.


Salvation may come to the people, but the desolation of their land would remind
them of their sins. However glorious the prospect, “the fruit of their doings”
would curse the country in which they lived. Many are the sins of a people
which are calamities to the land in which they are committed. We notice a few.

I. National idleness is a curse to the land. The ground is cursed by the sin
of man, but will yield produce when cultivated. But idleness will bring ruin in
all departments of trade. As men sow, so must they reap in this respect. II.
National intemperance is a curse to the land. It squanders financial resources,
aggravates the curse of poverty, and leads to failure in the means of comfort and
subsistence. lt devours savings and capital; and causes theft and destruction of
property. III. National war is a curse to the land. Devastated fields, the destruc-
tion of towns and villages, are some of the fruits of men’s doings. In many ways
judgments from God, as real as the fire upon the cities of the plain, desolate the


466


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH,


{cHar. vi





ground because of them that dwell therein (Hos. iv. 3: Jer. xxiii. 10: Gen. xix.


25).
herein.”


“A fruitful land into barrenness for the wickedness of them that dwell


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 11, 12. These words are a
promise and consolation to the Jews,
for their restoration is here foretold as
Micah had already foretold it (ch. iv.
10). But the whole is not limited to
this. He says with remarkable indefi-
niteness, there shall come. He does not
say who shall come. But he twice sets
two opposite boundaries, from which
men should come; and since these
boundaries, not being coincident, cannot
be predicted of one and the same subject,
there must be two distinct incomings.
While in the first place the restoration
of Israel is foretold, there follows that
conversion of the world which Micah
had before promised (iv. 1—3), and
which was the object of the restoration
of Israel [Pusey].

1. The Lord will in due time restore
and make up the ruins of his destroyed
Church and people ; for thy walls are to


be built. 2. God’s time is to be patiently
waited for in the restoration of his
Church ; for there is the day for doing
it which he will keep, and no sooner.
3. As it is one of the greatest trials to
the Church, to lie under the tyranny
and oppression of strangers, who, by
decrees and injunctions executed with
vigour, labour to ruin her and destroy
the work of God; so, when he has
wrought his work upon his Church by
such trial, the Lord will deliver them
from the yoke, set them at liberty to
serve him and enjoy tranquillity without
interruptions ; for, in that day the decree
shall be removed [ Hutcheson].

The fate of the earth and the glory of
Zion are here set forth. Zion is multi-
plied by the addition of Gentiles, but
judgment falls upon a sinful world. Sal-
vation and peace within, danger and
destruction without.


HOMILETICS.
THe Work or Gop.—Verse 14.


When we consider the symbolic language of the sacred writers, and the typical
nature of the Jewish dispensations, we are authorized to pass from the natural to


the spiritual Israel. 1. Observe the persons to be favoured ; “ His people.”


He


has always had a people for his Name, described as “the flock of his heritage.”
This indicates that they are sheep, and collectively all one in Christ. A man may
have a flock in his possession, and under his superintendence, but not the flock of
his heritage. In the East a person’s whole substance consisted in flocks and herds.
He would feel a peculiar concern for them as his own. The Lord takes pleasure
in his people. They are his portion, and he derives the revenue of his glory from
them. 2. See the blessing implored on their behalf; “feed thy people with thy
rod.” The rod is the symbol and the instrument of the shepherd, and the word
feed, by a common figure of speech, is significant of the discharge of all his office.
The Lord will lead them by his Word and Spirit, heal them when wounded or
diseased, guard them in danger, and restore them when astray. Especially does he
give repast and repose. Hence the inquiry, when hungry and thirsty, weary and
faint: “Tell me where thou /feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at noon.”
The believer can often say, “The Lord is my shepherd,” &c. 3. But how was the
privilege to be dispensed. ‘In the midst of Carmed let them feed, in Bashan and
Gilead, as in days of old.” Thus the richest measure and degree of provisions are
indicated. Suppliants may be choosers. God giveth liberally and upbraideth not.
“ Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.” When Alexander bestowed
a boon the recipient would say, ‘It is too much for me to receive.” But the
conqueror of the world would reply, “It is not too much for me to give”
[Adapted from Jay}.


CHAP VIL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. 487





THe Propte or Gop.—Verses 14, 15.


1. God's people are a separated people. As Israel was choosen and separated
from other nations, so God’s people are in the world but do not belong to it. They
“ dwell solitarily,” live apart from worldly men, who think only of time and sense.
They are alone in their character, tastes, and pursuits (Num. xxiii. 9: Deut.
xxxlii, 28). 2. God’s people are a protected people. God rules, and defends
them. He teaches, reproves, and delivers with his “rod.” The flock may be
scattered, helpless, and alone, but the kind Shepherd sill protect and bless them
(Ps. xxiii. 3). 3. God’s people are an enriched people. ‘ Let them feed in Bashan
and Gilead.” The greatest pastures of Canaan typify the blessings of God’s people.
(1.) Enriched in a wonderful degree. Rest and refreshment without stint. (2.)
Enriched in a wonderful method. ‘ As in the days of old.” As in Egypt, so now
would God display “ marvellous things.” Wonders of grace will eclipse miracles
of power. God will do for his people more than he has ever done. “So we thy
people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever: we will show forth
thy praise to all generations.”


WoNDERFUL ANSWERS TO PRaYER.—Verses 15—I17.


In answer to the prophet’s prayer God declares that he will perform marvellous
things, in bestowing good upon his people, and entirely subduing their enemies,

I. In the bestowment of good upon his people. In the deliverance from Egypt
and entrance into the land of promise, wondrous things were seen. Redemption
from Babylon was a blessing, a “ great thing” which gladdened the heart (Ps.
exxxvi. 1—3). Special manifestations of mercy are seen now. From the beginning
to the end of Christian life, God will show them his marvellous loving-kindness
(Ps. xvii. 7). IL. In the overthrow of their enemies. “The nations shall see”
these marvellous deeds of God to his people, and be astonished and confounded.
1. They shall be frustrated in their purpose. ‘“Confounded at all their might.”
They failed in their opposition. Ald their might proved weakness. Human power
can avail nothing against God’s people and their endurance in suffering. Its
strength is baffled before the might of God’s grace. 2. They shall be silenced in
their slander. ‘They shall lay their hand upon their mouth, ashamed of what
they have said, and unable to say any more.” Their ears shall be deaf “to the
report of God’s dealings,” before the thunder of Jehovah’s mighty deeds (Job
xxvi. 14). Extreme astonishment will take away the power of speech (Judges
xviii. 19: Isa. lii. 15). 3. They shall be humbled in their pride. 'To lick the dust
‘g an emblem of extreme humility. They will be cast down as low as possible, to
the very earth. As they lifted themselves up against God, so will they be abased,
like the serpent under the curse of old (cf. Ps. Ixxii. 9; xxii. 29), ‘They shall
bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy
feet.” 4. They shall be exposed in their folly. Brought out of their hiding-places,
they will tremble in fear. Like worms of the earth, they shall move out of their
holes. No security nor secret place can protect them. Discovered in their designs,
ashamed of their conduct, they will stand before God in that fear which is a fore-
taste of the judgment-day (Luke xxiii. 30: Rev. vi. 16).

“‘ Wit that can creep, and pride that licks the dust” [Pope].


Gop DeruicHtine In Meroy.—Verse 18.


Tne Prophet saw mercy unequalled in God’s dealings with Israel. The heathen
ods and all imaginary gods of men are unholy, revengeful, and cruel. “ Who is
God like unto thee,” &c. 9 } ;
I. God’s mercy is founded upon God’s nature. It is not something without
him, or something acquired like human virtues. It belongs naturally to God.
It is something without which he would not be God. It is the essence and


458 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH. (cHaP. Vin





manifestation of God. “Godislove.” All attributes join together in his character
and ways, but mercy is the brightest ray. Judgment is strange work, but
mercy is a delight to God. He puts his anger by, and while he corrects he ever
loves. ‘To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgiveness, though we have
rebelled against him.” II. God’s mercy is displayed in God’s works, In the
physical and moral world we have abundant illustrations of this truth. 1. In the
physical world we have proofs of God’s mercy. Famine, pestilence, and dearth
often come, but they pass away. Mervy dawns again in seed-time and harvest,
summer and winter. ‘The rain falls and the sun shines upon the just and the
unjust. The world, in its laws and constitution, indicates no malevolent Creator.
2. In the moral world we have proofs of God’s mercy. In the Divine forbearance
with sin, and the moral constitution of men; in the conversion of the sinner, and
the life of the believer, mercy is displayed beyond expression. In Christ we have
mercy like a fountain full and free. Paul was a pattern of this mercy to others. If
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and return unto
God, “he will have mercy upon him and abundantly pardon.” This truth, (1) Sets
forth the highest excellence in every moral being. To be like God is the crown
and substance of moral life. (2) Gives a reason to trust God at all times. A God
who delights in mercy can never be indifferent to our happiness. (3) Furnishes an
argument to be merciful to others. ‘Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain
mercy.”
No Parpon 1ike Gop’s Parpon.— Verse 18.


The Prophet here makes a challenge to other deities, and vindicates the glory of
God. “Who is a God like unto thee?” exclaim all who have embraced the
mercy and received the forgiveness of God.

I. No pardon like God’s in the ground ofits bestowment. It is not connivance
nor mere clemency. It does not ignore sin nor set aside justice. It is pardon
through substitution and satisfaction, bought with a price and conferred in a
method to honour the law and magnify Divine love. God can be just, and the
justifier of him that believeth. Czesar, shaking his sword, said to the Questor, who
sought to prevent his entrance into the treasury at Rome, that it was easier for his
power than for the goodness of his nature to despatch him. God might justly
have punished, but he spares and is ready to pardon.

** Here the whole Deity is known ;
Nor dares a creature guess


Which of the glories brighter shone,
The justice or the grace.”


II. No pardon like God’s in the method of its bestowment. 1. In freeness it is
unexampled. Men are reluctant to forgive when earnestly desired, begrudge
forgiveness and cherish resentment, when it is bestowed. But God waits to be
gracious, multiplies pardons, and makes overtures, beseeching us to be reconciled
tohim. “Come now, and let us reason together.” 2. In fulness it is complete. It
is not for one but for all sins. “ Forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin.”
It needs no supplement, no repetition. It is once and for ever—sins are forgiven
and forgotten. Cast into the depths of the sea, blotted out as a thick cloud, not
to be gathered again. He retains no anger, but looks upon us as if we had never
sinned, We are not therefore to judge God by ourselves, and measure his pardoning
love by a standard of our own. “ For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so
are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.”


Exutrine Conripenos in Gop’s Mzroy.— Verses 19, 20.


The Jews now avow full confidence in God’s mercy. He had often pitied and
delivered them. But his compassions were not exhausted, would be exercised again
ta displays of power and love. “ He will again,” &.


OHAP, VII. |


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MICAH.


459





I. Confidence in the bestowment of God’s grace.
subduing of sin, in showing compassion and restoring to Divine tavour.
Sin is passed by, left unpunished, and God does not “ mark
It is buried in eternal oblivion, never more to rise in


pardon of sin.
iniquities ” (Ps. cxxx. 3).


Grace in the pardon and
l. In the


view. As in the Red Sea not one enemy of God’s people was left, so in the pardou


of sin none are remembered.


“In those days, and in that time, saith the Lori,


the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none: and the sins of
Judah, and they shall not be found ; for I will pardon them whom I reserve.” 2.


In the subduing of sin.
guilt and destroys the power of sin.


“He will subdue our iniquities.”
Sin is tyrannical, and reduces man to bondage.


He takes away the


It combats the moral principles and is victorious over the moral nature of man.
Christ gives freedom from the dominion and consequences of sin, and implants a


new rule within us.


“ Be of sin the double cure,
Cleanse me from its guilt and power.”


3. In the restoration to Divine javour.


The Jews were not subdued in Babylon.


They were turned again and found that compassion which they had often forfeited.


God turns to the sinner and prepares him for his presence.
When they turn to him, he will turn again to them. IT.


men in Christ Jesus.


Confidence in the performance of God’s word.


He is reconciled to


“Thou wilt perform the truth.”


Return from captivity was a striking instance of the fidelity and kindness of God


in his covenant promise.
of the Messiah.


Gentiles.


But this is only a type of a greater display in the mission
1. In all ages. In the days of the patriarchs and of the prophets.
To Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses and Micah,
God’s mercy and truth are alike pledged to perform his word.


Jews and
“ For


2. To all people.


thy word’s sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all these things.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 15. Here is a present and full
answer to the Church’s prayer ; so ready
is the Lord to fulfil the desire of the
righteous. It is but ask and have; and
they are worthily miserable that will not
make themselves happy by asking. The
sum of Christ’s answer is this: As I led
Joseph like a flock out of Egypt, through
the wilderness, and fed them there, daily
and daintily, with angels’ food (never
was prince so served in his greatest
pomp), so will I show thee marvellous
thinys at Babylon, and bring thee thence
with a mighty hand (Ezek. xx. 34), to
make me a glorious name (isa. xi. 14),
and both these deliverances shall be a
certain type of thy spiritual redemption
by Christ. Lo, this wiil I do for thee as
in the days of old (ver. 14), and so tit
mine answer ad cardinem desiderii ; give
thee not only the desire of thine heart,
but the request of thy lips (Ps. xxi. 2),
let it be to thee even as thou wilt (Matt.
xv. 28) [Trapp].

Vers. 16 17. The subjugation of the


enemies of God’s people, a proof, 1. of
Divine power over men; 2. Divine
goodness to the Church ; 3. aground of
encouragement to trust God.

Ver. 18. God delights in mercy.
Illustrate and prove the text. 1.
Scripture proves this truth. In its laws,
doctrines, histories, and promises. 2.
The works of God prove this truth. The
world made for the theatre of mercy,
providence displayed in giving mercy.
3. All the perfections of God are employed
to illustrate this mercy. God’s name
emblazoned in mercy, his hands employed
in bestowing mercy. Power, wisdom,
justice and truth are on the side of mercy.
Let us delight in mercy [Dr. &.
Vaughan]. The text is also illustrated :
By the beauty and fitness of creation.
By the great regard paid to mercy and
the merciful in the word of God. By
the teachings of providence. By the
commission that he gave his Son, By
the purpose for which the ungodly are
spared. By the urgent way in whieb


460


God asks sinners to be reconciled to him.
By the way in which he receives and
pardons sinners. By the way in which
he deals with the infirmities of his own
people. By the reception he gives them
at the end of life. Learn: how had it
been with us if God had revealed all
concerning himself except his mercy?
He might as well not have revealed it, if
we have not sought and found it. Ifwe
have not found mercy, there is every
encouragement to seek it. Let us seek
more of this mercy, and show it more tc
others every day [Class and Desk].

Ver. 19. He will subdue our iniquities.
The term subdue (lit. tread under-foot)
is military, and indicates spiritual warfare.


1. The enemies. ‘ Iniquities.” Many,
powerful, within and without. 2. The
conquest. We are helpless. “Mine

ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1,2. Good men few. They say
that fish smell first at the head, and
when godly men decay, the whole com-
monwealth will soon go rotten. We
must not, however, be rash in our judg-
ment on this point, for Elijah erred in
counting himself the only servant of
God alive, when there were thousands


whom the Lord held in_ reserve
[Spurgeon].
Vers. 3, 4. Man is nothing but


insincerity, falsehood, and hypocrisy,
both in regard to himself and in regard
to others. He does not wish that he
should be told the truth ; he shuns saying
it to others; and all these moods, so
inconsistent with justice and reason,
have their roots in his heart [ Pascal].


‘¢ Faithless is earth, and faithless are the skies !
Justice is fled, and truth is now no more.”’
[ Virgil, Zneid.]
Vers. 5—7. |
“Lean not on earth; twill pierce thee to the heart:
A broken reed at best, but oft a spear :
On its sharp point peace bleeds, and hope expires.”
[Young.]
Vers. 7—9. A holy silence unstrings
every affliction, it takes off the weight of
every burden, it adds sweet to every
bitter, it changes dark nights into sun-
shiny days. The smallest sufferings will


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


[cHar. Vit


iniquities prevail against me.” Hence
(1) Divine. “ He” will, &c. (2) complete.
“ He will subdue.” 3. The means of con-
quest. Faith in Christ. Gracein the heart.
Sanctification by the Spirit. “ By my
Spirit, saith the Lord.” “We have
purified our souls in obeying the truth,
through the Spirit.”

God’s pardon. 1. Unequalled in
method. 2. Incessant in exercise. 3.
Unmerited in principle. 4. Immeasur-
able in degree. 5. Blessed ‘in results.

Ver. 20. 1. The different aspects of
God’s covenant. Mercyto Abraham, truth
to Jacob, an oath to the fathers. 2. The
certainty of its performance. Spoken,
written, and sworn to. 3. The confidence
which this should beget in our minds.
God is mindfui of his people, and faithful
to his word. “ Thou wilt perform,” &c.


TO CHAPTER VII.


easily vanquish an unquiet spirit, but a
quiet spirit will as easily triumph over
the greatest sufferings [Brooks]. Ver. 9.
Indignation. Though of all burdens the
indignation of the Lord be the greatest
burden, yet Divine indignation is but a
light burden in comparison of sin, A
gracious soul can better stand under the
burden of God’s indignation for sin, than
it can stand under the burden of sin
itself, which hath kindled that indigna-
tion [Zbid.].

Ver. 12. From mountain to mountain
probably includes all subdivisions of our
habitable earth, as the words, from sea to
sea, had embraced it as a whole. For,
physically and to sight, mountains are
the great natural divisions of our earth.
Rivers are but the means of transit. The
Euphrates and the Nile were the centres
of the kingdoms which lay upon them.
Each range of mountains, as it rises on
the horizon, seems to present an insuper-
able barrier. No barrier should avail to
hinder the onflow to the Gospel. Isaiah
foretold that all obstacles should be
removed, “Every valley shall be exalted,”
&c. (xl. 4); so Micah prophesies from
mountain to mountain [ Pusey].

Ver. 18. Mercy and pardon. Mercy
hath but its name from misory, and is ne


CHAP. Vin.)


other thing than to lay another's misery
to heart [Binney]. The forgiveness that
there is with God is such as becomes
him, such as is suitable to his greatness,
his goodness, and all other excellencies of
his nature; such as that therefore by
which he will be known to be God. It
is not like that narrow, difficult, halving,
and manacled forgiveness, that is found
among men; but it is full, free, bot-
tomless, boundless, absolute; such as
becomes his nature and his excellencies
[ Owen].
Vers. 19, 20. A merchant that keeps
a book of debit and credit, writes both
what is owing him, and what he oweth
himself, and then casteth up the whole ;
out God does not so, his mercy is
§


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MICAH.


461


triumphant over his justice, and there
fore he wipes out what we owe him,
and writes down what he owes us by
promise; much like the clouds that
receive ill vapours from us, yet returning
them to us again in sweet refreshing
showers [Nath. Shute, 1626]. Truth.
The revolutions caused by the progress
of truth are always beneficial to society,
and are only burthensome to those who
deceive and oppress [Du Marsais|. The
light of God’s truth must not be left to
burn secretly within the recesses of the
sanctuary, but must be applied to the
kindling of a thousand torches in the
hands of those who are commissioned to
carry it forth into the thick darkness of


a sinful world [Blomfeld]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


On


NAHUM.


INTRODUCTION.


Taz Waiter. Little is known concerning the Prophet Nahum. He was eé
uative of Elkosh (ch. i. 1); and prophesied soon after Isaiah and Micah, viz., after
the carrying away of the ten tribes by the Assyrians (B. 0. 721), and after the
destruction of the army of Sennacherib at the walls of Jerusalem (B. c. 712), and
before the fall of Nineveh [ Wordsworth].

Tue Book. It is the complement and the counterpart of the book of Jonah,
says Pusey. Nineveh repented after Jonah’s preaching, and God was represented
as merciful. But in the time of Nahum the city had fallen into violence, and the
judgment of God is proclaimed. Nineveh had no more place for repentance, and
the Prophet pronounces sentence. Both books form connected parts of one moral
history.

Contents. The phrase, “the burden of Nineveh,” intimates that Nineveh is
the object of the prophecy. There are three parts. “The first (1) contains the
introduction (1—10) and the theme of the Prophet’s oracle (11—14). The second
(2) sets forth the calamity which should come upon the Assyrian empire. The
third (3) recapitulates the reasons for the judgments that should be thus inflicted,
and announces the certainty of their coming. The whole forms one continuous
composition.”

Sryyz. His poetry puts him in the first rank of Hebrew literature. His
sentences are brief, contain multum in parvo, as in the descriptions of God, the
siege of Nineveh, and the destruction of No-Ammon. ‘He is inferior to none of
the minor prophets, and scarcely to Isaiah himself, in animation, boldness, and
sublimity ; or to the extent and proportion of his book, in the variety, freshness,
richness, elegance, and force of his imagery, The rhythm is regular and singularly
beautiful ; and with the exception of a few foreign or provincial words, his
language possesses the highest degree of classical purity. His description of the
Divine character at the commencement is truly majestic ; that of the siege and fall
of Nineveh inimitably graphic, vivid, and impressive” [Henderson]. “In the
organism of Scripture, Nahum occupies an important position, not so much on
account of the theological as of the historical significance of his prophecy. Its


INTRODUCTION. 463








theological importance culminates in the representation of God, Jehovah, Sabaoth
(cf. ii. 13), as the actual Judge—a representation accurately adapted to the situa
tion of the world ; and this description is not essentially different from that in the
earliest public writings and those of the preceding prophets” [Lange]. Nahum
has also a message to men and nations in these latter days. If having received the
message of the Gospel from the Divine Jonah, which is Christ, they fall away by
unbelief, as it was predicted by Christ and his Apostles (Luke xviii. 8; Matt.
xxiv. 12; 1 Tim. iv. 1), that many do, then they may see their destiny in the
prophecy of Nahum, foretelling the misery and shame, confusion, overthrow, and
desolation of the great city of Nineveh, which is the prophetic type of the sin and
doom of the Infidel form of Anti-Christianism [ Wordsworth}


464 BuUMILETIC COMMENTARY : NAHUM. [cHaP. 1








Ee nr TT


CHAPTER L


Critica, Norss.] Burden] (Vulg. onus), from a word to lift up, a tnreatening utterance ; some,
heavy and full. 2. Jealous], (words from the decalogue), to be warm. Burns against those who hate
him (Deut. vi. 15). The term indicates feeling of injured right, and strong inclination for justice.
Furious] Lit. a /ord or master of fury: a master of dreams, ¢. ¢ a dreamer, &. Reserveth]}
Applied to God, sig. to keep or bear wrath (Lev. xix. 18: Ps. ciii. 9). 8. Acquit] Ciear the
guilty (Ex, xx. 7; xxxiv. 7). Dust] Light dust easily raised. 4 Rebuketh) (Matt. vi. 26). 5.]
Fruitful districts fade under his wrath. Burned] Lit, lifts itself as in an earthquake (Ps, Ixxxix. 10),
kence to burn asa flame. 6, Abide] Stand up before wrath poured out like fire from a volcano,
which rends rocks to pieces (1 Kings xix. 11: Jer. xxiii. 29), 7. Strong] A fortress. Knoweth]
Stands emphatically for the knowledge with which God fosters and provides for his elect, and which
is experienced vy them (Hos. xiii, 5) [Lange], 8. Over.] Judgment by invading armies, sweeps
through the land like overwhelming floods (cf, Ps, xlii. 7: Isa, viii. 7, 8: Hab. iti, 10), 9.] The
city must be destroyed and its inhabitants perish. Imagine] By means of defence to ward off
danger, Second] time from Assyria (cf. Isa. li, 17—23: 2 Sam. xx. 10). 10. Thorns] twisted
together, to appear inseparable, and present a bristling front (2 Sam. xxiii. 6, 7). Drunken]
Assyrian kings proverbial for intemperance and revelry. 11. One] Sennacherib, Thee] From
Nineveh itself arises its own ruin. Counsellor) Lit. a counsellor of Belial, worthless and bad;
designs to overthrow the kingdom of God (Isa, xxxvi, 14—20). 12—14.] Repeat the truths
of 9—11. Good to Judah, and evil to Assyria, predicted. Quiet] In tranquil security; or
complete with unbroken ranks and number, with everything necessary for a successful siege. ‘The
word may also be designed to convey the idea of mental completeness, t.e in this connexion,
scourity, martial courage”’ [Hend.]. Cut] Mown down like the harvest (2 Kings xix. 35: Isa,
Xxxvil. 36, sf Give .historical facts. 18. Yoke] The tribute to Assyria (cf. Isa. x. 27: Jer.
ii, 20), 14.) The name and power of Assyria to become extinct. Sown] The seed or race to
be for ever destroyed, at destruction of Nineveh the dynasty would not be perpetuated. Gods]
Every kind of images (Deut. xxvii, 15), (See Layard’s Nineveh and its Remains, on Idol. of Assyria.)
House] The palace considered sacred. Make] ¢. ¢. the house of thy gods, thy grave. Sennacherib
slain during worship (2 Kings xix. 37). Vile] Because when weighed according to moral standards
worthless (Job xxxi. 6), found light (Dan, v. 27). 15.] This verse joined to ch. ii. in Heb. text,
and nearly like (Isa. lii. 7). Here deliverance from Assyria, not Babylon. Tidings] Overthrow
of Sennacherib, Mountains] No longer covered with hostile camps to prevent keeping feasts,
Peace] and deliverance, ¢.¢, great yearly feasts of thanksgiving, Wicked] Lit, Belial (ver. 11),


marg. == Sennacherib. ‘This is a wonderful type of Gospel events; salvation through Christ, vietory
over sin, death, and hell,


HOMILETICS.
Tus Servants BurpDEN.— Verse 1,


be verse we have the substance and object, the form and author, of the whole
prophecy.

I. The nature of the burden. A burden is something heavy and important.
1. The commission from God was a burden. An awful responsibility, a solemn
duty imposed upon the messenger. Who is sufficient for these things? 2. The
commission was a burden upon the mind of the prophet. He was not reluctant to
obey, but its solemnity weighed heavily upon him. He had to threaten judgment
upon his fellow-creatures, to be faithful in his threatening, and declare the whole
message from God. His duty was a burden. He was deeply sensible of its
import, of his own unworthiness and weakness. This is the spirit of all true
servants, “A dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me.” II. The form
of the burden. “The book of the vision.” 1. It was first a vision to the prophet.
He saw what he uttered. He had a commission from God, and spoke in God’s
authority. We should always testify what we have seen, and declare what we have
been taught. Some speak a vision of their own heart (Jer. xxiii. 16) ; but God’s
servants see the vision of the Almighty. 2. Then the vision was recorded in a


OHAP, I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. 465
ee mee ee


book. Reason teaches us to write laws and record events in a book. God’s
prophets were taught to pen their thoughts in a permanent form for the benefit
of future ages. ‘ Many a man lives a burden to the earth ; but a good book is the
precious life-blood of a master-spirit, embalmed and treasured up on purpose to a
ufe beyond life.” III. The object of the burden. “The burden of Nineveh.
Nineveh repented once, but returned to its wicked ways again. The first was a
message of mercy, the second one of judgment. If men despise warnings they must
expect rebukes. Employed by God to chastise, Nineveh sought to destroy the
chosen people. Now God will punish the city, and its last state will be worse than
the first. If men return to their former sins because judgment is not executed, if
they cease to do the good they once begin, then God will withdraw his promised
favour. ‘If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent
of the good. wherewith I said I would benefit them.”


JEHOVAH a JEALOUS Gov.— Verses 2—5.


God’s judgments are traced to God’s jealousy as the cause of them. His honour
is injured. _ His tender feeling for his people is wounded, and though punishment
is suspended for a time, eventually it is certain and severe.

I. God’s jealousy is connected with God’s long-suffering. “The Lord is
slow to anger.” Towards enemies even God is long-suffering. For one hundred
years he had endured the wickedness of the Assyrians. Judgments are often
delayed. 1. This delay is not through weakness. ‘ Great in power.” Men cannot
execute their vengeance because they lack power. But God has all power, and can
accomplish his will at all times. 2. This delay is not remission of punishment. He
“ will not at all acquit the wicked.” There is a limitation of mercy. He will not clear
the guilty, nor leave them unpunished. He is not insensible to violations of his
law, nor dilatory to vindicate his justice. Sinners have a respite in love, but not
a reprieve in weakness. All who abuse his long-suffering will smart at last. “ For
the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God.” II. God’s jealousy
is often provoked to vengeance. “And the Lord revengeth.” Vengeance is a
defect, and censured in man. Here it is predicated of God three times. 1. Vengeance
is associated with provocation. Slow to anger, he can be provoked, His jealousy
has the warmth of love and the fire of wrath. ‘ The coals thereof are coals of fire,
which hath a most vehement flame.” 2. Vengeance is associated with mastery.
“ And is furious,” a master of fury, one who has anger under control. He is Lord
_ of vengeance. ‘One who, if he pleases,” says Grotius, “can most readily give
effect to his fury.” 3. Vengeance is associated with ewecution. He reserves
wrath for his enemies, not because he is angry, but because he is slow to anger.
He allows it to accumulate, before execution. But he “ will take vengeance on his
adversaries.” (a) This execution is swift. He comes in the storm and the whirl-
wind (ver. 3). He sweeps men away swift as the wind. “ As the whirlwind
passeth, so is the wicked no more.” (5) This execution is easy. The clouds are
the mere dust of his feet. As man walks upon the dust, so Jehovah tramples upon
the clouds, as the light dust of his feet. (c) This execution is mysterious. “Clouds
and darkness are round about Him.” His purpose and his agents are often concealed,
until they break upon the guilty like a lightning flash. (d) This execution is often
terrible. The heavens above and the earth beneath feel the shock of his wrath.
The sea is rebuked by his power, and the fertility of the land is consumed by his
presence. The mountains quake and the hills melt; all nature trembles beneath
his anger. No one can stand before fury like this. The strongest will quail, the
hardest will melt. ‘Let all the earth fear the Lord; let all the inhabitants of
the world stand in awe of him.”


30


466


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM.


[cHaP. LL.


ee


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. The Burden. The Bearer. The
Destination. ‘He first defines the object
of the prophecy, whereto it looks; then
states who spake it, and whence it was”
[ Pusey].

Ver. 2. The titles of God rise in awe;
first, intensely jealous and Avenger ; then
an Avenger and a Lord of wrath; the
master of it (not as man, mastered by
it); having it to withhold or discharge ;
yet so discharging it, at last, the more
irrevocably on the finally impenitent
[Lbied. t

The justice and severity of God should
be contemplated. 1. As a warning to
his enemies to deter them from evil. 2.
As a consolation to his people to help
them in trouble.

Ver. 3 Mercy, omnipotence, and jus-
tice. 1. The first attribute of God.
“Slowtoanger.” Because he never smites
without first threatening. He is very
slow to threaten. When God threatens,
how slow he is to sentence the criminal !
And when the sentence is signed and
sealed, how slow to carry it out! Trace
the attribute to its source. Why is God
slow to anger? Because he is infinitely
good. Because he is great. 2. The
connecting link. A great reason why
he is slow, because he is great in power.
He that is great in power can restrain
himself, and is greater than he that takes
a city. When God’s power restrains
himself, then it is power indeed. If he
were less of a God than he is, he would
long ere this have sent forth thunders
and emptied the magazines of heaven.
Bless God that the greatness of his
power is our protection. 3. The last
and most terrible attribute; He will not
at all acquit the wicked. Unfold this
first of all, then trace it to its source.
God will not acquit the wicked. Never


once has he blotted out sin without
punishment. Calvary proves the truth
of that. The wonders of vengeance in
the Old Testament and hell itself are
proofs of the text. Trace this terrible
attribute to its source. Why is this?
God will not acquit the wicked, because
he is yood. Goodness itself demands
the punishment of the sinner. The
justice of God demands it. If in Christ,
never be afraid of God’s power. If not
fled for refuge, then God will noé acquit,
but punish. Reprieved but not par-
doned art thou. Reprieve will soon run
out, haste to the refuge [ Spurgeon].

Way in the whirlwind. | The venge-
ance of God comes at last swiftly, vehe-
mently, fearfully, irresistibly [Pusey].

Clouds the dust. 1. God hidden in
his ways. Clouds are round about him.
Deep and unsearchable in his counsels.
1. God powerful in his wavs. Treading
on the clouds, and making them as dust
to his feet. 2. God terrible in his ways
(vers. 4 and 6). Not difficult to put the
elements in motion to destroy Nineveh
or impenitent sinners. Great things to
us are small with him. All nature
subject to his control.

Vers. 4, 5. The quaking of all things
in the presence of an angry God.
Celestial and terrestrial agencies subserv-
ient to the purpose of God, (a) in
punishing the wicked, (6) in protecting
his people. ‘The huge roots of the.
towering mountains are torn up when
the Lord bestirs himself in anger to
smite the enemies of his people. How
shall puny man be able to face it out with
God when the very mountains quake
with fear? Let not the boaster dream
that his present false confidence will
support him in the dread day of


wrath.”


HOMILETICS.


Gop’s Goopness anD ANGER.— Verses 6, 7.


Note two things in these words.
I. Jehovah’s anger.


l. Zé is real.


Human theories of it are not always


true. They are got up to persuade the sinner that he has no need to be alarmed
for guilt. But God’s words are true—not exaggerations. 2. It 1s righteous. Not


CHAP, 1} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY NAHUM. 467





the rage of selfishness nor personal offence ; but the anger of a righteous judge
against sin, dishonoured right and insulted law. There is nothing in it unjust or
arbitrary. 3. Jtis terrible. Though calm, itis awful and overwhelming. No power
or numbers can withstand it. Expulsion from Paradise, the flood, the ruin of
Sodom, and the destruction of the ungodly, are specimens. 4. It is inexorable.
Nothing can turn it aside or quench it when kindled. II. Jehovah’s goodness.
He is good, and doeth good; kind to the unthankful and unholy. 1. His goodness
is sincere. He does not utter words and feelings which are not in him. His words
mean what they say, his deeds what they indicate. “God is not man that he
should lie.” 2. His goodness is powerful. Almighty goodness. He is able tu
deliver those whom he loves. Their interests are safe in his hands. 3. His
goodness is watchful. His eyes are upon us at all times, expecially in trouble.
An unsleeping eye, an untiring hand, never weary of blessing, ever delighting to
love and help us. 4. His yoodness is unchanging. Without variableness like
himself, ever flowing and not ebbing. Not like the tides and the seasons, his heart
changes not. But the great day of his wrath will come. Judgment lingers not.
He spares in pity, not willing that any should perish. Turn unto him, &e.
[Dr. H. Bonar.]}


Tue TrivumpH or FaitH.— Verse 7.


Here we have a beautiful description of the security and comfort of those who
trust in God in the day of distress.

I. God a Protection. Not armies, fleets, and fortresses.
refuges of lies. He is the only accessible, impregnable, delightful shelter. IT.
God a Comfort. “The Lord is good.” Good in himself and to others. His
goodness is spontaneous, undeserved, and boundless; consistent with the perfec-
tions of his character, and adapted to the wants of our nature. III. God a Friend.
“He knoweth.” He not merely perceives and understands; but approves,
acknowledges, and takes delight in us. He “takes pleasure in them that fear him,
in them that hope in his mercy.” God is our friend. His attitude to us is like
that to Abraham: “I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse
thee.”


All other refuges are


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 7. The Lord is Good. He is
essentially—immutably good—infinitely
good. The good of all creation is
derived from him. “He is good to all,
and his tender mercies are over all his
works.” But goodness does not appear
in its highest forms here. These crea-
tures never forfeited care and kindness.
We have rebelled, and as children of
disobedience deserve wrath. Yet he
spares us, and provides for us—fitted up
the world with sights, sounds, and
relishes to our appetites. But if the
bounties of nature and providence were
stopped, we could say, “ Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that God
loved us,” &c. This ensures every other
blessing. ‘‘ He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him freely give


us all things?” This involves every
other. He is “all in all.” By him and
in him we are “blessed with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places ” [Jay].
The Lord a Stronghold. From whence
does this trouble arise? From danger?
He is our strength for protection. “The
Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid?” ‘‘We are more than
conquerors.” From duty? He is the
strength to assist. If oppressed with a
sense of our inability, “our sufficiency
is of God.” From affliction? He is our
strength to support and deliver. If he
does not release, he sustains and com-
forts. ‘My grace is sufficient for thee.”
Whatever the nature and degree of
affliction, in God we find a “very pre
sent help in the day of trouble” (Jay).
Vers, 7, 8. God a refuge to his people,


468 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. (cHar. 1








who are safe, happy, and cared for in his completely destroyed. God’s people only
protection. God a terror tu their ene- afflicted for a short time, but of the
mies, who are overwhelmed with calami- wicked he will make “an utter end.”
ties (flood), pursued with darkness, and


HOMILETICS.
ResistaNcg TO GoD POWERLESS.— Verses 9-—11.


Nahum now turns to the invaders, boldly challenges them for their opposition
to Jehovah, again describes their ruin, and for the encouragement of the Jews, adds
that they should not be annoyed any more.

I. Resistance to God in its nature. “ What do ye imagine against the Lord!”
1. Resistance in thought. “Imagine.” They thought that they had to do with a
weak people, and would gain an easy victory. But they had to encounter God.
It is vain presumption to plot against him. “ There is no wisdom, nor understanding,
nor counsel against the Lord.” 2. Resistance in word. Many imagined evil, but
one leader was specially prominent in counsel. Sennacherib in the mouth of
Rabshakeh advised worthless and wicked plans (ef. Isa. xxxvi. 14—20). Crafty
counsellors are most mischievous, and often bring ruin upon themselves and their
country. 3. Resistance in act. Plots ripen into enterprises. Wicked thoughts
lead to denial of God’s power and providence ; to contempt of God’s people, and
opposition to God’s purpose. He sent “ to reproach the loving God” (2 Kings xix.
16), and blasphemed “against the Holy One of Israel” (ver. 22). II. Resistance
in its method. The metaphors of ver. 10 may be taken in many senses. Briars
and thorns denote hostile armies (Isa. x. 17; xxvii. 4). 1. Resistance combined.
“ Closely interwoven as thorns.” They strengthen one another, and are inveterate
towards God. Like the military phalanxes of antiquity, they were armed and
arranged to present a bold front. Thorns, “because they cannot be taken with
hands” (2 Sam. xxiii. 6). 2. Resistance audacious. Flushed with success, the
Assyrians regarded themselves as invincible, and gave themselves to wine and revelry.
Benhadad was smitten while drinking in his pavilions (1 Kings xx. 16) ; Belshazzar
was feasting when Babylon was taken (Dan. v. 1—30). Yet in this condition
men have the audacity to resist God. Intoxicated with pride they are prepared
for their fall. III. Resistance in itsend. Men’s devices are idle when God works.
1. The people were prepared for ruin. ‘They shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.”
Dry stubble easily takes fire, and thorns folded together are ready for the flames.
Wicked men are often compared to stubble, and God’s judgments to devouring fire,
Those who defy God’s will only fit themselves for the fire that is never quenched.
2. Ruin was certain. ‘He makes an utterend.” The destruction is absolutely fixed
and sure. No second attempt will be made. One stroke of the Angel destroyed
the Assyrian armies. One blast from heaven levelled Nineveh in the dust. Now
Nineveh—great Nineveh—the pride of its inhabitants, the terror of its neighbours,
and the envy of the world, has fallen. Its celebrity ceased, and its site for ages
remained unknown—

‘* Behold the pride of pomp,
The throne of nations fallen, obscured in dust,


Even yet majestical—the silent scene
Elates the soul” [Dyer].


Tae DszstrvcTion oF THE ENEMY, AND THE REDEMPTION oF Gop’s
ProPpLe.— Verses 12—15.


Here good is predicted to Judah, and evil to the enemy. One shall be purified
and restored, the other utterly annihilated.

I. The destruction of the enemy. The Prophet notices their present condition,
and contrasts it with future ruin. 1. They are unbroken in strength. “Though


CHAP, I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. 469





they be quiet.” If they be entire, sound and unharmed, perfect in warlike prepara-
tions, that will not avail them. 2. They are undiminished in number. “ And
likewise many.” Their numbers were unimpaired and great. Hezekiah thus
exhorted the people: “ Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for
the King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him” (2 Chron. xxxii,
7). 3. They are securein tranquillity. “Quiet,” that is, without fear, and perfectly
safe. They were free from attacks, and securely fortified, but not against God.
They pictured an easy march and a splendid victory in the land, “‘ When he shall
pass through ;” but the vast host was swept away in a single night. Notice their
future. 1. Idolatry will be destroyed. ‘Out of the house of thy gods will I cut
off the graven image,” Their gods in the temple, graven and molten, would not
help them, nor be spared by the enemy. God has a controversy with all kinds of
idols. The fate of a nation is often bound up with the fate of its God. 2. The
dynasty would be extinguished. “No more of thy name be sown.” If not
immediately, yet eventually the Assyrian line would cease. God commanded this,
and it was certain to happen. Their splendid renown would fade away and their
name be cut off. The race would be cut down without chance of springing again.
“The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of
them from the earth.” 3. The palace would be turned into a grave. “Twill make
(the house of thy gods) thy grave.” The temple was polluted by slaughter, and
converted into a sepulchre (Isa. xxxvii. 38; 2 Kings xix. 37). Men perish in the
things in which they seek refuge." The Assyrian power was destroyed. God
made a grave for its idols and its people. All were vile and light ; found wanting
when weighed in the balance (Dan. v. 27). Whatever honour man set upon them,
they were lightly esteemed by God. Wickedness in religious and political life
brings contempt and ruin upon a nation. “The seed of evil-doers shall never be
renowned.”


“ God needs no indirect nor lawless course
To cut off those who have offended Him ’’ [Shakespeare].


II. The redemption of God’s people. Deliverance from the enemy would be
followed by restoration of worship and peace. All sorrow would end, and every
cause of fear be overcome. 1. Deliverance would be enjoyed. Thenews would be
proclaimed and welcomed throughout the kingdom. If to Sophocles the hands
and feet of any one who went on errands of mercy were beautiful, how much more
should the heralds of the gospel be received by all who hear them. (1) Deliverance
from affliction. “Though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.” The
bitter potion will not be repeated, unless there be real necessity. God doth
not afflict willingly, and former trials should not hinder faith in present good.
(2) Deliverance from the enemy. Servitude no longer. (a) From the yoke of the
enemy. A victorious army shall no longer tax and oppress. ‘“ Now will I break
his yoke from off thee.” (b) From the fear of the enemy. He shall be completely
subdued, and no trace of his steps left behind. He will be cut off in spirit,
number, and existence. ‘The wicked shall no more pass through thee.” 2. Worship
would be restored. Solemn feasts would be kept. The free use and thorough
enjoyment of religious ordinances would be restored. Vows would be performed,
and gratitude continually abound. The ransomed of the Lord would return to
Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads. It is our privilege to behold
the feet of those who publish peace with God and salvation through Christ. If
we believe we may keep our feasts in gladness, and anticipate the glory of that
temple into which the wicked never enter.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 12. Cut down like grass in a_ tion, and the ease with which it is done.
field. The completeness of the destruc- Greatness and number nothing with God.


470


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : NAHUM.


“CHAP. I.


a a FT EE PTR RY A ET SGT


Ver. 13. The affliction of the Church,
“Yoke.” The method of deliverance.
“ Break his yoke.” The agent who
works it. “J will break.” ‘By the
strength of my hand I have done it”
(Isa. x. 13), The time in which it is
done. “God, lest his own should de-
spair, does not put them off altogether
to a distant day, but saith now” [Pusey].

Ver. 14. It is sufficient ground of
assurance for the coming to pass of
greatest things, that the Lord hath
determined they should be; for, this is


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. Burden. He who possesses
the virtues required in the care of souls,
should not take upon him the priestly
office, unless constrained to it; and he
who knows he has them not, should not
take it upon him, even though he were
compelled to it [Gregory].

Ver. 2. Vengeance. When God sees
it necessary to vindicate the honour of
his justice to the world, he doth it with
that severity which may make us appre-
hend his displeasure ; and yet with that
mercy which may encourage us to repent
and return unto the Lord [Sidlingfleet].

Ver. 3. Slow. God delays the punish-
ment of wickedness, and does not strike
presently, for a glorious manifestation of
his holy attribute of patience. His two
great attributes of justice and mercy, the
full season of their manifestation upon
the vessels of wrath and mercy, is at an
end at the great day of reckoning [Bp.
Browning\.

Vers. 3, 4. This passage is so sublime,
says one, that it would be difficult to
find its equal. May the reader’s heart
adore the God before whom the uncon-
scious earth and sky act as if they recog-
nized their Maker, and were moved with
a tremor of reverence. “Vain are the
attempts of men to conceal anything
from him whose word unbars the deep,
and lifts the doors of earth from their
hinges! Vain are all hopes of resistance,
fur a whisper of his voice makes the
whole earth quail in abject terror”
[ Spurgeon].

Ver. 7. ° He who avails himself of a
refuge is one who is forced to fly. It is


given as a sure ground of Assyria’s ruin,
that the Lord hath given a command-
ment, or purposed their destruction, his
purpose concluding as effectually the
concurring of all means to bring it about,
as if they were especially commanded.
Name. “The Lord doth justly root out
the memory of such persons or states, as
make it their only work to get a name
on earth, and to be eminent and terrible ;
for such is Assyria’s doom: no more of
thy name shall be sown” [ Hutcheson),


TO CHAPTER I.


a quiet retreat from a pursuing enemy.
And there are trials, and temptations,
and enemies, from which the Christian
does best to fly. He cannot resist them.
They are too strong for him. His wisdom
is to fly into the refuge of the secret
place of his God, to rest under the
shadow of the Almighty. His strength
is to sit still there (Isa. xxx. 7) [B. M.
Duncan}.

Vers. 8—12. When God shakes men
as dust from under the summer thrash-
ing-floor, the right hand of a man’s
strength is as powerless as the left hand
of a man’s weakness, and his wisdom is
as folly. What avails the wisdom of
the apple to make it cling to the bough
when it is ripe in autumn time? or the
wisdom of the leaf to hold it fast to the
stem when the tempest calls? or the
wisdom of the tree to make it stand
secure when a rock from the cliff comes
crashing down throughits puny branches?
When God sends storms upon men, they
must imitate the humble grass, which
saves itself by lying down. Therefore it
is said, ‘‘ Humble yourselves before the
mighty hand of God, that in due season
he may raise you up” [H. W. Beecher].

Ver. 14. Name. Thou mayest choose
whether thou wilt be remembered to
thy praise or to thy shame [Bishop
Pilkington).

“ He left a name, at which the world grew pale,

‘Yo point a moral, or adorn a tale.’’

[Samuel Johnson. ]


Ver. 15. Peace, newly granted by the
grace of God, was to be celebrated by a


CHAP. II.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM ary








new consecration of the people. This has already appeared in Christ, by which
has special reference to the king of the Belial, from whom every wicked
Nineveh and Assyria, and the promise  spiritproceeds, is for ever cast out [ Lange?
must have been very precious to con-

temporaries oppressed by Assyria. But “Come, and begin Thy reign


to us the fundamental truth is far more C ee Sree Pee to Thyself
’ fe} shied)


important, that to the people of God a Great King of Righteousness” [Bonart
perfect deliverance is near at hand, and


CHAPTER II.


CriticaL Nores. Dasheth] Lit. disperser. Keep] in Judah peace, in Nineveh tumult. Watch]
for the enemy. Loins] Prepare for conflict (Job xl. 7). very means of defence will be necessary,
2.] The Lord hath chastised Judah and Israel, and permitted the enemy to triumph; now the
excellency of Israel, the former independence, shall be restored. Empat Devastations, taken from
vine-pruning and cutting young twigs (Psal. lxxx. 9). 8, Red] with blood or paint, or overlaid
with copper. Scarlet] Crimson, the fighting dress of the nations, Torches] Chariot-wheels like
flaming torches in rapidity and motion (Isa, v. 28). Day] of equipment; to prepare, to equip for
battle (Jer. xlvi. 14: Ezek, vii. 14). Fir trees] Shields and lances made of fir, brandished and
thrown with destructive power. 4. Rage] The chariots, driven in fury, jostle one against another,
and run as lightning (Luke x. 18), in the market-place of the city. 5, He] King of Nineveh, shall
muster choicest troops. Worthies] Heroes or brave men (Judg. v. 13; Neh. iii. 5), Stumble}
through fear and haste. Defence] The covering used by besiegers. 6.] From the siege the
prophet passes rapidly to the capture of the city. Gates] The rivers round the city break their
sluices and overflood it. %. Huzzab] Probably Nineveh; some, the queen of Nineveh. Like a
queen she shall be dethroned and dishonoured; her maids mourn like doves over her fate (Isa, xxxviii.
14). Tabering] Beating their breasts, a mournful attitude (Luke xviii, 23). 8. Old] From
antiquity hath been like a pool of water; the confluence of people from ail parts, like countless
drops ; an unbroken empire for 600 years. Stand] Stand is the ery, but all flee away. 9. Take]
God bids the conquerors to plunder, ‘This does not happen by chance, but because God determines
to avenge the injuries inflicted upon his people” [Calvin]. 10. Empty] Lit. emptiness, and
emptiedness and waste. The city is left, without its wealth and monuments, a complete ruin. The
vanquished are horrified at the destruction, despond, can hardly keep on their feet, and turn pale.
‘The completeness of her judgment is declared first under that solemn number, Three, and the three
words in Hebrew are nearly the same, with the same meaning, only each word fuller than the
former, as picturing a growing desolation; and then under four heads (in all seven) ; also a growing
fear” [Pusey]. 11. Where] is the site on which the mighty city once stood? Its warriors crushed
the nations like Zions in their lust and power. ‘To fill up the picture, the epithets applied to the
lions are grouped together according to the difference of sex and age” [Kei/], 12.] Description of
tyranny and predatory lust of Assyrian kings. 18,] The destruction is certain —J against thee ;
God has proclaimed, and will fulfil it, Her war-chariots, ¢. e. the whole apparatus of war [Calvin],
will be consumed like smoke; imperial might shall no longer prey upon the nations, and emissaries,
vith the king’s commands or exacting tribute, shall be seen no more (Ezek, xix. 9).


HOMILETICS.
Tue Cavusz 4ND PREPARATIONS OF War.—Verse 1.


Whether these words be applied to the Jews defending Jerusalem, or to the
Ninevites defending their city against the Medo-Babylonian army, their meaning
is the same. They begin a lively description of the siege.

I. The cause of the war. “For the emptiers have emptied them out.” 1. The
Assyrians had oppressed God’s people. They had abused their power in the
chastisement of Israel, plundered the people, and outrageously destroyed their
vines. Now the emptiers must be emptied, and those who chastised others must
be chastised themselves. ‘ Power abused brings a curse upon its possessors. Power
gives temptation, which in turn sets. aside honour, social duty, law, and right;
creates abuse; and abuse, strife, confusion, retribution, bloodshed, sin” | Barley}.


472 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : NAHUM. {cHaP. Il.


Bn mr eS ee eas


2. God's purpose concerning his people was accomplished. The enemy falls, but God
will restore his people. He will re-establish the glory of Israel which Asshur had
destroyed. Its eminence, by virtue of its election, will no longer be tarnished,
God sees an excellency in his people which the world does not, and eventually will
make them “an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations,” II. The approach
of the enemy. “He that dasheth in pieces is come up.” Notice, 1. The nature
of the enemy. ‘The dasher in pieces,” not a hammer of war, but one whom God
employed to scatter other nations, The feeblest people, in God’s hands, may be a
terror to others The mightiest nations, intoxicated with success, and abusive of
their privileges, may be broken in pieces like a potter's vessel, 2. The nearness of
the enemy. ‘Before thy face.” Direct against her, face to face. Men are not
sensible of their danger, put the evil day far off, when it is nigh at hand. “Serious
things to-morrow,” said the ancient prince, who gave himself to revelry, and was
ruined with his kingdom. III. The defence of the city. Some take the words
ironically, and equivalent to a prediction. Thou shalt defend thyself, but all in
vain. The most powerful and courageous preparations are matters of derision
before God. 1. Keep the fortress. “Keep the munition.” Strong walls, though
unassailable by human skill, would not be secure. 2. Guard the avenues.
“‘Watch the way” by which the foe may come and repel him. Prevent entrance
into the city. 3. Encourage one another. ‘Make thy loins strong.” Gather up
courage, and let nothing be unemployed. Stand, having your loins girt about like
men (Ephes. vi. 14: Job xl. 7). 4. Resist mightily. “ Fortify thy power
mightily.” It is a desperate affair, no careless, timid defence will avail. Nor will
the utmost the wicked can do prevail against God. Impotent are all efforts of
defence when God has departed from a place. ‘The Lord hath opened his
armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation : for this is the
work of the Lord God of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans.”


Tue Great SigGk AND THE VAIN Derence.— Verses 3—7.


The assailing army is now described in its might and compactness, its warlike
appearance and design. Notice,

I. The besieging force. The order and equipment are graphically pictured.
1. The army ts formidable. Many are spoken of as one. The soldiers are valiant
and accustomed to victory, Divinely collected, and deterred by no foe. 2. The
army is terrific. Blood-red in uniform. Chariots like flames of fire, and spears
like waving forests. No quarter given. Like flames they intend to set all on fire.
3. The army is invincible. Its career has been triumphant, and its success is sure.
Against such generals as Cyrus the Younger and Alexander the Great, numbers
avail not. They appeared in the joyous splendour of Divine warriors (cf. 2 Kings
vi. 17), and in the colour of those who execute Divine judgments (Zech. i. 8:
Rev. vi. 4). The heroes are God’s heroes, and the bewilderment in the city is
from the power of God. II. The vain defence. :, The inhabitants are summoned
together, and no means of defence are neglected. 1. Brave men are summoned to
their post. ‘He shall recount his worthies.” All is at stake. The leaders
especially must set an example of courage. But they are struck with terror, run
in perplexity, and through fear or lack of strength fall, “stumble in their walk.”
They rush to the walls, but the enemies are already attacking under cover. It is
too late. 2. The river became an enemy to the city. The enemy had been three
times defeated. The city was intact, and the hosts were encamped before its gates
in vain, But a sudden inundation, more violent than usual, burst the sluices and
the mighty flood broke down the walls. 3. The royal citadel was destroyed.
“The palace shall be dissolved.” The king utterly despaired, shut himself up with
his slaves and concubines in his residence, kindled the whole and perished in the
flames. One ground of confidence after another failed. The mighty men, the


oHAP. Ii.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. 473


river and the temple, were no protection. Neither the palace of the princes nor
the temple of the gods can shelter those whom God will punish. “Of old the
funeral pile was erected ; yea, for the king it was prepared deep and large: it was
prepared with fire and much wood, and the breath of God, like a stream of brimstone,
kindles it.” 4. The inhabitants mourned. The people of the city, under the
figure of a captive woman ; and her maids, the lesser cities, as female attendants on
the royal city, were brought to shame and distress. (a) They were destroyed by
the flood, or (6) They were led captives, and (c) They grieved at their fate. Asa
queen Nineveh was dethroned and dishonoured. In helplessness and grief she
mourned as adove. If we do not repent in time no “ worthies” or “defence” will
turn away eternal lamentation and despair.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


The overthrow of the enemy of God
is not the work of men, but his work.
A disperser comes up; men would be
satisfied with the capture (cf. Obadiah)
[Lange].

Neither equipment, nor the appearance
of assembled power (ver. 2), nor capacity
of hasty movement and vehement and
varied activity (ver. 5) achieves victory
in the battles of the kingdom of God:
where God stands, there victory comes
[Lange].

Thus ver. 3- describes the attack ;
ver. 4 the defence ; the two first clauses
of ver. 5 the defence, the two last the
attack [Pusey].

Ver. 5. If kings rely more upon their
heroes and armies than upon God, they
must become discouraged and flee before
their enemies [Lange].

Ver. 6. The palace dissolved. The
prophet unites the beginning and the
end. The river gates were opened;


what had been the fence against the
enemy became an entrance for them:
with the river there poured in also the
tide of the people of the enemy. The
palace, then the imperial abode, the
centre of the empire, embellished with
the history of its triumphs, sank, was
dissolved, and ceased to be. It is nota
physical loosening of the sun-dried bricks
by the stream which would usually flow
harmless by; but the dissolution of the
empire itself [ Pusey].

Nahum predicted the destruction of
the city in its grandeur and prosperity.
Hence learn : 1. To adore the providence
of God in giving an exact and particular
account of the siege. 2. To fear the
power of God in collecting and employ-
ing such terrible forces to execute his
will. 3. To forsake sin, lest we should
be humbled and destroyed by the
judgments of God.


HOMILETICS.


Tax Fuicut oF THE INHABITANTS AND THE PLUNDER oF THE City.— Verses 8—10.


Nineveh was a wealthy and populous city. Like a pool of water in multitude


of men, but nothing could defend it.


I. The disgraceful flight.


“Yet they shall flee away.”


1. The people lost


courage. Effeminacy and lust beget weakness. God can dishearten the strongest
and most courageous. Patriotism and confidence flee apace, and men are helpless
as the reed when he pursues. 2. The people fled away. Panic seized them.
Deaf to the call of a few leaders, none looked back, took a stand, or stopped in the
flight, At Waterloo, Napoleon, observing the recoil of his columns and the
confusion of all around him, cried out, “ All is lost, save who can.” In Nineveh
the discomfiture and flight were complete. In the day of judgment none can save
themselves by flight. “he flight shall perish from the swift.” II. The extensive
plunder. Enormous wealth was treasured up in the city, Its reputation as a
commercial city rivalled Tyre (Ezek. xxvii. 23). Immense riches were acquired also
by predatory war and taxes levied to the utmost degree. 1. Its gold and silver


074 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. (cap. I.


nn


were taken. “Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold.” Riches cannot
deliver in the day of wrath. They rather tempt and entice the spoiler. Small
articles of value have been found in the ruins of Nineveh, but no gold nor silver.
“When thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled.” 2. Its pleasant furniture
was taken. ‘Glory out of all the pleasant furniture.” Everything considered
costly, vessels of desire, treasures and utensils that yielded glory and reputation,
were carried away. “The wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.” 3. Its
desolation was complete. “She is empty, and void, and waste.” (a) The city
itself was destroyed. Worldly wealth is vain, emptiness and poverty are the end
of worldly greatness. Those who heap up silver as dust, and prepare raiment as
clay, only provide for another’s booty (Job xxvii. 17). (6) The inhabitants were
terror-struck. Their hearts melted like wax before the fire, and their knees
trembled in weakness. Pain seized their loins, and paleness covered their faces.
A guilty conscience turns the most hardy into cowards. Nineveh’s strength failed
her in the day of need. The terror she had caused to Israel fell in just retribution
upon herself, and this storehouse of plunder was utterly laid waste and destroyed


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. Wealth may be treasured up
for ages, and increase in value and
abundance, yet not be secure. Of old,
yet flee away. Because God spares a
people, and permits them to prosper in
wickedness for a long time, it is no
proof of security from coming judgment.
Punishment is often sure and decreed ;
she shall be laid bare; they shall flee
away.

Vers. 9, 10. Learn the folly of de-
pending upon worldly resources. 1.
Wealth may be taken away. 2. Num-
bers may fail and flee away. 3. The
greatest defences may be levelled to the
dust. ‘The greatest kingdoms finally
come to nothing when the Lord inflicts
upon them his penal judgments, and all
their power is unable to quench and stop
the fire of his wrath” [Lange].

Ver. 10. The horrors of a_ guilty
conscience. 1. Desponding minds. 2.
Extreme pain. 3. Visible tokens of
approaching ruin. The state of mind
manifested in the attitudes of the body.


Natural men despair in adversity, sink
in courage when robbed of their earthly
goods. “It is certainly a great loss
when one loses money and goods, but
not so great as when the heart falls into
despair [Lange]. First, the heart, the
seat of courage, and resolve, and high
purpose, melteth ; then the knees smite
together, tremble, shake under their
frame; then much pain is in all loins,
lit. “strong pains as of a woman in
travail,” writhing and doubling the
whole body, and making it wholly
powerless and unable to stand upright,
shall bow the very loins, the seat of
strength (Prov. xxxi. 17); and lastly,
the faces of them all guther blackness
(cf. Joel ii. 6), the fruit of extreme pain,
and the token of approaching dissolution
[Pusey]. Joy ‘and sorrow will show
themselves in the face as in a glass.
Now if for a temporal mischief there is
so great a consternation in wicked men,
what shall we think there is in hell!
[Trapp]. :


, HOMILETICS.


Nineveu Erracep.— Verses 11—13.


The Prophet, beholding the destruction in spirit as having already taken place,
looks round for the site on which the mighty city once stood, and sees it no more.
This is the meaning of the question in ver. 11. He describes it as the dwelling-
place of lions. The point of comparison is the predatory lust of its rulers and
their warriors, who crushed the nations like lions, plundering their treasures, and
bringing them together in Nineveh [ Kei?].


I. Its site was obliterated. “Where is the dwelling of the lions,” & Great


OMAP, I1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. 476





must be the desolation to call forth such an expression. Where indeed is the
proud city? Its place was unknown for ages, and is only just discovered by the
ruins which have been dug up. It was secure, the dwelling of the lions ; spacious
walked ; and wealthy, the feeding-place of the young lions; but its battlements
were destroyed and its glory departed. The dust of Nineveh is a witness for the
truth of God, and a warning to the uations of the earth. ‘ Assyria lies buried
there with all its people; round about are their graves, all of them are slain and
fallen by the sword ; they have made their graves deep there below.” II. Its rulers
were overcome. Over 500 years this great city of God (cf. Jon. i. 3; iii. 2) was,
under its powerful rulers, the terror of Western Asia. Dynasty after dynasty had
transmitted its dreaded name to age after age. 1. Its rulers were strong. Like
lions in power and purpose, bent on plunder and mischief. They were greedy,
ravenous beasts, which could never be satisfied (Isa. lxvi. 11). - 2. Is rulers were a
terror to others. They tore others, and were not touched themselves. Exempt
from fear, they were a dread to surrounding peoples, “and none made them afraid.”
But the Lord of hosts was against them, and raised up one stronger than they.
‘“‘The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his
way ; he is gone forth from his place to make thy land desolate; and thy cities
shall be laid waste, without an inhabitant.” III. Its resources were destroyed.
Ver. 13 expresses her complete destruction. 1. Its military defences were destroyed.
“T will burn her chariots in the smoke.” Their chariots remarkable for speed and
lightness, their horses noted for fierceness and power, were fuel for the fire. All
their warlike preparations vanished into smoke, and not a brand was plucked from
the burning. 2. Their offspring were cut off. ‘The sword shall devour thy
young lions.” The flower of youth, their hope for the future, was cut
down. The whole race of oppressors was taken away. God in justice may
cut off those whom we seek to. enrich, and for whom we are so anxious to provide.
3. Their wealth was taken away. ‘I will cut off thy prey from the earth.” The
immense booty they had gathered by fraud and violence was robbed by the enemy.
4. Their agents were no longer seen. ‘The voice of thy messengers shall no more
be heard.” Emissaries exacting tribute or conveying the edicts of the king;
heralds and delegates travelling the provinces; messengers, uttering blasphemy and
publishing victory, “should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel.” God
had hushed them to silence, and the stillness of death prevailed. IV. Its destiny
was sealed. “ Behold, I come,” are words which seal and confirm the threat. God
had endured long, but came at last. The city was captured and destroyed. Its
ruins have never been revived, and Moslem tribes rear their hamlets on its barren
stones. ‘‘ Desolation meets desolation,” says Layard; ‘a feeling of awe succeeds to
wonder, for there is nothing to relieve the mind; to lead to hope, or to tell of what
has gone by. These high mounds of Assyria made a deeper impression upon me,
gave rise to more serious thought and more earnest reflection, than either the
temples of Baalbec or the theatres of Ionia.”


Conquerors proud, to seal her doom,
Swept her to ruin’s all-engulfing tomb.
Long ages past, and turf o’ergrew the walls,
And silence reigned in Ninus’ buried halls,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 11, 12. The lions. Oppression “The robbery of the wicked shall de
is brutish conduct. It turns palacesinto stroy them.”
dens, and princes into lions. “As a Ver. 13. God against the sinner. 1.
roaring lion and a raging bear; sois a God is declared to be against him.
wicked ruler over the poor people.” “Behold,” gc. 2. God has power te
Unrighteous gain is a risky bargain. fulfil his threats, “The Lord of Hosts.


476


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : NAHUM.


{cHar. I.





8. The results will be unmistakeable if
the opposition continues. Seek to be
reconciled to God. From the whole
chapter we may learn—1l. God’s hand
in destructive warfare. The wealth and
haughty bearing of Nineveh drew forth
the conquering army. The passions and
efforts of men were concerned, but they
only performed the pleasure of the


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1, 2. Dasher in pieces. Deme-
trius was surnamed Poliorcestes, the
destroyer of cities; Attilas called himself
Orbis flagellum, the scourge of the world.
Julius Casar was Fulmen belli, the
thunderbolt of war; he had taken in
his time a thousand towns, conquered
three hundred nations, took prisoners
one million of men, and slain as many.
hese were dissipatores indeed, and
dashers in pieces, rods of God’s wrath;
and this they took to be a main piece of
their glory [Zrapp].

Vers. 3, 4. Chariots were objects of
great interest. ‘‘ Their charioteers had
an air of perfect fearlessness; they
dashed along as if caring for nothing,
but resolved upon crushing everything.
These declarations are perfectly accurate,
and cannot be more evident than the
sculptures and bas-reliefs of Nineveh
have shown them to be. Their chariots
are represented, covered with costly
decorations and Sabean symbols; and
their horses are exhibited in almost
every variety of attitude—rearing, run-
ning and rushing—exactly as we should
have supposed them to be, after reading
that which is said of them in the pro-
phecies.”


Most High. 2. The vanity of human
greatness, Heaps of gold and silver are
not real possessions. A royal palace
and an imperial throne will crumble into
dust. “Empty and void and waste,”
may be inscribed on every earthly glory.


“They are but beggars that can count their
wealth ” [Shakespeare].


TO CHAPTER II.


The siege was no easy task. History
declares that the king, at the approach
of the enemy, collected all his active
forces—that the besieging army was
three times severely defeated, and that
the Medes could only be held with great
difficulty to the work. The Assyrians
abandoned themselves to negligent re-
joicing in the camps before the gates on
account of victory, but were attacked in
the night and driven back to the walls.
Salsemenes, brother-in-law to the king,
who had resigned the command to him,
was driven into the Tigris (cf. ch. iii. 3) ;
but the city was still uninjured,and the
enemy encamped in vain before the gates.
In the spring of the third year other
powers interfered. The river became “an
enemy to the city ” (ef. ii. 7; i. 8—10).
The inundation occurred suddenly, and
violently broke down in one night the
walls on the river. The king despaired
of his life, and having sent his family
to the north, shut himself up with all
his treasures, and burned himself in the
royal citadel. Immense booty was carried
away. The city was plundered, sacked,
and set on fire [Zange, Introduction to
Nahum].





CHAPTER IL


Crrricat Norzs.) The prophet resumes his description of the siege. Blood} Drops of blood shed


in murder [Keil]. Lies) Vain promises of help. Depart. ] Ceases not to plunder.


charges of war-cars.


2. Noise] In the


“ This passage is unrivalled by any other, either in sacred or profane literature ”


Hend.}, Riders dash along, the flame of the sword, the flash of the lance, and the multitude of the


slain, depict the attack and its consequences,


: [ 4. Whoredoms] The reason of the punishment; not
idolatry but selfishness, which under the guise of love sought the gratification of lust :


the crafty


policy to ensnare other States. Selleth] ¢. ¢. rob nations of ane bring them into bondage or make


them tributary (Deut. xxxii. 80: Ju


ii, 14).
metaphor of an harlot ;


|


\


}


5. Discover] Language suggested by preceding


referring to the custom of stripping captives, male and female, and exposing


CHAP. II.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. 477








them to nakedness and insult, 6. Gazing-stock] A warning to others (Ezek. xxviii. 17). 7.] She will
be an object of disgust, none will pity the devastated city, for her doom is deserved. 3} She will
share the fate of No--Amon, a royal city of Egypt, populous, sacred, and strong (Ezek. xxx. 14, 16;
Jer. xlvi. 25), like Nineveh well situated, protected by waters on every side. 9.] Allies numerous
and powerful, yet No (Thebes) could not preserve herself. 10.] Its inhabitants subjected to all the
cruelties and indignities generally inflicted upon conquered people. 11, Drunken] with the cup of
Divine anger. A refuge from the enemy sought and not found in other nations. 12, Strongholds}
All the fortifications will be easily taken, like ripe figs they will fall into the mouth of the gatherer
(cf, Is. xxviii. 4: Rev. vi. 13). 18. Women] Effeminate and timid, or weak and unable to offer
resistance (cf. Is, xix. 6: Jer. 1.37). 14, Draw] for a long-continued siege, improve fortifications,
put the kiln in order for burning bricks, 15. Make] Multiply thyself, like the largest and most
formidable locusts. 16.] Traders and merchants increased innumerable as the stars, but fire and sword
would devour all. 17. Crowned] rulers or vassal princes which encamp in the cold and flee away in
the sun. ‘The wings of locusts become stiffened in the cold; but as soon as the warm rays of the
sun break through the clouds, they recover animation and fly away.” 18. Shepherds] Princes and great
men, royal counsellors and deputies poe whom the government devolved. Sleep] in death. People]
The flock scattered and perished (cf. Num, xxvii, 17: 1 Kings xxii. 17). 19, Healing) Softening, or
anointing, no cure. Bruise] Fracture or ruin (Prov. xvi. 18: Lam, ii. 11).


HOMILETICS.
Great WICKEDNESS.— Verse 1.


The prophet in this chapter repeats and confirms the total ruin of Nineveh,
because of cruel oppression and blood. The wickedness of the city is set forth in
terrible aspects.

1. Cruel murder. “The bloody city.” Its prosperity was tainted with blood.
Unrighteous war, oppression of the poor, and manifold bloodshedding are the
indictment. ‘‘ Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and stablisheth a city
by iniquity!” ITI. Treacherous dealing. “It is all full of lies and robbery.”
Lies in word and act. Deceit with man, and hyprocrisy before God. Robbery
linked with lies, secret treachery and open violence. ull of wickedness. Integrity
and truth banished from them, and none upright for whose sake God might spare
the city. III. Constant rapine. “The prey departeth not.” She never ceased,
but continued to make a prey upon others. They neither repented nor grew weary
of iniquity. Avarice grew more intense, lusts were daily fed, and like a beast they
tore in pieces and greedily fed upon their prey. God specially marks and denounces
woe upon those who persevere in wicked courses. ‘“ Arise, go to Nineveh that
great city, and cry against it: for their wickedness is come up before me.”—


“ Who, stung by glory, rave and bound away,
The world their field and humankind their prey ” [ Young].


Great JUDGMENTS AND Great Sins.— Verses 2—4.


The sentence is enlarged, and the woe explained. Terrible are the preparations
of the enemy, and the noise of chariots and horsemen sounds already in the ears.
The city is filled with the dead, and the judgments of God are severe.

I. Great sins. ‘ Because of the multitude of the whoredoms,” &. 1. Bewitching
other nations. “The mistress of witchcraft.” As harlots try to dement and ensnare
by incantations, so Nineveh sought to draw others to her by subtle machinations.
The love of gain acts on multitudes like “ witchcraft.” They seduce others, hunt
after men in excessive lust, and lead them into idolatry and estrangement from God.
2. Enslaving other nations. ‘That selleth nations.” They have no scruples in the
use of unlawful means to get power and subdue others beneath their feet. Art and
politics, religion and wealth, were used to make the city great and universal.
3. Selfish aggrandizement. All her skill and artifice in ill-doing were employed to
gratify the desire of supremacy. Selfishness is often dressed in love to accomplish
its own ends. Religion is made subservient to worldly aims ; devilish arts enslave
man and offend God. Domestic sanctities are violated, the rights of men are


478 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. {[CHAP. 35.


a


trampled down, and justice is outraged. “Such ambition,” says Sir Walter Scott,
“ breaks the ties of blood, forgets the obligations of manhood.” II. Great judg-
ments. Men may glory in skill, increase in power, and pursue wickedness, but God
will have a reckoning with them. “ Because of the multitude,” &c. 1. Judgments
are prepared. “The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels,
and of the prancing horses,” &c. Military preparations are great: a formidable
army is advancing against the city with irresistible speed and power. The judgments
of God are (a) numerous, (b) ready for execution, and (c) will come with over.
whelming speed. When sins are small, God is often patient and long-suffering ;
but when they become notorious and we continue in them, then God will punish
them. 2. Judgments experienced. Before, all was beautiful and arranged to allure
in the city, but now how different the scene! Everything fills the ear with terror,
and the heart with sadness. (1) The dead innumerable. Death follows death in
rapid succession, “and there is a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcases.”
(2) The dead in every form. They are slain, and the bodies are carcases, corpses,
an oppressive number, without end. (3) The dead causing the living to stumble.
So great the multitude of those who perish, that they lie, a hindrance in every street.
“They stumble upon their corpses””—sad scene! an awful warning to others. “To
fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in mine anger and in my
fury, and for all whose wickedness I have hid my face from this city ” (Jer. xxxiii. 5).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Filled with deceit. Great hear the noise of the whip, the rattling


cities often great centres of wickedness.
Notice, 1. The wickedness, (a) deceit,
(b) violence, and (c) blood. God would
not have destroyed it on account of
idolatry or he would not have sent
Jonah ; his justice waited for the out-
break of greater violence and impious
deeds. 2. The degree of this wickedness.
“Tt is all full of lies.” ‘ She is wholly
made up of fraud and falsehcod, menda-
ciorum loquacissima; no truth in her
private contracts, no trust in her public
transactions and capitulations with other
nations; be they never so solemnly
confirmed, yet had they no longer force
with them than stood with their own
profit” [Trapp].

Ver. 2. Here we have, 1. The attack.
Eager and furious. Noise of whip,
rattling of wheels, &c. 2. The results of
the attack. ‘Tremendous slaughter, dead
bodies everywhere. ‘‘ Let those,” says
an old writer, ‘‘ that refuse to hear God’s
sweet words fear lest they be forced to


of the wheels, &c. (Ps. vii. 12,13: Luke
xix, 42—44: Prov.i. 24). The enemy
is sent to revenge the quarrel of God’s
covenant ; the red horse is at the heels
of the white” (Rev. vi. 4).

Ver. 4. The mistress of witcherafts.
The Hebrew not only indicates the
subtlety, but the ease by which the great
metropolis made itself the centre af
nations. 1. The dominion. “ Mistress,”
meaning power, control, and dominion.
2. The method of gaining thi lominion.
“Witchcraft.” Treacherous friendships,
and allurements, to ensnare and bind to
herself other nations. She decked her-
self like a prostitute to entice from God
into sin. But she will lose empire and
inhabitants, and become like a widow
destitute of children. ‘“ These two things
shall come to thee in a moment, in one
day—the loss of children and widow-
hood: they shall come upon thee in their
perfection for the multitude of thy
sorceries,” &c. (Is. xlvii. 9—12).


HOMILETICS.


RerTrisutivE PunisHMENtT.— Verses 5—7,


Nineveh is represented in her virgin splendour, and her pumishment under the
figure of that which is disgraceful to a woman (cf. Is. xlvii. 3, and Hab. ii 10).


CHAP. III. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : NAHUM. 478





God is against her, and her shame shall correspond to her conduct. As she
uncovered others, so shall she be uncovered.

I. She will be exposed to nakedness and shame. “I will discover thy skirts
upon thy face.” Her long flowing robes, which were part of her pomp and dignity,
but which veiled her misdeeds and pride, shall be lifted up as high as possible
(Jer, xiii, 22). She will be treated as a harlot, and stripped of her glory and defence.
Her face shall blush in fear, and the consciousness of guilt will be read in her features.
Nations shall see her nakedness, avoid and despise her. The same means will be
taken to display her lewdness that she used to commit it. “I will even gather
them round about against thee, will discover thy nakedness unto them, that they
may see all thy nakedness.” II. She will be disgraced and insulted. As
infamous harlots will she be treated. 1. Made a gazing-stock to men. ‘I will set
thee as a gazing-stock.”” The city once feared and renowned shall become a warning
to others, and exposed to public infamy. “I will cast thee to the ground ; before
kings will I give thee, for them to gaze upon thee.” 2. Treated with contempt by
God himself. “I will cast abominable filth upon thee.” She had done abominable
things before God (Jer. xiil. 27), which she had forgotten, but God will punish her
with abominable things. Filth shall be cast upon her and she will be made vile.
UI. She will be unpitied and forsaken. “It shall come to pass that all they that
look upon thee shall flee from thee.” Ste would be set to be gazed at, and the
effects on those who gaze are described. 1. Unpitied. ‘‘ Who will bemoan her?”
There will be none to comfort and relieve her. Unwept and unhonoured, she will
fall into the grave. Humau misery excites pity, but none pay Nineveh the tribute
of sympathy. Those who shuw no pity to others will find none for themselves.
2. Forsaken. ‘She had measured triendship by profit, and forsakén those who did
not trust in her. Now she is repayed, and becomes a terror to all round about her.
Such will be the portion of all who disregard God and live for self. They will be
stripped of all adornments, bereft of all comfort, and thrown into eternal misery.
“These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee t—desolation
and destruction, and the famine, and the sword; by whom shall I comfort thee?”


Tue Desstruction or Some a WarRNING TO OTHERS.— Verses 8—10.


There is no hope for Nineveh, for No-Amon was strong by nature and art, head
of many confederate nations ; yet was captured and destroyed. The city cannot
protect herself. Destruction is sure. Notice how one support after another is
taken away.

I. Natural defences will not avail. No was strongly fortified by nature and
art. She “ was situate among the rivers.” The Nile watered her fields and guarded
her walls. Her rampart was the sea. She was considered impregnable. No was
one of the grandest and most magnificent cities of antiquity. But no situation cau
shield from God’s anger. Nations may be secluded from others and encircled by
walls and seas, but God can overturn them. II. Large populations will not
avail. ‘“Populous No.” It was a great centre for corn and merchandise, and
attracted many people. It supplied the country round about with necessaries, But
it was no better or safer on account of its numerous inhabitants. ‘“ There is no king
saved by the multitude of. an host.” III. Confederate nations will not avail.
No’s allies were numerous and strong. Her military resources and Egyptian
auxiliaries were immense. Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength. Put and Lubim
were ready to help. But vast armies fail to maintain empires against the decree of
God. “The strongest battalions melt like snow-flakes when God is against them.”
The leagured might of earth is no match for the power of heaven, ‘The Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, saith ; Behold, 1 will punish the multitude of No, and
Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods and their kings,” &ec. (Jer. xlvi. 25, 26).


480





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : NAHUM.


[CHAP. O1.





HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. The ruined cities of antiquity
a warning to Christendom. Carthage,
Nineveh, and Jerusalem (cf. Matt. xi. 24:
Luke x. 12, 13). Warnings proportioned
to sins and privileges.

“Tt will help to keep us in holy fear
of the judgments of God,” says an old
author, “to consider that we are not
better than those that have fallen under
those judgments before us.”

Ver. 9. The weakness of all human
power before God. The fallacy of
trusting in numbers contrasted with
faithin God. “Lit. Hgypt was strength,
and Ethiopia, boundless. He sets forth
first the imperial might of No: then
her strength from foreign, subdued
power. The capital is a sort of imper-
sonation of the might of the State; No,
of Egypt, as Nineveh, of Assyria. When
the head was cut off, or the heart ceased
to beat, all was lost. The might of
Egypt and Ethiopia was the might of
No, concentrated in her. They were
strength, and that strength unmeasured


by any human standard. Boundless was
the strength which Nineveh had sub
dued : boundless the store (2—10) which
she had accumulated for the spoiler ;
boundless the carcases of her slain”
[Pusey].

Vers. 8—10. 1. How firm the stand-
ing of Nineveh. Surrounded by water,
defended by inner and outer walls,
endless in wealth, and powerful in con-
federacies. 2. How fatal the fall of
Nineveh. (1) Overcome notwithstand-
ing might. “ Yet was she carried away.”
She became an exile, and her people
carried into captivity with heathen bar-
barities, (2) All hope of recovery
destroyed. (a) Young children were
dashed in pieces by a merciless con-
queror. (6) Noble men were distributed
by lot. “They cast lots for her honour-
able men,” &c. No pity was shown.
(c) Officials, men of state, were treated
like slaves. “ All her great men were
bound in chains” (cf. Ezek. xiii. 14—16).


HOMILETICS.
THE Fats or Some Worsk THAN THAT OF OTHERS.—Verses 10—13.


No-Amon suffered greatly, but Nineveh will suffer more. ‘Thou also shalt be
drunken ” with the cup of God’s wrath. The greatness of thy anguish shall deprive
thee of reason and strength, and stupefy thee like death.

I. The punishment is a Divine judgment. God acts by the same unchanging
law in all ages and to all nations. No and Nineveh must alike suffér for sins.
1. Punishment in great degree. Not a mere taste, but drunken. They drink till
overwhelmed. The most prudent will lose judgment, and act like a drunken man.
“Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the
sword which I will send among you.” 2. Punishment without refuge. Help shall
be sought in vain from others. No stronghold from the enemy. If God forsake,
no help can be found in man. In time of justice it is too late to cry for mercy.
3. Punishment ending in ruin. ‘“Thoushalt. be hid.” The city once so proud and
glorious was buried beneath the mounds, hidden asin a tomb; covered out of sight,
and has only lately been discovered. In unearthing Nineveh from its ruins, we
read a tale of splendour and power, of cruelty and blood, of sin and retribution.
ITI, The punishment is easily inflicted. The two figures are strikingly expressive
of the extreme ease with which they areovercome. 1. Their valiant men are feint-
hearted. “ Behold, the people in the midst of thee are women.” Stone-walls should
make cowards brave. But in the midst, in the very centre, there is weakness and
fear. Warriors, whom no toil wearied and no danger daunted, one and all become
helpless as women. Where sin dwells there is no power to resist. When God
takes the mettle vut of men, the strongest faint away. “The mighty men of
Babylon have forborne to fight, they have remained in their holds; their might


OHAP. III. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : NAHUM. 481





hath failed ; they became as women” (Jer. li. 30; 1. 37: Is. xix. 16). 2. Every
avenue opens to the enemy. “The gates of thy land,” the fortified passes and natural
barriers on the hills, do not check the invader. Passes have been held by devoted
men against countless multitudes (Thermopylz), but the whole would be open to
the enemy, and frontier garrisons would pass away as if consumed by fire.
3. Strongholds would be easily taken. Weak are fortifications against Divine wrath ;
trees which tremble in the breeze, they only need the breath of God. Wealth and
position, self-righteousness and human wisdom, however great and relied upon, are
false towers, and will give no refuge at last (Prov. xviii. 10). The judgment of
God will shatter them and sweep them all away. 4. Everything is ripe for
destruction. “Like fig-trees with the first ripe figs.” They are eagerly sought
after, ready to fall by the slightest effort, and ‘will drop into the mouth of the eater,”
Without cost or sacrifice the enemy will take the city. The first assault would be
successful. What a fearful moral condition, to ripen so easily for the judgment of
God. ‘The wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into
the cup of his indignation.”


THe Last Hors Dsstroyrp.— Verses 14—18.


The city is laden with guilt, but relies still upon its fortifications and numerical
strength of population. The last prop iscut down, There is no hope left. Though
provisioned within and strongly defended without, Nineveh must fall, and great
will be the fall.

I. Inward provisions will waste away. ‘Draw the waters for the siege, go
into clay, and tread the mortar,” &c. Water, necessary for siege and the support of
life, must be procured, She must furnish herself with all manner of provisions to
keep her from surrender or starvation. Clay must be prepared, and the kilns made
ready for repairing and building strongholds. The conquering nation were to toil
and do the work of slaves. But all would be in vain. The fire would devour her
bulwarks, and the sword her population. Swift will be the ruin of all who number
houses and fortify walls, ‘but have not looked to the maker thereof, nor have not
respected him that fashioned them” (Is. xxii. 10, 11). IL. Outward defences
will be destroyed. ‘‘ There shall the fire devour thee.” There, in the very centre
of their toil and vast preparations, where the greatest security was relied upon, was
the devouring fire. What was considered strongest was destroyed with ease, like
locusts eating up the tender grass. Singly, and as a whole, the judgments of God
will find men out. ‘“ Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him.” III.
Immense numbers will fall away. ‘‘ Make thyself many as the cankerworm.”
Make thyself numerous and oppressive as locusts, gather from all quarters men to
help, and seek to become mighty in multitudes, yet the foe will consume like
creatures which lick up all before them. 1. Wealthy merchants will not defend.
Though multiplied above the stars of heaven, and trafficking in despotism, they
cannot lay up in store against the wrath of God. Money is the sinews of war, but
will not shelter from the consequences of sin. Prosperity suddenly changes into
adversity. ‘‘ The cankerworm spoileth and fleeth away.” 2. Warlike soldiers will
not defend. ‘The captains, confederates, and commanders of the army, will melt
away, perish like dew before the rising sun. They are but grasshoppers, mighty
as they are. “ All flesh is grass.” 3, Ruling princes will not defend. “'Thy crowned
heads are as the locusts,” &c. They subside into quietness in the calamity of the
night, and continue their flight in the morning. They are “ torpid in the cold and fly
in the heat.” Officers of state and subordinate chiefs will be completely annihilated.
“‘ Their place is not known where they are.” 4. Great counsellors will not defend.
The shepherds slumber in listlessness and excess ; sink into torpor and stupidity.
The nobles and greatest politicians were benighted and bereft of wisdom. “ At thy

31


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. (cHaP. If.


483





rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep.”
Valiant men would dwell in the dust, and be buried insilence. God can soon strip
a nation of its great ones, and lay its honour in the dust. Where are they when


he deals with them ?


“Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his


head reach unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever: they which have seen him


shall say, Where is he?


He shall fly away, as a dream, and shall not be found:


neither shall his place any more behold him.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 14. Clay. Mankind still, with
mire and clay, build themselves Babels.
They go into clay, and become them-
selves earthly like the mire they steep
themselves in. They make themselves
strong, as though they thought that their
houses would continue for ever. God’s
wrath descends, and eats up like a
cankerworm [ Pusey].

Vers. 14, 15. 1. Man by his en-
deavours cannot avert the judgments of
God. Nineveh prepared and provisioned
herself, but fell after all. 2. Man may
presume upon carnal means until he is
ruined. Lawful means are necessary,
but we must not rely upon them for
security. If God be against us no other
help can relieve. ‘“ Running into God
is the only best way to escape him. As
to close and get in with him that would


strike you doth avoid the blow”
[Trapp]. eet
Ver. 15. The prophet gives in three


words the whole history of Nineveh, its
beginning and its end. He had before
foretold its destruction, though it should
be oppressive as the locust: he had
spoken of its commercial wealth; he


adds to this, that other source of ite
wealth, its despoiling warfares and their
issue. The heathen conqueror rehearsed
his victory, “I came, saw, conquered.”
The prophet goes farther, as the issue of
all human conquest, ‘‘I disappeared ”
[ Pusey].

Vers. 15, 16. 1. The mightiest of
earth are as locusts before him (cf. Is.
xl. 22). 2. The more obstinately they
resist, the more irresistible is the judg-
ment. 3. The larger and more numerous
they are, the more utterly will they be
destroyed [Lange].

Ver. 17. Cowardly rulers. 1. Shelter-
ing for advantage. In the cold day,
camping in the hedges, but fleeing away
in sunshine. 2. Living only to eat.
They are wasters merely, like locusts
devouring everything before them.
3. Deserting when they should help, an
emblem this of the world’s friendship.
Men get what they can out of others, and
then bid them farewell in distress,
Treacherous friendships abound every-
where.

Dust. All fiesh perishes, but the
word of Gud endures for ever [Lange].


HOMILETICS.
Stumpernine SHEPHERDS anD ScaTTERED FLooKs.— Verse 18.


nat Shepherds unworthy in their character. They are destitute of counsel; base
and idle ; careful only for their own profit and safety, and not for the interests of the
flock. Efficiency depends upon character in the ministry. Good shepherds care
for the sheep, feed and defend them, ‘The hireling fleeth because he is an hireling,
and careth not for the sheep.” II. Shepherds negligent in their duty. They
sleep and consult their own ease, instead of defending their city and country
Indolence, self-indulgence, and tickleness doth eat like a canker into the ministry of
some. Our duties demand entire devotedness of mind and heart. Ministers
desecrate their high calling, when they enter it for ease or commercial advantage.
Diligence is required in study, visitation, and preaching. “Woe to the idol-
shepherd (one wishing to be his own idol and the idol of his flock) that leaveth the
flock | the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye.” III. Shepherds


CHAP. III. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NAHUM. 483





cursed in their efforts. The flock is exposed and scattered, like sheep upon the
mountains, They have none to care for them, consequently get lost. They are
lost for ever. “No man gathereth them.” Terribleruin! Fearful responsibility
somewhere |


‘*T am shepherd to another man,
And do not sheer the fleece that I graze” [Shakespeare],


IRRETRIEVABLE Ruin.—Verse 19.


Deliverance is utterly hopeless. The prophet declares the end of a nation which
ruled with a rod of iron, and oppressed with unmitigated cruelty.

I. Nineveh cruel will be repaid for her cruelty. ‘ For upon whom hath not
thy wickedness passed continually ?” Monuments and inscriptions prove the pitiless
cruelty of Assyria. In sculptures are rows of impaled prisoners, whose eyes were
put out, and whose lips were fastened by rings. God had long borne this oppres-
sion, but now guilt must be punished. Judgment must fall, and there is not the
least hope of recovery. Cruelty and oppression will be rewarded in their own coin.


II. Nineveh ruined will be a joy to others.
1. This joy is great.

All, for cruelty was extensive, and none can
The fall of the oppressor is the triumph of the oppressed.


shall clap their hands over thee.”
of hands. 2. This joy is universal.
grieve at its termination.


“ All that hear the bruit of thee
It is exultation, clapping


III. Nineveh destroyed will never be restored. There is neither comfort in the


affliction nor recovery from it.
thy bruise.”


displayed no signs of repentance in her guilt.
and without help. The ruin is total and irretrievable.
The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked,


ceased ! the golden city ceased !


The wound is incurable.
There is none éo help. She had made no friends in her policy,


“ There is no healing of


Now she must perish without pity
‘“‘ How hath the oppressor


and the sceptre of the rulers,” &c. (Is. xiv. 4—7).


ILLUSTRATIONS
Vers. 8—10. No-Ammon. Thebes


was renowned for its numerous gates and
vast extent. Its remaining ruins describe
a circuit of twenty-seven miles [ Hender-
son]. There is no definite historical
account of its capture by Assyrians.
But from brief notices in Scripture, we
have hints of a struggle for supremacy
between Assyria and Egypt (cf. 2 Kings
xvii. 4). See Smith’s Dict. of the Bible,
article Thebes ; and Keil on vers. 8—10.

Vers. 11—19. Nahum’s prophecy of
the future destruction of Nineveh was
fulfilled by the Medes and Babylonians
(cf. ch. ii. 1); and according to his pre-
diction, the vast power of Nineveh com-
pletely vanished, and its glory was utterly
eclipsed, so that in the year Bo. 401,
Xenophon passed by the site without
learning its name (Xen. Anab. iii. 4—7).
Four hundred years afterwards a small
fortress was standing on the site, to guard
the passsage of the river Tigris (Tacitus,


TO CHAPTER VII.


Ann, xii. 13), and opposite to it, on the
west bank of the Tigris, has arisen the
city of Mosul. In the year 1776,
Niebuhr visited the spot, and supposed
that what were the heaps of ruins of
Nineveh, were natural undulations in the
soil (See Ravlinson, i. 326). In more
modern times it has been explored by
Botta, the French Consul (in 1842), and
more recently by Layard and others, who
have brought to light those gigantic
remains of palaces, statues, and other
monuments which testify to the ancient
grandeur of Nineveh, and those annalistic
inscriptions which confirm the veracity
of the prophecies of Nahum and of
Isaiah, and of the historical narrative of
Holy Scripture: and bear witness to the
Divine foreknowledge of the Holy Ghost
who speaks in it; to whom with the
Father and the Son, Three Persons and
one God, be honour and glory now and
for evermore. Amen [ Wordsworth}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY
HABAKKUK


INTRODUCTION.


Tue Propust. We have nothing certain, but much apocryphal, concerning
the life of Habakkuk. Delitzsch thinks that he was connected with the service of the
temple, and belonged to the tribe of Levi. In his writings we find his name and
the notice that he was a prophet.

Tue Dare. There is considerable difference of opinion on this point. Some
say in the first years of Manasseh, and others that he prophesied in the reign of
Jehoiachin, about 608—604 B. o. Delitzsch fixes the twelfth or thirteenth year of
Josiah’s reign, B. 0. 630 or 629. “It is evident from the constant use of the future
tense in speaking of the Chaldean desolations (i. 5, 6, 12), that the prophet must
have written before the invasion of Nebuchadnezzar, which rendered Jehoiakim
tributary to the king of Babylon (2 Kings xxiv. 1), B. 0. 606, yet it is equally
clear from ch. ii. 3, that the prophecy did not long precede the fulfilment ; and as
there seem to be no references to the reigns of Josiah or Jehoahaz (B. 0. 609), and
as the notices of the corruption of the period agree with the beginning of the reign
of Jehoiakim, we cannot be far astray in assigning B. c. 608 as the appropriate date
of this Book.”

Tue Contents. ‘‘ The prophecy of Habakkuk is clothed in a dramatic form,
man questioning and complaining, God answering with threatening. It announces,
as nearest of all, the impending fearful judgment by the instrumentality of the
Chaldeans on the theocracy because of its prevailing moral corruption (ch. i.) ; and
next to this, in a fivefold woe, the downfall of this arrogant, violent, God-forgetting
and idolatrous offender (ch, ii.) ; and it concludes with the answer of the believing
Church to this twofold Divine revelation—that is to say, with a prophetico-lyric
echo of the impressions and feelings produced in the prophet’s mind” [Keil]. “The
prominent vices of the Chaldean character, as delineated in i. 5—11, are made the
subjects of separate denunciations : their insatiable ambition (ii. 6—8), their covet-
ousness (ii. 9—11), cruelty (ii. 12--14), drunkenness (ii. 15—17), and idolatry (ii.
18—20) The whole concludes with a maguilicent psalm in ch. iiL, ‘ Habakkuk’s


INTRODUCTION. 485





Pindaric Ode’ (Ewald), a composition unrivalled for boldness of conception,
sublimity of thought, and majesty of diction.”

Tue Struts. In point of general style, Habakkuk is universally allowed to occupy
a very distinguished place among the Hebrew prophets, and is surpassed by none
of them in dignity and sublimity. Whatever he may occasionally have in common
with previous writers he works up in his own peculiar manner, and is evidently ne
servile copyist or imitator. His figures are well chosen, and fully carried out.
His expressions are bold and animated; his descriptions graphic and pointed. The
parallelisms are for the most part regular and complete. The lyric ode contained
in chapter iii. is justly esteemed one of the most splendid and magnificent within
the whole compass of Hebrew poetry [Henderson]. ‘ His figures are great,” says
one, “ happily chosen, and properly drawn out. His denunciations are terrible,
his derision bitter, his consolation cheering. Instances occur of borrowed ideas
(iii. 19: comp. Ps. xviii. 34; ii, 6: comp. Isa. xiv. 7; ii, 14: comp. Isa. xi. 9) ;
but he makes them his own in drawing them out in his peculiar manner. With
all the boldness and fervour of his imagination, his language is pure and his verse
melodious.” The Book completes the series of writings threatening judgmente
upon particular countries and cities opposed to God and his people. Obadiak
prophesied against Edom, Jonah and Nahum against Nineveh, and Habakkuk
against Babylon. The prophet looks back to the victories of Egypt, derives hope
for the future, and closes with a sublime expression of faith in God. ‘“ Althougk
the fig-tree shall not blossom,” the believer may “rejoice in the Lord.” The darke
the outward circumstances, the greater the succour from God.


486 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK. (cHar. L


eer ree rere ene TS


CHAPTER L


Criticat Norzs.] Burden] (cf. Nab. i. 1). 2 How] A complaint; wickedness continued long,
and God did not interfere. 8. Why] dost thou behold violence without checking it? some; the
prophet is permitted to behold iniquity, and this is the reason for his cry. Since God the Holy One
will not look upon it in Israel (Num, xxiii, 21), why should his servant? Raise] A litigious spirit
prevailed; none were quietly permitted to enjoy their rights. All was seized by force or perversion
of law. 4. Therefore] Because crimes -re unpunished. Slacked] Lit. chilled; neither secures
obedience nor influence. The word meaus to relax, to lose strength and vital energy. Forth] Lit.
for a permanence, ¢. e. for ever, as in many other passages, ¢. g. (Ps. xili, 2: Is. xin. 20) [ef. Herd].
Wrong] Unrighteous verdicts given, and godless men encircle the good. 5—11]. God's answer to
the complaint. Behold] prophet and people. God is about to act, and they will be terrified at its
results (cf. Acts xili. 41), 6. Raise] To make incursions and at length conquer Judea (cf. 2 Kings
xxiv, and xxv.). Bitter] 7. ¢. cruel (Jer. 1. 42: cf. marg, Jud. xviii. 25; 2 Sam. xvil. 8). Hasty]
Rash and impetuous. 7%. Their] As they had raised themselves to this dignity so they would permit
none to share in their counsels and determinations, Lut would act in the most arbitrary manner
(Henderson]. 8. Leopards] which leap seventeen or eighteen feet at a spring. Evening wolves]
fasting all day, are keen in hunger and commit ravages on the flocks at night (Gen. xlix. 27: Jer.
v. 6). The eagerness of cavalry to plunder would be so great that fatigue in the march would be
nothing. Like the flight of an eagle] would they rush along (cf. Jer. iv. 13; xlvili. 40, and
Lam. iv. 19). 9. Violence] Not to administer justice, Faces] Presence. Sup] Swallow all before
them, They pass along like a tempestuous wind. Sand] Prisoners gathered like dust by the simoom
in the desert, 10. Scoff] Resistance impossible and laughed at. Heap] Heap mounds of earth,
according to the usual method of taking a fortress. 11. Then] Elated by victory. Change] Lit. the
wind passes by ; the storm of violence like the wind sweeps over the land. Some refer it to the Chaldee
nation, who change in mind, lose reason and moderation, and get proud. Power] is their god, or
“ (saying that) his power is his own, as one who is a god to himself” [Grotius]. Henderson gives—
“Then it gaineth fresh spirit ; it passeth onward and contracteth guilt, (saying,) Is this his power
through his God.” 12.) God now vindicated in opposition to the boast of the enemy. God eternal
and holy. Die] The Chaldeans will not destroy, only correct us. Mighty] Lit. Rock (Deut. xxxii. 4).
Thou] They are only thy instruments. 13. Look] inactively upon violence. Deal] Chaldeans
once allies of the Jews, now violent oppressors (Isa. xxi, 2: xxiv. 16). Right] Bad as Jews were, they
were much better than their enemies. 14.] God made his people defenceless as the fish, left them
in disorder, and without any to care for them. 15.] The enemy easily catches them and exults in
his success. 16. Sacrifice] Idolize their military skill and power by which they gained success.
Ancient Scythians offered yearly sacrifices to a sabre set up as a symbol of Mars ({ Keil]. 17. There-
fore} shall he empty] Lit. spread his net continually to destroy nations ? Empty it and throw it in


again for a fresh draught? It is implied that God will not permit such conduct to go un-
punished, but the answer is reserved for the sequel.


/


HOMILETICS.


Tue Importunate Prayrer.— Verse 2.


The question asked is this : How long will God suffer his people to pray and still
neglect to hear 4

I. Until they see the plague of their own hearts. We may be astonished at
the sins of others, and wonder at God’s forbearance with them. But we forget that
seeds of iniquity dwell in our own hearts and ripen in our own lives. We must
feel our sinfulness and humble ourselves in the dust. ‘ Who can say, I have made
my heart clean, I am pure from mysin?” II. Until they remove the hindrances
which prevent the revival of his work. Many stumbling-blocks are in the way.
God can do nothing, and will not hear until they are removed. Ignorance, avarice,
and slothfulness—all sins must be forsaken. We must be ready for every duty,
be wathchful lest by apathy, selfishness, and unbelief, we hinder the work of God.
III. Until they are willing to give God the glory. We may pray for selfish
ends, and withhold what is due to God. If in pride and success we claim the
blessing, this will silence devotion. In prayer we oiten devour that which is holy,


CHAP. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK. 487





and consecrate to our own use that which should be given to God (Prov. xx. 25).
We desire to pamper our lusts and feed our own vanity. Wrong in spirit and
purpose, we cry, “ O Lord, how long?” Learn, 1. Why so many prayers fail. 2. To
search your own hearts and purify yourselves before God. We way have earnest-
ness and grief and yet fail. “Though you stretch out your hands, I will hide
mine eyes from you; and though you make many prayers, I will not hear you’
[Adapted].
Tae LamentaBiE Sicut.— Verses 2—4,


The prophet is permitted to see the great social and national evils of the Jews.
Unchecked and encouraged they grow in magnitude and number. He laments, in
the name of all the godly among them, that their labours seem in vain, and he is
forced to cry bitterly to God for relief.

I. The rights of property were disregarded. “For spoiling and violence are
before me.” They robbed one another, and took goods and lands from others.
God himself divided the land, established the rights of property, by sacred law
fixed bounds to every citizen, and taught him to be content with his lot. When
violence of any kind breaks forth in a land its prosperity will soon fade away.
1. This disregard was openly declared. “Before me.” The sins were deeply
rooted, and those who committed them cared not who saw them. Modest at first,
and afraid of discovery, sinners get bold in their wickedness, and openly and
impudently avow them. 2. God seemed to connive at this open disregard. ‘How
long shall I cry?” When God appears to overlook sin and to countenance it by
permitting sinners to prosper, it grieves the heart and shakes the faith of good men.
They cry to God for a sense of justice and right to prevail. “It is time for thee,
Lord, to work.” II. The spirit of litigation prevailed. “There are that raise
up strife and contention.” They were broken up into parties and factions that bit
and devoured one another continually. Hatred stirs up strifes of all kinds,
domestic, political, and religious. It sets man against his fellow-men and against his
God. It disturbs society, promotes crime, and rouses the moral forces of the universe.

‘* A Trinity there seems of principles,

Which represent and rule created life,—

The love of self, our fellows, and our God ”’ [ Festus).
III. The law had lost its authority. ‘Therefore the law is slacked,” &c.
The law of peace and charity and the law of Moses were set at nought. That which
was the soul, the heart of political and religious life, ceased to act, like the pulse
ceasing to beat. The state of a country may be judged from the authority and
influence of its moral laws. 1. The law was first disregarded. Contempt for the
word and authority of God opens the door forall wickedness. Neither threatening
nor promise will then check in evil courses. 2. Then the law was perverted.
“Judgment (justice) doth never go forth.” (a) Wrong decisions were given.
“Therefore wrong judgment proceedeth.” The law was weak, the magistrates were
corrupted, and there was no appeal against injustice. (6) The ties of humanity
were broken. ‘The wicked doth compass about the righteous.” The godly and
innocent were surrounded and overcome by men turned into brutes. There was
no security for persons or property. ‘ Wickedness,” says Bp. Taylor, “ corrupts a
man’s reasonings, gives him false principles, and evil measuring of things.” Well,
therefore, did the prophet lament and cry to God. “ My soul is also sore vexed ;
but thou, O Lord, how long?”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. 1. The minister of God in by it, vision. 3. The matter of it, the
this prophecy. (1) By his name, burden. In which two questions are
Habakkuk. (2) By his function, the moved—(1) Why a burden; and (2),
prophet. 2. The manner how he came whose burden it is: a burden in respect





of the sin punished—of the punishment
threatened—of the word of God threaten-
ing [Marbury].

Ver. 2. 1. What the prophet did.
(1) He cried —with intense feeling, with
great boldness, with long patience.
(2) He cried to God in perplexity and
grief, to stir him in apparent forgetful-
ness, and remind him of promised good-
ness. 2. The reason why he did it.
For violence, strife, and war in domestic
circles, injustice and oppression in
courts of law, prevailing without check
and without shame. 3. The success he
had in doing it. (1) Thou wilt not hear.
(2) Thou wilt not save. As not hearing
is to be imputed to his mercy and
patience, so his not saving is to be
imputed either to his wisdom, putting
his children to the trial of their faith by
afflictions, or to his justice, making one
of them, who have corrupted their ways,
a rod to scourge the other, neither of
them being as yet worth the saving till


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HABAKKUE.


(car. 1,


Vers. 2—4. 1. Prevalent evils grieve
the minds of Gods servants. Like
David and Jeremiah, they weep at what
they see. It makes them sigh. Itisa
burden to them. 2. In their grief they
Sly to God for remedy. They have faith
in his power, providence, and purpose.
They earnestly pray for justice and truth
to prevail, for sin and wickedness to end.
3. But in this course they do not always
succeed. God is not unmindful of his
promise nor regardless of sin, but his
people are not always delivered, and
retribution not generally sent in the time
they fix. God is holy and just: we are
hasty:and sinful. “ Righteous art thou,
O Lord, when I plead with thee: vet let
me talk with thee of thy judgments.
Wherefore doth the way of the wicked
prosper? Wherefore are all they happy
tliat deal very treacherously 1”


“Thy God hath said ’tis good for thee
To walk by faith and not by sight.
Take it on trust a little while,


he had humbled them [Adapted from


Soon shalt thou read the mystery righ!
Marbury}. vile” [Ka


In the bright sunshine of his smile” [Keble


HOMILETICS.


THE WoNDERFUL Work.— Verse 5.


We have in these words an answer to the prophet’s question. God is not an
unconcerned spectator. He will vindicate his glory, and unexpected vengeance
will fall upon the transgressors.

I. The Work is Divine. ‘I will work a work.” God hears the complaints of
his servants and remembers the taunt of the wicked, who cry, ‘“‘ Where is now their
God4” God is the agent, though the heathen execute his judgments. He intends
and he carries out ; ‘‘ work a work” in solemnity and power. “This is the Lord’s
doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes.” II. The Work is nigh at hand. “In
your days.” That generation would not pass before its accomplishment. Already
the clouds blacken : the judgments may be suspended, but will break forth in
startling thunder. This evil day cannot be put off. “It is nigh at hand, and not
afar off.” III. The Work is wonderful. “ Wonder marvellously.” In its nature
it was not common, and in its effects it would be alarming. It would be strange
and unparalleled among other nations and in their own history; spectators “among
the heathen” would be surprised. ‘ Even all nations shall say, Wherefore hath
the Lord done thus unto this land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger 3”
(Deut. xxix. 24; xxviii. 37). IV. The Work isincredible. ‘ You will not believe,
though it be told you.” The Jews did not credit the prediction of such alarming
events; accustomed to confide in their cities (Is. xxxi. 1: Jer. vii. 4), and in
Egyptian strength, they believed they were too powerful to be overcome. Men
now will not believe in the judgments of God, though they loom in the threatenings.
They are stupefied by sin, despise the Word of God, and go on until the curse falls
upon them. Fearful is the punishment of those who presume upon security in
evil, “Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish; for F work a work in your


CHAP, I.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK. 489
SR OI


days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you.”
V. The Work demands attention. “Behold ye.” The call is solemn and Divine.
Behold, since language, the ministry of the prophet, and the complaints of the
oppressed, will not do. God will try something else which shall be heard. “J
will work,” be patient and silent no longer. Behold, the heathen spectators of their
sins will be instruments of their sorrows. This beholding must be attentive ; regard,
not mere gazing. The matter demands serious and earnest consideration. The
overthrow of the Jews is a warning to all, a proof that sin will be fearfully punished
if persisted in and the way of escape rejected. “Is not destruction to the wicked ?
and a strange punishment to workers of iniquity 1”


Toe WonperFuL Worx AoccomPpLisHep.— Verses 5—10.


We have now a particular description of the calamities to be inflicted. The
Chaldeans, in their preparations and dispositions, in their victories and devastations,
are exactly set forth, to confirm the truth and display the justice of God. The
Jews are repaid in their own coin, and the dreadful judgments are inflicted.

I. In raising up a mighty nation. “For lo, I raise up the Chaldeans,” &c.
God never lacks instruments to prosecute his design. He can fetch them from afar
and dispose them to his will, though already elated with victory and power. 1. A
nation naturally fierce. “That bitter and hasty nation.” They are cruel and
impetuous, unmerciful, and resolute in their course. They spare no pains and show
no pity. Hopeless is the condition of those who fall into their hands. “They hold
the bow and the lance” to brandish before the foe; “they are cruel and will not
show mercy.” 2. A nation terribly stron7, ‘They are terrible and dreadful.”
Lhey are great in numbers. armed with Divine vengeance, and emboldened by former
zonquests. By the force of terror and the dread of death they gain submission.
3. A nation blindly covetous. They will not only overcome, but rob the land and
‘possess the dwellings that are not theirs.” It is not merely to overturn others,
they also take their possessions. But the dwellings “are not theirs” by right, only
held while God pleases, and then lost again. The rights of society and the interests
of ots. -vs are nothing to the covetous. They fatten on the miseries of men, and
conside not that poverty will come upon themselves (Prov. xviii. 20—22). 4. A
nation proudly ambitious. They roam through the land, violently subdue everything
before them, and deport themselves in pride and insolence. They “ pass over” in
quest of glory to fresh booty and new wars. The mightiest empires have been
crushed by the weight of their own greatness. In their own ambitious ends they
have gone beyond bounds, and brought their own ruin. When our energies are
directed to personal aggrandisement and despotic rule we may expect a fall.
“ Pride,” says Gurnall, “takes for its motto great J and little you.” ‘Think not
thy own shadow longer than that of others,” says Sir Thomas Browne, “ nor delight
to take the altitude of thyself.” Ambition and pride are often the precursors of
ruin. “ Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall.” II. In
giving them an easy victory. In the figures mentioned, we notice—l. That the
conquest is irresistible. ‘Their horses are swifter than the leopards,” the lightest,
swiftest, and most bloodthirsty of beasts of prey. ‘‘ They shall fly as the eagle,”
hastening to devour what it has secured. ‘‘ Our persecutors are swifter than eagles
of the heavens” (Lam. iv. 19: Ezek. xvii. 3). 2. That the conquest is violent.
«They shall come all for violence.” The enemy would sweep over them like the
east wind, blasting and bearing down everything before it. Gathering the people
“ as the sand,” and burying them like caravans in heaps of destruction. 3. Thai
the conquest is easy. No opposition will hinder them from performing their work.
(a) The power of kings was laughed at. Princes and confederates would be exposed
to greatest contempt and most ignominious treatment. Kings will be put down and
set up in pleasure and in sport. “They shall scotf at she kings.” (6) The strength


490 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HABAKKUE.


NN


[cHar. L


of fortifications was derided. Forts and strongholds in which men trust will prove
matters of derision to the agents of God’s vengeance. ‘They shall deride every
stronghold.” The mightiest fort will be captured and levelled in the dust. _“ For
they shall heap dust and take it.” 4. That the conquest is complete. “ Which
shall march through the breadth of the land.” Far and wide they spread terror
and death. Unhindered and irresistible they swept over the earth. Kings fled in
fear, palaces were plundered with violence, and lands were taken by force. They
did as they liked. Their own lust was their law. No power of God or man seemed
to limit them in the infliction of judgment upon the Jews, or in getting honour for
themselves. God sometimes puts the stubborn and rebellious into the hands of
those who measure justice by their own judgment and honour by their own dignity.
“Their judgment and their dignity shall come of themselves ”—


‘¢The good old rule
Sufficeth them, the simple plan,
That they should take who have the power,
And they should keep who can” [ Wordsworth},


Evenina Wotves.—Verse 8.


Wolves are very fierce when urged to rabidness by a whole day’s hunger. They
prowl forth in that darkness in which all the beasts of the forests creep forth (Ps.
civ. 20). Such is the disposition of some men towards their fellow-creatures,
These evening wolves typify—

I. False teachers. False prophets are compared to “‘ravening wolves,”
rapacious, mischievous, and injurious to the flock of God (Matt. vii. 15). We are
warned against heretics, and false guides, such as Hymenezus, Alexander, and
Philetus. ‘ After my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the flock” (Acts xx. 29). II. Cruel persecutors. With relentless spite

‘some men pursue others. Christians are wilfully misrepresented in character and
conduct ; reviled, insulted, and spitefully used (Matt. v.11). Evil men, as “lions
seeking whom they may devour,” pursue them in envy. With keen scent and
eager feet they are swift to shed innocent blood. ‘‘ The assemblies of violent men
have sought after my soul.” III. Anxious cares. The cares of this world
devour the good in the heart. Domestic life and business impair the growth of
Christian character. Excessive care destroys peace, induces loss of temper, hinders

rayer, and hurries into dangerous conduct. “Be careful for nothing.” IV.
istracting doubts. Doubts and fears distress the mind, hide the light of God’s
countenance, and pursue us like evening wolves,


“To doubt
Is worse than to have lost: and to despair,
Is but to antedate those miseries -
That must fall on us” [Massinger].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. 1. God’s hand is seen in
furnishing the enemies of his people


Ver. 6. He is said to raise up those
whom he allows to be stirred up against


his people, since the events which his
providence permits favours their designs,
and it rests with him to withhold them.
They lift themselves up for some end of
covetousness or pride. But there is a
higher order of things in which God
orders their actions to fulfil by their
iniquities his righteousness [ Pusey].


with all necessary qualifications for
carrying on their enterprise. Boldness,
swiftness, number, &. 2. The fierce-
ness of the Divine anger may be read
in the celerity and activity with which
they execute their designs. 3. It is
vain for impenitent sinners to lean upon
any apparent ground of security or eon-


OHAP. I.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK.


61





fidence when God arises to plead with
them. Distance of places, extent of
country, and strength of buildings will
not avail ‘ef. Hutcheson].

Ver. 9. Violence. Learn, 1. That
God often repays violence with violence.
2. Yet those employed by God to punish
others may sin themselves by lust and
self-aggrandizement.

East Wind. “The East Wind, it
seemeth, was the most unwholesome
breath of heaven upon that land ; within
short time withered and destroyed the
fruits of the earth, and the hopes of the
spring. The Lord saith that the faces
of the Chaldeans, the very sight of them,
shall be as baneful and as irresistible as
the East Wind.” The cruelties of men,
the calamities which attend wars and
conquests, ought. to invite sinners not to
provoke God to give them up to such
punishment—to terrify such as fear not
the threatenings of the Word, and to
point out to those suffering such a lot,
the bitterness of departing from God
[Hutcheson].

Vers. 2—11. How utterly incompre-
hensible are the Judgments of God!
1. Incomprehensible in their delay,


to the view of those who have ne
patience, and think that God ought to
act as speedily as their anger prompts
them (vers. 2,3). 2. Incomprehensible
in their threatening, to those upon whom
they will fall, and who nevertheless
continue to sin in security (ver. 4). 3.
Incomprehensible to every human mind
in their realization. For—(a) They are
greater than any human thought would
anticipate (vers. 5,6). (6) They take place
in ways and by means of which no man
would dream (ver. 6). (c) They are
often brought about by men and events
that, at first sight, have nothing in com-
mon with God. 4. Incomprehensible
in their grandeur and universality, to
those by whom they are accomplished
(ver. 11) [Lange].

God’s deeds are always Niphiaot’,
and have on them something to exci «
wonder and astonishment. Incredib'»
as they seem, we know that they will
be performed, from past history, present
signs, and the light of God’s Word,
How they are to happen is a mystery.
It is ours to fear, believe, and obey.
Regard the threatening, and escape the
danger.


HOMILETICS.


Succgss Axsusev.—Verses 11 and 16.


Elated with success, the Chaldeans pass over all bounds and restraints. In pride
and arrogance they attribute all glory to themselves or their gods, deify their


own power, and incur the Divine displeasure.
Success is abused—


success and abused it.


They were intoxicated with their


I. When it is over-valued. Men cry, “ Nothing succeeds like success,” and


aim at it, for its own sake.


It creates pride, and sometimes overturns reason.


In anticipation and possession it is over-estimated.


“The human heart,” says


Volney, “is often the victim of the sensations of the moment ; success intoxicates
it to presumption, and disappointment dejects and terrifies it.” II. When it is
thought to cover sins. If sinful acts are crowned with success, they are con-
sidered proofs of prowess, matters of boasting and exultation. The end is thought
to justify the means. The Chaldeans rejoiced in conquests gained by the miseries
of the Jews, grew haughty and insolent, and prepared themselves for ruin by
worshipping their own power. Speed in the wrong direction is construed into
providence ; favour to sinful projects and success in evil courses are taken as signs
of God’s approval. Thus, because God suffers mischief to prosper, men forget their
guilt and rejoice in iniquity. But they prosper only to die, and like beasts fatten
to fit them for slaughter. Fat may be their portion and plenteous their meat
(ver. 16), but “hg slew the fattest of them” (Ps. Ixxxviii. 31). ITI. When it is
ascribed to wrong sources. Men render Divine honours to themselves and their
idols rather than to God, who alone gives skill and success, 1. They attribute


492 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUE. {CHAaP. I.


pe


success to idols. “Imputing this his power unto his god.” The Chaldeans
ascribed success to Bel and Nebo, and blasphemously argued that because they
had conquered his people, Jehovah was inferior to their gods. Ancient Romans
deified their standards and arms. Savage nations have made idols of their
implements and arrows. ‘There is no truth in that religion which dishonours the
true God, and no stability in that prosperity which is attributed to idols. “ He
shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak marvel-
lous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be
accomplished” (Dan. xi. 36). 2. They attribute success to their own power.
“They sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their drag.” When men
deny God, they deify themselves, and adore their own skill. Ajax called his
sword his god, and thanked it for all its brave achievements. Belshazzar said,
“T will be like the Most High” (Isa. xiv. 14); the Prince of Tyre said, “I ama
god” (Ezek. xxviii. 22); and Antichrist “exalts himself above all that is called
God” (2 Thess. ii. 4). Nebuchadnezzar was proud of the might of his power, and
the Assyrian declared, “ By the strength of my hand I did it; and by my wisdom,
for I am prudent” (Isa. x. 13—15). Sad are those events in life which minister
pride, and give occasion to men to deprive God of honour and exalt themselves,
“‘He who boasts of a thing,” says Luther, “and is glad and joyous on account of
it, but does not thank the true God, makes himself into an idol, gives himself the
glory, and does not rejoice in God, but in his own strength and work.”


“To our own nets ne’er bow we down,
Lest on the eternal shore,
The angels, while our draughts they own
Reject us evermore”’ [ Keble}.


Gop’s CHARACTER A GROUND OF ConsoLaTION In DistRess.— Verse 138.


The prophet turns again to God in sublime contrast to the deifying of human
power—vindicates the character of Jehovah as opposed to idols, and declares entire
confidence in him as the true ground of consolation in distress——“ Art thou not
from everlasting?” &c.

I. God is Eternal. Go back as far as possible in thought, God was before
thought. Inthe beginning God. ‘“ From everlasting to everlasting thou art God.”
Hence, 1. God ts unchangeable in his purpose. He is a rock firm and immovable.
From the eternity of his nature the prophet infers the eternity of his purpose.
“My God.” He has delivered in the past, and will deliver in the present and in
the future (2 Cor. i. 10). Whatever changes he never changes. His people lay
hold of his covenant, claim a special interest and express a strong hope in it.
‘Therefore we shall not die.” 1. Temporally we shall not die. God will reserve
a remnant of the Jews to return from captivity to the land of their fathers, to
build his temple and enlarge his Church. 2. Spiritually we shall not die. He
will keep his promise, and we shall not lose an interest in a better life. 3.
Eternally we shall not die. God having loved once will love to the end—will
never cast off his people. In eternal wisdom God hath given eternal redemption,
and an eternal inheritance. 2. God is unchangeable in his providence. The
prophet might be distressed at the description of the enemy—the condition of his
people might perplex and seem to contradict the covenant, but present judgment
was only temporary chastisement. Their enemies would not destroy, but only
correct them. The rod was in the hands of God. Because God lived, they would
live (John xiv. 19). Men might be wicked, cruel, and perverse, but he was
always the same. Clouds may hide the light, but do not destroy the sun. “ Why
art thou cast down, O my soul?” é&¢


CHAP, 1] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HABAKKUK. 493





enon


“ Now thou array’st thine awful face
In angry frowns, without a smile;
We, through the cloud, believe thy grace,
Secure of thy compassion still.”


iI. God is holy. ‘Mine Holy One.” The prophet implores God as an
individual and in the name of Israel. God in a special manner separated them
from other nations, avowed and adopted them as his own. He therefore takes
special interest in them, and will exercise special mercy towards them (Hos. xi. 9).
The chastisement of the enemy confirmed his holiness and purified his people.
The victorious heathen were unholy, imputed power to idols, but he was the Holy
One of Israel whom they reproached (Isa. xxxvii. 23). God’s holiness then is—
1. A guarantee of punishment to sin. 2. Of deliverance to his people: and, 3.
Of justice and right to all men. Among his people, or in the wicked, God will not
leave sin unpunished. ‘ Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? Who
is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders ?”


Gop DOES NOT APPROVE OF Sin.—Verse 13.


Men are tempted to think it is vain to serve God, when he permits the wicked
to triumph over them. True views of God will check such thoughts. He cannot
look upon sin with approbation. His eyes are too pure to befold evil and connive
at it. We infer from this that God is holy, and will certainly punish sin.

I. The testimony of Scripture proves this. From beginning to end it sets
forth the holiness of God. In rite and ceremony, in precept and doctrine, its
constant voice is heard, “ Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty.” II. The
testimony of Providence proves this. In the expulsion of angels from heaven
and our first parents from Eden—in floods and fire—in the history of Israel, and
in the punishment of the wicked. We see justice written in actions, and God’s
abhorrence of sin in the judgments he has inflicted. Evil may array itself in wit
and grandeur, or in villany and success, but it is always the abominable thing
which the Lord hates. Its perpetrators are hated, and will be punished by him.
“For thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness: neither shall evil
dwell with thee. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight; thou hatest all workers
of iniquity.”

THe Eniemas or Lire.— Verses 13—17.


Troubled thoughts are not easily driven away. Circumstances arise in which
perplexities increase-—in which God’s conduct seems at variance with his Werd,
and in which God’s people find it difficult or impossible to solve the enigmas of
life. The prophet seemed astonished, and expostulated with God at his proceed-
ings against the Jews by the Chaldeans. “ Wherefore lookest thou upon them
that deal treacherously,” &c.

I. Why does God permit his people whom he loves to be persecuted? Why
do the enemies who blaspheme thy name, deal cruelly and perfidiously with thy
people? 1. They are devoured. ‘The wicked devoureth the man that is more
righteous than he.” This has always been the lot of God’s people, from the days
of Abel to the present time. ‘‘In the world ye shall have tribulation.” But this
cruelty was great. They were hunted and devoured like prey. 2. They are
destroyed. God permitted the weaker to be taken by the stronger. They were
caught like fish in the sea, crushed like reptiles in the dust. They had no
defender to protect nor avenge them. God was silent and held his tongue. This
seems strange to those who trust in God. To punish the wicked may be the will
of God, but to strike at the righteous is treason. Why then does God permit
this? How can he love them? If God has fixed the times for executing his
purposes why does he hide them from his people (Job xxiv. 1)? “ Wherefore do
the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power?” II, Why does God.


434 ROMILETIC COMMENTARY HABAKKUK. [CHaP. L


—_—-—





who is holy, permit sinners to prosper in wickedness? “ Wherefore lookest
thou,” &. 1. Wickedness exulting over goodness. Rejoicing in its work of
mischief and destruction. Men glory in their crimes. 2. Wickedness idolizing
itself. ‘They sacrifice unto their own net.” Coarse forms of idolatry spring from
a corrupt mind, When the idol is first set up in the heart, men will not be
long before they worship their wealth and wisdom, their armies and navies. 3.
Wickedness apparently perpetual. The enemy had gathered immense booty, and
was rejoicing over it. They had caught the Jews like fish in a net. Will they
devour what they have taken? Will they empty the net again, and unceasingly
go on without check or punishment? asks the prophet. How perplexing were
these things to his mind. They have been perplexing to the good in every age.
The abnormal state of the world is a sore puzzle to most men. Ovid was tempted
to say there were no gods. Brutus condemned virtue entirely when defeated, and
Pompey declared that a mist had come over the eyes of Providence, when over-
come by Casar. Thus men charge God foolishly. The Psalmist solved the
problem in nearness to God (Ps. lxxiii. 17)—saw that this life was only a state of
trial and probation. Things may stagger the godly now, for we are brutish in
knowledge, impatient in spirit, and incapable of comprehending God’s plans.


Wait patiently, all will be cleared up before the great tribunal.


“How unsearch-


able are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!”


“Fixed to the hold, so might the sailor aim,
To judge the pilot, and the steerage blame,
As we direct to God what should belong,
Or say that Sovereign Wisdom governs wrong.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 12. Notice, 1. The grievous
affliction of God's people. ‘They were
ready to die, oppressed, and almost
annihilated. 2. The Divine appoint-
ment of this affliction, “Thou hast
ordained them for judgment.” The
enemy had no power over Israel but
what God gave them. Hence the afflic-
tion was (1) Appointed in measure. (2)
Appointed in duration. (3) Appointed
in instrumentality. All power is derived
from God, and is under his control (Ps.
xvii. 14). Men are in his hands, cannot
destroy his people, nor frustrate his


design. 3. The blessed design of this
affliction. ‘Thou hast established them


for correction.” Not for vengeance, not
for their own ends and pleasure ; but for
correction. This correction is needed,
and should be expected. “As thresh-
ing separates the corn from the chaff,”
says Burton, “so does affliction purify
virtue.” Michael Angelo saw in the
rude block an angel form, and with a
sculptor’s skill carved the image and
revealed its beauty; so God “rough
hews” his people, forms and fashions
them by affliction into his likeness.


‘Blessed is he whom thou chastenest.”
4, The vigorous hope under this affliction.
“We shall not die.” On the unchang-
ing character and the eternal covenant
of God, we ground our hope of deliver-
ance, and our belief in the perpetuity of
his Church. “ Virtue,” says Dr. Moore,
“can stand its ground as long as life ;
so that a soul well principled will be
sooner separated than subdued.” ‘The
Lord hath chastened me sore; but he
hath not given me over unto death.”
‘“‘T am the Lord, I change not ; therefore
ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.”
Let us thank God for discipline, and
kiss the rod which smites us. It is not
the stroke of a tyrant, but the chastening
of a Father.


‘Such sharpness shows the sweetest Friend,
Such cuttings rather heal than rend.”


The three titles of God in this verse
are significant. “The God to whom the
prophet prays is Jehovah, the absolutely
constant One, who is always the same
in word and work (see Gen. ii. 4); he
is also Elohai, my, i. e. Israel’s God, who
from time immemorial has proved to


CHAP. I.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUR.





the people whom he had chosen as his
possession, that he is their God; and
the Holy One of Israel, the absolutely
Pure One, who cannot look upon evil,
and therefore cannot endure that the
wicked should devour the righteous”
[ Keil}.

Vers. 14,15. The two figures (fish
and reptiles) indicate the low and help-
less condition of the Jews. The world
is like a troubled sea, the weaker are
caught and devoured by the stronger—
the more venomous hurt and destroy
the rest. Notice also the agencies of
cruelty. 1. The angle; 2. The net;
and 3. The drag. ‘“ Nebuchadnezzar
and the Chaldeans are a faint image of
Satan, who casts out his baits and his
nets in the stormy sea of this life, taking
some by individual craft, sweeping others
in whole masses to do evil; and whoso
hath no ruler, and will not have Christ
to reign over them, he allures, hurries,
drags away as his prey” [Pusey].

Vers. 15, 16. Notice, 1. The instru-
ments of wickedness. 2. The success
of wickedness. 3. The insolence of
wickedness. ‘Here is the growth of
iniquity; for first they exercise all
cruel inhumanity against the Jews, then
they rejoice over them, and then doth


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1—4. How long. If men look
upon some of God’s providential dealings
with a mere eye of reason, they will
hardly find any sense therein, such their
muddle and disorder. But, alas! the
wrong side is objected to our eyes, while
the right side is presented to the high
God of heaven, who knoweth that an
admirable order doth result out of this
confusion : and what is presented to him
at present may, hereafter, be so showed
to us as to convince our judgments in
the truth thereof [7. Fuller].

Ver. 5. Wonder. Others only look
and wonder, the Christian only looks
and loves [ Hurrion].

Vers. 6—11. Bitter. An envious
man waxeth lean with the fatness of his
neighbours. Envy is the daughter of
pride, the beginner of secret sedi‘ion,


the sin grow out of measure sinful, for
they forbear not to provoke God himself
by their pride of heart, robbing him of
the glory of his own work, and ascribing
it to themselves” [Marbury].

The career of a great conqueror has
something intoxicating. Before Na-
poleon men degraded themselves and
became idolaters. The sin of the world-
power is two-fold; first, it deals with
the property of God as if it were its
own ; secondly, it does not honour God
for the success granted to it, but its own
power [Lange].

Ver. 17. 1. The question—“ Shall
they?” 2. From whence the answer.
(a) reason? (b) philosophy? (c) expe-
rience? (d) it must be left where the
Psalmist leaves it (Ps. lxxiv. 22). 3.
The right attitude in ch. ii.

Vers. 13—17. There is a limit set
to the power of the wicked. 1. God is
holy. 2. But the work of the wicked
is unholy. For, (a) It is a work of
hatred against the righteous. (0) It is
an abuse of the powers bestowed by
God. (c) It does nothing for God, but
everything for itself (ver. 15). (d) It
does not give God honour, but makes
itself an idol (ver. 16). 3. Therefore it
must have an end (ver. 17) [Lange].


TO CHAPTER I.
and the perpetual torment of virtue
[Socrates].

(Verei. — ignite. Self-assumed


superiority of the Chaldeans. ‘“ Every
man has just as much vanity as he wants
understanding ” [Pope].
** They whose wit
Values itself so highly, that to that
All matters else seem weak, can hardly love,


Or take a shape or feeling of affection,
Being so self-endeared ’’ [Shakespeare].


Vers. 12—17. Let us at all times
cherish in our minds an unrelaxing
certainty, that we shall always find the
Almighty perfect in his justice to all,
and in everything, and individually to
each of us, as soon as we aave suflicient
knowledge of his operations with respect
to us. Let us wait with patience
until what we do not perceive or cannot


496 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUE. [CUAP. IL.





comprehend shall be satisfactorily eluci- Walking in Hyde Park one day, I saw
dated to us. We expect this equity in a piece of paper on the grass. I picked
our intercourse with each other. Let us it up; it was a part of a letter; the
also so conduct ourselves, in all our beginning was wanting, the end was not
thoughts and feelings with reference to there: I could make nothing of it.
Him, whatever may be his present or Such is providence. You cannot see
future dispensations personally to our- beginning or end, only a part. When
selves [ Turner) you can see the whole, then the mystery

Shall they # Providence is often mys- will be unveiled. [Tomas Jones, 1871].
terious and a source of perplexity to us.





CHAPTER II.


CrirroaL Notes.] Watch] As those ascending high places to look into the distance (2 Kings ix.
17: 2 Sam, xviii. 24), Set] Plant myself tirmly. To see] what God will say. Unto] Lit. iz me;
outwardly to the ear, inwardly to the heart; fixed in purpose and earnest in mind he waits for God’s
revelation. Reproved] when reasoned with, for my expostulation with God, 2. Vision] Outwardly
scen and inwardly perceived. Write] The revelation important and immutable. Plain| Clearly, that
it may easily be read (cf. Deut, xxvii, 8; i. 5). 8. For] The reason for writing. Appointed] 7. e. future
time fixed by God (Dan. x. 14; xi. 27). Speak] Lit. breathe out (then speak), hasten to the end.
Tarry | Linger, delay a little. Come] It is certain, though future, Not tarry| Be behindhand or
go beyond the appointed time. 4.] Judgment announced. Lifted] Puffed up, then haughty or
presumptuous. Upright] Not straight, not without turning or trickery. The heart of the enemy
was proud and displeasing to God. But] Marking the contrast between the Jew and the Chaldean
the believer and the unbeliever. Live] Opposed to death. The boast of power in one destroyed the
constant faith of the other secures salvation. Faith] from @mdamn, to be firmly rooted or established
as a building upon its foundation, or a tree by its roots. Constant and strong faith is necessary under
all the afilictions of life (cf. Rom. i, 17: Heb. x. 88). 5.] The thought further developed by a
proverbial saying with special reference to the Chaldeans, They were given to wine and insatiable
conquest. “ Wine is treacherous ; the haughty man stayeth not at home”’ [Hend,] (cf. Prov. xxx. 1).
Proud] Elated, haughty (Prov. xxi, 24). Home| For he longs to go forth to destroy. Desire] Lit.
soul ; passions widen or enlarge the soul (Ps. xxvii, 12; xli, 2,3; Isa, v. 14), Hell] Which is insatiable
(Proy, xxx. 15). Death] Which spares none, but swallows up every living thing (Prov. xxvii. 20).
Gather] Lit. hath gathered. ‘‘ He describes it, for the rapidity with which he completes what he
longs for, as though it were already done” [Pusey]. 6. These] “‘ nations” and “people” (ver. 4).
Parable] A derisive song (Isa. xiv. 4: Mie. ii. 4), some; ode, given by others, enigmatical in character.
Woes] fivefold given, a song raised by the oppressed over the fall of the oppressor. First woe, ill-
gotten gains. Increaseth] ?. ¢. seizes what does not belong to him, How long] will he do this with
impunity? Ladeth] To make heavy by a weight or load upon one. Thick clay] (mass of dirt) Lit,
a cloud of clay, which will cause her ruin, Many render ‘‘@ burden of pledges gained by usury,”
taken by an unmerciful usurer, which he will be compelled to give up (Deut. xxiv. 10), 7. Shall]
Answer to question, How long? Bite] of a suake; the enemy like savage vipers (Jer. vill. 17). Rise]
Shake or rouse up from possession. 8. Because] Reason for woe. Many] Boundless the spoil.
Remnant] Only a remnant left, will be sutticient to punish. “ Blood, land, and city] Understood
generally, and not restricted to the Jews with their country and its metropolis” [Hend.]. 9 Woe]
the second, against establishing a permanent settlement by godless gain. Evil] Covetousness sur-
passingly evil and fatal to itself. House] Not the palace Ca the dynasty (ver. 10). High] As
eagles build nests on high to protect from harm (cf, Job xxxix. 27); “‘so does the Chaldean
seek to elevate and strengthen his rule by robbery and plunder, that it may never be wrested from his
family again.” 10. Shame] the result instead of glory. 11.] Personification. Cry] For the in-
Justice they had suffered (cf. Luke xix, 40). Answer] the stone, ¢. ¢, join in its crying, 12. Woe! the
third. Town] Babylon, rebuilt and enlarged by spoils of blood (Dan. iv. 30), 18, Fire| Lit, to
suffice the fire ; conflagration and depopulation the result of all labour and fatigue, 14, For] God
has determined this result ; usurped glory must be destroyed that his glory may spread (Isa. xi, 9)
Waters] Surpassing abundance. This predictive of the gospel times. 15. Woe] the fourth. Bottle]
Skin in common use, Look] with delight (Gen, ix, 22). Naked.] The prostrate condition of the
drunken man a figure of the overthrow of a conquered nation (Nah. iii, 11), and the uncovering of
the shame denotes the ignominy that has fallen upon it (Nah, iii. 5: Isa. xlvii. 3). 16. Thor” shalt


CHAP. I1.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY . HABAKKUK. 497


drink of the cup of sorrow (Jer. xxv. 15—17). Foreskin] As one uncircumcised. Spewing]}
Shameful vomiting will cover thy glory, #. ¢, destroy thee. Turned] Lit. shall turn itself from other
nations. 17, Violence] Outrage in spoiling cedar forests to adorn magnificent edifices (cf, Isa.
xiv, 8). Cover] Completeness of the destruction. Similar violence to that which they had displayed
should fall upon them. 18.] Exposure of the folly of Babylon’s idolatry. What] use? none what-
ever, Lies} Lying oracles connected with idol worship. Dumb] Nonentity (1 Cor. xii. 1).
19. Awake] to help. Teach} Ironical, i¢ teach! Breath] Not at all breath, the spirit of life (Jer.
x, 14), 20. But] Sublime contrast between Jehovah and utter vanity of idols. Temple] Enthroned
in heaven ready to protect his people and destroy their enemies (Ps. xi. 4), He is not encased in
gold and silver, All] ¢. ¢. the people must submit in reverence before him, and wait for his judgment
(cf. con. i. 7; Zech, ii, 17), It becomes all to adore such a God who will speak to the soul hushed
in silence.


HOMILETICS.
Toe WarrTine Servant.— Verses 1, 2.


Habakkuk had two great difficulties in justifying the Divine government. First,
the wickedness of the Jews and their oppression of the righteous few among them.
God removed this difficulty by predicting that he would visit the corruption with
captivity, and that the Chaldeans would punish them. But a second objection
presented itself that the Chaldeans were worse than the Jews, the avengers more
demoralized than the people. Hence the aspect appeared dark indeed to the prophet.
The destruction of the temple, cessation of national worship, and universal depravity.
Anxious for further light, he determines to take a stand and discern in the light of
God’s presence the solution of his difficulties.

I. The fixed purpose of the prophet. “TI will stand and set me (firmly) upon the
tower.” The prophet made use of the means which God put within his reach to
solve his doubts. All temptations and perplexities should lead us to the sanctuary
of God. We should direct our prayer to him and look up beyond human vision.
Habakkuk desired—1. To be Divinely enlightened. ‘To see what he will say to
me.” More truth and more light could be had. God could give these, and he
would wait upon him in singleness of aim. The voice, the vision from God would
clear away the mists and satisfy the heart. Men are ignorant, and reason is dumb in
such circumstances. ‘“ I will hear what God the Lord will speak.” 2. To be Divinely
corrected. ‘‘ What I shall answer when I am reproved.” He had been pleading
with others and they had beset him with objections. He desires to be instructed
and guided in his reply. Or he might have cherished wrong thoughts and uttered
wrong words concerning God in his darkness. The psalmist stumbled and was
hasty in his words, when he saw good men suffer and bad men prosper. “ Let us
be silent, that we may hear the whisper of the gods,” says Emerson. II. The
appropriate attitude of the prophet. “I will stand upon my watch.” This
position was most appropriate and safe. It includes—1l. Outward retirement. He
ascended the tower, excluded himself from the noise of the city and the excitement
of society. Alone like Moses in the rock, he sought intercourse with God. “ Apart
from the world, and under the tuition of heaven, he was instructed in the principles
of Divine wisdom.” “All weighty things,” says Richter, “are done in solitude,
that is, without society.” “ Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with
thee.” 2. Inward meditation. The prophet was a man of reflection and prayer.
He searched his own heart and examined his own ways. He gave his whole
attention to his work. ‘“ Little can be done well to which the whole mind is not
applied,” says Johnson. In our great work there must be withdrawal from the
world and concentration in self. “Commune with thine own heart.” 3. Earnest
expectation. The prophet waited in patience and perseverance. He did not think
that his prayer was done with when offered. He did not find relief in his attitude
but in God’s answer. “I will watch to see.” Ministers must acquit themselves
like watchmen in an army or in a city, be awake when others sleep, and patiently
seek to be filled with light and truth to give to others in times of darkness and danger.

83


498 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HABAKKUR. {cHaP. II.





III. The gracious answer to the prophet. “And the Lord answered me.”
Expectation was not disappointed. God is sometimes found of them that seek him
not. But he pledges himself to hear those who sincerely call upon him. “ He
said not, Seek ye me in vain.” The answer was an assurance of ruin to the Chal-
deans when the chastisement of Israel was accomplished. It was far distant, would
try the faith of God’s people, but the event was certain and would come to pass.
The answer was to be written in a conspicuous place, recorded for the help of the
people in the suspension of the fulfilment, and known as a proof of Divine power
and faithfulness when accomplished. Both Israel and Chaldea must own. “ And
the thing was true, but the appointed time was long.”


Tor ApPoiInTeD Vision.—Verses 2, 3.


The prophet must not only hear but record the Word of God. What the seer
beholds he must write. “ Write the vision.”

I. To be permanently recorded. The preacher must die, for all flesh is grass.
Tradition is uncertain and may be corrupted. Philosophy is insufficient, and human
reason is delusive. The testimony of men would continually perplex and mislead.
But the Word of God stands for ever, an assurance and guide to all generations.
“To the law and to the testimony.” II. To be universally understood. “And
make it plain upon tables.” It must be legibly and correctly written upon accus-
tomed material. Not the impressions, the recollections and surmisings of the mind,
not something like the thing, but the thing itself. It must be delivered in sim-
plicity, not hidden in flowers of rhetoric ; adapted to the lowest capacity, not merely
to the thoughtful few. “It takes all our learning to make things plain,” says
Usher. ‘ Write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly” (Deut.
xxvii. 8). III. To be prominently fixed. “That he may run that readeth it.”
It must be so conspicuous that it may catch the eye of the traveller, hinder no
duty, but read at once without difficulty. Some think that the reference is to the
ancient posts which directed the man-slayer to the city of refuge, and that the reading
should be “he that runneth may read.” “Refuge” wasa word so legible that one
running for life was neither delayed nor puzzled to read. The writing (a) Ezxcites
attention. No one passes without noticing it. (5) Directs the steps. “This is the
way, walk ye in it.” .(c) Encourages speed by well-grounded conviction of its
truthfulness, ‘The words of the Lord are pure and forcible.” IV. To be a little
delayed. ‘The vision is yet for an appointed time.” God’s promises reach a
long distance and comprehend vast agencies. Delay is discipline to us, and God
has reasons for it. It tests our faith, cultivates our patience, and excites our hope.
We cannot hasten the end and must therefore wait. We must not measure God's
thoughts by our ways, and the purposes of eternity by the hours of time. We
must not attribute delay to impotency or forgetfulness. ‘The Lord is not slack
concerning his promise.” ‘And the thing was true, but the time appointed was
long: and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision,” &c.
(Dan. x. 1, 14).


‘HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 3. 1. As the mercies promised


trying, and delivering. 2. The Lord’s
to the Church are in the hands of God,


so is the timing of them; we are not
therefore to expect that the performance
of comfortable promises or of threatened
vengeance will be always ready at our
bid, but we must wait the Lord’s time,
who hath his own seasons for afflicting,


delaying to appear diminisheth nothing
of the certainty of performarce that he
hath promised to the Church. 3. But
such is our weakness, that when he
delayeth the performance we are ready
to think that he denies it to all, which
is to contradict the verdict of Scripture —


CHP. I. |


here published [Hutcheson]. “ God’s
time,” says one, “to visit his people with
his comforts is when they are most
destitute of other comforts, and other
comforters.”
Divine slowness. 1. The history of
the earth illustrates this principle.
(1) Creation. (2) The movement of the
seasons. 2. The history of all life
illustrates this principle. (1) Individual
life in man. (2) Life in national history.
3. Revealed religion harmonizes with
this principle. (1) The long interval
between promise and the coming of
Christ. (2) The manner of his coming,
not as the thoughts of men anticipated.
(3) The history of revealed religion since
the appearance of Christ. (4) The
spiritual history of individual believers.
(5) So with the events which make up
the story of life [Dr. R. Vaughan].
God's word speaks and lies not. 1. It
speaks at the end, therefore wait. It
will not tarry beyond, though it may
tarry till the very hour. (1) Impatience
leads to idolatry, as in the case of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK.


499


Israelites waiting for Moses (Ex. xxxiii.
2). Impatience leads to self-dest:x«tion,
as in the case of Saul waiting for Samuei
(1 Sam. xiii.). 2. It speaks ard lies
not. All failure is a kind of lying.
(1) Failure in truth is a lie in word.
(2) Failure in performance is a lie in
act. ‘Every man is a liar, either by
imposture, and so in purpose, or by im-
potency, and so in the event, deceiving
those that rely upon him (Ps. Ixii. 9).
But God is faithful and cannot he, “a
God of truth and without iniquity, just
and right is he’” [Trapp]. 3. Hence
wait for the fulfilment. 1t will not tarry,
it will not lie. “»Waiting comprises in
it (1) faith ; (2) hope; (3) patience, or
waiting to the end for the time which
the Lord has appointed, but which he
intends us to wait for” [Lange].

Surely come. 1. Here is the truth of
the decree. ‘The vision is yet for an
appointed time.” 2. Here is the truth
of the word. “It shall speak and not
lie.” 3. Here is the truth of the deed.
“Tt will surely come” [Marbury].


HOMILETICS.
Tue Great ContTRAst, OR THE BELIEVER AND THE UNBELIEVER.— Verse 4.


These words are generally applied to the Chaldeans, but we apply them to the
Jews. Some believed the words of the prophet and others did not. “‘ While those
Jews who, elated by false views of security, refused to listen to the Divine message
should have their security disturbed and their minds agitated by the calamities with
which they would be visited, such as lived righteously before God and men should
experience true happiness in the exercise of faith in that message and others which
God might communicate to them by his prophets” [Henderson].

I. The unbeliever’s character and conduct. God takes notice of man’s be-
haviour in times of trial, for it tends to promote peace or disturbance, to honour or
dishonour God. “Behold.” The unbeliever is first described. 1. He is proud in
heart. ‘His soul which is lifted up.” The source of all sin is pride. In the
oppression of the Chaldeans, the exaltation of anti-christ, and the rejection of the
gospel, pride is manifest. “From heaven the sinning angels fell.” “ Pride,” says
one, “had her beginning among the angels that fell, her continuance on earth, her
end in hell.” 2. He ts perverted in mind. His soul “is not upright in him.”
He is not straight, but crooked in his thoughts and purpose. He does not please
God, but denies his providence and ridicules his word. He is conceited in his own
wisdom, and will not wait upon God. Uprightness of character results from peace
with God and reliance upon his grace. We see the stature, the complexion, and
the deeds of men: God here reads the heart and censures the wicked. “The in-
tegrity of the upright shall guide them : but the perverseness of transgressors shall
destroy them.” 3. He is restless in his soul. Luther gives, “ He who is stiff-necked
will have no rest in his soul.” Pride inflates and unsettles. Those who trust to
themselves are disquieted within them, excited by fear, stirred to fresh adventures
by hope, but disappointed in their pursuits. Unbelief can never give rest of mind.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKOUR. (cHar. i


600





He who toils, contrives, and wearies himself in pursuit of sin will find his labour
in vain. Like the treasure in the miser’s dream, all will vanish in a world of reality.
“If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.” II. The believer's
character and conduct. Opposed to those who proudly reject the prophetic vision,
others give it a cordial reception. 1. The believer confides in the word. He has
firm attachment to God, unwavering confidence in his promise, and waits patiently
for its fulfilment. This faith is opposed to the pride of the enemy on the one hand
and self-assertion on the other. “ Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be
established ; believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.” 2. The believer lives by
his faith in the word. “The just shall live by his faith.” It supports in deepest
sorrows, and brings comfort in darkest times. It gives real life. Whatever outward
or inward sorrows assail, faith sustains in life and, enjoyment. We begin to live
by faith in Christ. Through union with him we gain spiritual, holy, and progressive
life here and eternal life hereafter. Steadfast faith is the source and element of the
highest life. ‘But without faith it is impossible to please God.” 3. The believer
is delivered from death by his faith in the word. Delivered from temporal calamity,


spiritual death, and eternal wrath. Out of faith springs life.
continuous life; but life never dwells in the unbelieving heart.


Abiding faith is
If faith in God


only is the source of life, then pride which estranges from God results in death.


Faith raises a man from danger and sets him on high (Ps. xci. 14).
“kept by the power of God unto salvation.”


Lord shall be safe.”


There he ig
“‘ Whoso putteth his trust in the


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 4. 1. Unsanctified affliction be-
gets a wrong spirit. The soul is lifted
up. Instead of humbling and correcting,
trial often discovers pride, murmuring
against Divine sovereignty, and vain
thoughts of self. 2. The wrong spirit
when cherished under affliction begets
apostasy. Those who are proud and
complain will not long wait upon God.
They become self-sufficient, unrighteous,
and withdraw from God. “The just
shall live by faith: but if any man draw
back my soul shall have no pleasure in
him.” This verse containeth an anti-
thesis, wherein two contraries are set in
opposition one against the other. (1) The
man that is lifted up. In which note
two things. (a) His notation, “lifted
up.” (0) His censure, “his soul is not
right.” (2) The just man. (a) By just
we understand not legal righteousness
but evangelical righteousness, rectitude
of obedience and holy life. (b) He
shall live, naturally, against oppression ;
spiritually, in Jesus Christ; eternally, in
glory [Marbury].

Notice the relation between righteous-
ness, faith, and life. Three words con-
taining the essence of creeds and the
requirements of the gospel. “This


sentence, the just shali live by faith, is
universal, belonging at once to Jews and
Christians, to sinners who are first being
justified, as also to those who are already
justified. For the spiritual life of each
of these begins, is maintained, and grows
through faith. When then it is said, the
just shall live by his faith, this word his
marks the cause, which both begins and
preserves life. The just, believing and
hoping in God, begins to live spiritually,
to havea soul right within him, whereby
he pleases God; and again, advancing
and making progress in this his faith and
hope in God, therewith advances and
makes progress in the spiritual life, in
rightness and righteousness of soul, in
the grace and friendship of God, so as
more and more to please God” [Pusey].
This is an answer to those that ask, What
shall we do till the vision speak? how
shall we hold out till it come? till the
70 years of captivity be expired? “The
just shall live by faith,” saith he, and
shall make a good living of it too; he
shall live and be safe by the same faith
whereby he is just. He shall feed upon
his faith, as some read that (Ps, xxxvii
3) [Trapp].


OMAP. II. ] HOMILETIZ COMMENTARY: HABAKKOR. 501


HOMILETICS.
Wine a Decerver.—Verse 5.


This verse not only developes the thought of the preceding, but adds another
feature. Yea also, i. e. add to this that wine is treacherous [cf. Keil]. The general
rule is applied to all oppressors, and especially to the Chaldeans, who were addicted
to the sins here described.

I. Wine deceives in its nature. Its victims are mocked and grievously
deceived. Wine promises pleasures which it cannot give. Strong drink is raging,
not that ‘ good creature” which some think it is. Intoxicating drinks abuse men,
deceive, and lead them astray. They are overcome, beguiled, and befooled before
they are aware. ‘‘ Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is
deceived thereby is not wise.” II. Wine deceives in its effects. ‘That it
strengthens the system is a deception; chemistry has shown that it contains no
nourishment for the body. That it enriches the national revenue is a deception.
It is true that the taxes on alcoholic drinks bring millions annually into the national
exchequer, but how much of the wealth of the nation does it exhaust by the pauper-
ism and crime which it creates! Alcoholic drink is the great false prophet in
England” [Dr. Thomas]. Prince and people, priest and prophet, have “erred
through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way.”

‘Ah! sly deceiver! branded o’er and o’er,


Yet still believed! exulting o’er the wrecks
Of sober vows ” [ Armstrong, I., M.D., 1744].


WInE anpd ITs AssocraTes.— Verse 5.


Drunkenness itself is sin, and is the cause of other sins. Those who are given
to wine are sensual and voluptuous. Wine never stands alone. We have here its
associated evils.

I. Pride. ‘He isa proud man.” The proud man thinks too much of himself,
despises others, and is arrogant in his conduct, “ealeth in proud wrath.” Pharaoh,
Seunacherib, and Nebuchadnezzar are fearful examples of pride. Flushed with wine,
Belshazzar and his princes desecrated the sacred vessels and insulted God. The
drunkenness of the inhabitants enabled Cyrus to take Babylon, well provisioned and
strongly fortified. Pride “is a vice,” says Hooker, ‘ which cleaveth so fast unto the
hearts of men, that if we were to strip ourselves of all faults one by one we should
andoubtedly find it the very last and hardest to put off” ‘‘A man’s pride shall
bring him low.” II. Ambition. “ Neither keepeth at home.” Restless in spirit
and in condition. Though home be a palace, to a discontented mind it is a prison.
Drunk with ambition, as well as wine, the Chaldeans were not satisfied with their
splendid kingdom, but sought to enlarge it. The world cannot fill the abyss of the
soul without God. The man who treads others under his feet exalts his gate
(Prov. xvii. 19) above his neighbour, affects a style beyond his rank, and seeks
destruction. Think of Alexander, Cesar, and Napoleon. When Philip was thrown
down in the games he saw the marks of his body, and said, “ How little a parcel of
earth will hold us when we are dead, who are ambitiously seeking after the whole
world while living.” ITI. Covetousness. “ Who enlargeth his desire as hell,” &c.
Covetousness and greed of wealth result from pride, Covetous men invade the
rights and seize the property of othcrs. One nation will not satisfy without another,
The ambitious “ gathereth unto him all nations and heapeth unto him all people.”
This passion is never satisfied. 1. It is like Hades, which devours in its desire and
act, and ever cries Give, give. ‘“ Hell and destruction are never full.” 2. It ts like
death, which has slain its millions and ready to take as many more. Death spares
none but is terrible to all. ‘Hell hath enlarged herself and opened her mouth


without measure”


602 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK. {cHuaP. I.





Tus Sin or tap Avaricious.—Verses 6—8.


The first woe is pronounced, and the sentence passed, upon avaricious men in these
words. ‘The fundamental thought is like that expressed concerning the Chaldzan,
in Isa, xiv. 12—14. Ambition manifests itself in cruelty, and proud edifices built
upon the ruins of others.

I. Avaricious men increase their guilt. The covetous and those who thrive
unlawfully in the world are under woe. They multiply their sins and their judg-
ments. They break God’s commands, and add injustice to their apostasy (1 Tim.
vi. 10). ‘Great abundance of riches cannot of any man,” says Erasmus, “be both
gathered and kept without sin.” “A faithful man shall abound with blessings ;
but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent.” II. Avaricious men
merease their enemies. ‘Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee?”
&c. God will not long permit their conduct to prosper. Enemies will suddenly
rise up to disturb their rest. When they are most secure and least prepared nations
will retaliate ; “the remnant of the people,” whom they have despised, or whom
God has hid from their fury, will rise against them. Those whom they have op-
pressed shall taunt them. Nations and “ many nations” will destroy them. Covetous
and ambitious men turn God and their fellow-creatures into their enemies. “ For
many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of them also, and I will
recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the works of their own
hands.” III. Avaricious men increase their dangers. Men haste to be rich
and rush into danger. 1. They heap up booty for others. ‘Thou shalt be for
booties unto them.” Notwithstanding their labour and strength, the enemy will
easily overcome them. Their wealth gotten by vanity will be diminished. Men
collect and foster what they cannot keep. They brood over ill-gotten gains which
forsake and disappoint them. ‘As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth
them not; so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.” 2. They insure fearful retribution. As
they had spoiled others, they would be spoiled themselves. “ Refrain from covet-
ousness,” says Plato, “and thy estate shall prosper.” Innocent blood which they
had shed would be avenged upon the land, the city, and the people (ver. 8).
“When thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled ; and when thou shalt make
an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 6. 1. Ambitious men become pression, robbery, cruelty. 3. With
contemptible to others, They are igno- folly. What is that heaped up t—only
minious, a taunting proverb, a public “clay.” What results from all toil and


derision. “Shall not these take up a vexationt—-a burden for themselves;


parable against him?” 2. Ambitious
men have no right to the possession of
that which they illegally acquire. Unjust
conquest brings a curse. “ Woe to him
that increaseth.that which is not his.”
3. Ambitious men will be stripped of all
their unjust acquisitions. To what end
does the conqueror sweep all nations
together. Not for himself, but for
others. “ Riches do not exhilarate us
so much with their possession as they
torment us with their loss” [Gregory].
Riches are often—1. Connected with
covetousness, 2, With violence, — op-


“Jadeth himself.” “ A bag of gold from
a Western steamer was found bound to
the neck of the robber, his treasure
having sunk him” [Van Doren]. “A
great fortune isa great slavery ” [Seneca].

Ver. 8. People shall spoil thee.
Avaricious men are spoiled: 1. In their
Friends ; who fall away, taunt, and help
to strip them, 2. In their dignities ;
which are tainted by sin and fall into
dust, 3. In their reputations; their
names are a proverb in the land, and
hated by all men. 4. In their posterity ;
who are cursed by the sins of theiz


CHAP. II. ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK.


503





fathers, and cut off from the earth.
“God loves to retaliate, to spoil the
spoilers by a remnant of the people, by
such as were of no note, and much


and his Macedonians. So the Roman
empire was miserably rent and torn by
the Goths, Vandals, Huns, Lombards,
people not before heard of, and the


unlikely to do such exploits. Thus he
spoiled these Babylonians, by Cyrus and
his Medes ; the Persians, by Alexander


Greek empire by Turks, Tartars, Saracens,
Seythians” [ Trapp].


HOMILETICS.
Tue Evin Covetrousnuss.— Verses 9—11.


The second woe is now pronounced against coveting still more, and aiming still
higher. The desire to build stately palaces, to be exempt from common misfortunes,
and to perpetuate human greatness, is condemned. It is an evil covetousness or
gain.

I. The design of this covetousness. ‘That he may set his nest on high,” &c.
1. To enjoy the comforts of life. The covetous seek ease and comfort, make their
nest in their acquisitions, and feather it for their offspring, as the eagle builds on
high to save its young from destruction, They think their prosperity can never
change, and believe they have enough to secure perpetual comfort. “Soul, thou
hast much goods laid up for many years ; take thine ease,” &. 2. To escape the
calamities of life. ‘That he may be delivered from the power of evil.” He fears
evil from those whom he has injured, and builds on high, and fortifies himself
against dangers. But what avails the height, when sin is in the foundation?
Babylon was built on high, encircled by walls which no invader could scale or


shatter. But it was levelled to the dust, and its proud king ranked with the
brutes. God can overthrow the strongest tower, and terror invade the proudest
conscience. ‘ Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, and though thou set thy nest


among the stars, thence will I bring thee down” (Ob. 4: Jer. xlix. 16). II. The
proofs of this covetousness. The very buildings which they rear cry out against
their conduct. God’s works speak of his wisdom, power, and glory. So man’s
works declare his skill and his guilt. Works of mercy are memorials before God,
and plead there; works of cruelty and wrong cry out for vengeance upon the
oppressor. 1. The stones in the wall cry out. 2. The beam out of the timber
responds to the cry. Here are strange witnesses, woeful antiphonies in sin. If
everything else is silent, their houses built by oppression and blood shall testify
against them. The whole creation groans beneath the bondage of their corruption.
“Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by
wrong; that useth his neighbour’s service without wages, and giveth him not for
his work.” III. The results of this covetousness. The covetous maa takes a
wrong course for his wealth, his family, and his posterity. With all his pains and
schemes he cannot preserve himself from utter ignominy and ruin. 1. He inflicts
personal injury. ‘And hast sinned against thy soul.” Men neglect their souls
in pursuit of the world, and find their gain in the end to be a poor bargain. “The
covetous man heaps up riches not to enjoy them, but to have them; and starves
himself in the midst of plenty, and most unnaturally cheats and robs himself of
that which is his own ; and makes a hard shift to be as poor and miserable with a
great estate as any man can be without it” [T%llotson]. In the present world he
disquiects himself, pierces himself through with many sorrows ; and in the world
to come he will lose what the whole world cannot redeem—


“ Some, o’ereenamour’d of their bags, run mad,
Groan under gold, yet weep for want of bread” [ Young].


2. He brings social disgrace. ‘“ Thou hast consulted shame to thy house.” B):
cutting off many people, he gained disgrace not safety. Mighty conquerors who


5t4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK.


{cHaP. 11.


aa


destroy others do not secure their own throne.


Those who scandalise, undermine,


or impoverish their neighbours to make room for themselves, turn their own glory


and that of their posterity into shame (Prov. xv. 25—27; xiv. 11).


“ He that


trusteth in his riches shall fall ; but the righteous shall flourish as a branch.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. Evil covetousness not a good
covetousness. ‘ Covet earnestly the best
gifts,” &c. The desire itself was evil in
its nature. Its results were evil, from
which he sought to deliver himself.
Covetousness is always evil when joined
with ambition, infidelity, and confidence
in earthly wealth. On high. 1. The
foundation of the building: pride, ambi-
tion, and earthly power. 2. The fate of
the building. Overthrown by Divine
power. “He who builds his house with
other people’s property, collects stones
for his grave” [Cramer]. What the
world calls protection, cannot protect
against God’s judgments; death mounts


fence against danger. Nests are builded
close, and so they are warm, and they
are built either on high, or out of the
way in some secret place, and so they
are safe [ Caryl].

Ver. 10. Thou hast consulted. Holy
Scripture overlooks the means, and
places us at the end of all. Whatever
the wicked had in view, to satisfy ambi-
tion, avarice, passion, love of pleasure,
or the rest of man’s immediate ends, all
he was doing was leading on to a further
end—shame and death. He was bring-
ing about not only these short-lived
ends, but the lasting ends beyond, and
these far more than the others, since


over all rocks [Diedrich]. A nest im-
ports two things: first, warmth, or a
fence against cold : secondly, safety, or a


that is the real end of a thing which
abides, in which it at last ends [Pusey].


HOMILETICS.
Tue City or Bioop.— Verses 12—14.


The third stanza, naturally suggested by the preceding verse, describes the
method by which they carried out their ambitious ends. They might pretend
public good, and seek to establish popular government ; but the wealth of the
kingdom was gained by bloody wars, and the city enlarged by captive tribes from
other nations. ‘They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.”

I. The city was built with wrong materials. It was built with blood. God’s
people and heathen nations were oppressed, compelled to serve the king, and labour
on the fortifications. All private fortunes gained by cruelty, all empires and
greatness built and defended in contempt for God, and by the blood of men, are
established by iniquity. They may impose upon the outward eye, seem strong
and majestic, but they are inwardly rotten ; will decay and fall to ruins, ‘“ Woe
to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and robbery; the prey departeth not.”
II. The builders of the city laboured in vain. 1. God frustrated their aims.
Human skill cannot succeed when God is opposed. In the Church and in the
world, nothing can hinder his purposes. He is Lord of Hosts, whom the armies
of heaven and the agencies of earth obey. As in building Babel of old so now
can he confound the design, and frustrate the efforts, of men. ‘ Behold, is it not
of the Lord of Hosts?” 2. God consumed their materials. They toiled and were
disappointed, They built the city, and reared splendid palaces, only for the fire.
They laboured, with intense energy and pride, to accomplish their own ends, but
they ‘“ wearied themselves for very vanity.” Men fatigue themselves in pursuit of
wealth and honour, weary themselves in sin, and the result is consumed in the fire,
“The people shall labour in vain (for vanity) and the folk in (for) the fire, and
they shall be weary.” III. The city shall eventually be destroyed. “For the


OFLAP. II. j HOMILETIC COMMENTARY . HABAKK UR, 60u





earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord.” God will be
known by the judgments which he executes upon wrong-doers. All violence and
injustice, like that of Babylon and Antichrist, will be overturned. The name of
God will be read in the punishment of the wicked, and the deliverance of his
people. The glory of God, obscured by oppression and cruelty, in due time will
shine forth from the clouds, and fill the earth with its splendour. “As truly as I
live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord.”


A Gtorious Day.— Verse 14,


“ For” indicates the reason for the sentence pronounced. God had determined
to manifest his glory in the judgment and overthrow of all ungodly powers (ef.
Isa. ii. 12—21; vi. 3: Num. xiv. 21).

I. The blessing predicted. “The knowledge of the glory of the Lord.” God
is glorious in character and procedure. And of this glory he is so jealous that he
will not give it to another (Isa, xlii. 8). The glory here is the revelation of
impartial justice and irresistible power; a manifestation condemning sin and
honouring truth. Not only the glory, but the knowledge of it, shall fill the earth.
Men shall recognize it, see mercy and judgment, and learn that, “ verily, there is a
reward for the righteous: verily, he is a God that judgeth in the earth.” II. The
method of revealing this blessing. In the connection of the words, we learn
that God reveals and magnifies his glory, when sin is prevalent, and human glory
is decayed. In the destruction of Babylon and all the powers that resemble it, and
in the deliverance and restoration of the Jews, we see the glory of God. But this
is only a type of the destruction of error and the spread of Gospel truth. Both
judgment and mercy are requisite to fill the earth with the glory of the Lord.
Everything hostile to him, and the interests of his people, must be destroyed. The
kingdom of Christ set up, and the earth illuminated with his glory (Rev. xviii. 1).
III. The measure in which this blessing is bestowed. “As the waters cover
the sea.” This indicates—1. Depth. God’s judgments are a mighty deep, and the
knowledge of them shall not be superficial. The nations shall feel thera, and be
convicted by the revelation of the Divine glory. 2. Abundance. The waters cover
the sea, and spread far and wide. This knowledge will fill the earth. 3. Permanence.
The waters of the sea abide, can never be exhausted nor diminished. Knowledge
is increasing, the Gospel is spreading, and the bright day is predicted when “the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea” (Ps.
exit; 19: Isa, xi. 9).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. Labour in the very fire.
Labour which fatigues ; labour in vain ;
labour opposed to God. Sin is labvuur—
the gain is vanity. Then why not
observe who causes this? “It is the
Lord that bringeth all the labours of the
ungodly to loss and vanity, that when
they come to thrash their crop of travail,
they find nothing but straw and chaff.
To express his power to do this he is
here called the God of Hosts, for all
things serve him, and he resisteth the
proud. He layeth their honours in the
dust; he disperseth their riches; he
spoileth them of ali their treasures: he
that exalted them made them low; he


that gave to them taketh away. They
had need to be made to see this; there-
fore he saith, Is it not of the Lord?”
[Marbury].

Ver. 14. The words of God in this
text are full of marrow and fatness, for
God is rich in mercy, so he dilateth his
favours. 1. In the latitude, all the earth
over. 2. In the plenitude, the earth
shall be filled. 3. In the magnitude, the
knowledge of God’s glory. 4. In the
profundity, as the waters cover the sea.

I. The thing to be done. The earth to
be filled with the knowledge of the glory
of God. His moral excellences—holiness,
righteousness and grace: his natural


506


perfections—power, wisdom, omniscience,
and omnipotence to be made known. II.
The necessity of doing it. God is seen
in the physical universe, and in the
powers of the human mind; but sin,
like a mist, hides the glory. No intel-
lectual effort, no human light whatever,
can do the work. God must shine in
Christ, shine into the world, and into
the soul, “to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God” (2 Cor.
iv. 6). ILL. Wail it ever be done? How


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK.


(CHAP. I





dark the days of the prophet! How
improbable the present signs! Yet how
much has been done already ! Sufficient
to guarantee future success. God himself
has pledged his word. ‘The glory of
the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh
shall see it together, for the mouth of
the Lord hath spoken it.”


“So, Jesus, let thy kingdom come ;
Then sin and hell’s terrific gloom
Shall at its brightness flee away,—
The dawn of an eternal day.”


HOMILETICS.
Tue Turee Curs.— Verses 15-—17.


Woe the fourth is pronounced upon beastly luxury, sensuality, and base treat-
ment of subjugated nations. The bottle of wine turns out a cup of wrath, and the
disposition in which it is given is that of voluptuousness and lust of power.

I. The cup of wine. “Woe to him that giveth his neighbour drink.” The
Chaldeans, with insatiable desire, allured neighbouring States, intoxicated them
with lust of war, to obtain booty, and expose them to shame. 1. Drink given toa
neighbour. Drinking oneself is bad enough, but to give to others is worse. To
put the bottle to others is a practice too common in the palace and the public-
house. By the laws of the club or the fashion of the Court, men are constrained
to drink. 2. Drink given to make a neighbour intoxicated. To give drink to a
weary traveller, a cup of cold water in the name of a disciple, is commendable ; but
to offer the bottle with a design to intoxicate, to “make him drunken also,” is
abominable wickedness. 3. Drink given to expose an intoxicated neighbour to
shame and contempt. ‘That thou mayest look on their nakedness.” To look on
such things with delight is most unnatural; to abuse men in such a condition is
awful. Woe to them who entice others to drunkenness that they may take
advantage of them, and mock their infirmities. II. The cup of riot. The shame
with which the enemy was satisfied, was equivalent to riot, or revelling in shame.
Belshazzar drank with his lords and ran to excess. In drink is a breach of
propriety and good temper; “envyings, and murders, revellings, and such-like.”
Day by day we learn the corruption of morals engendered and the crimes com-
mitted in sensuality and drink. Every lust of the flesh finds in drunkenness and
riot its appropriate fuel and fire, and its influence in seduction and ruin baffles all
calculation and conception. ‘Let us walk honestly, as in the day ; not in rioting
and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.”

“Pass where we may, through city or

Village, or lane of this therry nee pre

Though lean and beggared, every twentieth pace

Conducts the unguarded nose to such a whiff

Of state debauch, as makes temperance real.”’
III. The cup of retribution. “The cup of the Lord’s right hand shall be turned
unto thee.” To deal out, in barrel or bottle, inflaming and polluting drinks is not
innocent and blameless conduct. Woe, heavy woe, is pronounced upon such acta
But when the motives are mercenary, and the intentions unkind, the punishment
is heavy. 1. They are filled with shame instead of glory. They sought glory,
thought to be rich by oppressing others, but they lost their reputation and were
filled with shame. Drunkards and ambitious men proclaim their own shame.
Shameful spewing is on their glory. God rejects their services, and nature abhore


OMAP, II.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK. 52





their customs. “Their glory is their shame.” 2. They were treated as they treated
others. ‘‘ Drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered.” God’s judyments
are equitable. As they had drawn others to sensuality and cruelty, so they had tc
drink the very dregs, and become contemptible as a drunken man lying naked, or
an uncircumcised heathen, polluting himself with filthy vomit. Sensuality entails
shame. ‘Those who aid in the degradation of others adopt the most effectual means
to expose themselves. ‘The cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shalt be
arsnken and shalt make thyself naked.” 3. They were overcome with the violence
which they displayed to others. ‘ For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee.”
Violence to nature, in the destruction of the forests ; to beasts, in hunting them for
prey, or chasing them in fright ; to man, in shedding innocent blood. The city, the
country, and the people all suffered. The end of this plunder was not to adorn,
but overwhelm them. The destruction was complete ; “cover thee” (Isa. xiv. 6—8).
Violence done to others will be sure to recoil upon the transgressors ; “to make
them a desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse; as it is this day”
(Jer. xxv. 15—18).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 16. Shame. The shame of the
ungodly cometh forth from himself; the
shame he put others to is doubled upon
. himself; and the very means which he
had used to fill himself with glory and
greatness, cover the glory which by
nature he had with the deeper disgrace,
so that he should be a loathsome and
revolting sight to all. Man veils foul
deeds under fair words; God in his
word unveils the foulness [Pusey].

The Lora’s right hand shall be turned.
1. Retribution among men: turned, Lit.
turn itself from others to you. Every
one’s turn will come. 2. Retribution
measured among men. “The cup of
‘ the Lord’s right hand.” Measure for
measure all sin brings its own retri-
bution; but the violent will suffer
‘‘ violence,” and deeds of shame will be
put to everlasting contempt. Glory.
The Hebrew word for glory properly
signifies weightiness ; as the word twice
here used for shame signifies lightness ;
an elegant opposition, showing that
whatsoever the Babylonians gloried in,
and held themselves honourable for,


should be lightly accounted of, and lie
buried in the sheet of shame, as in a
dunghill of filthy vomit [7rapp].

Vers. 15, 16. That is an extraordinary
kind of argument which infers, from the
mention or prohibition of an extreme
sin, the rightfulness of the intervening
and causative steps. Here, however,
all the stages and agencies are denounced
and condemned—the poisoned potion,
the giving of it, and the final result
[ Temp. SE pene

Ver. 17. Beasts. God avenges cruelty
donetobrutes. Learn—1. The providence
of God over cattle, 2. The treatment
they should receive at the hands of man.
“Hath God care for oxen?” “We
learn here that when God cometh to
execute vengeance, he surveyeth the
whole catalogue of offences; and as he
saith in David, ‘I will reprove thee, and
set them in order before thee,’ the
wrong to the cities, to the men, to the
beasts, to persons, to places, all comes
into account, and the offenders shall
smart for all” [Marbury].


HOMILETICS.


Tue UNPROFITABLENESS oF IpoLATRY.— Verses 18, 19.


This fifth strophe does not utter woe at first, but makes prominent the cause


that leads to it.


Like the rest of heathen nations, the Chaldzans trusted to their


gods, but all hope from this quarter is cut off. Idols profit nothing; it is folly


therefore to carve and honour them.


508 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY HABAKKOUR. | Cap. m1.











I. Idelatry is a system of lies. ‘A teacher of lies.” 1. The ilo! itself rs a
lie. It represents God as visible, finite, and dependent, whereas he is Infinite and
Invisible. It contradicts the word of God and the nature of man ; and represents
carnal conceptions of truth and worship. 2. The teaching of the idol isa le. In
itself and by its priests it sustains delusions. Its oracle is the doctrine of vanities ;
it is a falsehood and a work of errors (Jer. x. 8), leading men to trust in dumb
idols, the work of their own hands (1 Cor. xii. 2). “ We have made lies our refuge,
and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.”

“ God’s omnipresence scems not sensuous ;
Unless he be in us, we are not in him” [ Batley).
II. Idolatry is a system of impotence. Idols may be adorned and beautified,
commended and honoured, but they are only dumb nothings. 1. They are
fashioned by man. Carved and encased with gold and silver, and yet neither
breath, fecling, nor understanding. They are inferior to their maker, how then
can they impart life and help to those who trust them? “They that make a
vraven image are ull of them vanity” (Isa. xliv. 9,10). 2. They respond not to the
requests of man. Men ery “to the wood,” Awake, for our relief ; “to the dumb
stone,” Arise, deliver me, for thou art my God (Isa. xliv. 17): but there is no
answer. A god that cannot speak is nothing. The cries of man must be heard,
the wants of man must be satisfied. Without a true response to the entreaties of
man there is no religion. We cannot animate stocks and stones, Art and science
may create and beautify gods ; but this is labour in vain—will deceive, and nourish
superstition. ‘They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they-
see not; they have ears, but they hear not ; neither is there any breath in their
mouths.” III. Idolatry is a system of vanity. When men have done all they
can, displayed their skill and carved their image, God ridicules the result. Only
wood aud stone, base and inferior matter. That teach / Yes, though dumb it
speaks of impotence, vanity, and folly. 1. What vanity to trust in a god of your
own creation’ If images are made by man, how can they have the being and
authority of God? Why spend your energy in the service of that which will not
profit? “’Tis mad idolatry,” says Shakspeare, “to make the service greater than
the God.” ‘What profiteth the graven image?” 2. What folly to rely upon
that which brings a curse! ‘Woe unto him that said to the wood, Awake.”
Whatever is accounted a god, which is only a creature or a feigned thing, is a curse
to man. It curses human nature by degrading it, and making men like brutes. It
curses the world by bringing down the judgments of God. When men are
determined not to retain God in their thoughts, but to exalt that which is below
themselves to be in the place of God, they become brutish in their knowledge,


vain in their imaginations, and alienated in their hearts. “For this cause God
gave them up unto vile affections.”


THE Diving Court.—Verse 20.


In sublime contrast to idols, Jehovah is set forth in his dwelling-place and
authority. None should dispute with him, but stand in awe before him. In the
court-house of God “ let all the earth keep silence.”

_ L God resides in this court. “The Lord is in his holy temple.” The world
is not empty space. A true and personal God exists ; not like idols dwelling in
temples made with hands, but revealing himself in the visible universe. In heaven
by glory and honour, in earth by grace and goodness. “The Being whose centre
is every where, but whose circumference is nowhere.” In every state and condition
God is ever near. “The Lord is in his holy temple.” II. God governs in this
court. He dwells in his temple, and has not left the world to chance, inflexille
law, or abstract powers. His throne is on high, and has neither been overturned
aor vacaied. He judges the world in righteousness, de'ivers his people in distress


GHA, 11] | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HABAKKUK. 508


er ey en ree oe


and punishes the insolence of the wicked. He is not enshrined in gold and silver ;
“but our God is in the heavens,” reigning supreme over all the nations of the
earth. He is the world’s great King, discerning and rewarding the works and
ways of men. ‘The Lord’s throne is in heaven; his eyes behold, his eyelids try
the children of men.” III. God demands silence in his court. “Let all the
earth keep silence.” If we are silent in courts of law, if all are reverent and
solemn before an earthly judge, how should we stand before Almighty God.
1. Let sinners tremble at his judgments. He will strike idolaters dumb, convince
the wicked of folly, and cover them with shame. 2. Let saints trust in his word
If perplexed, “ hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God ; for the day of the
Lord is at hand” (Zeph. i. 7). If afflicted, “be still, and know that | am God”
(Ps. xlvi 10). If weakened in faith, and disappointed in prayer, “Keep silence
before me, O islands; and let the people renew their strength: let them come
near: let them speak” (Isa. xli.1). ‘In speaking of God our best eloquence is
silence,” says Hooker. “Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord: for he is raised
up out of his holy habitation.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 18,19. The destruction of idols.
Created by man—deaf and dumb,
impotent and false. Dumb idols: Lit.
dumb nothings. ‘And what else are
man’s idols of wealth, honour, fame,
which he makes to himself, the creatures
of his own hands or mind—their great-
ness existing chiefly in his own imagina-
tion—before which he bows down himself,
who is the image of God?” [Pusey]. The
folly of idol worshippers. ‘Trusting their
own creation—calling upon it as God,
and exposing their own souls. ‘“‘ Here
is a double woe: 1. Loss of labour; 2.
Want of help. In the first they bewray
their folly ; the god of this world hath
made fools of them for turning the glory
of the invisible God into the image of
creatures ; but in the second we find the
misery, for we cannot subsist without
help, and they trust to idols where there
is no help” { Marbury].

Behold. Though the vanity of wor-
shipping idols be palpably gross, so that
seriously to consider it is sufficient to
refute it, yet such is man’s stupidity
that he needs stirring up to notice the
error of his way—to caution him of his
danger, and to wean him from his sins
[cf Hutcheson].

Vers. 4,14, 20. Three bright stars.
As the prophet stood on his eminence
and saw nothing but darkness, God
revealed three great principles which
infused light and life into the gloom—
principles which stand out to this day


to all perplexed, fearful, and sceptical
souls, as stars in a dark sky. 1. The
just shall live by faith, A truth so
important that it is quoted thrice in the
New Testament (Rom. i. 17: Gal. iii.
11: Heb. x. 38). 2. The earth shall
be filled,” &&. 3. The Lord is in his holy
temple. ‘The first of these three lights
reveals the secret of our religion. It is
Faith. Faith in God’s word, and faith
in God’s work. The second opens up to
the faith supposed to exist ; a glorious
promise that all sin, misery, and confusion
which now disgrace and oppress the
earth, shall disappear, and make room for
the glory of the Lord to take their place.
The third sets forth—the stay, the con-
fidence, the breathless silence of the
children of God, while the promise is
fulfilling, and especially when the ways
of God are dark aud mysterious. Think
of the circumstances and prospects of the
prophet, and learn that God, in dis-
pensing his blessings, takes seasons of
despondency and thick gloom—that in
selecting such times for predicting
splendid futures he draws from the
opposition of men and the infidelity of
the Church an illustration of his irre-
sistible majesty and unchangeable truth
[ Anon. ].

Vers. 5—20. Of shameful and hurtful
avarice. 1, Avarice is contrary to the
order prescribed by God ; therefore God
must bring it back to order by chastise-
ment (vers. 1, 63, 7). 2. It is contrary


510


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKOR.


(cHar.


ae


to love, therefore it produces a harvest
of hatred (ver. 6a). 3. It confounds
the ideas of right, therefore wrong must
befall it (ver. 8a). 4. It makes the
mind timid; but where fear is there is
no stability (ver. 9). 5. It accumulates
(riches) with sin, therefore for nothing
(vers. 12, 11, 13, 17). 6. It seeks false
honour, therefore it acquires shame (vers.
15, 16). 7. It sets its heart upon gold
and silver and lifeless things, therefore
it must perish with its lifeless gods
(vers. 18, 19). 8. On the whole it
provokes the judgment of God (vers.
8b, 14, 20) [Lange].


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. Watch. We should follow
providence, and not attempt to force it,
for that often proves best for us which
was least our own doing [ Henry].

Vers. 2,3. Tarry. For our actions
let his word be our guide, and for the
events of things and all that concern us,
let his good pleasure and wise disposing
be our will. Let us give up the rudder
of our life into his hand to be steered
by him [Adp. Leighton]. Prayer is the
rest of our care, and the calm of our
temper [J. Taylor].

Ver. 4. Faith. The life of faith can
only spring from faith; as trees and
plants do from their proper seeds. Faith
begins here with a weak apprehension
of things not seen, and ends with the
immediate vision of God in the world to
come.

Vers. 5, 6. Desire. Could you change
the solid earth into a single lump of
gold, and drop it into the gaping mouth
of avarice, it would only be a crumb of
transient comfort, a cordial drop, en-
abling it to cry a little louder, “Give,
give” [Royal Preacher].

Vers. 9, 10. House. How few houses
have you that those that are now in
them can say, ‘‘ My ancestor dwelt here,
and these were his lands?” Go over
the whole country, few can say so. Men
when they build have conceits. Now I
build for my child, and. for my child’s
child. God crosses them. Either they
have no posterity, or by a thousand
things that fall out in the world, it falls


Ver. 20. Notice—l. The privilege of
the godly. “The Lord is in his holy
temple,” to guide them by his wisdom,
defend them by his power, and save
them by his grace. 2. The duty of the
godly. ‘Let all the earth be silent ;”
but they should acquiesce in his word
and work. “Even so, Lord God
Almighty, true and righteous are thy
judgments.”


“ Wait, O my soul, thy Maker’s will ;
Tumultuous passions, all be still!
Nor let a murmuring thought srise ;
His ways are just, his counsels wise.”


TO CHAPTER II.


out otherwise [Rd. Sibbes].
shame—


Consulted


“ Sin and shame are ever tied together
With Gordian knots, of such a strong thread
spun,
They cannot without violence be undone,”’
[ Webster.]


Vers. 12,13. Vanity. To so small
a purpose is it to have an erected face
towards heaven, and a perpetual grovel-
ling spirit upon earth, eating dust, as
doth the serpent [Bacon]. The empire
of the world is but a crust to be thrown
to a dog [Luther].

Ver. 14. Glory. It is one of the
greatest praises of God’s wisdom, that
he can turn the evil of men to his own
glory [Bp. Hall].

Ver. 15. Drink. Seldom does any
sensual indulgence come alone. One
lust prepares the way for others; the
first step is sure to lead onwards. The
poor deluded victim cannot stop when
he pleases Lo Bridges|.

Vers, 16—18. Shame. There is
none of you that ever entered this house
of pleasure but he left the skirts of his
garment in the hands of shame, and
had his name rolled in the chambers of
death. What fruit had ye then? This
is the question [Bp. Tayler]. The man
wakes from his dream, and finds that
he possesses not an atom of the rich
possessions he had dreamed of [Lorin].

Vers. 18, 19. Idolatry. Any opiuion
which tends to keep out of sight the
living and loving God, whether it be ta


OMAP. 1. }


substitute for him an idol, or any occult
agency, or a formal creed, can be nothing
better than the portentous shadow pro-
jected from the slavish darkness of an
ignorant heart [Hallam]. While earthly
objects are exhausted by familiarity, the
thought of God becomes to the devout
man continually brighter, richer, vaster ,
derives fresh lustre from all that he
observes of nature and providence; and
attracts to itself all the glories of the
universe [ Channing].

Ver. 20. A heathen philosepher once


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK.





$11





asked a Christian, “Where is God?”
The Christian answered, “Let me first
ask you, ‘Where is he not’?” [Arrow-
smith.]. The Will of God is our pole-
star, and, with our eye constantly on it,
we shall be carried safely through every
storm and tempest of this mortal life
[Anon.]. What I do, thou knowest not
now; but thou shalt know hereafter,
is the unvaried language of God in his
providence. He will have credit every
step. He will not assign reasons, because
he will exercise faith [ Wilson].





CHAPTER II.


CrrricaL Norss.] Prayer] joined with praise. Sh ;
to the prophecy. 2. Speech] Keport concerning God’s judgments, Revive]


Shigionoth] (cf. Ps. vii.) ; this verse posterior
reserve, revivify (Ps.


Ixxx. 19): within years of calamity in which we live. Known] Make thy work known. 38.] These


descriptions rest upon earlier revelations of God. Teman, Edom; Paran] (Deut. xxxiii. 2).


God


appeared from Sinai in splendour, which like the morning covered the heavens with light, and filled


the earth with glory.
power veiled (Ps. civ. 2).


4, Horns] #.¢. rays (Ex. xxxiv. 29); side (hand). 1
The splendour was the covering of Divine Majesty. 5.] He comes to


There] In the light was


judge. Feet] Behind him, Burning] Lit. burning heat of the pestilence (Deut. xxxii, 24).
6. Stood] as a warrior. Measured] As a judge (parcel out land, Mic, i. 4), some ; he sets the earth
reeling, springing up as one in fear, Seattered] Broken asunder. Perpetual] Which never moved,
now trembled, bowed, and resolved into dust. Ways] As formerly, so now: , ¢. He follows them
(Job xxii, 15). 7%.) Neighbouring nations tremble at his judgments. Saw} in vision. 8.) Now
judgment is executed. The description rests upon two facts: dividing of Red Sea and of Jordan
(Ex, xv. 18: Ps, civ. 3, 5); and sets forth God the Judge who can smite in wrath the sea of the
world and the rivers of the earth, Salvation] The object of riding; a warlike figure (Ps. xviii. 11:
Ixviii, 17). 9.] Picture of a warrior continued. Naked] Ready to shoot, Oaths] Promises to their
forefathers (Deut. xxxii. 40—42). Cleave] Split into rivers by judicial interposition. 10.] The
form of earth’s surface is changed. Mountains] writhe; the abyss roars and raises its hands
(waves) ; most powerful agitations accompany the theophany. 11. Arrows] Executing justice, turn
light into darkness, or devouring fire (Isa, x. 17), 12.] Acts of judgment connected with the
salvation of Israel. March] Solemn and majestic proceeding (Jud. v. 4: Ps. Ixviii. 8). Thresh]
Tread down the enemy (Mie. iv, 13), 18.] The end of Divine manifestation. Salvation] Rescue.
Anointed] Not any particular king, “but the Davidie King absolutely, including the Messiah, in
whom the sovereignty of David is raised to an eternal duration” [Ae7l]. Head] wounded. Neck]
bared; the injury from above and from below, the very foundation destroyed. The necks of
princes were trodden under the foot of Isracl’s leadeis, and the first-born of Egypt cut off. 14.]
Warlike nations meet the same fate as royal houses. _Staves] The sword of the foe himself, the
instrument of destruction to his armies and villages. Some, “that the hostile troops will slay one
another in confusion” (cf. 1 Sam. xiv. 20: 2 Chron, xx. 23, 24). Came] with swiftness and
violence, like a storm to destroy me. Scatter] The figure of dispersing chaff (Isa. xii. 16; Jer. tee ;
24). Rejoicing] #.¢. directed to swallow the poor in secret (Ps. x. 9). 15. Sea] To destroy t Gi
enemies like Pharaoh’s hosts. No obstacle prevented God’s progress. 16, Trembled] The prophet
describes his own feelings at the coming of Jehovah: first, fear and trembling ; then, exulting joy
(vers. 18, 19). “The alarm pervades his whole body, belly, and bones, ¢. ¢ the softer and firmer
component parts of the body, tis, and feet; 4, ¢. the upper and lower organs of the body.” 17.] The
rouble of the day described, ‘The fig and vine, the noblest fruits of earth, plantations and fields
rield not; folds and stalls empty through the devastation, 18, Yet] God is my inexhaustible source,
and infinite sphere of joy, Strength] to gird me to overcome tribulation. Feet] Swift as hinds
to escape the enemy, and reach high places of eminence and safety. Hence the formule at the end
harmonises with that at the beginning. It is an ode of melody and joy (Isa, xxxvill. 20).


512 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKEUK. (CHAP. 11,











HOMILETICS
Gop’s Voron anp Human Frar.—Verse 2.


The prophet had received an answer to his prayer (ch. ii. 1). Knew the mind
of God towards Jews and Chaldzans: he now submits to God’s will, but fears the
threatened judgments, and prays for his afflicted people.

I. God speaks to men. ‘I have heard thy speech.” If we are willing to hear
the word and know the mind of God, we shall not have long to wait. 1. The
Scriptures are the voice of God. ‘They are given by inspiration of God—make
known the doings, and set forth the requirements of God. ‘The oracles of God
speak to men in wisdom and truth. “Upon whatsoever this title and inscription is
—‘The Word of Jehovah ’—there must we stoop,” says Owen, “and bow down cur
souls before it, and captivate our understandings unto the obedience of faith.”
2. The Christian ministry is the voice of God. God calls to men by his servants,
but they refuse to hear. ‘Thus we learn the necessity of preaching, and what
inconvenience follows when it is not used. Where preaching fails, saith Solomon,
‘the people perish.’ Therefore let every one keep himself in God’s school-house,
and learn his lesson diligently” [Bp. Pilkington]. ‘We are ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us.” 3. Providence is the voice of God.
In times of judgment and revival, in national and personal providences, God speaks
to us. Ponder the dealings of God, rest upon his will, and learn the instruction of
his discipline. ‘Shall there be evil in a «ity, and the Lord hath not done it?”
II. Men should hear the voice of God and fear him. “I have heard thy speech
and was afraid.” In ver. 16 we have the effect of this fear. The prophet stood in
awe at the matter and the majesty of the speaker. It was not a slavish, but a filial
fear, urging him to pray. The best men—Moses, Isaiah, and Daniel—have been
afraid at the voice of God. When the prophet heard the judgments of God—
1. He feared for himself. Ministers should examine their own hearts. Have they
been faithful in their work, pure in their motives, and holy in their lives?
“ Unfaithfulness,” says Bridges, “is to undo ourown souls, as well as our peoples’.”
2. He feared for the Church. Israel were the people, the special work of God
(Isa. xlv. 11). He desired their preservation and prosperity. Ministers should be
anxious for the glory of God, and the conversion of sinners among their people.
3. He feared for the world. When he thought of the threatenings upon the
enemy, he was astonished at their guilt, and desired their wickedness to end.
“The whole world lieth in wickedness ;” good men fear and warn others of the
consequence. “ My flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy
judgments.”

Tue Revivat or Gop’s Wors.—Verse 2.


The prophet saw the impending ruin, wept for his infatuated countrymen, and
wrestled with God to remove or mitigate the punishment of their sins.

I. The blessings desired. The revival of God’s work, and the manifestation of
God’s mercy. 1. The revival of God’s work. ‘O Lord, revive thy work.” God’s
people were afflicted, and God’s cause was low ; new life was desired in the nation,
and fresh favour to the Church. A revival implies deadness. Life may not be
quite extinct, but feeble and decaying. What deadness, formality, and few con-
versions in the Church / The stones and the dust give evidence of decay in Zion.
What worldliness and infidelity in the nation! Everywhere means of grace
neglected, and masses living without God. As Edwards lamented before the
New England revival, so we may confess: “ we have been long in a strange stupor.
The influences of the spirit of God upon the heart have been little felt, and the
nature of them but little taught.” A great necessity exists now for God to “give
us a little reviving in our bondage” (Hzra ix. 8). 2. The manifestation of God's
merey. “In wrath remember mercy.” (a) Generally manifest the favour.


OMAP. IIT. } HOMILESIC COMMENTARY: ARABAKKUK. 518





“Make known.” Make known thy power and providence in the world ; thy pity
and grace in the Church. Let us not guess at thy purposes. Do not remain
hidden and unknown. Glorify thyself in the accomplishment of thy work.
(5) Specially show favour to thy people. Mercy regards our misery. Sin will
bring wrath and prevent mercy to us, But with God there és mercy. The sinner
may be forgiven that he may be feared. God will remember or show mercy to the
penitent. ‘The depths of our misery can never fall below the depths of mercy,”
says Sibbes. “It must be great mercy, or no mercy; for little mercy will never
serve my turn,” said Bunyan. “ Mercy rejoiceth against judgment.” II. The
time in which the blessings are desired. ‘In the midst of the years” are
emphatic words, and twice given. He does not say at the ena of the years. He
thinks it long till then. He prays for something to bedone now. Whatever may
be the remote future, God suspends the punishment, and gives room for penitence
and prayernow  {n darkness stars may shine ; in distress, deliverance be wrought ;
and in wickedness the enemy overthrown. God has a set time to favour Zion, but
this is when his servants take pleasure in her welfare, and favour the dust thereof
(Ps. cii. 13, 14). Trial days of the Church will not be prolonged one moment
beyond the time appointed ; but, meantime, comfort may be given, and we should
renew our prayers for years which have to intervene and pass away. ‘“‘ Look then
upon us, and be merciful unto us, as thou usest to do unto those that love
thy name.” III. The means by which the blessings are to be secured. Man
has many plans, trusts to various institutions and societies; but God has one way
to improve the world. We hit upon a scheme; God implants a principle.
“‘ Revival preachers” and “ revival meetings” may be necessary, but the work is
of God. ‘Thy work.” Instead of looking for new and unusual methods, let the
Church earnestly use what she has. “ Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet for
this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them.” 1. Private prayer.
We are guilty of what has been termed “ the selfishness of the closet.” It is not
my family and my work, but God’s work, that we must remember. Personal
interests must not overlook public good. 2. United prayer. The first revival
began in the upper room when the apostles were met together. In America a
united prayer-meeting brought the wonderful change. “ By prayer,” says one,
“we lay our hand upon the springs of an agency which can diffuse blessings
through the world.” 3. Earnest preaching must not 6e overlooked. Preaching,
like Peter’s address on the day of Pentecost, adapted to awaken men from slumber,
and convince them of sin. It was bold and earnest, direct in its aim, and full of
compassion. “It must be serious preaching that makes men serious,” said
Baxter. Ministers and people must be revived first, that they may revive others
“ Wilt thou not revive us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Ifthe words be takenincon- Genuine religion is not theology, not


nection with the prophecy, we learn that
prayer and praise may be intimately
united together; that the petitions of
one generation may become the music of
another; and that Christian experience
varies as the dealings of God may vary.

Ver. 2. There are three things in
this text—1l. an alarming voice; 2. an
appropriate prayer; and 3, a potent
argument [Spurgeon].


We offer three thoughts. I. Genuine


religion ve the work of God in the here


ceremony, but supreme love to God.
This is produced only by God. II.
This work of God in the soul ts liable to
decay. Many things tend to impair and
destroy supreme love to God. Carnal
influences, impure associations, social
influences, and engrossing worldly cares.
Hence the prayer, “revive” it. IIL
This decay should be overcome by a
revival. Revive, quicken, energize this
love, and give it more force and influence
in the soul. This is true revival Not


614








the revival of crude theological dogmas,
pietistic cant, and superstitious fears [ Dr.
Thomas].

In the midst of the years means just
at the right time. He knows well how
to find the means to render help, neither
too son nor too late. For in case he
brought help too soon we should not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK.


(CHaP. IIL





continue presumptuous; in case he
brought it too late we should not learn
to believe. To revive and to make known
are nearly the same thing, only that to
revive is to perform the miracle and
bring relief ; but to make known means
that we should be sensible of and delight
in it [ Lange}.


learn to despair of ourselves, and should


HOMILETICS.
Gop’s Guory In Days or Oup.— Verses 3—».


God’s former imterpositions are remembered and celebrated to encourage hope.
Past favours are the ground and prediction of future deliverance. There is no
reason for despondency in our own case or that of the Church, if we think of the
displays of God in days of old (Ps. Ixxvii. 5). Mercy to Israel and severity to
enemies have been resplendent as light. In the manifestations described we have—

I. Glory in the wilderness. ‘God came from Teman,” &c. Paran is the
desert region extending from the south of Judah to Sinai. Seir, Sinai, and Paran
are near each other, associated together in the giving of the law (Deut. xxxiii. 2).
The glory of Sinai is a type of the law which shall go forth from Zion to distant
nations of the earth (Isa. ii. 3: Mic. iv. 2). The moral desert shall shine with
the majesty of another Lawgiver. Nations shall be enlightened and blessed.
The glories of the Red Sea and the river Jordan, in Canaan and the wilderness,
shall be eclipsed by the triumph of the cross. Songs of victory shall be resounded
from future triumphs. ‘The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the
blessings of my progenitors, unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills.”
II. Glory in holiness. He who came was “the Holy One.” God and the Holy
One are parallel phrases indicating the absolute purity of the Divine Being (Job
vi. 10: Isa. xl. 25). In the giving of the law, and the injunctions to the people
of old, we discover the purity of God. The outward splendours set forth the
unsullied perfections of God. Holiness in God is not a quality, but his essence.
The most glorious creatures in heaven and earth are only holy by participation.
“There is none holy as the Lord.” He 1s eminently, essentially, and constantly
holy. “ Holiness,” says Hodge, “‘ is God’s infinite moral perfection crowning his
infinite intelligence and power. There is a glory of each attribute viewed
abstractedly, and a glory of the whole together. The intellectual nature is the
essential basis of the moral : infinite moral perfection is the crown of the Godhead.
Holis.2ss is the total glory thus crowned.” ‘“ Who is like unte thee, glorious in
holiness?” IIT. Glory in light. “ And his brightness was as the light.” God
dwells in hyht inaccessible, yet shone forth in rays more brilliant than the sun.
1, Light wnich illuminated heaven. “‘ His glory covered the heavens.” Not only
the top of Sinai, but the broad expanse above. 2. Light which filled the earth.
“The earth was fnll of his praise.” The wonders of his power and glory called
forth universal praise. ‘‘OQ Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the
earth, who hast set thy glory above the heavens.” 3. Light linked with power.
“He had horns coming out of his hand.” Horns are emblems of strength. The
rays of light were rays of might, radiant as the face of Moses. The fiery law
went from his right hand (Deut. xxxiii. 2); by its majesty and mission administered
death (2 Cor. iii. 7); and yet was a type of the glory which remains in the gospel
(2 Cor. iii. 11). The horn of salvation has been raised up in Christ to destroy the
wicked aad save the righteous (Luke ii. 69). IV. Glory in judgment. “Before
him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet.” Death and


CHAP. III. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK. 616
ee ee ee


destruction of all kinds are a great army, marshalled and directed by him in their
mission. Pestilence and plague often go before him as heralds of his approach.
Judgments attend him ready to obey his bid. Burning coals lie beneath his feet,
to fling upon the foe. “If the law were thus given, how shall it be required ?”
says one. “If such were the proclamation of God’s statutes, what shall the
sessions be?”  [f outward manifestations are so awful, what horrible tempests
will be rained upon the wicked (Ps. xi. 6).


“Sinai’s gray top shall tremble ” (Mélton],


Tur Hipines or Divine Powsr.— Ver. 4.


Great sa this “splendour and retinue” was, it was only the veil or hiding of his
power. [he excessive brightness concealed the Divine glory. “ And there was
the hiding of his power.”

I. Divine power is hidden in the splendour of Divine revelation. As the rays of
tight hide the sun in their brilliance, so Divine manifestations veil the power of God.
The garment of light covers his real essence and attributes. The works of God display
his power,—the heavens his glory, and the earth his goodness ; but one half is not
seen. ‘The secrets of his wisdom and power are double to that which is (Job xi. 6).
He is omnipresent, yet incomprehensible. In his person and procedure there are
unfathomable “depths” of wisdom and knowledge. His ways are past finding
out. Notwithstanding nature and Scripture, reason and religion, he will still
remain an “unknown God.” ‘ Canst thou by searching tind out God? Canst thou
find out the Almighty unto perfection?” II. Divine power is hidden as a
discipline to human souls. Darkness and light always meet in God. This
invisibility of God—1l. J/s essential to our free agency. If God were visible to the
human eye, and constrained us by his Almighty power, we could not be free. Like
a parent God sees our ways, but leaves us to act as responsible agents. Too much
light might overpower us, and throw us, like Paul, prostrate on the ground. 2. Js
essential to our moral discipline. God's light will be darkness to those who wish
to gaze into it. It will veil his love and mercy. His darkness will be light to
those who wish to trust and obey. ‘The hiding of his power may be for shelter or
for judgment. We know enough of God in his goodness, and can never comprehend
him in his glory. “The phenomena of natter and force lie within our intellectual
range. But behind, and above, and around all, the real mystery of the universe
remains unsolved” [Tyndall]. Angels veil their faces. Let us adore and submit to
his will ‘Lo, these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is heard of
him? but the thunder of his power who can understand 4”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 3. God came. Ancient wonders the music probably continuing alone,
pledges of future deliverance. Prayer while the mind rested on the thought
will gather arguments for hope and duty which had just been presented to it ; our
from the storehouse of experience con- ‘interlude’” [Pusey].
cerning the past, ; ‘ hy ate is

Seluh ical —1. The weight of “I sing the warrior and his a peel
the matter, not a mere transient glory.

2. The solemnity with which we should Notice—1l. Who comes. God, Jehovah,
consider it. We must pause and dwell The Holy One. 2. How he comes. 3.
upon it until our hearts are duly affected. What he comes for. (a) To deliver his
“There is no doubt as to the general people. (b) To punish their enemies.

purport of the word—that it isa musical Ver. 4. 1. There is much more to be
direction, that there should be a pause, known of God in his works and ways


516


that we can possibly know in our present
state. 2. His perfections and opera-
tions are veiled, (a) to train the Church
in faith, prayer, and humble dependence $
(b) to permit the wicked to display their
malice, and finish their iniquity. 3.
Yet there will be greater displays of
Divine power, and a glorious increase of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY HABAKKUK.


BED Pi ek SE i a RT SS a a a


(Car. Il





knowledge far beyond what has been
witnessed in the past. “O God, we
have heard with our ears, and our
fathers have declared unto us, the noble
works that thou didst in their days, and
in the old time before them. O Lord,
arise: help us, and deliver us, for thine
honour” [Litany of Church of England].


HOMILETICS.


Tae Measurep InHERITANOE.— Verses 6, 7.


These words describe the effects of God’s approach. He stood like a mighty
warrior in his conquering career. The earth trembled, and primeval mountains
dissolved into dust. We take it in reference to Canaan. As ‘™ “hua conquered
and divided the land, so God measured and portioned it out to people.

I. The inheritance measured. He “measured the earth.” > measured the
whole, and the portion for each tribe. It was no scramble, but appointment by lot
and rule. He “divided them an inheritance by line” (Ps. xxviii. 55). God
measures the earth by bounds and borders to the various nations that dwell upon
it. ‘Thou hast set all the borders of the earth” (Ps. lxxiv. 17). Lands and
seas, continents and islands, are mapped out by him. He defined the shape and
weighed the elements of the world. In righteous judgment he observes the ways,
and fixes the bounds of man’s habitations (Acts xvii. 26). He ordains our present
lot, and will fix our final destiny. II. Theinheritance gained. “He beheld, and
drove asunder the nations.” Notice—l. The ease by which it was gained. He
stood in the midst of his glory, without going forth, and simply looked. What
was the consequence? (1) All nations were scattered. Though strong and
numerous, and their possession ancient and stable as the everlasting hills. (2) All
opposition was subdued. At his presence, kings and princes, firm and immovable
on their thrones, were overcome. The mountains were thrashed, and the hills
made small before him (Isa. xli. 15). (3) All enemies were terrified. ‘I saw the
tents of Cushan in affliction.” The tidings of his wondrous acts threw neighbouring
nations into despair (Ex. xv. 14—16). So now at the approach of God the sinner
trembles in fear. Before his rebuke nations wither away. No shelters, no tents
nor curtains can hide from him. “The mountains quake at him, and the hills
melt, and the earth is burned at his presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell
therein.” 2. The deliberation by which it was gained. ‘‘ His ways are everlasting.”
This was no sudden, precipitate work. It was by the eternal purpose and strict
justice of God. The works and ways of God are coherent, unchangeable, and true.
They have steps and progress, but no change. His creative and providential acts
are the same in all ages. ‘‘If God could change his purpose,” says Charnock, “ he


would change his nature.” “ Known unto God are all his works from the beginning
of the world.”


+


Tar Caariots or SatvaTion.— Verses 8—11.


“The ode, taking a new turn, now passes from the description of the coming of
God, to an address to God himself. To the mental eye of the prophet, God presenta
himself as judge of the world, in the threatening attitude of a warlike hero
equipped for conflict, so that he asks him what is the object of his wrath” [Keil].

I. The design of the chariots. God was not angry with the rivers and seas.
They were troubled on account of his appearance to deliver. He comes not to
destroy, but to save. The chariots of Pharaoh and of antichrist are chariots of


‘


CHAP, UL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HABAKKUE. 61)
nt es


destruction. From these God will ever preserve his people. When he comes
anything will bring them salvation. God has many chariots. Clouds and darkness
are his pavilion, winds and waves are chariots of victory. “The war-chariots of
Elohim are myriads, a thousand thousands” (Ps. xviii. 17). II. The Driver of
the chariots. ‘Was the Lord displeased?” ‘“ Thou didst cleave the earth,” &e.
God himself is set forth in majesty and grace, clad like a warrior, and terrible as a
judge. 1. The Driver is angry. “ Anger” existed, though not against the rivers.
God was “displeased” with the wicked, and his works revealed his mind. In-
sensible creatures reprove the impenitence of men, and tremble at the power of
God, ‘“ What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou
wast driven back?” 2. The Driver is mighty. “Thy bow was made quite naked.”
The sheath was laid aside and cast away. The arms were stretched, and judgments
were about to be shot swift as an arrow (Isa. xxii. 6: Ps. lxiv. 7). Quite naked
was the bow, and not drawn back. Power was really displayed, and the enemy
destroyed. God is a man of war, shoots arrows with certainty, and never misses
the mark (Job xvi. 12). ‘The Lord is a man of war; the Lord is his name.”
3. The Driver is resolved in purpose. ‘ According to the oaths of the tribes, even
thy word.” The promise was given to his servants, and confirmed with oaths.
Judgments upon the wicked, and salvation for his people, are sworn matters;
oaths, and interpositions for all ages (cf. Deut. xxxii. 40—42: Ps, Ixxvii. 8).
“The oath which he sware to our father Abraham, that he would grant us, that we,
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear.”
III. The effects of the chariots. The world of nature suffers under the judicial
hand of God. 1. The earth was convulsed by his power. Mountains trembled at
his presence, and ‘‘skipped like rams.” Rivers broke out of the deep, and rolled
their floods into the splits of solid earth. The sea roared, the abyss lifted its
waves, and uttered its voice to its Maker. What happened to the sea happened to
the river. God repeats his miracles. When great dangers are passed little ones
should not terrify us. ‘Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst
up mighty rivers” (Ps. lxxiv. 15; Ixxviii. 15, 16). 2. The heavens were eclipsed
with his splendour. ‘The sun and moon stood still (retired) in their habitation ”
at the prayer of Joshua, and in the tempest of “great stones from heaven” (Josh.
x. 11—13). At the light, the directions of God's arrows, and the shining of his
spear, Israel went forward. The darts of God smote their enemies, Their brilliant
splendour brought salvation to one and destruction to the other. “The stars in
their courses fought against Sisera.” But all these displays were eclipsed by the
Divine perfections on the cross—when Christ suffered for sin amid the darkness and
shaking of creation. How glorious the displays when the earth quaked and angels
attended the resurrection—when the Holy Ghost came down on Pentecost to
enlighten his people, erect his kingdom, and to avenge himself of his adversaries.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. Thy bow. The Divine archer. abundance, rivers to quench thirst, &c.
‘“‘He smote the rock, that the waters
gushed out, and the streams overflowed ”
(Ps. Ixxviii. 20; cxiv. 8).

Vers. 10, 11. He who fixed the
world’s pillars can make them rock in
their sockets, and upheave the corner-
stones of creation. The huge mountains
are torn up by the roots when the Lord
bestirs himself in anger to smite the
enemies of his people. How shall puny
man be able to face it out with God


“The bow represents the threat of the
vengeance of Almighty God, from which
it is at length discharged, if not turned
aside; the longer the string is drawn,
the sharper issueth the arrow. So then
the more the coming of the day of
judgment is delayed, the stricter is the
severity of the judgment then issuing”
[ Pusey ].

Cleave the earth. 1. Divine power.
2. Divine goodness, in its design and


518


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUE.


[CHaAP, I


EE eres


when the mountains quake with fear?
Let not the boaster dream that his
present false confidence will support
him in the dread day of wrath [Spurgeon].


the powers of earth and heaven, sun and
storms, earthquakes and floods, subser-
vient to God’s purpose, and typical of
his judgments. Notice-—The ease with


which they are collected, the order in
which they are linked, and the destruc-
tion they create. This, a hope to the
righteous, and a warning to the wicked.


Ver. 11. The judgments of God are
a light to his people, while they are the
destruction of his enemies; in them
they learn righteousness [Pusey]. All


HOMILETICS.
Tue Royvat Maron.— Verses 12—1).


To march, is used of the solemn and majestic proceeding of Jehovah before the
Hebrews (Judg. v. 4: Ps. Ixviii. 8: cf. Henderson). The defeat and extermination
of the Canaanites and the planting of Israel were the doings of Jehovah.

I. A benevolent march. “Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people.”
We speak of “the wanderings of Israel,” but they were an appointed, well-ordered
mareh, designed for victory. God, as Commander-in-chief, went with them. With
his anointed instruments—Moses, Joshua, and David, types of the Messiah—he
delivered them from their enemies. Salvation is the design, and will be tha result,
of all the doings of God for his people. The Church will never lack leaders, but
in each we have a pledge of eternal deliverance by Jesus Christ. “ He that is our
God is the God of salvation ; and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death.”
II. A terrible march. The march was not only in royal dignity, but in judicial
power. 1. Terrible in its aspects. “Thou didst walk through the sea with thine
horses.” In majesty, power, and splendour, the Exodus was the type of all
victories present and future. Waters stand on heap, and the deep becomes a path
for his people. ‘Dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting
name” (Isa. Ixiii. 12, 13). 2. Terrible in its consequences. The foes, princes, and
peoples, were overthrown, exterminated, and supplanted. He slew great kings and
famous (Ps exxxvi. 17, 18). Much more will God display his power to exalt
Christ and overthrow his enemies. ‘The Lord is the saving strength of his
anointed.” III A triumphant march. No obstacles impeded the march.
Mountains shook, waters fled, and the lofty bowed before God’s presence in his
Church. 1. Royal houses were destroyed. “Thou woundedst the head out of the
house of the wicked.” ach head and prince which sprung from the family was
cut off, in cities and villages. The neck, an emblem of dignity and power (Cant.
iv. 4); stubbornness and pride (Deut. xxxi. 27: Ps. Ixxv. 5) was laid baze. The
head and foundation, high and low, were completely destroyed. “I will cut off
from Babylon the name and remnant, and son, and nephew (grandson), saith the
Lord.” 2. Warlike nations were defeated. “They came out (were tempestuous)
as a whirlwind to scatter me.” Violent, powerful, and insatiable were the enemies.
Pharaoh and Sennacherib came out as a storm, to sweep everything before them,
like chaff in the wilderness (Jer. xiii. 24 ; xviii. 17: Isa. xli. 16). “I will pursue,
[ will overtake, | will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I
will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.” (a) Defeated in their secret
purpose. ‘Their rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.” The poor are not
a match for the powerful. Hence their pride and confidence of success. But God
frustrated their intentions. Their boasting made their fall more disgraceful, and
God’s care for his people more glorious. (0) Defeated with their own weapons.
He struck through “ with his staves.” The destruction was not only upon himself,
but upon the multitude of his subjects, and through an act of Divine might by his
own weapons. The misciief which he had prepared for others fell upon himself.
This has always been the case With the Midianites and Amalekites (Judg. vii


CHaP. II. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKURK. 519
I ieee eee ge ee ee en ee ee
22); with the Philistines (1 Sam. xiv. 16—20); and the inhabitants of Seir
(2 Chron. xx. 22, 23); in the case of Haman and Daniel those who made the pit
fell into it. Heatheas declared that there was “no juster law than that artificers


of death by their own art should perish.” Fearful will be the future iJustrations
of this principle (cf. Ezek. xxxviii. 21: Isa. ix. 20: Zech. xiv. 13).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 12. 1.God’s anger. 2. The report
of God’s anger. “Through the land.”
Not the mere land of Canaan, but the
wholeearth. 3. The fearful consequences
of God’s anger. “Thou didst thresh,”
a word indicating the ease and power
with which this was done, and the com-
plete subjugation of the enemy (Mic.
iv. 13).

Ver. 13. Head. “He shall destroy
at once, from above and below; over-
throwing his kingdom from the found-
ation. From above, his head was crushed
in pieces; from below, the house was
razed from its very foundations ” [ Pusey].
The power, pride, and wisdom, the very
life of evil to be conquered by God.
“He smites his foes on the crown of
their pride,” says one. “The seed of the
woman crushes the serpent’s head. There
is no defence against the Lord, he can
in amoment smite with utter destruction
the lofty crests of his haughty foes” (cf.
Ps. lxviii. 21; ex. 6).

Ver. 14. 1. The end in view —
“devour the poor.” 2. The method
of accomplishing the end—“ secretly.”
3. The feeling with which the end is
pursued. “ Their rejoicing.” The rich
boast in wealth, the mighty in power ;
bunt the cruel exult in mischief. The
ferocity, craft, and activity of the op-
pressor, and the danger, snares, and
helplessness of the oppressed, are de-
scribed.

“Do not insult calamity ;
It is a barbarous grossness to lay on


The weight of scorn, where heavy misery
Too much already weighs men’s fortunes down ”’
[ Daniel}.


Ver. 15. A second glance 1. In
time of ease we are satisfied with a
cursory glance, a time of trouble promotes


a deeper view of God’s works. We seek


relief, and find that we never dwell
enough on them. Particularly, extraor-
dinary works would be oftener remem-
bered, so much doth the _ prophet’s
practice of looking over again on this
act teach us. 2. It is worthy of our
second and serious thought — both to
honour God and confirm our faith—to
consider that God’s people are so dea
unto him that he will change the course
of nature to save them; that he can
make them go safely, like conquerors,
through affliction and danger [ Hutche.
son]. Take the verse as emblematic of
God’s ways. 1. Deep as the sea. 2.
Swift and orderly, as horses yoked ina
chariot. 3. Safe, though threatened by
the “ heap of great waters ” boiling up as
inastorm. ‘ The immediate connection,
however, shows that what the prophet
has in view is not the Red Sea, but the
hostile army of the Canaanites, which
presented a furious and impenetrable
aspect to the Hebrews. Through this
army Jehovah is represented as walking
with his warriors, as if a general were
coolly to march his cavalry through the
thickest of a proud and vaunting foe,
which he knew would prove utterly
powerless in the attack ” [Henderson].


HOMILETICS.
A Sone or Triumeyu.— Verses 16—18.


These verses form the second part of the ode, describe the feelings of the prophet
under threatened judgments, and his exulting joy and confidence in God. Beginning
with a sorrowful note, he closes with a burst of jubilant melody. The birds which
thrill out the sweetest music, love retirement ; so this psalmist-—one of the most
wonderful of human singers—sings out of obscurity. We learn that—


630 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HABAKEUR. [cHa?. Ot





I. God usually meets the varied wants of men by lavish provision. Fig-tree,
vine, and olive ; fields, flocks, and herds indicate variety and plenty. We do not
enter a world unprepared for us. Ample provisions were ready beforehand.
Marvellous vegetation, fierce fires, volcanic agencies, and toiling waters were
pioneers for human settlers. We have an attractive view of God’s goodness and
character when we think of him as the Provider. We evade the idea of a Father's
bounty by speaking vaguely of providence. What is providence but the wise
action, the benevolent operation, of gigantic forces? Good comes to us through
laws: but who controls the laws? Providence is the chosen way of a loving
Father’s dealing. The Bible takes us directly to God, who gives lavishly out of
“the riches of his goodness” (cf. Ps. civ.: Jas. i. 16, 17). Ample provision is
made for our needs and pleasure—l. sensational; 2. intellectual; 3.’ social ;
4, moral; 5. spiritual II. God must be recognized as the Absolute Proprietor in
this provision. The prophet contemplates famine, failure, and desvlating death.
Though God usually provides abundance and variety, he can reverse this action
and suspend the course of nature (Ps. cvii. 31—43). Health may fail, friends be
removed, plans be frustrated, and privation be felt. Dependent are we from first
to last. Resumption of his gifts establishes God’s claim to ownership. (Illus.
Abraham’s offering of Isaac.) The fig-tree without blossom, the vine without fruit,
the olive destitute of oil; the barren fields, the smitten flocks, and the empty stalls ;
impressively tell us that the Lord God Aimighty is the Absolute Proprietor.;
III. In direct calamity it is our privilege to rejoice in God our Provider.
Ver. 18. 1. A victorious faith. “ Yet.” Note the yets. “ Yea, they may forget, yet
will I not”, (Isa. xlix. 15). “ Yet will I look again” (Jon. ii. 4). “I am poor
and needy, yet” (Ps. xl. 17). “Truth Lord, yet” (Matt. xv. 27). ‘Though he
slay me, yet” (Job xiii. 15). Change may take place in the manner of God’s treatment, '
but never in his character. “I am that Iam.” If business prosper not, what
then? How shall I find bread? “Man doth not live by bread alone.” God asks
for entire trust. ‘ Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him.” “This is the
victory —even our faith.” This sublime confidence was nourished by—2. A precious
experience, “The God of my salvation,” are words that reveal manifold past deliver-'
ances. ‘‘ Because thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings
will I rejoice.” Then, in troubles, bodily, mental, and circumstantial; in family,
trials, business losses, and painful bereavements ; expect the fulfilment of the promise.
“T will never leave thee.”;! 3. A noble resolve. “I will rejoice in the Lord.”
£‘Those who have the Jehovah for their strength, should make him their song. Let
the fig-tree be barked, privation be felt, and the worst come; the trustful spirit
may rejoice in God, and triumph over all. In suffering we may say, ‘ In the night
his song shall be with me’” (Matthew Braithwaite}.


Gop tae Fountain os Perpetua, Joy.


L Joy in anticipated trials. Tho prophet heard of a gloomy future, saw one
support after another fail, yet his hope brightens, and joy increases as sorrows
multiply. We cannot expect freedom from trouble. *' Nor is it often that we are
permitted to see the future. No approach of foreign foes, no threatening of famine
and failure of fruit-trees, loom before us. \Yet how disquieted when business fails,
and family prospects darken! We fear as we enter the cloud, faint unless we see
the goodness of God, and never rejoice in anticipation of trials, Nut at “the
bright,” but at ‘‘the dark, side” of things do we look. ‘ All these things are
against me.” But through the darkness faith discerns the light, pictures unfailing
joy, and exults in the friendship of God, when all things fail beside. II. Joy in
present afflictions. The prophet not merely anticipates distress, but stands in the
midst of it. Barrenness and failure, disappointment and grief, are actually seen
and felt, But the sufferings do not freeze him into a misanthrope, nor sour him


CuaP. IL} HOMILETIC COMMENTARI: HABAKKUK. 521





into wretchedness. He is hopeful, and resolved to rejoice. It is said that Dr.
Priestly was one of the happiest of men. The greater his trouble, the greater
was his conviction that some special good was in store for him; the darker the
sorrow, the stronger grew the sentiment that joy was to succeed. ‘ Such a way of
looking at things,” says one, “literally converted every cloud that darkened his
horizon into a shadow of good things to come.” In all our clouds we may find
sunshine and passing scenes coloured with future glory. “Now men see not the
bright light which is in the clouds: but the wind passeth, and cleanseth them.”
III. Joy in eternal duration. If the soul be immortal its happiness must be
durable as its nature. The world and all in it will perish. The man of the world
deeply regrets loss in trial, but the Christian rejoices in God. Those who enjoy
God in all things, can enjoy all things in God. Amid the ruins of nature, they
are rich in him. When all created streams are dried, God is an everlasting fountain
of bliss. When the granary is empty, an assurance of joy will be better than a
“harvest home” (Ps. iv. 7). Christ in the heart is better than grapes in the
vintage. ‘I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God ;
for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation,” &c. (Isa. Ixi. 10; xli. 16),


“ Though vine nor fig-tree neither
Vheir wonted fruit should bear;
Though all the field should wither,
Nor flock nor herd be there ;
Yet God the same abiding,
His praise shall tune my voice:
For while in him confiding,
I cannot but rejoice ” [Coteper],


Gop ALL-SUFFICIENT IN TROUBLE.— Verse 19.


The prophet sow openly declares the source of his joy and strength, and predicts
the safety and niorai elevation of his people. In language borrowed from Scripture
he expresses the all-sufficiency of God, the hope of support in trouble, complete
deliverance from the enemy, and undisturbed possession of the land.

I. God is strength in weakness. “ ‘The Lord God is my strength.” Strength
to bear trial, and to triumph in conflict. Neither spiritual nor military soldi-rs
can do exploits in weakness. The Christian is only a hero, and the secret sprins
of his courage only in God. If he strengthens, nothing can weaken. “The Lord
is the strength of my life.” II. God is safety in danger. In this language we
have—l. Deliverance from the enemy. He is the God of salvation, rises up to judge
the nations, and deliver his people. Assailed on every side, yet delivered from the
strong enemy (Ps. xviii. 17). When rescued we must remember our weakness, and
aseribe all to God. ‘ Behold, God is my salvation ; I will trust, and not be afraid :
for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song.” 2. Pursuit of the enemy.
“He will make my feet like hinds’ feet.” Celerity of motion was deemed a
necessity in the hero of antiquity. He must suddenly attack and vigorously
pursue the enemy. Achilles was swift-footed. The men who came to David had
not only faces like lions, but were “swift as the roes upon the mountains,” to
pursue or escape the foes (1 Chron. xii 8: cf. 2 Sam. i 19; ii, 18). 3. Security
from the enemy. “He will make me to walk upon mine high places.” As Davia
cli..:ed rocks and steep cliffs to be safe from pursuit, so God’s people are sheltered
in mountain fastnesses in spiritual war. They are swift to pursue and agile to
climb. Ascending into impregnable heights we are preserved from falling, and
made to stand where the wild goat can find no footing. “He maketh my feet like
hi ids’ feet, and setteth me upon my high places.”


522


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK.


{cHapP. Il.


OI EAM es ee eee
HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 16. That I may rest. 1. Rest
in trouble. Peace of conscience, calm-
ness of mind, because the mind is stayed
upon God in distress. ‘ Thou wilt keep
him in perfect peace, whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusteth in
thee. 2. Rest through fear. “The true
and only path to rest,” says Calvin, “is
through such fear. Whoever is securely
torpid and hardened towards God will
be tumultuously agitated in the day of
affliction, and so will bring on himself
a worse destruction ; but he who in time
meets God’s wrath, and trembles at his
threats, prepares the best rest for him-
self in the day of tribulation.”


“ Nor peace nor ease the heart can know,
Which, like the needle true,
Turns at the touch of joy or woe,
But turning, trembles too” [ Mrs, Greville],


Vers. 17, 18. Fortitude in affliction.
“The power of habit and character,”
says Sir J. Macintosh, ‘ to struggie
against outward evils, has been proved
by experience to be in some instances
so prodigious, that no man can presume
to fix the utmost limit of possible in-
crease.”

Vers. 18, 19. 1. God the source «f
joy. 2. God the source of strength.
3. God the source of salvation. In both


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 2. Mercy is wanted for England.
The wickedness of this country belongs
not to one class only, but to all classes,
Sin runs down the streets. We have a
fringe of elegant morality, but behind it
a mass of rottenness. There is immor
ality in the streets at night, and dis-
honesty of business men in high places,
Cheating and thieving upon the grandest
scale are winked'at. This city is wicked,
and the land full of fornication and
idolatry. I may not utter a wailing;
but having heard the Lord’s speech, I
may be afraid, exhort you to pray for
this land, and ask God to revive his
work, thaé drunkenness and dishonesty
may cease [Spurgeon].

Vers. 4 -7. Hiding. Man’s know-


verses we have dangerous positions,
wonderful achievements, and secure
dwelling-places.

Ver. 19. “ Mine high places.” The
“high places” are called “mine,” to
imply that Israel shall be restored to his
own land, a land of hills, which are
places of safety and of eminence (ef.
Gen. xix. 17, “escape to the mountain ;”
and Matt. xxiv. 16) [Fausset]. Morally,
high places of knowledge, holiness, use-
fulness, and progress heavenwards—
“heavenly places in Christ Jesus.”

Chief singer. Servants of God do
not despise music, but only give direc
tions how it should be properly used in
the praise of God [Lange].

We too have our high places, of
honour, service, temptation, and danger,
but hitherto we have been kept from
falling. Bring hither the harp, and let
us emulate the psalmist’s joyful thanks-
giving; had we fallen, our wailings
must have been terrible ; since we have
stood, let our gratitude be fervent
[Spurgeon]. ‘The Lord was ready to
save me; therefore we will sing my
songs to the stringed instruments all the
days of our life in the house of the
Lord” (Is. xxxviii. 20).


“Tf music be the food of love, play on,
Give me excess of it ” [Shakspere].


TO CHAPTER III.


ledge is confined to parts only of God’s
ways. The extremities or forthgoings of
his ain inistration are visible on earth
only. The springs, principles, and
anterior steps are above and out of
man’s sight | Dr. Chalmers].
Ver. 6, Measured the earth.
‘‘ Then stay’d the fervid wheels, and in his hand
He took the golden compasses, prepared
In God’s eternal store, to circumscribe
This universe, and all created things,
One foot he centred, and the other turn’d
Round through the vast profundity obscure ;
And said, Thus far extend, thus far thy bounds,
‘This be thy just circumference, O world”
[Milton],
Ver. 9. Bow naked. The drawing
of the bow was a mark of great skill and
slaughter.


oHAP. II. |


—_—


“So the great master drew the mighty bow,
And drew with ease. One hand aloft display’d
The bending horns, and one the string essay’d.”

[Pope’s Homer. |


Vera. 10—15. The whole passage
depicts God’s descent to help his people,
attended by earthquake, splendour, and
power. So tremendous was the shock
of God’s assault in arms that the order
of nature was changed, and the bottoms
of rivers and seas were laid bare. What
will not Jehovah’s rebuke do? Vain are
the attempts of men to conceal anything
from him whose word unbars the deep,
and lifts the doors of earth from their
hinges! Vain are all hopes of resist-
» ance, for a whisper of his voice makes


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HABAKKUK.





the whole earth quail in abject terror
[Spurgeon].

The volcanic phenomena of Palestine
open a question of which the data are,
in a scientific point of view, too imper-
fect to be discussed ; but there is enough
in the history and literature of the people ~
to show that there was an agency of this
kind at work. Their traces on the per-
manent feeling of the nation must be
noticed. The writings of the psalmists
aud prophets abound with indications
which escape the eye of a superficial
reader. Like the soil of their country,
they actually heave and labour with
the fiery convulsions which glow beneatt
their surface [A. P. Stanley],


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ZEPHANIAH.





INTRODUCTION.


Tas Writer. In all probability Zephaniah was a prince as well as a prophet,
in virtue of his descent from Hezekiah, the pious king of Judah; who, aided and
taught by another royal prophet, Isaiah, wrought a notable reformation in the
faith and morals of the chosen people. In the title prefixed to this prophecy his
pedigree is traced, through four descents, to a Hezekiah, and there abruptly termi-
nates, as though, the name being well-known to fame, there was no need to carry
it further. Ordinarily, only the name of a prophet’s father is given. The fact that,
contrary to custom, Zephaniah’s pedigree is traced up to his great-great-grandfather,
is an indication that this ancestor, Hezekiah, was a man whose name was held in
memory and honour. We find no Hezekiah known to fame in the Hebrew annals,
save Hezekiah the king ; and therefore it is probable that the Hezekiah from whom
Zephaniah was proud to descend, was that devout king who for a time arrested the
downward current of the Hebrew story [Samuel Coz].

Toe Darts. In the reign of King Josiah (641—610 B.0.), who, aided by
Jeremiah and others, reformed public morals. This date is corroborated by state-
ments in the Book itself. The fall of Nineveh and the overthrow of Assyria are
predicted ; he must therefore have prophesied before these events (625 B. 0.) 7. e.
in the former half of the reign of Josiah. Idolatry was extensively abolished, but
a remnant was left (ch. i. 4). “This exactly tallies with the state of things in
Judah from the twelfth to the eighteenth year of Josiah ; for though this monarch
began, in the former of these years, to effect a reformation, it was not till the latter
that it was prosecuted with more successful results” [Henderson]. At this time the
state was corrupt as the religion. Princes and judges, priests and prophets, were
alike in sin. Law was disregarded between man and man, and worship was profaned
by Baal and Moloch. Prophets uttered not the word of God, but fine-spun deceits
(iii. 4: ef. Jer. v. 13). With the mass of the people religious feeling was extinct.
Thousands lived in scepticism and perfect indifference, indulged in lust and love of
money, and declared that God would neither reward men for virtue nor punish


INTRODOCTION. G28
oS IE ES i


them for vice. “In short, the interior cf the temple, which had been suffered to
fall into a ruinous disrepair, was an apt symbol of the spiritual decay that was
eating out the very heart of the national life, and unity, and strength.”

Tue Boox. Scope. Zephaniah does for the two, what had been done by Hosea
for the ten, tribes of Israel. Hosea is the first, Zephaniah is the last, of the minor
prophets before the captivity. The contents of the Book correspond to the position
of the author. They have a retrospective and a prospective character [cf. Words.
worth]. In its general scope, it closely resembles the prophecy of Joel. It traverses
the same large circle of thought. In both there is, first, a threatening of judgment ;
then, a call to repentance; and last, the promise of a golden age of concord and
peace. In both the history of the chosen race swells and grows into the history
of the world at large. In both the prophet starts from the history of the past, and
presses on into the future, until he is met by apocalyptic visions of a regenerated
race dwelling amid the sweet bounty and peace of a restored universe [S. Coz.

Contents. I. The exordium (i.1—6). Announcement of judgment upon the
world and upon Israel, arising from the evil condition of the present. II. The
description of the judgment (i. 7—18). (a) In reference to its objects (7—13) ;
(6) In reference to its dreadfulness (14—18). III. An exhortation to seck God
(ii. 1—3). IV. An announcement of the judgment upon the heathen nations
(ii. 4—15). V. A repeated description of the remediless misery in Jerusalem
(iii. 1—7). VI. The promise of salvation (iii. 8—20). (a) The salvation of the
heathen following the judgment (1—10). (4) The purification of Israel (11—13).
(c) The salvation of Israel (14—20) [Lange].

Stytz. The prophet borrows from the language and words of predecessors.
This “arises,” says Pusey, ‘‘not as people have been pleased to say—from any
declension in the originality of the prophets at his date, but from his subject.” It
has been said, “If any one desire to see the utterances of the prophets in brief
space, let him read through this brief Zephaniah.” At times he is concise and
poetic, yet full and vivid in his pictures. “Joel,” says one, “ is the most abstract
of prophets, and touches the history of his time at points comparatively few ; while
Zephaniah abounds in minute and elaborate allusions to the poetical facts and
events of his age. And hence, while Joel may be read with edification by the
simple and unlettered, Zephaniah is well-nigh a sealed Book to them until a scholar
unlooses the seals and opens the Book.” ‘The impressive, deeply impassioned
severity of his style, well deserves that his Book should be designated as the dies
ire of the Old Testament” [ Lange},





520 HOMILETIG COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. [CHAP a.


eee


CHAPTER L


‘SRIFICAL Nores.] 2, Consume] From root; to destroy, utterly to sweep away (ef. Jer. viii. 13)
everything (ver. 3), ‘‘ The enumeration of particulars is designed to augment the fearful and
universal character of the punishment’ [Henderson]. Causes, idols, which made them offend or
stumble (Ezek, xiv. 3, 4,7). 4.] Judgment, especially upon Judah. Stretch] Not only threaten,
but exert power to injury. Remnant] Statues, images dedicated to Baal, domestic and tutelary god of
the Phoenicians, 6.] The people now denounced for star-worship and tmcense-burning upon the flat
roots of houses (cf, Jer. xix. 13: 2 Kings xxiii. 12); for combining the worship of God with
idolatry. Swear] Acknowledge in public, solemn manner; openly to pledge one’s service (2 Chron.
xv. 14), 6.] Two further classes mentioned —those who entirely apostate, and those who are indifferent,
7.] Judgment speedily comes. Hold} A summons to silent submission (Hab. ii. 20); the reason given,
the day near. Saerifice] of victims of justice (lea. xxxiv. 6: Jer. xlvi, 10); “nations consecrated
to war, that they may consume Jacob”’ (Jer. x. 25) [ Kei/]. Guests] Lit. sanctifie? those imvited
(cf, Isa, xiii. 3: 1 Sam. ix. 13—22: xvi. 5). 8. Princes] should have set an example of virtue, but
imitated foreign oppressors. Strange] Peculiar vestments belonging to the worship of each idol
(2 Kings x, 22); a violation of law (Deut. xxii. 5). 9. Leap] An idol rite practised in the temple of
Dagon (1 Sam, v. 5). Fill} With goods obtained by violence. The servants of the princes were
eager to rush out of the palace, seize the property of others to increase their master’s wealth,
10.} Siege of Jerusalem. Gate] which stood near fish-market (2 Chron. xxxiti, 14: Neh. iii, 3),
Second] A part of the city given (2 Kings xxii, 14: 2 Chron, xxxiv. 22). Hills] within the walls,
Zion and Moriah. Crashing] Breaking to pieces of what now exists, not merely fall of buildings,
as Isa. xv. 5. Acry at the threat of utter destruction [He/]. 11. Maktesh] A rock in form of 3
mortar, where they hulled rice and corn, ‘The name probably chosen to express how their false
hczes, grounded on the presence of God’s temple among them, while by their sins they profaned it
should be turned into true fears”’ [Pusey]. 12. Candles] Diligently and thoroughly (Luke xv. 8) ;
the enemy would let no corner escape them. Lees] Quiet, retaining harshness, and growing
turbid and thick. It denotes perseverance, confirmation in moral indi‘ference (Jer. xlviii. 11). Say)
Denied God’s providence, put him level with idols, who did neither good nor ill (Isa. xli. 23: Jer.
x. 5). 18.] God proved to be ruler and judge, by giving up their wealth to plunder, and punishing
them as despisers of his name (Deut. xxvii, 3v: Amos y. 11). 14]. The hint of ver, 7 carried
out further ; the nearness and terrible character of judgmout described Great] in effects (Joel ii. 11).
Bitterly] For he cannot save himself from the foe; the might of the heroes and the city utterly
fails, 15.] All the words supplied by the language crc wded together to describe the terrors of judg-
ment (cf. Keil]. He first, as the day of wrath (Isa. xix. 18). The effect of wrath, distress and
pressure (Job xv. 24): then a reduplication (cf. Nah. ii. 11); desolation, &c. (Job xxx. 3; xxxviii.
27). Lastly, 16.] ‘‘ Indicating still more closely the nature of the judgment, as a day of the trumpet
and the trumpet-blast, ¢. e. on which the clangour of the war trumpets will be heard over all the
fortifications and castles, and the enemy will attack, take, and destroy fortified places amidst the
blast of trumpets [Ke7]. 17.] No help nor counsel in this distress, Blind] Groping insecurely, or
rushing headlong to destruction (Deut. xxviii. 29: Nah. ii. 5). Dust] Of as little value and in
as great quantity (Gen, xiii. 16: cf. 2 Kings xiii. 7), Flesh] From a root to ee¢ ; equivalent to food
{Job xx. 28) [ef. Lange]. “Their flesh here called dread, because doomed to be the food of worms”
(Drusius]. 18.] With silver and gold they cannot save themselves. No heed given to riches
oy the enemy (cf. Isa, xiii. 17: Jer. iv. 30: Ezek. vii. 19). Fire] will devastate ; cause speedy and
zomplete destruction. ‘“ A consumption, and thata sudden one” (Calvén],


HOMILETICS.
Tus Destructive JupemEnts.— Verses 2, 3.


The people had been formerly warned, but heeded not; now threatenings are
executed. Destruction, like another deluge, is to sweep the whole earth.

U The universality of the judgments. The judgment of Judah is preceded
by one upon all nations. The prophet was not of aselfish and bigoted spirit. He
concerned himself with the fate of heathen countries, and proved that the destiny
of the world was linked with that of the chosen people. As the result »f judg-
ment, nations will be converted to God (ch. iii. 9), and the world renewed and
glorified. <1. The severity of the judgments. Everything is specified and


CHAP. I. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. 627





paired, like the threat of old (Gen. vi. 7). The calamity will be as terrible as the
flood. 1. Inferior creatures destroyed. ‘The fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of
the sea.” 2. Human beings destroyed. “I will consume men.” Man is the lord,
not the helpless victim, of nature. All things are put under his feet, suffer for his
guilt, and share his fate. ‘All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field,
the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea.” Dumb brutes cry out against human
suilt. We should learn God’s displeasure against sin when we see innocent crea-
tures suffer for it. III. The design of the judgments. Joel (ii. 12—14) and
Zephaniah were deeply convinced that all sorrows and calamities were disciplin-
ary—that judgments were mixed with mercy, and designed to purify human life.
God afflicts men to restore their souls. The wicked are swept away, and their
offences with them. Sad when lite itself must be taken away to cleanse it from
corruption and guilt. But nations have thus been purified from idolatry and
oppression, and thus will it be at the last day, when the Son of Man “shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. The prophet’s employment. ruption and destruction, or the indis-


To declare God’s word, reprove sin, and
reform society. 2. The prophet’s au-
thority. The word came directly from
God. His doctrine not devised by men,
but received by inspiration. 3. The
prophet’s age. “In the days of Josiah,
king of Judah.” In times of general
defection, God’s mercy is so great, that
means are multiplied to reclaim men
from sin, “Not many noble,” but
some are called to this work. Here
we have a king, and the son of a king,
engaged in the service of God.

Ver. 2. I will utterly consume. A
tragical beginning of a terrible sermon.
Hard knots must have hard wedges;
hard hearts, heavy menaces. The doub-
ling of the denunciation, collingendo
colligam, importeth the certainty, verity,
and vehemency thereof [ Trapp].

Vers. 2, 3. ‘The besom of destruc-
tion” (Isa. xiv. 23) and the terrible


soluble link.

Ver. 3. Wicked with their offences,
Wickedness, corrupting the earth—en-
tailing suffering on the brute creation—
necessitating Divine interference, and dis-
playing Divine love. “I beheld, and lo,
there was no man, and all the birds of
the heavens were fled” (Jer. iv. 25: cf.
xil. 4). “As God’s acts of deliverance
are connected in time with his acts of
judgment (since his judgments are ever
separations of the godly from the un-
godly, and in this sense, salvations and
deliverances), so also are the revelations
of judgment at the same time revelations
of deliverance, and the faith of the elect,
which corresponds to them, is, at the
same time, both a faith in judgment and
a faith in salvation” [ Lange].


“OQ God! thy arm was here,
And not to us, but te thy arm alone
Ascribe we all” [Shakspeare].


sweep it makes; man and beast. Cor-
HOMILETICS.
JUDGMENT aT THE HousF or Gop.—Verses 4—6,
The prophet now declares upon whom the sore desolation must come. Even
Those


Judah, where God is known, and Jerusalem, the holy city, must suffer.
most exalted are most responsible, and those who sin against greater privileges will
be mest signally punished. Judgment must begin at the house of God. Six
classes are singled out for judgment.

I. Idolatrous priests destroyed. Two kinds are specified. 1. Inferior priests.
“The Chemarims,” priests ordained by the kings of Judah to minister at high
places, or at the altar of Jehovah, with alien and impure rites (cf. 2 Kings xxiii


52 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH, [OHAP. x








5: Hos. x. 5), “In either case,” says one, “ they were renegades from the national
faith ; miscreants, who, to earn a loaf of bread or to win the favour of the court,
were prepared to stand at any altar and administer any ritual.” 2. Superior priests.
“The Chemarims with the priests.” Those of the family of Aaron, Levitical
priests, who have apostatized to idolatry. Such ministers are not worthy of the
name and office of priest. Corrupt in doctrine, flagrant in practice, their very
name shall he blotted out of existence. Ministers who pervert the national faith,
and sel! their birthright to gain the favour of the world, will suffer awful punish-
ment. ‘A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land, the prophets
prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule at their hands.” II. Idolatrous people
destroyed. Corrupt priests influence the people. From the ministers the judg-
ments pass to the people. Three classes are pointed out. 1. Open idolaters.
These blended the worship of Baal (sun) and Astarte (moon) with Sabseism or
pure star-worship. The stars were thought to be originators of all growth and
decay in nature, and rulers of all sublunary events (2 Kings xxi. 3). The house-
top was chosen for secrecy, or to obtain fuller views of the heavenly bodies. This
custom was (a) prevalent, and (0) popular. Public idolatry was individualized and
adopted, family by family. From house to house, from street to street, incensa
burned and homage rendered to the queen of heaven. ‘The children gather wood,
and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough to make cakes to
the q 1een of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto other gods.” 2. Time-
servers. “Them that swear by the Lord, and by Malcham.” They swore allegi-
ance to God, but lived to Moloch or Baal as their king. To the service of Jehovah
they joined that of idols, and sought to be on good terms with both. One of our
own poets stigmatizes them, ‘‘as willing to serve Ged, so that they did not offend
the devil.” They thought Jehovah the true God, but yielded to the fashion and
adopted the religion of the day. Principle had no hold upon them, and reproach
was endured for present advantage. ‘ Will ye steal, swear falsely, and burn in-
cense to Baal, and walk after other gods, and come and stand before me in this
house, which is called by my name” (Jer. vii. 8—10; v. 7). 3. Religiously in-
different. “‘ Returning behind Jehovah, drawing back from him, turning the back
upon God, is just the same as not seeking Jehovah, or not inquiring after him.
The persons referred to are the religiously indifferent, those who do not trouble
themselves about God, the despisers of God” [Keil]. Notice the steps of this
departure. They do not want God, and therefore do not seek him. They fear
his presence might embarrass them, and therefore forget him as much as they
can, Then they cast him behind them, abstain from all worship, and renounce
every custom that would bring him to their minds. “Thou hast forsaken me,
saith the Lord, thou art gone backward: therefore will I stretch out my hand
against thee, and destroy thee.”


Four Ciasses or Uncopty Mun.—Verses 5, 6.


I. The worshippers of nature. When mensee beauty in creatures, and derive
advantage from them, their hearts dote upon them, and are drawn from God, Men
adoxe nature, and forget nature’s God. A specious and plausible idolatry abounds
in our day. ‘To honour a star is quite as offensive to God as to honour a stone.
To worship tne splendours of heaven or the wealth of earth; to love self, family,
or business more than God is “to change the truth of God into a lie, and worship
and serve the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever.”


“They trifle with the truth, until, at last,
Delusions strong as hell shal! bind them fast” [Cowper}.


II. The half-hearted in religion. By acts of solemn profession they worshi
God, and then try to serve the world. They pledge themselves first to one eal


CHAP, 1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAR. 629








then the othe’, and try to serve two masters. This is morally impossible. The
affections cannot be divided. One only can be our master, call him Baal, Moloch,
or Christ. All men are made to serve something. ‘The choice lies between Christ
and the world. Compromise and neutrality are impossible. “How long halt ye
between two opinions?” III. The backsliders from God. This class is too
common, Many once started well, were firm in purpose, and kept their face
Zionwards, but have ceased to follow after, and utterly forsaken the Lord. To go
back from God is virtually to join the enemy. “ He that is not with me is against
me.” Wandering is the natural tendency of man; but to wander out of the way
of understanding, amid light, conviction, and privileges, awfully aggravates the sin.
Watch the first step in feeling and practice, lest it fix you in a state of apostasy
among “the mighty dead.” Backsliding is the fountain of its own misery, and the


most fearful of Divine judgments.
his own ways.”


“The backslider in heart shall be filled with
IV. The practical atheists.
live in total neglect of God and his ways.


Those guilty of defection will soon
It is said that a sheep, having once


wandered from the fold, never tries to return, but “ wanders on still muse and more
astray ;” so in many cases backslidings are multiplied until men are reduced to


extremity and ruin.


“Ah, sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of


evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have
provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 4. The remnant of Baal. 1.
Good men may be hindered in their
work, or leave it partially done. Heze-
kiah’s and Josiah’s reformation did not
clear away the idolatry of Baal. Moses
and Luther did not entirely finish their
work. ‘Good and evil have each a
root, which remains in the ground when
the trunk has been hewn down. There
is a remnant of grace when the rest
have been blinded (Rom. xi. 5—7) ; and
this is a holy seed to carry on the line
of God (Isa. vi. 13). Evil too has its
remnant, which, unless diligently kept
down, shoots up again, after the con-
version of peoples or individuals”
[Pusey]. 2. The presence and efforts of
good men increase the guilt and the
responsibility of any nations. 3. If these
nations heed not their warnings or hinder
their work, God may justly punish them
for their sin. God will consume Judah
for the remnant that remains. The
reign of the pious Josiah preceded the
doom of Judah, to deprive the people of
all excuse. “I will also stretch out
mine hand upon Judah, and upon all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem.”


Ver. 6. Positive and negative apos-
tasy. Positive, in forsaking the Lord
for idols ; negative, in ceasing to “seek”
after him in real prayer. The latter is
the forerunner of the former: many
who do not go so far as open apostasy,
are virtually guilty of it, for they do
not “inqnire for” the Lord. This verse
describes more comprehensively those
guilty of defection from Jehovah in any
way. “My people have committed two
evils; they have forsaken me, the foun-
tain of living waters, and hewed them
out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can
hold no water” [Fausset].

Seeking God. 1. God must be sought
diligently to be found. 2. Men do not
seek God diligently. 3. The natural
consequences are, turning back, forget-
fulness, and carelessness. ‘‘ Not sought.
Diligently sought him (Heb. xi, 6),
zealously inquired after him, as after
a lost jewel (Jer. xxix. 13) God
will visit for unzealousness ; and curse
those that do his work carelessly, cur
sorily, in a perfunctory, formal way“


[Trapp].


530 BOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAA. [CHAP. 4





HOMILETICS.
Proprent Siuvence.— Verse 7.


God’s anger is not easily seen, nor his words laid to heart, by those who are most
concerned, Hence warnings are given time after time. Judgments are at hand,
and though men will purswe their own folly, yet God has fixed a day of vengeance.
Sinners therefore should tremble before the majesty of God, who can destroy the
rebellious.

I. Hold thy peace, and do not murmur. Sinners murmur at their lot in life ;
at the threatening and punishment of God for their sins. They deny his right
and his providence over men. The righteous feel condemned in God’s presence
(Job xi. 4: Ps. cxliii. 2), how much more should the wicked! They are warned,
devoid of every plea and excuse. The voice of Divine judgment finds an echo in
every heart, “ we indeed justly” (Luke xxiii 41). II. Hold thy peace, for God
is present. He sees our ways, and hears our ingratitude. “ Wherefore think ye
evil in your hearts?” Hush! for if you would not like a friend or a prince to hear
your words, why should God be offended with them? If at any time speech is
silvern and silence golden, it is in the presence of the Great Judge. III. Hold thy
peace, for the day of decision is at hand. Things which perplex and astonish
will soon be cleared up. “The day of the Lord is at hand,” and will speedily come
(cf. Hab. ii. 20: Zech. ii. 13).


“Thought has not colours halt so fair,
That she to paint that hour may dare,
Tn silence best adored” [ Keble].


IV. Hold thy peace, and submit. Submission is the most becoming attitude.
The praise of silence has its pre-eminent advocate in Carlyle, who writes: “ Nay, in
thy own mean perplexities, do thou thyself but hold thy tongue for one day: on
the morrow, how much clearer are thy purposes and duties ; what wreck and rubbish °
have those mute workmen within thee swept away, when intrusive noises were shut
out.” “Thou, whosoever hast been wont to speak against God, as if he had no care
about earthly affairs, cease thy murmurs and self-justifications: submit thyself to
God, and repent in time” [ Calvin].


Tue Yay or JEHOVAH'S SaoriFice.— Verses 7—9,


Judgment is described as a sacrifice. The Jewish people are prepared, and the
nations whom God has called to war are invited to punish them. It is nota
- sacrifice of joy but of sorrow.

I. The feast is prepared. ‘The Lord hath prepared a sacrifice.” Such as set
aside the means of grace and despise the regular offerings, only prepare themselves
for sacrifice. When men do not repent of sin and offer themselves “a living
sacrifice,” they will become victims of their own folly. Blessings are withdrawn,
and judgments prepared for them. “The Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a
great slaughter in the land of Idumea.” II. The guests are invited. “He hath
bid his guests.” The nations whom God has sanctified or set apart are the guests.
Nations and individuals, whatever their aims and passions, are called to execute
God’s displeasure. There is a kind of awe about “the scourges of God.” They
are sanctified sometimes in spite of themselves. The Chaldaans and the Romans,
Caiaphas, Herod, and Pilate, are constrained to bear testimony to God. “I have
commanded my sanctified ones, I have also calied my mighty ones for mine anger.”
III. The sacrifices to be offered. The judgments will fall with equal severity
upon all rank . The royal families. ‘The princes and the king’s children.”
Great men ofte abuse their power, influence the people by their examples, and


CHAP. LJ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAH. 63)





become chief in provocation. Royalty is not exempt from responsibility, and will
be reckoned with for its pride and wickedness.


“A flatter’d prince soon turns the prince of fools” [Ben Jonson].


2. The noble servants. ‘ All such as are clothed with strange apparel.” Apostate
nobles and princes imitated royal families ; mimicked the manners of the heathen,
and adopted their costumes. ‘Their apparel indicated their treasonable leanings,
their servility to alien monarchs, their addiction to heathen vices and superstitions.”
3. The servile retainers. ‘These were more licentious and cruel than the masters
they served, lived by plunder and extortion, and leaped out of their own stronghold
to invade that of others. Great men often think that their will should be law, and
employ servants to support their prodigality by fraud and violence. But the
obligations to God are greater than the claims of any master.


THe Lorp’s Saonirics.— Verse 7.


I. The sacrifice which the Lord hath prepared. The sacrifice of Christ a
subject at all times interesting. It is the believer’s feast and the sinner’s hope.
It demonstrates the love of God. Man has sinned, the curse was upon him. A
victim demanded, and must suffer to expiate sin. This sacrifice could not be
provided by the wealth of kingdoms and the wisdom of schools. Angels could not
prepare it. Must then man suffer? Silence all around, but the Eternal cries,
“ Deliver him from going down” (Job xxxiii. 24). Christ is the sacrifice offered
to the world (Heb. ix. 26). II. The guests whom God has invited to partake of
his sacrifice. We are not left to conjecture who these are. Our Lord’s parable
(Matt. xxii. 1—10) and Peter’s vision inform us (Acts x. 11—15, 34). 1. The
Jews. God’s chosen people, favoured with his will. They had a variety of
sacrifices, which set forth and typified Christ, pointed out their guilt and expiation
of it by blood. They had messengers in succession to call them to repentance ;
but when Christ came they rejected, persecuted, and crucified him. Yet after all
this enmity they were invited to the sacrifice (Luke xxiv. 47). 2. The Gentiles.
This sacritice prepared for Jews and Gentiles, nations afar off, perishing for lack of
knowledge. All mankind invited to the gospel feast (Isa. xxv. 6, 7: Luke xiv.
21—23). Christ gave himself for all people (Luke ii. 10) ; was a propitiation for
the sins of the whole world (1 Jobn ii. 2). The gospel must be preached to the
world, that all may be saved (Mark xv. 15). Application. 1. All have sinned,
need a sacrifice, mediator, and Saviour. 2. Sucha Saviouris provided. 3. Pardon,
holiness, and happiness may be obtained by all who rightly seek. Are you partakers
of this great sacrifice? Come, sit with the guests, and take your place at the
sacramental table. Do not waver nor doubt. If strangers, you are perishing.
Feel your need, and apply now. Woe be unto youif you make light of it! “ If he
that despised Moses’ law,” &c. [Rev. Thos. Jackson].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.&. The strange apparel contrasted Seneca complained that many in his
with the true garment, “the fine linen, time were more careful about attire than
clean and white,” granted unto the the welfare of the state. It is extreme
Church, which is “the righteousness of folly to be too anxious about either
the saints” in Christ (Rev. xix. 8). material or fashion of dress, to sacrifice

The dress may be taken as a witness comfort for appearance, and necessities
to—1l. The care for externals. 2. The for luxuries.


j noel tate of th
ind: oe ae iit ee ee “ Care no more to clothe and eat” [Shakepearv},


332 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. (OHAP. L


i


Ver. 9. Those that leap. Those who schemed, plotted, robbed; they sue-
serve their earthly masters with—-l. ceeded to their heart’s wish ; but ‘iil-
eagerness ; 2. insolence ; and 3. violence. gotten, ill-spent.’ They jilled their
Wealth thus gained is—1l. unlawful; masters’ houses quite full; but where-
2. uncertain ; and 3, Divinely cursed. with !—with violence and deceit, which
“Here again all which remains is the witnessed against them, and brought
sin. hey enriched, as they thought, down the judgments of God upon them”
their masters, by art or by force: they [Pusey].


HOMILETICS.
Tae Doomep City.—Verses 10—12.


The vision of Divine judgment which swept the earth, and settled in dark clouds
over the land of Judah, is now depicted as falling on the city. Jerusalem, the
metropolis, the centre of national vice and luxury, is besieged by Nebuchadnezzar
The advance of the enemy, the ruin of the buildings, and the miseries of the
inhabitants, are set forth in impressive figures.

I. The anguish at the gate. ‘“ Asound of crying from the fish gate.” Massive
walls and iron gates cannot keep out Divine visitations in the city; wealth and
grandeur are no barrier to retribution in the family. God can disturb our towns
and markets, our business and societies, and create want and anguish on every
hand. II. The desolation at the centre. From the entrance the enemy goes on
to the centre, or second part of the city. The second wall hinders not; the sacred
temple and the school of the prophets are battered by rams and fall crash to the
ground. When God assails, what can withstand! Neglect of duty and indulgence
in sin will bring a fearful “ ery of destruction” (Isa. xv. 5). IIL. The conquest
of the city. When God begins, he will make anend. Judgments penetrate most
secret places, and destroy the highest citadel. The horrors of the siege increase.
The storm sweeps everything before it. The inhabitants gather on the surrounding
hills, and howl at the devastation before them. ‘“ A voice of noise from the city, a
voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense to his enemies ”
(Isa. Ixvi. 6). IV. The destruction of the inhabitants. ‘“ Howl, ye inhabitants
of Maktesh,” &c. Not only the city in its grandeur, but the people in their
wickedness are all destroyed. 1. Wealthy merchants were overtaken. “ All the
merchant people are cut down.” The Maktesh (lit. mortar), in which they dwell,
is a type of the method in which they suffer. They will be pounded and crushed.
The silver with which they lade themselves will weigh them down to death.
Abused prosperity makes judgments severe. It is folly to dream of safety in any
place from which God is banished. Mercantile gains and heaps of silver cannot
deliver men “ in the day of the Lord’s wrath.” “They shail cast their silver in the
streets, and their gold shall be removed : their silver and their gold shall not be
able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord,” &c. (Ezek. vii. 19: Jas.
v. 1). 2. Men of business were carried off. “ All they that bear silver are cut off.”
The traders of the city had become very Canaanites in greed and gain (cf. Hos. xii.
7: Ezek. xvi. 3). The invaders seized the wealthy first, and carried away their
booty (cf. ver. 13). Traffic and trade are good things, but are not the real basis on
which a kingdom stands. When carried on by injustice and violence they will
cause depression in business, failure in banks, and ruin inthe country. God never
allows any dishonesty to go unpunished, ‘“ By the blessing of the upright the city
is exalted ; but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.”


CHAP. 1] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANTAH. 638





Diving Sorvtiny anp Rerrisution.— Verses 12—18.


God is not indifferent to human affairs. We may forget that God sees us, but
the fact is not altered by our forgetfulness.

I. Human conduct is under Divine inspection. This indicates—1. A thorough
serutiny. “TI will search Jerusalem with candles.” When God comes forth—to
make evil glare out by his fierce light—the secret sins and the secret sinners cannot
be hidden. No hiding-place can keep out the light that makes manifest. 2. The
detection of the guilty. ‘“ Men that are settled (curded or thickened). The imagery
is taken from the process of preparing wine, and emphatically sets forth—(a) The
evil of carnal self-satisfaction (Jer. xlviii. 11). Prosperity fostered pride; ease
generated presumption ; absence of dislodging changes resulted in aggravated spirit
of impunity. This self-security should be detected; and (0) Practical atheism
should be exposed. “That say in their heart, the Lord will not do good,” &c.
Practical atheism was the outcome of debasing indulgence. God’s watchfuiness,
justice, and government were flagrantly ignored. His patience was thought to be
unconcern. They talked in their hearts, held mental monologues, and charged God
with being alike indifferent to do good or evil, to bestow blessing or visit with
calamity. ‘ Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, there-
fure the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.” Note the
manifestation of a similar spirit in the days of the Apostle Peter (2 Pet. iii.).
II. Punishment is threatened for wrong-doing. “I will punish, because they
have sinned against the Lord” (cf. vers. 12—17). God’s anger is not awakened
by trifles, neither is it disproportionate to the offence. The same faithfulness and
power are concerned in the fulfilment of great and terrible threatenings as of
“exceeding great and precious promises.” The space mercifully allotted for
repentance was nearly over. The day of grace was ending, and stern justice was
drawing near. 1. The punishment would not be delayed. “The great day of the
Lord is near, it is near and hasteth greatly.” 2. The punishment would be most
exacting. ‘The curse causeless shall not come.” The penalty for sin may (1)
make the sinner’s labour profitless. “They shall build houses, but not inhabit
them, and they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof.” The
advent of justice may (2) render the offenders homeless. ‘Therefore their goods
shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation.” Judgment may (3) terrify
with manifold alarms (vers. 15—17). Retributions (4) make the whole land
desolate. “The whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy.” 3. The
punishment would not be evaded. (1) There would be no exemption by purchase.
“ Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them.” (2) The doom
would be inclusive and complete. ‘For he shall make even a speedy riddance of
all them that dwell in the land” [Matt. Braithwaite].


Tan Dinicenr SEARCH AND THB CERTAIN Discovery.— Verses 12—14.


Goa will now come in terrible judgment, go through the city, trying house by
house. and man byman. “ As the vintner goes through his cellars, torch in hand ;
or as the head of the household, taper in hand, searches every nook and corner of
his house before the Passover, lest any morsel of leaven should be hidden in it,
so Jehovah will ‘search Jerusalem with candles,’ hunting the evil out of every
dark nook in which they have concealed themselves, suffering none to escape.”

I. The nature of the search. “I will search with candles.” 1. It t a
determined search. An earnest and diligent search of persons and places ; a sifting
one by one in every corner until the thing searched be discovered. The woman
“lit a candle, and swept the house, and sought diligently till she found” the lost
ecin (Luke xv. 8: Ps. xliv. 21), 2. Jé is a universal search. None can escape.
Josephus tells in the destruction of Jerusalem how princes and priests were dragged


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAG. (CHAP. 2


De 3





out of tombs, pits, and caves, in which they had hidden themselves in fear of
death. Ungodly men hate the light, would extinguish the candle, and hide them.
selves from punishment. But this is impossible. ‘Though they hide themselves
in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence.” (a) No bribe can
avert it, (b) No strength can resist it. The might of the city and the courage of
the warrior would fail. So irresistible would be the attack that “the mighty man”
would abandon himself to shrieks of hopeless grief (ver. 14). There is only one
way of escape for the guilty: to examine his own ways, to condemn his pwn
offences, and abandon all pleas, to trust in Christ. II. The design of the search.
God searches the city, and penetrates the inward parts of the soul to expel dark-
ness, discover guilt, and bring men to himself. 1. To rouse the spiritually
hardened. Idleness and ease beget moral indifference. Men sit down upon their
lees, draw themselves together, and get hardened in sin. ‘They rest on the vilest,
the sediment and refuse of their nature; become defiled by lusts, and confirmed
in habitual wickedness. 2. To reprove the practically indifferent. Men who deny
not God’s existence may reason themselves into atheism, may wish and believe in
their hearts, and by acts inure themselves into the belief that God is far away from
them ; that he does not govern the world ; and “ will not punish men with eternal
destruction for the sins of this short life.” God sits in heaven heedless of what
men do or suffer, and will neither interfere in this world nor in the next. Why
then fear him? Why not give themselves to lusts and pleasures? ‘This spirit is
rebuked by the prophet. If men do not see God in the merciful visitations, he
will terrify them by judgments in life. 3. To pumish the worldly-minded. Men
pursuetheir ordinary course of labourandofsin, eat anddrink, build houses and plant
vineyards, until the day overtakes them, and deprives them of all they have ( Matt.
xxiv. 38,39). (1) They hoard up and cannot keep. “Therefore their goods shall
become a booty.” God refutes men’s notions by his providence, and makes them
feel that he cares for what they do by taking what they possess, and leaving them
homeless and penniless. “And their houses a desolation.” (2) They labour and
do not reap the benefit. They “build houses, but do not inhabit them; plant
vineyards, but do not drink the wine thereof.” God proves the verity of the
threatening by his execution, disappoints men of happiness and enjoyment by his
justice. If we forget God in prosperity, get intoxicated with pleasure, and revolt
in threatened punishment, we shall be convinced of our folly. God will visit our
cities and marts, and search our shops and families. We shall be frustrated in our
pursuits, and robbed of all our possessions. “Thou shalt build an house, and thou
shalt not dwell therein; thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the
grapes thereof” (cf. Deut. xxviii. 30: Amos i. 2).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


The three acts of punishment. The
first falls upon the princes who indulge
in the customs of the heathen (vers. 8,
9). The second falls upon the rich
(vers. 10, 11). The third falls upon the
careless despisers (vers. 12, 13) [Lange].

Vers. 12, 13, ‘1. Ease, prosperity, and
lack of change, beget false security, dis-
regard of God’s providence, and spiritual
indifference. 2. God refutes the lan-
guage, and makes practical atheists
alarmed at his judgments. 3. When
God strips any people of their posses-

will find that their enjoyment


and abuse of them have been a snare to
them. Therefore (t. 6. beeause these
things have had such an effect) “their
goods shall become a booty.” ‘“ Religion
and morality are two spheres which can-
not be separated. An upright heart can
only have one God, and in cherishi

other gods besides God lies a falseness
which bears its fruit in the field of
morals, Whilst the heart, in its pro-
foundest depths, is actuated by two
diametrically opposite opinions, it is
necessary that those influences should
finally neutralise one another. In this


HAP. 1] HCMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAH. 538





way arises indifference towards motives avarice, take the place of eternal. In
drawn from eternal things. The indif- the second place, the other result of this
ference has a twofold result. First, fearless, practical atheism is: God does
temporal motives, among which the no good and no evil” [Lange].

most powerful are pride (fashion) and


HOMILETICS.
Tae Great Day or tHe Lorp.— Verses 14—18.


To rouse the self-secure in their ease, Zephaniah carries out the hint of ver. 7,
of the near approach and awful character of the judgment. The warning to Judah
and Jerusalem should make sinners in Zion tremble. It is the day, the great day
of the Lord, “‘a specimen of the day of judgment, a kind of doomsday, as the
last destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans is represented to be in our Saviour’s
prediction in Matt. xxiv. 27.”

I. A day of profound darkness. Darkness and gloominess, clouds and thick
darkness. Everything looks threatening, and nothing encourages. No hope, no
light. “The day of a darkness so profound, that day itself is changed into its
very opposite and becomes a night, and a night wrapped in clouds through which
no star can shoot a ray of hope.” II. A day of Divine wrath. “That day is
a day of wrath;” wrath treasured up for awhile, but now overflowing and irresist-
ible—manifest, and felt in distress of every kind and degree, in calamity without
relief. If the wrath of a king is like a messenger of death, how much more the wrath
of an offended God? (Prov. xvi. 14: Mal. iii 2). III. A day of material
destruction. 1. The cities will be destroyed. ‘“ Against the fenced cities, and
against the high towers” (ver. 16). Whatever the strength and structure of fortifi-
cations, they would afford no protection. 2. The land will be wasted. The blast
of God will turn all fertility into waste. The dreary monotony of desolation
appears everywhere. ‘The earth is wasted with havoc, and broken into ruin, “A
day of wasteness and desolation.” IV. A day of human misery. “A day of
trouble and distress” (vers. 15 and 17). 1. Great helplessness. (a) No escape
by ransom ; (d) no escape by flight. Men sink into anguish beyond expression ;
into misery beyond relief. 2. Great blindness. Hemmed in, they turn first to
one place and then another; stagger like drunken men (Job xii. 25) ; and walk
like blind men. Bereft of counsel, strength, and hope, “ they meet with the dark-
ness in the day-time, and grope in the noon-day as in the night.” 3. Great
slaughter. ‘Their blood shall be poured out as dust.” Life was of no value,
blood would be utterly disregarded, treated as contemptible, and spilt in abundance
(Ps. lxxix. 3). Their jlesh would decay, putrefy, and become offensive, and lie like
dung upon the land. All this “ because they have sinned.” “ The most offensive
disgusting physical corruption,” says Pusey, “is but a faint image of the defile-
ment of sin.” 4. Great despair. Amid darkness, distress, and murder, the war
trumpet sounds louder and louder, strikes terror into every heart, and despair is
read in every eye. The fire of jealousy devours the land, and “a speedy riddance is
made of all them that dwell” in it. ‘He shall make an utter, yea, altogether
(nothing but) a terrific destruction of all the dwellers of the earth” (cf. Pa. civ.
99: Isa. lxv. 23). V. A day of speedy approach. “It is near, it is uear, and
hasteth greatly.” Each hour tells the knell of approaching doom. Conscience,
Scripture, and providence, like the voice of God, proclaim that it is near. Near,
adds the prophet, to impress us the more. It is at hand to each. It hasteth
greatly, and may come before we are aware. Nothing will hasten it more than care-
lessness in sin and security in judgment. Prepare now, before its voice is heard ;
arise, ye dead, and come to judgment. “For the great dav of his wrath is come ;
av’ who ahall be able to stand t”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAH.


qu F ok


eR


“TI see the Judge enthroned! the flaming guard!
The volume opened ! opened every heart!
A sunbeam pointing out each secret thought !
No patron! intercessor none! now past
The sweet, the clement mediatorial hour !
For guilt no plea! to pain, no pause! no bound!
Inexorable all! and all, extreme”’ [ Young].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER I.


Vers. 1—3. Consume. The wrath of
God is truly the terriblest thing in this
world—the sting of sin, which is the
sting of death. Alas! to us, God’s
wrath doth not appear in its full horror ;
for if it did, we should sooner die than
offend him. Some do but think of it;
few think of it as they should; and
they that are most apprehensive look
upon it as at a distance, as that which
may be turned away; and so, not fear-
ing God’s wrath, “treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath” [Farindon].

Vers. 4—6. Remnant. Baal was
the Phoenician tutelary god. His name
means lord; and the feminine deity
corresponding, and generally associated,
- with him, was Ashtoreth. As he was
represented by the sun, so she was the
goddess answering to the moon and the
rest of the heavenly bodies. In fact, it
was the worship of nature; a worship
to which correspond the pantheism and
scientific exaltation of natureand her laws
in our days [Fausset]. They offered
the sacrifices upon the roofs, that they
might be the better able to see the stars
in heaven [ Theodoret]. Swear. A neuter
is a monster; he hath two tongues, two
minds, two souls: he hath a tongue for
God, and a tongue for the world too:
he looks up to God, and saith, certainly
thou art mine: he looks down upon the
world, and saith, surely I am thine; he
hath a mind to be religious, and a mind
to save his own stake in the world too
[ Brooks]. ,

Vers. 7—9. Sacrifice. The image was
probably suggested by Isaiah’s words
(ch, xxxiv. 6). Jeremiah subsequently
uses it of the overthrow of Pharaoh at
the Euphrates (ch. xlvi. 10). Sanctified
ones. By giving this title to God’s instru-
ments against Judah, declares that them-
selves, having become in deeds like the
heathen, were as heathen to him. Jere


miah reports the saying (ch. xxii. 6, 7).
That is, so far, a holy war in the pur-
pose of God, who fulfils his will ; hence
Nebuchadnezzar was his servant (Jer.
xxv. 9), avenging his wrongs (cf. Joel
iii. 9: Mic. iii. 5) [ Pusey].

Vers. 10, 11. These verses describe
the state of Jerusalem, when besieged
by Nebuchadnezzar. Through the fish
gate he entered the city. It received its
name from the fish market, which was
near it. Through it passed those who
used to bring fish from the lake of
Tiberias and Jordan. It answers to
what is now called the Damascus gate
[ Henderson].

Ver. 11. Maktesh, the mortar, a
name applied to the valley of Siloam
from its hollow shape [Jerome]. It
is called by Josephus, ‘the cheese-
maker's valley,” and by the present
inhabitants, el-Wdd, 1. e. the valley, and
also the mill-valley. The name “ mor-
tar” was probably coined by Zephaniah,
to point to the fate of the merchants
and men of money who lived there
[Keil].

Vers. 12, 13. Neither the majesty of
God, nor his government or glory, con-
sists in imaginary splendour, but in
those attributes which so meet together
in him that they cannot be severed
from his essence. It is the property of
God to govern the world, to take care of
the human race, to distinguish between
good and evil, to relieve the wretched,
to punish all crimes, to restrain unjust
violence; and if any one would de-
prive God of these, he would leave
nothing but an idol [Calvin].


“ Even God’s providence
Seeming estranged ” [Thos. Hood},
Vers. 14—18. Day. When iniquity
hath played her part, vengeance leaps
upon the stage; the comedy is short,


CHAP, 1.]


HOMILET.C COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH.


63?


NSCS GRD


but the tragedy is long. The black
guard shai! attend you; you shall eat at
the table of sorrow ; and the crown of
death shall be upon your heads, many
glistering faces looking upon you [Hy.
Smith}. You can muzzle your fear, and
you can silence your conscience, and you


God abhors, and which every honest man
ought to abhor, and you can, in the
mean time, nave comparative peace ; but
there is a great difference between stav-
ing off judgment now, and staving off
revelation and judgment then [H. W.
Beecher},


can go on making money by wavs which





CHAPTER IL


Criticat, Norzs.] Summons to repent. Gather] As stubble (Ex. v. 7—12) ; then generally, to
collect; in this sense, to gather one’s self, to examine one’s self. Desired] A word which signities
ee to turn pale, become white with shame (cf. Isa. xxix. 22); unworthy persons, not desired

y God, 2.] Reason for exhortation. Decree] (ch. i.). Forth] As the embryo, hid in the womb, is
brought forth in due time. Day] Lit. as chaff the day passes ; “the day comes like chaff’ { Kez/].
8.] Because judgment will suddenly come, the pious exhorted especially, tbe quiet and humble before
God (cf. Mic. vi 8). Right.] Not loved strange apparel and practised idolatry. May he] Not
doubtful, but difficult, 4, For] The punishment of neighbouring states a warning. Five nations,
from all quarters of the earth, to indicate universality of judgment. Gaza] and cities of Philistines
(cf, Amos i, 6—8: Isa, xx. 1). Noon-day] Not by thieves at night; but in the hottest part of day,
generally spent in rest (2 Sam. iv. 5), and less likély for attack; hence sudden invasion Ge xv. 8),
5. Cherethites] Cretans. The connection of Philistines with Crete early noticed (1 Sam. xxx. 14:
2 Sam. viii, 18: 1 Chron. xviii, 17: Ezek. xxv. 16). Cherethites (from a verb, to cut off) were
used as executioners in the royal army of Judah, and would be cut off by Jehovah [cf. Wordsworth],
6. Sea coast] Lit. line of the sea, é. e, the region or coast along the sea-shore, and so called from
the custom of using a cord or line in measuring off or dividing a territory (cf. with the same appli-
cation, the coast of the sea, Jer, xlvii. 7: Ezek. xxv. 16) [Henderson]. Cottages] A proverbial
description for utter desolation (cf. vers. 14, 15); shepherds excavated or dug huts underground to
protect from the sun. %. Feed] The Jews restored to their land, not any longer annoyed by
Philistines, would dwell safely. Visit] in mercy (Ex. iv. 31). 8. Moab] and Ammon rejoiced in
the calamity of the Jews. Compare parallel prophecies against Moab (Isa, xv., xvi. : Jer. xlvitt.: Amos
ii, 1—3), and Ammon (Jer, xlix. 1—6: Amos i, 13—15). Magnified] Acted insolently against
their boundary (Jer, xlviii. 29: 2 Kings xiii. 20). 9.] The threat will certainly be executed. Divine
existence itself pledged. The land shall be overrun with stinging nettjes, and become a place for
salt-pits, like the southern coast of the Dead Sea. A remnant of Jews shall possess the people them-
selves. 10.] The judgment is ¢a/io. The universality of it stands out with greater precision,
according to its two-fold fundamental characteristic [Lange]. 11. Famish] Deprive them of
worship and sacrifices, which were considered food (Deut. xxxii. 38). His place] Not in Jerusalem
alone, but everywhere worship Jehovah (Ps. lxviti, 29: Mal. i. 11), 12.) Fulfiited when Nebuchad-
nezzar conquered Egypt, with which Ethiopia was closely allied (Jer. xlvi. 2, 9; Ezek. xxx. 5—9).
18.] The propbet dwells longer on the heathen power of the north, the Assyrian kingdom with its
capital, Nineveh, because Assyria was then the imperial power, secking to destroy the kingdom of
Judah. This explains the announcement, in the form of a wish, as the use of the contracte forms,
yet and ydsém, clearly shows. Assyria was north-east, but invaded Palestine from the north, bence
tacos as sifuated thus [Heil] ‘14. Cormorant and bittern] or pelican and porcupine (cf. Isa.
xxxiv. 11), from whence the words are adopted { Wordsworth]. Lintels] or knops of pillars (Amos
ix. 1). The capitals of the pillars do not lie on the ground, but now stand unattached, after the
roofs and tloors, which rested upon them, are thrown down” [ Hitzcg}. 15.] This city, proud and
haughty, sheltered behind defences of water, would become a lair of beasts, a desolate waste, @ hissing
to men, All would exult in its ruins, wave the hand, and deelare that ‘she richly deserved her fate.


538 AMOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. (OHAP. i.


eT


HOMILETICS.
Tus Cauy To RuPENTANOE.— Verses 1—3.


God had threatened his people, now withholds judgment, and urges them to
repent, earnestly to seek and serve him, before the day of punishment comes.

I. The necessity of repentance. ‘‘ Gather yourselves together.” Men are distant
from God and alienated from one another; dissipated by lusts, and live in
forgetfulness of their highest interests. Hence they have no desire to turr to God,
and are unworthy of his blessing ; “ not desired.” They must be gathered into one
feeling of penitence, one assembly of solemn worship, and one fold of God. 1.
The impenitent must seek the Lord. Judgment is threatened against “ sinners and
their offences.” The proud must be humbled, the unrighteous be holy, and the
backslider return. 2. The meek must seek the Lord. The submissive and quiet
must be more humble; those who do right must know more perfectly, and act more
constantly. Meekness, righteousness, and holiness must adorn their conduct. ‘ He
that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy
still” 3. The whole nation must seek the Lord. National repentance is the only
safeguard against national overthrow. An elect nation may become proud,
undaunted in sin, and unappalled in danger. ‘‘ A nation not desired,” which does
uot blush in shame ; yet a nation whom God urges to turn to him and live. “Seek
the Lord, and ye shall live, lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph and
devour it.” II. The method of repentance. ‘‘Gather yourselves together.”
1. By self-examination. A man must know himself thoroughly, examine himself
closely, and ascertain how he stands in the sight of God. “ Prove your own selves.”
As we collect stubble from the fields, so must we search with diligence, and pick up
“the withered leaves of past life.” The chaff must be burned up, all the dead and
worthless must be destroyed in heart and conduct. It is better to judge ourselves
than be judged of God. “ Let us search and try our way, and turn again to the
Lord.” 2. By earnest reformation. We must begin with self-examination, and
end with amendment of life. The first earnest search must be continued, until all
sin is discovered, abandoned, and pardoned. “ Bring forth fruits meet for repent-
ance.” “That vice may be uneasy, and even monstrous unto thee,” says Sir Thomas
Browne, “let iterated good acts and long-confirmed habits make virtue almost
natural, or a second nature in thee. Since virtuous superstructions have commonly
generous foundations, dive into thy inclinations, and early discover what nature bids
thee to be, or tells thee thou mayest be. They who timely descend into themselves,
and cultivate the good seeds which nature hath set in them, prove not shrubs but
cedars in their generation.” (1) Sin must be forsaken in act and deed. (2)
Humility must be cherished. (3) Righteousness must be followed. In this radical
change of disposition, attitude, and conduct, lies the sole chance of escape. “Seek .
the Lord and his strength ; seek his face evermore.” 3. By public confession.
“Gather yourselves” to a religious assembly, and avert the judgment by united
prayer and confession. The Jews forsook the worship of God foridolatry. Many
neglect to assemble themselves together now. If we sin together we should confess
together. Religion renders social intercourse sacred, and binds men in public acts
of praise and prayer. ‘Calla solemn assembly, gather the elders and all the
inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God, and cry unto the
Lord.” III. The motives to repentance. 1. Danger threatens. “ Before the
decree bring forth.” Men suppose that there is no approaching peril, no need for
instant amendment. But the decree is uttered, and God cannot change. “The
error of one moment may become the sorrow of a whole life.” 2. Time is given for
repentance. Space is afforded before the day of grace pass away. Time, on which
eternity hangs, is a light, uncertain thing. Like chaff before the wind it is driver


CHAP. 11.) HOMILBTIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. 530


_





(po


onward, and when it is passed the wicked will be overthrown. “They are as
stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm carrieth away.” 3. There is
now a possibility of escape. ‘It may be ye shall be hid.” Not much chance
appeared to the Jews, but God discovered one. Judgment looms over the impeni-
tent. The slightest advantage, the least hope of safety, stimulate to diligence in
temporal matters. You may secure a hiding-place in that day. In Christ we have
shelter. ‘A man shall beas an hiding-place from the wind and a covert from the
tempest.” 4, If the season pass, helpless will be the situation of those who meet the
day. (1) Destruction will be total. “Before the fierce anger of the Lord come
upon you.” (2) Destruction will be without remedy. The warning is twice given,
to impress the certainty and speed of its coming. ‘Take heed lest that day come
upon you unawares.”

“God stays long, but strikes at last,”

‘The higher the fool, the greater the fall.”


“Tn every fault there is folly.” -
“ What is not wisdom is danger ” [Old English Proverbs}.


Surx tae Lorv.—Verse 3.


Observe four purposes for which we are to seek God, and which enter essentially
into genuine religion. First, we are to seek to know him. Here religion begins.
“ This is life eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
hast sent.” “TI will give them a heart that they may know me.” Secondly, we
must seek to enjoy him. In order to this we must be reconciled. He cannot
comfort us till we are reconciled to him. We cannot rejoice in Christ till we have
received the atonement. Then we can draw to him as our exceeding joy ; our souls
can be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, In his favour we live, and his loving-
kindness is better than life. Thirdly, we must seek to serve him. He is not only
our portion to enjoy, but our master to obey and wait upon. “On thee do I wait
all the day,” not only as an expectant to receive supplies, but as a servant to receive
and execute orders, and to inquire, ‘‘ Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?” His
service is perfect freedom, his work honourable and glorious, his yoke easy, and bis
burden light ; and in keeping his commandments there is great reward. Fourthiy,
we must seek to resemble him. It is the essence of religion to be like him whom
We worship. Weare to “show forth his praises (margin, virtues).” God’s virtues
are God’s perfections, and the best way to show them forth is to follow and
exemplify them. We cannot resemble his natural perfections, eternity, omnipotence,
and omniscience ; but we may resemble his moral attributes—in our measure and
degree be holy, do good, and forgive like him. “Be ye merciful, as your Father
also is merciful.” As we advance in this grace, we are “renewed after the image
of him who created us in righteousness and true holiness.” ‘“ We are changed
from glory to glory by the Spirit of the Lord” [W. Jay].


Tas THREEFOLD CaLu.— Verse 3.


Divine judgments should rouse all to reflection, and lead them to test their
thoughts and actions. The wicked do not seek God, but fall under his just.
displeasure. But the meek are exhorted to bend under his chastening rod, to seek
him in outward ordinances and in active exercises There is a threefold call here.
or three special blessings to be sought.

I. Seek the Lord. This is most needful and important. We naturally seek
God in his works and word, in history, and in ourselves even. When we find
him our hearts and intellects are satisfied. ‘“ Lord,” says Augustine, “I have
viewed the world over, in which thou hast set me; I have tried how this and that
thing will fit my spirit and the design of my creation; and can find nothing in
which to rest, fur nothing here doth itself rest. Lo, I come to thee, the eternal
Being, the Spring of life, the Centre of rest, the Fulness of all things!” “ Lord.


540 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAH. (CHAP. iB








show us the Father, and it sufficeth us.” II. Seek righteousness. The knowledge
of God must be evinced in holy life. ‘‘ He lived his religion,” was said of one.
1. Righteousness with men. If wrong with our fellow-creatures, we cannot be
right with God. We must do justice and love mercy—fulfil the royal law of
loving our neighbour as ourselves. ‘Charity is the scope of all God’s command-
ments,” says Chrysostom. 2. Righteous with God. This is more than a good
moral life; paying your way, and being kind to all men. We must seek and
possess the righteousness by faith in Jesus Christ. “Except your righteousnesa
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into


the kingdom of heaven.”


“Their religion titled them the sons of God” [Miiton].


III. Seek meekness.


The virtue of lowliness (hwmilitas), known to heathens,


was dignified into humility by Christianity. It is the first of Christian graces in


order and rank—the very root of religion.


pluck” in opposition and insult.
Christ demands it from his disciples.
meek and lowly in heart.”


Meekness is weakness in their estimation.
To be meek is to be like him.
“ By pride have we fallen from the kingdom of God


Men teach us to cherish “ spirit and
Bust
“T am


and by humility must we again enter it” [Starke].


“ From purity of thought all pleasure springs ;
And from a humble spirit all our peace” [ Young].


HOMILETIC HINTS


' Ver. 1. 1. We may read an invit-
ation to repentance in the darkest times.
“ A fruitful rair. falls on the soil through
which the ploughshare has been driven.
The gracious intention of the Divine
‘doom’ is disclosed.” 2. All repentance
begins and continues in self-examination.
““ Gather yourselves, so as to rid your-
selves of all chaff-like vanities and sins.
Self-confidence and corrupt desires are
the dissipations from which they are
exhorted to gather themselves ” [ Calvin].
Collect yourselves, and be ye collected —
z. e. collect your thoughts, and look into
your state of mind [Gesenius]. The
gathering is opposed to scattering, dis-
sipation, and distance.


‘‘ Mankind is broken loose from moral bands ”’
[Dryden].


The precept is doubled, as it is likewise
Num. iii. 40:,2 Cor. xiii. 5, to show
the necessity of our doing it, as also the
utility if well done; and lastly, our
crossness and averseness thereunto, to-
gether with God’s exceeding great desire
that it should be done thoroughly for
our greatest good [Trapp].

Ver. 2. Before. (God’s word is full
(as it were) of the event which it fore-
telleth ; it contains its own fulfilment in


AND SUGGESTIONS.


itself, and travaileth until it come to
pass, giving signs of its coming, yet
delaying until the full time. Time is
said to bring forth what is wrought in
it [Pusey]. Here are three cautionary
“‘ befores,” as there are four comfortable
“yets” to be read (Zech. i. 17). God
yet offers them mercy, as Alexander
did those he warred against, whiles the
lamp burned ; and as Tamerlane, whiles
the white flag was hung out (cf. Jer.
xviii. 7, 8) [Trapp].

Ver. 3. Seek. 1. The objects of
search. God and holiness of life. 2.
The method of search. (a) To work
judgment, not merely zealous about out-
ward forms. (6) To seek diligently, for
the Hebrew form is intensive. 3. The
result of search ; mitigation, if not pre-
vention, of calamity; pardon of sin,
and hid when others are exposed to
punishment.

Seek righteousness, seek meekness, 7. ¢.
further measures of holiness and degrees
of grace, Let him that is holy be holy
still; let him persevere, grow, and
advance forward towards the prize pros
posed unto him, taking for his motte
that of Charles V., “ Plus ultra,” further
yet; perfecting holiness in the fear of
God (2 Cor. vii. 1) [Trapp]. Ye meek.


OAP, IL)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAH.


64)


ra ea a ns


1. In times of decline God hath a pecu-
liar eye towards the godly, and expects
much from them. He leaves the wicked
nations, and turns to them in exhortation


word, fear of judgments, and tenderness
towards others. 3. Then God puts their
safety beyond all doubt. 4. Hence, in
dangers, uncertainties, and troubles, they


must seek him, trust his goodness and


and promise. 2. The truth and reality
grace [ Hutcheson].


of their graces must be manifest in
humility of spirit, subjection to the


HOMILETICS.
Tue JUDGMENT UPON THE Puristines.— Verses 4—7.


Punishment to neighbouring states is now threatened. Under five nations all
mankind are included. The Philistines, as a near malicious enemy, are mentioned
first. “Out of the five cities, woe is pronounced upon the same four as Amos
(i, 6—8) before, Jeremiah soon after (xxv. 20), and Zechariah (ix. 5, 6) later.
Gath, the fifth, had probably remained with Judah since Uzziah and Hezekiah
{2 Chron. xxvi. 6: 2 Kings xviii. 8). The name of the place itself is regarded in
the sentence, that it may suggest the thought of the doom pronounced upon it. The
names expressed boastfulness, and so, in the Divine judgment, carried their own
sentence with them, and this sentence is pronounced by a slight change in the
word” [Pusey|. The four capitals include the whole territory and people.

I. The splendid cities will be destroyed. The cnief cities are threatened with
open and violent attack, with entire desolation and depopulation. 1. Gaza shall
be forsaken (Azzah, strong, shall be, Azoobah, desolated). Though strong, and able
to resist the conqueror for four or five months, its defenders perished in the battle.
Alexander sold its inhabitants, and repeopled it from the neighbourhood. 2. Ekron
shall be uprooted (Ekron, deep rooting, shall be Te-aker, rooted out). Not a
vestige of the place is now left. It is only known by name, say travellers. Man
builds, and God pulls down. Man plants, and God uproots. The most flourishing
trade, the most deeply-rooted society, may be torn out of the soil and carried away.
3. Ashkelon shall become a desolation. The present city is a ghastly skeleton.
The soil is good, but peasants who cultivate it live outside in mud-huts, under the
impression that God has left the place and permitted evil spirits to dwell there.
4. Ashdod shall be suddenly overtaken. ‘They (the enemies) shall drive out
Ashdod at the noon-day.” The power of Dagon (1 Sam. v.) could not defend it.
When its inhabitants were taking repose and sleep, and thought themselves most
secure—when evil was least expected, it would prove most fatal. The judgments
of God would suddenly overtake them. Neither antiquity nor valour, neither
natural strength nor the power of their gods, would protect these cities. The word
of God was against them, and their doom was inevitable. ‘I will send a fire on the
wall of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces thereof; and I will cut off the inhabit-
ant from Ashdod, and him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon, and I will
turn mine hand against Ekron: and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish,
saith the Lord God.” II. The whole population will be taken away. “ Woe
unto the inhabitants of the sea-coast.” Every epithet in ver. 5 is selected with a
view of deepening the gloom cf terrible denunciation. “The terrors are encompassed
by hints drawn from the latent omen of the Kerethite name, and from the ancient
Canaanite traditions.” 1. The fertility of the land would be cursed. Shepherds
will dig it up to build their huts, and shelter their flocks. 2. Seats of industry
will be abandoned. 3. The country would be repeopled. ‘This once fertile tract
by the sea, thickly dotted with the crowded hives of human industry, with fair
cities inhabited by free brave men, afterwards a desert, accursed by God, and
abandoned by man, ‘shall become pastures, with huts for shepherds, and folds
for sheep.’ Through the mountain gozgés the flocks of the restored Hebrews will


542 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. (CHAP. Il





descend on tne green flowery plains, knowing no want, fearing no evil, because the
shepherds go before them with staff and rod” [S. Coa]. “I will even destroy thee
that there shall be no inhabitant.” “In that day there shall be no more the
Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 4. Ths judgments threatened are not like the winter sun, that light.
upon others an argument for the un- eth but heateth not” [Trapp]. 2. The
godly to repent, and for the godly to source of the blessings. The covenant
persevere in well-doing, that they may of ‘‘the Lord their God.” Covenant


escape the general calamity.

Vers. 5,6. Woe. 1. The source of
the woe. ‘The word of the Lord.”
2. The cause of the woe. They were
of the posterity, possessed the land, and
inherited the sins of Canaan. 3. The
consequences of the woe. (1) Destruc-
tion, (2) Universal destruction. “ Woe
to the people who have the word of
God against them. ‘To them he speak-
eth not in good, but in evil; not in
grace, but in anger; not in mercy, but in
vengeance ” [ Pusey].

Ver. 7. The fall of the enemy, the
restoration of the elect of Israel. The
remnant of Baal driven out, to make
room for the remnant of God. Notice
—l. The blessings bestowed. (1) Visited
by God. “The Lord their God shall
visit them.” In mercy and_loving-
kindness (Ex. iv. 31). (2) Delivered.
“ And turn away the'r saptivity.” (3)
Restored to pussession. “ His visits are
not empty visite (Ps. viii 5); his favours


rights will not fail, after long delay and
many disappointments. 3. The method
of securing the blessings. After captivity
and calamity. Through much tribula-
tion we enter heaven. But the word is
sure. “ Be thou faithful.”

In chap. i. vers. 8, 9, God had
threatened to “visit” the men of Judah
and Jerusalem; now he promises to
“visit” them: the same Heb. verb used
in both places; but now by a slight
change of construction (padquad, construed
with an accusative of the person instead
of with al), the verb itself shows that
God is about to visit them in grace.
And the grammatical hint is expanded
in the words which follow: God is about
to visit them, that he may “ turn their
captivity,” as he turned that of Job,
by giving them freedom for bondage,
peace for war, wealth for want. The
peace and abundance of this happier
time are charmingly expressed in the
opening clauses of ver. 7 {S. Coz].


HOMILETICS.


THe JUDGMENT UPON THE Moasites.— Verses 8—10.


Moab and Ammon were of blood relation to Israel.


Their country adjoined


Canaan, and from the time of Balak they were always reviling Israel, and


invading their territory, and plundering their cities.


Ammon were proverbial.


The pride and insolence of


They were now to be punished for their conduct.


I. The nature of their doom. Their land was to be spoiled, and their cities
exterminated.’ 1. The tribes would be destroyed. They would incur a fate like


Sodom and Gomorrah, which are ingulfed in the Dead Sea.


be cursed,
would be perpetual.


2. The land would


Nettles would infest it, salt-pits would tear it up, and desolation
Destruction, barrenness, and extinction beyond recovery


(Jer. xlix. 18). ‘“‘ The whole lan‘ ‘hereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning : it is
not sown, nor beareth, nor any gra.« groweth therein ; like the overthrow of Sodom
and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger and in
his wrath.” II. The certainty of their doom. ‘Therefore as I live, saith the Lord
of hosts.” Jehovah pledges himself by solemn oath to inflict the destruction.
When God threatens men seem slow t believe that he is in earnest Whe» be


OHAP. II.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAR. 43


—— ere eoael








appeals to his own existence in support of his truth they should fear. ‘“ Because
he could swear by no greater he swears by himself.” III. The cause of their
doom. 1. Their pride. “This shall they have for their pride.” Pride and
arrogance are specially offensive to God. When men magnify themselves against
the people of God and their possessions, they magnify themselves against God.
God will bring them low, and give them shame and contempt. 2. Their cruelty.
They reviled and reproached the people of God (ver. 8) ; took pleasure in their
misfortunes ; cherished constant hatred towards them; and violated their land age
after age. Pride begets insolence and cruelty, and these expose to the judgment
nf God. “It is a dangerous indiscretion for a man not to know the bounds of his
‘wn calling” (Bp. Hall]. “A man’s pride shall bring him him low. ”


“My pride fell with my fortunes” [As you Jike tt].


Tan Living Gov.— Verses §—11.


“T live.” God here declares his eternal self-existence. “ In the beginning Ged.”
The living God is not indifferent to human affairs ; neither does he keep silence.
He has entered into relationships and covenants indicated by the name, “the God
of Israel,” revealed his majestic power, and triumphed gloriously over the rebellious
“ The Lord, strong and mighty.” This God has spoken, linked his sayings with his
character, and made them emphatic by an oath.

I. The living God is cognisant of all that transpires onearth. ‘I have heard.”
Nothing escapes the eyes of God. “ All things are naked and opened to the eyes
of him with whom we have to do.” God is an ever-present listener (whispering
gallery: telephone). 1. God hears the mockery of evil tongues. ‘I have heard
the reproach of Moab,” &ce. How painful for us to hear all the slanders, curses, and
blasphemies of one day! Yet God hears all the evil-speaking of men through all
time. The God of patience may bear long with personal and national provocations,
but he feels, and expresses feeling in words. “ As I live, saith the Lord of hosts.”
This brings out the idea—2. That God is affected by the injury done to his people.
This truth was unfolded to Moses when commanded to go to Egypt (Ex. iii. 7—10).
Note how the exalte/, living Christ identifies himself with his persecuted people.
(Acts ix. 1—4). This truth should comfort and sustain, “ when men shall revile
you, and persecute you,’ &c. II. The living God administers timely justice.
Nations only exist in time, and so in time punishment takes place. We are dealt
with as individuals before the judgment-seat of Christ. Moab and Ammon, for
repeated and persistent offences, are threatened with Divine judgments. God’s
words soon become God’s works, notwithstanding seeming hindrances and impossi-
bilities. The guilt was great and grievous. Observe—l. The severity of the
Divine judgment. ‘Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as
Gomorrah.” We have no encouragement from the history of nations to regard God’s
mercy as amiable weakness, or his judgments as harsh and vindictive. “ The Lord
is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.” Under his righteous
administration, and in the execution of judgment for the oppressed, light words may
bring heavy blows, and detiant tones desolating retributions. Cause and effect, sin
and suffering, are here connected. 2. The Divine judgment was the penalty of pride
and arrogance. “ This shall they have for their pride,” &c. “ Pride goeth before
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall.” Illustrations :—Goliath (1 Sam.
xvii.) ; Benhadad (1 Kings xx.) ; Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. iv.); Babylon (Isa. xlvii_}.
(II. The living God is jealous of his name and worship. “The Lord will be
terrible unto them ; for he will famish all the gods of the earth,” &c. An ezdolon
is a thing that can be seen and put for a being who canrot be seen. God ina
spirit, and no image can represent a spirit. He prohibits the attempt to make a
“ jikeness” of himself (Ex. xx.). ‘The maledictions upon this sin are nume ous


544 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAH. (OHAP. If,





and startling. It is specially offensive and insulting to the one living and true
God. With the most horrible, inhuman, and debasing rites, Moab and Ammon
worshipped gods, and left the infamous names of Chemosh, Molech, Milcom, and
Peor. 1. Idolatry is a flagrant insult to the living God. 2. God declares his
intention to exterminate it. ‘For he will famish all the gods of the earth.” The
triumphs of Divine truth over idolatry have been signal and complete. Islands and
countries have abolished their idols. The process goes on and must continue, for
he hath said, “I am God, and there is none like me.” ‘The idols he shall utterly
abolish.” 3. God predicts the universality of true and acceptable worship. Jealous
for his character, God will tolerate no rival. The heathen gods shall be without
offerings and devotees. The destructive work is to prepare for the constructive, or
rather the true worship is to displace the false. ‘ Men shall worship Him, every
one from his place,” &c. However prevalent, mighty, and venerable idol worship
may be in some places, it is doomed. Whether slowly or rapidly men “ turn from
idols to serve the living God,” the promise must be accomplished. ‘‘ All the ends
of the earth shall remember and turn unto the Lord: and all the kindreds of tha
nations shall worship before him.” The predicted universality of acceptable
worship should (a) Incite the Church of God to pray earnestly, “thy kingdom
come ;” and (0) Inspire unceasing aggressive efforts, until “the kingdoms of this
world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ” [Mt. Braithwaite].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. 1. No relation will bind the earth.” They will die from want and
wicked to the Church, and in sympathy _ starvation. There will be a gradtial and
with the godly. However near, they universal destruction of idols. This


break loose, persecute, and revile them.
2. But God takes notice of this conduct
towards his people, declares his love, and
determines to punish their enemies.
Chastisement does not hinder affection
for them. J have heard the reproach.
“ The memory of God is one of the most
fearful things of which a man can think.
He notices particularly the dishonour
done to his people, because they only
take no heed of dishonour, and are not
allowed to defend themselves. But take
heed that you are not reviled on account
of your own sins. Such reviling God
does not punish, but it is itself punish-
ment” [ Lange].

Ver. 11. The extermination of
idolatry, and the establishment of God's
worship. 1. Idolatry to be exterminated.
“ For he will famish all the gods of the


happened in the days of Sennacherib
and Nebuchadnezzar, who chastised the
Jews and weaned them from heathen
deities ; in the early age of Christianity,
and in modern missions. 2. Divine
worship to be established. Not only at
Jerusalem but universally. “ Men shall
worship him, every one from his own
place.” His own Gentile home taught by
Jews in the true religion. “ All the
isles of the heathen,’—the maritime
regions of the West. This prediction is
being fulfilled at present; and ere long,
“From the rising of the sun even unto
the going down of the same, my name
shall be great among the Gentiles ; and
in every place incense shall be offered
unto my name, and a pure offering”
(Mal. i 11: Ps. ii. 8: Num. xiv. 21)


HOMILETICS.


Tus JupemMents or Gop a ScHemEs or RepEmMPTion.— Versa 11.


‘The immense value of this verse consists in the fact that it reveals a law, a


sonstant invariable law, of the Divine government.


It stands alone and is com


plete. It isa place of vantage, a point of rest, to which the prophet has risen,
and from which he conté.aplates not simply the doom of which he has spoken, o¢


OHAP. II.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: 24. HANIAR. §4aé











the dooms of whivh he is about to speak, but the whole course of the Divine
providence. And as he looks before and after, as he recalls the past and _ project:
himself into the future, he finds this to be a law of human history, that the
judgments of God are a necessary part of the scheme of redemption: that God
intends them to recover men from error to truth, from sin to holiness” [S. Coa}.
Let us trace this thought—

I. In human experience. God often visits in terror, smites our gods, and
takes away what is dearest and most valuable. This terror brings torment and
despair. The darkness hides the light, and the judgment the mercy. God is
terrible indeed to us. But how else could we be weaned from sin, delivered from
idolatry, and restored to God? Threatenings have been unheeded, mercies have
been abused, and promises are of no avail. Severe measures must be adopted.
“ Fill their faces with shame ; that they may seek thy name, O Lord.” IT. In the
history of the Christian Church. In the Jewish nation, in apostolic times and
in modern history, this truth is abundantly confirmed. The Church has been
purified by persecution, and nations have been saved by the famishing of their
gods. ‘‘ These judgments,” says one, “answer to the convulsicns and storms of
the natural world, and serve to disperse the foul infections which brood over the
homes of men, to raise them to happier conditions, and to pour round them a mora
vital air.” God thus starves idols to make known himself, clothes himself m
terrors to redeem from error, and reveals mercy to win “the isles of the heathen.”
“ For when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness.”

Tus Doom or Erniopia.— Verse 12.


“ Zephaniah has to complete his circuit. He has travelled East and West, and
now completes his round by denouncing judgment on the nations of the North and
South. At the South he merely aims a blow in passing; but it is curious to note
how far it reaches. He travels to the utmost limit of his knowledge, and hurls
his curt ringing anathema at Cush or Ethiopia, the southernmost kingdom known
to the Hebrews.” Notice—

I. That the enemies of the Church, though numerous and far distant, wil
be found out and punished. Philistia, Moab, and Ammon escape not. Thi
sword passes Edom, a constant enemy, immediately south to Judah. Egypt,
insolent and more southern still, is not mentioned. But far away the judgment
sweeps to remote Ethiopia. “ Ye Ethiopiansalso.” II. That in the punishment
of these enemies the hand of God must be recognized. “Slain by my sword.”
All nations and individuals are God’s instruments, and under his control. The
most powerful and profane are under the rule and wielded by the hand of God.
None can annoy and act without his permission. All things are as easily managed
as a sword in the hand. Hence learn (a) to submit to God in the persecution
by wicked men; and (2) to discern his power and use of them. “Deliver my
soul from the wicked, which is thy sword.”


Tue Jup@ment upon AssyRria.— Verses 13-——15.


The prophet dwells upon the kingdom of Assyria with its splendid capital,
Nineveh. It was the imperial power then seeking to destroy Judah, But the
sentence of Jonah and Nahum was to be executed. No opportunity of repentance
now. The most populous and ambitious kingdom of Eastern races has to be
entirely laid waste. é ;

I. Its capital would become a heap of ruins. God wil stretch out his
hand “and destroy Assyria, and will make Nineveh a desolation.” Nineveh,
strongly built and splendidly adorned, secure in its streams and impregnable in
its defences, would become an arid waste. “Dry like a wilderness.” II. Its
ruins would be complete. They oul become—1. A lair of wild beasts,


a6 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. (CHAP. m











“ Herds crouch were once ran broad streets, loud with the wheels of traffic or the
tramp of armies. Wild beasts wander and climb about the fallen stones, seeking
a prey or finding a covert within its dismantled walls. Pelicans from the neigh-
bouring marshes, and hedgehogs from the adjacent fields, make their homes in the
sculptured capitals of her fallen columns.” 2. A home of unclean birds. Birds
perch and sing on the lintels of broken windows, joyous in existence amid exten-


sive ruins.


heap of desolation.


The music of the palace, men-singers and women-singers, have ceaseu
to be; but the song of the bird startles the spectator in the lonely scene.
“ Desolation shall be in the thresholds.”

porters watched and multitudes thronged, heaps of rubbish stand.
of house and temple, mart and palace, are covered with dust.


3. A
On spots where

The thresbolds
“ The sands carried


by winds from the desert, have buried the wreck of former grandeur, and hid every
trace of its magnificence.” IIT. Its ruins would become a derision to travellers.


“ Every one that passeth by her shall hiss and wag his hand.”
scorn, and motion with the hand in detestation, not in joy (Nah. iii. 19).


He shall hiss with
The


desolation would astonish, and the ruin of the immense and stately city would de


a source of joy.


“The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee ; thou shalt
be a terror, and never shalt be any more.’


’


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 13. Desolation. No desolation
is like that of decayed luxury. It
preaches the nothingness of man, the
fruitlessness of his toils, the fleetingness
of his hopes and enjoyments. Grass in
a court or on a beaten road, much more
in a town, speaks of the passing away
of what has been ; that man, wont to be
there, is not there now. It leaves the
feeling of void and forsakenness [ Pusey].

Ver. 15. “Jam,” &c Pride will
fall. ‘The “.ure selfish and secure in
sin, the greater the human shame and


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1—3. Meekness. Is it not as
the steps of degree in the Temple,
whereby we descend to the knowledge
of ourselves, and ascend to the know-
ledge of God? Would we attain mercy 4
humility will help [C. Sutton}.

Vers. 10, 11. Pride. That which
first overcame man, is the last thing he
overcomes [ Augustine].

Vers. 13—15. This doom on Nineveh
was carried out to the very letter. It
was not simply the largest city of the
ancient world. In the mouth of the
Hebrew prophets it was the name of a
district, 25 miles long, by 15 broad,
which included four large cities, besides
villages and forts, within its protecting
walls. About six centuries B.o., this


the Divine indignation. This was the
language of—1l. Pride. Deification ot
its own might. 2. Selfishness. I alone,
and no other that I care for. 3. Deft
ance. I am, who dare touch me? Ne
security in worldly strength and pros.
perity. 4. Self-deception. Judgments
from God humble the most haughty,
and turn the most mirthful into mourn.
ing. Thus Divine retribution
“ Falls most sure
On wicked men, when they are most secure.”


TO CHAPTER II.


vast populous district was conquered
and destroyed by the Medes (under
Cyaxares), and the Chaldeans (under
Nabopolassar, father of Nebuchadnez-
zar). So complete was the destruction,
that with startling abruptness the great
city vanished from the face of the earth,
and. its very ruins were hidden from the
eyes of men. In a.p. 1766, Niebuhr,
the great historian, stood on the eastern
bank, which he took to be acclivities
wrought by the Land of nature. It was
not till a. p. 1842 that Layard, Rawlin-
son, and Botta dug into these mounds,
exhumed and interpreted the remains
which tell the story of the city’s great
ness, luxury, and culture with a power
beyond that of words [S. Coz.


CHAP. III. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. 547


a








“I am.” Indulged sin thrives and “‘ When we in our viciousness
strengthens in character. Germs of evil dei ee nee
gather round the accursed Toot, until Malorne edovevour Brena Ree che
judgments from heaven cut it down. We strut to our destruction.”

CHAPTER IIL


CriticaL Norss.] Woe] to Jerusalem ; others, Nineveh. Filthy] From a word, to straighten one-
self; hence, to rebel, to be refractory. 2. Voice] In law and prophets. Correction] Instruction with
manifold chastisements, 8, Princes] aggravated the evil (cf. Mic. iii.). Lions] tearing the poor
(Prov. xxviii, 15: Ezek. xix. 2; Nah. ii. 12). Wolves] (cf. Hab. i. 8): voracious and insatiabie,
who devour all in the night. 4. Prophets] Light and vainglorious ;:from a word, to boil over ;
frivolous in words; brag (Jer. xxiii. 82). Priests] desecrate the temple and distort the law; make
everything common (Ezek, xxii, 26). 5.] The cause not with God. He is very near, declares his
displeasure with sin, and daily brings all things to light. Morning] Lit. in the morning, in the
morning. Shame] of penitence and conversion, 6. Cut off] Judgments appealed to as warnings
(ch. ii,); to consider severity and goodness. 7%.| Threatened danger would be averted if the people
would turn from evil. But] Instead cf repenting, they rose early, became more zealous in wicked-
ness, prepared themselves for it, like parties starting early for a journey. Hence punishment,
8. Wait] The prophecy returns to its starting-point in vers, 2 and 3, to bring it to a close [e7/].
Prey] (cf. Gen. xlix. 27: Isa. xxxili. 23). Determination] is fixed, or my right or justice to do
this (ver. 5). ‘‘ My justice, t. ¢, the justice which I shall bring to the light, consists in the fact that
I pour my fury upon all nations, to exterminate the wicked by judgments, and to convert the penitent
to myself, and prepare myself worshippers out of all nations” [ Ke:/], Gather] To sift and convert
them by Judgments, 9. For] The reason for judgment, dip purity of language, *‘ effusions of devo.
tion,” springing from renewed hearts. Consent] Shoulder; a metaphor from burden-bearers with even
shoulders (Jer. xxxii. 39); one accord, # ¢. unanimity. 10, From] most distant countries Jews will
be presented to God by converted Gentiles as a meat-offering (cf. Isa. Ixvi, 20). Rejected Israelites
will be benefited by Gentiles entering into the kingdom of God. 11. Ashamed] All cause for shame
removed, They will be sanctified and restored to favour. Pride] Haughty princes and priests, who
exult in sin, taken away. Mountain] The city or temple of which they boasted. 12.] Those
spared in judgment and gathered together. Afflicted] Bowed down, oppressed with feeling of
impotence for guod, opposite of pride, and trusting in seli—‘a humble and lowly people”’ [ Netoc.].
13. This remnant] will be a holy nation (Hx. xix. 6); without injustice in life and deceit in word.
Feed] in peace, undisturbed by foreign foes or unjust rulers, ‘This blessing is still further
developed in what follows ; first of all, by reference to the removal of the judgments of God (vers.
14—17), and secondly, by the promise of God that all the obstacles which prevent the enjoyment of
the blessing are to be cleared away ’’ [Keil]. 14.] Fulness of joy indicated by repetition of words
15.] The reasons given for exultation, Evil removed, enemies destroyed, full enjoyment of God’s
presence. 16.] Therefore ng cause for fear, but reason for diligence. Slack] Faint not (Heb. xii. 12)
through alarm and anxiety (Isa. xiii.7). 17.] Jehovah within is mighty to help and save, and rejoices

‘over his rescued people (Isa. lxii. 5; Ixv. 19), Rest] Be silent in his love; love deeply felt and
absorbed in its objects. ‘As a man caresses his dearest wife, so will God then quietly repose in thy
love” [Calvin]. To be silent, not to speak, is here very appropriately employed to express the non-
remembrance of iniquity [Hend.]. 18.] Those who pined in distance at the time of festivities, shall
be gathered together. Of thee] he people are of thy origin and descent (Isa. lviii, 12 ; Ezra ui, 59 :
Ps, lxviii. 27). Reproach] Presses upon them as 2 burden [ef. Lange]. 19. Undo] Lit. I will deal
with all oppressors; heal the limping. Her that halteth] Weakness no barrier to restoration; gather
together the dispersed, and will get] Lit. make them a praise and fame ix lands whee they have
been reproached. 20. Captivity] Lit. captivities of every age and kind shall end. God will lead
them, finish the work begun, and, incredible as it may appear, their glorification sball be seen with
their own eyes (Luke xxiv. 41).


548 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAL. [ CHAP. ITL


iret





AHOMILETICS.
Tur Guitty City.—Verses 1—4,


After threatenings denounced against other nations, God speaks to the Church,
denounces Jerusalem for the iniquities done by her. Former means were used in
vain. Now the last sentence.is uttered. A sinful state will bring a woeful doom.

I. Its inhabitants were ungodly. Its citizens were chosen of God to be “a
holy people, zealous of good works;” but they were stained with corruption and
vice. 1. They were deaf to warning. ‘She obeyed not the voice” of God in his
law and prophets. Remonstrance and appeal were in vain; wise counsel and
wholesome reproof were set at nought. ‘They would none of my counsel : they
despised all my reproof. Therefore they shall eat of the fruit of their own way,
and be filled with their own devices.” 2. They refused correction. “She received
not correction.” She was neither disciplined by her own, nor the sufferings of
others. Humbled by force and not in spirit, men kick and rebel ; like an untract-
able child under the rod, they increase their own chastisement. ‘Correction is
grievous unto him that forsaketh the way.” 3. They hardened themselves in
wickedness. Obstinate in sin, they were given up to filthiness and infamy. (1)
They were rebellious. ‘ Woe to her that is refractory (filthy).” (2) They were
defiled. “Polluted” within, notwithstanding ceremonial purity without. (3)
They were oppressive. ‘‘The oppressing city.” Rebellion begets inward defilement
before God, and cruelty to man. Hence—(4) They provoked God toanger. “ Woe
to her!” The infinite patience of God may be exhausted, and he may become
weary in correcting for sin, ‘ Why should ye be stricken any more?” (Isa. i. 5),
II. Its rulers were unjust. The leaders, civil and religious, who should have
been a protection and a praise, were cruel and ferocious. 1. The princes were cruel.
“Her princes within her are roaring lions.” Terrifying inferiors and devouring the
poor who had no helper. 2. The judges were corrupt. ‘ Her judges are evening
wolves.” Instead of defending the innocent and redressing the wrong, they were
most greedy and rapacious. They were no check to the insolence and rapacity of
the nobles; but like wild beasts driven by famine, they left not a bone of their
evening prey for the hunger of the morning. “They gnaw not the bones till the
morrow.” 3. The prophets were unfaithful. ‘Her prophets were light and treach-
erous persons.” (1) In their words they were light and frivolous, without truth
and stability in their teaching. Insolent speech and empty boasting characterized
their ministry. (2) In their life they were treacherous and inconsistent. They
evinced not that gravity and humility which become the messengers of God;
trifled with most serious subjects ; declared their own thoughts to be the truth of
God, and apostatized from him to whom they should have witnessed. 3. The
priests were polluted “Her priests have polluted the sanctuary.” (1) They
committed sacrilege; polluted the temple and its services. They encouraged
others, in a bold and carnal spirit, to profane that which was holy, and turn to
their own use that which should be consecrated to God. (2) They violated law.
“They have done violence to the law.” They openly strained or secretly wrested
it in forms of violence. By craft and gloss they perverted its function, and became
a type of all who transgress the commandment of God and make it of none effect
by their traditions (Matt. xv. 6; xxiii. 23). Thus were all classes of society, high
and low, accused of guilt and exposed to judgment. Mere power and outward
sanctity will never save a people. They must be under tha fear of God, accept his
correction, or they will be denounced with woe


CHAP. IIt,] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. 549








Kerrpine From Gop.— Verse 3.


God is the source of our happiness, the satisfaction of our hearts, and the end of
our being. What, then, the condition of those who draw not near to God? These
words may be said concerning—

I. The wicked generally. Sin separates from God, creates enmity against him,
The wicked, through the pride of their countenance, will not seek God. God is not
in their thoughts nor supreme in their life. They stand at a distance, will not
approach God ; but say, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways,
IT. Some afflicted people. Jerusalem was heavily afflicted, but stubborn. The
end of affliction is not answered in the case of many. Like Asa, they ask counsel
of physicians and not God. They murmur, repine, and-rebel against him. They
draw not near to God in his providential dealings with them. “It lightens
the stroke,” said one, ‘‘ to draw near to him who handles the rod.” “ I would run
into the arms of Christ, if he stood with a drawn sword in his hand,” said Luther.
“It is good for me to draw near to God.” III. Some professing Christians.
Instead of walking with God, they live afar off. The sanctuary and the prayer-
meeting are forsaken, the Bible neglected, and the back is turned from God. Ina
letter to Matthew Henry, his mother says, “I write a line or two to remind you
to keep in with God by solemn, secret daily prayer.”


“The soul in audience with its God is heaven,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1,2. Corruption. 1. Its nature.
“Towards God, in herself, towards man,
she is wholly turned to evil, not in
passing acts but in her abiding state.
She is known only by what she has
become, and what has been done for her
in vain. She is rebellious, and so had
had the law; defiled, and so had been
cleansed ; and therefore her state is the
more hopeless” [Pusey]. 2. Its source.
Contempt of the word. Law and pun-
ishment, invitation and promise, failed.
“She obeyed not the voice.” 3, Its
manifestation. ‘Inbelief in threatenings
and promises leads to settled hatred.
“Tf a man despise the word of God,
then the next thing is that he refuses all
amendment, because he is well pleased
with himself, and imagines everything
which is in him good. And this is the
climax of perversion of the life from
God” [Lange]. 4. Its consequence.
“She drew not near to her God.” No
change effected in life and heart. Dis-
tance from God not merely as a natural
fact, but as a penal consequence. Drew
not nigh in repentance, faith, and love ;
stood away until too late to come.
“The way of destruction begins with


obstinacy against God,” says one;
“then comes pollution by vice ; finally,
the destruction of conscience, which be-
comes manifest in open acts of violence
and crime.” The fourfold sin. Dis-
obedience, obstinacy, atheism, and
final impenitence. Take heed lest any
of you ‘‘ be hardened through the deceit-
fulness of sin.”

Ver. 4. Pollution. 1. in the persons ;
2. in the things. The priests were pol-
luted themselves, and “ made the sacri-
fices of the Lord to be abhorred.”
* Polluted her sanctuary, lit. holiness, and
so holy rites, persons (Ezra viii. 28),
things, places (as the sanctuary), sacri-
fices. All these they polluted, being
themselves polluted—first themselves,
then the holy things which they handled,
handling them as they ought not; care-
lessly and irreverently, not as ordained
by God; turning them to their own use
and self-indulgence” [Pusey]. ‘ Her
priests have violated my law, and have
profaned mine holy things: they have
put no difference between the holy and
profane, neither have they showed
difference between the unclean and the
clean” (Ezek. xxii. 26: Mal. ii. 8).


580 HOMILLLIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. [OHAP. IL


eer


HOMILETICS.


Gon’s Justice provep To a Guitty Proriz.— Verses 5, 6.


No argument against the righteousness of God can be presented by those who
have been warned, spared, and at last condemned. If iniquity be determined, and
the sinner becomes incorrigible, the course of justice is clear. God could not rightly
be taxed with injustice in punishing Jerusalem with greater suffering than the
offence deserved. This is proved—

I. By God’s holy character. “The just Lord is in the midst thereof.” He is
essentially holy, eternally just ; the primal law of right to all. He is—l. Just in
himself ; and 2. Just to others. “ He will not do iniquity.” He is in the midst of
men who are polluted and oppressive ; reproving wrong, and giving an example of
right. Hence, if sinners heed not, God cannot connive at their wickedness, and
become as one of themselves (Ps. 1. 21). “The Lord is upright, and there is no
unrighteousness in him.” II. By God’s righteous administration. God not
only dweit in the temple, but gave clear intimations of duty, bright manifestations
of equity, which they heeded not. God’s condemnations of evil practices were—1.
Open. In the day, not in secret. 2. Clear. He brought ‘ his judgment to light.”
All secret things, all works of darkness, were exposed and reproved (2 Sam. xii.
12). 3. Continual, ‘Every morning ;” morning by morning, day by day, his
voice was heard and his judgments conspicuous. ‘‘ He faileth not” in judgment
and mercy ; but they knew no shame, were conscious of no sin. “They were not at all
ashamed, neither could they blush.” III. By God’s terrible judgments upon
others. ‘I have cut off the nations,” &c. (ver. 6). Judgments upon others had
always been set before them as a warning. When about to enter the inheritance
(Lev. xviii. 24-26; xx. 23), they were cautioned. When they got possession the
ruins of cities were silent preachers of the results of sin (Isa. xvii. 9). They haa
been the instruments of inflicting judgments, and lived in the memories of God’s
visitations upon others. Fortified cities had been destroyed, mighty towers levelled
to the dust, and nations completely ruined, to admonish them, but all in vain.
How earnest is God in seeking the sinner, but how terrible the punishment at last !
“T said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction ; so their dwelling
should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them.”


Aaaravations oF Human Guitt.— Verses 5—7.


What aggravated their guilt till it became intolerable, and put them beyond all
mercy save the “ mercy of judgment,” was—1. That God had given them a pure law
of life, and himself administered it among them. In other cities, such as Gaza or
Nineveh, the presence and the law of God were but obscurely revealed. Men were
left to grope after the Unknown, if haply they might find him ; to infer a spiritual
presence from the operation of physical laws ; to deduce a Divine rule from the im-
perfect and confused utterances of reason and conscience. In Jerusalem, God and
his will were ‘set in the light ;” the history of the chosen race, the services of the
temp:e, the voices and scriptures of the prophets, the national habits of thought,
and manner of life, loudly proclaimed God to be their God. Who should know
him if they did not? and who do his will if they disobeyed it? But with so pure
light of goodness in their midst, they wrapped themselves in darkness, and hated
the light which reproved their deeds. “ But the unjust know no shame.” 2,
That in the destructicn inflicted upon neighbouring kingdoms, he had constantly
warned them of the inevitable results of violating that law (ver. 6). They had seen
race after race cut off, their battlements laid waste, their cities battered down, and
their streets reduced to such ruinous desolation that no man dwelt in them, nor so
much as passed through them. What were these Judgments but the law of God


OHAP. ILI. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAH. 561
a


‘writ large,” and illustrated so impressively as to arrest the attention of the most
heedless, and to rouse a saving fear in the stubborn and impenitent? But even
these glaring and portentous illustrations of God’s wrath against sin and all who
cleave to it, had been wasted. They were unmoved, or moved only for a moment,
under shocks and alarms. Only a judgment more severe than any they had seen
or known could constrain them to penitence, through penitence to righteousness,
and through righteousness to peace. “The nation that did not turn pale” (ch. ii. 1).
3. That much as they suffered, they had not accepted correction, nor learned that
the beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord (ver. 7). Not only had they seen “a
day of the Lord” darken other lands, and judgments desolate heathen cities. They
themselves had been visited with judgment, smitten again and again till the whole
head was sick, and the whole heart faint. The whole body politic was bruised, and
wounded, and sore. Their whole past history was full of Divine chastenings.
What was their meaning? what were they sent to say? “Only fear God, accept
correction,” let it produce its natural effect upon you, and all will be right. Cor-
rections were sent to them that their land and city might be spared. But if they
be rejected, they harden and deprave. Jerusalem had been content to give the day
to disobedience and mutiny. Now as if it were not long enough for the sins they
were eager to commit, “ they rose up early” in the morning “ to corrupt all their
doings,” so shameless were they, so incorrigible [Preacher's Lantern. Vol. IT.
Adapted).
HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 5. In the midst. God’s
presence with an apostate people will


unheeded we shall ourselves be punished.
“‘No words could be more simple and


not save from wrath, but will bring it
nearer to them. “Is not the Lord
among us?” was their boast (Mice. iii.
11). True, he is, but it is for another
end from what ye think [ Calvin].

He faileth not. 1. In presence; 2.
In promise ; 3. Inhelp. He continually
sets before us examples of judgment and
mercy. “He wakeneth morning by
morning ” (Isa. v. 4; 1. 4). He does not
fail to visit at the time looked for,
though he may seem to forbear or linger
behind (Hab. ii. 3).

Shame. 1. Many in the Church and
in the nation acknowledge God, yet sin
against the clear light of the Word. 2.
When such are mad in their sin and
rush to ruin, it is a presage of their de-
struction when the Word has noinfluence
upon them ; a token that judgment must
come, notwithstanding warnings, when
“the unjust knoweth no shame”
[ Hutcheson].

Vers. 6,7. 1. The chastisement of
others is designed to improve us. The
design is benevolent; “so their dwelling
should not be cut off.” The method is
suitable ; “ howsoever I punished them.”
The results are reasonable; “surely
‘hou wilt fear.” 2. If the warning is


direct than these ; none could state more
plainly the merciful and Divine purpose
of judgment; the true function of the
miseries men are called to endure.
These judgments and miseries come to
teach us the fear of the Lord ; that is, to
save us from all fear. So soon as we
accept them as corrections of our sins,
their end is answered ; henceforth there
is no anger in them, no injurious pain,
but only a Divine love and goodwill.
And if no statement of the meaning and
functiov of suffering can be more plain
than this, surely none can be more con-
solatory. For, according to Zephaniah,
it comes only for our good, for our
highest good ; to teach us the true wis-
dom, and to make us perfect. When
once we ‘accept’ it, its end being
reached, there is no reason why it should
not either pass away or be changed into
the stay and stimulus of our life.”
Long unaffected, undismayed,
In pleasure’s path secure I stray’d


Thou mad’st me feel thy chast’ning rod,
And straight I turn’d unto my God,


Instruction. — Other men’s woes
should be our warnings ; others’ suffer-
ings our sermons; others’ lashes our
lessons ; God’s house of correction, a


533 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. YOHAP. Ii.





school of instruction where we should not in hearing, shall be crushed te
hear and fear, and do no more so_ pieces in feeling, said that martyr
(Deut. xvii. 13). He that trembleth [Trapp].


HOMILETICS.
Tae Waitina ATTitupE oF Gop’s PEOPLE IN TIMES OF TROUBLE.—Verse 8.


The prophecy now returns to its starting-point. The faithful are called upon to
wait upon God, as formerly they were exhorted to repentance (ch. ii. 3). Judgments
had thundered forth in terror, the impenitent were to be swept away, and the fire
of Divine wrath to consume the whole earth. But after the storm comes a calm.
Consolation is given in calamity. The judgments upon the enemies will issue in
the salvation of the sons of Israel, the purification of the earth, and the glory of the
Lord. Good, not evil, will spring out of present trials. “ Therefore wait” a little
longer, the day will surely come. God’s people must hope in him.

I. The basis of hope. ‘‘ Wait ye upon me, saith the Lord.” Salvation could
not come from the people, even of favoured Israel, who had corrupted themselves.
Princes plundered, and judges bribed, to get wealth ; prophets deceived, and priesta
consecrated themselves to idols. There was no hope in the government nor in the
priesthood. All were silent and all were guilty. Law makes nothing perfect,
Christ alone brings in a better hope. II The discouragements of hope. Sad
must have been the heart of God’s people under their oppression. Many things
would tend to weaken their faith in God. 1. Inward decay. Leaders became
unfaithful. When those upon whom we depend for help, and who should be
examples of virtue, become faithless, we doubt all men and call them liars
(Ps. exvi. 11). 2. Foreign invasion. The enemies came, like wave after wave,
and swept the land. The innocent suffered with the guilty, and none escaped.
3. Long delay of help. How can God be holy, when vice unfolds itself and
pollutes the whole nation? How can God be kind, when the righteous are over-
whelmed with the wicked? Where is God’s providence in punishing the evil and
rewarding the good? Disappointment and dejection seize the mind, and we forget
to wait upon God. It is not the intenseness, but the length of trials, which test
our patience. ‘The patience of hope,” says one, “ will end” im the full assurance
of hope—


‘ Our lives, discolour’d with our present woes,
May still grow white, and smile with happier hours” [Addison].


III. The rewards of hope. Wait for me, the day is at hand; I will seize my
prey, and accomplish my purpose (vers. 9—20). 1. The enemy would be subdued.
Gathered together for cruel ends, God would snatch the prey out of their mouth,
and crush their opposition. 2. They would be sheltered in the day of wrath. God
not only overthrows hostility to his people in its powerful juncture of circumstances,
but makes a complete destruction of heathenism and a full salvation to his chosen.
3. A purified earth would be created. The earth would be consumed with the fire
of insulted love, and out of it would spring a new order of things. Christendom
will yet become pure in life, united in effort, and all “with one mind and one
mouth shall glorify God” (Rom. xv. 6).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. Prey. Divine justice, like picture of the warrior leading to vic-
eagles, ready to fall upon the prey, the tory. Hence—l. Danger from sin and
carcase of corruption (Matt. xxiv. 28). enemies. 2. Divine power in deliver.
Taking prey as booty, we have the ance “ Through the judgment Jehovak


OHAP, IIT.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANTAR.,





obtains from among the nations those
who will confess his name, so that the
souls from among the nations which
desire salvation fall to Him as prey
(ef. Isa. lili. 12, with lit, 15, and
xlix. 7)” [Keil].

Fieree anger, or God’s judgments, a
fire. 1. Toconsume; or—2. To cleanse.
The wicked are exterminated, the peni-
tent are converted, and worshippers are


as purifying, struggling, and demolishing
to the last. In the second place, there
is a work of salvation, a new-creating
work, so that the same history is pre-
sented as a progressive communication
of the Divine life-germ, advancing to the
complete re-creation of that which has
become corrupt by sin. These views
cannot be separated ; each receives its
internal form by the irradiating lines of


prepared out of all nations. “In the


the other” [Lange].
first place, there is a work of judgment,


HOMILETICS.
Tae GATHERING oF THE CuRisTIan CHuRcH.—Verses 9, 10.


In judgment God dispersed his ancient people, but they shall be restored with
the Gentiles to God again. The heathens shall be converted, and be the means of
turning the scattered nation to Jehovah. God will gather from all parts a people
pure in life and united in service.

I. The Gentiles shall be gathered together. “From beyond the rivers of
Ethiopia ;” Abyssinia and neighbouring nations shall be converted. From the
utmost bound of the known world shall people come. The dispersed, the outcasts
of spiritual Israel, shall be gathered from every region. With the restoration of
the Jews shall “the fulness of the Gentiles” come. “ That also he should gather
together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad.” II. The Gentiles
shall be holy in their life. 1. Pure in their language. ‘Then will I turn to
the people a pure language.” The confusion of tongues was the punishment of sin ;
but dips once polluted with idolatry and blasphemy, shall be purified by the Spirit
of God. A pure language indicates a pure life. The mouth speaks from the
abundance of the heart. The lip was created by God, and should be used for his
service and glory. A pure heart refines character and conversation, pours grace
into the lips, and cleanses them from falsehood and profanity. ‘He that loveth
pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the king shall be his friend.” 2. Sin-
cere in their worship. ‘‘ My suppliants shall bring mine offering.” Converted
Gentiles will not only bring devout Jews as an offering to God (cf. Isa. lxvi. 20) ;
but they will present themselves in humility and acceptance (Rom. xv. 16). No
longer defiled by invocations and foul strains to idols, they will “all call upon the
name of the Lord.” “For, from the rising of the sun to the going down of the
same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall
be offered unto my name, and a pure offering.” 3. United in their service. ‘Serve
him with one consent.” Saved by judgments, the nations shall be sanctified in
speech, and one in effort. They shall bear the burden without strain or distress,
walk step by step and work shoulder to shoulder in the cause of God. Christen-
dom shall yet be purged from bigotry and sectarianism. There shall be a return
to the simplicity and union in Christ. The Gospel shall dislodge idolatry and
anti-Christian systems. Nations shall walk together—the Jew and the Greek, the
Barbarian and the Scythian—side by side, shoulder to shoulder, bearing the con-
quests of the cross. Thus, on earth we may anticipate the joys, and hear the songs,
of heaven (Rev. vii. 10 and 12; xi. 15). “I will give them one heart and one
way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them and of their children
after them.”


554 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAH. (CHAP. 1,


eG


BEARING THE BURDEN WITH ONE CONSENT.— Verse 9.


The law of God is a burden. Man can only bear it without strain and distress
as each freely assumes it, and as all help to bear it, by walking in willing and
happy consent of obedience. To induce a free and universal obedience, men are
judged and corrected of the Lord. The metaphor, therefore, suggests three main
thoughts—

1. That the law of God is a burden which men are reluctant to assume. To
our selfwill it is always hard to submit to the purest and tenderest will, even to
the Divine Will, which moves in the light of eternal wisdom, and at the impulse of
perfect love. Christ admits obedience to be a yoke to our unruly passions, a burden
to our stubborn necks (Matt. xi. 23—30). When we delight in his law after the
inward man, we find another law in our members warring against the law of our
mind, and bringing us into the captivity of sin (Rom. vii. 21—23). We can only
enter into rest as we get unity and freedom in our life, and we willingly submit to
a higher will than our own. 2. That we can only attain this freedom as, with
cheerful and enforced accord, we assume the burden of the Divine law, and do the
will of God. Self-will makes us hateful to ourselves and to others ; incapacitates
for social and spiritual life. Follow your own will, you become a burden to your-
self and all about you. Voluntarily curtail your own liberty, then you have true
liberty. Set yourself against the world, you will find that the world has a stronger
will than you have. We must take up some burden, and submit to some law. No
law is so good, no burden so light, as the good will of God. This will rules in
human affairs. It is wise to make it our law—not merely yield to it, but cheer-
fully adopt and love it, and walk in liberty. Love makes all burdens light. When
we love God, his will grows beautiful to us, and preferable to our own. Because
we bear the yoke we find rest; because we keep the commandment we walk at
large (Ps. exix. 45). We are free because we obey. But are we happy because
we are free. 3. That the happiness of obedience depends on the unanimity and the
universality of obedience. Only when all men serve God with one shoulder the
sense of strain and distress will pass from us. To love God is to love man. Till
they share our freedom, it cannot be a happy freedom. Till they love him and do
his will, they will put many hindrances and temptations in our way which make
obedience hard and painful. If they do not take their full share in bearing the
Durden, it will press unduly upon our shoulders. If some are morally taller and
others morally shorter, men do not keep step. Only when the whole world stands
under the Divine burden with one shoulder, and moves with one step, will our
freedom be a happy freedom, and God’s statutes become our songs. Seeing how
men suffer from the sins of men, and nations from the sins of nations, we may well
long and pray for the time when all men shall speak with a pure lip and serve with
a single shoulder [Preacher’s Lantern, vol. II.].


THe Restorep Ramnant.— Verses 11—13.


In these verses the prophet pictures the happy characteristics and condition of
restored Israel, These qualities are common to God’s people in all ages and
countries. Notice—

I. Their spiritual character. 1. They are few in number. “The remnant ot
Israel.” Small compared with the whole, yet precious in the sight of God—in-
creasing, and will Increase. 2. They are humble in spirit. “ An afflicted and poor
people.” Poor in spirit, and conscious of no desert. Realizing life, growth, and
strength only from God. 3. They are dependent upon God. Feeling themselves
unworthy, they naturally “trust in the name of the Lord.” 4. They are upright
in conduct. (1) They do no iniguity. (2) They speak no lies. They worshir
God in truth, and love man in sincerity. They are Israelites indeed, in whom


SHAP. 1.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAR. 655





is no guile. Born of God, they sin not (1 John iii. 9) in word or deed. Where
true faith exists, holy life will follow. II. Their blessed condition. They are
completely restored to holiness, sit in the centre of a regenerated world, in the
special presence and under the constant care of Jehovah. 1. They are cleansed
from shame for sin. “In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for thy doings.”
The disgrace of rebellion shall bo wiped away. Remembrance of sin and failure
may cause penitence—long after sin is renounced and forgiven we feel humble—
but the guilt and reproach of sin shall not remain. 2. They are delivered from
spiritual pride. The spirit of the Pharisee, the vain confidence which they had
in the temple, and the pride of descent from Abraham, shall be taken away.
3 They are redeemed from proud oppressors. ‘I will take away out of the
midst of thee, them that rejoice in thy pride.” The meek and lowly will be left.
The haughty judge and the proud sinners will be exterminated. Priests or
prophets who exult in sinful ways will be cut off. 4. They are specially pro-
tected by God. (a) Delivered from fear. ‘ None shall make them afraid.”- No
foreign foe nor native prince—no “treacherous” prophet, nor “violent” and
“ polluting” priest, can touch them (ver. 4). They are beyond all harm and fear.
(5) Blessed with peace. As God’s sheep they “shall feed” in green pastures—
“lie down” to rest in perpetual enjoyment (Mic. vii. 14), and dwell in God’s
presence without fear (Lev. xxvi. 6). “I will feed my flock, and I will cause
them to lie down, saith the Lord God.”


Tar True Israeuite.— Verse 13.


Of the subjects of Divine grace here mentioned, notice: Their number; “a
remnant.” Strait is the gate, and narrow the way, that leadeth to life, and few
there be that find it. Yet God has always had a people for his Name—never left
himself without a witness, and this has been our case as a nation ; for, “ except the
Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as
Sodom,” &c. Though “a little flock” in a large field, “a garden” in a vast wil-
derness, yet “he shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root: Israel shall
blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.” Their sanctity.
“They shall not do iniquity.” Take this with some restriction. “There is not
on earth a just man that doeth good and sinneth not.” But they are not “ workers
of iniquity,” and “evil-doers.” Sin does not reign in them. They hate every
false way, and esteem all his commandments concerning all things to be right. He
that has “true holiness” cannot be satisfied without perfect holiness. He there-
fore prays to be sanctified in body, soul, and spirit. Their sincerity. “They
shall not speak lies,” &c. A part is put for the whole, and the quality of speech
expresses the inward temper of their minds. Everything is a lie religiously that
does not accord with the state of the heart. Only an upright spirit can maintain
a deceitless tongue before God. Christians are not mere pretenders; a painted
sepulchre, fair without, and rottenness within. Not mere actors on a stage, but
are really what they appear to be. Their integrity is specially known by their fear
of self-deception. They come to the light, examine themselves by the Word, and
implore the inspection of God himself: “Search me, O God.” Their privileges.
Their blessedness is expressed pastorally, and includes three things. First, pasture.
they shall “ feed.” As new creatures their food is intellectual and spiritual ; found
in the ordinances of religion, and with the Saviour himself. Secondly, repose :
and shall “lie down.” In an eastern climate, in a warm sun, how desirable would
rest be! Hence the Church says, Tell me, not only where thou feedest, but “ where
thou makest thy flock to rest at noon.” Thirdly, security : “and none shall make
them afraid.” Sheep are the most timid of all animals, every appearance and
movement alarms them. But the righteous should be bold as a lion; their duty





requires it, and their principles justify it.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH.


CHAP. 11





God has amply provided for their con-


fidence. When they believe it, they can be in quiet from the fear of evil. “ dwell
safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods” [W. Jay].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 11. Haughty because of holy
mountain. Pride in outward privileges.
1. Asin against God who gave them.
2. A danger, because robbing of enjoy-
ment, and exposing to judgment. “That
haughtiness is most offensive to God,
which is supported and fed by the
pretensions of holiness.” If pride
be “the last infirmity of noble minds,”
“is not spiritual pride the last infirmity
of religious minds? When the Jew
shall no longer boast himself in Jerusa-
lem and the temple; when there shall
not be a single sectarian left to pride
himself in his exclusive possession of
some spiritual gift, or on his singular
fidelity to some neglected truth; when
every man shall hold all he has in trust
for his brethren, call nothing his own,
and value all gifts in proportion as they


are common to all; when this catholic
charity is the animating, all-pervading
spirit of the Church of God, will the
millennium be far off? or Heaven
itself?” [S. Coa].

Ver. 12. It is painful to the human
heart, that it must first become com-
pletely poor and humble before it learns
to trust entirely in the living God. This
is the reason that the hearts rich in the
opinion of the world are richest in dead
idols [Lange].

Vers. 12, 13. The glory of the
Christian Church. Not in outward
splendour ; for they are often few, poor,
and afflicted, but in holy life, exalted
worship, and Divine protection. Feed :
Shall have all that heart can wish or
need require: plenty, safety, security
[Trapp].


HOMILETICS.
Tus Joy or THe RepEEMED.—Verses 14—17.


These words are a call to the converted Israelites, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, to exult in their distinguished blessings. The prophet seems to be in a
transport of joy himself, as he adds word to word, and epithet to epithet, in tender
feelings. Three designations are given: ‘Daughter of Zion,” “Israel,” and
“daughter of Jerusalem.” The wonders of “that day” are great, and the source of
exultant joy to all who see them. The causes of this joy are distinctly pointed
out,

I. Judgments are removed. ‘The Lord hath taken away thy judgments.”
Israel was chastised in mercy, but God forgave her sins, and took away her judg-
ments. Christians are freed from condemnation by the law, and rejoice in hope of
salvation. When sin is pardoned, the consequences of sin are removed. When
the cause is destroyed the effects will cease ; happiness follows the way of holiness.
II. Enemies are subdued. ‘He hath cast out (lit. cleared quite away) thine
enemy.” This is a type of the destruction of antichrist, the casting out of the
prince of this world (Matt. xii. 31), and the overthrow of all opposition. Delivered
from all enemies, God’s people will serve him without fear, in holiness and right-
eousness all their days (Luke i. 74, 75), III. God is enthroned in their midst.
“Even the Lord is in the midst of thee.” God seemed to desert them for a time,
but now returns to a purified temple. As King of Israel he sits enthroned in mercy
to receive the homage of a grateful nation. He dwells in the Church, and will be
with his people to the end of time. 1. To deliver them from evil. “Thou shalt
not see evil any more.” 2. To strengthen their hearts, They will neither be weary
nor faint in God’s service. Saving health will be impar‘ed, timidity shall be over-
come, and men will admire their courage. 3. To rejoice over them with sacred joy,


OMAP. III.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAR. 66)








“ He will rejoice over thee with joy.” With a bridegroom’s joy will God “ rejoice
in Jerusalem, and joy in his people ” (Isa. lxv. 19; Ixii. 5), But man’s love is only
a faint shadow of God’s love, Love in twofold aspects—in its silence and exult-
ation—represents God’s satisfaction and joy in his people. He exults over and
takes pleasure in those that fear him. Rejoicing now is only the first-fruits.
Those who weep by the rivers of Babylon will sing in the new Jerusalem : “ Sing,
(O daughter of Zion), shout, (O Israel), be glad, and rejoice with all thy heart, O
daughter of Jerusalem.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.
Ver. 14. Whether the Church or the be slack. The love of God is threefold :


faithful soul—she is summoned by all
her names—called to the fullest joy in
God, with every expression, and every
feeling. Sing; it is the inarticulate,
thrilling, trembling burst of joy : shout ;
again the inarticulate, yet louder, swell
of joy ; a trumpet-blast : and then, too,
deep within ; be glad, the calm inward
joy of the soul; exwlt, the triumph of
the soul which cannot contain itself for
joy; and this, with the whole heart, no
corner of it not pervaded with joy. The
ground of this is the complete removal
of every evil, and the full presence of
God [ Pusey].

Vers. 15—17. Very remarkable is
the use of the sacred number three in
these verses. Threefold is the descrip-
tion of their being freed from sins: (1)
They shall not do iniquity ; (2) nor speak
lies ; (3) neither shall a decettful tongue
be in their mouth. Threefold their
blessedness : They shall (1) feed , (2) lie
down; (3) none make them afraid.
Threefold the exhortation to joy: sing,
to God the Father ; shout, to God the
Son; be glad and rejoice, in God the
Holy Ghost. The promise is threefold :
(1) Thou shalt not see evil any more ;
(2) fear thou not ; (3) let not thine hands


(1) He will rejoice over thee with joy;
(2) He will rest in his love; (3) He
will joy over thee with singing { Pusey].

Ver. 17. God in the midst. 1. God
near. In his works, but specially pre-
sent with his saints. 2. God mighty.
Mighty to comfort, sustain, and defend.
3. God will save. He is willing, bound
by promise, oath, and blood. 4. But is
he thy God? Thine by promise, cove-
nant, and actual possession.


“ How happy, then, are they to whom
The Lord our God is known;
Whom he, from all the world besides,
Has chosen for his own !”’


He will rejoice over thee. The satistac-
tion here implied is the Saviour’s own
joy arising out of the salvation of his
people. First, we may view this joy as
the result of success. Secondly, as a
manifestation of benevolence. Thirdly,
as indicative of the delight and complu-
cency with which he regards his people.
The Saviour’s joy over, and in, his people
is the sinner’s hope. Lastly, the Saviour’s
joy is the saint's example. He was
infinitely more than an example, and
nothing less. If we depend upon him,
we must resemble him [Jay].


HOMILETICS.


MourniING FoR THE SonemN AssemMBLY.—Ver. 18.


The prophet concludes with the promise that all the dispersed—all who moura
because they do not share the joy of festal meetings in the temple—shall be
restored to ancient privileges, and gathered into one fold. We have not to sorrow
because deprived of Christian ordinances. Our temples stand, our Sabbaths are not
taken away, yet there is reason to mourn for the condition of Zion

I. Mourn when deprived of personal attendance. Domestic affliction, acd-


dents, and trials may detain from its solemnities. ‘
God thus teaches us to value the means more highly, quickens ow


within us


Then the soul is cast down


558 } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZEPHANIAH. (CHAP. m1.











relish for the provisions of his house, and draws us nearer to himself. ‘“ When
shall [ come and appear before God?” (Ps. xlii. 2). II. Mourn when neglected
by others. Many entirely forsake the assembling of themselves together (Heb. x.
25). They do not see the utility and necessity of public worship. Others are
kept away by most trifling excuses. In vain are all pretences to religion if the
means of grace have no attraction. Resolve with Nehemiah and his friends, “ We
will not forsake the house of our God.” III. Mourn when dishonoured by its
attendants. It is dishonoured by a worldly spirit. Many have no serious heart
in worship. “If familiarity does not breed contempt,” says one, “it must always
tend to reduce veneration.” ‘In thy fear will I worship towards thy holy temple.”
2. It is dishonoured by inconsistent conduct. The apostasies, backslidings, and
disgraceful conduct of professors bring reproach upon the house and the people of
God. The enemies blaspheme, the way of truth is evil spoken of, and the
Redeemer is wounded in the house of his friends. God’s people bear the reproach
and grieve at the dishonour cast upon solemn assemblies. To them, this “is 4
lamentation, and shall be fora lamentation.” IV. Mourn for its lack of spiritual
prosperity. Its members lack fervour and power. They are faithless, unhappily
divided, and do not heartily work together. Its agencies are few, and fail in thei
design. Sinners are not converted to God, and the world is prejudiced against
Christianity. When the ways of Zion mourn, the sons of Zion are sorrowful also.
God will uot forget their distress, but gather them (1) to feasts on earth, and (2) to
the assembly in heaven. ‘“ Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper
that love thee.”


THe WonperFuL Restoration.— Verses 19, 20.
>


God confirms his promise of restoration by removing all impediments. The
prophecy closes with the tinal reversal of all which in this imperfect state of things
seems turned upside down, when those who now mourn shall be comforted, they
who now bear reproach and shame shall have glory, and those who now afflict the
people of God shall be undone [Pusey].

I. A restoration glorious in its character. It will be a most signal day for
Israel. What they could not do for themselves God will do for them. 1. J¢ will
be Divinely performed. “ At that time will I bring—I gather you—I turn back ”
&c. God manifests his interest in his people. and the greatest difficulties should
not lead us to doubt the certainty of the promise. 2. It will be completely performed
God will bring home all banished ones, and recover all captives. (a) All infirmities
within shall be healed. Their weakness and unworthiness only sets forth the free-
ness and fulness of Divine love. “ Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord”
(Ezek. xxxvi. 22). (b) Ali dangers without shall be removed. The enemies will
be repressed and rooted up, judged by God, to prepare for the restoration of Israel
(Isa. Ixvi. 15, 16). Dignity for disgrace, mercy for misery, and honour for insult.
In every land where they have been reproached shall they be praised by the foe.
They will then be “ high above all nations which he hath made in praise, and in
name, and in honour,” &c. (Deut. xxvi. 19; xxx. 3). 3. It will be visibly per-
formed. ‘ Before your eyes, saith the Lord.” However incredible, it shall be quite
obvious to the sense. The testimony of the senses shall convince you. Believers
will see the end of all their sufferings, realize all their hopes, and soon partake of
the fulness of their redemption. II. A restoration certain in its accomplishment.
‘he promise is repeated tu make the assurance greater. One act of God makes way
for another. When he begins he will finish his work. 1. Unimpeded by outward
enemies. “1 will undo all that afflict thee.” God may be silent, but will not
always sit still. He will deal with all according to their deserts. 2. Unimpeded
by internal weakness. None can detain them in bondage. All difficulties will be
easiiy surmounted. (#) Zhe weak shall be strengthened. ‘I will save her that


owaP, IIt. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZEPHANIAH. 558


halteth. (3) The outcast shall be restored. ‘ And gather her that was driven out.”
(c) The captives shall be recovered. “ When I turn back your captivity.” What
a sublime prospect to God’s people! They shall be redeemed from oppression,
called together from the utmost ends of the earth—the maimed and the halt, the
peasant and the priest-—to be owned, guided, and fixed in theirkingdom. Jewand
Gentile, Barbarian and Scythian, shall become one fold, become the praise of the
earth, and the glory of the universe. ‘“ At that time,” the Christian Church will be
a type of the Church of the first-born, which in the great day will be admired and
glorified in Christ, and he in them. Then his kingdom will be established and
perfected in the new Jerusalem. And the “redeemed out of every tribe and tongue
and people and nation ” shall become kings and priests to God.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 20. The period of restoration
distinctly prominent by pointed refer-
ence. The manner also remarkable.
“ T will bring you in.” I will lead you
like a shepherd going before his flock,
and gather you in due season, like the
shepherd putting his flock into the fold.
‘“‘ For even these weak and helpless ones,
who limp, and are burdened, and have
been dispersed, are of the flock of the
Lord, and will experience the faithful
tender care of the Great Shepherd and
‘Bishop of souls.” “That time is the
whole time of the gospel; the one day
of salvation, in which all who shall ever
be gathered, shall be brought into the
New Jerusalem. The words were ful-
filled, when at our Lord’s first coming
the remnant of the true Israel, those
ordained to eternal life, were brought in.


It shall be fulfilled again, when the ful-
ness of the Gentiles shall be come in,
and so all Israel shall be saved (Rom.
xi. 25, 26). It shall most perfectly be
fulfilled at the end, when there shall he
no going out of those once brought in,
and those who have gathered others into
the Church shall bea name and a praise
among all people of the earth” [ Pusey].

Your captivity, lit. captivities of dif-
ferent ages and countries in Jewish and
gospel history. ‘ All personal and social
captivities will be turned back like a
stream. ‘ Turn our captivity, O Lord, as
the rivers of the south’ (Ps. exxvi. 5) ;
they will all flow into the Church of


Christ. (See Isa. ii, 2: Mic. iv. 1).
‘All nations shall flow into it’”
[ Wordsworth].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER III.


Ver. 1. Polluted. Sinful corruption
is a poison so subtle, that it pierces into
all the powers of the soul; so con-
tagious, that it infects all the actions ; so
obstinate, that only omnipotent grace
can heal it [Dr. Bates].

Ver. 2. Instruction. The end of
learning is to know God, and out of that
knowledge to love and imitate him.
“That it may please thee to give to all
thy people increase of grace to hear
meekly thy word, to receive it with pure
affection, and bring forth the fruits of the
Spirit” [Litany]. Near to her God.
The essence of all wickedness is for-
saking God [Wichols].

Ver. 3. Avarice is insatiable, and is
always pushing onfor more [L’ Estrange},


“ Fancy, and pride, seek things at vast expense,

Which relish not to reason, nor to sense,”

[ Pope.)

Ver. 4. Treacherous. “There is no
love among Christians,” cries the man
destitute of true charity. ‘“ Zeal has
vanished,” exclaims the idle talker.
“© for more consistency!” groans out
the hypocrite. ‘‘We want more vital
godliness,” protests the false pretender.
As in the old legend, the wolf preached
against sheep-stealing, so very many
hunt down those sins in others which
they gladly shelter in themselves
[Spurgeon].

Ver. 5. Just. If there be one truth
that speaks throughout the Bible like the
voice of God, and resounds with all the


grandeur of the Divine intonation, it is
the truth that God does not look with
an equal eye upon the evil and the good,
that He is a discriminator of character,
a lover of that which is right, and a
hater of that which is wrong [H. W.
Beecher}.

Vers. 6, 7. The desolation is com-
plete, within as well as without; ruin
itself is hardly so desolate as the empty
habitations and forsaken streets, once
full of life, where
“ The echoes and the empty tread

‘Would sound like voices from the dead,”
[ Pusey.]

Ver. 8. The terrors of the Lord are
great, but they do not exercise supreme
sway in a human heart, and lead all its
affections whithersoever they will. His
anger is not a ruling, leading, drawing
power. It is mighty, but not to save
[ V. Arnot].

Vers. 9and 13. Language. Speech ie
the perfect expression of the senses.
Words are but the representations of
she disintegrated body of man [ Oken!


HOMILETIC COMUEN PARY: ZEPHANIAH.


ne tiremnees


(cHar. m.





Christ became the one ianguage of the
whole world [Jerome]. Deceitful tongue
(ver. 13). They employ words but to
disguise their thoughts [ Voltaire].

Vers. 14,15. Sing. Thy words have
larted hope into my soul, and comfort
*awns upon me [Southern].


“ Joy is our duty, glory, health,
The sunshine of the soul ;
Our best encomium on the Power
Who sweetly plans the whole ” [ Yowng}.


Vers. 18—20. So with this scene of
quiet pastoral felicity the poem closes ;
and Zephaniah, whose earlier words
seemed to bespeak a veritable “ son of
thunder,” proves himself to be a true
“son of consolation,” even as the judg-
ment he was sent to denounce proves to
be an act of sovereign and Divine merev.
Harsh and severe in husk, in outward
seeming, its heart is ‘made of tenderness.”
It is like one of those fairy nuts in
which, when they could be broken,
there were found lustrons gems of prias


[& Coz}.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


HAGGAL





INTRODUCTION.


Tae Proper. The name Haggai means my feast; given, according to Cocceius,
in anticipation of the joyous return from exile. He was probably one of the Jewish
exiles who returned under Zerubbabel, the civil head of the people, and Joshua the
high priest, 536 B.c., when Cyrus (actuated by the striking prophecies as to him-
self (Isa. xliv. 28 ; xlv. 1), granted them their liberty, and furnished them with
the necessaries for restoring the temple (2 Chron, xxxvi. 23: Ezra i. 1; ii, 2)
{Fausset]. All we know of his personal history is gathered from his book (cn. i.
1; it. 1, 10, 20: cf. Ezra v. 1; vi. 14). The traditions of Jewish writers seem to
have no evidence to support them.

Tue Time. — He is the tenth in order of the twelve minor prophets, and the first
of the three who prophesied after the Captivity. He was preceded by Zechariah
by about two months, and by Zephaniah 100 years. ‘ His book itself vouches for
the fact that he prophesied in the reign of Darius Hystaspis, who ascended the
Persian throne B.c. 521. Having been interrupted in building the temple by an
interdict, which the Samaritans obtained from Smerdis the usurper, the Jews
became in some measure indifferent to tne work ; and when Darius came to the
throne, an event which must have deprived the prohibition of all authority,
instead of vigorously recommencing their labours, the more influential persons
among them pretended that, as the prophecy of the 70 years applied to the temple
as well as to the captivity in Babylon, and they were cnly yet in the 68th year,
the proper time for rebuilding it had not arrived, and gave their whole attention to
the erection of splendid mansicns for themselves” [Henderson].

THE Boox. Consists of five addresses, which were delivered at successive periods
within the short space of three months. They are very brief, and supposed to be
only a summary or epitome of the original discourses. ‘The first discourse (chap.
i. 1—11), is one of reproof, expostulation, and warning, being designed to arouse
the people from their religious apathy, and, in especial, from their indifference to
the condition of the temple, which was then lying desolate. The second discourse
(i. 12—15), after a relation of the beneficial results of the first, holds out to them,
in their returning obedience, the promise of God’s returning favour and aid in their


662 INTRODUCTION.

AMR PHL WD i I EN RMN MMU Ee TE SiS a a AS eS
work. The third discourse (ch. ii, 1—9), evoked by the despondency that had
begun to affect some of the people on account of the outward inferiority of the
present temple, predicts fo> it a glory far transcending that of its predecessor, since
the treasures of all nations were yet to adorn the Church of the Messiah, of which
it was the representative. The fourth discourse (ch. ii. 10—19), teaches them, from
the principles of the Ceremonial Law, that no amount of outward religious observ-
ance can communicate holiness, or secure acceptance with God, and the restoration
of his favour, the withdrawal of which had been so manifest in their late public
and private distress. The ifth discourse assures the struggling community of their
preservation in the midst of commotions which should destroy other nations,
promising to its faithful rulers, represented by Zerubbabel, the special protection of
their Covenant God ” [Lange].

Tus Strue. Lacks the poetical qualities of the earlier prophecies, but is marked
with passages of great vivacity and power, ‘to which, among other characteristics,
the frequent use of the interrogation largely contributes (e. g. in chaps. i 4, 9;
ii, 3, 12, 13, 19). In addition to these more obvious characteristics, we can discern
both rhetorical and grammatical peculiarities natural to the declining period of the
Hebrew language and literature.” The #tyle of Haggai is consonant with his mes-
sages : pathetic in exhortation, vehement in reproofs, elevated in contemplating the
glorious future. The repetition of the same phrases (e. g. satih tke Lord, or, the
Lord of hosts (ch. i. 2, 5, 7), and thrice in one verse (ch. ii. 4); so “ the spirit”
thrice in ch. i. 14) gives a simple earnestness to his style, calculated to awaken the
solemn attention of the peopie, and to arouse them from apathy. Chaldaisms
occur (ch. ii. 3, 6, 16) 28 might have been expected in a writer who was so long in
Chaldea. Parts are purely prose history ; the rest is somewhat rhythmical and
observant of poetic parallelism [Fausset]. There are references to Haggai in Old
and New Testament (Ezra v. 1; vi. 14: and Heb. xii. 20: cf. Hag. ii. 7, 8, 22).

Tue Purposs of the book is to exhort to the rebuilding of the temple, but the
predictions relate to the Church of God in all ages, and should evoke and perpetuate
the spirit of obedience and love to Divine ordinances. To revive the drooping spirits
of all engaged in the work of God, a future transcendent glory is revealed which
shall crown their labours and embrace all the kingdoms of the earth.


CHAP. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAI 563





CHAPTER I.


Criticat Notes.) By] Lit. in the hand of Haggai, the prophet, merely a conscious medium,
God the real speaker (cf. Acts vii. 35: Gal. iii. 19). Governor] Pechah, akin to the Turkish Pasha,
one who rules a less country than a Satrap. 2. This] Not my people, but reproachfully, this people,
as in acts disowning him, and so deserving to be disowned by him [Pusey]. Come] i. e. to build.
Two out of seventy predicted years of captivity unexpired: this a plea for delay (cf. Henderson). 3.]
A repetition, to give greater prominence to the antithesis. 4.] God meets them with a question, and
appeals to the conscience. You] Yourselves; the shameful contrast between them and Jehovah.
Cieled] Heb. to cover, wainscot, or overlay with boards, “‘so that what is predicated of the houses is
not to be confined to the ceiling, but must be extended to the walls which were thus covered, at
once for comfort and ornament”? [Henderson]. 5. Consider] Lit. set your heart upon; 7. e. consider
your conduct and lay it to heart; a frequent formula with Haggai (cf. ver. 7; ch. ii. 15, 18). 6.]
The meaning of these clauses is, not that the small harvest was not sufficient to feed and clothe the
people, but that even in their use of the little that had been reaped, the blessing of God was wanting,
as evident not only from the words themselves, but placed beyond doubt by ver. 9 [Keil]. Holes]
A torn bag was proverbial for money spent without profit (cf. Isa. lv. 2: Jer. ii. 13: Zech. viii. 10).
Necessities were dear, and a day’s wage to purchase them, as if put into a bag with holes. 8.] The
summons repeated. They were not required to buy, but simply to give their labour, and bring
timber from the mountainous country where trees grew. Cyrus granted cedars from Lebanon for the
building of the temple (Ezra ili. 7; vi. 3, 4). Pleasure] God displeased when it was in ruins.
Glorified] Be propitious to suppliants, and so receive the honour due to me (1 Kings viii. 30). 9.
Looked] Lit. Ye turned towards much, inspecting frequently the growing crops (Exod. xvi. 10).
Blow] I dissipated, blighted with my breath, the little gathered into barns. Because] Most
emphatic. Run] Indicating the eagerness with which they pursued their own affairs and sought for
self-indulgence. 10.] The curse further depicted, with an evident play upon the punishment with
which transgressors are threatened in the law (Lev. xxvi. 19, 20: Deut. xi. 17; xxviii. 23, 24)
[Keil]. 11. I] The first cause: heaven and earth (ver. 10), the visible and second causes.
Drought] Affecting man and beast, through vegetation. ‘The word is carefully chosen, to express
the idea of the lex talionis. Because the Jews left the house of God charébh, they were punished
with chdrebh” [Keil]. All] Comprehending the cultivation of the soil and labour for the necessi-
ties of life. 12—15] The result of reproof. Obey] 7. e. to lay to heart, so as to obey what was
heard. Fear] The first-fruit of hearing; the second given ver. 14. 13] The penitence of the
people with their rulers, met with the promise of Divine aid. Messenger (cf. Mal. ii. 7: Gal. iv.
14). Message] 7. e. invested with his authority and commission. 14. Stirred] To awaken the spirit
of a man is to make him willing and glad to carry out his resolutions (cf. 1 Chron. v. 26: 2 Chron.
xxi. 16: Ezra i. 1—5). God gave them energy and perseverance in the work. Did] Thus, filled
with joyfulness, courage, and strength, they began the work on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth
month, in the second year of King Darius (ver. 15); that is to say, twenty-three days after Haggai
had first addressed his challenge to them. The interval had been spent in deliberation and counsel,
and in preparations for carrying out the work [Keil].


HOMILETICS.
Taz Catt to Duty.—Verees 1, 3.


The prophet addresses the people through their rulers, and seeks to rouse them to
their work. The first day, the day of the new moon and a time of festal sacrifice,
was an appropriate time. On such a day they must have been conscious of the
ruins of the temple, and the work they had te do. In season and out of season
God calls to duty. j .

I. A call through an inspired messenger. The prophet was invested with a
Divine commission, and spoke with Divine authority. The voice was human, but
the “word” was from Jehovah. Heentrusts ministers with His words and works,
and they should dispense them, as faithful stewards, to his people. This is a
motive, an encouragement, and a help to perform his will. II. A call to all
people. ‘The people were only few, a remnant, but none must excuse (vers J2 and


BGA HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAI, (CHAP. 2


a LT


14). 1. To the prince. “Unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel.” The prince of
royal blood, the governor of the land, was not to be exempt. 2. To the priest.
“And to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest.” The heads in civil and
religious authority, rulers in Church and State, were jointly responsible for the
negligence of the people. Great and good men must be stirred up when they grow
remiss. Men in high position have greater opportunities of knowing, and should
set a better example in doing, God’s will, No institution must be set aside, and no
social elevation must excuse from duty. 3. To the people. The few are addressed
through their officials. All have equal share and equal responsibility. Duty is
the ery to all. Duty only is truth, and there is no true religion but in its accom-
plishment. This alone is the end of the highest life, and the truest happiness is
derived from the consciousness of its fulfilment. Duty performed, says George
Herbert, “gives us music at midnight.” ‘The word duty seems to me,” says one,
“the biggest word in the world, and is the uppermost in all my serious doings.”
This call to duty is loud, continual, and urgent. ‘“ Whatsoever he saith to you,
do it.”





Tue Guitty Excuses ror Denay IN Duty.— Verses 2—4.


The people are charged with neglect in their work, bereft of every excuse to
justify their negligence, and refuted in their pretences by their own sinful conduct.
They did not guestion the call, nor deny the obligation to duty, bt were criminal
in delaying it.

I. They were actuated by selfishness. They dwelt in ceiled houses,
adorned them with comforts and luxuries, while the temple was in ruins. They
were more concerned for themselves than for the cause vf God. They were
not poor in means, but in spirit. Self-love will hinder all effort to repair and
build the house of God. It is fatal to spirituai interests. “ Woe to you who join
house to house, and field to field, and regard not the work of the Lord.” II. They
were hindered through fear. They might urge that their relation with Persia
was not favourable, and that the edict to cease labour, were reasons for inaction.
But this was a more pretext. They had made no effort to discover the mind of the
legitimate king, Darius Hystaspis. Their neglect was not the opposition to zealous
patriots and ardent worshippers, but the selfish indifference of an unfaithful people.
The intrigues of the enemies, and cowardice, determined them from serious effort.
They grew fainthearted through difficulty (Ezra ili. 11—13; iv. 4). “ Woe unto
him that is faint-hearted,” says the son of Sirach, No blessings equal a stout heart
in the service of God. Cherish the spirit of Nehemiah, “The God of heaven, he
will prosper us; therefore we, his servants, will arise and build.” III. They
delayed in presumption. ‘‘This people say, The time is not come.” Ingenious
in exeuses, they declared that interruptions proved that the proper time to build
had not arrived. “God hath interposed many difficulties to punish our rash baste”
[ Caivin], why then work till the full period is expired? Many, like the Jews, do
not say, Never, but not yet. Conscience will not let them say, We will never be
religious and work for God; but they procrastinate—put off till to-morrow what
should be done to day (2 Cor. vi. 1, 2), and thus leave the great work of life un-
done. ‘The time is always come to him who wishes to do right. In his providence
and by his prophets, God calls now. The present is the opportunity to respond,
undertake, and finish the work which God has given us to do. Should worldlings
exert themselves for pleasure and self-indulgence, and the servants of God stand
back amid the ruins of the temple, and the loss of immortal souls? “Surely I will
not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed; I will not give
sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord,
a habitation for the mighty God of Jacob” (Ps. cxxxii. 3—5: 2 Sam. vii. 2.)


OHAP, I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAI. 565





A Missionary Sermon.-—Verse 4.


The captivity of Babylon had passed away. The Jews were now called to re-
build the second temple, and restore the worship of God. Adversaries watched
them, and tried to cause their work to cease for a time. The prophets Haggai and
Zechariah were raised up to urge them to begin afresh. This state of things existed
in other periods of the world. To excite you to zeal and greater diligence in the
cause of God, look at the words in the following aspects—

I. As representing a depression in the cause of God. “‘ The house of God lieth
waste.” There is a painful imperfection in the work of God in the present day. What
are the scenes in lands where Christianity is professed? Tn our own land the cause of
God is depressed. Much that is opposed to purity and happiness abounds. In other
countries which bear the name of Christendom, in the continent of Europe, we
behold the strong-holds of the prince of the power of the air—mystic Babylon,
having in her hand the cup full of abominations. Over the vast portions of the
East reigns the vile impostor in barbarism and sensuality. Beyond these are the
regions of heathenism. The light is only just gathering which is to dissipate the
darkness, and change the world into brightness and beauty. Are we not compelled
to say, “the temple of God lieth waste”? II. As describing a pursuit of temporal
gratification on the part of those confessedly attached to the cause of God.
- All neglect exertions which God justly demands. Some think the cause is
impolitic, others that it is unjust. Generally, it is often a lamentation that large
portions of wealth, talent, and influence in the world are not devoted to God.
More particularly, is there sufficient exercise of talent and opportunity? Do not
the principles of selfishness prevent us from making sacrifices which ought to be
made? From the period of the Reformation, little has been done to purify the
‘hurch and advance its interests. The spirit of missions has to Christianize the
“hurch, before the Church can Christianize the world. The time must come when
wealth, splendour, talents, and influence must dedicate their most hallowed powers
to God. Individual exertion is still very imperfect in the great cause. Let each
consider how much of his time, natural gifts, and property have been given to pro-
mote the interests of his fellow-mea. It will be little indeed, while an immense
portion of each has been given to the world. Contrast our state with the votaries
of false religion, Mahommedanism, and heathenism. Think of almost incredible
sums devoted to degrading superstitions. Think of Whitfield and others, whose
memory we cherish ; emulate their zeal and catch their spirit. III. As challenging
the employment of our various talents, and urging the claims of God. 1. Con-
sider the nature of those obligations under which God has placed you, and regard
the services which you are called to render. 2. Cousider the peculiar nature of
the gospel which you have embraced. 3. Consider that while there is not energy
in the cause of God, there is au awful amount of misery resting upon your fellow-
men. 4. Consider the prospect of success. God has promised that every enemy
shall be overcome—that the mountain of the Lord’s house shall be established upon
the tops of the mountains—that he will cause peace and righteousness to prevail in
all the earth, and that the world shall be given to Christ, and filled with the glory
and power of his grace [James Parsons].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. Joshua, the high priest, was Together they are types of him, the true
a type of Christ. 1. Inhis name, which King and true Priest, Christ Jesus, who
significth a Saviour 2. In his office by the Resurrection raised again the
of high priesthood. 3. In his partner- true Temple, his body, after it had been
agency with Zerubbabel, in bringing the destroyed [ Pusey).
people home to their country [Trapp]. Ver. 2. “This people,” instead of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAI.





566 (omar. t
“My people.” The loss of God’s con you have positive command, in anticipa.
fidence. 1. Its occasions. 2. Its con- tion of plainer providence or better
sequences. 3. Its retrieval [Lange]. days—

“This people say.” Words then have “The primal duties shine aloft, like stars.”
their weight ; neither are men’s tongues Wordsworth.]
their own; but there is a Lord over Vers. 2—4. There is a time for


them (Ps. xii. 4}, that will call them to
a strict account of all waste words
(Matt. xii. 36), and hard speeches
(Jude 15). He that weighs his words
before he utters them, shall prevent an
after-reckoning for them [Trapp].

The time ts not come. 1. An indica-
tion of the wrong spirit. 2. A misin-
terpretation of Divine providence. 3. A
manifestation of disobedience. 4. An
expectation of times without difficulty.
Never lay by present duty, for which


everything with men; but they should
consider— 1. Who it is that claims
their first and most devoted service.
2. The means and methods of serving
him best [Lange]. Men are very in-
genious when they wish to hide their
delinquencies [Calvin]. Many have
plenty of money when they build
houses for themselves, but great scarcity
of it when it is wanted for churches,
schools, or anything to promote God’s
glory [Cramer].


HOMILETICS.
Human THoUGHTLESSNESS.— Verse 5.


Having reproved their sinful negligence, the prophet urges them to a serious con-
sideration of their ways. Why should the earth be deprived of produce and their
labour of profit through their ingratitude and folly? From the results of their
conduct they may discern the principles of moral government, and the proofs of their

it.

I. Men should seriously consider their ways. Solemnly and prayerfully lay
them to heart. Are they reasonable? Nature is governed by force, and brutes
driven with the lash, but men should act under the influence of thought and reason,
in gratitude to God,—and a feeling of responsibility. To be the slave of habit, or to
be under the dominion of lust, is most unreasonable, Are they safe? If opposed
to God’s word they are sinful and dangerous. “There is a way that seemeth right
unto a man: but the end thereof are the ways of death.” Will they end well!
Every action tends to good or evil. Thoughts, words, and deeds are the germs of
future harvest. ‘‘ Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” II. Men
do not seriously consider their ways. Thoughtlessness is common in spiritual
affairs,— some occasionally, and others never, consider. Indifference, prejudice, and
habit operate upon the mind. The greatest difficulty is to make men think.
Thoughtlessness in spiritual affairs is inconsistent. Men think intensely and act
eagerly in business. When self-interests are at stake they are considerate enough ;
but in most important concerns careless and guilty. ‘‘ My people doth not consider.”
III. God urges men to consider their ways. God’s servants call continually upon
them to reflect upon their character, condition, and doom. God’s providence warns
them of their danger. ‘They have been chastised time after time, to rouse them to
consideration and repentance. Sorrows and griefs, disappointments and embittered
cups, have brought no change. Once more God calls. Consider now before it be
too late to consider. Neglect, want of thought, will be attended with consequences
as fearful as open rebellion. “Son, do nothing without counsel, and when thou
hast done it thou wilt not repent” (Ecclus. xxxii. 19).


“ Evil is wrought by want of theught
As well as want of heart” [ Hood],


OHAP. I.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAI 567


a a


Dux ConsrpEraTION OF OUR Ways SHOULD TEACH US THE WILL, AND URGE UB
To THE Work, or Gov.— Verses 6—8.


The admonition of ver. 5 is repeated (ver. 7), both as betokening greater urgency,
and also for the purpose of reinforcing the argument of vers, 5, 6, by showing to
what course a conscientious review of their conduct should determine them. They
should be impelled, as is next shown, to make immediate preparations for the
complete restoration of the temple [Lange].

I. Consideration of our ways should teach us the will of God. Lack of con-
sideration led to disobedience. When the Jews therefore did not hearken to the
word of God, they lost his favour and providential care, which secure fruitful
seasons and social enjoyment. They were under the visible curse of the law
(Deut. xxviii.). God’s will was read—l. In fields without produce. “Ye have
sown much, and bring in little.” God disappoints our expectations from the
creature that we may fix themon him. 2. In daily necessities without enjoyment.
“Ye eat, but have not enough,” &c. If men would seek first the kingdom of God,
they would secure the secondary things of life (Matt. vi. 33). 3. In labour without
remuneration. Wages earned were spent without profit. They laid up treasures
for themselves and lost them. Nothing will prosper if we neglect known duty.
‘« The events of life are the hieroglyphics in which God records his feelings towards
us,” says Moore. He speaks in the failure of the crops, and the loss of the mer-
chandise. He diminishes the customers of the tradesman, and scatters the wealth
ot the rich, to correct in sin and restore to duty. II. Consideration of our ways
should urge us to the work of God. “Go up to the mountain,” &c. (ver. 8).
They were to rouse themselves, collect materials, and begin to build. When we
seriously consider our life and are convinced of our sins, we shall amend our ways,
engage with diligence in needful and neglected duty. ‘ Amendment of life is the
best repentance ; neither is there any wiser way to break off our sins than to prac-
tise the contrary duties” [Zuther]. In neglecting God’s commands we dishonour
him ; but earnest obedience will secure his blessing. “1 will take pleasure in it,
and I will be glorified, saith the Lord.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


sin lasted, so long the punishment,


Ver. 5. Consider. The religion of the
Bible is a reasonable service. We are
not forced like a machine into insensible
workings and results. We are here
taught that while God is the author of
all good, and our progress in goodness is
from him, yet he does not carry us
along in the way everlasting, but enables
us to walk. He works in us, but it is
that he may will and do. We are not
only impressed, but employed. Thus
all true religion arises from consideration
[Jay].

Ver. 6. Withholding from God’s cause
tends to poverty. Willingly devote a
portion of your possessions to his glory,
there will be sweetness in the remainder
which the worldling can never enjoy
(Prov. xiii. 25). He will “ bless us in
basket and in store.” “ As long as the


The visitation itself was twofold; im-
poverished harvests, so as to supply less
sustenance ; and various indisposition
of the frame, so that what would, by
God’s appointment in nature, satisfy,
gladden, warm, failed of its effect”
| Pusey].

The bag with holes, contrasted with
“ bags that wax not old” (Luke xii. 33),
We provide for a large store in future,
by a wise and generous use of what we
have in the present. ‘Lord, thou
knowest where I have laid up my
treasure,” cried Paulinus, when he heard
that the Goths had sacked Nola and
taken all he had.

Ver. 8. 1. The work to do. Go ap,
bring wood, and build the house. A
divine task, a holy urge it is for


God a spiritual temple to build. All
may help. 2. The motive to perform tt.
“J will take pleasure in it.” God would
accept them and their labours, 3. The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAL.


(cHaP. L





service tohim. (2) In the manifestations
of his grace to man. “God will not
come to bless us as an uninvited guest.
His favour will be displayed towards us


result. “I will be glorified, saith the
Lord.” (1) God is glorified in man’s


only when we have prepared him a
temple in our hearts” [Lange].


HOMILETICS.
Hagea@ar i. 8.


Important events in the spiritual world have been symbolized by things in the
natural, In this event—

I. Observe an important operation directed. The nature of the
operation is, “the building of a house,” z. e. the house or temple of God upon
Mount Zion. The spiritual import of it, with which we have to do, is the form-
ation and gradual perfecting, through successive ages, of the Church of God, which is
compared to a temple. Observe its attendant difficulties. Numerous adversaries
around them. Obstacles from the Jews themselves, scanty in number, and feeble
in resource. Some depressed and fearful, others indifferent and apathetic. These
facts set forth the circumstances attendant on the erection of the temple of Divine
grace under the gospel of Christ. That work progresses, amid difficulties and
epposition, in numerous forms; heathen imposture, infidel impiety, antichristian
superstition, worldly contempt, neglect and indolence of the Church. JI. Observe
the agency with which this operation is conducted. 1. An instrumeital and
secondary agency. The devoted labours of converted men, under the impulse
of renovated nature, influencing others; their success being as the bringing of
materials by which the temple is built. 2. Distinct mention is made of Divine
agency. This agency is connected with the instrumentality of men ; directs them
in their counsels, gives efficiency and success to their movements. III. Observe
the result, in which this operation, so conducted, shall terminate. 1. The
operation shall be triumphantly completed. The second temple was finished in a
brief space of time. 2. Being triumphantly completed, it will eminently redound to
the glory of God. “TI will be glorified in it, saith the Lord.” This completion
will be hailed with rapture by holy created beings. When the second temple was
finished, they brought out the headstone “ with shoutings, crying, grace,” &c. Ezra
says that they kept the dedication with songs, and that they were delighted in the
achievement of their work. We may anticipate the same delight in the victories
of truth and the subjugation of the universe to Christ. Redeemed men will rejoice,
and angels in heaven will partake in their pleasure. Application from the whole.
l. What encouragement here for those already labouring torGod. 2. What rebuke
here tu those who profess the religion of Jesus, yet are indolent and inactive. 3.
What warning here to those avowedly hostile to God and his truth [Preacher's
Treasury].


Duty Vinpicatep By Diving GoveRNMENT.— Verses 5—11.


I. The Dividic government recognizes the selfish motives which actuate men.
First, the necessity of moral reform in the world. Secondly, the necessity of
attending more to the spiritual than the formal in the Church. Thirdly, the pos.
sibility of solemn disclosure at the lastday. II. The Divine government avenges
selfish motives which actuate men. “ Yelooked for much, and, lo, it came to little,”
1. God neutralizes the fruits of their labour. ‘1 will blow upon it.” 2. God
renders inefficient the materials of their labour. Learn—(1) That God directs the
universe, “I called.” (2) That God directs the universe to mind. ‘“ Why?”





OHAP. I} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY + HAGGAI. 569
(3) That God directs the universe to meet the state of every heart. “ Because”


(ver. 9), “Therefore” (ver. 10). [Adapted from The Homilist.]


THe Dousite Curse.—Verses 9—11.


To stir them up, the evidences of God’s anger are again put before them. All
sought their own things, and neglected the things of God. He therefore disap-
pointed their hopes of harvest, and withheld his blessing from that which they
gathered into the barn. ‘‘ God punishes men in both ways, both by withdrawing
his blessing, so that the earth is parched, and the heaven gives no rain ; and also,
even when there is a good supply of the fruits of the earth, by preventing their
satisfying, so that there is no real enjoyment of them” [Calvin]. I. Little was
reaped when much was expected. ‘Ye looked for much,” &c. Their toil had
been great. They sowed much (ver. 6), and kept much ground under tillage.
They expected much, enough and plenty to spare. But the greater their hopes, the
more bitter their disappointment. II. Little was reaped, and that little withered °
away. ‘When ye brought it home,” &c. Stroke follows stroke, and men are
punished in their homes and possessions. Portions, little or great, are easily scattered
by the blast of the Almighty. III. The cause of this double curse. 1. The
cause should be sought. ‘The curse causeless does not come.” Afflictions do not
spring from the ground, nor trouble rise from the dust. God appeals to the
awakened conscience. “ Why?” 2. The cause may be found. “ Because of
mine house that is waste,” &c. (a) In duty neglected. Absorbed in material
interests, they had no time for God’s work. Men seek their own, more than the
things of Jesus Christ (Phil. ii. 21). (&) In Divine retribution for duty neglected.
“ Therefore the heaven over you is stayed,” &c. God rules the world in the
interests of humanity. Heaven and earth are at his command, to bless or curse.
Spiritual indifference results in temporal distress, and ruin falls upon an unfaithful
people. “If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto
my name, saith the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will
curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to
heart.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 9. Mine house waste, ye run
every man, &c. Apathy in spiritual
matters, zeal im selfish (Prov, i. 16: cf.
Ps. exix. 132). Concern for the spiritual
wants of men. 1. Thesituation of man-
kind, ina moral and religious view, is
such as ought to awaken the unaffected
concern of good men, 2, Men who
properly care for the spiritual state of
their fellow-beings are rarely to be found.
This was the case in the time of
Haggai; Paul (Phil. ii. 21); and is so
now. 3. Some of the principal causes
of this unconcern. 1. An inerdinate
and criminal self-love. 2. The preval-
ence of unbelief. 3, Despondency
[Dr. Payson}.


Ver. 10. He “ calls for” famine, &c.,
as instruments of his wrath (2 Kings viii.
1: Ps, ev. 16). The contrast is striking
between the prompt obedience of these
material agencies and the slothful dis-
obedience of living man, his people
[ Fausset].

House wasted, and drought. Heb.
chadréb and chorebh. Wasted temple
and wasted substance. Divine retribu-
tion in human conduct, the correspond-
ence between the sin and its punishment.
“The very evils which men think to
escape by neglecting God’s ordinances,
they actually bring on themselves by
such unbelieving conduct ” [ Fausest).


570 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAL.





HOMILETICS.
Tue Prerrormance or Neauecteo Dutry.—Verses 12—15.


The effect of the prophet’s words upon the people was powerful and abiding, and
upon the very first indication of a change in their disposition, he is commissioned
to tell them that God’s favour had already returned, and that he would assist them
in their labours. The work is then speedily recommenced under the influence of
that new zeal with which Jehovah inspires both leaders and people [Lange].

I. Duty performed in the right spirit. It is a critical time when individuals
and societies are warned by the voice of God in his word and works. Weal cr woe
depends upon submission or rejection. The Jews returned to duty. 1. Ina spirit
of obedience. ‘ They obeyed the voice of the Lord their God.” (a) Universally.
* Zerubbabel and Joshua, with all the remnant of the people.” (5) Sincerely.
“ According to the words of Haggai the prophet.” 2. In a spirit of humility.
“‘The people did fear before the Lord.” They dreaded Divine wrath, regarded
Divine authority, and trembled at the word of God. When the word expounds the
providence of God, men often discern their sins, and serve the Lord with fear. IT.
Duty performed by Divine help. When God saw the penitence of the people, even
before they began to work, he passes from reproof to tenderness and encouragement.
1. By the teaching of the prophet. “Then spake Haggai, the Lord’s messenger, in
the Lord’s message.” The direction of the prophet was clear, constant, and
authoritative. 2. By the stirring up of the people. “The Lord stirred up” the
spirit of prince, priest, and the remnant of the people. Though slothful in them-
selves, God gave them strength, alacrity, and joy in their work. He strengthens the
feeblest hand, warms the coldest heart, and imparts every necessary influence to


revive his work. 3. By the manifestation of his presence.


the Lord.”


“Tam with you, saith


This includes all other blessings, and is the sure guarantee of success.


Nothing more inspirits men, and rouses them from torpor, than promise of Divine


aid and successful issue of work.
by obedience only (Matt. xxviii. 20).


But God’s presence is conditioned to the Church
“ What shall we then say to these things 1


If God be for us, who can be against us?” (Rom. viii 31: 2 Cor. xii 9).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 12, 13. 1. For the word to be
effectual, God’s authority must be seen
and acknowledged in the message and
messenger. ‘ Haggai, the Lord’s messen-
ger, in the Lord’s message.” 2. When
God is thus seen in his Divine authority
and covenant relation, men will submit
themselves, and encourage others to do
the same. Zerubbabel and Joshua first,
and then all the remnant of the people,
obeyed. 3. When we consider that God
can bless beyond all probability — for
here, by one sermon, all the people set
about a long-neglected duty, in the
midst of many difficulties—it should
encourage God’s servants to go on with
their work [cf. Hutcheson]. This was
the beginning of a conversion. In this
one thing they began to do what, all
along in their history, and most in their


decay before the captivity, they refused
to do—obey God’s word [Pusey]. Sue-
cessful preachers need not ascribe to
themselves the merit of the results of
their labours. It is the voice of God
which makes their hearers listen. Whom
God makes strong for his service, he first
subdues to his fear | Lange].

Ver. 13. “Lam with you.” Here al!
former threatening is recalled, and all
former disobedience forgiven [Burck].
All the needs and longings of the crea-
ture are summed up in those two words,
I with you [Pusey]. 1. Consider who
speaks—a Divine Being. No other could
promise and fulfil. This specially needed
to give assurance, joy, and success, 2.
Consider to whom Ctod speaks. Jews,
weak, harassed, and dispirited. Then to
a)) represented by them.


eae


CHAP. I.]


HOMILEVIC COMMENTARY. HAGGAL


671





teachers, and all Christian workers.
How should this promise enspirit and
strengthen! ‘God’s promises are a
defence against man’s threatenings”
Mason|.

Vers. 13, 14. The presence of God
in our labours: 1. The conditions on
which it may be secured; 2. Its influence
upon our souls; 3. Its consequences in
our achievements [Lange].

Ver. 15. The time is diligently noted,
to teach us to take good note of the
moments, wherein matters of moment
have been, by God’s help, begun, con-
tinued, and perfected in the Church.


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. Jn its very jirst day, when
the grief for the barren years was yet
fresh, Haggai was stirred to exhort them
to consider their ways; a pattern for
Christian preachers to bring home to
people’s souls the meaning of God’s
judgments. God directs the very day to
be noted in which he called the people
anew to build his temple, both to show
the readiness of their obedience, and a
precedent to us to keep in memory days
and seasons in which he stirs our souls
to build more diligently his spiritual
temple in our souls | Pusey. |

Vers. 2—4. The disingenuousness of
their plea is self-evident, and is assumed
in the following discourse, which is in-
tended to awaken in them a sense of
their ingratitude to God. It is repre-
sented to them most impressively, with
an allusion to the very language of their
pretext, that while they held their own
wants, and even their luxuries, to be
matters of pressing moment, they thought
any time suitable to attend to the claims
of their God; that while their own
houses had been regained, there was yet
no habitation for the God of Israel ; that
while their wealthy members were using
their superfluous means to adorn and
beautify their dwellings, God’s dwelling-
place still lay desolate, appealing in vain
to their piety and patriotism, which had
been overborne by selfishness and supine-
ness. The allusion, moreover, could not
fai) to expose the insincerity of their
excuses If some of them had now the


This will be of singular use to increass
our faith and affect our hearts [Trapp].
Let those who have fallen into spiritual
torpor, but are now awakened, endeavour
as far as possible to make up for time
past, by redoubled diligence for what-
ever time may be left. The longer we
have loitered, the more let us henceforth
redeem the time in self-devoting labours
for the Lord [Fausset].


‘Tis greatly wise to talk with our past hours,
And ask them what report they bore to heaven,
And how they might have borne more weleome

news” { Young].


TO CHAPTER I.


command of such resources as enabled
them to live in princely splendour, they
might surely have reserved a portion for
the requirements of the temple, when
the work of building it should be re-
sumed, if that work had been giving
them the least concern [Lange].

Ver. 6. Holes. Money is seen in the
pierced bag when it is cast in, but when it
is lost it is not seen. They then who look
how much they give, but do not weigh
how much they gain wrongly, cast their
rewards into a pierced bag [ St. Gregory].

Vers. 5 and 7. Consider.

“ Come, then, sad thought, and let us meditate,
While meditate we may. We have now
But a small portion of what men call time,
To hold communion” [H. &. White].

Vers, 9—11. Looked. We are too
apt to misjudge the dispensations of
Providence when we wish them with
our own wishes [Skelton]. The good
things of Providence may be considered
as having this inscription, “ Accipe,
redde, cave,” that is, ‘accept us as from
God, return us in gratitude to him, and
take care not to abuse us” [ Wilson].

Vers. 8, 12—15. Obeyed. The
longer the soul hath neglected duty, the
more ado there is to get it taken up;
partly through shame, the soul having
played the truant, knows not how to
look God in the face, and partly from
the difficulty of the work, being double
to what another finds that walks in the
exercise of his grace. It requires more
‘ime for him to tune his instrument than


672 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAI. [OHAP, IL





for another to play the lesson [An old % : :

Ke ‘ Never anything can be amiss,
Divine]. Those who give to God only When Mites and duty tender it?”
the shadow of duty, can never expect [Shakespears,}
from him a real reward [Flavel].





CHAPTER IL


Critica, Notes.] This oracle, delivered nearly a month after building had begun, designed te
remove despondency, and to meet a new difficulty. 3.] The glory of the second did not answer te
that of the former temple. Some of the oldest who had returned, had seen the first building, and
wept at the contrast (Hzra iii, 12). The Jews note five points of inferiority, The absence (1) ot
the sacred fire ; (2) the shekinah ; (8) the ark and cherubim ; (4) the Urim and Thummim; (5) the
spirit of prophecy. Nothing] God makes the contrast as great as possible, seems to share their feel-
ing, and give evidence of his strong sympathy. 4. Yet] whatever your estimate, I give another.
Strong] Fear not, I am with you. Work] David’s words to Solomon (1 Chr. xxviii. 10: 2 Chr.
xix, 11). 5. Covenanted] God the same in promise to all generations and ages (Ex. xix. 5, 6; xxiv.
10, 11). Spirit] to strengthen (cf. i. 14: Zech, xiv. 6), hence continual enjoyment of God’s presence
and aid. 6. Once] Yet only a little while; lit. ove little, ¢.e. brief space; till a series of movements is
to begin. Shake] by great moral and physical revolutions, preparatory to the establishment of
Christ’s kingdom (Matt. xxiv. 29: Heb, xii, 26—28). 7.J Having figuratively set forth great
political changes, the prediction is repeated, and the arrival of the blessings desired, announced,
Desire] Some apply these words to the Church, but the majority to Christ, This is not the place
for a discussion [ef. Henderson and Wordsworth], Glory] Not outward furniture, but the presence
of God himself (cf. Zech. ii, 6; Ezek, xliii. 4,5: Ex. xl. 34, 35; 1 Kings vili. 11), 8. Mine]
Hence they should be free from anxiety in poverty, and cease to mourn the absence from the temple
of these things. 9. Greater] Not in architectural splendour, but in the presence of Jehovah the
Messiah, and in peace between man and man, and God and man—temporal peace under Persian
rule, and spiritual in Jesus Christ. 10.] This prophecy two months later than those preceding in
this chapter, 11—13.]To convince them of their unworthiness, they must learn from their legal
advisers two things—no holy objects could communicate holiness to things or persons who touched
them (Lev. vi. 20); but whatever an unclean person touched was unclean (Num. xix, 22). 14. So]
“ The nation in its attitude toward the Lord resembles, on the one hand, a man who carries holy
flesh in the lappet of his garment; and, on the other, a man who has become unclean through touch-
ing a corpse” [Kei/]. Unclean] By their habits of sin, all their worship, character, and lives were
impure. 15. Consider] Review of their condition from the present specific time to the period before
resumption of work—‘‘ to connect their distress, then suffered, with their unfaithfulness.’’ They had
ten measures when they expected twenty ; twenty vessels instead of fifty from the press-vat ; they
were smitten with two blights of corn which were predicted as chastisements for disobedience (Deut
xxviii, 27: Amos iv. 9); yet none turned to God. 18.] Resumed from ver, 15, after vers. 16, 17,
that the blessing in ver. 19 may stand in the more marked contrast with the curse in vers, 16, 17
[ Fausset]. 19.] After an appeal to lay to heart past times, in which blessings had been withheld,
they must now fix their eyes upon the time now beginning. “It is winter (ver. 10); the seed, only
just committed to the earth, was not yet in the barn. No fresh leaves on the fruit-trees—vine, fig
tree, pomegranate, and olive—but ye have begun again to build; from this day forward I will hasten
to bless you ” [Wordsworth]. 20—23.] Renewal of promise to save in convulsions. 21. Shake!
Points back to vers. 6 and 7, 22. Throne] Government which binds nations together (Dan. vii. 27).
War-chariots, horses, and riders, military power, and support of kingdoms, to be overthrown by one
another’s sword. , “ One hostile kingdom will destroy anotner, and in the last conflict the heathen
hosts will annihilate one another ” (cf. Ezek, xxxviil. 21: Zech. xiv. 13) [Kei/]. 28.] At that time
Jehovah would take Zerubbabel, invest him wich power and authority as head over all, as kings
depute viceroys by giving them their signet (Esth, tii. 10; vill, 2). Some think, as seals and rings
were objects of great value and regard, so Zerubbabel would be dear, and held close, to God—an
object of incessant care and delight (Jer. xxii, 24: Cant, vill, 6). In a theocratic sense he restored
the reign of David. What was promised to him was equally promised to all faithful rulers of Judah.
They would be guardians of the people, and should stand secure amid the fall of earthly kingdoms,
Tuis prosperity and triumph of old prefigured the Redeemer’s reign, whom God would exalt on the
throne of David (Matt, i. 12; Luke iii, 2), crown as king of the earth (Ps, lxxxix. 27), and endow
with » kingdom which will never be destroyed (Dan. i, 44: Heb. xii. 28: 1 Cor. xv. 24).


CaP, IL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HAGGAL. 578





Ps


HOMILETICS.
MezrtHops 1n Diving Tracuina.—Verses 1, 2.


Rebukes, warnings, and encouragements had due influence upon the people. But
new difficulties now threaten and a fresh message is required. Hence “came the
word of the Lord” again, in matter and method adapted to guide and comfort.

I. God speaks to his people in different periods of time. “In the seventh
month, in the one and twentieth day of the month.” In vers. 1, 10, 18, and chap.
i. 1, 15, how specific the mention of time! no age is left without its prophet and
Divine utterance. II. God speaks to his people in different circumstances of
life. The Jews had passed through circumstances of indolence and zeal. Now
they begin to despond on account of an inferior temple and failing harvests (vers.
9—11). But when God stirs up a people he will help and comfort them in their
work, “Set the wheels a going and God will oil them,” says an old writer.
III. God speaks to his people in words adapted to their needs. We have
warnings and comfort, “consider” and “ fear not,” “ go up and build” (chap. i. 8).
Revelations are given “in sundry times and in divers manners,” in parts and methods
according to our requirements. Germs for present use and future growth. “ What-
soever is Divine revelation ought to overrule all our opinions, prejudices, and
interests, and hath a right to be received with full assent,” says Locke. ‘“ What [
do thou knowest not now ; but thou shalt know hereafter.”


Causes or DESsPONDENCY IN THE WorK oF Gop.—Verse 3.


The inferiority of the second temple to that of Solomon was a ground of dis-
couragement in work. ‘The old people affected the young, and though disappoint-
ment was not openly expressed, yet it suspended their labours.

I. Many disaffected discouraged others in the work. Some old men were
still alive, who thought more of former performances and attainments than present
duty and hopeful signs. They discouraged others, exaggerated the evils and
reflected upon the work of God. Murmurers and complainers belong to every age.
“Tf the times are bad what are we doing to mend them?” asks one. “ Say not thou,
What is the cause that the former days were better than these? for thou dost not
inquire wisely concerning this.” II. All esteemed the work too lightly. “Is it
not in your eyes, in comparison of it, as nothing.” They thought more of outward
glory than spiritual blessings. We are too apt to judge by outward appearance,
and forget God’s estimate of labour. Though we are not building a material wa
are a spiritual temple. If not honoured with the position of some, we have
responsibilities and duties. Never say that you do nothing, if not surrounded with
outward pomp, and patronized by the rich and the noble. Let us “serve our own
generation by the will of God.”


Remepizs ror DesponDENoY IN THE Work oF Gop.—Verses 4, 5.


Notwithstanding alleged grounds of fainting, God exhorts them all to be
sourageous, to go on with their work, and gives reasons for the exhortation.

I. God’s covenant with them is unchangeable. “According tothe word that T
covenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt.” Mercies to God’s people are
ensured by a pledge which is eternal and immutable. Dark may be the days and
difficult the work of his people ; but they are as much the object of his care as when
the covenant was first ratified. They may sin and be punished for their sin ; but his
attitude towards them is not the result of caprice nor change. Unfaithfulness will
banish God from us, but return to obedience will restore his favour and help. “ My
covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips”


874 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY - HAGGAL. (CHAP, Ii.


II. God’s presence with them is guaranteed. ‘For I am with you, saith the
Lord of hosts.” God continually declares that we have no ground for fear. We
need to have these assurances repeated. If hosts are against us, and the Lord of
hosts is with us, this should strengthen us. His presence will compensate for
past distress, aid in present duty, and be all-sufficient for the untried future. “The
promises of the gospel are sealed to us by the word of the Father, the blood of the
Son, and the witness of the Spirit ” [Mason]. TIL. God’s Spirit with them abides
for ever. “So my Spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not.” God’s Spirit was
with the leaders, inspiring the prophets and sanctifying the priests ; with the people
for the work of the sanctuary (Ex. xxxi. 1), and the confirmation of the weak.
The Spirit to stir up all to duty (Kzra v. 1: Zech. iv. 6), and remove every
hindrance to its performance. The Spirit still abides in the Church, helping to
realize the Divine purpose in Christ. ‘Thou gavest also thy good Spirit to instruct


them.”
3. a motive to renewed consecration.
(ver. 4).


This should furnish, 1. an antidote to fear, 2. a ground of confidence, and
“ Be strong and work: for I am with you”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. The better to hearten them,
the prophet is sent again, with a like
message as before. Learn—1l. That there
are none so forward for God and his
work but may stand in need of continual
quickening. 2. That continual preach-
ing makes men continue in well-doing
Trapp}. 3. That all those who work
or the Lord will be strengthened and
encouraged in their difficulties. Speak
now, &c. ‘The encouragements here are
sent to the same persons to whom the
reproofs in the foregoing chapter are
directed ; for those that are wounded by
the convictions of the word shall be
healed and bound up by its consolations,”

Ver. 3. Important questions. What
answers to be given? Some were left
who had seen the first house in its glory,
about sixty-eight years since. The con-
trast in the times and in the buildings
no ground for despair. “ Long life is a
blessing to the servant of God, if at its
close he is permitted to see the revival
of God’s kingd>m and increasing signs
of its coming glury” |Lange]. In your
eyes, that is, in your, thoughts: for God
taketh notice of the inward workings of
the heart [Trapp]. Whatever they
thought of the work, (tod’s estimate was
very different. Judge not by appear-
ances.

Vers. 4,5. Lessons of life. Dwell
much upon past history, and learn—
1. That what checks and distress may
be experienced are due to unfaithfulness,


2. That God never failed to fulfil his
covenant, whether he chastened or
blessed. 3. That in the adversities of
the present true hope lies in the presence
and power of the Spirit [ef. Lange].

Ver. 4. Be strong. Here he exhorieth
all ranks, first to good affection, Be
strong, or of a good courage ; secondly,
to good action, Work, or be doing; for
atfection without action is like Rachel,
beautiful but barren. Here then, that
we falter not, betray not the cause of
God, nor come under his heavy dis-
pleasure, who equally hateth the timorous
and the treacherous, 1. Be armed with
true faith. Faith quelleth and killeth
distrustful fear. 2. Get the heart
fraught with the true fear of God; for
as one fire, so one fear, drives out
another (Matt. x. 28: 1 Pet. iii. 13, 14).
3. Get and keep a clearing, cheering
conscience ; for that feareth no colours,
as we see in St. Paul, Athanasius,
Luther, Latimer, and other holy martyrs
and confessors. 4. Think on God’s
presence as here, Be strong and be doing,
for [am with you. Lastly, look up, as
St. Stephen did, to the recompense of
reward ; steal a look from glory, as Moses
(Heb. xi. 26); help yourselves over the
difficulty of suffering with Christ by
considering the happiness of reigning
together [Trapp].

Ver. 5. The word that I covenanted.
Deliverance in Egypt should remind of
God’s power and presence with hie


OmaP. I1.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HAG Al. 578








Church. .Incouragement is strengthened petition and renewed emphasis of the
by refe ence to the covenant. Former word.
appearauces are types of future. 1. e : Nee
Providences may seom to contradict “Our God is still as ind and all His gifts

: ; ae Like wondrous, like unlimited, like fair,
promises, 2. Prornises never contradict As when the wind first blew. Man is to God
providences. Hence the continual re- That he hath ever been” [ Batley}.


HOMILETICS.
Tae EstaBuisHMENtT or Gop’s Kingpom.— Verses 6—8.


The Jews are encouraged to proceed with the work by the assurance that Jehovah
would, as the governor among the nations, in a brief space, exert his almighty
power in effecting a great revolution in the state of the kingdums of this world,
preparatory to the establishment of the kingdom of the Messiah. This mighty
change is first described in the usual fiyurative language of prophecy, as a convulsion
of the physical universe, and then literally as a convulsion of all nations. The
passage has long been regarded as one of the principal prophecies of the Redeemer’s
advent [ Henderson].

I. Revolutions prepare for its establishment. “I will shake the heavens and
the earth,” &e. 1. Phys‘cal preparations. ‘The kingdoms of the world are but
the scaffolding for the spiritual kingdom, and will be overturned when they have
accomplished their end. All earthly mansions are moveable and transitory, sub-
servient to “the kingdom that cannot be moved ” (Heb. xii. 26—28). Recognize—
(1) Divine agency in the world—“ J will.” (2) Divine order—* will shake.” Dis-
turbance before repose, war before peace, is a law in the operations of nature, the
government of nations and the history of the Christian Church. In the wars of
Alexander the Great and his four successors, in the conquests of Rome, the world
was shaken and reduced to order. 2. Moral preparations. ‘TI will shake all
nations, and the Desire of all nations shall come.” It was an ancient notion that
the gods forsook the cities that were taken by the enemy. Hence the power of
the gods decayed and national deities were destroyed by the conquests of Roman
armies. The nations were thus prepared for the gospel (cf. Keil and Hengs. in loco).
If men did not definitely desire Christ, they were not satisfied with painful rites
and bloody sacrifices. They were unsettled, and longed for some one to satisfy
their desires. Bewildered by superstitions, they craved for Divine light. And as
the time of the Redeemer’s advent drew near, there was a general expectation of a
deliverer in Jewish and Gentile world. IT. All natiens contribute to its estab-
lishment. “The silver is mine, and the gold is mine.” According to Josephus,
gifts adorned the temple, and dedicatory offerings were presented in it. King
Artaxerxes and his counsellors bestowed presents upon Ezra (vii. 15), and the
help of Darius Hystaspes (Ezra vi. 6—10) may be regarded as a pledge of the fulfil-
ment of the promise. The riches of kingdoms flowed into the temple. Material
wealth will yet be given for the extension and inward growth of God’s kingdom.
All that is valuable in labour, all that is achieved by intellect, all that is pure and
lofty in science, art, and religion, are offerings which the world has brought or will
bring into the Church. “The glory and honour of the Gentiles” shall be presented
in the courts of Zion (Rev. xxi. 26).


Tse Dusire or atu Nations.—Verse 7.


This refers unquestionably to the Messiah, yet the title seems to disagree with
other parts of Scripture and with fact. He was in the world, and the world knew
him not—despised and rejected of men. How then can he be called the Desire of
all nations? This character is justified five ways. First, by the general expectation


546 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAI. (CHAP. i


that prevailed in the world previously to his advent. It is well known that there
was a looking out for some great deliverer and benefactor nigh at hand. Testimonies
from heathen authors have been collected, especially a little poem of Virgil’s, written
a few years only before the birth of Christ, which contains a prophecy and fore-
shadows a personage who would restore the peace and plenty of the golden reign.
The sentiment was handed down by tradition, but originally derived from a Divine
source, the early and repeated promise of “him that should come.” Secondly, by
the need all mankind had of such a Saviour as he would be. Darkness covered
the earth. Men knew not the supreme good—found only vanity and vexation of
spirit in their pursuits and attainments—had no support in trouble, and their un-
easiness arising from guilt, death, and futurity, led them to offer thousands of rams,
rivers of oil, and to give their first-born for their transgressions. No remedy could
be found to remove doubts and fears. Though they had no revelation of Jesus,
who meets their condition, yet they ignorantly groped after what he alone can
impart. He therefore deserves to be called the Desire of all nations, just as a
physician, able and willing to cure all diseases, is the desire of all patients. Thirdly,
by being so attractive in himself, that all would actually long after him if they
knew him. He has every excellency in person, every perfection in character.
Nothing in creation will afford a proper image. All the loveliness of man and
angels cannot be compared to his charms. ‘ He is altogether lovely.” Do we
esteem riches? His are unsearchable. Admire friendship? He sticketh closer than a
brother. Applaud benevolence? His love passeth knowledge.


“ His worth if all the nations knew,
Sure the whole earth would love him too.”


Fourthly, by his having had admirers in every country. Wherever believers have
been found, they have been distinguished by the same convictions and dispositions
with regard to him. Abraham in Canaan rejoiced to see hisday. Job in the land
of Uz knew that his Redeemer lived. Wise men from Persia paid him homage,
and devout men from every nation under heaven joined in the sacrifices and cere-
monies of the temple. John heard his praise from an innumerable multitude out
of all nations and tongues. Lastly, he is so named because in due time he will be
prized and gloried in by all the ends of the earth. To him shall the gathering of
the people be. He is the salvation prepared for all people, a light to lighten the
Gentiles, All kings shall fall down before him; all nations shall serve him and
call him blessed. How does he appear to me? Is he all my salvation, all my
desire? Will it complete my happiness to be like him and see him as he is? [Jay].


Gop’s Cuaims anpD Man’s StewarpsHip.—Verse 8.


In commanding the erection of a glorious house for the Lord to replace the one
that had been destroyed, and which then lay waste, a principle is asserted which is
unaffected by time or circumstances. God’s rights in man and man’s possessions
may be put among the things which change not.

I. God’s claim. God himself makes the announcement. He is jealous for bis
honour and rights. What he orders to be done, he expects to be done, even if it
be difficult to accomplish and involve many sacrifices. 1. The claim is just. When
God demands the silver and the gold to be devoted to his service, he is not usurp-
ing authority that belongs to another. 2. The claim is absolute. ‘“ Mine” may be
written by the finger of God upon all the wealth of the globe (cf. Ps, 1. 10, 11, and
Isa xl., on God’s absolute proprietorship). 3. The claim is universal. It was true
concerning the exiles returned from long captivity, and it is “the present truth ”
concerning the possessions of all who are now in the land of the living. II. Man’s
stewardship. Possessions entrusted to our keeping or use involve us in responsi-
vility. Silwar and gold are atruat from God. They may mean go much intelligence,


CHAP, 1.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGGAI. 67°





industry, and self-sacrifice on the part of their temporary owner—but even those
mental and moral qualities, which win silver and gold, are enjoyed by God’s bounty,
and employed by God’s providence. ‘Thou shalt remember the Lord thy God:
for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth.” 1. Our stewardship ought to be
recognized. We may ignore accountability, but putting it out of mind will not put
it out of existence. By considering, laying to heart, we shall escape the wrong and
mischief of forgetfulness. 2. Our stewardship should be thankfully acknowledged.
The inward realization ought to havea glad expression. If the blessing of the Lord
makes us rich, he ought to be blessed for his munificent gifts. “What shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me.” 3. Our stewardship should
be faithfully discharged. “It is required in stewards that a man should be found
faithful.” Diligent employment of possessions, of which silver and gold may stand
for symbols, is the condition of their continuance and increase. “ For unto every
one that hath (or uses what he hath) shall be given, and he shall have abundance ;
but from him that hath not (or uses not what he hath) shall be taken away that
which he hath.” Because much silver and gold may not be ours we do pot escape
the levy of divine law for God’s service. “ For if there be first a willing mind, it
is accepted according to that a man hath,” &c. Remember that the eternal rewards
are given, not to the conspicuous, famous, or successful servant. The divine com-
mendation of “well done,” and the divine dignity and blessedness are bestowed
upon “good and faithful servants” [Mt. Braithwaite].


Tus Gtory or tHe Latrer Hovsz.— Verse 9,


The glory of the second temple was not in its outward structure, but its inward
furniture. Splendid buildings, painted windows, and stately forms are surpassed
by spiritual blessings. There is a “ glory that excelleth.”

I. In the purity of its worship. In the first house was worldly splendour ; in
the second, heavenly treasures, In one, dark shadows; in the other, the real sub-
stance. There was the ministration of the letter, here of the Spirit. One temple
was often polluted with idolatry (2 Kings xxiii. 11, 12), the other is holy in its
elements and institutions. Rites and ceremonies gradually retired into the back-
ground ; prayer and praise took their place. Thus was kept alive a higher and
purer type of religion than outward forms and gorgeous ritual. ‘That which was
made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth.”
II. In the residence of its owner. God who owned the temple promised to dwell
in it. The first glory was covered in the cloud, the second veiled in humanity.
The Messiah was “the glory of his people Israel.” His presence would be more
than a substitute for the distinguished articles wanting. Many eminent persons
entered the temple, but he was “greater than the temple.” It exists for him, and
we must assemble to meet with him. Without him, however splendid, there is no
glory; with him, however humble, it becomes “the palace of the great King.”
‘‘The Spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court ; and, behold, the
glory of the Lord filled the house.” III. In the blessedness of its attendants.
“(Tn this place will I give peace.” The Jews had great trouble, but God’s presence
secured peace and protection. Peace in Christ to the penitent sinner and the
doubting Christian is “the glory” of God’s house. Peace with men first, and
eventually peace on earth. Convulsions in the natural and revolutions in the
political world increase “ the distress of nations with perplexity ” (Lu. xxi. 25—27),
and create a longing desire for the Prince of Peace. When he reigns there shall be
perpetual peace. Peace from God and based upon his right can never be destroyed.
It abounds in depth and duration. “In his days shall the righteous flourish ; and
abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth.”


87





HOMILETIC COMMENT 4RY: HAGGAL.


(ca.?P. EB





Prophetic, lengthens aye by aye her sceptre”’ [ Basley).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


878
“ Peace is the end of all thing»—tearless peace ;
Who by the immovable basis of God’s throne
Takes her perpetual stand; and of herself
Ver. 6. The Messiah’s kingdom.


i. Introduced by general shaking. 2.
Fnding in general satisfaction. As the
tirst dispensation was introduced by the
shaking of the mount, so the second by
the revolutions of nations. These com-
motions—the presage of God’s help and
the fulfilment of his promise. “ The
Desire of all nations shall come.”

Vers. 7, 8. Notice—l. The absolute
dominion over the world’s wealth. 2.
The subserviency of this wealth to the
promotion of Christ’s kingdom. 3. The
confidence this should beget in the
minds of God’s people. ‘Every penny
bears G-i’s superscription as well as
Cesar’s ‘Henry|. The comparative
poverty of the Church is not because
God cannot bestow riches upon her,
but because there are better blessings
than wealth that are often incompatible


with its possession [Lange].

Ver. 9. Peace. 1. The blessing
bestowed. 2. The source from whence
it comes—J, saith the Lord of Hoats.
3. The certainty of its possession—“ J
will give.” 4. The place in which it ia
given—ZIn this house. Every house of
God is a place where God gives peace,
and every place of peace is also a house
of God [Lange].

On the whole discourse : The glory ot
God’s kingdom. (1) Its conditions—the
faithfulness of his people to all their
covenant obligations and duties, their
obedience, their faith and their courage
securing his favour and help. (2) Ite
nature—ihe constant reception of in-
creasing multitudes of “Gentiles” with
their “treasures” of devotion and ser-
vice ; and the abiding presence of God’s
Spirit diffusing peace and joy [Lange].


HOMILETICS.
DuTy NEGLECTED CONTAMINATES CHARACTER AND Conpbuot.—Verses 10—14,


The people suffering from scarcity of food consequent upon the failure of their
crops had, it seems, been continuing in some measure their regular sacrificial’ offer-
ings, though they had been neglecting the building of the temple. These oblations
had not been accepted, as they might have inferred from the withdrawal of the
divine blessing, the true cause of which is now impressively illustrated. As he
who was ceremonially unclean tainted everything with which he came in contact,
so had they sufiering from God’s displeasure, on account of their disregard of his
claims, communicated the effects of that displeasure to all the labour of their
hands, which profited them nothing [Lange]. Attendance upon outward ordinances
will not sanctify the character and render those acceptable to God who neglect
their duty. ;

I. This truth is illustrated py divine teaching. ‘“ Ask now the priests con-
cerning the law,” and it will prove two things. 1. That sacred things cannot
communicate holiness to what they toucn. The flesh of the sacrifice might hallow
“the skirt” in which it was carried (Lev. vi. 27), but did not transmit virtue te
meat and drink. ‘The altar does not sanctify the gift, nor the temple the land.
Corn, wine, and oil are merely common produce. No special blessing rests upon
the fruits of the land, on account of its sacredness. 2, That an unclean person
contaminates whutever he touches (Num, xix. 22). “‘ Legal sanctity is not so readily
communicated as legal dmpurity. So the paths to sin arc manifold; the path to
holiness one, and that one of diflicult access” [Grotius]. Thus prophet and priest
act in accordance with their proper functions, and teach the same lessons. One


HAP. 11. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : HAG@AL 679








expounds the law, and the other applies it (Lev. x. 10, 11: cf Isa. viii. 20)
II. This truth is proved in human life. ‘Sois this people, and so is this nation
before me.” Here the two cases are applied. By the first the nation is not made
holy by its offerings; by the second, by their disobedience, they pollute what they
offer. 1. /t is proved in Divine worship. ‘ And that which they offer there is un-
clean.” Like character, like worship. However splendid the gifts or beautiful
the actions in themselves, they will not remove impurity of life through nevlect of
duty. The possession of sacred privileges will not counterbalance disobedience.
2. Ft is proved in daily life. “So is every work of their hands.” Not only in
their offering, but also in their works are they unclean. Impurity in heart will not
sanctify in works. ‘Those whose devotions are plausible, but whose conversation
is wicked, will find their devotions unable to sanctify their enjoyments, and thei:
wickedness prevailing to pollute them.” ‘“ Unto the pure all things are pure, but
unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind
and conscience is defiled.”


Gop’s Reiation to MN DETERMINED BY THEIR Conpuot.—Verses 15—19.


The people are bidden to review their condition from the present time to the
period preceding the resumption of the temple. The time when the work was
resumed is specified here, because it was the turning-point of their fortunes.
Their condition before that event is recalled for their contemplation, that it might
connect their distress then suffered with their unfaithfulness ; and the brief period
succeeding their return to obedience is included, because they could not so soon
recover from their embarrassments, no harvest having yet interveued [Lange].

I. If duty be neglected men are punished. If we repudiate what is due to
God, we expose ourselves to danger. Without the controlling influence of duty
the wisest and strongest go astray. 1. They are fruitless in their labour (ver. 17).
“| smote you . . . in all the labours of your hands.” To the disease of the corn
we have the hail, which smote the vines. The grape for the rich, and the fig for
the poor, were smitten by the judgment of God (Ps. Ixxviii. 47). 2. They are
disappointed in their hopes (ver. 16). The heap of sheaves when threshed only
yielded half of what they expected. The juice of the grapes gave not the usual
measure. God’s curses are upon men’s labours, if they care not for his work and
honour. ‘‘The Lord shall smite thee with . .. blasting and with mildew; and
they shall pursue thee until thou perish.” II. If duty be performed men are
blessed. As the consequence of repentance and obedience the Jews had a prospec
of rich and speedy blessings. 1. Blessed from the day of amendment. ‘“ From thi
day will I bless you” (ver. 19), God blesses more readily than we think. Th
day of return to him is the day of rejoicing for us. ‘Temporal blessings shall .:
followed by spiritual, and we shall prove that ‘Godliness is profitable unto ii!
thinys, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to com:.”
2. Blessed beyond former abundance. The vine and olive, which had borne ‘lit. /¢
or nothing, would produce from that day more abundantly. The earth would yield
its increase, and God would bless them beyond all probability and degree. Thus do
we learn that rewards or chastisements come to man according to his conduct
towards God. That natural laws serve for moral discipline, and that whoso is wise
will observe these things. “If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good
of the land” (Isa. i. 19: Zech. viii. 9—12).


CoNSIDERATION oF Divine CHASTISEMENTS


God’s dealings may be seen and felt by all, without being understood Hence ivr
nee constantly to be stirred up to consider them. “* Now, I pray you to consi le:
from this day.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: HAGG AL.


689 (CHaP. 11








a


I. Consider the cause of chastisement. God’s anger rested upon them when they
neglected their spiritual interests. We assign any cause for sufferings rather than
our sins. ‘‘Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall
reprove thee.” II. Consider the time of chastisement. 1. The past. “From
before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the Lord” (ver. 15). 2. The
present, ‘From this day.” Think of the evils which befell you before you set
to work, and remember the blessings promised from the day of its commencement.
A true understanding of the past is often the best preparation of the future.
III. Consider the source of chastisement. “I smote you with blasting” (ver. 17).
Men do not recognize Divine agency in the government of the world. The Jews
were sensible of their calamities, but did not inquire seriously into the cause of
them. Tully thought that God had nothing to do with rain and dew, and ordinary
occurrences in life. Science dethrones God, and assigns nature to inflexible laws or
infinite power. But all things are upheld by God’s power (Heb. i. 3), and made
subservient to his purpose. “ Fire and hail, snow and vapour, stormy wind fulfil-
ling His word. IV. Consider the aggravations of chastisement. “Yet ye turned
not to me, saith the Lord” (ver. 17). Affliction will harden the heart if God’s
purpose be not discovered in it. Impenitence will be a ground of further contro-
versy. The more men revolt, the more will they be smitten (Isa. i. 5). “‘The people
turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts,”


*¢ Though woo’d and awed,


Bless’d and chastised, a flagrant rebel still!” [Dr Wardlaw].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 15. The retrospect. 1. Its be-
ginning. With the resumption of work.
2. Its direction. “From this day and
upward” (te. backward). Literally,


the barn and no signs of a crop, much
less of safe ingathering. “Yet from this
day will I bless.” 1. God’s blessing im-
mediate. “* From this day ”—as soon as


“from the not yet of the laying...
ouwards,” %.¢. onwards from the time
when stone was laid upon stone at the
temple; in other words, when the
building of the temple was resumed,
backwards into the past [Keil]. 3. Its
design. To learn the evils of disobedience,
and the blessings of obedience.

Ver. 17. Divine chastisements. 1. In
their intention to bring back to God.
2. In their results, “yet ye turned not.”
This result grievous to God, and sorrow
to men. “ Not being untutored in suffer-
ing, I learn to pity those in affliction”
[ Virgil].


you return to me and my work. 2. God’s
blessing certain. No visible sign in nature
—every appearance against it. But the
promise is sure—“ infinitely to be pre-
ferred even in prospect, to the world’s best
things in possession” [Fausset]. God is
so sovereign and absolute a Lord of all
things, and hath times and seasons, bless-
ings and cursings, so in his hands, that he
may undertake to do things whereof there
is no visible probability or certainty in
the second causes, and can certainly
perform them ; therefore doth he under-
take to bless them, when second causes
and the season could speak no such thing


Ver. 19. Itwas winter. No seed in [Hutcheson].
HOMILETICS.
Tue PRESERVATION oF Gop’s Propie AMID THE OvERTHROW OF Em pEes—
Verses 20-—23.


The same day in which God promised the bounties of nature, the prophet received
a second message for Zerubbabel, who was concerned for the interests of Zion in


predicted revolutions.


God would overturn the nations, but preserve his people


and their ralers as elect and precious in his sight.


OHAP, IL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; HAGGAL. $81





oo mene: et


I. Earthly kingdoms will be overthrown. ‘ I will shake the heavens and the
earth ” (cf. vers. 6, 7). 1. Overthrown by Divine agency. ‘“ I will shake ”—“J will
overthrow,” and “J will destroy.” God is enthroned over all kingdoms, puts down
one, and exalts another in his pleasure (Dan. ii, 21: Luke i. 52). 2. Overthrown
by mutuul strife. ‘ Every one by the sword of his brother.” Men opposed to God
are often opposed to one another. If national truth and righteousness do not con-
trol national life, then we may expect self-destruction, if not fratricidal war. Mutual
destruction is a feature of Divine judgment upon wicked nations at the end of the
world. ‘Every man’s sword shall be against his brother” (Ezek. xxxviii. 8, 9
21: Isa. ix. 19). 3. Overthrown in military strength. “The strength of the king-
doms,” that which supports them —their chariots and horsemen, and all their
military preparations. The kingdoms shall be shaken, thrones upset, and dynasties
destroyed. Every people will be shorn of its strength, fall, and cease to be; but the
Church of God will be preserved, when unfaithful nations are blotted out of exist-
ence. II. God’s people will be protected. ‘In that day, saith the Lord of Hosts,
will I take thee,” to protect and promote thee and thy people to honour. 1. Certain
protection. The words, “ saith the Lord of Hosts,” are given three times, for greater
assurance and confirmation of faith. 2. A delightful protection. ‘TI have chosen
thee.” God loves his people, and chooses them for himself. He will never cast them
off, but make them subjects of his special care. They are a seal upon his heart, a
seal upon his arm (Dan. vii. 13) ; and hidden in the shadow of his hand (Isa. xlix.
2). 3. An everlasting protection. As the ring is inseparable from its possessor, so
God’s people will be permanently connected with him, and become his special
inheritance. As royal signets on the eternal hand shall they be safely guarded.
They are sealed in Christ, and safe for ever—heirs of that kingdom before which
all earthly dominions shall fall. ‘‘These shall make war with the Lamb, and the
Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they
that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful” (Rev. xvii. 14).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 22. The overthrow prophesied
is universal. It is not one throne only,
as of Persia, but the throne, i.¢., the
sovereigns of kingdoms ; not a change of
dynasty, but a destruction of their
strength ; not of a few powers only, but
the kingdoms of the heathen; and that
in detail; that in which their chief
strength lay, the chariots and horsemen
and their riders, and this man by man,
every one by the sword of his brother
[Pusey].

Ver. 23. As a signet. 1. A token
of value. 2. A token of love (Cant. viii.
6). 3. A tokenof remembrance. This
promise is the reverse of Jeconiah’s
sentence: “though he were the signet
upon my right hand, yet would I pluck
thee thence ” (Jer. xxii. 24). “ Zerub-


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1, 2. Word. What a beautiful
sermon or essay might be written on the
growth of prophecy |! —from the germ no


babel was a devoted servant of God. God
acknowledges his faithfulness. Only the
beginning of all was with God. God
speaks of the nearness to himself which
he had given him. But in two words
he cuts oif all possible boastfulness of
his creature. Zerubbabel was all this,
not of himself, but because God had
chosen him” [Pusey]. In his theocratic
relation he represented and preserved the
kingdom of David. Hence ho is regarded
by many as a type of Christ, the son of
David, and descendant of Zerubbabel
(cf. 1 Chr. iii. 19: Matt.i. 12: Luke iii.
27), in whom the kingdom shall be
perpetuated. It will be assailed, but
never destroyed. All nations that resist
shall be broken to pieces, and scattered
like chaff before the wind.


TO CHAPTER II.


bigger than a man’s hand in Genesis, till
the column of cloud gathers size and


strength, and height and substance, and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. UAGGAI.


(cHaP


SSS


assumes the shape of a perfect man: just
like the smoke in the Arabian Night’s
tale, which comes up and at last takes a
genie’s shape [ Colerizgz].

Vers. 3—5. Despondency. Too often
a mischievous gloom enters the mind of
God’s people. Their hands slacken, their
energies are paralyzed for the work of
God, and they sink into desponding
apathy and indolence. Did we realize
our present privileges and future pro-
spects, the gfeam of sunshine would be
to us the earnest of what it will be, when
—as Rutherford beautifully observes—
““we shall be on the sunny side of the
Brae” [Bridge].

“ There’s not a scene on earth go full of lightness,
That withering care
Sleeps not beneath the flowers, and turns their
brightness
To dark despair ” [Hon. Mrs Norton}.

Vers. 6—9. Shake. The prophet
lays stress upon the brevity of the time,
for the purpose of comforting. And only
what is short in the eyes of men is fitted
for this. Even there were forebodings
that the time of this empire (Persian)
would soon be accomplished,: and the
rapid conquests of Alexander gave ful-
filment to this foreboding. And even his
power, which seemed destined to last for
ever, very speedily succumbed to the lot
of all temporal things. The two most
powerful kingdoms that grew out of the
monarchy of Alexander, viz. the Syrian
and Egyptian, destroyed one another.
The Romans now attained to the govern-
ment of the world; but at the very time
when they appeared to bs at the summit
of their greatness, their shaking had very
considerably advanced [ Hengstenberg].

Ver. 8. Gold is mine. Trust Pro-
vidence for the supply of your wants in
the ways of duty and righteousness
[ Nicholls}.

Vers. 12—14. Priests. The cere-
monial institutes of the ancient law were
designed to illustrate man’s relation to
God, as being under his favour or under
his displeasure. The cunditions and
treatment of uncleanness, while setting
forth most vividly the loathsomeness and
defilement of sin, exhibited as clearly the
effects of God’s anger against it, which
was shown to extend to all the sinner’s


experience, removing him beyond the
reach of covenant mercies and blessings.
While the Divine displeasure was mani-
fested towards an individual or a nation
no amount of outward religious observ-
ances could appease it, just as no fre-
quency of contact with legally consecrated
offerings could impart sacredness to any
other object [Lange].

Vers. 15—19. From this day. Live
much in a short time. “Redeem the
time,” and repair thy omissions in some
manner, by redoubling thy diligence.
Let the book of thy life, the book that
must be opened at the last day, be full
of sense and worthy matter: let there be
no void spaces and empty gaps (idle
words and idle hours are such) in it ; let
every page of it, every day, be filled
with what is significant, intelligible,
rational, and worthy to be transcribed
and copied out by others [Dr Worth-
ington |.

Consider. Things are not to be done
by the effort of the moment, but by the
preparation of past moments [Cecil].

Vers. 17—19. Mildew. Thorns and
thistles were brought forth from the
earth as a judgment for disobedience ;
serpents and savage beasts became evil
to man or to each other for the same
cause. Every hour reminds us of our
fallen condition; but God has so tem-
pered mercy with judgment, that even
the natural world calls the sinner to
repentance, but not to despair [Brewer],
‘‘These worlds had never been, hadst thou in

strength

Been less, or less benevolent than strong.

They are thy witnesses, who speak thy power

And goodness infinite” [Cotoper].

Vers. 21—23. Overthrow. In spite of
man’s short-sighted endeavours to dispose
of events according to his own wishes
and his own purposes, there is an Intelli-
gence beyond his reason, which holds
the scales of justice, and promotes his
well-being in spite of his puny efforte
[Morter]. Take thee. The weakest
believer is safe, because, by believing, he
is within the strongest of all defenves.
None can pluck him out of the hands of
Christ (Prov. xiv. 26). “Let God be
thy love and thy fear, and he will be alae
thy refuge” [Nicholls],


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ZECHARIAH.


INTRODUCTION.


Tas Writer. Our prophet, like Jeremiah and Ezekiel, was of priestly descent, —
a son of Berechiah, and grandson of Iddo (ch. i. 1—7), the chief of one of the
priestly families that returned from exile along with Zerubbabel and Jeshua (Neh.
xii. 4). He followed his grandfather in that office under the high priest Joiakim
(Neh. xii. 16), from which it has been justly concluded that he returned from
Babylon while still a youth, and that his father died young. This also probably
serves to explain the fact that Zechariah is called the son (grandson) of Iddo, in
Ezra v. 1, and vi. 14, and that his father is passed over [ Keil].

Tae Timz. We learn from ch. ii. 4, that the prophet was quite a young man
when he commenced his labours. In the second year of Darius Hystaspes (B. 0.
520), together with Haggai, he sought to stimulate the Jews in rebuilding the
temple, which had been suspended from the first year of Cyrus (B. . 536).
Haggai is thought to have commenced two or three months before Zechariah, but
Zechariah prophesied for a longer period than that of Haggai. His predictions are
a sequel to those of his contemporary, aud stretch out in a series of visions from his
own days to the first and even the second advent of Christ.

Tue Boox opens with a very simple, touching call to those returned from the
captivity, linking himself on to the former prophets, but contrasting the transitori-
ness of all human things, those who prophesied and those to whom they prophesied»
with the abidingness of the word of Gid [Pusey].

1. Irs Contents. There are four parts, differing in outward character, yet with a
remarkable unity of purpose. All begin with a foreground subsequent to the
captivity ; all reach on to a further end ; the two first to the coming of our Lord ;
the third, from the deliverance of the house then built, during the invasion of
Alexander, and from the victories of the Maccabees, to the rejection of the true
shepherd and the curse upon the false, The last, which is connected with the third
by its title, reaches from a future repentance for the death of Christ to the final
conversion of the Jews and Gentiles [Pusey]. Besides the introduction (ch. i.
1—6), we have four longer prophetic announcements: vis. (1) A series of seven


684 INTRODUCTION.





SS


visions which Zechariah saw during the night on the twenty-fourth day of the
eleventh month in the second year of Darius (ch. i 7; vi. 8), together with e
symbolic transaction, which brought the visions to a close (vi. 9—15); (2) the
communication to the people of the answer of the Lord to a question addressed to
the priests and prophets by certain Judzans as to their continuing any longer to
keep the day appointed for commemorating the burning of the temple and Jerusalem
by the Chaldeans as a fast-day, which took place in the fourth year of Darius (ch.
vii. and viii.) ; (3) a burden, «. ¢., a prophecy of threatening import, concerning the
land of Hadrach, the seat of the ungodly world-power (ch. ix.—xi.) ; and (4) a bur-
den concerning Israel (ch. xii.—xiv.) [Ked/]. The Messianic predictions abound.
It has been remarked that Zechariah is distinguished for his insight into the moral
and spiritual meaning of the Mosaic economy, and his illustration of the Apostle’s
statement that the law is a schoolmaster unto Christ, (cf. iii. 8 with vi 12,13; xii
10; xiii. 7.

2. Its Stytz. In point of style, our prophet varies according to the nature of
his subjects and the manner in which they were presented to his mind. He now
expresses himself in simple conversational prose, now in poetry. At one time he
abounds in the language of symbols; at another, in that of direct prophetical
announcement. His symbols are, for the most part, enigmatical, and require the
explanations which accompany them, His prose resembles most that of Ezekiel ; it is
diffuse, uniform, and repetitious, His prophetic poetry possesses much of the eleva-
tion and dignity to be found in the earlier prophets, with whose writings he appears
to have been familiar; only his rhythm is sometimes harsh and unequal, while his
parallelisms are destitute of that symmetry and finish which form some of the
principal beauties of Hebrew poetry [Henderson].

The Hebrew is considered pure and free from Chaldzisms. - Some forms are
peculiar, but on the whole the language corresponds to the earlier forms, and exhibits
few traces of decay. “The prophet, who returned as a child to Judea, formed his
language upon that of the older prophets” [Pusey]. Hengstenberg suggests two
considerations which aid the interpreter. One, that Zechariah leans much upon his
predecessors prior to the Captivity ; hence much light is gained from parallel passages.
The other, that being a prophet of the Restoration, one element of uncertainty which
is found in the earlier prophets here ceases, ‘‘Tha beautiful harmonies of
Zechariah’s prophecies are awakened by the breath of the Holy Spirit in the Gospel,
as by a heavenly breeze stirring and attuning the golden strings of a Divine harp.
The one is adjusted to the other. The one proves the Divine origin of the other”
[ Wordeworth).


CHAP. I.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 585





CHAPTER L


Crrricat Norzs.] 2. Sore] Lit. displeased with displeasure, wrath not common, whose greatness
is given as a ground for their return. 3. Therefore] Lit. and thon sayest, or must say. Return]
(cf. Mal, ili. 7: Jas, iv. 8) Amendment of life and return to work not enough; conversion must be
thorough. The threefold ‘‘thus saith the Lord,’ shows the importance of the admonition, and
indicates the boundless power of God. 4. Fathers] Warning to shun the example of their predecessors,
who were disobedient. Former prophets] before captivity. 5. Fathers] have perished; their fate
should warn you, But you may object, the prophets also are dead, and apparently their words died
with them. 6.] No; the threatenings take hold ; overtake them as one flying from the foe, The words
and statutes (decrees) of God uttered by the prophets reached them like arrows shot forth, and
fulfilled threatened punishment (cf. Deut. xxviii. 145 —45). Thought] Decreed to do (Lam, ii. 17). 7.]
The general plan of the nine following visions (ch. i. 8 to end of ch, vi.) is first to present the symbol ;
then, on a question being put, to subjoin the interpretation. Though the visions are distinct, they
form one grand whole, presented in one night to the prophet’s mind, two or three months after the
prophet’s first commission { Fuusset]. 8—17.] Vision first. A man] 7. ¢. an angel in the shape of
a man (vers, 11, 12). Riding! Swift in execution and help ; leader of those who follow, and to whom
they report. Red] Colour of blood; vengeance to be inflicted upon the foes of Israel (cf. 2 Kings iii.
22: Isa. lxiii. 1,2: Rev. vi. 4). Myrtle trees] Symbol of Israel ; not a stately forest, but a low shrub,
fragrant in smell and beautiful in leaf. 8. Behind] horses. Red, speckled (bay), and white] the
symbol of victory. These are agencies employed by God, and the colour may indicate the nature of
their mission [cf. Lange]. 9. My lord] The one who answers the prophet, the angelus interpres,
whose sole function was to enlighten the prophet, and cause him to understand the vision. 10.] The
angel of Jehovah replies, and not the interpreting angel. 11.] The riders themselves then state the
result of their mission. Walked] with unceasing activity (cf. Job i. 7) in God’s errands. Still]
Hindrances to restoration removed, Persian wars had ceased, and at that time (ver. 1) universal
peacereigned over the earth ; tranquil (Jud. v. 26). This statement of peace contrasts with the prostrate
condition of Israel, and gives occasion for intercession. 12. How ?] Intercession. 70 years] does
not imply that the period predicted (Jer. xxv. 12) was just closing, for it had already expired in the
first year of Cyrus (Ezra i. 1). But the people were in a sad state; though restored, the capital in
ruins (Neh, i. 3) and the work hindered. 13.] Jehovah, the angel of ver. 12. Words] which promise
good, ¢.¢. salvation (cf. Josh. xxiii, 14: Jer, xxix. 10). “Invers. 14—17, the first two of which
assert Jehovah’s active affection for his people, and the latter two his purpose to manifest that love
in the restoration and enlargement of Jerusalem” [Lange]. Jealous] for Jerusalem, which is wantonly
injured, Displeased] with nations careless and secure, confident in their own strength and prosperity,
To Israel anger was only a tittle ; to the heathen it was fatal. 16, Returned] to Jerusalem, from whom
God had withdrawn. Line] All obstacles removed, the temple completed, and the whole city shall be
regular in shape, and exact in its survey. 17. Cities] Other cities of Judah belong to God, will
prosper and spread] Lit. scattered not by an invading foe, but by growth and abundance (ef. ii. 4;
viii, 4). 18—21.] Four horns] The second vision. The foes of the Jews will be destroyed. Scattered]
The people of God surrounded by enemies on all sides. The number four referred to the four
quarters of the earth in relation to Palestine (cf. Hend]; by others, to four chief nations, 20.
Carpenters] Artificers for each horn, indicating the agencies God employs for the destruction of those
hostile to his people; “ skilful to destroy” (Ezek. xxi. 36). Lifted up] Depressed with suffering and
fear (Jobx. 15), Fray] Terrify and scatter them in their pride and tyranny (Ezek. xxx. 9; Pa. xxv,
4, 6.


HOMILETICS.
Tan Propuet’s Commission.— Verses 1—3.


Zechariah was sent to console and encourage God’s people in distress, But tae
ground must be prepared Law before gospel, repentance before blessing. Hence
in the first words we have the key-note to his message, and the introduction to his
labours. In the prophet’s commission we have—

I. [ts Divine origin. “The word of the Lord came to him ”—his call was Divine
not human, real not fanciful; a token of God’s great work among his people, and
a guarantee that it would be successfully carried on. IL 1t3 sol2mn nature,


686 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. L,





“ Therefore, say unto them,” that God was angry with their fathers, and will be with
them if they repent not. The first message is one of warning and judgment. He
has to set forth the justice and assert the prerogative of God in the government of
the world. Men consider Divine displeasure to be an unreasonable disturbance of
their ease, and an impeachment upon the Divine character. But God’s anger is
real and terrible. It is visible in providence and in nature. “‘ Wrath and threatening
are invariably mingled with love; and in the utmost solitudes of nature, the exist-
ence of hell seems to me as legibly declared by a thousand spiritual utterances as of
heaven” [Ruskin]. Persistent attempts are made to deny and evade this fact. Sin
blinds men, and makes them transfer their own views to God. ‘ Thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such an one as thyself: but I will reprove thee” (Ps. L 21).
III. Its inward pressure. The words in ver. 2 were delivered to the prophet, and
contain the reason for the summons to the people in ver. 3. ‘‘ They disclose to us
the internal pressure under which he entered upon his office. A due sense of the
power of God’s wrath lies at the basis of all true earnestness on the part of his:
prophets. It is the ‘ burning fire shut up in the bones’ (Jer. xx. 9), which imparts
its owa vehemence to the message, and produces corresponding conviction in them
that hear. We observe it in the Prophet of all prophets, the Saviour himself. His
groaning in spirit at the grave of Lazarus, his tears over Jerusalem, show how deeply
he felt the terribleness of God’s anger” [Lange]. There is a great demand now
for honest, enlightened, and seasonabls speech in the Christian ministry. ‘‘ We
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard” (Acta iv. 20: Job
xxxii, 1[8—20; Acts xviii. 5).


THe Caui to Repsntanoe.— Verses 3, 4.


Like John the Baptist, Zechariah begins his preaching with a call to repentance,
and warns the people, by the history of their fathers, that no epiritual privileges
will profit them without holiness, but rather will aggravate their guilt and increase
their condemnation if they disobey God. He declares to them that no outward
profession of religion will avail; that all notions of self-righteousness are offensive
to God ; and that what he looks for is personal holiness, and a practical discharge
of the duties of piety and mercy [ Wordsworth].

I. They had need to repent. ‘Therefore, say unto them, Turn ye.” 1. Their
return was defective. God had delivered them from captivity, and stirred them to
work ; but zeal without real conversion will soon die out. We must give our whole
heart to God, leave self-interest behind, and seek nearer access. “ Draw nigh to God,
and he will draw nigh to you.” 2. Their delay would be dangerous. (1) Dis-
obedience would be imitation of their fathers. “Be ye not as your fathers.”
Precedents have great influence. Men decry good, but follow evil customs. The
sin of Jeroboam was held sacred by his successors. But we should be warned by
the sins, and deterred by the punishment, of our fathers. ‘‘ They did not hear nor
hearken unto me.” (2) Disobedience would bring Gods displeasure upon them.
God was sore displeased with their fathers, and would be with them if they refused
to turn. Heavier scourges were ready, and symptoms of displeasure already appeared
in “ sowing m:ch” to “ bring in little” (Hag. 1 6). God’s dealings with the past
are designed to instruct the present generation. ‘‘ Now all these things happened
unto them for énsamples (types): and they are written for our admonition (instruc-
tion)” (1 Cor. x. 11). II. They had encouragement to repent. ‘“ And I will turn
unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts.” This promise was a motive and a help to them.
The duty would be difficult, if not impossible, but for this encouragement. God is
always found of those who seek him. If we desire God to turn to us, we must
return to him. The flower turned from the sun can never catch its genial rays.
1. The promise is necessary. We require something positive. ‘We are saved by
hope.” The beginning of religious life and duty is often a kind of venture. Hence


CHAP. 1.1] HOMILETIC COMMENTAR? : ZECHARIAH. 687





failure and turning back. 2. The promise is certain. We have not mere possibility
or probability, but certainty ; assurance which cannot deceive. “I will.” 3. The
promise is confirmed. Israel returned to God, and he returned to them. Manasseh
sought the Lord and found him. The prodigal went home and was received
“ Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord; and I will not cause mine anger
to fall upon you; for I am merciful, saith the Lord” (Jer. iti. 12: Mal. iii. 7:
Ezek. xviii. 30).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 4. 1. The advantages of ther
fathers. ‘‘The former prophets” en-


day of grace is short, and even the mes-
sengers of grace are passing away. 2. If


forced the law, and proclaimed the word
of God ; exhorted to repentance; and pre-
dicted Divine judgments. 2. The guilt
of their fathers. “ But they did not hear,
nor hearken unto me, saith the Lord.”
Their guilt aggravated by their privileges.
“Unto me.” God was in the voice of
prophets, but was despised. “ He that
receiveth you, receiveth me.” “We
learn here that the examples set up as a
a shield for wrong-doing are so far from
becoming of any weight before God that
they enhance our guilt. Yet this folly
infatuates many, for the Papists claim
their religion to be holy and irreprehen-
sible because it has been handed down
by their fathers” [Calvin]. Ancient
example and long usage will not justify
disobedience (2 Chr. xxvi. 15, 16)
{ Fausset}.

No mercy without return, and no re-
turn without mercy. Haste that you may


once you are overtaken, your eyes will
open too late, and only with trembling
lips can you give honour to the Lord
[Lange]. Evil ways. The ways and
works of the earlier generations are called
evil; in the first instance, because they
were morally corrupt, and also because
they were followed by sore consequences
[ Lange].

Vers. 3, 4. 1. Stn creates distance
from God. The siuner is alienated in
heart, and turned back from God in his
works and pursuits. 2. Repentance is a
full return to God. Not partial amend-
ment, but entire renunciation of sin, and
coming close up to God in reconciliation
and fellowship. 3. God calls men to
this repentance. “Say unto them.”
His voice is heard in the ministry.
His judgments rightly studied declare
his will, and are often suspended till we
return. But some return, and others do


not be overtaken. 1. Haste, for your not.


HOMILETICS.
Lessons FroM THE LivEs oF THE FatuerRs.— Verses 5, 6.


The two questions in ver. 5 are meant as denials, and are intended to anticipate
the objection which the people might have raised to the admonitions in ver. 4, to
the effect, that not only the fathers, but also the earlier prophets, had died long
ago; and therefore ap allusion to things that had long since passed by could have
no force at all for the present generation. Zechariah neutralizes this objection by
saying: Your fathers have indeed been long dead, and even the prophets do not,
or cannot, live for ever ; but notwithstanding this, the words of the earlier prophets
were fulfilled in the case of the fathers. The words and decrees of God uttered by
the prophets reached them, and they were obliged to confess that God had really
done to them what he threatened [Keil]. We have—

I. A motive to activity. Your fathers and the prophets who taught thom are
dead. No man lives for ever. Others have worked and lived where we dwell ; but
ministers, teachers, and parents are gone, and their hearers after them. Our course
will be finished soon. Hence this is our day of service. It becomes us to redeem
the time, to be active and diligent in serving God ourselves, and urging others to


588 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. [eHaP. f


a RR Se ee]


serve him. II. A testimony to the truth of God’s word. Your fathers are not
here, but we have their testimony. My words took hold upon them, and they con-
fessed their power in twofold experience. “ According to our ways and according to
our doings.” If they rebelled they felt the threatening, and if they returned the
promise was fulfilled. God’s providence ensures the accomplishment of his word, and
compels the acknowledgment of that accomplishment from those who feel it. God
is faithful and unchangeable in his purpose. “The word of the Lord endureth for
ever.” III. A warning against apostasy. The fate which overtook the fathers is
pointed out as a warning to them.” “Where are they?” They are dead ; but did
they escape the punishment due to their sins? No; in mournful confessions we have
acknowledgments of the fact. There may be delay, and the sinner may think that
he will escape ; but sooner or later the word will catch him, stick in his heart like
an arrow from the Almighty. The transgressor will be made to confess, “ Mine
iniquities have overtaken me.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 6. I. The message of God pro-
claimed by his servants. Unchangeable
inits nature. ‘‘ My words and statutes,”
i, e. decrees, given with Divine authority ;
“ which I commanded.” II. Men trying
to escape from this message. The words
took hold, ¢. e. overtook them, when flee-
ing from them in hatred and rebellion.
Ill. The humble confession of men when
caught by the word. “ Like as the Lord of
hosts thought to do unto us,” &c, They
have to confess the truth of God, and
expose their folly when it is too late. Men
should be wise in time. “The Lord is
righteous, for we have rebelled against
his commandments.”

According to our ways. An acknow-
ledgment—1. Of the truth of God. 2.


The desert of sin; and 3. The certainty
of retribution. Sin sweet in taste, but
bitter in fruits. Lessons:—1. Consider
the warnings of God. 2. Recognize the
hand of God in the punishment of men.
“¢ Tikeas the Lord of hosts,’ whose power
is irresistible, ‘thought’ (devised, deter-
mined with himself, and accordingly de-
nonuced by the prophets) ‘to do unto
us,’ who did not the words which he
commanded us (Jer. xi. 8), ‘according to
our ways, which were always grievous
(Ps. x. 5), ‘and according to our doings,’
that were not good (Ezek. xxxvi. 31),
‘so hath he dealt with us ;’ for he loves
to retaliate, and to render to every trans-
gression and disobedience a just recom-
pence of reward (Heb. ii. 2).” [Trapp].


HOMILETICS.


Tue Man amona Tes Myrtuss, on THE Diving Prorgcrion oF THE CHURCH.
Verses 8—13.


The prophet received his visions not in a aream, but when spiritually conscious ;
at night, when most still and free from worldly cares, and most susceptible for


Divine communications.


In this first vision we have the protection of the


Church of God in its weak and dangerous condition.


I, Jesus Christ is in her midst.


“ Behold, a man riding upon a red horse, and


he stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom.” The presence of a great
personage should give confidence. ‘‘ Fear not, thou carriest Cesar.” But “God isin
the midst of” the Church ; ‘‘she shall not be moved : God shall help her, and that
right early.” 1. Standing to defend her. “ He stood” as in his own residence
(Ps. exxxii. 14). 2. Riding to help her. Riding in speed, upon a red horse, to
inflict vengeance upon her foes (cf. 2 Kings iii. 22; Isa. lxiii. 1, 2: Rev. vi. 4).
3. Interceding on her behalf. “O Lord of hosts,” &c. (ver. 12). He was deeply
touched with the report given, and with the contrast between the condition. of the
heathen at ease and that of the Church in desolation, Hence he prays (a.) for


CHAP. L) HOMILETIC COUMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. 589





mercy. “ Wilt thou not have mercy upon Jerusalem?” (b.) For a full display of
mercy. The work, long delayed, had only just begun. Much more remained to be
done for the city, the country, and the people. As God had executed the threaten.
ing, so a fulfilment of the promise is desired, II. Angels are employed on hex
behalf. ‘ What are these? . . . These are they whom the Lord hath sent to and
fro through the earth. We have a craving for the knowledge of creatures above
ourselves, No system of religion separates the seen from the unseen world. Hence
all the various doctrines and theories of angels. In Scripture alone is our natural
longing satisfied. We learn that God is pleased to use the agency of supernatural
beings ; that these heavenly watchmen continually walk about Zion, or visit distant
parts of the universe, to counteract the work of Satan (ef. ii. 11: Job i. 7), to guard
his people, and minister to the heirs of salvation (Heb. i. 14). Consider—l. Their
number ; 2. Their work ; and 3. Their obedience. Why despair, like the servant of
Elisha? Angels are sent to help when God is pleased with us. “ Behold, the
mountain was full of horses, and chariots of fire round about.”
“ They fight for us, they watch and duly ward,
And their bright squadrons round about us plant ;


And all for love, and nothing for reward,
Oh! why should heavenly God to man have such regard ” [ Spenser].


III. God’s providence defends her. Most commentators take the troop and
the colour of these horses as symbolic of the dispensations of Divine providence.
Observe—l. The nature of Providence. “ The peculiar nature of the dispensations
is indicated by the colour of the horses, and the armour and appearance of the riders ”
[Hend.]. The red horse to-day in conflict and suffering; soon will the Divine
Leader ride in triumph on the white horse. 2. The order of Providence. Red
horses “ first,” speckled and white follow. Without pressing the point too far,
we see wars, famines, and pestilence end in victory. Most wonderfully did God
prepare political events, in the restoration from Babylon and in the coming of Christ,
for the special condition of his Church. Quietness may reign in all quarters except
in the Church. Divine justice may seem to sleep ; but it is only the calm before
the storm. Amid sufferings and perplexing providences, believers may cry, “ How
long?” But the uncreated angel intercedes ; ‘comfortable words” shall be heard,
and the darkness of the night shall be forgotten in the glory of the day. ‘Speak
ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished,
that her iniquity is pardoned ; for she hath received of the Lord’s hand double
for all her sins.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.
Ver. 8 The myrtie trees in the


bottom, from their fragrance and low-
ness, probably symbolize the Church, as


still, while the storm sweeps over the
mountain summits, In the metaphor
we have perpetual growth. The myrtle


at once yielding a sweet odour, and in a
low estate or lowly. The natural habits
uf the myrtle make it the fitter emblem
[Pusey]. The Church of God is hidden,
secreted as unobserved in a valley. There
is the idea of tranquil security; the
myrtle grove in the valley is calm and


is always green, sheds not her leaves.
The Church has ever a verdure of grace,
sometimes most verdure when winter iz
sharpest. Here we have the emblem of
peace, and a significant token of victory


(Spurgeon).


HOMILETICS.
ComrortTaBLE Worps.— Verses 13—17.


Jehovah replied to the intercession of the angel that he loved Jerusalem, and that
this love would be displayed in securing its good. If we wait patiently, and commit


690 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. L





our trouble to our Intercessor, we shall have “good words” for ourselves, and
“ comfortable” words for others.

I. God’s love in its objects. He was jealous for his people, and angry with
their enemies. 1. He loved Jerusalem. The sity had been wronged by others.
His honour was involved in its insults. He was zealous for her interests, zealous,
“with a great jealousy,” for her good. He had been ill-requited for kindness—
had chastised them for deserts—but his love changed not. In the past and in
the present he was “a jealous God” (Ex. xxxiv. 14). 2. He was displeased
with their enemies. “I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at
ease.” He was “but a little displeased,” when he gave them permission to chastise
his people. But they afflicted them more than he desired, and sought their extinc-
tion to gratify lust and revenge. ‘They helped forward the affliction.” God’s
displeasure is temporary and for good; men’s displeasure is lasting and cruel.
II. God’s love in its consequences, ‘“ Therefore, thus saith the Lord,” &. (ver. 16).
Judgments were designed to restore them to God—that he might return in mercy
to them. God hides his face and we are troubled (Ps. xxx. 7); he returns and
we rejoice. We have mercy instead of wrath—mercies repeated and manifold.
“T am returned to Jerusalem with mercies.” 1. The capital shall be built. All
hindrances shall be removed, and instead of scattered houses, the whole city shall
be measured in order and regularity. ‘A line shall be stretched forth over
Jerusalem.” 2. The temple shall be restored. ‘My house shall be built in it.”
The worship of God should be the concern of men. Cities without churches are
cities without ornaments. The palace of the prince must never take the place of
the temple of God. 3. The country shall flourish. “Cry yet,” in addition to
foregoing promises, “ my cities shall overflow with prosperity.” Not only Jerusalem,
but subordinate cities of Judah, shall have abundance of outward and spiritual
increase. The produce of the vintage and the fruits of the earth; an extension
of trade and an increase of population, shall be given. Whatever be the immediate
prospects of the Church, God has great consolation for her. He will yet prosper
and comfort Zion. The completion of the temple, the restoration of the city, and
the increase of the people, are a declaration of his love, a manifestation of his
purpose, and a pledge of his fidelity. ‘‘The Lord shall comfort Zion; he will
comfort all her waste places ; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her
desert like the garden of the Lord.”


Tus Four Horns anp THE Four Situs, on THE DaNGER AND THE DEFENCE
or THE CHUROH.— Verses 18—21.


This second vision is a fultilment of the foregoing promise. The horn is an
emblem of power. The four mentioned indicate hostile powers on every side, which
seek to oppress and crush the people of God. The four smiths signify antagonistic
forces which God has raised up and commisioned to destroy. Learn—

I. The Church of Christ exists in the midst of conflict. “These are the horns
which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.” The Jews, in every age, were
opposed by enemies. In Apostolic and succeeding times, the Christian Church had
to contend with powers and principalities—persecutions strong and violent. In
every quarter of the earth the people of God have been in danger, have had to endure
wrath, conflict, and death. Fiery trials await them everywhere. They are left to
be tossed by the horns of the enemies, apparently defenceless, though loyal subjects
of him who has all power in heaven and earth. It is God’s will that they should
struggle and conquer in conflict with evil II. In this conflict God raises up
men. Enemies and difficulties may surround the Church, but God provides help,
and opens our eyes to discern it. ‘The Lord showed me four (carpenters) smiths.”
1. Men qualijied in strength. Workmen are needed. Men of iron hand and
~eeolute will, Smiths who can wield the hammer and smash the horns in pieces.


OHAP. I., AUMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 59)





Right kind of men are often wanting. Jeremiah searched in vain (ch. iv. 22—25 ;
v. 1), and another cries with a similar result: “I sought for a man among them,
that should make up the hedge and stand in the gap before me, for the land, that
I should not destroy it; but I found none” (Ezek. xxii. 30). 2. Men sufficient in
number. For every horn there was a smith to fray or destroy it. Strange that a
kind of equilibrium between assault and defence should be maintained. But this is
no ground for despair. The agencies to foil are as numerous as the enemies tl.em-
selves. For every evil there is a remedy, and for every danger a deliverer. The
horn may do its work, but the smith will follow to take vengeance. III. Men of
the right kind are raised up at the right time. The prophet saw the horns first,
but had not long to wait for the carpenters. Just when they were required they
‘came ready for work. Men will be called and qualified when God has a work for
them to do. They may be in the hut of the peasant or in the school of the pro-
phet, preparing for the contest. Moses and Joshua, Paul and Luther, Knox and
Whitfield, were raised up at the right time. Have confidence then. A providence
silent and unseen works on and prepares the way. Where God has a people, there
he is to defend and prosper them. Rutherford wrote to a little church in Scotland,
harassed and ready to despair on account of persecution: **So long as there is any
of the Lord’s lost money in your town, he won’t put out the candle.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. God’s displeasure. 1. To- tiful increase of men, cattle, and all


wards his people only short. “A little
displeased.” <‘ Little,” says Pusey, “in
comparison with our deserts; little, in
comparison with the anger of the human
instruments of his displeasure ; little,
in comparison with their’s who, in their
anger, sought their own ends.” 2. To-
wards his enemies very great. “I am
very sore displeased with the heathen.”
At ease themselves they persecute others.
Though permitted tocorrect God’s people,
they often with revengeful malice exceed
their commission, and thus bring mischief
upon themselves (Prov. xxiv. 17, 18).
The chastisement of believers is tempo-
rary, and in love; the punishment of the
wicked will be in anger, and for ever.
“ God uses not the rod where he means
to use the sword,” says Bishop Hall.
Vers. 16,17. 1. The nature of the
mercies. The rebuilding of the temple
—restoration of public worship—rebuild-
ing of the metropolis, and increase of
the cities. 2. The source of the mercies.
“ Thus saith the Lord, J am returned.”
“Thou hast punished us less than our
iniquities deserve” (Ezra ix. 13: Lam.
iti. 22). 3. The measure of the mercies.
In ver. 17 there are four yets, and all
very gracious ones; to break their hard
hearts and to raise their faith on his
promised mercies. You shall have plen-


manner of fruits of the earth, so that it
shall no more be said, This is Zion whom
no man careth for (Jer, xxx. 17); yea,
you shall have a fulness of all things,
not only repletive, but diffusive, not only
of abundance but of redundance too ;
your cup shall overflow into the lesser
vessels of others [cf. Trapp].
“ Surer to prosper than prosperity
Could have assured us” [Milton],

Vers. 18—21. We learn from these
verses that the friends of Zion are nu-
merous as her foes; that her defence is
equal to her danger ; that as the state of
his people requires it, the Lord will
seasonably raise up means and instru-
ments for their succour and deliverance.
The assurance may be derived from four
principles: the love of God—the power
of God—the faithfulness of God—the
conduct of God. In the first, we see that
he may be inclined to appear for them,
as they are infinitely dear to him. In
the second, we see that he is able to save
them. In the third, that he is engaged
to do it. In the fourth, that he always
has done it. Scripture, history, and
experience, being witness—-

‘* Then let the world forbear their rage,
The Church renounce her fear ;


Israel must live through every age,
And be the Almighty’s cara” [Jay].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


(OHAP. 1


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER I.


Vers. 2, 3. Turn. Let every man
that would avoid a return to his former
iniquity, be infinitely careful to avoid
every new sin, for it is like a blow toa
broken leg, or a burden to a crushed
arm. Every little thing disorders the
new health and unfinished recovery.
[J. Taylor. ]

Ver. 5. Your fathers. While we
shrink with self-diffident dread from the
thought of apostasy from Christ and
from God, let us see to it that in our
different conditions and relations in life
—in the family, in the church, in general
society —-we be found filling up our
fleeting day of life with increasingly
active devotedness, ‘*‘ not slothful in busi-
ness, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord,”
that so, when it shall, in our turn, come
to be said of us, “ Where are they?”
the recollection of our lives by those who
survive us may not be an entire blank
[ Wardlaw].

Ver. 6. Overtake. Heathen reminis-
cence of God’s justice acknowledged.
“Rarely hath punishment with limping
tread part with the forerunning mis-
ereant” (cf. Hor. Od. iii. 9) [Pusey].

Vers. 8—1l1. Angels. Angels are
men of a superior kind [Young]. They
bear his will about to every part of the
universe. This is their delight. They
bless God, who vouchsafes thus to em
ploy them. But when they have fulfilled
God’s message, then they return back to
him by whom they were sent forth, and
stand before him, drinking in fresh
streams of life and strength and purity
and joy from his presence [ Hare].

Ver. 11. Their office was not a specific
or passing duty, as when God sent his
angels with some special commission,


such as those recorded in Holy Scripture.
It was a continuous conversation with
the affairs of men, a minute course of
visiting, inspecting our human deeds and
ways, and a part of the “wonderful order ”
in which God has “ ordained and consti-
tuted the service of angels and men”
[ Pusey].

Vers. 12,13. That same Christ, who
is on earth in spirit on the red horse, is
in heaven in person, pleading before the
throne. He pleads—he pleads for mercy.
Mercy that sent him to earth; mercy is
his petition now. He pleads for present
mercy. His cry is, “ How long?”
Eighteen hundred years is it since my
blood was offered, and yet my kingdom
has not come. Observe the objects of
his intercession ; he pleads for Jerusalem
and Judah. “I pray for them; I pray
not for the world, but for them which
thou hast given me.” And must he not
prevail? Church of God, if thou canst
be rejected, yet he cannot be. No! in
the name of him who loves, and lives,
and pleads before the eternal throne, let
us set up our banner ; for God has given
the victory into our hands in answer t
the pleadings of his Son [Spurgeon].

Vers. 18—20. Fray. The Church
may rest calmly in the assurance that
every hostile power shall be judged and
destroyed. The primary reference was
to the Jews in restoring the city and
completing the temple. But it has a
wider significance. In the long history
of the Church, it is proved that “no
weapon formed against her shall prosper ”
[cf. Lange]. God directs and overrules
all counsels and events for the progress
and ultimate triumph of his kingd:m.


CHAP, IT. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH,





es


CHAPTER TL


Cairican Norgs.}] The third vision. Man] Messiah, who measures and will reetore the city.
2. Measure] To sketch a plan for its arrangement and rebuilding, denoting exactness of proportions
and completeness of number {Rev. ii. 1; xxi. 15, 16). 4. Run] Necessity of desyaxzh. Young
man]| Zechariah young in service ur in age, probably between 20 and 30 years old Jerusalem]
to have vast influx of men and cattle, no longer to be confined in narrow walls and fixed limits, but
spread out like the open coutry (Isa. xlix. 19, 20: Ezek. xxxviii. 11). 5. Wall] Protection, in
allusion to nightly encampmenis, when fires were kindled to keep off wild beasts. Glory] Illustrious
displays of God’s presence; an allusion to the Divine presence in the Holiest (Rom. ix. 4).
6. North] Babylon, north of Jerusalem; an address to such Jews as still remained there, through
infirmity, ties of property, &. The urgency of the call denoted by repetition, Ho, ho! Spread]
Scattered in violence. 1, Zion] 7. e. inhabitants of Zion ; God’s people dwelling with the daughter,
t. e. the people, of elie personified as a woman (Ps. ix. 14; cxxxviii). 8, 9, After] obtaining
glory (ver. 5), the speaker is sent to inflict vengeance upon the enemies. ‘To get glory upon the
heathen, 7. e. to display the glory of God upon the heathen through the judgment by which their
power is broken, and the heathen world is made to serve the people of God” [Hezl]. 9. For] An
additional explanation. Tha angel of the Lord would swing (shake) his hand, as a gesture of menace
or symbol of miraculous power (cf. Isa, xi, 15; xix. 16) over the nations, As @ consequence they
would be a spoil to the Jews who had been obliged to serve them. Know] here, and in ver. 11,
signifies as frequently, to know by experience [Henderson]. 10,] Summons to rejoice over God’s
indwelling, and its happy results, Come] at Messiah’s first advent, and more especially in his return
in glory (Jer. i, 14, and Rev. xxi. 3). 11.] Then many nations will be joined ; attach themselves to
Jehovah, and become his people (cf. chap. vill. 20, 21: Isa. xiv. 1), The restricted kingdom of
Israel will be enlarged and glorified. 10, 11.] (Heb. xiv. 15). The Divine residence here predicted
must be interpreted of that which took place during the sojourn of the Son of God in the land of
Judea. The almost entire identity of the language here employed with that used in chap, ix. 9,
where, in like manner, the daughter of Zion is called to hail the advent of her king, compels to this
conclusion (cf. Ps. xl. 7: Isa. xl. 9,10). With this appearance and residence of the Messiah are
connected, as their consequents, the extensive conversion of the heathen nations, and their being
constituted a people devoted to his service and glory. The repetition of the prediction relative to
nis residence in Zion is designed to express the certainty of the event [Henderson]. 12. Inherit]
Will take possession of Judah, according to Deut. xxxii. 9; they would become the objects of God’s
favour and delight. 18, Silent) All flesh summoned to wait in reverence and submission to Jehovah
coming towork. Already he has risen up] out of heaven his holy habitation (Deut. xxvi. 15:
2 Chron. xxx. 27), to avenge his people. ‘The Divine majesty has seemed to be asleep, but now
it is roused up; let men therefore beware ” [ Lange},


HOMILETICS.
THe Measourep Ciry.— Verses 1—5.


The third vision continues the subject of the second—the rebuilding of the city
and temple of Jerusalem. The one represents the destruction of Israel’s foes, the
other the increase and security of the covenant nation. The prophet sees a man
with a measuring-line advancing on the scene, and asks the meaning. The answer
is given, that Jerusalem is about to be measured, with a view to future glory and
extension.

I. The city accurately measured. ‘To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the
breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof.” When a house or city is built or
enlarged a survey is made. When Constantine resolved to erect a metropolis for his
mighty empire, he set out on foot, at the head of a procession, to trace its boundary.
His attendants expressed astonishment at the breadth of the circuit he was taking.
“T ghall still advance, till he, my Invisible Guide, thinks proper to stop,” was the
reply. He halted not till wide over seven hills the limits were fixed. Then
millions from all parts of his dominions set to work with wonderiw suecess. The


504 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. IL


Church has an architect,—“ whose builder and maker is God.” Before a stone was
laid, the dimensions were taken, and the plan formed. If men form plans before
they build, shall not God? In creation we have order and measurement, in pro-
vidence purpose and gradual fulfilment.. God knows the number and condition of
the Christian Church—the true and the false professors, On earth and in heaven
this city is defined in its proportions, and exact in its size (Rev. il. 1 ; xxi. 15, 16).
II. The city greatly enlarged. “Jerusalem was to be inhabited as towns
without walls.” The former limits of the city would be too narrow. The
inhabitants shall become so many that they shall spread out and dwell securely in
the open country. Earthly walls may defend, but they limit and straiten a city.
Barriers will be removed, and the boundaries of the Church shall extend far and
wide. Literally, this was verified. Josephus and others tell us that the citizens
“ gradually crept out beyond its walls,” and grew “to a number which the city in
its ancient dimensions could not supply with dwellings.” Spiritually, the Mosaic
walls were thrown down, and the limits of the Church extended to others far
beyond the Jewish nation. Now the “line” of the gospel “is gone out through
all the earth.” There is yet room for “every kindred and people and nation and
tongue.” Of the increase of this city there will be no end. Its inhabitants at
length will be “a multitude which no man can number.” III. The city Divinely
protected. ‘The Lord will be unto her a wall of fire round about,” &c No
danger will happen to the unwalled city. God would encamp round it, a wall of
fire, to consume every foe that invades it. Moats may be crossed, massive walls may
be assailed, and mighty ramparts be overturned; but a circle of flame is an impassable
barrier. The walls of Babylon were levelled to the ground, the hills round Jeru-
salem were scaled, and proud cities have been destroyed; but God is the defence
without and the glory within the Church. It is a strong city, and God has appointed
ealvation for walls and bulwarks (Isa. xxvi. 1). “As the mountains are round about
Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, from henceforth even for ever.”


In vers. 4 and 5, three things are promised respecting the literal Jerusalem.

I. Extension. Notice the correspondence between ver. 4 and the represent-
ation in the first vision (chap. i 16, 17). The expression, “ shall be inhabited
without walls” (or as a modern translator gives, “as unwalled villages”), has a
meaning sufficiently obvious ; viz. that the former limits of the city which “the
man with the measuring-line” was about to take, would be too straitened for the
number of its inhabitants ; so that they would spread themselves out into surround-
ing localities. This was literally fulfilled. For a time immediately after the return
from Babylon, under Nehemiah, the building and extension were rapid. ‘Lne pro-
gress suffered interruption —adverse and prosperous seasons,—opposition and
favour ; till, in the period of the heroic Maccabees, “ Jerusalem, blessed with free-
dom and prosperity, filled the extent of her walls with citizens, resumed her royal
insignia under native princes, overpassed her former boundaries,—and, as the head
of a populous and extensive territory, rose to a state of opulence, power, dignity, and
splendour which she had not known since the division of Israel and Judah”
[Stonard]. II. Security. ‘his is implied, to a certain extent, in the former
particular. The very idea of dwelling “without walls” implies confidence or felt
safety. But mark the striking promise (ver. 5). The figure is most vivid and
expressive. As a literal “wall of fire,” environing a city, would effectually prevent
intrusien by consuming all who should venture to attempt it; so would Jehovah's
avenging jealousy destroy every assailant of the holy city. He himself would be
its unseen but sure protection. Had the inhabitants—Israel and Judah generally—
in former days exercised faith in Goa, walked in his fear, maintained the purity
of his worship, and the practice of his laws, its walls had never been overthrown,
nor its temple demolished ; it would have been as safe without walls as with them ;
it would never have experienced its seventy years’ desolation, nor ita people the same


Omar. 11] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY . ZECHARIAH. 598





period of captivity and oppression. Now he had begun their promised restoration;
and engages to invest their city anew with his all-protectirg presence and power.
The figure resembles the vision in 2 Kings vi. 15—17. III. Glory. “The
glory in the midst of her.” Jehovah’s presence, “ dwelling between the cherubim,”
was from the beginning and all along the true glory of ancient Jerusalem. Its
Shekinah was glorious; but this was only the visible symbol of an infinitely more
glorious presence. The Jews counted the fire, and the temple, the ark, the altar,
and the pomp of ritual their glory. But these external glories did nothing for them.
When by their sins they drove Jehovah from them their true glory departed.
When he took up anew his abode with them—that would be their glory. He
would also be glorified in delivering them from thraldom, protecting them in
danger, receiving their homage, vindicating their rights, and avenging their wrongs
[Wardlaw condensed].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 1—5, I believe this passage refers
to a happyand gloriovs future, yet to come,
when the city of Jerusalem shall have no
walls, except the protection of the Lord,
but shall be extended far and wide. The
Jewish people and their royal city shall
remain the centre of the manifestations
of the Divine glory, just as the city of
London still remains the centre of the
metropolis ; but the nations of the earth
shall be joined unto the Lord; so that
while Jerusalem remains the city of the
Great King, the faithful among the people
of all nations shall be, as it were, a
suburban population to the chosen city,
and the kingdom of the Messiah shall
extend far and wide. The city will be
rebuilt in more than former splendour—
the Jews restored to their own land, and
Messiah reign as a prince of the house of
David. The text will bear an application
to the Church and congregation. 1. First,
let us see the man with the measuring-line
in his hand. It is possible that the man
in the text was nothing but a man. I
have intense reverence to the angel, but
entire dislike to the man, with the
measuring-line. Men err in measuring
the length and breadth of God’s true
Church. 2. Hear the prophecy of «a
great extension of the kingdom of Christ.
‘Look for it now. Learn that the supply
for all the number shall be as great as is
required. The cattle are the provisions
for the population. God will give what-
ever provision the Church wants. Divine
love shall be very sweetly enjoyed among
all the members. The joy of the Divine
presence will be common. 3, Observe


where this great increase is to come from.
From two sources, indicated in vers. 6
and 7. Muiltitudes are to come out of
the world. People of God are scattered
everywhere, but God knows them and
will bring them together. A large num-
ber do not believe in Christ, but dwell
with the daughter of Babylon. From
unconverted men and women we expect
the greatest increase through the Spirit’s
power. We are looking for it, and pray-
ing for it; may God grant it [Spurgeon].

Vers. 1—4. 1. Itis our duty to inquire
into God’s dealings with his Church, »
search out his mind, and read his word.
2. Such as would see the true condition
of the Church have need of elevated and
spiritual minds, enlightened by God. “I
lifted up mine eyes,” &c. [cf. Hutcheson].
3. Those who inquire in the right spirit
shall be lightened to discern the safety
and glory of the Church. (1) Enlightened
wonderfully. Angels and prophets were
commanded to teach. (2) Enlightened
earnestly. “Run, speak,” &c. ‘“ Not go,
but run; yea, fly swiftly, with weari-
ness of flight, as Dan. ix. 21. Christ
thinks it long ere his praying people hear
from him ” [ Trapp].

Ver. 4. Run, speak. A sermon to
young men. Speak to him of his mental,
moral, and spiritual interests, Speak in
earnestness, and without delay. ‘ Run.”
Remember the honour God has conferred
upon you in giving you the command to
speak. “The angel tells the prophet,
but the prophet must tell the people ;
Kod using not the ministry of angels,
but men, earthen vessels, to bear his name


596





to his people (Acts viii. 27; ix. 6; xvi.
9” [Trapp].

Ver. 5. God the beauty and the bul-
wark of the Church. His presence a
pledge of his protection, a provision for
outward and inward wants. Zion’s true


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.


[CuAP. 11.





glory is not in architecture and ritual, in
eloquence and music, but in the presence
of God’s Spirit, converting the sinner and
quickening the saint. ‘‘ When the Lord
shall build up Zion, he will appear in
glory.”


HOMILETICS.
THE Cau To Quit THE Woriv.— Verses 6—9.


When God had promised to rebuild and enlarge Jerusalem, dwell in it and glorify
it, his people should have been glad to return to it. But all did not obey the
proclamation of Cyrus and come back to their own land. Many Jews still remained in
Babylon. They are urgently called to leave the devoted city, and avail themselves
without delay to return to their own country. Apply this generally, and learn—

I. That God calls men out of the world. ‘Come forth.” Careless and
indifferent to their origin and their destiny, they live in ease and forgetfulness of
God. Hardened by sin and overcome by the world, they are deaf to entreaty and
disobedient to warning. But at length God rouses and restores them to himself.
This call to men is—1l. Larnest. 2. Repeated. 3. Effectual. IY. That men are
reluctant to obey the call. Through love of the world they are prejudiced against
the work and the ways of God. Unwilling to embark in difficulty, they linger in
danger. This reluctance springs from many causes. 1. Continuance in sin
obliterates remembrance of spiritual good. The Jews forgot their own land, and
preferred the wealth of Babylon to Jerusalem their chief joy. Worldly men are
concerned for nothing beyond present enjoyments. 2. Present possessions are
thought more certain than future good. The present world to them isreal. Power,
position, and riches are seen and felt. But they disbelieve in future blessings.
“‘Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world.” 3. Unbelief leads
men to disregard all calls to God. 'The Jews might doubt the power of God, the
sincerity of the proclamation, and the benefits of returning to Jerusalem. The
commands of God seem unreasonable, the calls to duty prejudicial to selfish
interests, to indolent and wicked men. Others may go to the celestial city, but
they remain in the city of destruction. III. That sufficient motives to comply
with the call are presented to men. God deals with them as reasonable and
intelligent creatures. He does not constrain or force men out of the world. Many
reasons are given in the text. 1. Though God has punished yet he lovee men.
“For I have spread you abroad as the four winds of heaven.” Far and wide had
they been dispersed ; with violence had they been punished ; yet God recalled them,
and would have mercy upon them. 2. Though men have disobeyed the call yet
they are not forsaken. Call after call is given to the Jews. They had been
ungrateful and disobedient, but God invites them again with love and urgency.
3. Though invitations are given to man yet disobedience will endanger their souls.
God was about to destroy Babylon and punish the oppressors, to spoii the nations
who had persecuted his people. The alarm is given. ‘‘ Ho, ho, come forth.” 1. In
the world is danger. “Flee” like Lot from Sodom, Speed your way and lose
no time. ‘ Escape for thy life ; look not behind thee.” 2. In the world is captivity.
‘Deliver thyself.” From sin and sloth, from danger and eternal death. ‘‘ My
people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the
fierce angar of the Lord” (Jer. li. 45 ; 1 8 ; li. 6).


Tus BLEssEDNESS OF ISRAEL, AND THE PERILS OF HER PeERsEcUTORS.—- Verse 8.


That God will avenge his people is a doctrine of the New as of the Old
Testament (2 Thess. i. 6). For our comfort we shall describe those whom God


OHAP. IL. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 687





avenges ; in order to excite to adoration, show the intensity of Divine sympathy ;
for the purpose of warning, refer to the perils of persecutors ; and for the fortifying
of patience, point out the season of vengeance.

I. The subjects of the Lord’s concern, “He that toucheth you.” 1. A sinful
and perverse people. Not a nation of Enochs, Abrahams, nor Johns, but an erring,
provaking nation. 2. An afflicted and chastened people. Here is the secret of
concern. A father pities his petulant and wayward child if he be wounded and
troubled. 3. A chosen people. God could choose no other but a sinful pecple, for
the wholeearth was corrupt. He chose them, knowing their future sins—ordained
that from them should come the Saviour of the world. 4. A penitent people. God
comforts none of his servants until they mourn their sinfulness and perversity.
He always loves them, but the beam of his consolation cannot reach them when
they wilfully immure themselves in the strongholds of sin, II. The intensity of
Divine sympathy. “He that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye.” Tears
flow at once if the eye be touched. In this figure we see the truth illustrated—1.
That the sufferings of the saints personally affect the Lord. He is far more affected
by the malice of our enemies than we are. Our sufferings compared with his are
as the striking of the body to the wounding of the eye. When Jesus hung upon
the cross they touched the apple of his eye. 2. We learn also that the Lord feels
our woes instantly. The idea seems to be that the moment the saints are touched
the Lord is. However sudden the attack, he knows and feels, III. The peril of
persecutors. The pronoun Ais, is understood by some as referring to the subjects
of Divine vengeance. Whether it be so or not, this is certain—they stand under
condemnation. To touch a king ora king’s son is treason. God accounts indignities
offered to Isracl as indignities offered to himself. Pharaoh touched them and was
destroyed ; the Amalekites and Canaanites fought against them and were defeated ;
Assyrians strove to enslave them and were discomfited. Babylon was laid in the
dust ; Rome was spoiled, and ultimately ruined. IV. The season of vengeance
“ After the glory.” After the return to their own land ; after their penitence and
purification. It was in God’s own time. When the saints have entered the New
Jerusalem, their robes being made white, then the Lord will avenge his own elect
in a special and final sense.—Stems and Twigs.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 7,8. Two classes addressed.
1. The careless and indifferent. Those
in the world, living in ease and sin.
2. Those in Babylon who should be in
Zien. Christians are out of their place
in the pleasures and pursuits of the
world. “Come out from among them,
and be ye separate, and touch not the un-
clean thing, and I will receive you,” &c.
(2 Cor. vi. 17, 18: Rev. xviii. 4).

Vers. 8, 9. The Messiah, not the pro-
phet nor the angel mentioned (ver. 4), is
here intended. ‘Observe the evidence
of the Divinity of the speaker here, in the
terms used by him: ‘J will shake my
hand at them.’ This can be the language
of no other than Jehovah; and yet it
is the language of one who speaks of
‘Jehovah’ as having ‘sent him'"”—
| Wardlaw].


We have here the twofold object of
Christ’s mission. 1. To glorify the
Church. “ After the glory ”—in restor-
ing and edifying the Church. Manifest-
ing his glory to his people (John xvii.
6). 2. To destroy the enemies, He hath
“sent me to the nations which spoiled
you.” Mark—(1) The ease with which
this is done. ‘I will shake mine hand
upon them.” A mere wave of the hand
is sufficient to crush all opposition.
What must be the stroke of the hand, if
the mere shaking will prostrate the foe !
(2) The power with which this is done.
The nations are spoiled of their strength
and honour—made slaves to those over
whom they tyrannized. 3. To reveal
God to men. “ And ye shall know that
the Lori of hosts hath sent me.”

Ver. 8 How admirably adapted to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


(oHar. m1.





popular instruction and impression is the
imagery of Scripture. Who does not
in a moment understand and feel the
allusion before us? ‘“‘ He that toucheth
you,” &c. It reminds us of wnion: it
shows saluation: it bespeaks attention :


saries of his people learn their danger
Let this encourage us to do anything for
the people of God. Let his people also
learn to do their duty. If God is so
concerned for them, how should they
regard and be concerned for his glory


[Jay].
HOMILETICS.


Tus Guory or tHe Massian’s Kinapem.— Verses 10—13.


it expresses sympathy. Let the adver-


These words look beyond the Jewish restoration, to the earlier and remoter times
of the Messiah. With his appearance and residence are connected the return of his
people to his service and glory, and the extension of his kingdom among the heathen.
In prospect of this glory, the people are called to exult with joy. The glorification
of this kingdom consists in the following privileges :—

I. In the residence of its King. “ Lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of
thee, saith the Lord.” The greater the resident the more dignified the house. God
dwelt with his people in type and shadow, in the glory of the temple and the
blessings of his Spirit. Literally, in Christ’s first and future coming ; spiritually, in
the power of his grace over heart and life. We have not a mere poet, statesman, ot
prophet, but the great God himself, dwelling with individuals and sections of the
Christian community. ‘God hath said, I will dwell in them and walk in them ;
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people ” (2 Cor. vi. 16: Ezek. xxxvii.
27: Zech. viii. 3). II. In the extension of its dominion. “ Many nations shall
be joined to the Lord in that day.” Proud exclusiveness shall cease ; the walls of
partition shall be broken down ; and Jew and Gentile shall become subjects of one
King. Hence extension. 1. By the restoration of the Jews. ‘The Lord shall
inherit Judah.” “It was to be on the principle, to the Jew first,” says Wardlaw.
“ Among that people was he to appear and dwell while on earth. The chosen
people were not to be utterly and finally cast off. He would again restore them in
merey ; gather from their so much wider and longer-continued dispersions ; restore
them anew to the land of their fathers and the city of their God (ver 12).” 2. By
the adoption of other nations. “ Many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that
day.” New converts shall inherit the blessings of the chosen people. An abundant
increase is promised to the mere handful of Jews. This is the purpose for which
Israel existed and was restored (Jer. xxiv. 7; xxx. 22: Ezek. xi. 20; xiv. 11).
Gentiles shall be grafted in with Jews (Rom. xi. 23) ; Jerusalem shall become
the centre of glory, the throne of God, and one law shall rule the stranger and the
homeborn (Ex. xii. 49). “At tk at time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the
Lord ; and all nations shall be gathered unto it.” III. In the grandeur of ite
achievements. Earthly kingdoms achieve greatness and create happiness by
wealth, power, and war. True glory springs from spiritual birth and God’s presence.
1. Great joy will result to this kingdom. ‘Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion.”
Those only can rejoice who have been restored to God and recovered their purity—
those with whom God dwells, and whom he bids rejoice and sing. (1) This joy is
abundant. “1t is a creat jubilee of joy, to which Zion is invited. Thrice besides
is she invited with the same word (Isa. liv. 1: Zeph. iii. 14,15; Isa, xii. 6), and
all for the restored and renewed presence of God” [Pusey]. (2) This joy is
bestowed in circumstances unlikely. Rejoice in trouble and opposition! Yes, it is
not unseasonable then. Do we not seek medicine in sickness, music in mourning 1
“Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel
in the midst of thee.” 2. Universal submission will result to this kingdom. “ Be
silent (hush), O all flesh, before the Lord.” Unbelievera among the Jews are not to


CHAP. 11]





doubt God’s promise, and enemies in all nations are to fear his power.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


599





All opposi-


tion will be subdued. Willingly or unwillingly men must submit in the day of
God's power. How foolish to measure wisdom and compare strength with God, to


“contend with him that is mightier than they!”


Learn to reverence God’s


authority, to hear providential warnings, before he is roused for the last act of


justice, to pronounce the doom, and fix the eternal condition of millions.


“Thou,


even thou, art to be feared; and who may stand in thy sight, when once thou art


angry ¢”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vera, 10—12. The joy of the Church
springs from three sources. 1. The
presence of Christ. 2. The increase of
numbers. 3. The gathering together
and possession of God’s people [cf.
Hutcheson).

Ver. 11. (First clause.) The formation
of national brotherhood by Christianity.
1. Christianity alone affords a basis
for it. Socialism, communism, &c., do
not. Society built upon any other found-
ation will fall, and great will be the
fall. 2. Christianity alone can cement it
together. Education, science, and philo-
sophy useful, but not sufficient. 3.
Christianity alone guarantees tt. “ Na-
tions shall be joined.” ‘TI will mention
Rahab and Babylon as knowing me. Lo,
Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia. (To
each of which it shall be said), This
nation was born there” (in Zion)
(Ps. Ixxxvii. 4.)

“ Mark ye well Philistia’s legions,
Lo, to seek the Lord they come ;
And within the sacred regions
Tyre and Cush have found a home.”

Thou shalt know, &c. The manifest-
ation of the unity of the Church a proof
of the Messiah’s commission. When
nations know God, the world will know
saving truth (John xvii. 21—23).

Ver. 12. 1. The inheritance. “ Judah.”
The joining of nations did not destroy
God’s covenant with his ancient people.
Hence this assurance that he would
“again” be the portion of Israel (Jer. x.
16; li. 19: Deut. xxxii. 9). “ Pardon
our iniquity and our sin, and take us for
thine inheritance.” 2. The place. ‘In
the holy land.’ The land is again made
holy by God, and sanctified by his pre-
sence. So he calls the place where he
revesled himself to Moses holy ground


(Ex. iii. 5). “It is not one technical
expression, as people now by a sort of
effort speak of ‘the holy land.’ Every-
thing which has reference to God is holy.
The land is holy, not for any merits of
theirs, but because God was worshipped
there, was specially present there. It was
an anticipation and type of “thy holy
Church throughout all the world doth
acknowledge thee ” | Pusey].

Ver. 13. Three reasons for silence
implied. 1, They are but “flesh,”
weak and ignorant. 2. He is Jehovah,
all-wise and all-powerful. 3. He is
already “raised up out of his place,” and
who can stand before him? [A. &.
Fausset. |

If God do but awake for us, all is
presently well with us. Therefore, when
the Church was in her return from
Babylon the prophet concludes with an
exultation of spirit. Be silent, &c. “AU
flesh, ye that are wicked of the world,
ye that are enemies, be ye silent; leave
your boasting, your reproaching, and
blaspheming, for the Lord is awaked ;
now he begins to stir for his people, he
will stop your mouths shortly. All flesh
takes in the Church and people of God
too. O be ye silent, in regard of your fears
and doubtings, murmurings and dis-
tracted complainings : silence all these,
why? The Lord is awaked, he is raised
up out of his holy habitation ; that is, he
that seemed before to confine himself to
those higher regions, as atheists speak in
Job, to walk in the circle of the heavens,
not intermeddling with the earth: this
God is now awaked, raised out of his
holy habitation, and now ye shall know
that he orders all things here below;
therefore be silent, all flash” [Oary?].


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1—4. Behold, a man. All
Zechariah’s visions are remarkably simple.
They are not like Isaiah’s, when he saw
the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and
lifted up; nor like Ezekiel’s, when he
beheld living creatures with four faces,
and wheels full of eyes. Zechariah had
not imagination enough to he capable
of beholding with dueappreciation visions
so complicated and mysterious, He was
not the proper instrumet of God for the
revelation of those mor mysterious mat-
ters: but the Lord had a place for him,
and a vision for him too. How sweet to
be a servant of God in any position
[ Spurgeon].

Ver. 5. Wall. China is said to be
protected by a wall of stone; old Eng-
land is shielded by her wooden walls ;
but the Church of God has a better wall
still, for she has the Divine wall of fire ;
her enemies cannot break through this to
destroy the meanest of her citizens, and
her false friends shall say to themselves,
“Who among us can dwell with eternal
burnings?” and so shall start back from
a Church which is visibly sheltered and
protected by the presence of the Most
High [Spurgeon].

Ver. 7. Deliver thyself.


“How vain and poor, and little worth,
Are all these glittering toys of earth
That lure us here!
Dreams of sleep, that death must break,
Alas! before it bids us wake,
Ye disappear’’ [Manrique].


Ver. 8. Apple. It is a charming
image. The eye is one of the most
intricate and delicate structures in the
human frame; and the pupil of the eye
—the opening by which the light of
heaven enters for the purpose of vision,
—the most delicate and easily injured, as
well as important, part of that structure.
Nothing can more finely convey the idea


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.


(CHAP. IL


TO CHAPTER II.


of the sensitively tender care of Jehovah
for the objects of his love. There are
many figures in the Bible expressive of
the same sentiment: there is no one
more exquisitely beautiful than this
[ Wardlaw].

Ver. 9. Shake. God is known by his
power; that power is known by his
works ; and how shall we approach to
estimate him, unless we examine those
works ? [ Macculloch|.

Vers, 10—12. Rejoice. To be happy
we must be blessed with the presence of
the Holy Spirit. In adversity, in pro-
sperity, in sickness and in health, our
joys will be pure, our sorrows will be
lightened, with this holy emanation of
the Deity in our bosoms. Natural evil
we must feel ; moral evil and its effects
we shall often experience ; but there will
still remain in our hearts, if regenerated,
a cordial drop, a source of sweet enjoy-
ment, of which no external circumstances
can utterly deprive us [V. Knoc].

Ver. 11. Nations. The Jews’ un-
belief was a step whereby the Gentiles
arose to the knowledge of the gospel ; as
the setting of the sun in one piace is
the rising of it in another [Oharnock].

Ver. 13. Silent. The prophet, like a
crier in a court, commands or proclaims
silence. The Hebrew word means hush,
inhibiting speech. Yield all reverence,
respect and fear, stand in awe. Let the
wicked silence their vain boasts and the
godly their vain fears. Let neither the
one nor the other utter a word before the
Lord [Caryl]. How readily can Jehovah
command an audience! It may be that
in the latter days he will, by some such
miracles of power in the realms of grace,
constrain all earth’s inhabitants to attend
to the gospel, and submit to the reign of
his all-glorious Son [Spurgeon].


CHAP, 1L] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH, 601





CHAPTER TL


Crrrioat Nores.] He) The interpreting angel. Standing] As before a judge (Num. xxxv. 13:
Deut. xix. 17; 1 Kings iii. 16), A judicial transaction represented, say some, But the high priest
is described as having entered the new temple, taken his position before the altar, and was about to
offer sacrifice for the people, when he was opposed by Satan [Henderson]. Satan] No human
adversary ; lit, the adversary. Right] The side of the accuser (Ps. cix. 6: Job xxx. 12). Resist]
Ympede or oppose, by dwelling upon the sins of high priest and people (cf. ver. 3). 2. Jehovah] . ¢.
the angel of, said. Rebuke] Twice repeated, ‘‘for the sake of emphasis, and with the repetition
the motive which led Jehovah to reject the accuser is added” [Ket/]. God will not only nonsuit,
but reprove by act, and overcome the accuser (Ps. ix. 5; cxix. 21). Plucked] Delivered from
Babylon, God will not desert them; though defiled by sin, he will cleanse them. 8. Filthy] garments
worn generally by those on trial among the Romans, but here represent the guilt and punishment
of the Jews, as removal, and investment of splendid attire, indicate restoration to enjoyment and
privileges, 4, Stood] Ministering angels, honoured with standing continually before the great King
(cf. 1 Kings x. 8: Dan. i. 5), To pass] ¢.¢, removed its guilt; remit, forgive, and justify (2 Sam.
yii. 13; xxiv. 10). 5.] The nation not only to be forgiven but glorified. Let] The prophet asks
telp. Mitre] The priesthood restored ; and its facr colour symbolizes its official purity and order—
y the wish complied with. 6—10.] Here the symbolic act of reclothing is made the occasion of a
prophetic address through the high priest to the nation, Protested] Testified, made a solemn
declaration as one on oath (Gen, xl, 3: Deut. viii, 19). Walk] God’s promise was connected with
their observance of his ordinances. Then} Vertain privileges. Judge] Administer right, viz. “in
relation to the duties devolving upon the high priest in the sanctuary as such ; hence, right adminis-
tration of the service in the holy place and Holy of Holies” ( Kez]. The priestly family of Joshua
would takea part in the future government of the nation. Places] Guides, Stand by] Angels.
“The import of the promise is, that he and his successors in office should enjoy the care, direction,
and aid of celestial spirits in the management of the national affairs” [Henderson]. 8. Fellows]
Thy associates in the priesthood. Wondered] Men of wonder, of sign or portent; typical men,
foreshadowing future persons or events (cf. Isa, vill, 18: Ezek. xii. 6). Branch] All expositors
admit this to be the Messiah, the servant (Isa, xlti. 1): the sprout from the stem of Jesse (Jer,
xxiii. 5; Isa, ii. 1, 2; liii, 2). 9. Stone] Foundation by God, the chief builder, which should be
the object of his special care. Eyes] upon a thing denote vigilance and care (cf. Ps, xxxii. 8), Seven]
denotes perfection ; these not carved upon the stone [Calvin], but directed towards; fixed upon
the covenant people (cf, Rev, v. 6). Engrave) Lit. “I will open the opening of it.” What kind
of ornaments it does not say, “but that they were cut out or engraven in the foundation-stone, the
exigency of the place requires, except we regard the stone as here used by synecdoche for the whole
temple, in which case reference will be had to the finishing off of the structure, the foundation
of which had been laid in the presence of Joshu ’’ [ Henderson]. Land] of Israel with its inhabitants
representative of the Christian Church. Hamers) tke punishment to which Jews had been exposed.
Day] The day of national atonement celebrated after completion of the temple (Lev. xxiii. 27);
ihe of day of atonement by Christ (Heb. x. 10—12; vii. 27). 10. Under] A proverbial

escription of a happy period (1 Kings iv, 24); an emblem of tranquil prosperity (Mic. iv. 4) ;
ef personal and social peace in the gospel; amd of the blessed condition flowing from a purified
Church.


HOMILETICS.
JosHua RssIsteD AND ESTABLISHED IN HIS WorK.— Verses 1—5.


This fourth vision is an encouragement to the people in their work. In the person
of the high priest they stand before Jehovah opposed by Satan, assisted by Christ,
and restored to covenant blessings.

I. Joshua resisted in his work. ‘The condition was critical, but God made it
known to the prophet. “He showed me Joshua.” 1. Joshua resisted in his
service. “The high priest standing,” not as a criminal, but officiating as priest, and
ministering to Jehovah (Deut. x. 8). He is engaged in prayer, anxious for the
people ; but opposed in his work. Honourable duty and nearness to God will not
exempt from opposition and temptation. Satan vresented himself with the sons ci


602 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. [OHAP. m1.





God (Job i. 6). 2. Joshua resisted in his filthy garments. Filth is caused by
sin. The soiled robes were emblematic of his own and the sins of the people—of
their unworthy and abject state before God. The nation had been chastised, but
its guilt was not cleansed. Gross wickedness may be forsaken, but the power of sin,
self-righteousness, and refined idolatry remain. The garments of all Christians
should be clean, “for glory and for beauty” (Ex. xxviii. 2). If stained with filth
they taint the dignity of office, and bring accusation against it. How God bears
with our manifold infirmities! “‘ We are all as an unclean thing, and all our right-
eousnesses are as filthy rags.” 3. Joshua resisted by Satan. ‘And Satan stand
ing at his (Joshua’s) right hand.” Satan, one of the highest created spirits, has
become the tempter and accuser of men—tbe most finished example of perverted
will and unsanctified power in the universe. He would probably be mortified at
the return of Divine favour to the Jews—plead their sinfulness and unfitness for
the work, and desire that God would cast them off and recall his grace. This was
a vital issue for that day, and for the history of redemption in all ages. It touched
the existence of God’s kingdom and the coming of the Messiah on earth. (1) He
resisted with energy. He is strong and experienced in his work, diligent in mischief,
and ever seeking opportunities to do it (1 Pet. v. 8). (2) He resisted in the fittest
place. The right hand is advantageous ground for one who impedes or opposes
another. When the enemy can choose his position in fight, it is of great service to
him. The subtlety and power of the adversary, the guilt and weakness of men, give
every opportunity for success. Satan often gets the advantage, and seems likely to
triumph over us. “Let Satan stand at his right hand” (Ps. cix. 6). (3) He
resisted at the fittest time. The Jews had only just returned from captivity, were
few and weak, and not very earnest in their.work. God’s people are attacked, like
Christ, when weakened by nature (Matt. iv. 2), when resistance seems impossible.
When a man is down, little will crush or overcome him. Occasions of trial are
chosen that the fall may be more disgraceful (Isa, xxi. 4). “In the greatest calm
provide for a storm,” said Elizabeth. ‘A day may have a fair beginning and a
foul ending.” II. Joshua established in his work. He had a defender who
confounded and rebuked the adversary in his evil design. ‘The Lord said unto
Satan,” &. 1. His adversary is defeated. (a) Defeated by the Lord. “The Lord
rebuke thee.” Satan was checked by one who silenced him without arguments.
Christ himself gave him into the hand of God, and effectually withered him with
rebuke (Mark i, 25, 26: Luke iv. 35). “We have an Advocate with the Father.”
(b) Defeated by the Lord in love to his people. They had no merit in themselves.
It was enough that he had chosen them. “The Lord hath chosen Jerusalem,” and
maintained his choice in all its integrity. The nation is acquitted, not because the
charges of Satan were false, but out of God’s free love to them. ‘‘ Who shall lay
anything to the charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that
condemneth?” 2. His sins are forgiven. “I have caused thine iniquity to pass
from thee.” ‘The filthy garments were taken away, and sin completely and freely
forgiven. In Christ Divine wrath is appeased, polluted nature cleansed, and guilty
man justified before a holy God. ‘“ Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth
iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage} He
retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.” 3. His privileges
are restored, God not only acquits but restores to all the honours and duties of
office, justifies and sanctities. (1) The priesthood was restored. He was clothed
with change of raiment. ‘The robes of the high priest were put upon him, and he
ministered for the people. (2) Its official qualification was given. Priestly veat-
ments did not complete the attire. The “ mitre,” the turban of pure white linen,
with its holy crown, was wanting. “Set a fair mitre upon his head.” Men are
washed and decorated to be qualified for work. Ministers and teachers must be
holy and adorned with the crown. Engraven on their breast-plate must be the title


CHAP. IIL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 603





of their office, and the aim of their life, “ Holiness to the Lord” (Ex. xxviii. 36).
“ Thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.”


We may take Joshua as a type of all the people of God, as they stand in their
sense of sin and natural faultiness, subject to the accusation of Satan, but delivered
by their gracious Lord; and the change of raiment as setting forth the foryiveness
of sin and the imputation of the Saviour’s righteousness, which is the joy of all
believers, Let us take each particular separately.’ I. To begin where the vision
begins—with the believer himself, represented by Joshua. He is described as a
priest, standing before the angel of the Lord. Mark this. He is a priest. Certain
sons of Korah claim to be legitimate descendants of apostles, and pretend to be
priests in a special sense, But the apostles claimed no priority beyond others
(1 Pet. ii. 5). Every humble man and woman that knows Christ's power in the
soul—that has been cleansed from dead works—is appointed to serve as a priest unto
God. But observe, the high priest is “‘ standing before the angel of the Lord—”
standing to minister. This should be the perpetual position of the believer ; not in
a bed of sloth, or wandering about for private business. He is appointed priest for
ever; should always be offering sacrifice, and attending to the duties of his high
calling. He ministers before the angel of Jehovah. He can never stand to minister
before Moses, the mediator under the law; much less before Jehovah himself, for
our God is a consuming fire. It is only through a Mediator that we poor defiled
ones can ever become priests unto God. Read the next word in the light of your
own experience. “ Clothed with filthy garments.” Did you ever feel this in coming
to God? Perhaps at evening prayer, unable as the head of the household to pray—
in your business kept up late, and distracted in the house of God. How can we
hope for a blessing on anything we do, with a heart of unbelief! But do not let
a sense of unfitness keep you from service—lead you to renounce your priesthood.
Stand where you are, and remember it is the only place where sin can be washed and
prayer accepted. II. Let us turn to another individual. An adversary. Satan
stood before the angel to resist Joshua. Observe the name, Satan, which signifies
an adversary. An adversary by nature, who is so vile that he cannot help being
the adversary of everything good. This adversary selected a most fitting place. He
accused him before the angel—before God’s own Son. He does not attack Joshua
first, but seeks to prevent his acceptance. If once persuaded that you are not God’s
children and not accepted before him, he knows that serious injury is done us. He
selected a fit opportunity—when Joshua had his filthy garments on. Expect, when
you have lost your sense of justification, when conscious of sin, and you feel unfit to
minister before God, that he will come to accuse you. III. Here is a very gloomy
picture—the believer willing, but quite unable, to minister unto the Lord ; but the
Angel speaks. He has been silent till now. This rebuke comes at the right season.
When Satan accuses, Christ pleads. He does not wait until the case has gone against
us—-then express regret; but is alwaysa present help. He knows the heart of Satan,
being omniscient ; and long before he can accuse, puts in the plea on our behalf, and
stays the action till he gives the answer to silence every accusation. This rebuke
came from the very highest authority... “ Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan.” If God
hath chosen his people, it is no use for Satan to attempt their overthrow. The
rebuke is forcibly applicable to the case in hand. Satan says, “The man’s garments
are filthy.” “ Well,” says Jesus, “how do you expect them to be otherwise? When
you pull a brand out of the fire, do you expect it milk-white or polished?” This
plea did not require a single word to be added to it from Joshua. ‘This so silenced
the devil that he was speechless. He has often made outa case against us, but
been nonplussed! “I will sift him like wheat in my sieve.” His plans would
succeed, but there is a “ but” in the way (unfortunate for him, fortunate for as).
« But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.” IV. A matchless deed of


604 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. [CHAP. Tu.


grace, is the soul of the text. Sin is removed. “ Take away the filthy garments
from him.” The order is given to clothe him. “TI will clothe thee with change of
raiment.” The righteousness of Christ is given to the believer. One thing more.
The prophet was so astonished to see the change that he broke out and spake
himself. ‘And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head.” Some of God’s
people get as far as imputed righteousness, believe themselves to be accepted in
the Beloved, but tarry there. Put on your mitre, and praise the covenant angel,
who in Jehovah’s name has taken away your filthy garments. Notice the closing
sentence, ‘The angel of the Lord stood by.” We want him always to stand by,
though clothed with new garments, and crowned with the mitre. We want his
strength, corafort, and the light of his countenance. “ Abide with us,” must be our
daily prayer [From Spurgeon].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. There are two grounds on
which the rebuke of Satan proceeds.
1. Jehovah's choice of, or delight in,
Jerusalem. “The Lord that hath chosen
(or that delighteth in Jerusalem) rebuke
thee.” Satan knew full well that in
his opposition to Joshua, to prevent his
officiating as priest, he was opposing
Jehovah, who had returned in loving-
kindness to Jerusalem. He would have
that loving-kindness kept back and
turned away, and the punishment of
their sins continued ; and would thus
have interdicted the blessing of Jehovah.
Since it was the pleasure of Jehovah he
was seeking to hinder, it was appropriate
that the rebuke should come from him.
2. The malice—the envious and deadly
spite of the devil, stands here in contrast
with the benevolence—the relenting for-
bearance and love of Jehovah. “Is not
this a brand plucked out of the fire?”
The question must be understood, not
of Joshua considered only personally, but
representatively—as relating to the rescue
of the people as well as himself from
oppression and wrong, and, if their ene-
mies had had their will, extinction; and
the deliveranceand restoration of the very
office of Joshua—the priestly office—
which, without such Divine interposition,
might have been lost. Satan would have
had the brand kept in the fire till it was
consumed. But Jehovah’s power, and
goodness, and faithfulness, had plucked it
out of the flames—rescued it from such
consumption. The rebuke is evidently
that of indignant supremacy and offended
benevolence, directed at once against


malignity and presumption [ Wardlaw].

Is not this a brand ? &c. 1. If delivered
once, is it reasonable to cast them into
the furnace again} fPersecutors in the
days of Queen Mary were cruel enough
for this ; but we must have compassion
upon men, “pulling them out of the
fire” (Jude 22). How much more will
God have pity! 2. If God loves his
people, shall he change? Never! Though
stained with dirt and scorched with fire,
he will never cast them off. Like the
three worthies (Dan, iii. 20), they will be
delivered from fire and promoted to
honour. The gifts and calling of God
are without repentance. Rebuke thee. 1.
This a warning against the sarcastic,
bitter, and virulent spirit which so often
shows itself in speaking and writing
against others [Wordsworth]. 2. A
lesson not to argue with the tempter, but
refer him to the Saviour, whose rebuke
is powerful and successful (Ps. lxxx. 6:
Matt. iv. 10).

Vers. 3—5. Two things are here said
to belong to free acceptance with God.
(1) The taking away of the guilt of our
sin, our filthy robes; this is done by
the death of Christ, the proper fruit
of which is the remission of sin. (2)
But more is required ; even a collation
of righteousness, and thereby a right
to eternal life. This is called a change
of raiment, or, as in Isaiah lxi. 10, the
garments of salvation, the robe of
righteousness. This is made ours only
by the obedience of Christ, as the cthex
is by his death [ Owen}.

We may learn from the whole—l.


OKAP, III. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 605








That those whom God redeems he will ness, cleansing and love, should be a
cause to serve him. 2. That though sin reason for confidence in prayer, a support
may pollute, God freely forgives them. in temptation, and a motive to activity in
3. That God’s deliverance and forgive- service.


HOMILETICS.
Great Promiszs on Spreciriep Conpitions.— Verses 6, 7.


We have here three things promised, or engaged for—and the promise made to
depend on certain conditions. It matters not which of the two we notice first ; we
may take them as they stand.

I. The specified conditions. The stipulations are these: “If thou wilt walk in
my ways, and keep my charge” (marg., ordinance). These two conditions are closely
connected. 1. Personal holiness. ‘The former relates to personal character and
conduct. He was to be found obedient to God’s precepts ; exemplifying in his own
character the sanctity and moral rectitude which it was part of the duty of the priest
to inculcate on the people: “ for the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they
should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.”
2. Official faithfulness. He was to keep the charge of Jehovah, 7. e. faithfully to
perform all official duties, punctually to attend to every enjoined function of his
commission ; keeping all the ordinances, as God had delivered them to Moses (Lev.
viii. 35). II. The great promises. Three things depended upon these conditions.
1. Thou shalt “judge my house.” The word house does not mean temple, but
household. “The house of Jacob” is a designation of Israel, who were regarded
and repeatedly spoken of as the family of Jehovah. “I am a father to Israel.’
To judge his house, then, is the same thing as to rule his people. This, you think,
did not pertain to the priesthood ; but it is remarkable how it thus turned out, in
regard to the priestly lineage in the family of Joshua. Not in the person of Joshua
himself; but after Nehemiah’s death, a large portion of the management of the
civil affairs of Judea was committed by the Syrian prefects into the hands of the
high priest; and it was more fully realized in the time of the Maccabean high
priests, in whom the civil and the sacred were eminently united. When these
princely priests failed in the conditions here specified in the arrangements of
providence, the glory departed. 2. Thou shalt “also keep my courts.” He was to
continue to have the charge of God’s house, to minister in the holy place, and
superintend the entire system of the sacerdotal and Levitieal services. His
continuance in this high and honourable office,—that is, in the way of succession
in his lineage, depended on the conditions mentioned, of personal obedience and
official fidelity. It is the same style of conditionality with that on which Jehovah
promised to Israel generally, and took them into covenant : “ Now, therefore, if ye
will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiat
treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto
me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.” 3. I will give thee “places to walk
among these that stand by.” By “these that stand by” are meant, the attendané
angels, he difficulty here is with the word rendered “places to walk” (marg.,
walks). The original in some degree is ambiguous. But trom the conjugation of
the verb to which as a participle it belongs, we are disposed to acquiesce in the
judgment of Henderson, who makes it to signify, neither walks nor walkers, but
those who guide or conduct in walking :—“I will give thee ministering guides
among these that stand by.” No sense can correspond better than this with all
that we learn from. the previous history of the Jewish people from the call of Abraham
onwards, respecting the ministration of angels. It is a promise, then, of the aid and
direction of th.se who surround the Divine throne, ‘ the ministerings spirits sent


606 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. IT.





forth to minister to the heirs of salvation.” If the rendering “ walks,” or “‘ places
to walk,” be retained (though we feel doubtful), then the promise will i a higher
one still—namely, that of an association with angelic spirits from heaven [Adapted
from Wardlaw.


Men or Wonper.— Verse &.


The Jewish economy was typical in its aim. Its sacerdotal institutions were
“shadows of good things to come.” Hence, “Joshua and his fellows that sat >efore
nim ”—inferior priests, who officially ministered to the high priest—are termed men
of signs. They typified the Messiah here promised, and those whom the Messiah
admits to share his priesthood (1 Pet. ii. 5: Rev. v. 10). These words might be
taken—First, as a pledge to the desponding Jews that the priesthood would be
preserved until Christ came. Secondly, as a reproof to the unbelieving multitude,
who wonder at God’s people with incredulity (Ps. lxxi. 7: Isa. viii. 18). Apply
the words to Christians.

I. They are a wonder t> themselves. They are astonished at God’s love to
them—amazed to think of his grace and goodness. Why are they called, while
others refuse to come? They were chosen not because better than others, not on
account of their foreseen repentance and faith. “TI am a wonder to myself,” said
one. “I ama miracle of grace,” said another. “ By the grace of God, I am what
Tam.” II. They are a wonder to their fellow-men. Believers are “ to thousand
eyes a mark and gaze.” They are not understood in their spirit, habits, and
employments. To the wicked, they are a puzzle. They are often feared, despised,
and persecuted. Their spiritual birth is a mystery of mercy, their life a constant
reproof to the ungodly, and their death a triumph of grace. “I am as a wonder
unto many.” ‘Behold I, and the children whom the Lord hath given me, are for
signs and wonders in Israel, from the Lord of hosts.” III. They are a wonder to
angels. Angels take deep interest in redeemed men, and wonder at their characters
and pursuits. As Jesus was “seen of angels,” so are his people. ‘ Last” in the
judgment of the world, they are deemed by heavenly hosts worthy of intense
regard. “For we are made a spectacle (theatrical exhibition) anto the world, and
to angels (good and bad), and to men” (1 Cor. iv. 9).


My Servant, tHe Branon.— Verse 9.


Only one person is here typified by the Jewish high priests, and most comment-
ators admit this person to be the Messiah, under the titles of the text.

I. My Servant. 1. Under this title was Christ predicted. This was the
characteristic name of the Messiah. ‘“ Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine
elect, in whom my soul delighteth ” (Isa. xlii. 1 ; xlix. 3; lili, 11: Ezek. xxxiv. 23).
2. Under this capacity he appeared on earth. “I am among you as one that
serveth.” Thus honouring service, and dignifying the humblest calling. “ Who made
nimself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made
in the likeness of men.” 3. In this capacity he rendered most eminent service.
No one ever merited this title like him. He rendered a service most signal and
gracious, which no one in the universe could perform beside. “ Being formed in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross.” II. The Branch. He is “the branch of the Lord” (Isa. iv. 2) ;

a righteous branch” (Jer. xxtii. 5); “the branch of righteousness” (Jer. xxiii.
15). He is the tender branch from the almost extinct royal line of David. Not
‘¢a limb, in the sense of one among many on the same tree, but a shoot which springs
up from the root; and which, though small at first, becomes a tree of wonderful
qualities ” [ Cowles}. This marks— =) His humble origin ; (2) gradual growth ;
and (3) ultimate prosperity. In course of time the tender shoot would become the


OMAP. IIl.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. ay?


monarch of the forest, and under its mighty branches and beautiful foliage the
nations of the earth would take shelter.


Tae Mission oF taz Massian snp 1Ts Resutts.— Verses 8-—10


These words point to the author of the blessings promised—to him by whom sin
was to be expiated, and the kingdom of God flourish. They set forth the mission
of the “ servant, the Branch,” and the results of that mission in the building of a
more glorious temple than that of Solomon or Zerubabbel.

I. The method of his coming. He comes as a servant, and as the sprout.
1. Asa branch. “ According to which the Messiah is to spring up as a rod out of
the stem of Jesse that has been hewn down, or as a root-shoot out of a dry ground.
Tsemach, therefore, denotes the Messiah in his origin from the family of David,
that has fallen into humiliation, as a sprout which will grow up from its original
state of humiliation to exaltation and glory, and answers therefore to the train of
thought in this passage, in which the deeply humiliated priesthood is exalted by
the grace of the Lord into a type of the Messiah” [Keil]. 2. A branch Divinely
caused to grow. “I will bring forth my servant, the Branch.” God himself under-
takes to bring him forth. He is God’s servant, and will have to do God’s work.
He came from the bosom of the Father, and was upheld until he had done the
will of the Father. “Thus speaketh the Lord of Hosts, saying, Behold the man
whose name is the Branch; and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall
build the temple of the Lord.” II. The nature of his work. 1. Tu prepare the
kingdom of God. “Iwill engrave the graving thereof” (ver. 9), 7. e. engrave it so
as to prepare it for a beautiful and costly stone. ‘‘ The preparation of this stone, 7. e.
the preparation of the kingdom of God, established in Israel by the powers of the
Spirit of the Lord, is one feature in which the bringing in of the tsemach will show
itself” [Kei]. 2. To remove iniquity. “And I will remove the iniquity of that land.”
The removal of punishment from the Jews was typical of the remission of sins by
the atonement of Jesus Christ. (1) From the Jews. From “that land ”—
maultiform and aggravated as that was (Jer. 1 20). (2) From all nations. To the
Jew first, then the Gentile (Acts iii. 26). (3) “Jn one day.” The wiping away will
not be imperfect and continually repeated; but once and for ever taken away.
“ By one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified” (Heb. x. 12 ;
ix. 26; vii. 27). IIs. The results which flow from the completion of his work.
When guilt is taken away, discontent and misery will be swept away ; peace and
prosperity will be enjoyed by a purified Church. We have a figure (ver. 10) for
a state of repose—peace, security, personal and social. The peaceful influence of the
gospel was felt from the first—individually, in the soul of each subject of it;
socially, in the intercourse of all. Jew dwelt in peace with fellow-Jew ; and even
Gentiles were numbered among neighbours and brethren, who before were aliens
and outcasts, “hated with perfect hatred.” The proclamation was to be, “ Peace,
peace to him that is far off, and to him that is nigh” -- and the corresponding effect
of it was, “ He is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the
middle wali of partition” [Wardlaw.| ‘They shall sit every man under his vine
and under his fig-tree ; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the
Lord of hosts hath spoken it.”


‘No sound of war is heard—no thought of sin,
But one sole word, ‘ Peace—Peace.’”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 8. Sign men. 1. Wonderful in and restored to God and duty. 2.
their experience. Delivered, pardoned, Wonderful in their manners. Despising


608


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH


(cmap. 111.





pleasures which others esteem ; pursuing
paths which others term folly. “They
think it strange that ye run not with
them into the same excess of riot;
speaking evil of you.” 3. Wonderful in
their character. Redeemed and made
holy—types of future converts, and of
all priests unto God.

Ver. 9. The stone, Taking it as the
foundation-stone of the temple. 1. Its
laying. By God, before Joshua. 2. Its
protection. ‘Upon one stone, seven
eyes.” “The eye,” says Wardlaw, “is
the natural hieroglyphic for knowledge ;
and seven, as every reader of the Bible
is aware, is the number used to denote
completeness, perfection. ‘Seven eyes’
denote the perfection of observant know-
ledge: and as ‘the eyes of Jehovah’
mean Jehovah’s observation and know-
ledge, his ‘seven eyes’ express the per-
fection of both—omniscient observation”
—(cf. chap. iv. 10). Hence this is a
proof of—(1) Prowidential care ; and (2)
an encouragement to the Jews in work.
Taking the stone with many as repre-
senting Christ, notice—1l. God declares
that he lays (Heb.), that he gives a stone
before Joshua, lit. before his face, to de-
fend him, and in order that he may place
it as the foundation and corner-stone
of his building, which symbolized the
Church, of which the corner-stone is
Christ (Isa. xxviii. 16: Ephes. ii. 20:
1 Pet. ii 6). 2. The stone is graven,
like the precious stones in the breast-
plate of the high priest, with the names
of the tribes upon them (Ex. xxviii.
21: ef. original in 2 Tim. ii. 19; and
Rev. xxi. 14). 3. The figure here is
of eyes, emblems of light (cf. Matt. vi.
22: Ezek. i. 18: Rev. iv. 4—6). The
stone is not a dark, lifeless stone, like
other stones, but a living, seeing stone.
4. Those eyes are seven, signifying com-
pleteness, representing the sevenfold gifts
of the Spirit with which the Messiah was
anointed, animated, strengthened, and
enlightened (Isa. xi. 2); indicating the
perfection of the spiritual illumination
and perpetual watchfulness of Christ
[Words.|. The language is future: “I
will engrave the graving (or the sculp-
ture) thereof.” As the stone is a figure,


so is the engraving that of hieroglyphic
eyes, which may convey a twofold mean-
ing. The first, certainly, that the eyes
of Jehovah should be continually upon
it, with intense and delighted interest ;
and upor the glorious spiritual structure
that was to rest upon it, marking its
progressive advancement to its final
completion. The idea is the same as
that expressed respecting the land of
Canaan: “The eyes of the Lord thy
God are always upon it, from the be-
ginning of the year to the end.” The
second, one which I express with hesita
tion, because not sure about the propriety
of assigning two meanings to one hiero-
glyphic. I cannot forget that the stone
represents a person, and that person
Divine. Jesus Christ himself is the
“ chief corner-stone.” May not the en-
graving of the seven eyes, then, convey
the additional idea of the Detty of him
whom the stone represented—as himself
the possessor of Divine omniscience ;
which could say—‘ All the churches
shall know, that I am he that searcheth
the reins and the hearts” [ Wardlaw],

Seven eyes upon one stone. Observe the
notice that Christ was to excite and
engage. The eye of God was upon him.
He had complacency in contemplating
him in the redemption of his people.
The eyes of angels were upon him.
They announced and sang his birth, and
ministered to him in the wilderness.
The eye of Satan was upon him. He
watched him through life, hoping to
make a prey of him, as he had done of
the first Adam. But he was the Lord of
heaven, and found nothingin him. The
eyes of men were upon him, Simeor
saw him, blind Bartimeeus followed him.
Judas followed him closely for three
years, and Pilate saw him judicially.
The centurion watched his death, and all
the people gathered at the sight. The
disciples saw the Lord after his resur-
rection and were glad. Paul saw him
at mid-day. How many millions and
millions have seen him since, not with
the eye of sense, but of faith! In an-
other world he is all in all—he draws
every eye and employs every tongue
We shall see him as he is [Jay].


OMAP. IIL}


Ver. 10. The reign of the Messiah is
distinguished by tnree things. (1) En-
joyment. The very image of the vine
and the fig-tree is delightful. (2) Liberty.
Slaves and captives did not sit under
their vines and fig-trees, nor did pro-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. ZECHARIAR.


G08





prietors in time of war. (3) Benevolence.
“Ye shall call every man,” &c. There is
no selfishness,no envy. All are anxious
that others should partake of their
privileges [Jay].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER III.


Vers. 1—5. Satan, “the accuser of
our brethren,” (Rev. xii. 10). Accusation
is the element of his being. He accuses
God to men (cf. Gen. iii. 4, 5), and he
accuses men to God (as in Job and in
this passage). Uence his name in the
N. T., Diabolus, from diaballein = to set
at variance, namely, by slander,—a de-
seriptive title quite as strong as the
Hebrew term, Satan =opposer, the in-
herent and everlasting adversary of God
and man, and of all that is good. In the
end, the kingdom of our God and the
power of his Christ will be too much for
the craft and malice of Satan. Still that
malignant being opposes the truth, and
leaves uo stone unturned to turn away
God’s favour from his people, and thus
overthrow the entire redemptive economy
[Lange]. Resist. Against whom does
Satan multiply his malicious assaults }
Against those in whom God has multi-
plied his graces. He is too crafty a
pirate to attack an empty vessel; he
seeks to rob those vessels which are
richly laden [ Wilson].

Ver. 2. Brand. A poor Hindoo con-
vert was once taunted by a European
infidel, who asked him what Jesus had
done for him. The Hindoo took a worm,
put it inside a circle of dried leaves and
grass, and set fire to them. When the
fire approached the worm, he snatched
it up and put it into his bosom, exclaim-
ing, “That is what Jesus has done for
me.” I was once exposed to eternal fire.
The flames had even touched me, and I
was a scorched and blackened brand ;
when God in his matchless grace plucked
me forth! [Sacred Garland].

Ver. 5. Mitre. Some act with their
mitres as our kings and queens do with
their crowns; they only put them on
upon state occasions— -do not wear them


always, because they are too heavy. ms


Christians, your state occasion should
be always: you are always dear to
Christ, and always near the Father's
heart [Spurgeon].

Ver. 7. Keep. Godliness is the high-
way to happiness; the good old way
that hath ever been beaten by all those
saints that now find rest to their souls
Trapp|. Consult duty, not events
Annesley]. Perish discretion when it
interferes with duty [H. More].


“ Devotion when lukewarm is undevout ”’
[ Young].


Ver. 8. Men of signs. So were the
primitive Christians. They were like so
many pieces of immortality, dropped
down from heaven, and tending thither-
ward—all full of God, and full of Christ,
and full of heaven, and full of glory:
and this world was nothing to them ;
trampled upon as a despicable, con-
temptible thing [ Howe].

Ver. 9. Stone. The excellence of the
foundation is for the building that
rests on it. And so, whatever gives
Christ value, so to speak, in the sight of
God and angels—as the union in him of
the glories and virtues of the two natures,
Divine and human; his filial zeal, and
perfect obedience, and efficacious atone-
ment, and priestly intercession, and royal
might and majesty—all, all redounds to
the honour and blessing of ‘‘them that are
Christ’s” (1 Cor. xv. 23), through faith
in his name [Dr. Lillie].

Iniquity. Christ, with his holy suf-
fering, love, and perfect obedience, is the
only one thing wherein God can have
infinite pleasure, and for the sake of
which he can look graciously on the race
of men [Dr. Heubner].

Ver. 10. Sit. Mankind have always
clung to the hope of better times of


619 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHaARLAH (CHAP. IV








the text. We give a passage from the The base, degenerate, iron offspring ends,


; eae A golden progeny from heaven descends. . . ,
famous Eclogue (iv.) of Virgil See, labouring nature calls thee to sustain


The nodding frame of heaven and earth and





“ The last great age, foretold by sacred rhyme, main!
Renews its finished course ; Saturnian times See, to their base restored earth, seas, and air,
Roll round again ; and mighty years, begun And joyful ages from behind in crowding ranks
From their first orb, in radiant circles run. appear. [Dryden's Virgil.)
CHAPTER IV.


Carricaz Norgs,j] The golden candlestick a symbol of the pure and prosperous state of the
Jewish Church. Waked] Overpowered by what he had seen and heard, the prophet needed quick-
ening into spiritual consciousness. 2. Candlestick] or chandelier. Like the seven-branched golden
candlestick in the tabernacle (Ex, xxv. 37: lzek. xxv. 31); but this visionary candlestick is a
designed enlargement. Bowl] ¢.¢. can or round vessel for the oil. Seven lamps] united in one stem
(Ex, xxv. 32). Seven pipes} Lit. seven and seven. Some say, seven and seven, 2. ¢, fourteen; others,
seven each for each lamp, ¢. ¢. forty-nine for the seven; this not impossible. The greater the
sumber of oil pipes, the more brilliant the light. 8. Trees] Supplying oil to the bowl, Explanation
(vers. 12—14), 8. Knowest not] No nes of ignorance, though the vision might easily be
mistaken, but a stimulus to inquiry. No] How candid the confession! 6. Might] Lit. army, power.
The work undertaken will be finished, not by human strength of any kind, but by the Spirit of God
(cf. flag. ii. 5). 7] The resources of the Jewish leader were few, and the hindrances formidable,
but the great mountain] will be depressed into a level plain, every obstacle removed, and the work
completed. Headstone] Refers to the finishing of the structure. Shoutings] of acclamation. “The
repetition of favour or grace is for the sake of intensity; and the ascriptions of this favour to the
stoue, impliex that it was possessed of this quality, and was to be the medium of its conveyance to
others. Vhs prediction was clearly fulfilled in our Redeemer, ‘ Grace or favow was poured through
his lips" ° { Henderson]. 9.] Additional information, Finish] So he did, in the sixth year of Darius
(Ezra vi. 15), 10. Day of small things] “ The short period which had elapsed since the Jews had
begun to rebuild the temple, and the cemsaencement which had been inconsiderable and inauspicious.’
Who ?] with its negative answer, contains an admonition to the people and their rulers not to despise
the small beginnings [ Heid]. Plummet] With the human ts strikingly contrasted Jehovah’s estimate
of the work. His eyes, which run to and fro, rejoiced when they saw Zerubbabel with the plummet
in hand; a sign of work commenced, and superintending care. Zerubbabel is the type of a future
Zerubbabel, the Messiah, who will build the temple of God. 11. What] A question. put three times,
ver. 4), this, and ver. 12; varied at each time and at last minute. Two olive trees] Supposed to
be the anointed priesthood and royalty by some (by others, the two Churches, the Jewish and
Gentile), or “ Christ’s priesthood and monarchy—confirmed by vi. 13. Olives produce oil ; oil supplies
light to the candlestick, and all the oil of the Holy Spirit flows, by the medium of his Messiahship
in its twofold functions of King and Priest, into the Candlestick of the Universal Church ” [ Words.}.
12. Branches] Lit. ears, from resemblance to ears of grain. “ As ears are full of grain, so clive.
branches are full of olives.” Golden oil] Gold-like liquor in brightness and purity, 18, Answered]
The angel is anxious to awaken attention. 14. Two anointed] Lit. sons of ot/,a symbol of Joshua
and Zerubbabel, anointed and installed into office by oil ; and of the royal and priestly office of
Christ, Stand] The posture of servants waiting to receive orders from their masters. “If, then, the
candlestick had two olive-trees by its side, yielding cil in such copious abundance, shat every one of
the seven lamps received its supply through seven pipes, it could never fail to have suflicient oil for
a full and brilliant light. This was what was new in the visionary candlestick ; and the meaning was
this hat the Lord in future would bestow upon his congregation the organs of his Spirit, and
maintain them in such direct connection with it, that it would be able to let its light shine with
sevenfold brilliancy ” [ Kez/].


HOMILETICS.


ge Curistian CuurcH THE GoLDEN LIGHT-BRARER.— Verses 1—6.


In the former vision there was a display uf the means and grounds of the
forgiveness of sin. In this we have communications of grace, to conquer obstaclea


CHAP. Iv. ] HOMILETiC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 61)


and establish the work of God. The Church is symbolized by the candlestick.
Streams of golden liquid flow into it from one centre, to feed and preserve the
light. Without the aid of man, the oil is supplied freely and copiously to bless a
sinful world. Notice—

I. The design of the Christian Church. To give light. It is created and
constituted to be the light of the world. The world is spiritually dark: for
‘‘ darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the people.” But truth, light, and
life are found in the Church of God. 1. Its light is diffusive. All light is
diffusive. The light in the Church must not be quenched nor “hid under a
bushel.” Individually and collectively, we must diffuse knowledge, holiness, and
joy—shine forth for the benefit of men and the glory of God. 2. its light is
borrowed. It is only a light-bearer, not a creator of light. Like the moon, the
Church shines with a borrowed light. She has no resources of ker own, but
depends upon Christ the Sun of Righteousness for every kind and degree of
influence. If she forgets her end, neglects her mission, and disowns her dependence,
her light may be extinguished. ‘In him was life; and the life was the light of
men.” II. The unity of the Christian Church. The seven lamps may indicate
its unity—one candlestick, but many branches ; one body, but many members. All
sections of Christians are united together in Christ the Head. All nave their light
and place, and in proportica as they are supplied with oil and diffuse the sanctifying
influence of truth to others, do they answer the end of their own illumination
(cf. Job xxv. 3: Phil. ii. 15). III. The vitality of the Christian Church. It was
fed and sustained by virtues not its own. 1. It was Dwwinely fed. The lamps
were not furnished with oil, nor kept by human agency. The two living olive
trees poured their oil into the central reservoir without the skill and labour of man.
The Church thrives, and the cause of God triumphs, “not by might, nor by
power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord.” 2. Jé was freely fed. The oil
spontaneously flowed from the olive-trees. Christ has received gifts for men, and
from his priestly and regal offices they are freely bestowed upon the Church. “ And
of his fulness have all we received.” IV. The value of the Christian Church.
The candlestick was gold. Though few in number, obscure and imperfect in
character, God’s people are precious in his sight. They are his jewels, pure and
indestructible. If they lose purity of life and doctrine they will tarnish their
character and dim their lustre. ‘‘ How is the gold become dim! how is the fine
gold changed!” The preciousness depends upon the purity, and the responsibility
upon the honour, of the Christian Church. ‘The king’s daughter is all-glorious
within ; her clothing is of wrought gold.”


‘The purest treasure mortal times afford,
Is—spotless reputation : ‘That away,
Men are but gilded loam, or painted clay”” [Shakspeare},


Not sy Miaut nor sy Powrr-—Verse 6.


“The vision was an embodied prophecy, intended in the first instance for the
guidance and comfort of Zerubbabel.” The prophet, and through him the people,
are informed in their despondency of God’s purpose and method concerning his
work. They must not faint, but rely upon him, who is all-sufficient, and would
preserve and furnish them with needful means to finish the work. ‘“ Not by
might,” &c. Take the words generally—

I. Not by might nor power in Christian life. Spiritual life is the direct act
of God; “ born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of max, but
of God.” From beginning to end it is promoted by the Spirit of God. Carlyle
speaks of “the almost omnipotent power of education,” ard others commend the
refinements of life ; but these do not satisfy conscience nor touch the heart. Men


612 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


Pee ORS he 00S ee ee ee ees se


[OHAP. Iy


are “ saved by the renewing of the Holy Ghost.” This is the doctrine of Scripture,
and the characteristic of spiritual life. II. Not by might nor by power in
Christian work. The temple was rebuilt not by the might of this world. God
procured the edict of Cyrus, and touched the hearts of Darius and Artaxerxes. In
the day of Pentecost, and at the Reformation, in the revivals and movements of the
Church, we recognize the same truth. In the work of the Spirit, the redeeming
energy of Christ and the agency of God are preserved through all generations.
By the Holy Spirit the power of God is brought into the world. God has all
hearts in his hand, and all agencies under his control. He inflames the zeal, inspires
the prayers, and bestows the qualifications for the spread of his kingdom. We rely
too much upon numbers, eloquence, and human agencies. The great want of the
day is the Holy Spirit. If we depend upon him, then however few and feeble in
effort, the progress of the work will never beimpeded. Systems founded by power
and spread by force will come to nought. ‘All they that take the sword, shall
perish with the sword.” God’s presence must be sought, and his power trusted.
Then, when human means are hidden, and the might of the Spirit enjoyed, all the
glory will be given to him.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


derful teacher. I. The pupil. The pro-
phet—1. Not ashamed to confess his
ignorance. Ignorance may be wilful,


Vers. 1, 2. The weary and sleepy
prophet. 1. Indicative of Christian
weakness. Believers are mortal, cannot


long bear up in spiritual duties, and
often astonished by wonderful revelations
in hard times (cf. Daniel’s sleep, ch. x, 9 ;
and Peter’s at the Transfiguration, Luke
ix. 32). 2. A type of all who stand un-
consciously, and live carelessly, in the
presence of God and great events. ‘There
is a lethargy of soul in the whole
sphere of Divine realities ; and men try
to live indifferent to, or entirely without,
the light and friendly visitations of God.
3. A proof of God's goodness in rousing
men to duty. Werequire stirring up in
natural indolence and spiritual weakness,
to reap the benefit of Divine instruction ;
and when the revelations are given, we
do not understand them. “The angel
that talked with me came again.” “ He
wakeneth morning by morning ; he wak-
eneth mine ear to hear, as the learned.”

Vers, 2, 3. Obsevve the candlestick
is golden, and the oil is called golden.
The Church must be pure and holy;
what she teaches must be pure and holy
also ; not adulterated with the admixture
of any novel doctrines, such as those
which have been added by some to the
faith once delivered to the saints, and
imposed as necessary to salvation [ Words-
worth |.

Vers. 4, 5. An apt pupil and a won-


but criminal when it can be removed.
“ Knowest thou not,” &c., as much as
to say that he ought to know (ef. John
iii. 10). Its removal difficult. We may
search and attend, yet not properly
understand. The prophet was warned,
and took heed to the angel, but required
further teaching. 2. Sought to be in-
structed by asking questions. “The
prophet pretends to no knowledge which
he does not possess. Let us imitate the
twofold example; both that of inquisi-
tiveness and that of ingenuousness. Let
us be on the alert in our inquiries after
knowledge ; and in order to our acquiring
it, never foolishly, and to save our pride
or vanity, affect to have what we have
not” [Wardlaw]. II. The Teacher, the
angel. Notice—1l. His method, by asking
counter-questions; to excite, quicken,
and suggest. This is Socratic and Christ-
like. The wisdom of ancient philoso-
phers, and the teaching of Jesus, have
come to us in dialogue forms. 2. His
willingness. The pupil was eager and
earnest, the teacher was able and
willing. ‘There are many,” says one,
“‘ whose ignorance clings tc them because
they are unwilling to confess it, and so
to forsake it ; whilst, on the other hand,
there are others who are as reluctant to


CHAP. IV.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


618





drop a word of wisdom from their lips,
as a miser is to surrender a guinea from
his purse.” If not taught by angels, be
thankful for the Bible and the Holy


given to him for present duty, and
this must be communicated to the
people. One revelation only prepares
for another, and by giving what we


Spirit. 3. But the degree of inform-
ation was not great. Explanations were
reserved, and the pupil had to ask again
(cf. vers. 12 and 13). Enough was


HOMILETICS.
Divina Grace THE Sourcgs oF alt Streneru.— Verses 7—10.


know, we increase our own stock of
learning. ‘He that watereth others
shall himself be watered.”


The resources of the Jewish leader were few, and dangers formidable, hence the
promise of help. The beginning may be small and discouraging, but the co-operation
of the Holy Spirit will ensure success. Joshua and Zerubbabel shall finish the
work, and bring forth the copestone amid the loud shouts of the people—“ Grace,
grace unto it.”

I. The work was carried on under the Divine auspices. The leaders do their
part, but it is “with those seven” eyes (ch. iii. 9), “the eyes of the Lord, which
run to and fro through the whole earth.” God watched the foundation, and was
ever present to superintend. Nothing took him by surprise or happened unknown.
In all parts of the earth his people are defended and guided by his providence.
“The Divine eye is ever in union with the Divine arm,” says a writer; “the
knowledge of God with his power.” Under his inspection the work must prosper.
He takes cognizance of all creatures, inspires and directs all efforts. Those that
have the plummet in hand can do nothing without him, should seek his presence,
and depend upon hishelp. “Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain
that build it.” II. The difficulties were overcome by Divine help. Difficulties
there were, manifold and great, in the people theraselves and outside them. 1. Some
despised the work. Circumstances were disheartening, made them sigh and desist.
They were few in number, and the work in proportion to their means very great.
“Who hath despised the day of small things?” 2. Powerful enemies opposed the
work. They were artful, malignant, and often successful. Like great mountains,
impassable and immovable, they stood inthe way. But the mountains were levelled
down, difficulties vanished away, and all became a plain. ‘Thou shalt thresh the
mountains,” when engaged for God (Isa. xli. 15). To despond is faithless and guilty.
Nothing can resist God. The victories of his word are sure. “Every mountain
and hill shall be made low; and the crooked be made straight, and the rough places
plain.” III. The work was finished amid joyful acclamations of Divine praise.
“‘ He shall bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace
unto it.” The people wished well to the building, and prayed that it might stand
for ever. The finishing of the temple was a type “a the work of God aN all ages.
The Jewish builder represented Christ, the Divine architect of the spiritual temple.
His work begun by grace should end by grace. Amid opposition it is carried on
and will be finished. Soon the plaudits of men and angels shall shout in
acclamation and acknowledgment of the multiplied favour of God. Grace, free
grace, shall be the theme of their song! “Grace, grace unto it.”


Daspising THE Day or SmatL Turnes—Verse 10.


The Jews are reproved for their heartlessness and unbelief. They should not
estimate God’s work by present appearances. Their progress though small is an
earnest of great and glorious success. To despair when God has promised help, is to
doubt his faithfulness, power, and omniscience. These words declare—

I. A fact in history. 1.“ The day of small things.” This, notwithstanding


614 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. (omaP. Tv.





great toil and much time spent in the work of God. In Jewish history and in the
present time—in the Sunday School and in the Christian Church—in philanthropic
and missionary enterprise, it is the day of small things. Though success may be
realized, yet it is small in itself; small in comparison with what might be, and with
what will be, 2. Let us learn a lesson. To be humble, because we have done so
little and been so idle. To be more prayerful; “O Lord, revive thy work.” To
depend more upon God. “Not by might, nor by power.” II. A tendency in our
nature. Contempt for small beginnings in religious matters has been a common
feeling. Sanballat despised the work of Nehemiah (ch. iv. 2). Christianity “was
despised and rejected of men,” in the person of its founder and his apostles.
Missionaries, religious institutions and societies, have been ridiculed in their feeble
beginnings. Why does this happen? ‘“ Because,” says Foster, “we do not apprehend
the preciousness of what is good, in any, even the smallest thing—we know not
what is requisite to be previously done, to bring the small beginning into existence
We are apt to set far too high a price on our own efforts, as estimated against their
results; and then there is the impiety of not duly recognizing the supremacy of God.”
III. A reproof from God. “Who hath despised?” How unreasonable and
foolish in the present circumstances. “ Our duty,” said Spinosa, “is neither to
ridicule the affairs of men, nor to deplore, but simply to understand them.” It
becomes no one, least of all a believer, to deride a small beginning, and think
despondingly of the work of God. This conduct is foolish. 1. Because there are
no little things really. Appearances deceive. We see not the connection, the
beginning and the end of things. ‘‘ All are links of one vast chain.” 2. Because
great things spring from what appear little things. In nature, we have mighty
forests from smallest seeds, and broad rivers from tiny streamlets. It is “ first the
blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear.” In history, we have great
results from small beginnings. The Bible and missionary societies are illustrations.
The law of providence and the gospel of Christ teach the same truth. A little
leaven hid in the meal affects the mass; the grain of mustard becomes a mighty
tree; and the handful of corn on the bleak mountain-top yields a waving harvest
like the fruitful Lebanon. Despise not, despair not. The work will and must be
finished. What, then, will be the end of those who help not, but deride and
hinder its accomplishment? ‘Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7. Great movntain. Mighty
snemies despised, subdued, and rendered
subservient to the cause of God. “A


power to build a habitation for his name,
and to finish their work. 3. When thie
work is finished, it is a proof of Christ’s


mountain is spoken of in Scripture
emblematically, to denote the greatest
difficulties and oppositions of men to
cross any design; and the overturning
or levelling of these mountains ex-


presseth the highest actings of the power °


of God, in subduing all difficulties and
oppositious for the good of his people”
[Cary!}.

Vers, 8, 9. 1. The promises of the
Word are faithful and worthy of con-
fidence — their repetition indicates our
distrust, but God’s readiness to perform.
2. It is a special favour to a people
when God grants them reformation,


unchangeable love and care, and should
be rightly studied as revealing the char-
acter of God. Thou shalt know that
the Lord of hosts hath sent me [ef.
Hutcheson.

The whole drift of this chapter might
be summed up in the words of Jesus to
his disciples, ‘‘ Have faith in God!”
and the encouragement that was held
out to the Jewish builders, is held out
to us. We have, first of all, what should
ever be enough to inspire confidence,
though it stood alone—independent of
all information as to the way in which
the work was to be effected by him— we


CHAP. IV.]


have the express and explicit promise of
Jehovah, that the building shall be
finished ; and that before the obedient
and prayerful efforts of his people the
greatest — the most apparently insur-
mountable — obstacles give way. We
have more than the bare word of promise:
the assurance of the incessantly attentive
superintendence and watchful care of his
ever-present providence. The “seven
eyes of the Lord run to and fro” to help.
Still further, we have the promise of the
constant and copious effusion of the Holy
Spirit. The might and power of man
are pronounced altogether incompetent,
and this Divine influence is promised.
‘This was true in the existing case. Faith,
fortitude, energy, aud perseverance were
needful, and supplied by the Spirit in
leaders and people. It is true in a
peculiar sense of the spiritual temple.
The stones must be prepared, and no
energy but God’s can make them living
stones. ven all legitimate and zealous
effort must prove fruitless, unless God
give his influence with them. But
having the promise, we need never de-
spond. As the ancient Church was
animated to look with confidence for the
accomplishment of the glorious things
awaiting her; so let us look forward


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


616





to the great results promised to us
[Wardlaw].

Ver. 10. When good men despise the
day of small things, the grand essential
of religion, faith, is wanting. They
lack faith in the unerring wisdom of the
Divine scheme and determinations ; faith
in the goodness of God, the absolute
certainty that infinite wisdom and power
cannot be otherwise than good; faith
in the promises of God, that his servants
shall, in the succession of their gener-
ations, see his cause advance from the
small to the great, though this be not
granted to any one separately ; that their
labours shall, each in their turn, be ap-
proved and recorded ; and that they shall
at last exult in the glorious consummation
[John Foster]. We ought not to de
spise the day of small things, because—
1. such conduct tends to prevent its
becoming a day of great things; 2. angels
do not despise it, but rejoice over every
one repenting sinner; 3. our Saviour
does not break the bruised reed, nor
quench the smoking flax; 4. God does
not despise it, but noticed even some
good thing found in the son of Jero-
boam ; 5. the day of small things is the
commencement of great things [ Payson).


HOMILETICS.
Tus GotpEn CANDLESTIOK.-— Verses 11—14.


The candlestick of pure gold represented the Church of God. There is alwaya
some distinctive peculiarity between the material emblem and the spiritual reality;
a seeming incongruity which is in reality a distinguishing glory, e.g. “a lamb in
the midst of the throne ;” so here, such a candlestick was never seen except in
vision. The lamps in the temple were supplied by the priests in the ordinary way,
but this in a supernatural way. The mystery was explained to the prophet as
representing Joshua the high priest and Zerubbabel the prince, who were endued
with the Holy Spirit, and raised up to rule, intercede, and build up the temple.
All authority and success depended upon God; they were acknowledged as a
combined and eminent type of Jesus Christ, who is priest upon the throne, builds
the spiritual temple, and who alone shall bear the glory.

I, The seat of spiritual light. The Church contains the knowledge, holiness,
and consolation to be found in this sinful world. Worldly men are strangers to
this light ; wander carelessly into error and destruction ; and even the wisest and
most diligent never discovered a light sufficient to guide them aright. This light
is not inherent, or all would have it alike, as the light of conscience and reason.
Not merely the light of the old dispensation, but the light of the glorious gospel,
which is fixed in this Church, which there diffvses satisfaction, direction, and


616 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: GHCHARIAL. [GHAP. Iv.





holiness, Its rays thrown around, invite and attract the world ; but they must come
into the Church to enjoy it. Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath
shined. II. The source of spiritual light. It comes from the Lord Jesus, its
glorious source, in whom all fulness dwells. The Holy Spirit is the oil of gladness,
resting on Christ, and freely given by him to his Church. It is supplied not by
any natural or artificial means, as the oil in the vision was not pressed from the
olive, nor poured into the lamps by the help of man; but flowed spontaneously,
abundantly, constantly, from a living source—so the communication of Divine grace
from Christ, the living spring. III. The communication of light. It is by
means of a golden candlestick. 1. This may apply :—First, to the glorious doctrines
of the gospel, by which the light of the knowledge of God is displayed in Jesus
Christ. Second, to the ordinances of the gospel, by which light and consolation
are dispensed in the Church, and which attract the notice of the world. Seven
branches turning every way, all lit. Christ so places his word, ordinances, and
ministers, that no part of the Church is destitute of life, and that the whole will
shine as the light of the world. Third, to the character of the saints, shining in
the effulgence of holiness; “ye are the light of the world” (cf. Isa. lx. 1).
2. Whether allusion be to either or all of these, the emblem will apply-——a golden
candlestick. First, formed of valuable material, The doctrines and ordinances of
the gospel are more precious than gold: the law of thy mouth is better than
thousands of gold and silver. The saints, precivus sons of Zion, are comparable to
fine gold. The candlestick is formed by ¢njinite skill, and wrought with most
exquisite workmanship. Second, gold denotes brightness, purity, splendour, and
glory. What refulgent purity in the doctrines, in the ordinances of the gospel, and
in the lives of consistent Christians! Third, gold denotes durability. It is an
indestructible metal. Lead can be melted until wasted away; but gold, expose it
to what heat you may, retains its weight, loses nothing by alloy, and escapes
uninjured. The doctrines of the gospel, the Church, and the characters of holiness
in saints, are incorruptible; shall endure to the end of the world, and never be
consumed, by persecution or hell itself. In closing—l. We are led to admire the
wonderful provision of Divine grace. Worldly men despise our secret communica-
tions and deride our expectations, and we ourselves wonde- how supplies come.
But the mysterious olive pours in its rich abundance. 2. We see the reason why
the gospel and the Church live in spite of opposition. They depend upon a living
source. arth and hell cannot cut the golden pipes, or turn aside the stream.
3. We are reminded that no human power or effort can do good to men, except the
Holy Spirit works by them. But the Spirit works by the meanest instrument, and
needs not the countenance of mighty monarchs, or the aid of learning and oratory.
The excellency of the power is his own. 4. We are taught to distinguish between
grace and the gospel. The oil is distinct from the pipes, though conveyed through
them. Ordinances are but pipes and means, not to be rested in; yet golden pipes,
very valuable, and employed to convey the blessing Pray for a rich supply of the
Holy Spirit [The New Evangelist].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 12—14.; 1. The question (ver.
12); 2. the confession (ver. 13); 3. the
answer (ver. 14). The angel returned
no answer (only asked a question) to
the question of the prophet, to invite
closer attention, and prompt a more
definite question [cf. Pusey].

Ver. 14. Two anointed ones. Blessed


in themselves, and the means of bless-
ing others—empty themselves (ver. 12).
The unction of the Holy One must abide
in us before we can furnish grace to
others (cf. Johniii. 20—27). ‘‘Joshuaand
Zerubbabel shadowed forth what was
united in Christ, and so in their several
offices they might be included in the


CHAI Ly.)


symbol of the olive-tree. They could not
exhaust it ; for men who, having served
God in their generation, were to pass away,
could not be alone intended in a vision,
which describes the abiding existence of
the Church. Christ is both High Priest
and Eternal King. In both ways he
supplies to us the light which he brought.


From him flow unceasingly piety and.


righteousness to the Church, and it never
lacks the heavenly light. The oil is
expressed into tubes; thence passed
through tubes, into the vessel which
contains the lamps: to designate the
various suppliers of light, which, the
nearer they are to the effluence of the


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1—4. Candlestick. All human
souls, never so bedarkened, love light ;
light once kindled spreads till all is
luminous [ Carlyle]. We are all naturally
ambitious to shine in the world. It is the
foible of our race; but the fault lies not
in the passion itself, but in mistaking the
sphere and choosing improper objects.
Many are proud to shine in the lustre
of pomp, the elegance of dress, or the
splendour of equipage ; others again are
ambitious of the voice of fame, or the
acquisition of power. To such as act by
the opinion of the world alone, fashion
is above all other laws. They study
nothing but appearance. This object
absorbs other appetites, passions, princi-
ples, and duties. But religion alone will
teach. from what principle, in what
manner, and by what means to shine
[ Baseley].

Vers. 4, 5. What? Conviction of
ignorance is the door-step to the temple
of wisdom [Spurgeon]. Compare thy-
self with those that are more learned or
wise than thyself, and then thou wilt
see matter to keep thee humble [Sir
Mi. Hale]. Ask the reason “ Why?”
{Arkwright}.

“ Tenorance is the curse of God ;

Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to

heaven” [Shakespeare].

Vers. 6,7. Power. Dependence gives
God his proper glory. It is the peculiar
honour and prerogative of Deity to have


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.


617





oil, the more they resemble him by
whom they are appointed to so Divine
an office. The seven lamps are the
manifest Churches, distinct in place, but
most closely bound together by the
consent of one faith, and by the bond
of charity. For although the Church is
one, yet it is distinct according to the
manifold variety of nations. But the
lamps are set in a circle, that the oil of
one may flow more readily into others
and it, in turn, may receive from others
their superabundance, to set forth the
communion of love and the indissoluble
community of faith”’ [Pusey].


TO CHAPTER IV.


a world of creatures hanging upon it—
staying themselves upon it; to be the
fulcrum, the centre of a lapsing creation
{ Howe}.

Ver. 10. Despised. To a decidedly
irreligious contemner, we might say,
“ Beware what you do;” for “if the
thing be of God,” you are daring him by
your contempt. If there be something
of his spirit and power contained and
acting in things, it is not safe to make
free with them in the way of scorn,
however inconsiderable in magnitude
they may seem. It may one day (not
“a day of small things” that) be a
question, not of rebuke, but of judgment.
On that day will not be forgotten a
contempt of the introductory littleness
(say, rather, undisclosed dignity) of what
God had determined to advance to
greatness and glory [John Foster'].

Ver. 11. Olive. No tree is more fre-
quently mentioned by ancient authors,
nor more highly honoured by ancient
nations. By the Greeks it was dedicated
to Minerva, and even employed in
crowning Jove, Apollo, and Hercules,
as well as emperors, philosophers, and
orators, and all whom the people de
lighted to honour. By the Romans alse
it was highly honoured. Columella de-
scribes it as “ the chief of trees.” It is
not wonderful that almost all the ancient
authors, from the time of Homer, so
frequently mention it, and that, as


618 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. v.





Horace says, to win it seemed the sole appeared in pairs; as Moses and Aaror
aim men had in life [Carm.i. 7]. See the inspired civil and religious authori-
Tristam, Nat. Hist.of the Bible; Thom- ties; Caleb and Joshua; Ezekiel the
son, Ld. and Bk. priest and Daniel the prophet ; Zerubba-

Ver. 14. Two. Christ’s witnesses, in bel and Joshua (cf Rev. xi. 3, 4) [D.
remarkable times of the Church, have Brown, D.D.}.





CHAPTER V.


Crrrican Nores.] Flying roll] Vision sixth, 2,] Ten yards long and five yards broad. The
size intended to indicate the number of curses contained ; and Flying] The velocity of judgments upow
the wicked. 8. Earth] Land of Judah first; ultimately, to all the earth. Stealeth] Sinners against
the second commandment, false swearers against the first. Cut off] Lit. cleared, swept away as
offensive A Kings xiv. 10 ; Ezek. xxiv. 11), Twosins put for the whole. This side—that side)
The scroll was written on both sides, as in Ex, xxxii, 15. Henderson gives: “ From that plecs,
whether on the right hand or on the left, he should be swept away by the Divine judgment.
Nowhere should he find protection.” 4. Forth] Out of the treasure-house (Jer. x. 13). Enter avd
remain] Lit. lodge orstay; not idle, but consuming inmates, beams, and stones (cf. 1 Kings xviii, 35
Lev, xiv. 45), 5.] Seventh vision. Wickedness driven from Judah to mingle with its kindrea
elements in Babylon, 6. Ephah] A familiar dry measure, denoting unjust dealings in buying and
selling (ef. Amos viii. 5). Resemblance] Lit. eye (¢. ¢. that to which the eye was directed, their aim,
viz. evil, some), The ephah was an image of the wickedness of the Jews in the land. 1. Lifted]
The ephah was covered, Talent] Lit. a round piece of metal, 125 lbs. weight. A woman] In
miniature, perhaps; Lit. one woman personified wickedness (cf. Prov. ii. 16; v. 3, 4). Lit. the
wickedness in its peculiar form. 8. Cast] it within; caused her to contract herself within the
compass of the vessel [Newe.]. Wickedness had risen up, but was cast down again, and sealed up in
the ephah. The weight] Lit, the stone, round mass of lead, to secure her. No escape from judg-
ments. 9. Two women] removed the ephah with its contents. One not enough to carry the load
[Maurer]. The Assyrians and Babylonians, by whom God removed idolatry in the persons of
apostate Jews out of the land [Henderson]. Wings] like storks’ wings, strong and ample. Wind] To
represent the swiftness of movement, flying before instead of struggling against wind [ Wardlaw].
Lifted] up above hindrance and earthly power. 11. Build] a permanent habitation. Shinar] An
old historic name for Babylon (Gen. x. 10: Isa. xi. 11: Dan. i 2). Wickedness is to be punished
by another exile, longer than the former one. Established] Wickedness cast out of Judah, will
dwell long and firmly, but not permanently, in Babylon; a type of the final separation of the ungodly
from the godly in time and eternity.


HOMILETICS.
Tas Unowanarna Law anpD ITs UnivarsaL Cursn.— Verses 1—4.,


The series of visions now take another turn. In the two preceding chapters we
have the elements of the gospel, in the destruction of Zion’s foes, the forgiveness of
the people, the teaching of the Holy Spirit, and the finishing of the temple. Now
we learn that God is holy, and cannot tolerate sinners in their wickedness—that
all who remain impenitent or reject God’s mercy will be punished with a long
and dreary exile, or visited with exterminating judgment. “The white robes of
innocence and the golden oil of the Holy Spirit disappear, and in their place comes
a fearful curse, overshadowing the land and threatening an irrecoverable overthrow ”
[Lange]. We learn from the connection of these words—

I. That God’s law is not abrogated by change of circumstances. The Jews
were restored to their land, forgiven in their sins, ar.d aided in their work; but


SHAD. V.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAB. 619








the law of God still observed, and would punish, their guilt. No place, time, nor
circumstances can alter this law. It is “from eternity to eternity.” It is the
revelation of God, and the standard of rectitude in all nations and ages. Unchange-
able in its nature, demands, and design, it is designed to educate conscience, to keep
alive a sense of sin, and to lead to repentance and faith. “The law entered (came
in by the way, «. ¢. provisionally, with the foreseen effect) that the offence might
abound.” IY That the curse of God’s law will come upon all transgressors.
“This ie the curse that goeth forth.” There is a constant tendency in men to gbuse
Divine goodness, and encourage sin. But to all who see, the “ flying roll” unfolds
the knowledge of God. It is still a “fiery law,” pronouncing curses on those who
disobey Sinai still thunders forth its terrors to all who in spirit, word, or deed
break its principles. They lay hold upon all, and where is the man that can escape 1
“ Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the
book of the law, to do them.” III. That Divine grace alone will secure a man
from the curse of God’s law. The Jews were reminded that sin would hinder
their work—that they were to forsake it, if God must continue to help them, and
fix them in their own land. In other words, God’s favour alone would be the
ground of their security. They are only safe who trust his mercy and obey his
will. ‘The lesson under a different form,” says Wardlaw, “ was also, that the land
to which they had been restored, must be held by the same tenure as before. God
had given it originally by promise. By faith of the promise it was obtained. By
*the obedience of faith’ it was held. The inheritance was never ‘of the law;’
was never held by any legal tenwre—by any kind of desert—any right arising out
of the doings of those who occupied it.” Only in Christ are we free from
condemnation. We are saved by grace, not by works, ‘* Not of works, lest any
man should boast.”


Tae Fryinc Ronn, or Sin anp its Punisament.— Verses 1—4.


Taking this roll as representing the curse of God, ready to be executed upon
transgressors, let us “lift up our eyes and behold ” the sins which bring the curse,
and provoke God to ruin men in personal and domestic affairs.

I. The sins. Some infer the Divine authority of the roll, from its size, just the
dimensions of the temple porch, a place where the law was usually read ; others
infer, the great, number of the sins and curses written upon it. Like Ezekiel’s roll
“if was written within and without,” and full of “lamentations, and mourning, and
woe.” 1. The sins were grievous. Two kinds are specified as indicating the whole.
(a) Sins against man. “ Every one that stealeth.” This means every kind of
injustice and violence. (6) Sins against God. ‘‘ Every one that sweareth.” False
or profane swearing was common among the Jews. Stealing and perjury often
together ; for the covetous and fraudulent have no scruple in the use of God’s name
(cf. Prov. xxx. 9). Innumerable methods of fraud and deceit are constantly practised,
and scarcely considered criminal, because customary. But all who are guilty of
injustice and dishonesty with their neighbours in whatever form, and all who
withhold from God, in principle and action, the reverence due to his name, are under
the curse of the law. 2. The sins were open. They were not only written on the
roll, but the roll was open, and of extraordinary size. “It was not rolled up and
sealed, but fully expanded to view, that nothing it contained might. be concealed,”
says one. Sins are written legibly on our moral constitution, in the sight of God
and man, and are “ known and read of all men.” Sin is self-revealing. It is
impossible to hide wrong-doing. Jupiter was supposed to write down the sins of
men in a book. God keeps a record of human guilt, which will be unfolded on
earth and in eternity. “Some men’s sins are open (manifest, clear,) beforehand,
going (like heralds) before to judgment ; and some men they follow after.” II. The


[OHAP. ¥.





620 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARLAA,
punishment. “This is the curse that goeth forth.”


must be denounced against all transgressors.


The curse of the Divine law
Its sanction must be set forth and


not erased. The theology which denies Divine justice, and deludes the conscience,


finds no place in the teaching of the prophet.
not a mere brutum fulmen, but a solid and terrible reality.”
“ Every one shall be cut off.”
2. The curse was inevitable.
Who can turn aside that which Almighty power sends
On “this side, and on that,” the ungodly are “ cut off.”
Its speed was not slow: ‘“‘I see a flying roll.”
suddenly break forth, and overtake the disobedient.


universal.
earth,” ready to fall upon its objects.
it forth, saith the Lord.”
forth ?
swf.


is not more swift and irresistible.
earth: his word runneth very swiftly.”


into the house.”


“The anathemas of Scripture are
1. The curse was
It hangs over “the face of the whole
“J will bring


3. The curse was
Judgments sleep not, but
The lightning from heaven


“‘He sendeth forth his commandment upon
4, The curse was destructive.

the house, and consumed everything inside, like the plague of old.

(a) It destroys families. The homes of the thief and the false-


It penetrated
“Tt shall enter


swearer were attacked. The curse of God comes to the sinner where he thinks


himself most protected and most secure.


(b) It destroys possessions. Vengeance


enters and remains in the house until it answers the end for which itis sent. It
“remains in the midst of it;” abides like leprosy, infecting, wasting, and consuming


all.


Ahab multiplied his house, and defied the curse pronounced against it; but
the stroke swept all away (1 Kings xxi. 20—22).


“ The curse of the Lord is in the


house of the wicked ; but he blesseth the habitation of the just.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Prophecies partly appertain
to those in whose times the sacred
writers prophesied, partly to the mys-
teries of Christ. And therefore it is
wont of the prophets, at one time to chas-
tise vices and set forth punishments ;
at another, to predict the mysteries of
Christ and the Church [ Aug. de Civ. Det].
It was a wide, unfolded roll, as is in-
volved in its flying; but its flight sig-
nified the very swift coming of punish-
ment; its flying from heaven, that the
sentence came from the judgment-seat
above [Pusey].

Ver. 2. Its large size might denote
two things: — the large number and
amount of the Divine denunciations it
contained ; and at the same time, there
being room for writing them large, that
they might be seen. It was at the same
time “flying.” By which, also, two
things might be denoted—that it was not
meant for any particular city or locality,
but to make a progress through the
length and breadth of the land; and
also, that the denunciations of Jehovah
written in it would come speedily and
surely on those against whom they were


pointed [ Wardlaw].


Ver. 3. Cut off: lit. cleansed away.
The moral meaning of the Hebrew
word suggests, the defiling and offensive
nature of sin, and the several measures
necessary to take it away. “ None who
enter the porch of the visible Church
may flatter themselves that they can
escape God’s wrath and malediction, if
they commit any of the sins condemned
by the comprehensive commination of
this flying roll, which may be compared
to a net, co-extensive with the world, and
drawn throughout the whole from side
to side” [ Wordsworth].

Ver. 4. A man’s house is termed his
castle, but is unable to hold out against
Divine judgments, which may be noticed
—1. for terribleness; 2. suddenness; and
3. retributive end. Property and estates
often cut off, families dried up root and
branch, and doomed to perpetual curse
(cf. Job xviii. 14, 15). “It is a curse
that embitters every sweet, and gives more
than twofold intensity to every bitter.
From this world it must accompany
and follow a man to another, and settle
with him there for ever. The special
reference made to their houses, with the
stones thereof and the timber theraof,


CHAP. \V.; HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARTAII. 621





forcibly points to the care which they Jehovah's house was neglected” {| Ward
had been taking of their own accommo- Jaw].
dation, in comfort and elegance, while





HOMILETICS.


Taz Woman IN THE Eruau, orn THE WICKEDNESS AND PUNISHMENT OF THE
Nation.— Verses 5—11.


The scope of this vision is not much indicated by the angel, and is differently
interpreted by commentators. In the former vision, God pursues personal sins
with private calamities ; in this, the nation iills up the measure of its iniquity, and
is cast out of its land. Taking the woman as representing the Jewish nation—the
Church of God, and the ephah—the wickedness, the corruption in which the nation
had fallen ; we have a prophetic warning or denunciation for the future. The two
visions, distinct in form, are allied in meaning and purpose.

I. The wickedness of the nation. “This is an ephah that goeth forth.”
Dr. Henderson regards the wickedness as meaning “idolatry with all its accom-
panying atrocities.” Wardlaw and others take the ephah as an emblem of worldly
tragic or merchandise. This traffic was mixed up with fraud and treachery, and
the ground of complaint and expostulation. 1. The wickedness was universal.
“This is their resemblance through all the land.” “Ye are cursed with a curse;
for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation” (cf. Mal, iii. 9). 2. This wickedness
was deeply vooted. The woman is represented as sitting in the ephah. World-
liness dwells in the Church. “The love of this present world” leads many astray.
3. This wickedness was measured. The ephah was gradually filled, and every one
contributed to the full measure. All helped to make the heap, and ripen the
nation for judgment. Sin was a common store, Divinely permitted and exactly
measured (cf. Gen. xv. 16). “ Fill ye up the measure of your fathers ” (Matt. xxiii.
32). IL The punishment of the nation. The nation was shut up with its sins in
the measure ; enclosed so that they could not escape; and carried where the retri-
bution begins, but does not seem to end. 1. The nation was carried away. They
might be permitted to build and work for God, but if they heeded not the warning,
they would be lifted up out of their land, and dispersed to other countries, 2. The
nation was openly carried away. “They lifted up the ephah between the earth and
the heaven.” The punishment was before the eyes of all, a public example of God’s
vengeance to the world. 3. The nation was carried away by suitable agencies.
Whatever the two women represent, they are set forth as agents, swift and sufficient,
to execute the Divine purpose, without let or hindrance. “ Rapidly, inexorably,
irresistibly, they flew and bore the ephah between heaven and earth. No earthly
power could reach or rescue it” [Pusey]. 4. The nation was carried away to an
appointed place. “In the land of Shinar.” Babylon was an emblem of restored
and repeated captivity. A place which symbolizes the anti-christian or ungodly
powers, who by violence, art, and falsehood war against the truth. 5. The punish-
ment of the nation in this appointed place would be of long duration. “The
building of a house” for the ephah, and “the setting of it on its own base,” repre-
sent the long duration of the second dispersion. For two thousand years the Jews
have remained a distinct people in a scattered state, a proof of God’s faithfulness,
and a warning to all nations. Unjust measures, whatever they be, will bring
righteous retribution upon their possessors. The instrument of defrauding God
aud man will become the agent of punishment. Siuners will be driven away in
their own wickedness, and sent to their “‘own place.” Let us seek our portion
with the true Israel, and avoid the curse of Babylon’s doom. ‘Mystery, Babylon
the great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth” (cf. Rev. xvii. 3-5).


822


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


(CHAP, ¥





“ Tribes of the wandering foot and weary breast,
How shall ye flee away and be at rest ?
The wild dove hath her nest, the fox his cave,
Mankind their country—lIsrael but the grave” [Lange]


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 6. This is equivalent to see,
there is a woman, &c. The strokes of
punitive wrath do not fall at random
or capriciously. There is ample reason
in every case, so that one, may always
say, this (the ephah) is their object in
all the land. Men go ceaselessly adding
sin to sin, and, because judgment is not
suddenly executed, think that there is
impunity ; whereas they are only filling
the measure. God waits. There is an
appointed time with him, and he will
not anticipate [Lange]. We too are
taught by this, that the Lord of all
administers all things in weight and
measure, So foretelling to Abraham
that his seed should be a sojourner, and
the cause thereof—“ for the iniquity of
the Amorites is not yet full,” ¢.¢. they
have not yet committed sins enough
(Gen. xv. 16) to merit entire destruction,
- wherefore I cannot yet endure to give
them over to the slaughter, but will
wait for the measure of their iniquity
[Pusey].

The ephah may therefore represent—
l. The sins of the people. Every one
contributing to fill up the measure. 2.
Their ripeness for Divinejudgment. The
measure filled up. 3. The just retribu-
tion of their punishment. “The unjust
measure was one of Judah’s leading
sins, and thus, in just retribution, their
punishment.”

Ver. 6. They who had dealt treacher-
ously with others, were dealt treacher-
ously with themselves. What measure
men mete to others, God metes to them-
selves (Isa. xxi. 2; xxxiii. 1) [Fausset].

Ver. 8. Lead on the mouth of it. The
ephah was covered, and the heavy lid of
lead carefully put down upon the mouth
of it. This is a significant emblem of
the impossibility of escape from the
merited judgments of God. So the
Jewish people, considered conditionally,
es retainiug their character, would be


carried away in their worldlinese, as the
woman was borne in the ephah. The
very ephah, the instrument of their
merchandise and wealth, is represented
as the means of confinement; so does
the worldly-mindedness, the ambition,
and covetousness of the Jewish people
shut them up to retributive vengeance
[ Wardlaw}.

Vers. 9—11. 1. A people abusing
afflictions and marvellous deliverances
from it, by sinning yet more, may ex-
pect their afflictions to be returned upon
them with harder measure; for a new
and sorer captivity, and longer dwelling
under it, is here threatened upon renewed
provocations. 2. The Lord hath suffi.
cient instruments at command to execute
his judgments, who, being employed
against his sinful people, shall find all
things concurring with them in their
work ; two women enough to carry the
ephah ; wings, enabling them to flee and
do their work violently and swiftly;
high in heaven and earth, above the
opposition of men; and wind in their
wings, to indicate providence helping
them forward. 3. Captivity and exile
in profane nations, from the face of
God, and the society of one another in
his ordinances, is one of the sorest
judgments by which the Lord plagues
his Church ; wickedness is carried to the
land of Shinar. 4. As the Church is
no place for sin to reign and get a biding
habitation ; so enemies to the Church


“are accounted by God as the common sink


of wickedness, whom he will punish;
for wickedness is carried from the holy
land to Shinar, its own place, where all
wickedness dwelt, from which the Jews
might gather that, as he punished them
so he would not spare their enemies
[Hutcheson]. The prophet intimates to
the Jews of his own age, that if they
sin against God by the sins here men-
tioned, their restoration to Jerusalem ‘a


CHAP. v.]


frustrate and abortive; they are not, in
heart, in Zion, the city of peace, but in
Babel, the city of confusion ; and though
they may pride themselves in building a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


,


city and temple at Jerusalem, yet their
own proper place, where their own
house is built, is the land of Shinar
[ Wordsworth}.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER V.


Ver. 3. Curse. The good make a
better bargain, and the bad a worse,
than is usually supposed, for the rewards
of the one, and the punishments of the
other, not unfrequently begin on this
side of the grave [Colton’s Laconics].
The wages that sin bargains with the
sinner are—life, pleasure, and profit ; but
the wages it pays them with are—death,
torment, and destruction. He that would
understand the falsehood and death of
sin, must compare its promises and
payments together [South].


“ Our pleasant vices make instruments to scourge
us” [Shakespeare].


Ver. 7. Behold. The angel bids him
behold the sins of the people Israel ;
heaped together in a perfect measure,
and the transgression of all fulfilled—
that the sins which escaped notice, one
by one, might, when collected together,
be laid open to the eyes of all, and Israel
might go forth from its place, and it
might be shown to all what she was in
her own land Teed as

Ver. 8. Lead. iquity, as with a


talent of lead, weighs down the con-
science [JSt. alae Escape is con-
trary to the laws of God and God’s
universe. It is as impossible as that
fire should not burn, or water run up-
hill Your sins are killing you by
inches ; all day long they are sowing in
ou the seeds of disease and death
Canon Kingsley).

Vers. 9—11. This vision, like the
other visions of Zechariah, extends to
Christian times. In the Christian Church
universal corruptions have arisen which
may find a solemn warning here. The
Church of Rome boasts herself to be
Sion: but she is the mystical Babylon
of the Apocalypse. Her sovereign pon-
tiff is “the lawless one” of St. Paul
(2 Thess. iii 3—12). This prophecy
may be applied, and ought to be applied,
as a warning to those who are tempted
to communicate with her in her errors
and corruptions. Her doom will be, to
be removed from her place, and to be
swept away by the whirlwind of God’s
wrath, because she rebels against his will
and word [ Wordsworth}.





CHAPTER VL


Carricat Nores,] Chariots] Symbolic of four great empires described (Dan, ii. 31—43; vii.
3—7): or of the four winds of heaven (ver. 5). Two mountains] Between Moriah and Zion, some;
others, emblems of Medes and Persians, corresponding to the two horns (Dan. viii. 34). Brass]
Strength and solidity (cf. Jer. i. 18). 2. Red] The colours indicate the character of the dispensations.
Red, a symbol of cruelty, war, and bloodshed, Black] of calamity and sorrow. White] of
prosperity and gladness. Grisled and bay] or piebald, of a mixed dispensation, light and darkness,
prosperity and adversity. 5. Angel] explains. Spirits] (winds, marg.), emblem of the destructive
powers and agencies of Divine judgments (cf. Ps. cxlviii, 8: Jer, xlix. 36: Rev. vii. 2, 3).
Henderson gives, ‘‘angels or celestial spirits, represented as employed by God to carry into effect
his high behests, which they receive in his immediate presence (Job 1, 65 11. 1), and them proceed to
the different.quarters of the globe in which the special operations of Divine Providence are to be
carried forward.” 6. North] To conquer Babylonians, After them] ler and his successors


624 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. vr.


go forth to conquer the Persians. South] Egypt and Arabia. 7. Bay] Lit. strong or fleet.
Sought] Eagerly seeking for permission to do what had to be done. Walk] in the land, unmolested
by invasion, yet not free from annoyance; a mixed state of affairs in Israel for a considerable period.
Get] Permission given by him who commands the chariots. 8. Quieted my spirit] 7. ¢. have appeased
mine anger, or caused it to rest (Judges viii. 3: Eccl. x, 4: Ezek. v. 13), Babylon alone in the days
of the prophet was punished; God’s anger was satisfied in that direction ; other monarchies had to
expiate their sins, 9,] The ninth vision, Crowns on Joshua, 10, 11.] The persons named appear to
have formed a deputation from the captives still remaining in Babylon, who had sent them with
contributions in gold and silver, to help forward the building of the temple at Jerusalem. These
deputies had deposited their gifts in the house of Josiah, to which the prophet is commanded to
repair, and take what was necessary for making the two crowns, which were to be placed on the head
of the high priest [Henderson]. Crowns] A symbol of the priesthood and kingdom of Messiah (Rev.
xix. 12), 12. The man] shadowed forth in Joshua, viz, the Messiah. Branch] As if it were a
proper name, as appears not only by the lack of the article, but by the established usage of the earlier

rophets [Lange]. (Cf. iii, 8: Isa, iv, 2: Jer, xxiii. 5). Grow] Shall sprout out from his place, ¢. ¢,
ee his land or nation ; not an exotic, but a root-shoot of the real stock. ‘‘ Not merely from
Bethlehem or Nazareth, but by his own power, without man’s aid, in miraculous conception ”
[Henderson]. Build] the future spiritual temple; an encouragement to Jews that the material temple
will be finished in spite of opposition, 18. Glory] A reference to the insignia of majesty put on the
head of Joshua; the honour and authority of sovereign. Sit and rule] The former denotes the

ossession of the honour and dignity of a king; the latter, the actual exercise of royal authority
Hengs.]. Priest] Priestly and kingly offices united in him on one throne, Peace] Civil and
religious authorities working together, typify the harmony of his kingdom and priesthood ; no clashing
of jurisdiction between the two offices. ‘‘ By the counsel or purpose of peace, is understood the
glorious scheme of reconciliation between God and man, effected by the joint exercise of the
sacerdotal and regal offices of the Lord Jesus Christ (cf. Isa. ix. 6; Mic, vy. 5: Ephes. ii. 14—17:
Col. i. 20, 21: Heb. xiii. 20" [Henderson]. 14, Helem] The same as He/dai and Hen] Another
name of Josiah (ver. 10). Not unusual among Jews for one man to be known by two names,
Memorial] The crowns not for these persons to wear, but a symbol of the act just taken place ; hence
to be desposited in the temple as pledges of the Messiah, to animate their anticipations of his
appearance. 15, Far off] Gentiles shall be called, and shall actively participate in setting up the
kingdom of God. Know] When events correspond to predictions. Come] Unbelief would not
hinder the accomplishment of the promise; but if they obeyed, the temple would be finished, and in
the latter days this would be realized. The benefits of the Messiah’s coming and work were
conditional to them. The large portion of the Jews were disobedient, and perverted the prophets.
Henderson and others consider the words an aposiopesis ; a figure of speech by which emphatic silence
conveys an intimation more impressively than words. If ye will hearken, then—“ The words simply
declare that Israel will not come to the knowledge of the Messiah, or to his salvation, unless it
hearkens to the voice of the Lord, Whoever intentionally closes his eyes, will be unable to see the
salvation of God” [ Ket].


HOMILETICS.


Gop’s PROVIDENCE GUARDS THE INTERESTS OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.—
Verses 1—8,


Under the type of four chariots the providence of God is represented in this

vision as guiding the agencies of the world, in reference to the destinies of God’s
eople.

; r The powers of the world are subservient to the interests of the Christian
Church. The history of the world is arranged with a view to promote the welfare
of God’s people and to establish the kingdom of the Messiah. Hence all things are
designed and adjusted to work in mutual action and united tendency for the good
of the Christian (Rom. viii. 28). 1. In their origin. ‘There came four chariots out
from between two mountains.” Calvin explains the mountains as the hiding-place
of the Divine purpose, which is kept back until the time for its revelation and
execution. All events and agencies emanate from the decrees of God, which are firm
and immovable as mountains of brass. 2. Jn their nature. The messengers of God
are sent to accomplish various designs. Some go on errands of bloodshed and
mourning ; some as heralds of joy and triumph; and others have missions mixed
with joy and grief, prosperity and adversity, 3. In their direction. Some go to
the north, and others to the south (ver. 6). They all start from a common centre,


“HAP. VI.) HOMILETIC COUMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. 62d


the purpose of the Eternal, but are sent in different directions. In all quarters of
the globe God is supreme, and sees the end from the beginning of events. Nothing
is contingent or happens unknown to him. “ Political changes,” says Moore, “are
only the moving of the shadow on the earthly dial-plate that marks the mightiest
revolutions going forward in the heavens.” II. The powers of the world are
employed according to the design of God concerning the Christian Church.
God’s swift messengers are sent forth to accomplish the counsels of his will. 1. To
punish some. War, pestilence, famine, and destructive agencies bring mourning
and distress, God can turn nations one against another, and white horses may follow
black. 2. To caution others. To many, providences are a cup mixed with bitter
and sweet ; life to them is now prosperous and then adverse. 3. To help God's
people. Whatever be the dispensations of God to others, they portend good only
to his people. Swiftly and triumphantly are the chariots driven along, agitating
the earth like rushing winds ; but the Church of God is secure. “God is in the
midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right early.”


THe ADMINISTRATION oF DivingE PRovIDENCE.—Verses 2—8.


In this vision we have an insight of the providence of God in its telation to men.

I. It is various in its aspects. There were red and white horses, grisled and
bay. Events have different aspects, and the times change like the face of the sky.
One thing is set over against the other, and the cup of God’s hand is full of mixture
(Ps. Ixxv. 8). II. It is supreme in its operations. All events “go forth” from
God. He commands and he restrains. He is supreme, 1. Over all agencies. The
chariots are driven by his skill, and the winds gathered in his fists (Prov. xxx. 4).
2. Over all times. In all ages of the world, and in every period of national and
personal history, God rules. All the laws and forces of the universe were created and
are preserved and directed by him. There is no chance nor caprice; there are no
inferior deities, like the store-keepers of Jupiter, in the providence of God. III. It
is wonderful in its method. In John’s vision angels are represented as holding
the winds (Rev. vii. 1). ‘‘ Why not the angels,” asks Wardlaw, “in the vision of
Zechariah, be considered as directing the winds?” Angels stand before God,
“excel in strength,” and are “‘ ministers of his that do his pleasure.” How strange
that God should employ the mightiest and most intelligent creatures in the universe
on our behalf. Well may Shakespeare exclaim, “ Angels and ministers of grace,
defend us!” IV. It is rapid in its movements. Swift as chariots and sudden as
the winds are changes often wrought. Now sunshine beams upon nations and they
bask in prosperity ; then clouds and storms gather over them and joy is driven
away. ‘The chariot of God’s providence runneth not upon broken wheels,” says
Rutherford. V. It is satisfactory to God in its results. ‘They have quieted
my spirit.” This may refer to the satisfaction of Divine justice in executing
vengeance upon the enemies of his people (cf. ch. i. 15, and Isa. i. 24). Wrath
and mercy may be deferred, but will eventually be revealed. God’s people should
hope on and work earnestly. God’s enemies should beware lest they be overtaken
in their sins. ‘The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.”


Tus Ministry or ANGELS.— Verse 7.


In these words the charioteers are represented as asking permission to do what
they could for the holy land, They have to wait, but the command is given and
they are swift in obedience. Take them as describing the ministry of angels.

I. It is extensive in range. “To and fro through the earth.” North or south,
as God commissions them (ver. 6). II. It is antagonistic in its character.
Satan and his angels walk to and fro ee earth to do mischief. They roam in


626 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. VL








restless activity, and no place is secure from their attacks (Job i 7). But
the messengers of Jehovah are more numerous and powerful than all against us.
The ultimate triumph is certain, we may therefore have confidence. III. It is
retributive in its design. To punish the enemies of God’s people and satisfy the
demands of his justice. They not only minister mercy but execute vengeance.
IV. It is eager in its spirit. They “sought to go that they might walk,” they
Were eager and ready to be employed.


“They stand with wings outspread
Listening to catch the Master’s least command,
And fly through Nature ere the moment ends” [Carrington],
HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Brass. Mountains of brass it. But first, that they can do nothing .


denote the immovable decrees of God,
his steady execution of his counsels,
and the insuperable restraints that are
upon all empires and counsels, which
God keeps within the barriers of such
impregnable mountains that not one can
start till he opens the way [Cruden’s
Concordance}.

Ver. 4. What? Difficulty doth but
whet desire in heroic spirits ; the harder
the vision, the more earnest was the
prophet’s inquisition; he was restless till
better resolved, and therefore applieth
himself again to his angel tutor, rather
than tutelar, whom for honour’s sake he
called my lord [ Trapp].

Ver. 7. Sought. is doth not teach
that the angels are more careful of this


without commission from him. Secondly,
that they are ever ready to offer their
service and yield obedience upon the
least intimation of the Divine pleasure
[Trapp]. From the whole section we
learn—that the earth may seem to be
quiet and at peace while the people of
God are in a weak and suffering con-
dition ; that the outward peace of the
earth will be disturbed in due time, and
God’s people wonderfully delivered ; that
whatever sad dispensations God sends
upon the nations, the Church will be his
special care; that his purpose wil! be
fully accomplished and all things done
according to his mind, therefore his
eles may trust his wisdom, power, and
ove.


world than God is, of whom they desired


HOMILETICS.


Tae Messian’s Person anpD Work.— Verses 9—13.


In predictions concerning the Messiah we find word combined with action,
prophecy coalescing with history. An example of symbolic prediction based upon
present history is found in the text. In presence of a deputation of Jews from
Babylon, the prophet was charged to place a crown on the head of Joshua, the
high priest, and then deliver the prophecy. Its form and spirit, the union of the
priestly and regal office, forbid us to confine it to Jewish restoration. It is founded
upon visible representations, yet in mystic vision soars into the future.

I. The person of the Messiah is described. Behold the man, the man marked
and well known, the true man and most eminent of all men (Hosea ii. 16). Not
man wretched and miserable, mortal and dying (Job xxv. 6: cf. Ps. viii. 4); but
man with the characteristics of a man—strength, courage, and pre-eminence. Joshua
and his companions were men of signs (ch. iii. 8), but in none of them were the
priestly and regal splendours united. Then the word branch designates a future
person, a sprout of Jehovah (Isa. iv. 2), a descendant of David. The Messiah is
the priest and king. Zechariah revives the prophecy of Jeremiah (xrxiii. 15). One


OHAP. VL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. 627





belongs to the last predictions at the beginning of the captivity, and the other is
one of the first after it is past. God does not forget his promise, and will never
forsake his people. In every age it may be said, “ Unto you that fear my name
shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings.” II. The work of
the Messiah is specified. 1. He shall grow up out of his place. He shall sprout
up from his place, 7. ¢. from the place peculiar to him; not merely from Bethlehem
or Nazareth, but by his own power, without man’s help, in his miraculous concep-
tion. Some refer this to his springing up from a low family ; others, to the growth
of the Church under him. It is better to apply it as above. He shall grow by
virtue of his own power, with rapid and vigorous increase. He springs from God
in his human and Divine nature, shot forth through man, blossoming in the royal
line of David, yet neither sown, nor planted, nor propagated by human hands. He
shall continue to grow, extend his power and dominion, and his kingdom skall be
an everlasting kingdom. 2. He shall build the temple, the Church of God, which
is the house and temple of God (1 Cor. iii. 16: 1 Tim. iii. 15: 1 Pet. ii, 5). Of
this temple he is the author and foundation (Ephes. ii, 20—22). It is growing
in beauty and numbers, filled with his light and glory, and is the school of instruc-
tion, the monument of wisdom to the universe (Ephes. iii. 10). The repetition
may indicate the certainty of the work being commenced and finished, or give
emphasis to the truth, to encourage faith in his person and confidence in his work.
III. The honour of the Messiah is set forth. 1. He (himself) shall bear the
glory. The crowns of royalty, the robes and insignia of office, shall hang upon
him and adorn his person. He shall lift up the glory (as the word means) which
had been depressed and despised. It shall be exalted in him, not divided any
longer between kings and priests, but the government shall be upon his shoulders
alone, and he shall have the glory (Isa. ix. 6: Phil. ii. 9—11). 2. He shall sit
and rule. For a king to sit was nothing strange, but contrary to the custom of
priests, who stuod daily (Heb. x. 11). But Christ has offered one sacrifice and
obtained eternal redemption ; he has finished his work, will never rise to perform
it a second time, but now sits for ever at the right hand of God: a priest upon
his throne, whom the people cannot approach without priestly intercession. Here
the majesty of a prince is blended with the sympathy of a priest (Heb. ii. 18 ; iv.
15; v. 2). IV. The special arrangement with the Messiah is mentioned.
“The counsel of peace shall be between them both.” The words allude, first of all,
to Joshua and Zerubbabel, then to the priestly and kingly office of Christ.
Formerly kings and priests had counselled together for the peace and prosperity of
the Church and the State. Now these offices may be centred in one person, and no
longer kept distinct ; yet each must have its dignity. The majesty of the king is
not to be displayed without the intercession of the priest. There is no depression
of one to exalt the other, no confounding together, but harmony and co-operation,
The priest is a king, and the king is a priest. There may be reference also to the
plan of redemption, a plan of infinite wisdom, and Christ is called “ Counsellor”
(Isa. ix. 6). As in the creation of man, so was there consultation in his redemption.
Peace is the grand result; harmony in the moral government of God, peace
between God and man, and man and man. “On earth peace, goodwill toward
men” [By the Author, from The Study, 1873].


Curist THE BUILDER OF THE TEmMPLE.— Verse 13.


The temple is not that of which Zerubbabel was the builder; but the spiritual
temple, the house, the Church of God.

I He drew the plan. The Divine Architect who made and beautified the world
planned the structure of his house. Everything is specified and pre-ordained.
Sects may scheme and build, but Christ alone can rear “the Church of the living


628 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. [CHAP. VI





God, the pillar and ground of truth.” II. He collect the materials. For 2
material temple the stones are not naturally prepared. Solomon had to fell the
timber and cut out the stones. Christ collects the living stones of this wonderful
building. 1. He bought them. He shed his precious blood and “ gave his life a
ransom for many.” 2. He prepares them. He renews by his grace, forms and
polishes them for their place in the building, “In whom all the building, fitly
framed together, groweth into an holy temple in the Lord.” III. He unites the
materials wh-n collected. He assigns them their suitable position, and puts
them together nore firmly than any human being or human theory could “In
whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit.”
IV. He employs others to help in this work. Christ is the sole builder, others
are under-builders. Paul was“ as a wise master-builder,” and “laid the founda-
tion,” but he declared “ another buildeth thereon.” Ministers are only assistant
instruments, and cannot add a single stone without his aid. ‘He shall build,” and
under his superintending care and by his Divine agency “the temple” shall be
finished. In due time the head-stone shall be brought forth with shoutings of
‘Grace, grace unto it.”


Curist GLORIFIED AS THE BuILDER oF His CuurcH.— Verse 13.


1. The first point is the temple. The temple is the Church of God, not in any
narrow, sectarianism sense. Any company of Christian men gathered together in
holy bonds of communioz, for the purpose of receiving God’s ordinances and
preaching God’s word, is a Church, All believers scattered throughout the world,
all Churches gathered together from the one Universal Apostolic Church. Why is
the Church called the temple of God? The temple was the special residence of
God, the place of the clearest manifestation, and a place of worship. For these
reasons the Church is said to be the temple of God. 2. The next is the builder
of the temple. Make a parallel between Solomon, the builder of the first temple,
and Christ, the builder of the Church. Solomon was wise, but needed instructions
and a pattern, Christ is no Solomon in this respect. A mountain, Moriah, was
ready made for the first temple ; for the second, the foundation was laid in oaths,
promises, and blood. Again, Christ excels Solomon in providing all the materials.
He hews them himself, rough-casts them first, then during life polishes them till
ready for the hill of God whereon the temple is built. In Solomon’s temple the
stones were made ready in the quarries, and no sound of the hammer was heard ;
so we must be made meet for heaven. There will be no sanctifying there if not
ready beforehand. 3. Pause and admire the glory of the builder. ‘ He shall bear
the glory.” Half his glory can never be told. Note first that the glory shall be @
weighty glory. “They shall hang upon him all the glory of his Father’s house.”
He shall have ail the glory, all that can be conceived, desired, and imagined. This
glory is continual glory. When shall his dominion become effete? He shall bear
all the glory. 4. Now for the practical application. Ayre we built upon Christ?
Can we say that we are a part of his temple, that his handiwork has been exhibited
in us, and that we are built together with Christ? If so, honour God, for he has
highly honoured you. Think that you might have been disgraced, abandoned, and
cast away, but iow made temples of the Holy Ghost! If no portion in Israel, if
not stones in the spiritual temple, how sad never to be used in the building up of
God’s Jerusalem! It may seem a slight thing to be left out of the muster-roll of
the Church to-day, but will it seem a slight thing to be left out when Christ shall
call for his people? When the list is read before the great white throne, and your
name left out, then there will be no change, no deliverance. Submit now, and
believe in Jesua Christ to-day [From Spuraeon).


OMAP, Vi.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.


629


ere re re


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 9—12. First, the offerings of
these people. We know little or nothing
concerning the persons who brought the
gold and silver, but God can touch the
hearts of strangers and dispose all to
contribute to his work. Second, the use
of these offerings. They were accepted,
though sent by some who perhaps pre-
ferred to remain severed from the temple
and the people of God. They were
used as a memorial in the crowns placed
on the head of Joshua. “Every con-
tribution toward the building up of the
Church coming from a true heart was
its memorial before God, and is a testi-
mony before the world of the Divinity
of the gospel” [Lange]. They were
gladly received. ‘Come thou, the same
day.” The people required speedy and
great comfort, and no sooner were they
prepared than the favours were ready
(2 Chron. xxix. 36). God delays no
blessing when we are earnest in his
work.

Vers. 12, 13. The temple of the Lord.
“Even he,” &., constantly and confi-
dently affirm and aver it, that notwith-
standing all unlikelihood and unbelief
on the people’s part, Almighty God will
surely bring it to pass. This heap of
words importeth so much, for “do ye
think the Scripture speaketh in vain?”
saith St, James, not without some holy
indignation (iv. 5) [Trapp]. The Church
of God is often set forth under the
image of a temple. The allusion was
peculiarly natural in a Jewish writer,
considering the importance attached to


the house of God in Jerusalem. The
name is founded on three reasons.
First, consecration. A temple is appro-
priated to sacred uses. The people of
God are separated from the world and
dedicated to his service. “The Lord
hath set apart him that is godly for
himself.” Beware of profane mixtures,
maintain your sacredness, and keep your-
selves pure from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit. Secondly, residence. A
mansion is a dwelling fora nobleman, a
palace for a king, a temple for God.
“Ye are the temple of the living God ;”
“T dwell in them, and walk in them.”
He is everywhere, but in the Church
by a special presence, in a way of grace,
influence, and operation. This secures
and dignifies it. ‘“ This is my rest for
ever; here will I dwell; for I have
desired it.” What are numbers, fine
buildings, or imposing ceremonies to
communion with the living God? Third-
ly, devotion. He is served and wor-
shipped in them as a temple; he receives
homage and adoration nowhere else ac-
cording to his own requisition. ‘God
is a Spirit, and they that worship him,”
&c. His worship, therefore, is a reason-
able service; not gross, but spiritual
sacrifices. Though prayers, praise, and
alms are imperfect and defiled ; yet they
result, from principle, aim at the glory
of God, and being offered through the
Mediator, and with his incense, they are
accepted, and the worshipper has this
testimony, that he pleases God [Jay].


HOMILETICS.
Jesus upon His THronu.— Verse 13.


A throne is, literally, the seat of a king, and therefore the emblem of royalty.
Solomon’s throne was made of ivory and gold, so that “there was none like it in


any kingdom.”


But a greater than Solomon is here.


A greater than angels, for


unto “the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever,” &c.
Yet how sublime and unrivalled ! it is és throne; he has dearly earned it, and


sees in it the travail of his soul.
name above every name,


peopre.


God hath highly exalted him, and given him a
It is Ais by Divine ordination, and by the suffrage of his
They are made willing in the day of his power, and avow his name only.


But many who ascend a throne can hardly ha said to sit and rule there. They are


630 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAB. [OHaP. Vi


hurled by violence, or drop by weakness, from it. If they continue on it for awhile
they have little pleasure or repose ; they are filled with fear and cares, and cann9t
do what they wish. In spite of the sovereign of a hundred and twenty-seven
provinces, Daniel was thrown into the lions’ den. What a wretch is Ahab, king of
Israel, who is sick, and can neither eat nor drink, because he cannot get a few feet
of garden ground from a faithful subject. But Jesus “shall sit and rule upon his
throne.” He will never be deposed, never die. Nothing can impede, nothing
perplex him. He rules in the midst of enemies who shall be made his footstool.
He will display wisdom and power in correcting their designs and making their
efforts subserve his own purpose. Though his spiritual empire at present be limited,
yet remember two things. Jérst, his real dominion is universal. He is not only
King of saints, but King uf kings, and the King of nations; all creatures serve him.
The treasures of grace, the elements of nature, and the dispensations of providence
are his. He is the head over all things to the Church. Secondly, though his
kingdom be limited, and subjects who obey him from the heart be few at present,


it will not always be so, nor be so long,
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession.”


“He shall have the heathen for his
Yea, all


kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall serve him [Jay].


YOMILETIC HINTS


Ver. 15. Afar off. Distant nations,
symbolized by those from captivity (ver.
9), shall be called. This was partially
fulfilled in Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes,
and Herod, who greatly assisted in the
temple work. but the conversion of the
Gentiles is here set forth. They shall
be united to Israel in faith and privilege,
and the truth of prophecy shall be
realized. 1. This event is certain. “This
shall come to pass.” 2. The truth of the
word will be proved when it does come to
pass. “ You shall know that the Lord
of Hosts has sent me unto you.” 3. But
it shall be fulfilled only to those who
obey the word preached unto them. For
“this shall come to pass if ye will dili-
gently obey the voice of the Lord your
God.” To secure the favour of God we
must obey, and diligently obey, him.
This knowledge and experience depend
upon individual faithfulness and effort.
4. Hence, though the performance of the
promise be not suspended upon men’s
conduct, yet neglect of duty muy hinder


} ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1—8. Providence. Everything
that acts for an end must know that
end or be directed by another to attain
that end. The arrow doth not know
who shocts it, or to what end it is shot,


AND SUGGESTIONS.


its fulfilment. If men despise know-
ledge, stifle convictions, and reject the
truth, Christ’s work will not profit them.
By this means they bring “swift de-
struction” upon themselves, and not the
blessings of the Messiah’s reign.

From the whole chapter, learn—
1. God’s cause shall be avenged even by
his enemies. The messengers of earth
and heaven shall alike fulfil his pleasure.
2. God’s cause shall be supported by his
friends, ‘The silver and the gold are
the Lord’s,” and these they will not fail
to bestow where it is in their power
to give; while God will graciously
remember their works of faith and
labours of love. 3. God's cause shall
be honoured by the Mediator. All the
purposes of eternal love are accomplished
in him. To him belong dominion and
glory, and on his head are many crowns.
When the great events of his kingdom
are consummated, then shall he become
all in all” [Cobbin).


TO CHAPTER VI.


or what mark it is aimed at; but the
archer that puts it in and darts it out ot
the bow knows [Charnock]. Providence
certainly does not attend merely to the
interests of individuals, but the profound


{


OHAY, VII.)





wisdom of its counsels extends to the
right ordering and betterment of all
[Humbolt].

Ver. 5. Angele stand. A king is
there where his court is, where his train
and retinue are; so God, the Lord of
Hosts, is there specially present where
the heavenly guard, the blessed angels,
keep their sacred station and rendezvous
[ Mede].

Ver. 8. Justice satisfied. Justice is
the key-note of the world, and all else
is ever out of tune [Theodore Parker].
Justice always whirls in equal measure
[ Shakespeare}.

Vers, 10—15. Prophets introduce
gospel subjects. Zechariah, especially,
in mystic vision and by typical repre-
sentation, which yet are sufficiently clear,
as expressive of the kingdom and priest-
hood of Christ, the establishment of the
Christian Church, and tbe concourse of
nations resorting to that future Temple.
For here we have a second application
of the same systematic form of prophecy
‘vhich was employed in the establish-
ment of the temporal kingdom. The
nearer subject in each instance supplies
the prophetic ground and the prophetic
images for the future Christian subject.
In the first instance, the kingdom of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


631


Christ is delineated in connection with,
and by analogy to, the actual kingdom
which was seen before men’s eyes rising
to view; in the second instance, his
personal priesthood and his Church are
delineated in connection with, and by
an equal analogy to, the priesthood and
temple of the Hebrew Church, at the
time when that priesthood was reinstated
in its functions and that temple way
rebuilt. This is an example of symbolie
prediction founded upon the presen)
scene of things [Davison on Prophecy}.

Vers. 12,13. Theman. A man’se
man, but when you see a king you see
the work of many thousand men [@.
Eliot|. Throne. He was aking blessed
of the King of kings [Shakespeare].
Kings ought to be kings in all things
[Adrian].

Ver. 15. Diligently. The expecta-
tions of life depend upon diligence, and
the mechanic that would perfect his
work must first sharpen his tools
[Confucius]. What we hope ever to do
with ease we may learn first to do with
diligence [Johnson]. Toil, feel, think,
hope. A man is sure to dream enough
before he dies without making arrange


ments for the purpose [Sterling].


CHAPTER VIL


Cr:ticau Nores.] The Didactic part. Replies to questions relative to fasts observed by the
Jews, but which they supposed no longer binding after restoration to prosperity. Fourth] Two
ears, nearly, after the foundation of the temple was laid (Hag. ii, 10—13), and nearly two years
forges it was finished, Chisleu] Corresponding with part of November and part of December.
“The end of B.0. 618” [Pusey}, 2, House of God] here a rendering for /3ethel. Unto] A word
for which there is no corresponding Hebrew, Bethe/ is construed by most as nominative to the verb,
and the translation given, ‘‘ When Bethel (s. ¢. the inhabitants of that city) set Sherezer and Regem-
melech, and their men” as an embassy to Jerusalem. Pray] Lit. to entrzar the face of, t.¢. to seek
and conciliate the favour of Jehovah, to obtain a Divine answer to their inquiry. 8. Weep] They
fasted and mourned in captivity, on account of the ruins of the temple. Why fast now when the
city and temple are being restored? Separating] by vow of consecration, sanctifying oneself by
separating from defilement and food, as in solemn fast ee Joel ii. 16). 4& Word] of reproof for
the method and spirit in which they fasted. 5, All] The answer given not only to those who put
the question, but to the people at large. Fasted] in fifth month in remembrance of the burn
of the temple; in seventh to commemorate the murder of Gedaliah the son of Ahikam. To aa
Fasting alien from God and for selfish ends. 6. Did] ye not eat and drink in self-indulgence?


632 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. VIL


na a rn nt





Neither in feasting nor fasting had they any regard for Jehovah ; all was done for self-imterest.
%. Words] of former prophets threatened a curse upon hypocrisy and disobedience, when Jercaalem
was inhabited and prosperous, The lessons of former teachers had been verified in the nation’s history ;
they should heed the warning. 8—14.] God requires obedience, not formal fastings, The disobedi-
ence of the fathers brought judgment upon the nation. 9. Execute] Admonitions which have special
reference to evils of which they were guilty. Judgment] Righteous impartiality in public and
private matters. “Judgment of truth (cf. Hzek. xviii. 8) is such an administration of justice as
simply fixes the eye upon the real circumstances of any dispute, without any personal considerations
whatever, and decides them in accordance with truth” [Keil]. Mercy] Tender love to all,
Compassion] to the unhappy, sympathy for human suffering, 10.] This verse specifies some of the
chief ways of violating the preceding requisition, and shows that it covers the thoughts of the heart
48 well as the acts of the members [Zavge]. Imagine] ¢.¢. devise evil (Ps, xxxvi. 4: Mic. ii. 1).
Meditate no revenge, but act up to the royal law of love. 11.] The attitude of the people towards
these precepts described. ‘Their fathers and some of them refused], paid no serious attention ; then
pulled away’, like a refractory beast refusing the yoke (Neh. ix. 29: Hosea iv. 16). ‘* Tt seems
rather to refer to one on whose shoulder we lay our hand, when he is reluctant to listen to us, im
order to arrest, and beseech him to hear, but be fretfully and violently ‘ draws the shoulder’ from
our kind and earnest grasp” [Wardlaw]. Stopped] Made heavy (Isa, vi. 10: Jer, vii. 26: Acts
vii, 57). 12, Adamant] Hard and impenetrable as stone (Ezek. iii. 9; xi, 19). Wrath] The
consequence of disobedience and obduracy (2 Chr. xxxvi. 16). 13. He] by his prophets. They] cried
in calamities, retribution in kind. They would not hear God, and he would not hear them (Prov.
i. 2426; Isa, i. 15). 14,] The great wrath described in its execution. Scattered] for 70 years
among foreign and barbarous nations; like a tempest driven among those who pitied them not,
After] their exile and expulsion no occupants possessed the land. Passed through] Lit. goes away
and returns again (Ex. xxxii. 27), pass to and fro, They] The Jews themselves to blame; they
desolated the pleasant land] lit. the land of desire; made the choice land a desert by their sins
(Jer. tii, 19 : Ps. cvi. 24).


HOMILETICS.
Past WaARNINGS AND PRESENT JuDGMENTS.— Verse 7.


The former prophets taught the worthlessness of fasting, when God was forgotten
and the weightier matters of the law disregarded. If the Jews had listened to the
messages, the evils which they were suffering would not have come upon them.
Belief that fasting could obtain the favour of God overthrew the nation.
take warning —

I. Israel had been warned in the past. ‘The Lord hath cried by the former
prophets.” God declares his will loudly and sufficiently in his word, but men
disregard the trumpet-call. 1. Warned by various messengers. Zechariah was
not the first prophet; they had been warned by every prophet whom Jehovah
had sent. 2. Warned in different periods. Warnings were not only addressed
to them in adversity, when men should “consider,” but in prosperity, when they
should humble themselves before God to save themselves from the punishment of
pride and rebellion; when Jerusalem was inhabited in prosperity. God tells us
beforehand, arranges ‘‘ one over against another,” that we may rightly chose and
have no excuse for our sin (Ecce. vii. 14). II. If past warnings had been regarded
present punishment might have been avoided. “Should ye not hear the
words?” Should men disregard the Scriptures and have no concern for their own
salvation and the interests of the nation? Too often the admonitions of ministers
are disregarded by those flushed with prosperity. The Jews before and after the
captivity failed to learn from their fathers, and had to mourn for their country.
“Study the past, if you would divine the future ” [Confucius].


Hence


Divinst Requirements aNp Human Disrecarp.— Verses 8—14.


The prophet exposes the hollowness of mere outward forms, and reminds the
people that their ruin was not caused by neglect of ritual, but by disregard of the
plainest duties of justice and humanity. They had refused to hear the reiterated


and explicit injunctions of the prophets, and they are reproved for their folly.
Notico—


CHAP. VII. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 633


I. The Divine requirements specified. They had practised injunctions of their
own imposing and neglected the commands of God. The prophet repeats the
substance of former teaching and urges the claims of Jehovah. 1. Sincerity in life.
Obedience is better than sacrifice. (1) Execute judgment. Practise justice officially
and privately, before God and man. Judgment must be ¢rue, without personal
considerations or partiality. “He that hath not given forth upon usury, neither
hath taken any increase, that hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath
executed true judgment between man and man.” (2) Compassionate the miserable.
“Show mercy” to the unfortunate, be kind and have “ compassions every man to
his brother.” “ Kindness is the golden chain by which society is bound together,”
says Goethe. (3) Oppress not the helpless. Special regard must be paid to the
widow and the fatherless, the stranger and the poor. “ Ye shall not afflict any
widow or fatherless child” (Ex. xxii. 21). “Thou shalt neither vex a stranger nor
oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.” 2. Purity in heart.
We must not only do no wrong, but not even wish it. No evil must be devised
in the heart. “Let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.”
Cherish no ill-feeling, no wish to retaliate. All evil inclinations and spiteful
intentions must be subdued. We can never act rightly if we do not feel and think
rightly. Hence the law of God restrains the heart. ‘ Beware that there be not
a thought (word) in thy wicked (Belial) heart” (Deut. xv. 9). II. The Divine
requirements disregarded. Except men execute judgment, whatever be their
fastings and pretensions, they reject the word of God. Ceremonial observances
without love to God and man areasolemn mockery. 1. They refused to hearken to
God's word. They hated the claims and rebelled against the authority of God's
commands (1) They were wilfully deaf. “Stopped their ears.” (2) They were
wilfully prejudiced. ‘That they should not hear.” They had no desire to know,
much less to practise. God pursued them in earnest, constant warning, but they
shook their shoulders, refused to submit or bear the yoke, and were determined in
their obstinate purpose (cf. Acts vii. 51). “They hearkened not, nor inclined their
ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went
backward, and not forward.” 2. They hardened their hearts in sin. ‘ They made
their hearts as an adamant stone.” They were resolved that nothing should make
an impression upon them: they became proud, presumptuous, and inflexible.
Divine power even could neither soften their hearts nor shape their lives, “They
dealt proudly, and hearkened not unto thy commandments, but sinned against thy
judgmensé (which, if a man do, he shall live in them), and withdrew the shoulder,
and hardsaned their neck and would not hear.” IIT. The fatal consequences of disre-
garding the Divine requirements. Most terrible are the penalties here set forth.
“Therefore,” since they have rejected God, punishment will bein proportion to the
violation of hislaw. ‘ Terrible penalties, withal, if thou still need penalties,” says
Carlyle, “ are there for disobeying.” 1. God was angry. ‘Therefore came” wrath, a
great wrath, from the Lord of hosts. This anger is evinced—(1) By disregarding
their prayers. “They cried, and I would not hear.” There is “great reason,” says
Bp. Reynolds, “ that God shall refuse to hear him who refuseth to hear God.” “ He
that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination.”
(2) By scattering them among other nations. ‘I scattered them with a whirlwind
among all the nations.” The common bond of humanity and social intercourse was
broken (Deut. xxviii. 49, 50) ; they were cast out of their own into a land of perfect
strangers, from whom they received no kindness nor mitigation of sorrows. 2. The
land was desolated. ‘‘ For they laid the pleasant land desolate.” It was not the
enemy, but their own sins that had cursed their country. God’s presence is the
beauty of a nation, but sin will turn it into a barren waste. Human guilt desolates
everything that is “‘ pleasant.” Let us take warning. If we despise God’s word
he will not hear our cry in the day of wrath. The harder men grow in heart, the


634 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (OHAP, ViL


heavier the stroke at the judgment day. Those who are lost will have to blame
their own folly. No delusion will rob them of this conviction, and no remedy can
be devised for the misery which they despised and cannot endure. “They would
none of my counsel; they despised all my reproof: therefore shall they eat of the
fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices,”


Riexreovus Rerassurion.— Verse 13.


This is the first part of punishment, retribution in kind. They would not hea,
God when he called to them; now he will not hear them when they cry to him.
This is God’s method of dealing with nations and individuals.

I. It is often physically true. The drunkard pays when at last he feels him-
self the slave of habits which he knows will ruin soul and body, and yet unable
to throw them off. The licentious who survive the power of gratification may be
tortured by appetites for which exhausted nature has no provision [ef. Lange].
II. It is always spiritually true. He that digs a pit for another shall fall into it
himself. The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own devices (Prov. xiv.
14). Those who contemn the word of God shall be unheard in the day of distress
Alarmed at their situation, they will call, but God will not answer them. Thus
men become the cause of their own misery, and constantly remind us of the wise
man’s words: ‘‘ Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way” (Prov. i
30, 31; xxviii. 9: Gal vi. 7, 8).


“T doas trul
As e’er


suffer
did commit ” [Shakespeare]


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. Love, the royal law of life,
the essence of religion. Not religious
profession, but the practice of social
duty. Keep from evil in thought and
act. Meditate no revenge, brood over
no wrongs, but in all things act up to
the requirements of God’s law. “ Love
worketh no ill.” “ Love will not permit
us to injure, oppress, or offend our
brother; it will not give us leave to
neglect our betters, or despise our
inferiors. [t will restrain every inor-
dinate passion, and not suffer us to
gratify our envy at the expense of our
neighbour’s credit and reputation ; but
it will preserve us harmless and inno-
cent” [ Bp. Sherlock].

Moral duties. Required in every
age. Superior to external ordinances.

Ver. 10. Widow and _fatherless.
1. A sad condition in life. Weak and
helpless. 2. A proof of God’s care.
“Widows and orphans are God’s clients
taken into his special protection”
[Trapp]. 3. An evidence of true religion.
“One of the surest tests of an intelligent
Christianity, as well as of a high civiliza-


tion, is found in the provision made and
maintained for those who so often are
the victims either of cruel neglect or,
alas, of wilful oppression” [Lange].
Compare the teaching of Scripture with
the customs of heathenism.

Ver. 11. Pulled away tie shoulder.
What is implied in these words? 1. A
benevolent purpose. 2. Remarkable
human power to resist it. 3. Mysterious
providence to permit resistance. 4. As
tounding effrontery in the conduct
indicated. ‘“ Pride not only withdraws
the heart from God, but lifts it up
against God ” [Manton].


‘* All pride is willing pride” [Shakespeare].


Ver. 12. Hearts as adamant. The
stone, whatever it be, was hard enough to
cut ineffaceable characters (Jer. xvii 1);
it was harder than flint (Ezek. iii.9). It
would cut rocks; it could not be engraven
itselr, or receive the characters of God.
This is the last sin, obduracy, persever-
ing impenitence, which resisted the Holy
Ghoat, and did despite to the Spirit of
grace. Not through intirmity, but of eet


OMAP. VIL]


purpose, they hardened themselves, lest
they should be converted and be healed
(Isa. vi. 10). Observe the gradations. 1.
Tne words of God are not heard. 2.
The restive shoulder is shown. Men
turn away, when God by the inner
motions of his Spirit, or by lesser chas-
tisements, would bring them to the
yoke of obedience. They would not
bear the burden of the law, whereas
they willingly bore that most heavy
weight of their sins. 3. Obduracy.
Their adamantine heart could be softened
neither by promises nor threats; there-
fore nothing remained but the great
wrath which they had treasured to
themselves against the day of wrath
[Pusey].

. Hardness is the state of a person
insensible alike to entreaties, expostu-
lations, warnings, admonitions, and chas-
tisements (Jer. v. 3). Men become
obdurate—1. By separating themselves
from God, the source of all life, just as
a branch dries up when detached from


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1—6. God or self—Which!
A certain king had a minstrel, and he
bade him play. before him. It was a
day of high feasting; the cups were
flowing, and many great guests were as-
sembled. The minstrel laid his fingers
among the strings of his harp, and woke
them all to the sweetest melody, but the
hymn was to the glory of himself. It
was a celebration of the exploits of song
which the bard had himself performed.
He had excelled high Howell’s harp,
and emulated great Llewellyn’slay. In
high-sounding strains he sang of himself
and all his glories. When the feast was
over, the harper said to the monarch, “ Oh
king, give me my guerdon; let the
minstrel’s mede be paid.” And the king
said, “Thou hast sung unto thyself;
pay thyself: thine own praises were thy
theme ; be thyself the paymaster.” He
cried, “ Did I not sing sweetly? O king,
give me the gold!” But the king re-
plied, ‘‘So much the worse for thy pride
that thou shouldst lavish such sweetness
upon thyself.” If a man should grow


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.








the tree, or as a limb withers when
the connection between it and the heart
ceases. 2. By a life of pleasure and
sin, the effects of which may be compared
to those of the river north of Quito,
petrifying, according to Kirwin’s account,
the wood and leaves cast into its waters ;
or to those of the busy feet of passers-
by, causing the crowded thoroughfare to
grow hard [Rev. C. Neil].

Vers, 11, 12. Causes of spiritual ruin.
1. Heedless indifference. 2. Stubborn
rebellion—(1) in refusing the yoke, and
(2) in stopping the ears. 3. Resistance
to the Holy Spirit.

Vers. 13, 14. Self-inflicted calamities.
1. Rejection of God introuble. 2. Dis-
persion in strange lands. 3. Devastation
of country. Mark the contrast : the land
of desire and the land of desolativn.
Obey the word of God and seek to reach
that heavenly ‘‘land of desire,” where
desolation is unknown, and whither the
spoiler can never come [cf. Fausset].


TO CHAPTER VII.


grey-headed in the performance of good
works, yet when at last it is known that
he has done it all to himself, his Lord
will say, “Thou hast done well enough
in the eyes of man, but so much the
worse, because thou didst it only to thy-
self, that thine own praises might be
sung, and that thine own name might
be extolled [Spurgeon].

Ver. 7. Not hear. There is a story
which tells of a bell which was sus-
pended upon a rock of the ocean dan-
gerous to navigation. The waves of the
ocean beating upon it caused it to give
a noise of warning to keep off the ap-
proaching mariner. It is said that at
one time some pirates destroyed the bell
to prevent the warning. Not long after
these very pirates struck upon this rock
and were lost. How many hush or
remove the voice of warning from the
point of danger, who as soon as the
warning ceases founder upon the rock
of temptation and are lost for ever
{ Mec Cosh |].

Vers. 8—10. Duties. Your daily


636 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. [CHAYP. Viit.





duties are a part of your religious life most ignorant by necessity; and beasts
Just as much as your devotions are[H. by nature [Cicero].
W. Beecher]. Formality in religion is





the name of being alive | Jenkyn]. “The ear is the road to the heart” [ Voltaire},
“The path of duty is the way to glory” Vers, 13, 14. Come to passe.
[Tennyson].
. “ The past lives o’er again

cetera Tires ey reac | Sea of (eee ee le

‘ees GE ° Y ct Aas The ever-fro present is its image”

understanding by experience; the [S. 7. Colertdge.}
CHAPTER VIIL.


Criticat Norzs.] The fate of their fathers urged them to obedience, now the promise of future
rosperity. %. Jealous) Implying warmth of love and zeal. Fury] Indignation to enemies. 3.1
Proofs of love. Returned] Jerusalem forsaken when given up to foes; now God resumes abode,
Truth] or fidelity, ¢.¢. in which truth and fidelity towards Jehovah have their abode (Isa. i. 21 :
der. xvii. 17), fully realized under the Messiah, 4, 5.] No sweeping disease among them; long
life one of the greatest blessings of the theocracy; plenty of children playing securely in the streets
(contrast Jer. vi. 11; ix. 21). 6. Marvellous] These promised blessings seem incredible to the
people; but nothing impossible to God. 7%. East] Lit. rising of the sun. West] Lit. the going
down of the sun (ef, Isa. L 1), They will be gathered from every region to which they were
scattered, 8.] The covenant renewed, In truth] On both sides the relation real and sincere (Hosea
ii, 21, 22: Isa, xlviii. 1: 1 Kings iii. 6). 9.] Adversity followed neglect of duty, now blessings
promised to create courage. Hands] With such bright prospects be energetic and active (2 Sam
xvi. 21), These words] of consolation and encouragement from Haggai and Zechariah. 10.] A
reason for courage in work. No hire] The labour of man and beast little or nothing; agricultural
results meagre (cf, Hag. i. 6,9—11; ii. 16—19). Neither peace] None free from the enemy in the
ordinary pursuits of life ; intestine broils and contentions prevailed everywhere. 11. Now] a vivid
contrast, blessings for obedience in building the temple, 12. Seed] will be healthy and not fail to
yield abundance (Hosea ii, 21,22). Dew] beneficial, especially in hot climates, where rain is scarce.
“‘ Future abundance will compensate for the drought and scarcity of the past” [Jerome]. 18.] All
the blessings summed up in this verse, ‘The formula, to be a curse among the nations, is to be
interpreted according to Jer. xxiv. 9; xxv. 9; xlii, 18: 2 Kings xxii, 19, as equivalent to being
the object of a curse, ¢. ¢, so smitten by God as to serve as the object of curses. In harmony with
this, the phrase to “become a blessing” is equivalent to being so blessed as to be used as a
benedictory formula (cf. Gen. xlviii, 22: Jer. xxix. 22). “This promise is made to the remnant of
Judah and Israel, and therefore of all the twelve tribes, who are to become partakers of the future
salvationin undivided unity (cf. ch. ix. 10,13; x. 6; xi, 14)’ [Het/]. “ The ground upon which this
promise rests is given in verses 14 and 16, and it is closed in verses 16 and 17 by the addition of the
condition upon which it is fulfilled.’ 14. Repented not] Just as the threatening did not fail,
neither shall the promise. 16.] Just as in ch. vii. 9, 10, first positive (ver. 16), then negative
(ver. 17). Judge] truly and promote peace, Gates) Places of administering justice. 17. Hate]
Lit, emphatic. ‘They are all these things which I hate ;” ¢.¢. the sum of what I hate; for they
comprise the breaches of the two tables [cf. Pusey]. 18, 19.] An answer to question (ch, vii. 3).
Fasts] shall be turned into Feasts] of joy and gladness. Love] Live in harmony among yourselves
as the result : others as the only condition of blessing. 20. Yet] Emphatic. People] shall be attracted
to God’s house. 21. Saying] Mutually appealing to one another. Speedily] Lit, go, going,
implying intense earnestness and determination. I also] Prompt response. 22. Many] in contrast
to a few and weak Jews now engaged in God’s work. 23. Ten] A definite for an indefinite number;
denoting a great and complete multitude (Gen. xxxi. 7: Lev, xxvi. 26: Num. xiv. 22). For the
figure cf, Isa. iv. 1. Converts from among the Gentiles shall be as ten to one Jew. All
languages] ¢.¢. of nations of all languages. Take hold] A gesture of entreaty for help and
protection (Isa, iii, 6: 1 Sam, xv. 32). With you] An effect often produced upon unbelievers
when entering the assemblies of Christians (1 Cor. xiv. 25), Primarily produced on the nations
who witn the deliverance by Cyrus; finally, that to be produced by the ature grand interposition
of Messiah on behalf of his people [cf. Fasusset].


CHAP. VIIL. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. 637





HOMILETICR
THe Restoration or Lost Puriry.—Verses 1—3.


The prophet had rebuked the people for their formalism and set forth the results
of disobedience. Now he assures them of God’s love, and describes the consequences
of obedience in restored privileges and restored purity. Their purity is restored —

I. By the manifestation of God. This is the first requirement. Man has
wandered from God, sinned so much that he has no disposition to return. The
sun must first shine to draw the.plant. Grace must first work to dispose the
heart. Men can never convert themselves; they have fallen, but God alone can
raise them again. ‘Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned.”
II. By reconciliation to God. God can never dwell with wickedness. When
Jerusalem was in the hands of enemies God forsook the temple. Only when we
forsake sin and return to God—when reconciled to him—do we secure the aid of his
grace and Spirit to purify us. Conversion leads to renovation and holiness of
character. ‘Do thou give us the grace of conversion and amendment,” says W.
Lowth, “and then thou wilt remove thy heavy judgments, and restore us to that
happiness and prosperity which we formerly enjoyed.” III. By consecration to
God. When God returned to Zion it became “a city of truth.” It became what
it had been before, the city which God had “chosen to put his name there.”
Hence—1l. The city was holy. “The holy mountain.” Holy as the residence of
Jehovah and the object of devout veneration. True worship and spiritual blessings
were restored. “The name of the city from that day shall be, The Lord is there.”
2. The people were truthfil. Their attachment to God sincere and not hypocrit-
ical ; their love to man not in word, but in deed and of atruth. The proof of real
conversion is not in partial, outward reform, but in devotion to God and growth
in holiness founded upon truth. As God is righteous and holy, those who enjoy
bis favour must partake of these qualities. “The new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness.”





Gop’s Love anp its WonprERFuL Dispuays.— Verses 1—8.


The Jews are encouraged in distrust by the affection of God for them. He was
jealous as a husband or loving father; he loved most earnestly, most constantly,
2ud out of free love best-wed upon them the blessings here mentioned.

I. It is revealed by the authority of his word. “Again the word of the
Lord of hosts came.” In the former chapter we have reproof, in this encouragement,
lest his people should despair. ‘Times of adversity and reproof dishearten, hide the
love of God, like clouds before the sun. But God repeats former messages, gives
Scripture comforts, and reminds us of past deliverances. “TI was jealous for her
with great fury.” II. It is displayed in the manifestation of his presence. “I
am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem.” Ezekiel saw
the glory of God depart from the sanctuary, and pictured the consequences in the
conquest, bondage, and exile of Israel. But return is the pledge of his love and
the path to pre-eminence. God’s presence is heaven and its bliss; “the river, the
streams whereof shall make glad the city of God.” “As a countenance is made
beautiful by the soul’s shining through it, so the world is beautiful by the shining
through it of God” [Jacobi]. TII. It is proved in abundant blessings. Manifold
are the blessings here promised. 1. The Jews should be restored to their own city
(ver. 7). From east and west, from every nation, would they be redeemed. Their
distance and weakness would be no barrier to Divine power. 2. Spiritual privileges
would be regained. (a) The covenant would be renewed. God would be their God,
and they would be his people. (b) God’s presence would be given. He would dwell
in their midst, (c) IMvine worship would be restored, Jerusalem would he holy,


638 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. VII.


and idolatry and falsehood would eventually cease. The mount, the temple, the
mercy-seat, and all the memorials of God’s merey would enhance their joy and
privilege. 3. Temporal prosperity would be given. When God in covenant
grace takes away sin, he takes away sorrow. (a) Longlife and freedom from disease.
Men and women would live to an advanced age. (6) Outward peace and security.
The streets would be full of children playing in fearlessness and joy. Age sat
resting the weight of years on its supporting staff, yet looking fresh and happy.
Youth enjoyed its cheerful sports without the stern reproof or the angry growl.
The sports of childhood and the benefits of old age are contrasted with the days of
sin (Jer. ix. 21; vi. 11) and the purpose of God. “As the days of a tree are the
Jays of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.”


Gop’s WorRKS GREATER THAN Man’s ConcrePTION oF THEM.—Verse 6.


The promises just made seemed improbable, morally impossible to the Jews in
their present condition. But God encourages faith by reminding them that what
seemed incredible to them was possible to him. Learn—
I. Men stagger at the greatness of God’s promises. “If it be marvellous” to
you, something distinct and prominent from common events. The doings of God,
by reason of his infinite greatness and goodness, are beyond anticipation, past belief.
1. His people are few. “A remnant” of what was once a great nation. Will he
interfere on their behalf? 2. The times seem unlikely. “In these days” of
infidelity, oppression, and sorrow. 3. We doubt his word. “These things are too
good to be true.” They can never be realized in our experience, 4. We measure
God by ourselves. We cannot act, therefore God cannot perform his promises.
They appear against the course of nature and the laws of worldly policy. Thus do
we sin against God and wrong ourselves by measuring his power and purpose by
human standards. Be “fully persuaded that what God had promised he was able
also to perform.” II. God’s promises are not too great for him to perform.
“‘ Should it also be marvellous in mine eyes, saith the Lord of hosts?” 1. His love
indicates this. It is unchangeable and never offers what he will nut give. He
forgives, and forgives abundantly. In daily life and Christian experience he works
far more exceeding abundantly above all we can ask or think. 2. His power proves
i. “Is anything too hard for the Lord?” Many things with man are impossible,
but “ with God all things are possible.” Beware of profanity and unbelief (2 Kings
vii, 2). Look to God in all things to increase faith and secure comfort. “I
know that thou canst do everything” (Job xlii. 2).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. The word came. The first
(vers. 1—17) declaring the reversal of
the former judgments, and the complete


“Jealous for Zion.” Though he pun-
ishes yet he loves. ‘The Lord wiil be


though conditional restoration of God’s
favour; the second (vers. 18—23) con-
taining the answer to the original question
as to those facts in the declaration of the
joy and the spread of the gospel. The
first has, again, a sevenfold, the second a
threefold, subordinate division, marked
by the beginning, Thus saith the Lord of
hosts | Pusey].

Ver. 2. Divine jealousy. 1. Its na-
ture. “Great jealousy” to love men
and hate their sins. 2. Its object.


jealous for his land, and pity his people.”

Ver. 3. Returned. The departure of
God a curse, and the return of God a
blessing to a people. God’s presence in
ordinances and God’s favour in provi-
dences,

Vers. 4, 5. A delightful scene.
and girls playing in the streets. 2. Aged
men and women watching them. ‘The
sports of childhood—innocent sports in
their own nature, of course—are the very
instincts of that period of life; and they
have here the sanction of a benevolent


1. Boys


CHAP. yIM. ]


God, being a part of his promised blessing
to his favoured city. Who would like
to be the man or the woman the sight
of whom frightened such a group?”
| Wardlaw]. Great blessings. 1. Lon-
gevity. 2. Peace and security. 3. Real
enjoyments. ‘Thou shalt see thy chil-
dren’s children, and peace upon Israel.”
Ver. 6. Marvellous. 1. A great sal-
vation. 2. Accomplished with (a) ease
and (0) certainty, yet-—3. Doubted by an
incredulous people. “Strange that,
among a people who had amongst them
the records of all the ‘mighty deeds’
done for them by the finger of Jehovah
in the days of their fathers, there should
have existed the slightest surmise of
impossibility, or even of difficulty, in
regard to any assurance of good coming
from him. On many occasions was
the incredulity, both of individuals in
what regarded themselves, and of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


639


community in what regarded the publie
interests, met with a similar rebuke”
[ Wardlaw}.

Vers. 7, 8. Israel’s restoration. 1.
They shall be gathered together into the
kingdom of God. “Not to the earthly
Jerusalem, that not large enough for
Jews scattered throughout all the world,
but to the open and enlarged Jerusalem
in ch, ii. 8, ze. the Messianic kingdom
of God” [Keil]. 2. They shall become
God’s people, and God will again become
their God. 3. This new relation shall
not be as the past; a new feature is
given by which the future will be dis-
tinguished “in truth and righteousness.”
A father may chastise a son for disobedi-
ence, put him into temporary seclusion
and disgrace, and then restore him. God
will never disown his relation to Israel,
but eventually bless them more than
ever in Christ.


HOM ILETIUS.


CouraGE IN Duty.—Verses 9—15.


The prophet now urges the people to be courageous in their work. Adversity
formerly attended them for neglect of duty, but God will henceforth bestow
blessings, which are but the earnest of greater ones which await those who return
to God. The grounds for courage are distinctly given.


I. Tke words of the prophets.
the mouth of the prophets.”


exhorted them in their work and assured them that it would be finished.
messengers sent to stir us up and predict success ought to encourage.


“Ye that hear in these days these woris by
Ever since they had commenced to build God had


Special
It is a


privilege to hear the prophets, and a sure way to prosperity to believe them (2


Chron. xx. 20).


in their work ; man and beast Jaboured in vain.
1. Great rewards for labour.
Produce was expected, waited for, but came not (Hag. i. 10).


will be strong.
hire for beast.”


II. The prospect of better days.


Before, they were hindered
But bright is the future if they
“There was no hire tor man, nor


“ Man must be disappointed with the lesser things of life before he can comprehend


the full value of the greater” [Bulwer Lytton].
The seed will be healthy and the harvests fruitful.
No failure nor famine, no poverty nor distress,


and the heaven its dew.


will be seed to the sower and bread to the eater.


2. Abundant temporal prosperity.
The earth will give its increase
There
3. Hntire security from foes.


Neither discord within nor invasion without will disturb their peace and security.
They will dwell together in unity and labour without fear. Their disposition will
be peaceful and their country secure. “ Peace is rarely denied to the peaceful ”
[Schiller]. 4. Complete reversal of fortunes. “ I will not be unto the residue of this
people as in the former days.” If we return to duty God will visit us in favour.
The curse shall be turned into a blessing, and we shall be saved from dispersion
and dishonour. God will dwell with us without fear and reproash. “I know the
thoughts that I think towards you, saith the Lord ; thoughts of peace, and not of
evil.” III. Tne pledge of God’s help. ‘ Again have I thought in these days to
do well unto Jerusalem.” God had determined, purposed to help. 1. God’s word


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (OBAP. VIT.


640








is explicit. “ Fear not,” “ let your hands be strong.” Fear makes the heart faint, and
when the heart is feeble the hands can never be strong. When the spirit is timid
and irresolute we have neither energy in body nor mind to work. Confidence will
brace up the energies, and the joy of the Lord will be our strength. 2. God’s faith-
fulness is unchangeable. His word was true to the fathers. He “ repented not.”
If faithful to his threatenings, will he not be to his promises? Punishment long
suspended came at length. Those who would not hear were made to feel that
God’s denunciations were nut empty words. So “all that God is, and all that
God has, are alike pledged in the promises of his covenant,” says Wardlaw, “to do
good to his confiding and obedient people.” ‘‘ Hath he said, and shall he not do
it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good 4”


Past AND Present, oR Onoz a Curse and Now a Buxssina.— Verse 13.


These words apply to all the tribes of Israel—have been partially fulfilled. For
generations Jews have been cursed by all people, but a more glorious accomplish-
ment will be in the future. They might be taken literally, but apply them in
another sense.

I. God’s people have once been a curse. 1. When unconverted, many were a
curse in their influence and example. Their lives, if not openly wicked, were a
hindrance to everything good. “One sinner destroyeth much good.” 2. When
chastised by God they were in a sense cursed. From the first a curse and a
blessing were set before Israel, and the result was according to their choice (Deut. xi.
26; xxx.1). But God’s people disobey, and are corrected by sufferings. 3. When
persecuted they are cursed. They are ridiculed for their profession, and often
become a by-word and a proverb (Jer. xxiv. 9). They are thought to be “ stricken,
smitten of God, and afflicted.” ‘ Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, a
scorn and a derision to them that are round about us” (Ps. xliv. 13, 14). II. God’s
people are now a blessing. ‘Ye shall be a blessing.” 1. They are blessed in
their own experience. They are renewed and forgiven. They enjoy the presence
and the favour of God. ‘And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God.” 2. They are the means of blessing others. In their influence
and example, prayers and efforts, good men are a blessing. As the Jew was a
source of blessing to the Gentile, so is the Christian to the world. ‘“T will blesy
thee and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. 1. The privilege. Hearing should be specially recognized. “TJ set
the words of the prophets. 2. Theduty. all men,” &c. God’s holy hand hath a
“Let your hands be strong.” ‘Those special stroke in the Church’s afflictions,


only who are employed for God may
expect to be encouraged by him; those
who lay their hands to the plough of
duty shall have them strengthened with
the promises of mercy.”

Ver. 10. Ll. Those who neglect God’s
work will not always succeed in their
own. “There was no hire for man.”
Neither can they always expect peace
and prosperity. ‘There was no peace
to him that went out.” 2. Outward
troubles and civil discord may be judg-
ments from God, in which his hand


whosoever be the instrument. Herein is
all-disposing Providence not only per-
missive, but active. “I make peace
and create evil,” that is, war and conten-
tion (Isa. xlv. 7), which is called evil
by a speciality, as including all evils.
This God doth—1. By letting loose Satan
upon them (that great kindle-coal and
make-bate of the world) to raige jeal-
ousies, heart-burnings, and discontents be-
tween them. 2. By giving them up to
the lusts and ¢ »ruptions of their own
wicked hearts, 3. By giving occasions


CHAP. VIIL]}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


64)





of enraging them more and more one
against another [7rapp].

Ver. 11. I will cause. Whereas
people are-apt to attribute too much to
means and second causes of plenty and
prosperity, God assumes the honour of
all to himself. Rain and fruitful seasons
are his gift (Acts xiv. 17). He resolveth
the genealogy of corn and wine unto
himself (Hos. ii. 22); and both here
and elsewhere he giveth us to know
that the reward of religion is abundance
of outward blessings, which yet are


and not for these transitory trappings
[Trapp].

Vers. 14, 15. Past sorrows pledges of
future good. How’ 1. Because past
sorrows inflicted to prevent future evil.
2. Because past sorrows prove God’s
unchangeable purpose and love. ‘So
have I turned and purposed,” &. “The
illustrations of God’s severity will be
surpassed by those of his goodness”
[Lange]. His chastisements were the
earnest of his mercies, for they too were
an austere form of his love [ Pusey].


Fear not. 1. Grounds of apprehen-


not always entailed to godliness, to the
sion. 2. Grounds of confidence.


end that it may be admired for itself,


HOMILETICS.
Morat Connpitions or Prospxrrry.— Verses 16, 17.


These verses contain a virtual and instructive reply to the question relative to
the celebration of the fast (chap. vii. 3). It was not in such merely external,
ritual, or ceremonial observances, that Jehovah delighted ; but in the love and
practice of moral rectitude [Hend.]. In verses 14 and 15 we have the grounds
upon which God’s promise rests; here, the conditions upon which it will be
fulfilled. ‘There are two aspects of duty as essential to prosperity.

I. Sympathy with our fellow-creatures. We are forbidden—1l. To act evi?
“Execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates.” Nothing must be done
in partiality, violence, and passion. In public administration and private inter-
course we must allay feuds and seek peace. 2. To speak evil. “Speak ye every
man the truth.” (a) In social intercourse. “To his neighbour.” (b) Jn public
courts. ‘Love no false oath.” ‘Truth is the band of union, and the basis of
numan happiness. Without this virtue there is no reliance upon language, no
confidence in friendship, no security in promises and oaths” {Jeremy Collier}.
3. To think evil. “ Let none of you imagine evil in your hyvarts.” All evil springs
from the thoughts. The most secret sins and the most grievous acts begin there.
“'To think well,” says Paley, “is the way to act well.” ‘‘The thoughts of the
righteous are right” (Prov. xii. 5). II. Moral conformity to God. “All these
things” forbidden, are evils which God hates, and will punish. Therefore we
should hate and avoid them also; shun them, not for the sake of policy, nor
propriety, but as offensive to God. Men are seeking to substitute philanthropy for
piety; ‘‘the claims of humanity” for the worship of God. But Scripture and
experience prove that there can be no true and permanent love to man, which is
not the offspring of love to God. The test of our character and the degree of our
prosperity will be according to our conformity to God. If we love what he loves,
and hate what he hates, we shall bear his image and become his children. ‘‘ For
love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God and knoweth God.”


Fasts TurNgsD into Fustive Joy.—Ve ses 18, 19.


These words are fresh grounds for encouragement.

I. Their mourning will be turned into gladness. Their seasons of sorrow and
penitential confession should end in feasting and praise. They would be delivered
from foreign yoke, and brought back ae their own land; restored from spiritual


642 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. VIII.





desolation to the privileges of the temple. Personally and socially, joy and
gladness would be great. Troublous times often end in joyous songs to the Church,
After the night of weeping, the morning dawns in light and cheerfulness. ‘ They
shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.” II. This
gladness will lead to sincerity of life. ‘ Therefore, love the truth and peace.’’
God blesses his people, that they may love him. The greater his promises, the
greater should be our obedience. Fasts 2nd feasts are empty forms. God requires
truth in our life, and peace in our hzarts. ‘What doth the Lerd require of thee,
but to do justly, and to love mezey, and to walk humbly with thy God?”


“Trin is always straightforward” [Sophocles],


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGUESTIONS.


Ver. 19. Mark the practical improve-
ment. ‘“ Therefore, love the truth and
peace.” The words may be taken in
two senses: First, as an appeal to grati-
tude, as if Jehovah had said, “ You owe
your deliverance to me.” You deserved
it not. You never could have wrought
it for yourselves. It is all my doing.
If, therefore, you feel ag you ought;
thankful to your covenant God for my
interposing on your behalf, think of my
will, and henceforward attend to what
you know will be pleasing in my sight:
‘love the truth and peace.” Secondly,
as an appeal to self-love—an appeal
grounded on a regard to their own in-
terests: as if he had said, ‘‘ You have
been suffering for your own and your
fathers’ sins. You have been delivered.
If you would shun a repetition of the
sufferings—if you would continue in


possession of your now restored land
and liberty, and temporal and spiritual
blessings—‘ love the truth ard peace.’
Love them in heart: show love to them
in practice. It is thus on]3 ‘that you
can retain my favour and blessing; thus
only that your days can be prolonged
upon the land which the Lord your
God has again given you” [ Wardlaw].

Truth and peace, twin virtues. Ob-
serve—1. Their connection. ‘Lruth
should be sought, maintained, and
diffused in a peaceful spirit. 2. Their
order. Truth first, and then peace.
Trust must not be compromised for the
sake of peace. It is not peace on any
terms. “If it be possible (it may not
be so always), as much as lieth in you,
live peaceably with all men,”


“ Truth hath a quiet breast” [Shakespeare],


HOMILETICS.


Tus Foturs Prosperity oF THs CHRISTIAN CHuRcH.—Versees 20—23.


Yhe ordinary reference of these words is to Gospel times, and, in part, to the


Gospel dispensation of the future.


They express the obligations to be felt and


owned by the whole world—by “men of every kindred, and people, and nation,
and tongue”—to the Jews, for the knowledge, the worship, and the practice of


true religion [ef. Wardlaw.
prosperity to the Church of God.


I. Multitudes will be converted to God.


”


shall come.


says few.


The text contains a wonderful description of future


“Many people and strong nations


The few and feeble Jews shall increase into a mighty nation. “ Many
shall come from the east and the west, from the north and the south.”
Modern Scribes and Pharisees say few; but God says many. Every


Bigotry


fresh conversion shall wiu others, until “all nations flow” into God’s kingdom.
II. Multitudes will be converted to God by the instrumentality of the Jews.
“ Ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations of the skirt of him
that is a Jew.” 1. Nations shall feel indebted to the Jews. Their outward polity
has decayed, and they have been scattered and ‘lespised for centuries; but the


CHAP. VIII.)} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 648





world will yet own its obligation to them. Other nations have given science and
art, government and laws; but to the Jews are we indebted for a knowledge of
God, and the preservation of his Word. “ What advantage then hath the Jew}
Much every way; chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles of
God” (cf. Rom. iii. 2; ix. 4,5). 2. Nations shall discern that God is with the
Jews. “For we have heard that God is with you.” God has not cast off his
ancient people, but still watches over them. The report of his deeds among them
shall spread. They shall be gathered and honoured, and other nations will be
anxious to participate in their blessings. All people shall yet testify in their
favour. “Their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring
among the people; all they that see them shall acknowledge them that they are
the seed which the Lord hath blessed.”


A Catt to Gop’s Housz.— Verses 21, 22.


Take Jerusalem here literally or spiritually, the words may be regarded as a cal]
to Christian worship. God has put his name in his house. It shall be attractive
to all sincere believers, and in whatever place they reside they shall come to the
great festivals of the future.

I. The purpose for which they come. Not to play nor pass away the time;
not for any secular, but a spiritual end. 1. They go to pray hefore the Lord.
Prayer is the language of dependence and entreaty. Men feel that nothing can
satisfy but God—are led to give up every kind of idolatry and come to him,
believing that he will hear prayer. Prayer is most important, and most necessary,
yet meetinys for united prayer are neglected. If the spirit of prayer be not with a
people, thure can be no life and unity. 2. They go to seek the Lord. God pre-
eminently displays grace aud glory in his house. ‘rue worshippers covet his
favour, and long for his fellowship. They regard God in everything. They
earnestly seek to behold his power and glory in his sanctuary (Ps. lxii. 2). Through
the veil of ceremonies they look to the Invisible One. “This is the generation of
those that seek him.” II. The method in which they come. ‘Many people
and strong nations,” &. 1. In great numbers. At present the ways of Zior
mourn. Few attend the house of God, and like sparrows are alone upon the
house-top. As in ancient times, Jews went from village to village, gathering
numbers and singing hymns as they journeyed on, until all appeared in Zion
before God: so shall multitudes say, “Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob” (Isa. ii. 3). 2. In great variety.
“The inhabitants of many cities.” Country and townspeople, merchants and
mechanics, masters and servants, shall come. “ Men out of all languages of the
nations ”—the Mahomedan and the Turk, the Hindoo and the Hottentot, Greek
and Jew, shall yet meet together in the house of God. JII. The spirit in which
they come. 1. A spirit of mutual excitement. The inhabitants of one city go to
another. They do not invite those whom they accidentally meet on the way, nor
do they wait for the minister and the missionary to do their work. They go to
the negliyent—perhaps at some sacrifice and inconvenience—and stir one another
up. ‘This is needful now. Frivolous are the excuses, and unjustifiable the causes,
which keep men from the house of God. 2. A spirit of personal resolve. “I will
go also,” was the response of each when invited. Many excuse; they have no
time, no clothes, and you must call again. but others are only waiting for an
invitation. Let us all resolve with Nehemiah and bis friends: ‘We will not
forsake the house of our God.” 3, A spirit of earnestness. “ Let us go speedily.”
(a) Go with heartiness. Put heart and feeling into your work. Angels are like
flaming fire in their service. We are dull and half-asleep. (0) Go without delay.
Many delay and never go. They never begin to pray, till God has ceased to hear,


644





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


(cHAP. VIX


—


Let all attend and take others to the house of God—pray that God would revive


his work, and bless our souls.


“T was glad when they said unto me, Let us go


into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 20, 21. Characteristics of a
genuine revival. 1. A general interest
in the house of God. 2. A mutual
concern for each other’s welfare. 3. An
earnest resolve for individual duty; and
4. A great accession to the Christian
Church.

The inhabitants, gc. They shall not
be satisfied with their own salvation,
careless about the salvation of others;
they shall employ all labour and in-
dustry, with wondrous love, to provide
for the salvation of others as if it were
their own, It is a marvellous stirring
of minds [Pusey]. Learn also—1. That
those who know God will seek to bring
others to know him. 2. That mutual
stirring up to duty isa means of increase
to the Church. 3. That in this work


we should not be discouraged. (1) Sad
times should not blot out remembrance
of the Church’s charter and future
privileges. (2) Personal sacrifices should.
not tire nor dishearten us. Indifference
and lukewarmness are out of place. We
must be active and constant in the
work. “Lt us go speedily.”

I will go also. J. Tne object of th
awakened sinner. To seek God. IL
The means of accomplishing this object.
(1) Attendance in sanctuary. (2) Prayer.
III. The influence of example in pursu-
ing this object. Inciting others, Indi-
vidual example connected with general
exhortation.

Ver. 23. A revived people. 1. Blessed
with God’s presence. 2. Instrumental
in the conversion of others.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER VIII.


Vers. 1, 2. Jealous. Love often
re-illumines his extinguished flame at
the torch of jealousy [Lady Blessing-
ton]. Jealousy is always born with love,
but does not always die with it
[ Rochefoucauld].

Ver. 3. City of truth. Justice is
the idea of God, the ideal of man, the
rule of conduct writ in the nature of
mankind [Theodore Parker]. Great is
truth and mighty above all things (Esd.
iv. 51).

Vers. 4, 5. Here is a fine picture.
The scene is the streets of Jerusalem.
For it is clear that in this connexion, the
word rendered “ dwell” is decidedly to
be understood as meaning “‘szt.” Lon-
gevity, when in any country it is found
on a more than ordinary average, is a
proof of a healthful and prosperous
condition of society; and although I am
satisfied that some passages of Scripture
which have been interpreted of personal
longevity have reference rather to the
long-continued national possession of
the land of premise; yet that longevity


is included amongst the promises of
temporal blessing and well-being, there
can be little doubt. “Thou shalt see
thy children’s children, and peace upon
Israel,” is one of not a few similar
assurances. The state described is one
of peaceand tranquil security [ Wardlaw].

Ver. 6. Marvellous. The man who
cannot wonder, who does not habitually
wonder and worship, were he president
of innumerable royal societies, is but a
pair of spectacles behind which there is
no eye [Carlyle]. :


“ Wonder is involuntary praise ” [ Young].


Ver. 8. Jn truth. God’s relation
sustained from the time of having chosen
them had been always thus characterized.
Not so theirs. They called God their
God, and themselves his people ; while
too often it was neither “in truth” nor
“in righteousness ;” but when their
hearts and lives gave the he to their
lips; when they flagrantly played the
hypocrite, and defrauded him of his
due, both in inward devotion and in


CHAP. VIII. |


outward service. Let us see that our
professions are sincere—that our hearts
are steadfast [ Wardlaw].

Ver. 9. Strong.


“Fear is the virtue of slaves: but the heart
that loveth is willing ” [ Longfellow},


Vers. 10—12. Fruit. Interesting
and lovely as the green fields in their
luxuriant riches must ever be, to the eye
of faith and devotion they are even
more so, Did we accustom ourselves to
associate with their beauty the super-
intending providence of God, as well as
the subordinate art and labour of man,
they would possess an interest and a
loveliness which the mere lover of nature
never knew. The sweetest landscape is
improved by the presence of animated
objects, which impart a liveliness, an
interest, as it were, an existence, to the
whole. What increased force and inter-
est are added to it by the presence, so
to speak, of the living God [ Palin].

Ver. 13. Curse.


‘CA curse is like a cloud,—it passes ” [ Batley].


Vers. 14, 15. Do well. God is
goodness itself; and whatsoever is good
is of him [Sir P. Sidney]. God has
been pleased to prescribe limits to his
own power, and to work his ends within
these limits [ Paley].

Vers. 16, 17. I hate. Men resemble
the gods in nothing so much as in doing
good to their fellow-creatures [Cicero].
Every day should be distinguished by at
least one particular act of love | Lavater'].

Ver. 19. Joy. What is joy? A


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


645





sunbeam between two clouds [Madame
Deluzy|. Joy never feasts so high, as
when the first. course is of misery
[ Suckling].

Vers, 20—22. Pray. The gracious
God is pleased to esteem it his glory to
have many beggars thronging at the
beautiful gate of his temple, for spiritual
and corporal alms, What an honour it
is to our Great Landlord that multitudes
of tenants flock together to his house to
pay their rent of thanks and worship for
all which they hold of him! How loud
and lovely is the noise of many golden
trumpets! Good Lord, what an echo
do they make in heaven’s ears! When
many skilful musicians play in concert
with well-tuned and prepared instru-
ments, the music cannot but be ravish-
ing to God himself [George Swinnock].

Ver. 23. Skirt. This is a simple
and striking expression. We have seen
a dear little infant, when he wished to
engage the attention of his mother,
pulling her by the clothes. When a
child has been walking along with his
father, and afraid that he would leave
him, he not only cries but lays hold of
his coat. When the cripple had been
healed at the beautiful gate of the
temple, he held Peter and John, and
was afraid to let them go (probably
dreading a return of his former misery),
as much as to say, “ You shall not go,
and if you do I will go with you, and
you shall draw me after you.” Just so
is it here. It shows conviction, attach-
ment, eager attention, a wishing to be
among them and of them [Jay].


CHAPTER IX.


Crrrican Norzs.] Hadrach] Part of Syria, near Damascus, Rest] On which God’s wrath shall
rest, and permanently abide. Eyes] of Israel, and of other people, would mark the providence of
God; or, “Jehovah has an eye upon men, and upon all the tribes of Israel’’ (cf. Jer, xxxii, 26),
2. Hamath] as adjoining Damascus partook in “‘the burden,” Tyre and Sidon lay directly im
Alexander’s march along the Syrian coast towards Egypt (sce Isa, xxiii.). Wise] in building
strong holds, and heaping up silver (Ezek. xxviii, 3—17). &.] A description of new Tyre, an islan
700 paces from the shore. 4, Cast] Heb. dispossess, drive out her inhabitants, Alexander captured
Tyr after seven months’ siege; some few escaped; others put to death, or enslaved, and the city was


646 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. IX.





burned. 5.] Principal cities of the Philistines given. Gath only left out, probably owing to its
situation inland, lying out of the route of the army. The fall of Tyre terrified these capitals of
different districts, If Tyre could not stand how could they? Expect.) Ekron, furthest north,
expected Alexander would be checked at Tyre. Gaza] captured after a siege of two months. Betis,
its governor, was bound to a chariot, and dragged round the city. 6. Ashdod] A bastard (foreigner
or stranger) of the conqueror’s nominated ruler, 7. Blood] of sacrifices, which heathens often
drank, Abominations] Ligeia offerings, “A prediction of future conversion of the Philistines
to the knowledge and service of the true God. Their abandonment of idolatry, and their embracing
the true religion, is represented by no longer drinking blood, and eating things sacrificed to idols,
both of which were common among pagans, but prohibited by the Mosaic law, and by the apostles”
(Numb. xxv. 2; Lev. vii. 6: Acts xv. 29) [Henderson]. He] The Philistines regarded as one.
Left] Many Philistines became proselytes to Judaism, says Josephus. Governor] Philistine princes
shall be like tribe-princes (chi/iarchs) in Judah. There will be no distinction between proselytes
and native Jews-—all will enjoy equal honours and privileges. Jebusites] Original inhabitants of
Jerusalem, subjugated by David, incorporated among Jews, and enjoyed their privileges (2 Sam. xxiv.
16). 8. House] Jews, not to be injured by the army of Alexander on its march to or from Egypt,
Fulfilled to the letter. Samaritans punished, but Jews escaped [cf. Henderson]. peer Lit, Now
do I look with mine eyes. They were indebted to God’s providence only, 9.] A royal personage
to appear without armies, and to reign withont destructive judgments. Daughter] Theocratic nation
to rejoice at the appearance of her Aing (Ps. ii, 11). Thine] ¢.¢, the one promised and long
expected. Just] in his official and personal character. An attribute of the Messiah in connection
with salvation (Isa, xlv, 21; liii. 11: Jer. xxiii. 5,6). Lowly] Expressing his general character,
not merely his Awmiiation in first advent. Colt) A rough unbroken colt. An ass was not mean
and despised animal, but in triumphant processions horses were chosen, and arrayed in costly
caparisons, 10.] The nature and extent of Messiah’s reign. Cut off] Remove instruments of war,
and reign by peaceful means. Ends of the earth] Not a mere Jewish, but a universal, kingdom.
11. Blood] The covenant sealed with sprinkled blood, the pledge. Prisoners] Jewish exiles in
Egypt and Greece. Pit] An allusion to Gen. xxxvii. 24. Their distress great, like dungeens
without water (Jer. xxxvili, 6). 12. Strong hold] Fortress, forcibly contrasting with pit (Ps. sl,
2). To-day] No need to despair; their condition miserable, yet not hopeless. Double] Not strictly
of twice the quantity, but simply of great abundance, A large amount of blessing far outweighing
the misery of bondage [cf. Wardlaw]. 13,] The method of victory represented figuratively. Judah,
the extended bow; Ephraim, the arrow by which Jehovah would overcome the Grecians, 14—16.]
God’s presence with his people. Seen] Conspicuously displaying power, like the pillar of old: seen
like lightning, the arrows of God in a thunderstorm. South] (cf. Isa. xxi. 1: Hos, xiii. 5). Southern
storms always most violent. 15. Eat] the flesh and drink the blood of the enemy, like a lion
devouring its victim (Numb, xxiii. 24), Subdue] Lit. ‘‘tread underfoot the sling-stones,” hurled
by the foe. Missiles will not hinder their progress, but fall at their feet, and be trampled to the
dust. Bowls] of sacrifices, Corners] Horns of the altar, sprinkled with blood from the bowls (Ex.
xxix. 12; Ley. iv. 18); priestly figures intimating holy war and victory. 16. Stones] Gems in the
crown of the conqueror; not the sling-stones trodden by the foot. 17. How great] (exulting
exclamation) in bestowing victory and fruitful seasons. Corn and wine] indicate peace and plenty
to those pressed by the foe and pinched in circumstances (Deut. xxxiii. 28: Ps, iv. 8).


HOMILETICS.


JUDGMENTS UPON SYRIA AND PuHaanio1a.— Verses 1—4.


Judgments are now threatened upon the lands of Syria, Phoenicia, and Philistia.
Nations from which Israel greatly suffered, typical of worldly powers exulting in
their strength, and broken to pieces by the might of Jehovah.

I. Judgments upon the land of Syria. “in the land of Hadrach.” 1. Their
nature. “The burden of the word.” The punishment of the land is burdensome;
no light trifling matter. It is bitterand crushing. 2. Their centre. ‘“ Damascus,”
the capital, “shall be the rest thereof.” On this city the burden was permanently
to settle. Eminent places generally share in the guilt, and procure the punishment,
of the land. After Alexander's victory over Darius in the battle of Issus, one of
his generals was sent to the city, who took its immense wealth, treasured up by
the Persian monarch, and carried away its satraps and princely families (cf. Jer.
xlix. 23: Amos ii 3—5). 3. Their extent. “Hamath also, which borders
thereon,” did not escape. Near in situation, it shared in the burden of wrath
resting upon Damascus. Contiguous in territory, they were alike in doom. The
proverb of the Jews was realized, ‘‘ Woe to the wirked man, and woe to his


AFEAP. IX.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. om


acighbour.” IT. Judgments upon the land of Phoenicia. Tyre and Sidon, the
two capitals of Phoenicia, are next mentioned. Tyre was originally a colony of
Sidon, but soon outgrew the mother city, and became the capital of all Phcenicia.
Hence Tyre is only spoken of here. But the fate of both places is interwoven (ef.
Isa. xxili, 4—12: Ezek. xxviii. 21). 1. Tyre could not be saved by its worldly
wisdom. ‘Though it be very wise.” Volney says, that it was “a nursery of arts
and science.” Its wisdom consisted in building fortifications, multiplying riches,
and trusting to them. It was worldly wisdom, the source of her pride and the
means of her destruction. 2. Tyre could not be saved by its worldly wealth.
“Though silver was heaped up as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the
streets,” yet this availed not. 3. Tyre could not be saved by its mighty strongholds.
“Tyrus did build herself a stronghold.” She had “the greatest confidence” in
herself, says a historian, ‘‘ owing to her insular position and fortifications, and the
abundant stores she had prepared.” She was “the crowning city,” rivalling the
world in strength, beauty, and riches. Her fleet was sunk in the sea, her
fortifications overturned, and she was “devoured with the fire.” The waves girt
her round, buried her ruins, and now roll over her site. “TI will make her like the
top of a rock ; it shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea ;
for I have spoken it.”


Taree Aspects oF Diving Provipence.— Verse 1,


When the eyes of man. Taking these words as they stand, they may mean that
the events of God’s providence would be such as to constrain men to acknowledge
God’s hand in them, or that the dangers would be so great to Israel that other
nations would watch whether Jehovah, in whom they trusted, would be their
protector. They are generally taken as indicating God’s providence over all man-
kind, to punish the ungodly, and defend his people. In this sense—

I. Divine providence is universal. ‘The Lord hath an eye to man,” 7. e. to
all mankind, as well as to the tribes of Israel. He controls and disposes the
conquests of armies, and the destinies of nations, for the advancement of his glory.
The providence is the eye of God. His look is not careless and transient; buat
scrutinizing and constant. “ His eyes behold,” without slumber or fatigue, the
actions, words, and thoughts; “his eyelids try the chitdren of men,” as one
intently examining some objects to the exclusion of all others (Ps. xi. 4). “ All
things are naked,” stripped of all covering and concealment, ‘‘and opened before
him”—Jaid prostrate, and exposed before his eye (Heb. iv. 13). IL. Divine
providence is protective. ‘As of all the tribes of Israel.’ He may chastise, but
he will ever protect, his own. The victorious progress of Alexander terrified Israel,
but Jerusalem escaped unhurt amid the storm. “This ‘captain of the Lord’s
host’ (Jos. v. 15) kept at bay the otherwise irresistible foe” [Lange]. III. Divine
providence is retributive. It is a defence to Israel, and a punishment to others.
Damascus was the rest; the region on which God’s anger settled. He who chastises
his people will not fail to visit other men’s sins. Love seems hidden at times, and
it may be difficult to see on which side favour lies; but the disproportion will not
continue long. A distinction, an eternal separation, will be made at length.
“ Every eye shall see him” then, and all reap their reward. A difference will be
made “ between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and
him that serveth him not.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. The eyes of man, &c. 1. Times versal, those only can escape who trust
of trouble sent to direct men’s eyes to him. 3. The punishment upon those
God. 2. As God’s providence is uni- who do not trust him will be heavy


G48


Divine wrath is sure to hit its mark, and
sink those on whom it rests.

Vers. 2—4. Vain confidences. 1. Re-
puted wisdom, which is not ‘counsel
against the Lord” (Prov. xxi. 30).
2. Immense wealth, which “ profits not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


[oHap. 1x.


midst of the seas” (Ezek. xxviii. 2);
but she was devoured with fire. ‘“ How
art thou destroyed, which wast strong in
the sea” (Ezek. xxvi. 17).

Ver. 4. Mark the language. Who
was to ‘smite her power in the sea,


burn her with fire, and cast her out?”
Alexander the Great, says history,
Jehovah, says Divine revelation. Both
are true. Only revelation keeps us in
mind that “men are God’s hand”—a
truth which profane history is too prone
to overlook and forget; as indeed we
ourselves —all of us — naturally are
[ Wardlaw}.


in the day of wrath” (Prov. xi. 4).
“ Misery assails riches, as lightning does
the highest towers” [Burton]. 3. Out-
ward fortifications. High walls and
deep seas, instruments of power, may
be elements of destruction. God can
destroy the wisest, the wealthiest, and
the strongest nation. Tyre said in her
pride, “I sit tn the seat of God, in the


HOMILETICS,


JUDGMENTS UPON PuHILIsT1a.—Verses 5—7.


The prophet now turns to the inveterate enemies of Israel, and mentions four
capitals of the Philistines. Their country lay between Tyre (or Phcenicia) and
Egypt, the south-east of the Mediterranean Sea. What is said of one may be said |
of all, and the fate of the different cities corresponds with the prediction.

I. The cities lost their rulers. ‘The king shall perish from Gaza.” The
Persians set up petty kings as vassals to their superior control. Notwithstanding
two months’ siege, Gaza was taken, its inhabitants sold, and put to death. Betis,
its brave king, was most cruelly fastened to the chariot of the conqueror, and
dragged through the streets. II. The cities were depopulated. “A foreigner
shall sit as ruler in Ashdod.” They lost their native people, and were filled with
a mongrel breed. At first a stranger was nominated to govern in Ashdod; but
eventually “the inhabitant shall be cut off from Ashdod.” Ashkelon, once noted
for its figs and fertility, though dismantled and re-fortified several times, is now
surrounded with desolate ruins of former grandeur. III. The cities were bereft
of their religion. They shall no longer glut themselves with bloodsheddings.
‘The prey of their gods was taken from their mouths. “I will take away his blood
out of his mouth, and his abominations from between his teeth.” There was not
mere suspension but total abolition of their idolatry. They lost their religion and
their nationality, and were incorporated with the Jews. IV. The cities were
desolated. “I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.” Their hopes were “ cut
off ;” for Tyre did not check Alexander’s triumphant march. Their jortisicutious
were “cut off,” and levelled to the ground. Everything in which they prided
themselves, strength, situation, wealth, and nationality, were “cut off.” The day
of wrath came, and all was swept like chaff before the whirlwind. The desolate
ruins now declare that God is a consuming fire. “For Gaza shall be forsaken, and
Ashkelon a desolation; they shall drive out Ashdod at the noon-day, and Ekron
shall be rooted up” (Zeph. ii. 4).


A ConverRTED Remnant oF Paiuist1a.—Verse 7.


Just as God left a remnant for himself in Israel when judgment fell upon them
so a remnant shall be left for God in Philistia.
shall be for our Guid.”

L The remnant was preserved from destruction. Some remained after judg-


5


“ But he that remaineth, even hie,


OHAP. Ix.) © HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 649





ments had swept the land, and were converted to God. Monuments of grace and
mercy set apart for him. From all nations God will gather his people. Nothing
shall be a barrier to acceptance with him. “The son of the stranger that hath
joined himself to the Lord” (Isa. Ivi. 3). II. The remnant was incorporated
with Israel. There would be no distinction between the Israelite and the
Philistine. 1. Dignity would be conferred upon them. Their honour and eleva-
tion before God and the people “shall be as a governor in Judah.” 2. Equal
privileges would be conferred upon them. “ And Ekron as a Jebusite.” Jebusites
were incorporated with Jews, and enjoyed equal honours and rights (2 Sam. xxiv.
16). In Christ Jesus there is no distinction of race nor sect. All are one in him,
and alike welcome to him. The proselytes under the Maccabean dynasty, were
only a partial fulfilment of the text. Heathens shall yet be converted, and be
joined to God’s people. ‘The strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall
cleave to the house of Jacob” (cf. Isa. xiv. 1; lvi 8),


Tas Divine Enoampment.— Verses 8, 9.


While neighbouring nations are destroyed, a promise of Divine protection is
made to the Jews. Their nationality would be preserved, and all their sufferings
would turn out for good. For this they were indebted to God, who encamped
about them, and watched over them.

I. The Christian Church is surrounded by enemies. She is in the battle
field, and at war with all ungodliness. Enemies seek to oppress and subdue her—
pass by and return. There is marching and counter-marching, with a design to
attack. Powers of darkness invade our spheres of action, and encamp within us.
In this moral campaign the fight is indispensable, holy, and severe. ‘The good
fight of faith.” II. The Christian Church is defended by tiod. “T will encamp
about mine house.” It is not a mere visit, but an encampment, a dwelling or
settlement. 1. God watches over her. ‘‘ Now have I seen with mine eyes.” Some
think that he does not see at all, or only looks when he interferes. But he ever
beholds the insolence of the enemy, and the sufferings of his people—will judge
the one and avenge the other. ‘“ Awake to help me, and behold.” 2. God delivers
her. ‘No oppressor shall pass through them any more.” Alexander punished the
Samaritans, but favoured the Jews. No foreigners invaded the land before the
advent of Messiah, as Assyrians and Chaldeans had done of old. God guarded
them, like “the chariots of fire and horses of fire round about Elisha.” The
power and goodness of God are pledged for the triumph and salvation of his
Church. On every side the watch is kept with sleepless eyes. None can resist
the Captain of the Lord of Hosts. “The Angel of the Lord encampeth round
about them that fear him, and delivereth them.” III. The Christian Church
should rejoice in this defence. To show the magnitude and the consequences of
this salvation, Zion is called upon to “ rejoice” aud “shout” for joy in the prospect
before her (ver. 9). If the presence of Alexander, Cesar, or Wellington, created
joy in the camp; what confidence should the presence of God inspire! Napoleon’s
oversight was remarkable, Cromwell’s interest in his men was great; but God says,
“ Rejoice greatly.” Cowardice in God’s presence is doubly criminal. ‘‘ Cowards
falter,” said Queen Elizabeth, “but danger is often overcome by those who nobly
jare.” ‘Fear not, daughter of Sion” (John xii. 15).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7. He ‘hat remaineth. The longer an snemy, or a stranger and
elect remnant. 1. From whom chosen. foreigner, but a fellow-citizen with the
2. To what promoted. kron as a saints, and of the household of God.
Jebusite, as a denizen of Jerusalem; no Two things in this promise. 1. It t a


dU








great thing tu be a Jebusite. One of
the highest of all privileges to “come to
Mount Zion, the city of the living God.”
What a governor have these citizens!
What a charter have they! What can
equal their safety, liberty, and defence?
—their commerce, wealth, happiness,
and peace? Their joy is unspeakable,
and full of glory. 2. Jebusites may be
derived from Ekronites. The thing has
been done; and most unlikely charac-
ters have furnished pious converts —
Manasseh, the dying thief, and the
murderers of Jesus, prove this. What
surpassed the guilt and depravity of the
Corinthians? What says Paul of his
own conversion? What triumphs of
the riches, freeness, and power of Divine


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHaRIAH.


| [OHAP. m&


desperate his own case—nor despond
with regard to any of our fellow-
creatures. God is able of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraham [Jay].
Ver. 8. The house of Jehovah. The
workmanship, the residence, and the
property of God. The camp of God,
the deliverance of the good. ‘Seen
with mine eyes.” With God, compassion
is so intrinsic an attribute, that he is
pictured as looking away when he does
not put it forth. With God, to behold
is to help [Pusey]. Hence God sees
with approval and tender consideration
—with a design to help his people, and
punish their foes. He is an observant
God—eyes and ears are set upon men—
“in every place beholding the evil and


grace! Let none despair, however the good.”


HOMILETICS.
Tas PraceruLt Kiue anp HIS Giorious Reien.— Verses 9, 10.


From the Grecian conqueror, and the temporal protection which Jehovah would
accord to his people, the prophet abruptly (by the prophetic law of suggestion,
Fausset), and in the most sublime and animated strain, calls the attention of the
Jews to a Royal Personage of a very different character, the Messiah, meek and
righteous, the Prince and pattern of peace, and the author of spiritual salvation to
all his subjects. His advent was to be accompanied by such glorious results that
it was to be hailed with the most joyful anticipation [ Hend.].

I. The character of the King. The features refer to his personal and official
character. 1. He 7s a righteous ruler. “He is just.” Just himself, and the
means of justifying others before God. In character, principle, and practice, he is
a righteous King. His administrations in providence and grace are conducted by
laws of pure and unbending righteousness. ‘Truth and uprightness are fixed on
his throne. ‘Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.” 2. He is a
benevolent ruler. ‘‘ Having salvation.” Take these words actively or passively, he
had power over death and the grave. He finished his work, rose to the right hand
of God, and bestows gifts upon men. ‘The design of his death was to honour God,
and render salvation consistent with the claims of righteousness, that he might be
‘“‘a just God and a Saviour” (cf. Rom. iii. 26). He bestows salvation in its
beginning here, and in its results hereafter. ‘The Son of Man is not come to
destroy men’s lives, but to save them.” 3. He is a lowly ruler. “ Lowly, and
riding upon an ass.” He had no war-horse richly caparisoned, and tossing his
arched neck—no imperial chariot, like Alexander. _He was not cruel like Nero,
nor proud like Herod, in disposition. He was lowly in his intercourse and
triumphs, He linked greatness with humility, performed menial service to his
disciples, and set himself as an example to all men. ‘‘ Learn of me; for I am meek,
and lowly in heart.”


“¢ Gentleness ! more powerful than Hercules” [Catherine I.].


II. The nature of his kingdom. It is not that of a worldly conqueror, nor is it
eonfined to Jewish lands. It is peaceful, universal, and perpetual. 1. Jt tw a
peaceful kingdom. The symbol would remind the Jews of «he prediction concern:


OMAP, IX. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 65


ing “ The Prince of Peace” (Isa. ix. 6). No wars nor bloodshed were to disturk
his reign. “ Peace hath its victories no less renowned than war.” Notice—That
he was not to teach peace, nor command it; but to accomplish by a word, what
earthly kings cannot do by force. ‘He shall speak peace.” He announces
reconciliation to Jew and Gentile, and in his Word proclaims, ‘ Peace, peace to him
that is far off, and to him that is near.” 2. Jt is a universal kingdom. It ia more
extensive than the kingdom of Macedon, greater than that of “the Emperor of All
the Russias.” As Solomon ruled the land of promise, and left no unconquered
spot; so shall the Son of David reign “from sea to sea—from the Atlantic to the
Pacitic”—from the river “unto the ends of the earth.” His subjects gathered
from “all nations, and kindreds, and people,” no man can number. “ Yea, all
kings shall fall down before him; all nations shall serve him.” 3. I¢ is a perpetual
kingdom. Solomon’s reign came to an end, and Alexander’s empire was divided
by his successors ; but the throne of Christ shall endure for ever. ‘‘ Son culte se
rajeunira sans cesse,” wrote Renan, Suns may set, and moons may fade, but
‘** His name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the sun:
and men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall call him blessed.” III. The
blessings of his reign. “Rejoice greatly.” 1. Great joy. The prophet, under
the impulse of inspiration, invites the people to hail the coming of Messiah, in
terms of exulting joy. “Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem!” It is not “a reign of
terror,” but of happiness and joy. “I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my
people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of
crying.” 2. Perfect security. Freedom from the power and corruption of sin to
the believer, protection and prosperity to all nations, are offered by his Word. He
is King both of righteousness and peace. Many usurp the throne, league with
craft, and rule in tyranny and oppression. Hence kings are dethroned, kingdoms
short-lived, and subjects insecure. Happy and safe are his people. ‘‘ He shall
judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall
break in pieces the oppressor.”


DELIVERANCE FROM THB Pit.—Verse 11.


These words may be an invitation to Jewish exiles to return from the bondage
of Egypt and Greece. But they relate to the spiritual conquests of the Messiah,
and are the pledge of Jehovah to him, that his people (thy prisoners) shall be
delivered from distress, exult in freedom, and through the blood of the covenant
anticipate the blessings of the future.

I. The moral condition. Prisoners were confined in dungeons or pits dug for
the purpose. Jeremiah was left to sink in the mire, and perish from thirst in the
pit (xxxvili. 6). The pit indicates—1l. Deep distress. ‘Wherein is no water.”
Men are restless and dissatisfied—distressed by sin and the world, a broken law,
and an accusing conscience. Estrangement from God brings anguish of soul.
*‘ What exile from himself can flee?” asks Byron. ‘“O wretched man that I am!
who shall deliver me?” 2. Great darkness. Prisoners sit in darkness as well as in
distress. The spiritual light of this world is darkness. ‘The wisest only grope in
uncertainty. Sinners walk in darkness, and live under the powers of darkness.
Heaven above is shrouded in gloom, round about and within them dwells no light,
and before them hangs the’ shadow of death (cf. Ps. evii. 10). The Sun of
Righ eousness never penetrates their hearts. Their condition is like an Eastern
sepulchre—‘“a land of darkness, as darkness itself, without any order” (Job x. 22).
3. Utter helplessness. Neither Joseph nor Jeremiah could get out of the pit.
Captives in a dungeon cannot escape. Cursed by the law, and condemned before
God, immured in darkness and degradation, men are ready to perish. ‘‘God hath
concluded (shut up as in a prison) them all (all mankind) in unbelief, the consequence


852 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. IX.


of disobedience, that he might have mercy upon all” (Rom. ii. 32). II. The price
of deliverance from the pit. ‘By the blood of the covenant.” 1. A covenant of
blood. The Jews were delivered through the covenant made at Sinai, and sealed
* with blood. In redemption there is no remission of sins without shedding of
blood. But “the blood of bulls and of goats” could not take away sin. Ancient
sacrifices were mere shadows, had to be repeated, and were inefficient. The blood
of man is not required, and will not avail. ‘None of them by any means can
redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him.” Christ alone can deliver
us. “In whom we have redemption through his blood.” 2. A covenant without
change. ‘The price paid will not be required again. It avails for this and every
age. Father and Son have taken solemn oaths, and sealed it by sacrifice. Nature’s
covenant abides firm as heaven and earth. The Jewish covenant was not disan-
nulled by the sins of the people. God’s purpose in Christ shall be realized. “ Yor
thee also” thy prisoners shall be delivered. The gifts and calling of God are
without repentance. They are incapable of being regretted, revoked, or changed
(cf. Vaughan, Acts xi. 29). “ Behold the blood of the covenant which the Lord
hath made with you, concerning all these words.” III. The method of deliverance
from the pit. ‘I have sent forth.” A beautiful expression, indicating—l. Mighty
power. Nothing but God’s power can lift us up out of the horrible pit and miry
clay, set our feet upon a rock, and establish our goings. 2. Wonderful grace. “I
have sent forth.” God might have left us in the pit; but he is gracious, and “ saith,
Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.” 3. Perfect
liberty. Not only lifted out, but “sent forth” without fear or foe, like Peter from
prison. “That we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might serve
him without fear.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 9. Here we have—l. The need, and a renewed supply answerable


Divine in the form of the human.
2. The majestic in the form of the mean.
The dignity is royal. ‘Thy king
cometh.” Royalty surpassing all others.
3. The victorious by means of the moral.
A king, but not the ‘ind the Jews
expected. His sceptre from heaven,
and his glory gained through suffering.
He had to borrow the colt, and who
were his guards and attendants in his
entrance in Jerusalem? (cf. Matt. xxi.
5: John xii. 15). In the whole history
of Jesus we have a wonderful combina-
tion of humiliation and grandeur.

Vers. 9, 10. Messiah is King of
Zion. Happy the subjects who dwell
under his shadow. He rules them, not
with a rod of iron by which he bruises
and breaks the power of his enemies,
but with his golden sceptre of love. He
reigns by his own right, and by their
full and free consent in their hearts.
He reigns upon a throne of grace, to
which they at all times have access, and
from whence they receive the pardon of
all their sins, grace to help in time of


to all their wants, cares, services, and
conflicts [John Newton].

Notice—1l. The Great King. 2. The
wonderful kingdom. 3. The strange
way in which he comes to possess it.
“Riding upon an ass,” &. Majesty
veiled in meekness, justice blended with
mercy, drawing the attention, and re-
ceiving the homage, of multitudes. 4.
The method by which he spreads it. “I
will cut off the chariot,” &e.

Ver. 11. The sinner’s condition by
nature, and his rescue by grace. The
pit dark, dismal, and deep. “The pit
of corruption,” or putrefaction and filth
(Isa. xxxviii. 17). The release, conde-
scending, reaching to the depth; and
free, “sent forth.” ‘They have cut off
my life in the dungeon, and cast a
stone upon me. I called upon thy
name, O Lord; out of the low dungeon
thou hast heard my voice.” Covenunt,
The covenant love of God, and his
faithful promise, sealed with blood, are
the hope of the Church in time of
trouble [Zanael The word suggests


CHAP. IX.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. 663





thoughts of grace, privilege, and security, present in the form of a compact, with
not attained in any other way. Our stipulations (and sometimes when the
trust for this world and the next, not stipulations were all on one side, Gen.
upon the voices of nature or conclusions ix. 9), and not only so, but to confirm
of reason, but upon the promise of God _ it by sacrifice [ Lange].

--—a promise which he hath chosen to


HOMILETICS.
Prisoners oF Hopr.— Verses 11, 12.


With the promise of release is connected the duty of the captives to embrace the
opportunity of returning to their own land, where they would enjoy the protection
and favour of Jehovah.

I. There is no imprisonment without hope. “Prisoners of hope.” 1. To
saints in trouble. In trials and straits they must maintain hope. 2. To sinners
tn wickedness, A stronghold is provided for all; secure from the stroke of offended
justice, and from the attack of the foe. “No case is desperate. None should
despair or say, “Our hope is lost.” “I would not despair unless I knew the
irrevocable decree was passed, saw my misfortune in the book of fate, and signed
and sealed by necessity” [J. Collier]. II. There are grounds for hope in the
provisions of Divine mercy. 1. In the atonement of Christ. In the covenant
blood we have every hindrance removed, and every means provided for the salva-
tion of man. 2. In the promise of Scripture. ‘I will render double unto thee.”
Grace to convert and strengthen, the Holy Spirit to teach and direct, are offered.
Blessings double in themselves, and as pledges of others. 3. Jn the stronghold
provided. The height (Ps. xviii. 30) is prepared, the rock contrasting with the
pit. The Rock of our Salvation immovable and inaccessible. Low defences are
soon scaled, and weak ones soon destroyed. But this refuge is eternally secure. Its
sanctity none can invade, its power none destroy. III. Men are urged to avail
themselves of these provisions. Hope should inspire our hearts in danger, and
prompt us to get out of it. 1. They are commanded to escape. “ Turn ye to the
stronghold.” Divine authority and affection are set forth in the prediction.
2. Escape should be made immediately. “Even to-day.” The Jews were not to
wait for future opportunity, when all might return together. While there was
hope, individually they must hasten, and make no delay. To-morrow may be too
_ late. To see the light of day fade away is sad, but much worse to lose hope for
eternity. Flee “for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before you.”


Ye prisoners of hope. This title is not a fanciful one. To the Jew it had a
triple significance, 1. He was under the yoke of a foreign despot, and longed to
regain his freedom, 2. He was under the yoke of an unfulfilled promise, and
yearned for the “ day star to arise.” 3. He was under the the yoke of the unrealized
prophecies concerning the glory of the Messiah’s kingdom, and the eternal felicity
of his followers. The words of the text are the true designation of every Christian.

I. We are prisoners to an unredeemed body (cf. Rom. viii. 23). Observe—
l. There is a sense in which the body is already redeemed. 2. There is another
sense tn which our bodies are not redeemed. (a) They are not yet free from
manifold infirmities. (b) Not yet redeemed from sensuous appetites. (c) Not yet
redeemed from the dominion of death. 3. Hope anticipates the possession of an
immortal body. (a) From which every element of weakness and infirmity is
excluded. (6) In which carnal appetites shall have no place. (c) Which shall be
no more subject to death. II. We are prisoners to a limited and superficial
knowledge. “Now I know in part”—there is bondage. “Then shall I know
even as I am known ”—there is freedom. 1. Our knowledge touches not the essence,
but only the phenomena. 2, Reaches men not as they are, only as they appear.


654 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (OMAP. Tx.





3. Is limited by the brevity of life, and the conditions of its existence. 4. Hope
anticipates the solution of the dark enigma of human life. III. We are prisoners
to a circumscribed Christian fellowship. The great family of God is sadly
dismembered. 1. Doctrinal divergence. 2. Suspicion, the offspring of imperfect
knowledge. 3. Social status is a barrier to fellowship. 4. Distance and death
contribute to limit the measure of fellowship. 5. Hope anticipates the universal
and perfect fellowship of saints. (a) This will include all ages; (0) all climes ; (c)
all classes and creeds. IV. We are prisoners to an imperfect vision of Christ.
“We see through a glass darkly,” and through “a mirror in an enigma” [Lange].
Yet note—l. Christ is really apprehended by faith even here. 2. This vision is
a test, a dim one. 3. Human nature in its present state is not capable of a more
open vision. 4. Hope anticipates not only an immediate vision of Christ, but a
nature capable of beholding it. Lessons. 1. This hope inspires the heavenward
pilgrim—(a) with patience “‘to endure as seeing him,” &c. (b) With courage “to
war a good warfare.” 2. This hope was a sanctifying virtue. 3. This hope
amounts to an assurance [The Homiletic Quarterly].


Tue Dovusie REcoMPENSE To Gop’s Propue.— Verses 13—15.


The abundance of the blessings promised after release is expressed by the word
double, which conveys the idea of compensation, a measure of glory outweighing
all former sufferings. ‘“‘ For your shame ye shall have double.”

I. Victory over the world will be granted. ‘The sons of Javan are the
Greeks, as the world-power, the Greeco-Macedonian monarchy (cf. Dan. viii. 28),
against which the Lord will make his people into a hero’s sword” [Keil]. This
was fulfilled in some measure in the wars of the Maccabees and Seleucida, but
must not be confined to that period. The Gospel is destined to overthrow the
wisdom of the Greeks, and subdue the world to Christ. 1. Victory by human
agency. Kphraim and Judah have to fight. Apostles and ministers have to
preach. “ Heaven made us agents, free to good or ill” [Dryden]. 2. Victory by
God’s blessing upon human agency. ‘I have been raised up,” &c. These words
found an echo in Judas Maccabeeus, when the company with him asked, “ How
shall we be able, being so few, to fight against so great a multitude and so strong,
seeing that we are ready to faint with fasting?” “It is no hard matter,” answered
Judas, “for many to be shut up in the hands of a few; and with the God of
heaven it is all one, to deliver with a great multitude, or a small company”
(1 Mace. iii, 16—-19: cf. 2 Chron. xiv. 8—11). II. The special presence of God
will be displayed. ‘The Lord shall be seen over them,” conspicuously displaying
his power for them. 1. As a shield to defend them. ‘The Lord of Hosts shall
defend them,” in the midst of enemies numerous, powerful, and bitter. He
delivered “by providential arrangements, by earthquakes, by angelic messengers,
by direct punitive and deadly judgments, He released them, to the amazement
and confusion of their enemies, from the closest and most vigilant confinement”
[Wardlaw]. 2. As a conqueror to help them. Taking the sling-stones as a figure
of the enemy | Keil], they were trampled beneath the feet of the Jews. “The souls
of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out of the middle of a sling” (1 Sam.
xxv. 29). A phrase denoting security from the assaults of the enemy under the
special protection of God. 3. As a shepherd to provide for them. “The Lord
their God shall save them in that day es the flock of his people” (ver. 16). Not
only victory, but lasting peace. Constant care and tenderness will be exercised
over his people (Ps. xxiii.). III. Great honours will be conferred upon them.
Job’s latter end was better than the beginning. The dignity of God’s people shall
be double their shame. 1. Moral beauty. “ How great his beauty!” The beauty
Christ bestows upon his people in character and conduct is more than human; 4
is Christ’s own beauty. Thou art fairer than the children of men.”


OHAP. IX. ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH,


6565


‘‘ Old friends shall lovelier be,
As more of heaven in each we see” [Christian Year).


2. Unwonted prosperity.
scarcity,
wine.


people.


love and favours, and to commend all past dealings as excellent and good.


Young men shall be made cheerful, and no longer suffer
Maidens, ready to faint from hunger and thirst, shall have plenty of new
This abundance of the fruits of earth typifies the recompense to God’s
They will be strengthened, and made glad; be led to admire God’s free


“ For


how great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty ! ”


“ Beauty armed with virtue bows the soul,


With a commanding, but a sweet, control” [Percival].


Tue Mieutry StruGe_te anp Tus Guorious Victory. — Verses 13—17.


I. The army is collected. ‘The Lord God shall blow the trumpet.” The
terms are martial. The trumpet blowing naturally represents the proclamation of
the Gospel by Divine authority, and with accompanying Divine power ; the design
being thus the gathering of outcast sinners to Christ’s standard; and thus the
enlargement of his spiritual host, and the increased rapidity of his conquests


[Wardlaw]. 1. The foes.


description is poetical.


south” sweeps everything before it.
might of Divine grace.
beasts.


“Against thy sons, O Greece.”
Judah the bow, and Ephraim the arrow.

over them,” like the pillar of cloud and fire.
1. Terrible as a storm.
lightning ””——suddenly and irresistibly (cf. Ps. xviii. 14).
No power in earth or in hell can resist the
Thousands will yet be subdued.
“ They shall devour,” a metaphor from beasts.
would eat the flesh and drink the blood of the enemy.


2. The friends.
3. The commander. Jehovah “seen

II. The conflict is described. The
“ His arrow shall go forth as the
“The whirlwind of the


2. Furious as wild
Like devouring lions, they
“ Behold a people like the


lioness ; it rises up, and like the lion does it lift itself up: it lies not down till it


devour the prey, and drink the blood of the slain” (Num. xxiii. 24).


victory is gained.


1. Vietury given as a shepherd to his flock.
2. Victory recorded in the crown of the conqueror.


the flock of his sheep.”


III. The


waft


The result is not uncertain. Jonquering and to conquer.’


“God shall save them in that day as


Precious stones or gems were set in crowns, and the elevation of the crown


indicated victory.
numbers” [Shaks.].


“ A victory is twice itself, when the achiever brings home full
3. Victory celebrated in the joy of the conqueror.


The


general idea is that of sacred joy, the songs and shouts of victory, inward delight


and exultation of spirit.


“ They shall drink, and make a noise as through wine.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 11, 12. Duty, and encourage-
ments to perform it; or, the stronghold
—how to get it, and the blessings of its
security ; or, salvation may be had. This


salvation only gained by effort. “Turn
ye,” &e.
Ver. 12. 1. Available refuge. “The


stronghold,” impregnable, secure, and
lasting. 2. Access to it free, and should
be immediate.

Ver. 14. Arrows. Strongly express
the speed and the resistless power of his
converting grace. The arrow of Divine
truth, with which the Apostolic bow


was fitted, carried conviction to the con-
science, and quickening power to the
heart. By killing it made alive. We
are reminded of the language of Ps.
xlv. 3—5 [ Wardlaw].

Ver. 16. God’s people glorified. slere
we see the dignity of the Lord’s people.
They are “stones,” precious stones, set
in the “crown” of the King of kings.
Here is also their exhibition: these stones
of a crown are “lifted up.” They are
not to be concealed. Here is also their
utility : these stones are to be lifted up
“as an ensign upon the land”—an


oriflamme suspended over the royal tent;
designed to attract followers to the cause
in which he is engaged [Jay].

Ver. 17. How great his goodness!
God’s free love (benevolence) the foun-
tain of all mercies, 1. Great in the gift
of Christ. 2. Great in the conversion
of sinners. 3. Great in the support of
his people. How great were the sacrifices
which Christ’s goodness made! How
great are the gifts which his goodness
bestows ! How great the extent to which
his goodness spreads! How great is the
duration of his goodness! [Sacred
Garland]. But it is not the goodness
of God alone that is to be seen in the
Gospel. _ “ How. great is his beauty /”
The loveliness of his entire character—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.


(CHAP. rx,


its light, as well as its Jove—the united
harmony of all its attributes in the
work of Christ! We are not truly
under the renewing influence of the
Holy Spirit, if it is only his goodness
that we admire. The faith of the Gospel
imparts a spiritual taste for “the beauty
of holiness,” as well as of love. It
teaches and disposes us to delight in all
that God is [Wardlaw]. Hence, great
his beauty—1. In himself. ‘The
brightness of the Father's giory,” &c.
“The glory of the only begotten,” &e.
He is beautiful in his Divine and human
nature, 2. In his people. ‘The king’s
daughter all glorious.”


‘ All human beauties, all Divine,
In my Beloved meet and shine.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IX.


Vers. 1—6. The foreground of this
prophecy is the course of the victories
of Alexander, which circled round the
Holy Land without hurting it, and
ended in the overthrow of the Persian
Empire, The surrender of Damascus
followed first, immediately on his great
victory at the Issus ; then Sidon yielded
itself and received its ruler from the
conqueror. Tyre he utterly destroyed ;
Gaza, we know, perished; he passed
harmless by Jerusalem. Samaria, on his
return from Egypt, he chastised. History
gives no other explanation of Zechariah’s
prophecy than this conquest by Alex-
ander: that conquest agrees minutely
with the prophecy. No other event in
history does [cf. Pusey’s Lectures on
Daniel].

Ver. 7. The happy effect of this
numiliation of the great worldly powers
of Persia, Syria, and Philistia, was this
—that they lost their confidence in their
own false deities, and were prepared to
receive a purer faith. The prophet
foretells this, and predicts also, that
there will be a faithful remnant among
those nations, which will turn to the
true God; and’ many among the heathens
wil become governors in Judah ; many
who were once Gentiles will become
preachers and missionaries in Christ’s
Church, Even Ekron itself will be


come a Jebusite, a dweller in Jerusalem,
the Church of God [Wordsworth].

Ver. 8. Encamp. On every side
the watch is kept by warriors of sleep-
less eyes, and the Captain of the Host is
one whose prowess none can resist. We
little know how many providential
deliverances we owe to those unseen
hands which are charged to bear us up,
lest we dash our foot against a stone
[Spurgeon].

Vers. 9,10. Thy king. Christ asa
mere man was great—great in intellect,
heart, purpose, action; as a Mediator,
supremely great. But how does this
great Being, Prince of the powers of the
earth, enter Jerusalem? In a triumphal
chariot?—on a stately, prancing steed,
accompanied by a magnificent cavalcade 4
No! On an ass. The more truly kingly
a man is, the less he cares for conven-
tional pageantry. Your great men have
never cared for jewellery. The more
ornaments are coveted, and dress is
studied, the more mean and impoverished
the soul. Heart of oak requires neither
veneer nor varnish, A great age has
never been an age of millinery and gold
rings. The kingly soul does not care
for the rose or the crown [Dr. Thomas].

Vers. 11,12. Pit. Some of the pits
referred to in the Bible were prisons,
one such I saw at Athens, and another


CHAP, X.}





at Rome. To these there were no
openings, except a hole at the top,
which served for the window and door,
The bottoms of these pits were neces-
sarily in a filthy and revolting state,
aud sometimes deep in mud. ‘‘He
brought me up also out of an horrible
pit, out of the miry clay:” one of these
filthy prisons being in the Psalmist’s
view; in Isa. xxxviii. 17 called “ the
pit of corruption,” or putrefaction and
filth [John Gadsby].

Vers. 13—15. Mighty man. It is
held that valour is the cheapest virtue,
and most dignifies the haver [Shaks.].
When a man goes in the fulness of his
strength upon any enterprise, how do
his blood and spirits triumph _before-
hand! No motion of hand or foot is
without a sensible delight. The strength
of a man’s spirit is unspeakably more
than that of the outward man; its
faculties and powers more refined and
raised ; and hence are rational or intel-
lectual exercises and operations much


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.





857





more delightful than corporal ones can
be [Howe].

Ver. 16. Flock. What condescension,
for the Infinite Lord to assume the office
and character of a Shepherd towards his
people! It should be the subject of
grateful admiration that the great God
allows himself to be compared to any-
thing which sets forth his great love
and care for his people. No man has a
right to consider himself the Lord’s
sheep, unless his nature has been re-
newed, for the Scriptural description of
unconverted men does not picture then
as sheep, but as wolves or goats. A
sheep is an object of property, not a
wild animal; its owner sets great store
by it, and frequently it is bought with a
great price [Spurgeon]. ;

Ver. 17. Goodness and beauty.
“Oh, he is good,—he is immensely good,

Who all things formed, and formed them all

for man:

Who marked tke climates, varied every zone,


Dispensing all his blessings for the best,
In order and in beauty! "” [Smart],





CHAPTER X%


Critican Norss.] Idol worshippers brought their judgments now ; they must call upon Jehovah.
Ask] He will give rain: i.e. all temporal and spiritual blessings. Clouds] Lightnings, precursors
of rain. Showers] Lit. rain of heavy rain: 7. ¢. plentiful (Job xxxvii. 6). Grass] for cattle, and
corn for man, 2. Idols] Lit. the teraphim, household and oracular gods, thought to give prosperity
(cf. Gen. xxxi. 19). Diviners] Soothsayers brought misery through vain and deceitful prophecy.
Therefore] Because they trusted idols and soothsayers. They went] Lit. to break up, pull up the
pegs. and take down the tent; hence wander into exile. Troubled] Oppressed, because no
shepherd] no king, to defend them. 98. Punished] Lit, visited the goats] in evil, but his flock] for
good, and made them courageous as a war-horse; a horse chosen by the commander-in-chief to ride
at the head of his army. 4. Out] Thrice repeated, for emphasis. Judah no more subject to
foreigners ; from them were to come rulers described as corner]-stones, upon which the building
firmly rests (Ps. cviii, 22). Nail] The large ornamental pin, fixed in the wall, to suspend valuable
furniture (Judg. iv, 21: Isa, xxii, 23). The battle-bow] Military force, and weapons in general,
5.] For such heroic conflict will they be fitted by the help of Jehovah, that the enemy will be put to
shame before them, The riders of the horses are mentioned for the purpose of individualizing the
enemy, because the principal strength of the Asiatic rulers consisted in cavalry (cf. Dan, ii, 40)
[Kei/]. 6. Judah] will share as well as Ephraim. Bring] and replace them happily and securely,
as of old. %. Ephraim) addressed in remainder of chapter, had not participated much in restoration.
They, like Judah, would become heroes, Rejoice] ¢. e. fight like a mighty man exulting in joy (ef.
Ps bexviii. 65, 66). abtisen |shyeid see the joy, which would be lasting and complete. 8. Hiss]
Whistle as bee-keepers call back swarms to the hive. ‘I'he extraordinary increase of Jews after thie
is a familiar fact of history (cf. Josephus’ Wars, Bk, iii. ch. ili, § 2). 9. Sow) broadcast, with a
design to multiply (Hos. i, 25 :. Jer, xxxi, 27). Remember] Return to right mind (cf. Luke xv.
17: Ps. xxii, 27), Live] in political and spiritual life. 10. Egypt] the house of bondage, and
Assyria] the scene of captivity, represent lands ia which they are now scatte Gilead and


8358 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. [cHaAP. x





tse ee


Lebanon] Their old dwellings east and west of Jordan. This territory, though fertile and large,
should not be able to support them. 11. The sea] personified, shall not hinder their return, God
will march at their head, trample down all its proud waves, and the depths shall become dry.
Assyria’s pride] and Egypt’s sceptre] (rod of task-master), shall be smitten. 12. I] God will
strengthen Ephraim, ‘They will walk] in his name, and enjoy his protection ; find the past a pledge
of the future, and see the Divine perfections more illustrious than ever.


HOMILETICS.
Gop tan AuTHor or SpirituaL Buessines.—Verses 1, 2.


At the close of the preceding chapter God had promised abundance of temporal
and spiritual good. Here directions are given to obtain that good. Idolatry had
brought judgments, but Jehovah will pour out blessings upon them.

I. All spiritual blessings come from God. Rain is the symbol of God’s
spiritual gifts. 1. The idols of the heathen cannot bestow them. The gods in the
temple and the deities in the house are vanity and lies. 2. The laws of nature
cannot bestow them. There are “diviners” in the present day who “have told false
dreams "—who have forgotten that God sits in the heavens, and rules the clouds ;
that he visits the earth to water and fructify it. There is neither showers nor
sunshine in the natural world without him—no personal prosperity, progress, and
fruit, in the Divine life without the influence of his Spirit. Nor can any portion
of the soil of the world—“ the desolate heritages” of heathenism, with all the
tillage that missionary labour can bestow upon them, be rendered productive of the
“fruits of righteousness,’’ except as God is pleased to shed down the same gracious
influence—“ pouring water on the thirsty, and floods on the dry ground” [ Ward-
law]. “Is there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? Or
can the heavens give showers?” ‘ Thou visitest the earth,” &c. (Ps. lxv. 9—11).
II. Prayer is the appointed means for securing these spiritual blessings.
“ Ask ye of the Lord.” Men of science exalt the laws of nature, and despise
prayer. Natural philosophers may combine and direct the forces of nature, but
God does not. “ Without a disturbance of natural law quite as serious as the
stoppage of an eclipse, or the rolling the St. Lawrence up the Falls of Niagara, no
act of humiliation, individual or national, could call one shower from heaven”
[Tyndall]. But the prophet directs the people to God, when the heavens withhold
their dew, and assures them that if they ask they shall obtain. “The Lord shall
make bright clouds,” &c. 1. Blessings in rich abundance. “And give them
showers of rain.” Enough for man and beast, “to every one grass in the field ”—to
every one that asks will he give, “as the showers upon the grass.” 2. Blessings in
due season. ‘The early rain in spring, to water the seed sown; “ the latter rain” in
autumn, to ripen the corn. We must pray in due seasons, and look for spiritual
prosperity with the same intense anxiety as the Jews did for rain twice a year. “I
will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain and the latter
rain, and I will send grass in thy field for thy cattle” (Deut. xi. 13—15),
3. Blessings indicated by visible signs. Rain, with its harbingers or accompaniments,
will be given. “The Lord shall make bright clouds.” Clouds, as precursors of the
showers, to encourage; or clouds which terrify, shall be turned into rain to bless
them. ‘He maketh lightnings into rain” (cf. Ps. exxxv. 7: Jer. li. 16). Clouds
shall be filled with showers, and distilled as the dew upon the land. “As one
shower is unburdened another shall be brewed” [Trapp]. Forerunners and proofs
of Divine goodness shall abound on every hand. ‘“ He made a decree for the rain


(regulating its time, place, and quantity), and a way (through the clouds) for the
lightning of the thunder” (Job xxviii. 26).


“ Who sets the bright procession on its way,
And marshals all the order of the year ’ tango}


OHAP, X.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. 658


Tue Misery or Forsaxine Gop anp Consuttine Fatse Oracurs.— Verse 2,


The Jews are here warned not to imitate the conduct of their forefathers in
consulting idols, and forsaking Jehovah, who hindered Divine blessings, and
brought human miseries. The warning is needed now. If man rejects the true,
he will choose the false. His moral convictions, dependent condition, and exposure
to danger, make him dissatisfied, and impel him to trust in superior power. Learn
the folly of trusting to idols.

I. This course will disappoint. Men who renounce trust in God, and
embrace false ways in hope of prosperity, will be disappointed. 1. Zdols reveal
nothing to be relied upon. ‘The idols have spoken vanity.” The idols which
men consult in distress, promise what they never perform. All the vanities of the
heathen put together cannot give rain (Jer. xiv. 22). 2. Diviners lead astray.
They put their own lies into their lips, and clothed them with God’s authority.
They pretended to see what they saw not. “The diviners have seen a lie.” They
uttered false prophecies, “told false dreams.” False in matter, because opposed to
God’s word, false in event, because they were not fulfilled. “Let not your prophets
and your diviners, that be in the midst of you, deceive you,” &c. (Jer. xxix. 8, 9).
II. This course will lead to bitterness of mind. “They comfort in vain.” If
the voice of God, uttered with every degree of evidence and affection, be disre-
garded, and men have recourse to necromancy, the result will be vanity and
vexation of spirit. All who, like Saul, seek an answer from diviners, will find
them deceptive. ‘Ye are forgers of lies (stitchers up of falsehood), ye are all
physicians of no value” (of nothingness, idol physicians, Zech. xi. 17), Job xiii. 4.
III. This course will expose to great danger. “They went their way.” They
were not only disappointed and vexed, but they lost God’s protection, and were left
a prey to every injury. As sheep without a shepherd, they were troubled,
scattered, and led into captivity. They had no king to rule over them, no priest
to intercede for them, and no shepherd to care for them. This is the condition of
all who forsake God, and refuse the salvation and tender care of the Good Shepherd.
“My flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth; and none did search or
seek after them.”

Divine Visitations.— Verse 3.


Against the shepherds, the leaders or chiefs of the nation, God’s anger was
kindled. He “ punished (lit. visited) the goats,” but Judah waa “his flock,” whom
he visited in mercy. Hence—

I. The rulers are punished. As shepherds they should have been concerned
for the flock. But they neglected, starved, and scattered the sheep. As goats they
were guilty of mischief, the emblem of wantonness and offensive lust. God will
ever make a distinction between the goats and the sheep, aad those who are first in
crime will be first in punishment. II. The people are blessed. Judah is the
flock of God, aud must be tenderly w.tched and fed. God would employ, govern,
and defend them against their enemies, as a rider doth “his goodly horse in the
battle.” Learn the advantages of serving God, and the necessity of turning from
idols. He will visit the ungodly in anger, but his people in love. The goats will
be rejected, and the sheep saved (Matt. xxv. 32). ‘‘I will judge between cattle
and cattle, between rams and he-goats.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. 1. The blessing needed. morality, and bless the Church with
‘‘Rain,” all natural, temporal, and fertility. 2. The way to get it. “ Ask
spiritual influences, to ripen the fruits ye of the Lord rai.” Idols cannoi
of the earth, advance the nation in send it, and man cannot create it


660





Hence, it is fitting to feel dependence,
and give it expression in prayer. This
is good for ourselves, and the only
efficient method to secure Divine opera-
tions in our favour. Elias, a notable
example (Jas. v. 17, 18). 3. The time
in which we should seek it. We should
ask in seasons when it is required for
the refreshment and beautifying of the
earth. Prayer may be out of season
as well as in season. ‘“‘ Ask of the Lord
rain. We should ask it in a higher
sense-—ask the outpouring of God’s
Spirit—for the revival and growth of
religion and its appropriate fruits in our
own souls; for its revival inour Churches,
and for its progressive influence and
productiveness throughout the world”
[| Wardlaw}.

Ver. 2. Idol confidences. 1. Vanity ;
2. False; 3. Comfortless; and 4. Mis-
leading. “ Diviners have seen a lie.


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


[cHap, x.





Unbelief has recourse to a crowd of
superstitious devices, and by their folly
and impotence is put to shame. Faith,
on the contrary, turns to prayer, and
thr-ugh it works wonders ” [ Lange].

Ver. 3. Against the shepherds. The
sins of the civil and ecclesiastical rulers
affecting the nation (cf. Prov. xxviii. 2).
“Thus, saith the Lord God; Behold, I
am against the shepherds: and I will
require my flock at their hand, and
cause them to cease from feeding the
flock.” Goodly horse. Judah’s might
was not in himself; but in God’s hands,
he had might like, and above, the mighi
of this world [Pusey]. This may in
part be understood of the Maccabees’
victories ; but principally of the Apostles,
those white horges, upon which they
rode through the world, conquering and
to conquer (Rev. vi. 2) [Trapp].


HOMILETICS.


Toe DELIVERANCE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF Gop’s PropLe.—Verses 3—7.


God confirms his mercies to Judah and Israel, enlarges the former predictions,
and assures the triumph, restitution, and defenza of his people.


I. God will deliver them from their enemies.


Foreign or native oppressors—


the sinful leaders of the flock, or the inveterate foe of the nation, would be visited


with punishment.


Often at the worst, things turn for the better.


Whatever


troubles, his people—they are his flock—will not be cast off; but delivered, “ For


the Lord of Hosts hath visited his flock.”


defence.


II. God will equip them for self-


Though exposed to danger, yet God will furnish them with everything


necessary to defend themselves, and prevail over their enemies. Governors of their
own shall be raised up to unite and help them. No foreign aid will be required.
The corner-stone, the nail, and the battle-bow, all strength would be inherent,
though given by God. “ Their nobles shall be from themselves, and their governor
shall go forth from the midst of them.” III. God will give taem victory over
their enemies. The timid sheep became strong as the battle-horse. From a
peaceful people sprung heroes, mighty men, to deliver from oppressors, The
victory of the Maccabees typifies the triumph of Christ over anti-Christian powers.
1. This victory will be complete. “Their enemies” will be trampled down as mire
in the streets, foul and worthless, As Jehovah’s war-horse they will overcome and
confound the cavalry of the foe. ‘The riders on horses shall be confounded.”
2. This victory will be through Divine aid. “They shall fight because the Lord is
with them.” Courage is not our own. All might comes from God, and against his
power nothing can prevail, Mere human strength is perfect weakness, but God
strengthens in Christ (Phil. iv. 13). Feeble humanity rises into prowess and
majesty whens made mighty in all (kinds of) might (Col. i 11). IV. God will
restore them to ancient privileges. Most commentators take vers. 6 and 7 as
alluding to the ten tribes. . Judah and Israel are distinctly mentioned. A more
complete restoration than a few from Babylon. A greater deliverance than the
Maccabean is promised. 1. The tribes of Israel will be umsted together. The


OHAP. X.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAR. 661


house of Joseph will share the salvation, and all Judah together will be strength-
ened. The children of God, scattered abroad, shall be incorporated; Jew and
Gentile shall become one fold. 2. The land will be restored to them. “TI will
bring them again to place them.” Privileges lost through sin will be restored
when God turns to his people. 3. Security will be given them. God will place
them ; make them dwell securely as in olden time. They shall be treated as if
they had never been cast off. “TI will settle you after your old estates, and will do
better unto you than at your beginnings” (Ezek. xxxvi. 11: cf. Job xlii. 12).
V. God will cause others to participate in their privileges. Ephraim and their
sons would not be forgotten, though hitherto not partaking largely of the blessings
of restoration. 1. In the strength of conflict. ‘They of Ephraim shall be like a
mighty man.” 2. In the joy of victory. ‘And their heart shall rejoice.” God’s
presence will be their strength and song. From generation to generation, mercy
will be enjoyed in renewed performance of the promise. “Yea, their children
shall see it, and be glad.” f


Gop tHE AvTHor or PouiticaL Buiessines.— Verse 4.


God is the King of kings, and Lord of lords. He only can give magistrates
and legislators who are “‘for the punishment of evil-doers, and for the praise of
them that do well.” They are not created by the institutions nor the politics of
the state. ‘The powers that be are ordained of God.”

I. Men who are the corner-stones, the ground of support to the state.
Princes are often called “the chief (corners, marg.) of the people” (1 Sam. xiv.
38: cf. Isa. xix. 13; xxviii. 16). II. Men who are the nails, the strength of the
state. They unite discordant parties, as nails fasten different timbers. On them
rest the responsibilities of government, and the security of the whole fabric. Rulers
and officers in the Church should strengthen and held it together. On them hang
all the implements of evangelical warfare, which should be ready for use. ‘I will
fasten him as a nail in a sure place ; and he shall be for a glorious throne to his
father’s house” (Isa. xxii. 23, 24). IZI. Men who are the battle-bow, the
defence of the state. Armour in general, for personal and national conflict—men
to wield it with skill and success come from him. IV. Men who govern, the
rulers of the state. “And from him every oppressor together,” 7. e. in a good
sense, every ruler who exacts tribute froia nations subject to Judah. Thus the state
is built up and defended by God. Legislation without him is insecure. He must
be trusted for every politician that founds and fastens the empire together—
thanked for every ruler that crushes oppression. All valour and success, all
ornaments and defence, are from him. “The Lord is Governor among the nations.”


Tue Reuicion or Joy.—Verse 7.


Through communicated and accompanying might of Jehovah, Ephraim would
be a man of valour and strength against every foe. The exulting joy with which
they would be filled would impart energy of heart and hand. In proportion to the
amount, the variety, and long-continuance of their outcast condition, of depression
and humiliation, of scorn and reproach, of personal and social oppression ; and of
all, as the effect and indication of what was worse than them all—Divine desertion
——the hidings of God’s countenance, his frown, his wrath—should be the joy of
Jehovah’s return and blessing [ Wardlaw].

I. Joyful religion in its source. Its source is secret and hidden from the
world. 1. /¢ ts in Goud. They shall “rejoice in the Lord”—not in his gifts,
health, abundance, and honour—but in God himself. In his favour and friendship,
in his Word and service. 2. It eprings from the heart. “Their heart shall


662 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP, X





rejoice.” Not from outward circumstances, but from pardoned sin and peace with
God. This fountain of living waters is within a man. “A good man shall be
satisfied from himself.” II. Joyful religion in its degree. “ Their heart shall
rejoice as through wine.” Wine is called by Plato, “the mitigator of human
sorrows.” The figure denotes exuberant joy, joy beyond a natural degree (cf. Ps.
Ixxviii. 65; civ. 15). By a bold figure wine is said to “cheer God” himself
(Judg. ix. 13. Hence as cordials are seasonable in the hour of need; so joy
buries sorrow, and makes us forget past evils. ‘Let him drink, and forget his
poverty, and remember his misery no more.” III. Joyful religion in its influ-
ence. This fountain is never sealed. 1. It conduces to health. Diseases of the
mind produce diseases of the body ; a fretful repining spirit will waste away the
vigour and beauty of the constitution. ‘Let thy mind’s sweetness,” says Geo.
Herbert, ‘‘ have its operation upon thy body, clothes, and habitation.” “A merry
heart maketh a cheerful countenance ; but by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken.”
2. It promotes’ activity. Happy Christians are strong and active Christians.
Ancient nations drank wine before battle. Those who drink of this joy will be
heroes in life, ‘ Neither be ye sorry; for the joy of the Lord is your strength.”
3. It influences others. Children see and neighbours feel it. “I am sure my
father’s religion is true,” said one, “‘ because it makes him happy.” ‘The beams
of joy,” says Fuller, “are made better by reflection.” Yet some are strangers to
this joy. Their religion is morbid and melancholy—“ the religion of the sorrowful,”
misrepresenting the bright religion of Jesus. Seek to rejoice in God, and to
rejoice always. ‘Delight thyself in the Lord.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Lord God, he it is that fighteth for you.”
Ver. 6. JI have mercy upon them.


Ver. 5. Mighty men or warriors of
the Gospel. 1. Their valour. The


figure is general, indicating triumphant
progress againstall enemies, and thorough
and shameful discomfiture. It was in
looking forward to the success of his
Apostles—so rapid, so signal—that our
Lord said, “I beheld Satan fall, as
lightning from heaven.” The comparison
is simple. “As mighty men.” They
shall triumph over the enemies of their
cause as completely as the most victori-
ous general over his enemies, The
causes and the weapons are widely
different ; so is the spirit in which the
war is conducted, and the results to those
taken captive by the conquerors [ Ward-
law). 2. The source of their valour.
“They shall fight because the Lord is
with them.” He is the source of all
success, Through him they do valiantly ;
for he it is that treads down their
enemies. Not a victory, not a trophy,
not a song, without him (Jos. xxiii. 10:
Neh. iv. 20). If Mithridates never
wanted courage nor counsel, how much
more shall the Messiah and his mighty
men succeed in their warfare! “The


Here is a double cause alleged, of these
great and gracious promises; and both
excluding works. . First, God’s mere
mercy ; secondly, his election of grace .
“for I am the Lord, their God.” This
latter is the cause of the former; for
God chose his people for love, and
then loveth them for his choice. The
effects of which love are here set: down
—1l. That he heareth their prayers, “I
will hearthem.” 2. That he re-accepteth
and restoreth them in Christ, as if they
had never offended against him. ‘They
shall be as though I had not cast them
off.” That was a cutting speech, and
far worse than their captivity, when
God not only threatened to cast them
out of their country into a strange land,
but that there, ‘“‘he would show them
no favour” (Jer. xvi. 13). Here he
promiseth to pity them, and then they
must think deliverance was at next door
[Trapp].

1. The blessings. Strength, “I will
strengthen them;” salvation, “I wili
save;” and restoration. “I will bring


OHAP. X.]


them again.” 2. The cause of the bless-
ing. God’s mercy. “I have mercy
upon them.” God’s unchanging purpose ;
“they shall be as though I had not cast
them off.” 3. The consequence of the
blessings. “Y will hear them.” He
heard the voice of their distress, as he
did in Egypt. But understand their
calling upon Jehovah in a state of
penitential abasement, confession, and
return of heart (cf. Wardlaw) “I
will hear,” is the fulfilment of a promise
repeatedly made to them in former days,
and an encouragement in their present


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


663


to be gracious.’ His ear is open to
their very first penitential cry; and
while his ear will be open (that alone
were little) his power will be ready to
aid” [ Wardlaw].

True conversion. 1. Men turn to God
only through Divine merey. 2. When
men repent, and turn to God, they are
treated as if they had not been cast off.
3. Humble penitent prayer to God is an
evidence of converted men. “ Prayer
is to religion what thinking is to philo-
sophy. To pray is to make religion”
[ Novalis}.


dispersed state. “Jehovah yet ‘ waits
HOMILETICS.


THe RestroraTIon, SETTLEMENT, AND IncREASE OF Gop’s PsopiE.— Verses 8—12.


To remove all doubt concerning the promises just given the restoration is more
minutely described.

I. The restoration of God’s people. “TI will gather them.” 1. From different
places. From “the land of Hgypt,” a type of all lands of bondage. “Out of
Assyria,” a type of all lands of exile. They shall be sought and found in all
quarters of the world. 2. By Divine call. “I will hiss for them and gather
them.” As bee-keepers whistle back the bees to the hive, or as sheep flock
cogether at the well-known call of the shepherd, so God will bring them back tc
oimself and their inheritance. “He will lift up an ensign to the nations from far,
and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth; and, behold, they shall come
with speed swiftly” (Isa. v. 26). 3. Without hindrance. (a) Distance shall
not keep them back. Out of lands far and near. (0) Distress shall not hinder
them. At the Red Sea Israel thought they were lost. The sea of affliction shall
be opened up. Its smitten waves shall overwhelm the foe, ‘for the Lord fighteth
for them against the Egyptians” (Ex. xiv. 24, 25); or sink into silenve at the
command of its Maker and Ruler. “All the deeps of the river shall dry up.”
(c) Enemies shall not impede them. “The pride of Assyria shall be brought
down.” The rod of Egypt shall be broken. The wonders of old shall be repeated,
and the first deliverance shall be eclipsed by the last. II. The settlement of
God’s people. “I will bring them into the land of Gilead” beyond Jordan, the
eastern, “‘and Lebanon,” the northern, boundary. 1. Settled them in Divine
strength. “TI will strengthen them in the Lord.” Strengthen them to resist
temptation, discharge duty, and endure trial. “‘ Be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might.” 2. Settled them in delightful freedom. “I have redeemed
them” (ver. 8): spiritually and temporally, the type of the true Israel. “I gave
Egypt for their ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.” III. The increase of God's
people. “ And they shall increase as they have increased.” 1. Increase by sowing
them in other nations, As seed sown in the ground they were scattered, not merely
to spread the knowledge of God, but to be quickened in themselves, and to
quicken others. “The word is used of sowing to multiply,” says Pusey, “never
of mere scattering. A rich harvest was to spring from them.” “TI will sow the
house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed
of beast.” 2. Increase with unparalleled degree. “Pace shall not be found for
them.” “A promise of such increase is a promise that includes much more than it


864 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. xX.





’ expresses. It implies in it all that contributes to such rapid multiplication.” “The
children of thy bereaved estate shall yet say in thine ears, The place is too strait for
me: give place, that I may dwell.” 3. Increase in permanent duration. ‘They
shall live with their children and turn again.” The gift would be a continual gift.
“They and their children, and their children’s children for ever” (Ezek. xxxvii.


14). The blessing would not be transient, but abiding; the chartered privileges
would be as before the dispersion. ‘‘The promise is unto you and to your
children,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. Here we seem to have their
dispersions, their penitent recognition
of .@od, and their consequent pre-
servation and return [ Wardlaw).
Sow them, partly to keep them as
winter seed in the ground till the
spring-time of their conversion and
restitution; and partly making them
seed to bring in an increase of the
fulness of the Gentiles at their con-
version. Further, the Lord promisetk
that scattering should not hinder their
eonversion, for the veil shall be taken
away, and they shall remember the
Lord, and they and their children
being preserved shall return to God
{ [Lutcheson}.

They shall remember me—1. May be
applied to the Jews; and 2. to the
conversion of sinners. It indicates—
1. That men have forgotten God,
wandered into distance from him.
2. That true conversion is a “ turning
again” to God in humility and duty.
A state of unregeneration is one of
forgetfulness. Sinners have Jost all
sense of God’s glory, authority, and
mercy. The first religious exercise of
the mind is reflection, fitly represented
in the prodigal when he came to himself.
Then a return to God the Father. “ All
the ends of the world shall remember
and turn unto the Lord.”

Ver. 12. Security and happiness
under Divine protection. 1. Christian
knowledge ; a knowledge of God’s name
revealed to direct and encourage in duty.
“The name of Jehovah is a compre-
hensive expression denoting his glory
as manifested in history” (Hengs.).
2. Christian profession. To walk in his
name, or maintain a course of life in


harmony with God’s will and word.


3. Christian freedom. “They shall walk
up and down.” “The expression seems
further to imply a state of felt peace,
and freedom, and confidence of safety,
and happy social intercommunion, atis-
ing from faith in God—from unshaken
reliance on his power and wisdom,
faithfulness and love” [Wardlaw]. I
will strengthen them in the Lord. The
very assurance we want in the duties and
trials of life. Confidently rely upon it,
for it comes from the lips of Faithfulness
and Truth. But we may err as to
manner of fulfilment; our expectation
therefore to be regulated accordingly.
Observe, that the fulfilment of the
promise will not exempt us from all
ground of complaint. It will keep us
in work, but not cause us to cease—
secures help in conflict, but war lasts for
ever. Jt will also be seusonable. “ As
thy days, so shall thy strength be.”
Look for grace, not for imaginary but
real purposes, not for future but present
difficulties, to “help in time of need.”
These supplies of strength to be sought
in God's own way. In the use of
appointed means. Foolish to avoid
religious exercises, even when not in a
proper, spiritual, and lively frame. Then
the means most necessary, as fire when
we are cold, and excitement when dull
[Jay].

Vers. 10 —12. Messianic mercies.
Survey the whole promise from ch. ix.
11 onwards; there are two leading
thoughts developed in it. (@) That
those members of the covenant nation
who were still scattered among the
heathen should be redeemed out of their
misery, and gathered together in the
kingdom of Messiah. (6) That the
Lord would endow all his people with


OHAP, X.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


665





power for the conquest of the heathen.
They were both fulfilled in weak com-
mencements only in the times immedi-
ately following, and down to the coming
of Christ, by the return of many Jews
out of captivity and into the land of
their fathers, particularly when Galilee
was strongly peopled by Israelites; and
also by the protection and care which
God bestowed upon the people in the


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1, 2. Ask rain. Men seom
practically to have but little remembrance
that the mainspring of all mechanism
of second causes is in the hands of an
invisible Creator; that it is not from
what goes on in the hidden laboratories
of what they call nature that season
succeeds season, and shower and sun-
shine alternate with so much of beautiful
and beneficent order, but that the whole
arrangement is momentarily dependent
upon the will and energy of that Supreme
Being who ‘sitteth upon the circle of
the earth, and the inhabitants thereof
are as grasshoppers” [ Melville].

Ver. 3. Shepherds. As hired servants
will tend men’s sheep no longer than it
is profitable to them, so is it with
promotion-seeking ministers [Cawdry].

Ver. 4. The administration of govern-
ment, like a guardianship, ought to be
directed to the good of those who confer,
and not of those who receive, the trust
[ Cicero].

Vers. 5, 6. Mighty men. Power is
according to quality and not quantity.
How much more are men than nations !
[Emerson]. Where power is absent we
may find the robe of genius, but we
miss the throne [ Landor'].

Vers. 7, 8. ‘‘The house of Judah,
and the house of Joseph,” spoken of in
the first of these verses, signify respect-
ively, the two tribes and the ten tribes—
unitedly, the whole house of Israel—the
posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
The declaration, “J will save them, and
bring them again and place them,”
cannot refer to the return from Babylon;
seeing, in that respect, they had been


contests between the powers of the
world for supremacy in Palestine, The
principal fulfilment is of a spiritual
kind, and was effected through the
gathering of Jews into the kingdom of
Christ, which commenced in the times
of the apostles, and will continue till
the remnant of Israel is converted to
Christ its Saviour [ Kei].


TO CHAPTER X.


already “saved,” and “brought again,”
and “placed.” And the language is
much too strong to have reference to
any such remaining partial deliverances
and returnings—additions only to that
from Babylon—which might take place
under the Maccabean princes, or at any
period of their history between the
prophet’s days and the coming of Christ.
And if it refers to a period subsequent
to the coming of Christ, to what else
can the reference be but to their recovery
from their present long-continued outcast
and scattered condition? [ Wardlaw].
Vers. 9—12. The victory described
is followed by a large increase of popu-
lation, not confined to Judah, but also
including Israel. Nor is there reason
to doubt that the independence achieved
by the Maccabees attracted very many
of the exiles from the northern kingdom,
who forgot the old causes of dissension,
and united earnestly in maintaining the
re-established national centre in Jerusa-
lem. This fusion at home led to a
similar fusion abroad, and wherever
Jews were found, who preserved their
hereditary faith’ at all, they still remem-
bered Jehovah as one who had chosen
Zion, and considered themselves as con-
stituent parts of one covenant people.
So far the predictions of the chapter
were fulfilled historically in the period
extending from the establishment of
Jewish independence to the time of the
advent. In the last three verses the
prophet describes a far greater, because
spiritual, blessing in terms borrowed
from the old experience of the people.
The drying up of the sea, the humiliation


666 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAA. {CHAP, XI.








of Assyria, the overthrow of Egypt, reclaim and bless them by procedures as
simply set forth the removal of all marvellous as any that ever occurred in
possible obstacles in the way of a their former history [Lange].

spiritual return to God. The Lord will





CHAPTER XI.


Cruitican Norss.] In this chapter we have a contrast to the former. It was necessary to promise
blessings, to encourage, and to warn, lest many should presume by vain confidence in the promises,
We have the destruction of the second temple and of the Jewish polity for the rejection of Christ.
Lebanon] #. ¢. the temple, lofty and magnificent as the mountain. ‘The picture is a dramatic one.
Instead of the devastation of Lebanon being announced, it is summoned to open its gates that the
fire may be able to enter in and devour its cedars. The cypresses, which hold the second place
among the celebrated woods of Lebanon, are then called upon to howl over the fall of the cedars,
not so much from sympathy as because the same fate awaits them” [Kei/]. 2. Forest] Lit. the
fortified or inaccessible forest, Jerusalem, with houses numerous, and built close together, and round
which was a wall (cf. Mic. iii. 12). 8. Shepherds] In reference to office, and young lions] in
disposition. Jordan] with its thickets and decorated banks, which furnished lairs for lions, Jewish
leaders are represented as despairing at the destruction of their polity. 4.] The cause of the ruin.
Feed] The prophet to act the part of a good shepherd, Flock] Jewish nation. 65, Possessors] Lit
buyers, who think they can sell or slay for their own advantage, 6. I] Divine pity would not be
shown to them; they would be left to civil discord and foreign rule. King] Roman emperor (John
xix, 15). 7%. I] The prophet executed the task committed to him by shepherding a sad (poor) flock.
Two staves] “to set forth the kind of double salvation bestowed upon the nation through the care of
the Good Shepherd” [Ker]. Beauty] Loveliness or favour (Ps, xxvii. 4; xc. 17); which Jehovah
will give them :n protecting them from foes. Bands] Internal union and friendship. Easterns tied
a cord or band as a symbol of confederacy (cf. Ps, cxix. 61, marg.). 8.] First act of shepherd. Cut
off) Lit. cause to disappear, destroy, or annihilate (Hx, xxiii, 23). Three] orders —civil authorities,
priests, and prophets (cf. Jer. ii. 8, 18); others, three rulers of Asmonean line—who died by violent
death in a short space of time-—Hircanus, Alexander, and Antigonus. Loathed] Was straitened for
them: ‘the Divine grief at the misery of his people” [Pusey]. Abhorred] ‘‘Nauseated me.”
9. Let it] Perish those who are doomed to perish. All kindly control is withdrawn, and the flock is
left to the consequences of its fatal rejection of deliverance. The fulfilment in the history of
Jerusalem, 10. Break] Symbolic action of taking away the good received by the flock in form of
covenant. ‘That is to say, the covenant which God has made with all nations is to be repealed or
destroyed” [Keil]. 11. Broken] The covenant annulled as the staff was broken. This not observed
by the flock at large, only by the poor] who recognized the fulfilment of a Divine word (Jer, xxxii.
8). 12. Good] ‘‘ He served them, not for wages, but in obedience to the Divine will.” Wages,
however, were due; the price of a slave offered. 18.] It was contemptuously rejected. Jehovah
regards the wages offered to himself. Goodly] Noble price, ironical, Potter] As worthless, 14.]
Worse evil threatened than the former. Second, utter breaking up of the nation, and loss of fraternal
unity. 15.] Since the Good Shepherd was rejected a very different class would shepherd them. Take]
again. Instruments] A crook, bag, pipe, and knife, &c. Foolish] Bad shepherd (Ps. xiv. 1). 16. ]
Conduct of this ruler described; not mere neglect, but destroys (cf. Ezek. xxxiv. 3, 4). Enumera-
tion of particulars complete. Claws] Tearing off hoofs, disabling them from seeking pasture,
expressive of ferocious greed. yen extremities rent rather than lose a shred of flesh. 17. Woe
These merciless rulers meet with retribution. Leaveth] Instead of guarding the flock. Arm
Instrument of tyranny. Right eye] The organ of pee (John x. 12, 18), The former
withered, and the latter biimded. ‘The doom imprecated is truly awful—an utter deprivation of
power and intelligence” [Henderson].


. HOMILETICS.
Nationa. Furen ror Divine Fire.—Verses 1—3.


Applied to the temple, the city, or the people, these words indicate the destruction
of everything great in the Jewish nation. Formerly they had been visited and


OHAP. XI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. 687


recovered; now there is a final judgment. All is ripe fer destruction. God’s
anger is kindled; the conflagration sweeps through the land, devours mountain,
forests, and lowland pastures, and creates lamentation in man and beast.

I. The nation’s glory is spoiled. “heir glory is spoiled.” The temple and
the city, the boast and excellency of the nation, were besieged and sacked. Their
honour and power were brought low ; the wealth and luxury acquired by the abuse
of power became a prey to the enemy. God can take away the results of our
labour, and the monuments of our skill. We may think our resources to be secure,
and our fortifications impregnable, but the doors will open to the Divinely-appointed
agency. II. The nation’s nobility are cut down. “The mighty are spoiled.”
The leaders of the people—men of superior and inferior ranks—are taken away.
“ The cedars,” the pre-eminent in rank and office ; the jir-trees, rulers of lower grade;
the “oaks of Bashan,” men of strength and sturdy power—the highest and the
lowest are involved in fearful destruction, and howl in agony together. Whatever
be the estimation in which nobility are held, Divine wrath may consume them like
fire. ‘‘ Worship your heroes from afar ; contact withers them” [Madame Necker].
III. The nation is filled with despair. “Howl, fir-tree.” If doors open of their
own accord, what use are defences? If the highest fall, what can the lowest do?
When chief men, in civil or religious position, are fallen from their station, horror
and anguish may well fill the community. 1. Despair most sad. ‘“ Howl.” The
cedar, the fir-tree, the oak, alike suffer, ‘for the forest of vintage is come down.”
2. Despair universal. All have cause for alarm and lamentation. The fire sweeps
through Lebanon and Bashan, the entire land is seized, mountain and plain, forests

.and fields, are laid waste ; men and beasts cry out in terror, and universal despair
indicates the awful ruin. If God’s favoured nation were thus punished, let the
wicked beware and the godly be warned. “ Behold, the righteous shall be
recompensed (rewarded or chastened) in the earth : much more the wicked and the
sinner (shall not go unpunished)” (Prov. xi. 31).


CHRISTIAN SORROW FOR FALLEN GREATNESS.— Verse 2.


The Bible abounds with comparison, is an ancient book, and in proportion as
you go back in history, you will find the language poetic. The warm imagination
of the Easterns never suffered them to speak without figures. Men are called
trevs. Three things in the text—

I. The differences there are among men. Where are sameness and equality to
be found? God is always producing variety. All flesh is not the same flesh
(1 Cor. xv. 39). What wonder, then, that differences should exist among men?
Some are superior to others in family, rank, and station; in corporeal qualities, in
stature, in beauty, in strength, gracefulness, and speed; in mental qualities, in
acquired knowledge, in usefulness. Think of the Luthers, the Whitfields, and the
Hills. Scme cedars and others fir-trees. II. Their fall, however, distinguished.
1. There is a moral fall to which we are exposed while in flesh and blood; indeed
a man is never secure as long as he is in the world. 2. There is a@ mortal fall by
death, accident, disease, infirmity, or age. Great men die often—not always—
before others. Here the cedar falls, while the fir-tree survives. III. The sorrow
caused by their removal. 1. Sympathetic sorrow. Sympathy, a word the more
we consider the less we can explain. We only know the fact that God has put
something within us which reciprocates the feeling which we find in another, A
mother hears her child cry, and darts to its relief. You see a man drowning in
water; you sink as he sinks, rise as he rises, and are equally glad when he comes
to shore. 2. Rational sorrow. All men die. Princes and soldiers that defend
us, merchants that supply us, and husbandmen that till our ground and fill our
barns. Can we see the nation atript of these, like a tree dropping its leaves in


668 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (omar. xi





autumn, and not feel? Can we see the country robbed of its members, its
ornaments, and not sorrow? 3. Pious sorrow. We are told of St. Ambrose that
when he heard of the death of a minister of Christ he burst into tears. (a) The
death of a good man is a public loss. We lose their examples, which are important
and beneficial. (5) As benefactors, they are the salt of the earth, the light of the
world. (c) As intercessors, they pray for others as well as themselves. (d) As the
defence of the earth, they are better than navies and armies. Ten righteous men
would have saved Sodom. 4. Unlawful sorrow. We sorrow, not as those without
hope. (a) Your mourning would not be proper if accompanied with murmuring ;
(b) if ungrateful ; (c) if it called you away from present things. Every day has
ita duties [The Preacher's Treasury].


Toe Froox or Siavenrer.— Verses 4—6.


The prophet here performs in vision the acts enjoined, and becomes a represent-
ative of the Messiah, who feeds those willing to be fed, and punishes those who
reject him. But by obstinate wickedness, instead of becoming “the sheep of his
pasture,” they become “the flock of slaughter,” doomed to destruction.

I. The shepherds of the flock were worthless. Not merely negligent, but
very wicked. 1. They had no compassion. “Their own shepherds pity them
not.” Sad when ministers have no benevolent feeling for their flocks—when rulers
in every department under their control are devoid of conscience. 2. They were
avaricious. They bought and sold, to make gain of the flock. They sought only
to gratify self and covetous desires. ‘All other love is extinguished by self-love ;
beneficence, humanity, justice, philosophy sink under it” [Hpicurus]. 3. They
were cruel. ‘‘ Whose possessors slay them.” In ruthless cruelty “they ate the fat,
and clothed themselves with the wool, and killed them that were fed.” “ Yea,
they are greedy dogs, which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that
cannot understand : they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his
quarter.” 4. They are hypocritical. They say, “ Blessed be the Lord.” They are
cruel and oppressive, yet profess to be religious! They succeed in ways which
God abhors and reprobates, and then thank God for their riches! Sin is most
daring when committed and defended under the pretence of piety, and claiming
the approval of God in success. Sanctimonious hypocrisy is often displayed in
covetousness and self-aggrandizement. ‘Hypocrites do the devil’s drudgery in
Christ’s livery,” says one. II. The flock itself is given up to destruction.
1. Divine pity was withdrawn. God had often displayed compassionate forbearance
towards them, but now he “ will no more pity the inhabitants of the land.” 2. Hvil
discord rent them asunder. ‘The zealots and factious Jews expelled and slew one
another in the siege of Jerusalem. ‘I will deliver the men, every one into his
neighbour’s hand.” 3. The land was smitten by the foe. ‘‘They shall smite the
land.” The people generally and individually were delivered into the hands of the
Roman emperor. With indignant voice they rejected their own lawful ruler, and
cried, ‘ We have no king but Cesar!” They were dispossessed of their trust, and
their precious inheritance was given to others. Those who should have been
protectors became oppressors. Without friends or helpers, they were destroyed as
a nation, “and live only to perpetuate the memory of their past history, and teach
more vividly its great lessons of sin and retribution.” “Out of their hand I will
not deliver them.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 4. 1. The wretched flock. For- 2. The tender compassion ef Jehovah.
saken and flayed by the shepherds, “Feed them,” foster and preserve them
counted all day for the slaughter. with affectionate care. “O the goodness


OMAP. XI.)





of God to a nation so shamelessly, so
lawlessly wicked. He himself, the
Shepherd of Israel, neglected no good
office in seeking and feeding them; was
careful to raise up shepherds for them
(Mic. v. 5), till at length he sent the
Man, Christ Jesus, the Chief Shepherd,
who came to look up the lost sheep of
the house of Israel, whom (to move
compassion and affection) he here
calleth the sheep of slaughter, until the
time prefixed for their total dispersion,
by reason of ingratitude” [Trapp].

Ver. 5. 1. Wickedness declared to
be innocent. ‘They slay them, and
hold themselves not guilty.” They
thought there was no wrong in it, and
would not be called to account for it.
“All that found them have devoured
them: and their adversaries said, We
offend not, because they have sinned
against the Lord” (Jer. 1. 6, 7). 2. Wick-
edness claiming G'od as its associate.
“Blessed be the Lord.” Can anything
be more offensive to God than to thank
him for the gains of oppression and
fraud! “To what point does not art
teach? Some learn even to weep with
grace” [Ovid]. 3. Wickedness justified
by success. “I am rich.” I have
succeeded in business, prospered in family
and estate, therefore I must be right.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.


668


God has blessed me, I may thank him |
“Success consecrates the foulest crimes ”
[Seneca]. Thus while “through covet-
ousness they with feigned words made
merchandise of men,” they at the same
time sought to impose upon the omnis-
cient God, and to put Aim off with words
and forms, in which there was no heart
and no moral or spiritual obedience.
There could not be a juster description
of the leading features in the character
of the Pharisees. These were avarice
and hypocrisy : their hypocrisy being, as
is the wont of religious dissemblers,
accompanied with a large amount of
ostentation and pagade. Mark the
manner in which our Lord speaks of
them (Matt. xxiii. 14, 23—25).

Ver. 6. No more pity. 1. God's
pity ts very great. Had been displayed
in wonderful ways to his people, and is
to us. 2. But this pity is limited. ‘‘ No
more.” Forbearance will reach its limit,
and heavy woes will fali upon those who
despise it. Observe the evils threatened
—(a) Deadly feuds; (5) Foreign yoke;
(c) Dispossession of land ; and (d) Help-
less misery. ‘ ‘They shall smite the land,
and out of their hand I will not deliver
them.”

“‘Meroy to him that shows it is the rule ”

[Cowper').


HOMILETICS.
Tua Two Sraves; ok Beauty anpD Banps.— Verse 7.


The two staves are differently explained, indicating, according to some, the double
care of Christ for his flock. Henderson takes them as symbols of “the two modes
of treatment ” which the Jews had experienced “ under the guidance and protection
of God.” Beauty has been rendered grace or favour. Taken in its connection
(ver. 10), it means the covenant of God, with all its blessings and special favours.
Bands signify unity or brotherhood, which binds men together (ver. 14).

I. The staff Beauty. ‘The one I called Beauty.” This symbolizes—l, God's
gifts to men. The gifts of pastors, the wisdom of senators, and the power of
princes come from God. 2. God’s presence with men. Purity of worship and
principle in the nation—holiness in character and usefulness in the Church—are
beauties which attract and adorn. The image of God, the beauties of holiness, are
most desirable. ‘Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us.” 3, Gord's
defence of men. God’s covenant was a pledge of defence to them as long as they
kept it. Thus God’s favour is better than armies and fleets, wealth and valour, in
the protection of a people. This alone beautifies and strengthens. “For God is
my defence, and the God of my mercy.” II. The staff Bands. “The other 1
called Bands.” Binders symbolize the unity or brotherhood among men. 1. This


670 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (cHAP. XI.





alone ts the gift of God. In the gospel we have a basis of brotherhood, and
motives to cement it. The bands of friendship and marriage, the contracts of
business, and the treaties of nations may be broken. But in Christ we have a
living, universal, and everlasting brotherhood of humanity. 2. How strong ars
men when thus bound together. Foes without cannot destroy unity within. “ Union
gives strength and firmness to the humblest aids.” 3. How weak are men when
not thus bound together. Factions and civil discords in the nation, divisions in
the Church, and discords in the family, will bring ruin. Nothing can beautify or
defend a broken people. ‘Men’s hearts,” says Carlyle, “ought not to be sef
against one another, but set with one another, and all against the evil thing only?
If you wish to retain strength and beauty, co-operate together, in obedience to tl»
Great Shepherd, and under the rule of Beauty and Bands. “Every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation ; and every city or house divided
against itself shall not stand.”


Toe SHapHeRD Propust.—Verses 7, 8.


I. The charge. The command was given, “Feed the sheep” (ver. 4). Eagerh
does the prophet undertake the duty, and become a type of Christ. ‘Lo, I come
to do thy will. O my God.” But notice the condition of the flock. 1. A helpless


flock. In the hands of cruel shepherds; bought and sold by strangers, oppressea
by native rulers. 2. A miserable flock. ‘‘ Poor of the flock,” lit. truly miserable
sheep. Men may be poor without being miserable. But the Jewish people were
reduced to a most unhappy condition. As in the days of Christ, they were
harassed and worried (Matt. ix. 36); lost sheep (x. 36). The poor are not
despised, the lost are sought out, and the wounded are healed by the gospel. “I
will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and
will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick.”
II. The method of executing the charge. “And I fed the flock” (ver. 7). Ha
performed, like Christ, the work of a good shepherd to the Jewish nation. 1. He
furnished himself with staves. ‘I took unto me two staves.” He did all ha could
to bind them together in unity and obedience, and direct them to the gra’e and
favour of God. 2. He destroyed the oppressors of the flock. ‘I cut off three
shepherds.” “These,” says a critic, “were the persons of influence by whom the
affairs of the nation were conducted, and to whose wickedness, which reached its
culminating point when they crucified the Lord of glocy, the destruction of the
state is to be ascribed.” 3. He was grieved in soul at the condition of the flock.
“My soul loathed them.” He witnessed the fearful wickedness of rulers and
teachers, He was deeply pained, “vexed from day to day with their unlawful
deeds.” This was the feeling of Christ, and will be the feeling of all true shepherds.
Sad the wickedness which creates tears of the Saviour! If “every human feeling
is greater and larger than the exciting cause,” as Uoleridge says, what must be the
loathing of him who sees the hearts of all men! ‘He knew what was in man.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 7. I fed the flock. Christ the
King of men. The poor in spirit are
chosen to be rich in faith, and heirs of
his kingdom. ' “Jehovah in Christ did
the work of a Good Shepherd to the
Jewish nation during the whole of his
earthly ministry (cf. John x 11—14;


xiv. 6: Heb. xiii. 20: 1 Pet ii, 25)”
[ Wordsworth].

Ver. 8. My soul loathed them.
1. Divine compassion. “ Loathed,” lit.
was straitened , the opposite of enlarged
towards them, in love and tender com-
passion (2 Cor. vi. 11,12) “Hiw soul


OHAP. XL]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


67)





was grieved (shortened) for the misery
of Israel” (Judges x. 16). 2. Human
abhorrence. ‘Their soul also abhorred
me.” ‘My soul did not loathe them
first, but their soul first despised me,
therefore my soul abhorred them.” The
soul which drives away God’s good
Spirit comes at last to loathe him and
the thought and mention of him [ Pusey].
No room was left by them for the grace
of God, and his favours were rejected
[Calvin]. Learn that unbelief creates
a mutual distaste between God and the
sinner. “Their soul nauseated me” is
the real meaning—that alienation from
God will lead to God’s withdrawal from


men, “TI will not feed them” (ver. 9).

3. The impenitent flock and the grieved
Shepherd. God is infinitely happy and
incapable of grief, yet acts as if he felt
the sins and miseries of men. “The
Good Shepherd lost patience with their
perverse impenitence, and they, on the
other hand, loathed him for his spiritu-
ality and holiness” [Lange]. Christ
cannot be rejected with impunity. Even
the Jews, who “did it ignorantly in
unbelief,” paid a terrible penalty for
their crime; how much more terrible
will be the punishment of those who
have all their unbelief without any of
their ignorance [ Zd. }.


HOMILETICS.
GoD WITHDRAWN, AND MAN GIVEN UP TO HIS OWN DestruotTion.— Verses 9—11.


The treatment which the Shepherd received leads him to give up feeding the
flock, and leave it to its fate. Israel rejected Jehovah, and was in turn rejected.
The staves were broken, and the miserable flock have experienced the weight of the
words, ‘“‘ Woe unto them when I depart from them!” Learn—

I. That God may withdraw himself from men on account of their sins.
“Then said I, I will not feed you.” God woos and awes men; instructs and
chastises them; loads them with benefits and corrects them in evil; uses all
possible means to keep them in his ways: but they despise his long-suffering, and
provoke his wrath. The greatest favours of God often draw forth the worst mani-
festation of conduct. Men persist in rebellion, refuse when God calls, and are
ultimately left to their folly. “My Spirit shall not always strive with man.”
II. That when God withdraws himself from men fearful punishment falls upon
them for their sins. How awful the picture given here. 1. Destruction most
effectual. “It was broken in that day.” If not suddenly, the Jewish nation
suffered eventually. God has power to execute judgments, and nothing escapes
his notice. 2. Destruction in manifold ways. (1) By pestilence. “That that
dieth, let it die.” (2) By the sword. ‘“ And that that is to be cut off, let it be
cut off.” (3) By famine. “ Let the rest eat every one the flesh of another.”’ (4) By
intestine feuds, God withdrew, and ceased to be “a wall of fire round about them.”
The staff Beauty, the covenant, was broken, and fearful was the fulfilment. When
the Romans forced admission into their city, famine and pestilence, feuds and
mutual hatred, had done their work. Josephus tells us that every law of nature
and humanity was broken; that even the very letter was fulfilled ; “The left over
shall eat every one of the flesh of his neighbour.”


Tue OsservaNt Few.— Verse 11.


When the staff was broken, and calamities were threatened, this was not
observed by all. Only a small number gave heed to Jehovah, and recognized the
fulfilment of the Divine word. Their character, attitude, and experience are
described.

I. Their character is described. ‘The poor of the flock.” Poor in condition
and poor in spirit. The nation was gone astray, but God had “a seed to serve


$72 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. XL


him.” The people were doomed, but Jesus had a “‘little flock.” However low the
condition of the world, God has always a “remnant according to the election of
grace.” II. Their attitude is described. They “waited upon me.” They prayed
to God for mercy; observed God in the warnings and actions of the prophet.
They discerned the hand of God in the signs of the times, just as the disciples saw
coming judgments in the sieye of Jerusalem, and fied to Pella. ‘ Whoso readeth,
let him understand (mark, consider, 2 Tim. ii. 7) it” (Matt. xxiv. 15). III. Their
experience is described. ‘They knew that it was “the word of the Lord.” They
understood the word of God, however perplexing it was to others ; were sensible of
God’s displeasure, and cherished a humble spirit. Events which are common
occurrences, chances of war to some, are warnings of God to others. Let faithful ’
pastors be encouraged from these words. Prophets before them have shared their
lot—ministered to a flock, despised by the world, but distinvuished by the mark
that they know the Lord. Jesus himself thought it not beneath him to shepherd
“a little flock,” whom he will own at the great day.


Tus SHepHEerRD’s Priok.— Verses 12—14.


The prophet, representing Jehovah, demands the price for his services. The
Jews were God’s peculiar people, blessed above all others, and should have made
grateful return. But they offered forms for sincerity, added injury to insult, and
sold the Messiah for thirty pieces of silver. :

I. A price of their own rating. “If ye think good, give me my price; and if
not, forbear.” As their servant, he sought their love and obedience. He will not
force, but leave it to free-will, If men withhold what is due, God will not con-
strain them to give. His goodness should bind us to love him. “ Love sought is
good, but given unsought is better” [Shakespeare]. II. A price most contempt-
ible. ‘They weighed, for my price, thirty pieces of silver.” They gave him the
price of a bond-servant, half the value of a free-man—the compensation for a slave
that had been killed (Ex. xxi. 32: Matt. xxvi. 15). “A goodly price ”—a splendid
value that has been set upon me! Good men are not half valued in the world.
What wonder when Christ, the Son of God, was sold so cheaply! III. A price
rejected by the Shepherd. “Cast it unto the potter.” The most suitable person
to whom to cast the despicable sum, who plies his trade in the valley of poitnted
clay (2 Kings xxiii. 10). An action significant of the mind of God, and the doom
of the people. God values our sinallest service if offered iu sincerity, but contempt
of his Son will meet with death. IV. A price which brought Jehovah's displeasure
upon them. “Then [ cut asunder mine other Staff” (ver. 14). The shameful
payment by the people leads to the abandonment to their fate. Fraternal unity is
dissulved, and the nation is broken up into self-destroying parties. When schisms
rend the Church, and factions break the peace of a people, we may see the with-
dvawal of the Shepherd’s care, and the presage of the nation’s dvom. ‘ When the
staff of Beauty is broken the staff of Bands will not hold long. An unchurched
people will soon be an undone people.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 12. If ye think good. ‘The indebted to him. 2. Men should make
demand an appeal to men, to give them some return to God. Not because they
opportunity of reasoning, explaining enrich God, but as proof of their
their conduct, and appreciating Gou’s affection. 3. God seeks return. “Give
kindness. 1. God lays men under great me my price.” He will not enforce it,
obligation by his love; makes them but leave the consequences with men


OHAP, XI.}


“Thus saith the Lord God, He that
heareth Jet him hear, and he that
forbeareth let him forbear.”

Ver. 13 (cf. Matt. xxvii, 3— 10).
There are points of diversity between
the two transactions—that in the Pro-
phet, and that in the Evangelist.. There
are points, too, of similarity; and in
these the allusive type is to be considered
as lying. The “ price” —reward or hire
—given to the prophet, in the vision,
represented the slight value set upon his
person and official services. So did the
same price, put upon the head of a
greater than Zechariah or any of the
prophets, testify the low value they set
upon him and his Divinely - attested
nunistrations and work. The identity
of “the price ;” the principle, or want
of principle, shown in its pitiful diminu-
tiveness ; and the giving of each to “the
potter,” are the chief points of resem-
blance, in which the treatment of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.


673


prophet was a prophetic prefiguration of
the treatment of him “of whom Moses
in the law and the prophets did write.”
However indirect and obseure the pre-
figuration might be, we are not to regard
the reference by Matthew as a mere
accommodation. There was in what
befell the prophet a designed foreshadow-
ing of what in the future should befall
the prophet’s Lord [ Wardlaw].

House. They are his most guilty
adversaries who, like the Jews in Jesus’
days on earth, and like apostate Chris-
tians in our days, are so “in the house
of the Lord” [Fausset].

Ver. 14. Cut. God seems to say
that he will now no more govern this
people in mildness and clemency, nor
yet exercise his shepherdly severity in
saving corrections and visitations, as
formerly he had done; but utterly reject
and disject them [Trapp].


HOMILETICS.
Tax CHarce oF WortHinss SHEPHERDS.— Verses 15—17.


Israel rejected the Good Shepherd, and must now be ruled by shepherds of a
different class. In one more symbolic act the prophet represents the truth. “Take


unto thee yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd.”


I. The character of the shepherds.
—l. They were worthless.
vanity, a thing of nought.
of a shepherd.”
mere forms or images before God.
with wicked (Ps. xiv. 1).


and ungodly shepherds; vain, passionate, and cruel.
This is described in the figure, not the exact words of Jeremiah
1. They are negligent.
The flock is sick, wounded, or lost; and the shepherd is unfaithful and


shepherds.
(xxiii. 1, 2) and Ezekiel (xxxiv. 3, 4).
visit.”


“Woe to the idol shepherd.”
“A shepherd of nothingness, one who hath no quality
Destitute of spiritual life, no care for themselves or their flock,
2. They are foolish. Foolish is synonymous
Not mere ignorant and unqualified, but unprincipled


Notice—
These pretended shepherds are described
An idol expresses


Ii. The rule of the
“6 Who shall not


negligent. 2. They are selfish. They think only of gratification and self-indulgence.
“He shall eat the flesh of the fat.” 3. They are cruel. They not only neglect,
but seriously injure the sheep. They have neither sympathy for the young nor
regard for the lost. They seize and devour the flock, and tear in pieces the claws
of the sheep.
Ationd. “This holy fox

Or wolf, or both,—for he is equal ravenous

As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief

As able to perform 't*” [Shukespeare].


III. The punishment of the shepherds. “ Woe to the idol shepherd” (ver. 17).

1. Judicial blindness. “ His right eye,” which should have been vigilant, ever

looking out to guide the flock, “shall be utterly darkened.” Visited with blindness,

‘the shall grope in the noon-day as in the night.” 2. Withered strength. ‘The
Aa


674


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


[CHAP. XL





aword shall be upon his arm,” by which he should have defended the flock. His
ooasted light shall be obscured, and his might dried, shrivelled up to nothing. He
is bereft alike of wisdom and strength. Awful warning to faithless ministers,
“Tf such woe,” says Wardlaw, “hung over negligent, unfaithful, unfeeling, selfish
shepherds, under the eld economy, how weightily ought they to feel their
responsibility, to whom, under the new, Christ says, “Feed my sheep: feed my


lambs” !


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. Instruments of a foolish
shepherd. Exalted rank and sacred
power ; the weakness of human nature,
and all the means to support their
ambitious designs.

Ver. 16. 1. The condition of the
flock. Some are cut off. Having
wandered, they are left to perish. Others
are “broken, t.¢. injured through the
fracture of a limb. The opposite of that
which stands upon its feet, and is still
strong” [Keil]. Some stand still through
faintness or weakness. “Better the
whole (asthe word always means, ‘in ite
good estate;’ like our prayer, ‘that
thou wouldest strengthen those who do
stand’). Which was set firm, or set him-
self firm, as in Ps. xxxix. 6, ‘ Every man
in his firm estate is all vanity.’ Id quod


stat (S. Jer.)” [Pusey]. All require
special care. But notice—2 The
wickedness of the shepherd. He should
sustain and furnish every one with
provisions. “If taken as pointing to an
individual king, there is none to whom
it will more aptly apply than to Herod,
who was totally regardless of the real
interests of the Jews, and whose reign
was marked by the perpetration of the
most shameful and barbarous cruelties’’
[ Hends. }.

The whole chapter sets forth—l. The
conduct of the Good Shepherd (vers.
4—14) who laid down his life for the
sheep. 2. The conduct of the bad
shepherds (vers. 15—17). The foolish,
cruel, and worthless rulers, who devoured
the flock and destroyed the nation.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XI.


Vers. 1—3. Open. Josephus relates,
that “at the passover, the eastern gate
of the inner temple, being of brass, and
very firm, and with difficulty shut at
eventide by twenty men ; moreover with
bars strengthened with iron, and having
very deep bolts, which went down into
the threshold, itself of one stone; was
seen at six o’clock at night to open of
its own accord. The guards of the
temple running told it to the officer, and
he going up with difficulty closed it.
This the uninstructed thought a very
favourable sign, that God opened to them
the gate of all goods. But those taught
in the Divine words, understood that
the safety of the temple was removed of
itself, and that the gate opened.”

Ver. 2. Fir-tree. The world cannot
do without great men, but great men are
very troublesome to the world [Goethe].
The highest and most lofty trees have


the most reason to dread the thunder
[Rollin].

Ver. 5. Rich. It is success that
colours all in life; success makes fools
admired, makes villains honest [ Thomson].
Let them call it mischief: when it is
past and prospered, it will be virtue
[Ben Jonson].

Ver. 6. Deliver. Such was the fury
of contending factions, that all parte
of the city and the very temple itself
were filled with slaughter. In their
mutual frenzy, they burned the very
granaries of corn which should have
sustained them, and destroyed the
magazines of arms which should have
defended them. And such was the
pressure of the famine, that parents and
children, husbands and wives, tore the
food from each other's mouths, scanty
and bad as it was, and, as a subsequent
verse hints, fed on the very bodies of


OMAP, XI.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


676





the dead, envying them the meanwhile the
cessation of their sufferings [ Wardlaw].

Vers. 7 (10 and 14). The prophetic
narrative which follows differs in its
form, in some respects, from the symbolic
actions of the prophets, and from Zecha-
riah’s own visions. The symbolic actions
of the prophets are actions of their own:
this involves acts which it would be
impossible to represent, except as a sort
of drama. Such are the central points,
the feeding of the flock, which yet are
intelligent men who understand God’s
doings: the cutting off of the three
shepherds ; the asking for the price ; the
unworthy price offered ; the casting it
aside. It differs from Zechariah’s own
visions, in that they are for the most
part exhibited to the eye, and Zechariah’s
own part is simply to inquire their
meaning and learn it, and receive further
information. Here he himself is the
actor, yet representing Another, who
alone could cut off shypherds, abandon
the people to mutual destruction,
annulling the covenant which he had
made | Pusey].

Ver. 9. J will not. God’s decrees
are not the result of deliberation, or the
Almighty’s debating matters within
himself, reasoning in his own mind


about the expediency of things, as
creatures do; nor are they merely ideas
of things future, but settled determina
tions founded on his sovereign will and
pleasure [Buck].

Ver. 10. Beauty.

“Tn his favour life is found,
All bliss beside—a shadow or a sound ”
[ Covper).

Vers. 12,13. Price. The influence
of money on a man will be according to
the man’s state of mind; according to
the condition of his heart and affections,
his estimate and plan of life [Binney].

Ver. 14. Brotherhood. Let us keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. Let this soft and silken knot of
love tie our hearts together: though our
heads and apprehensions cannot meet,
as indeed they never will, but always
stand at some distance off from one
another [Cadworth].

Vers. 15—17. Shepherd. O miserable
is that Church wherein are hirelings
instead of the Good Shepherd; more
miserable where are wolves in place of
hirelings, and most miserable where
devils in place of wolves [Bishop Jewell].
Eat the fiesh. Not keeping but clipping
the flock ; as if having now got a cure,
they might bid adieu to care [ Bernard].





CHAPTER XIL


Critica Nores.] This chapter begins the first half of the second prophecy concerning Israel’s
future and the nations of the world, The conflict against Jerusalem and Judah will issue in the
destruction of the enemies (vers. 1—4). Burden] Implying distress to Israel and destruction to
their foes; explained by reference to God’s creative power, which removes all doubt concerning the
thing predicted. 2. Cup] Causing those who drink to reel; a symbol of Divine judgments, which
intoxicate and cause nations to fall and perish (Isa. li. 17; Jer, xxv. 15). Against] Lit. “alsa
with Judah it shall be thus in the siege of Jerusalem,” #.¢. Judah with Jerusalem will be a cup of
wrath; the country and capital will be involved in the same conflict. 3. Burden.] Another figure,
borrowed from the custom of young men lifting up stones to test their strength. Nations will fail
and suffer. Cut] They will wound themselves by the sharp edges of the stones. 4. Horses] and
riders represent warlike forces, confused and injuring one another; but God exercises great care over
his people. Madness] (cf, Judg. vii, 22: 1 Sam, xiv. 20). Open] ¢.¢. to protect (1 Kings viii. 29 :
Neh, i. 6: Ps. xxxii. 8), 5, Judah] Chiefs of Judah will see the foe smitten with madness, and
recognize in the repulse of the enemy by ¢he metropolis Divine security for the country. 6. Sheaf]
Ts eonsequence of this trust in God the leaders consume their foes on every hand, as a basin of fire


876 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. [CHAP. XII,





devours faggots, or a torch consumes sheaves, Jerusalem] ¢. ¢. the inhabitants. Again] After
complete rout of the enemy shall dwell in (Jerusalem) peace. 7. Tents], shifting and insecure, and
spread over the country, first saved; to prevent pride and self-exaltation in the inhabitants of the
tortified and well-defended metropolis, 8. Defend] God’s people will be exalted to a degree of
strength and glory surpassing anything in their experience. Even the stembler, one who caa scarce
hold himself up, much less attack a foe, the feeble, shall be heroes like David ; David's house shall
exceed its ancient fame, become like God; yea, like the angel] that guarded Israel in the wilder-
ness; the highest type of glory and strength (Ex. xxiii, 20: xxxii. 34). This climax proves the
beautiful style of the prophet, and contains stimulating consolation as a promise. 9. Seek] expresses
the energetic purpose of the speaker, more hawnano [cf. Lange]. 10.) This a complete contrast t
preceding; nothing warlike, but all subdued and spiritual, “a clear and definite prophecy of the
future conversion of the Jews, in consequence of a special and extraordinary outpouring of the
influences of the Holy Spirit” [Henderson]. Jerusalem] ‘he whole covenant nation. Spirit]
which brings grace, and which results in supplication. Wook] Applied to bodily and mental vision
(cf. Num. xxi, 9: Isa, xxxii. 11), with the idea of confidence in thing looked at. Me] Jehovah
(ver, 1). Mourn] The consequence of looking, Him] Jehovah—Messiah speaking in his own
person first, then the prophet speaking of Aim [Fausset], Pierced] Thrust through, to slay by any
kind of death (cf. Lam. iv. 9), Mourning most bitter and deep, as for an only son], 11,] An
illustration given, the greatest recorded, mourning for Josiah in Hadadrimmon], a city in the valley
of Megiddon (2 Chron. xxxv. 22). 12.] It is universal mourning. “ All the families and households
of the nation mourn, and not the men only, but also the women. To this end the prophet mentions
four distinct leading and secondary families, and then adds in conclusion, ‘all the rest of the
families, with their wives’ ” [ Kes?].


HOMILETICS.
THe Omnipotent Supremacy oF Gop.—Verse 1.


To remove doubt concerning the promises in this chapter, God prefixes his name,
proves his omnipotence, and declares his supremacy over matter and mind.

I. God is supreme in the physical world. Power is displayed in its creation
and constant government. 1. He formed the earth. He “layeth the foundation
of the earth,” fixed it on its basis, and revolves it on its axis. He not only made,
but rules and judges in it, and those mistake who say, ‘“‘The Lord hath forsaken
the earth.” 2. He stretched out the heavens. Like “a curtain” he can stretch
them out or draw them together. God not only created at first, but continually
sustains all things. But the power which created the world must be unlimited
and ever present to uphold it. Without him the earth would wander from its
orbit, and the universe fall into ruin, “ Upholding all things by the word of his
power” (Heb. i. 3). II. God is supreme in the spirit world. He “ formeth the
spirit of man within him.” God is the Creator and sustainer of man’s spirit. ‘“‘ The
Father of spirits.” The human soul is the breath of the Almighty (Job xxxiii. 4) ;
and spiritually we are of Divine parentage (Acts xvii. 28). ‘‘ Behold, all souls are
mine.” He created them all, endowed them with powers and faculties necessary
to constitute them subjects of moral government (cf. Hend., Ezek. xviii. 4). He
. controls men’s hearts and purposes “as rivers of water,” encourages his people and
dispirits their enemies, and will save his chosen by quickening grace and eternal
life. Thus in creation and human experience we have proofs of God’s power,
refutations of doubt to perform his promise, and hope in seasons of trial and diffi-
cult enterprise. “Iam the Lord that maketh all things ; that stretcheth forth the
heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself; . . . that confirmeth
the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers” (Isa, xliv.
24, 26).


Gon’s PEOPLE RUINOUS TO THEIR EnNEMins.— Verses 2—A4.
*


Here we have promise of security to the Church of God. Nations may attack
Jerusalem, but will fail, whatever be their forces and fervour. Three figures are
ased to indicate this failure. They will be intoxicated by the “cup of trembling,”


OHAP, XII. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 677.





oy by the ‘burdensome stone,” and consumed by the “hearth of fire”
ver. 6).

I, The enemies of God’s people will be rendered powerless in their efforts.
They will gather together and besiege Jerusalem—thirst for spoil and blood, and
be doomed to destruction. As the gods infatuated those whom they destroyed, so

God will intoxicate them with the wine-cup of wrath, administer a potion to make
them helpless and reel on the ground. Sennacherib’s army were stupefied and
helpless in their assault. Persecutors may be excited to rage, but will be deprived
of their precaution and power, made drunk in their fury, and exhausted in their
efforts. “The stout-hearted (valiant) are spoiled, they have slept their sleep (of
death), and none of the men of might have found their hands (were able to fight) ”
(Ps. lxxvi. 5).


“For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast,
And breathed in the face of the foe as he passed ;
And the eyes of the sleepers waxed deadly and chill,
And their hearts but once heaved, and for ever were still” [Byron].


II. The enemies of God’s people will be wounded in their efforts. This stone
will be burdensome to all who seek to remove or carry it away. God’s Church is
founded on the rock, and persecutors dash against it in vain. It is a rock of
offence by virtue of its charter and power, a stone of stumbling to many. In times
of persecution kings and rulers have tried to upset or remove this stone, but it has
torn, lacerated, or ground to powder those upon whom it has fallen. Israel
escaped, but Pharaoh was drowned in the sea. The Philistines captured the ark,
but Dagon was broken to pieces. Diocletian built a monument to commemorate
the extinction of Christianity, but he perished, and it survives. In a conference
with Andrew Rivet, the King of France threatened severe measures against the
cause of truth, but the Reformer answered, ‘‘May it please your Majesty, the
Church of God is an anvil which hath broken a great many hammers” [cf. Lange].
III. The enemies of God’s people will destroy themselves by their efforts.
Zechariah revives the words concentrated by Moses to express the stupefaction at
their ills which God would accumulate upon the people if they perseveringly
rebelled against him. Each expresses the intensity of the visitation [cf. Pusey|
1. They are smitten with blindness, Then they rush to their own ruin (Zech. xiv.
12, 13). 2. They are smitten with terror. The horses of the enemy were
unmanageable by their riders, got entangled one with another, and became
injurious only to themselves. 3. They are smitten with madness. “TI will smite
every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness.” The riders were
deprived of self-possession and forethought. Thus all attempts will fail, and bring
shame and discomfort upon those who are guilty of them. “TI will sing unto the
Lord; for he hath triumphed gloriously ; the horse and his rider hath he cast into
the sea.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Learn—1. That the promises
of God often seem incredible. 2. That
doubt concerning these promises will
hinder our comforts. 3. That the visible
effects of God’s power should remove
our doubt an@? strengthen our hope.
Nothing can fail f-2 lack of power and
love. The Chu»h, therefore, is perfectly
safe, the ersmies are in great danger.
Pledaes ff Divine faithfulness —The


power of God, by which he stretched
forth the heavens. The wisdom of God,
by which he founded the earth, The
goodness of God, by which he formed
the spirit of man [cf. Trapp].

Ver. 2. A cup of trembling. What it
is, and who brings *t, and who drinks it.
“The cup is ali sitter and full of
svirow,” saith Augustine: “the godly
do often taste the top, and feel the


478


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


[ CHAP, Ril





sitterness, but then it is suddenly
«natched from them; but the ungodly
shall drink the very grounds and ex-
sremest poison” [ J. Adams].

Ver, 3. A stone. It is not a rock,
or anything in its own nature immov-
able, but a stone—a thing rolled up and
lown, moved, lifted, displaced, piled on
others, in every way at the service and
zommand of men, to do with it what
they willed [Pusey]. But notice its
tremendous weight and injurious effects
when abused !


enemy, and the perfect security of the
Church ; or the madness of men, and the
special providepce of God. J will open
mine eyes, in *.sntrast to the blindness
with which ‘#od smote those arrayed
against them—in pity, love, and guid-
ance, in contrast to the cruelty and self-
injury of the foes [cf. Pusey]. God
seems to close his eyes sometimes, and
leave his people in darkness and distress.
The enemy thinks that God disregards
them ; but eventually he will notice the
trials of the Church, and splendidly


Viz. 4. The self-destruction of the interfere to destroy her foes.


HOMILETICS.
Tae Enereay or Zion’s Leapers.— Verses 5—7.


God will not only presecve Israel, bu* raise up and qualify rulers to manage
their affairs—holy men, putting confidence in the people, and rejoicing in the
welfare of the country. Notice the energy of spiritual leaders.

I. Its elements are the unity and affection of the people. “The princes of
Judah shall say in their heart, (lit.) ‘The inhabitants of Jerusaler strength to me.’
The princes recognize in the unity and love to God found in wa people their
‘strength to endure and defend. The poor aud weak are held in highest estimation,
and confessed to be the hope of the nation, not as a matter of expediency nu
policy, but from deep conviction.” In their heart the rulers confess this. God's
people may be ignored by worldly rulers, but they are the defence and glory of an
empire. II. Its origin is found in Divine grace. ‘In the Lord of Hosts, their
God.” Few or many, holy or unholy people have no inherent worth. Rulers
have no energy without God. Jehovah makes Jerusalem “a cup and a stone.” “On
human principles, or according to the ordinary operation of cause and effect, the
world would prevail. Often every advantage is on its side — arms, wealth,
influence, state-craft, learning, prestige, and numbers. Yet the few, the weak, the
unlettered, the lowly, the things that are not, brought to nought the things that
are. The excellency of the power is not in man, but of God. The Lord will not
give his glory to another. ‘ Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubians a huge host,
with very many chariots and horsemen? yet because thou didst rely upon the
Lord, He delivered thee’” [Lange]. This should—1. Aid the weak. “The Lord
shall save the tents of Judah first.” 2. Humble the strong. That “the glory of
the inhabitants do not magnify themselves against Judah.”


THe DanGgR AND THE DEFENCE OF ‘Zion.— Verses 6, 7.


The Church is looked upon by many as troublesome. They have spared no
effort to destroy it. God has defended Zion, the city of our solemnities.

I. The danger of Zion. A mighty confederacy is formed against it. “ All the
people of the earth” (ver. 3) gathered to besiege Zion. ‘They shall be in the
siege” (ver. 2). “To cut off the name of Jerael, that it should be no more in
remembrance.” Gathered against a defenceless people. In Zech. ix. 13 we have
the bow, the sword, and the valour of the Maccabees under the direction of God ;
but here we have tents shifting and insecure. II. The defence of Zion. The
people and the princes make common cause, become one-minded, and each exalt the


OHAP. XII.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 679





strength which the other was to him in Jehovah. 1. God helps them to defend
themselves, Self-help first, and then help from others. “For they can conquer
who believe they can,” says Virgil. “Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie which
we ascribe to heaven” [Shakspeare]. 2. God helps them by his own power. “The
Lord shall save.” The defenceless Jirst. The country people were more exposed,
and needed greater protection. They might be forgotten or despised by the
citizens of Jerusalem ; but God specially protected them. This was to teach the
great men—men of influence and position—“ not to magnify themselves against
Judah.” None must assume anything to himself. All, the meanest and migKtiest
are equal in the sight of God, and saved by grace Divine. Hence in every civil
and religious community there should be no ill-feeling in the low towards the high,
and no disrespect in the rich towards the poor. “He that glorieth, let him glory
ip the Lord.”
“ Praise is only praise when well addressed” [Gay].


Sprrituat Heroism.— Verses 8, 9.


As a consequence of Divine protection, the weak would be strengthened, the
mighty endowed with supernatural vigour, and all their enemies would be scattered.

I. Spiritual heroism is Divine in its source. The strength is “as the Angel
of the Lord before them.” ‘The Angel of Jehovah,” known as the manifestation
of Deity in their history. The might of God in Christ Jesus. “I can do all
things through Christ, who strengtheneth me.” II. Spiritual heroism is
different in its degrees. We have two classes mentioned—l. The feeble become
powerful. “ He that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David.” He that
stumbles and is ready to fall shall become a hero, a mighty man of valour. His
feebleness and unskilfulness shall merge into strength, and God shall teach his
hands to war and his fingers to fight. “Let the weak say, I am strong.” 2. The
strong shall be more powerful. David’s house shall eclipse its former splendour,
and be “as God.” He shall possess a superhuman courage and decision, perform
exploits, and resemble God, seen marching in the front of his conquering hosts.
III. Spiritual heroism is gradual in its growth. “From strength to strength,”
by strenuous effort and perseverance. Faith is gained by experience, and courage
strengthened by trial. ‘Tried grace is growing grace.” The sapling once bending
before the blast has become the sturdy oak by the tossing storm. No degree of
strength is impossible, but the steps to attain it are gradual. “The righteous also
shall hold (take firm hold) on his way, and he that hath clean hands be stronger
and stronger (add strength)” (Job xvii. 9).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 5. Strength to me. 1. The
piety and unity of a people the strength
of the leaders. 2. The confidence of
the leaders in the people a necessity to
success. Without concurrent aid, skill
and valour of little avail. In times of
danger there should be full co-operation,
reliance one upon another, and hope in
God. ‘‘This union and valour would
be the ‘strength’ of their leaders;
without which they must find them-
selves utterly powerless. A divided, dis-
pirited, heartless, dastardly soldiery or


populace is weakness, disappointment,
and discomfiture to the best-conceived
plans of the most bold, prudent, and
experienced leaders” [ Wardlaw].

Ver. 6. The pot of fire. The
governors of a united and brave people,
when trusting to God, are—l. Destruc-
tive. ‘‘ Like a hearth of fire (a fire-pot)
among wood, or like a torch of fire in a
sheaf.” 2. Very destructive. “They
shall devour all the people round abont,
on the right hand and on the left.”
The idea conveyed is destruction mest


terrible and complete—most. easily and
most certainly accomplished. 3. Very
destructive only through God. “I will


make,” &c. Jehovah speaks, infatuates
and exposes the enemy, and makes the
chiefs of Judah a consuming fire. “The
fire could not kindle the wood or the
sheaf of itself, unless applied to it. All
is of the agency of God: J will make”
| Pusey].

Notice—First, the destruction of the
enemy; second, the restoration of the
city. “Jerusalem shall be inhabited
again.” The people shall yet dwell in
their own city. “It shall not be a new
city in some new territory ; but Jerusa-
lem, the city of their fathers, the city
of. their God; on the same spot, hal-
lowed by all the ancient associations of
their history and religion. The language
pointedly and strongly expresses reoc-
cupancy and permanent possession ”
[Wardlaw]. Literally, Jerusalem shall
dwell still under herself, i. e. the Church
will not rely on earthly powers, which
will be opposed to her, but she will
dwell in continual stability, dependent
upon herself (cf. vi. 12, out of his
place ; lit. from under himself), and on
her own spiritual strength, derived from


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.


(oHaP. xm





jiret.”. 3. The design in the salvation
“That the glory of the house of David
.. . do not magnify themselves.” Ne
local or personal supremacy then. In
the Christian Church all are equal;
nothing is due to learning, wealth, or
merit, and none should domineer over
the rest.

Vers. 8, 9. Zion’s conquest over her
enemies —all of God, yet achieved
through human agency. 1. By defend-
ing the helpless; 2. Aiding the stum-
bler; and 3. Elevating the mighty. The
strongest have need of more strength,
and this strength is only found in
Jehovah. Hence the promise of de
fence added to that of strength.

Ver. 9. 1. God’s people have many
enemies. ‘All the nations that come
against Jerusalem.” 2. These enemies
will be discovered. “I will seek.”
Secret plotters and open enemies will
be found, however distant tieir dwelling
or daring their enterprise. 3. These
enemies will be destroyed. “I will
seek to destroy.” This the end of all
persecutors, the issue of all opposition to
God. ‘God will seek to destroy them,
not as if at a loss for ways and means
(infinite wisdom was never nonplussed),


her Divine Head, Christ [ Wordew.]. but his seeking intimates earnestness


Ver. 7. 1. The certainty of sal- and intent upon it, and that he over-
vation, “The Lord also shall save.” rules means and instruments, all motions
2. The method of salvation. ‘Judah and second causes, to accomplish it.”

HOMILETICS.


Ispagu’s Sin anpD IsraKL’s Sorrow.— Verses 10O—1]4.


As the former portion of the chapter sets forth the outward protection of
providence shown toward the New Testament Israel, by means of which it
emerged victor from all trials and conflicts, and saw its enemies utterly discomfited,
this portion turns to the other side of Israel’s experience, and deals with its cut-
ward character, showing how the covenant people become such, how the Church
in its new form commences the Christian life, and obtains a title to the Divine
protection. It is by the bitter herbs of repentance, leading to pardon and renova-
tion through a believing sight of the pierced Saviour—the whole preceded and
induced by a copious shower of spiritual influences of the same kind as those
predicted by Joel (ii. 28) and Isaiah (xliv. 3; xxxii 15). In this view the two
parts I the ‘chapter correspond to each other, and make one complete whole
Lange.

I. Israel's sin. ‘They shall look upon me whom they have pierced.” Indig-
nities and insults offered to the Son of God. “Upon me.” By wicked hands
they crucified and slew the Messiah. ‘From that day to this the impenitent and


CHAP. XII.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 681
a ere ae ee ONE TRV Sete ose LSE Nil he Sa


anbelieving Jews have given their hearts’ consent to the judgment and deeds of
their fathers ; have reiterated the cry, ‘His blood be on us and on our children :’
have through many successive generations continued to ‘crucify to themselves the
Son of God afresh.’ On this account it is here said, even of the Jews who shall
repent and believe ina yet future generation, ‘ They shall look upon him whom they
have pierced,’—an expression which signifies not merely that their sins, like ‘the sins
of the whole world,’ contributed to bring sufferings upon the Saviour, but which
describes the state of mind and heart toward Jesus; their being, though not in act,
yet in spirit, his murderers, as their fathers were” [Wardlaw]. II. Israel’s
mourning. The sorrow described by comparisons “was a repentance unto salva-
tion which needs not to be repented of.” 1. It was universal. Not confined to
Jerusalem, but “ the land,” the whole nation, “shall mourn.” Four leading classes
are mentioned. The priesthood or “family of the house of Levi;” the royal
lineage or “ family of the house of David;” the prophets or “family of the house
of Nathan;” the scribes or “family of the house of Shimei.” 2. I¢ was intense.
Like the sorrow of loving parents bereft of the only object of their affection, a
sorrow most deep and bitter, the death-wail of the Egyptians (Ex. xi 1). A
mourning like the national distress at the loss of Josiah. 3. It was personal, each
family apart. Our relations to God are personal, and our grief must be solitary.
There is a sorrow as well as a joy with which strangers intermeddle not. The
power of God came down upon the Indians when David Brainerd was preaching.
“Their concern was so great, each for himself, that none seemed to take any notice
of those about him. They were, to their own apprehension, as much retired as if
they had been alone in the thickest desert. Every one was praying apart and yet
all tozether” [cf. Lange]. “I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is eve}
before me,”
‘The deeper the sorrow, the less tongue hath it” (Zalmud).


Tue Spirit or Suppiication.— Verse 10,


Not in vain did Moses and others long for a copious outpouring of the Holy
Ghost. God answered their appeals, and one of His promises lies before us,
Addressed towards the close of the Babylonish captivity to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, it must not be limited to these alone. In contrast to the fearful
judgment of God upon their enemies, they were promised the rich gifts of tlie
Spirit “ of grace and of prayer,” that is, according to the most probable interpreta-
tion, the influence of the Spirit which imparts grace through which he teaches to
pray in truth ; and in consequence of this benefit, says the Lord, “they shall look
on me whom they have pierced.” The complete fulfilment of this promise must be
looked for in the future. Looking at the Holy Ghost in the special character hee
represented, as the best instructor of the prayer which is well-pleasing to God, in
the first pluce, it is through him that a sense of the necessity of prayer is awakened.
The necessity exists for all, but experienced by comparatively few. Who must
not often confess, “ We can scarcely urge sluggish flesh and blood to pray”? Who
then teaches men to seek and inquire after God earnestly? Who permits the sinner
no rest until his broken heart is fashioned to pray? The Holy Spirit teaches man
to ery after God, convinces the sinner of sin, and constantly fans the flame, and lo,
it blazes bright aud high! It is through him that boldness in supplication is
heightened. We lack courage to approach, but he banishes fear, begets confidence,
and enables us to go joyfully to the Father in the Son’s name; places hallelujahs
on the lips which recently uttered with trembling, “If thou, Lord, shouldest mark
iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand?” It is the Holy Ghost through whom the
tendency of prayer is so directed that it glorifies God and is abundantly blessed to
ourselves, If more disposed to what is pleasant than necessary, and we allow


682 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. (oHaP. XII


SN


ourselves to be deceived by appearances, he shows us our folly, and induces us
to ask the best gifts with the most pressing urgency. Do there come moments
—what Christian knows them nott—in which we scarce can tell what we ought
to pray for—the Spirit helps our infirmities, &c. (Rom. viii. 26); so that all the
varying, conflicting desires of the restless heart are subservient to one object, that
(tod’s name should be glorified, and his will in and through us be perfectly
accomplished. Even as regards frustrated wishes, the desires are not in vain.
“ He that searcheth the heart knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit ;” and through
the same Spirit again is the hearing of prayer assured to us. The amen of faith
so heedlessly taken on the lips he places in the heart, and instructs God’s children
to trust that the answer, whatever its form, will not fail to be sent. The infallible
promise associated with prayer in the name of Jesus he aids us to comprehend in
all its depth, and to adapt to our wants; but preserves from the folly of unreason-
ably ascribing to God a course of action, as if we might extort that which had not
been determined in his counsel for our happiness. Thus it is he through whom,
finally, the fellowship of prayer is perfected ; because where he lives, there have
all whom he guides to the throne of grace an actual fellowship with one another
—with the Son, with the Father. Thus he forms and trains a constantly in-
creasing number of worshippers in spirit and in truth ; and those whom he here
teaches to pray he teaches on high to praise. O, ye who have felt something of
this, should ye not pray for the Holy Ghost? Ye who know him, should ye
not pray more fervently in the Holy Ghost, without whom our defective speaking
to God shall never be true prayer? [J. J. Van Oosterzee}.


EvanGELICAL REPENTANOB.— Verse 10.


These words clearly describe the chief characteristics and the chief means of
kindling evangelical repentance.

I. It is mourning for sin. Not feeling great terror nor shedding many
tears. Natural conscience may inflame remorse and sudden judgments over-
come, but sorrow from shame may work death. Godly sorrow is a bitter
thing, but not mixed with despair. It is a personal practical mourning for
sin; it pierces (pricks) the heart (Acts ii. 37) and leads to amendmient of
life. II. It springs from looking to the Lord Jesus. It is a common
mistake to think that we must first mourn and then look to Jesus. The mourning
springs from the looking. ‘They shall look upon me and mourn.” We may be
convinced of sin in various ways, but sorrow for sin springs from a look at the cross.
In a crucified Saviour we see thu malignity, guilt, and vileness of sin. All excuses
are given up, and we are humbled in the dust. ‘A quick returning pang shoots
through the conscious heart.” But the arrow that wounds brings the balm that
makes alive. Peter saw his master, went out and wept bitterly, and was restored.
III. It is the work of the Holy Spirit in the heart. ‘There is neither mourning
nor looking without the outpouring of the Spirit. All holy affections, desires,
principles, and states of mind are the result of the Spirit. ‘That which is born 0!
the flesh is flesh ; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.” Hence the precise
influence conceived by the prophet is overcoming evil, imparting grace, aii
developing this grace in supplication. Prayer is the first result of a converted
soul. “ Behold, he prayeth.” “The gift of prayer is not always in our power,” says


HOMILETIU HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 10. Learn—1. That a great —in both princes and people. On the
change will take place in the house of first preaching of the gospel many of the
David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem people believed, but scarcely any of the


CHaP, XII.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH.


683





rulers; now all descriptions of men are to
bow to the Redeemer’s sceptre. 2. The
cuuse to which this change is ascribed
is the pouring upon them of a_ spirit
of grace and supplication. The spirit
of true religion is an emanation of the
grace of God, which necessarily leads
to importunate prayer. The present
state of the unbelieving Jews would
seem to render their conversion hope-
less; but when the influences of the
Holy Spirit shall descend upon them,
the heart of stone shall become a heart
of flesh. 3. The great medium of effect-
ing this change will be the remembrance
of him whom their fathers crucified, and
whom they themselves have pierced by
persecuting his followers and continuing
so long in enmity and unbelief. A
realizing view of Jesus on the cross, as
slain for us, will dissolve the most
obdurate spirit into contrition and godly
sorrow [Sutcliffe].

Ver. 10. The predictions. The re
pentance and mourning of the Jews is
immediately foretold, but the fact im-
plied is his having been pierced. There
are in truth two predictions: the one,
that Messiah should be pierced; the
other, that the penitent Jews should
look on him whom they had pierced.
They relate to widely distant periods.
Since the first was fulfilled eighteen
centuries have passed away. But it
was fulfilled, and this gives ground of
assurance that the other will be fulfilled
in its time [ Wardlaw].

1. The gracious blessing given. (1)
Look at the promise itself. The Holy
Spirit. First, as a Spirit of grace. “The
gift of God’s free favour, testifying to
grace alone in the sinner’s salvation ;
the author of gracious dispositions and
affections in the human soul, bringing
men in harmony with God’s methods of
grace in the gospel, and teaching them
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusta.


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. Heavens. Creation in all its
length and breadth, in all its depth and
height, is the manifestation of his Spirit,
and without him the world were dead


Then the Spirit of supplications, because
coming from God. He draws imme
diately to God. He teaches all under
his agency, not merely convincing them
of the duty, but inclining them to avail
themselves of the privilege of prayer.
Wherever the Divine Spirit dwells, com.
munion with God will be the character-
istic feature of the favoured individual
in whom he abides. When his influences
come largely upon families, churches,
and communities, the result will be a
concert of prayer—a union of hearts,
and a united outpouring of those hearts
at the footstool of God” [Wardlaw].
(2) Look at the extent of the promise. The
effusion is not fitful nor scanty, but
generous and abundant—a pouring rain
upon all classes, highest and lowest,
individually and socially. 2. The won-
derful result, First, ‘they shall look”
with a simple, earnest, attentive, and
personal look, “ with trustful hope and
longing, on me” [Pusey]. Then “ they
shall mourn,” most deeply and univers-
ally, the whole land, family by family.
As males and females sat and worshipped
separately, so “every family apart and
their wives apart.”


“ T was a stricken deer that left the herd’’
[Cowper].


Every family apart. Apply this to
ministers. The priestly tribe had ite
own special in the day of national
mourning. “The chief priests moved
the people,” and thus shared their guilt.
Are ministers not reminded of their
shame? Is not grief becoming them
when reviewing their treatment of God’s
people? ““ Who can estimate the crimi-
nality of the clergy,” asks one, “during
ages of corrupt and persistent oppression
of the truth?” Let the guilt of our
neglect and contempt of God and his
word ever abase and cause us to mourn


apart.


TO OHAPTER XII.


and dark. The universe is to us as the
burning bush which the Hebrew leader
saw. God is ever present in it; for il
burns with his glory, and the ground on


684





which we stand is always holy | Franczs].
Spirit of man. The soul, immortal as
its sire, shall never die [ Montgomery].

Vers. 2—4, A cup. ‘There is no
greater punishment than that of being
abandoned to one’s self [Pasquier Ques-
nel]. Madness. There is no future
pang can deal that justice on the self-
condemned he deals on his own soul
[Byron]. O, that way madness lies;
let me shun that [Shakespeare].

Ver. 5. My strength. The multi-
tude which does not reduce itself to
unity is confusion; the unity which
does not depend upon the multitude is
tyranny [Pascal].

Vers. 6, 7. Fire came down from
heaven, therefore restlessly works itself
through all combustibles till it returns
thither again [W. Seker]. The wrath
of man is the rage of man, but the wrath
of God is the reason of God [Bishop
Reynolds}.

Vers. 8, 9. Heroism, the Divine
relation which in all times unites a
great man to other men [Carlyle].

Fesble,


“Tis not enough to help the feeble up,
But to support him after’’ [Shakespeare].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


(omar. xr,





Ver. 10, Look. Their eye shall
affect their heart (Rev. i. 7: Lam. iii.
51); for the eye is the instrument both
of sight and of sorrow; and what the
eye never sees the heart never rues.
The sun looketh upon the earth, draweth
up vapours thence, and distilleth them
down again; so doth the sun of under-
standing; which, till it be convinced, the
heart cannot be compuncted. Sight of
sin must precede sorrow for sin [Trapp].

Vers. 11—14. Mourning. The
prophet uses the strongest metaphors
known to human experience. No pang
which death can inflict is so severe as
that which wrings the heart of parents
following to the tomb the remains of a
first-born or an only son. It seems as
all hope and glory were interred in the
same grave. When President Lincoln
was assassinated in 1865, a shuddering
horror seized every heart throughout the
land, and multitudes who had never
seen the kindly leader were as deeply
moved as if the blow had fallen on their
own kindred. A gloomy pall settled
down over all hearts and all households


[Lange].





CHAPTER XIIL


Critica Norgs.] This verse completes the thought of ver. 10, ch. xi. God not only pours out


the Spirit, but provides means of purification,


‘The verse exhibits the two grand doctrines of the


gospel-—justification and sanctification” [Henderson]. Unclean.] Alluding to water of separation


or purification for sin (Num. xix. 9).


2. Idols] (ch. x. 2, marg.) Prevalent form of ungodliness,


cut off, ¢. ¢. utterly destroyed, Prophets] False prophets, perhaps under demoniacal influence.
Spirit] of uncleanness, opposed to the Spirit of holiness (cf. Acts xvi. 16: 1 John iv. 6; Rev. xvi.
13). 8.] The evil denounced will be abolished ; the very parents of false prophets would be the first
to inflict merited punishment (cf. Deut, xiii. 6, 10; xvili. 20). 4 Prophets] themselves would be
ashamed] of their calling ; wear] the badge of a prophet—assumed to deceive] ¢. ¢, to lie by imposin

upon the people. 5. Say] A dramatic representation of means by which he deceives. He is charge

with wounding himself in idolatrous worship (1 Kings xviii, 28). He denies the charge; declares
that they are chastisements which he formerly received in the house of his relatives or friends. 6.] By
many the words are applied to Christ. 7.] A new turn, rather abruptly, to the Messiah, who is
designated shepherd] and fellow] lit. the man of my union, #.¢. not a neighbour, but pears
closely related. Man] Heb. mighty man, “by way of eminence” (Vsrum coherentem mthi,- Vulg.
Sword] Figure of any means for taking human life Me Ex. v. 21: 2 Sam, xii. 9; xi, 24). Wick

Jews intended (cf. Ps. xvii. 13), and regarded as asleep, therefore summoned to perform tae dead


CHAP. XUL]J HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 685








Turn] Interpose in favour of the little ones (Isa. i. 25), 8.] Bringing back the hand explained.
“The dispersion of the flock will deliver two-thirds of the nation in the whole land to death, so that
only one-third will remain alive” [Keil]. 9, Fire] Severe affliction, to refine and purify (cf. Isa,
xlviii. 10: Jer, ix. 6: Mal. iii, 3). The result, mutual intercourse and confidence between God and
his people. Everything is included under these phrases (cf. ch. viii, 8: Hos. ii 25: Jer. xxiv. 7) ,


HOMILETICS.
Tue Fountain ror Unoueannsss.— Verse 1.


These words are connected with the preceding chapter. The outpouring cf the
Spirit will be followed by universal sorrow, and then by forgiveness and purification.
Learn—

I. That sin is moral pollution. The evil is described by two words: sin, which
is transgression of the law; wncleanness, which is impurity. Sin defiles the heart
and conscience, makes unfit for the presence and service of God. What leprosy
was to the body, sin is to the soul; the uncleanness of the one sets forth the
impurity of the other (Ps. li. 9). Education, outward profession, and religious
privilege do not exempt from this corruption. ‘The house of David and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem” required to be washed. All have sinned and need
deliverance: first from the guilt, and then from the pollution of sin. ‘ Wash me
throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.” II. That God has
made provision to take away this moral pollution. “In that day there shall be
a fountain opened.” The fountain comprehends forgiveness and sanctification.
“The grace of Christ’s Spirit, as well as the virtue of Christ’s blood: whatever is
necessary for both ends” (cf. 1 John v. 5, 6). 1. A fountain denotes fulness. It
is not a well, cistern, nor reservoir ; but a fountain of inexhaustible fulness, 2. A
fountain denotes sufficiency. It is ever full and ever flowing. Enough mercy in
God, enough merit in Christ, to cleanse the vilest of the vile. The laver of old haa
to be replenished (Ex. xxx. 18); but God in Christ justifies from the guilt and
“leanses from the pollution of sin. ‘The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth
us from all sin.” III. That this provision is always accessible to men. It isa
fountain opened, not closed nor sealed up, as in Cant. iv. 12. The atonement is not
a fountain hid and inaccessible. Men are not excluded on account of nationality
and the greatness of their sin—the injustice of God’s demands or inability to comply
with them. 1. Opened in eternity by the purpose of God. Before the disease
same the remedy was provided. ‘‘The Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world.” 2. Opened in every age for all nations of the earth. It was open from
the time when it was first needed—from the time that sin came into the world.
Ever since it has been opened to Jew and Gentile in every age. From the begiz-
ning to the end of the world it will ever be open, if our eyes are only opened
see it.


Tue Openep Fountain.


“That day” opens up a bright vision to the prophet in the darkness of his
time. Looking 500 years into the future, he predicts an event at Jerusalem which
displays the love of God and makes provision for the necessities of man. “There
shall be a fountain,” &c. This is a figure of the source and method of salvation
through Christ.

I. The purpose of Divine provision. “For sin and uncleanness.” 1. To
expiate sin a necessity. This is the great problem of humanity—what all
pilgrimages and penances have had in view. Christ’s death atoned for sin and
accomplished what Jewish sacrifices typified. 2. Then pardon for sin is required.
Grace destroys the power of sin and delivers from itsdominion. “ For this purpose
was the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.”


686 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAE. XIil





II. The freeness of Divine provision. ‘A fountain opened.” 1. Opened freely
by Jehovah. Tt is not dug by man. The Divine mind originates the scheme.
Man wanders in the wilderness ready to perish, seeking water where there is noue ;
but God opens a fountain to quench his burning thirst. 2. Opened freely to all.
It is not sealed up, nor forbidden, but accessible to all, without money and without
price. “Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.” III. The
plenitude of Divine provision. In Christ is unlimited fulness of grace and
truth Millions have been refreshed, and still the waters flow on with undiminished
volume, ‘Enough for all, and enough for evermore.” “The waters that I shall
give him shall be in him a well of water,” &. IV. The perpetvity of Divine
provision. ‘A fountain opened,” and always open. It never closes. Its store
is never wasted nor exhausted. It is an ever-flowing, never-failing fountain to
supply every demand. Not the deceitful brook nor summer stream which vanishes
away ; nor the broken cistern which holds no water. It is a perpetual spring,
which makes the valley of Baca a well, the wilderness glad, and the desert to
rejoice and blossom as a rose. This fountain is open now—open for you. Drink,
and thirst no more [Adapted].


“There is a fountain filled with blood” [Cowper],


Tar PURIFICATION AND REFORMATION OF I[sRAEL.— Verses 1—6.


That grace which pardons sin will also sanctify the soul. The promise which
says, “From all your filthiness,” declarés also, ‘ From all your idols will I cleanse
you.” Sanctification and reformation go together.

I. The purification of Israel. Many seek to get rid of the guilt and conse-
quences wthout desiring freedom from the stain of sin. Repentance however
bitter, tears however numerous, do not repair the evils of a wicked life. We must
be renewed by grace, and washed in this “fountain for sin and uncleanness.”
Some of the vilest characters at Corinth were washed in a double sense. ‘“‘ Ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified (two aspects of the same work) in the name of the
Lord Jesus.” II. The reformation of Israel. Idolatry and divination shall be
utterly abolished. ‘The very names shall be “cut off,” and unmentioned. False
prophets and the spirit of uncleanness shall be completely destroyed. This is
done—l. By a spirit of judgment. They will discern between the true and the
false, commend the one and avoid the other. 2. By a spirit of zeal. The nearest
relations were to denounce those who seduced from God, and cast the first stone.
Loyalty to God is needful now as ever. Love to God must be supreme, and
nothing must compete with holiness and truth. “He that loveth father or
mother more than me is not worthy of me.” 3, By a spirit of shame. Pretenders
will be ashamed, and strip off the outward dress of their calling. They will rid
themselves of every suspicion by disowning the profession of a prophet, and when
pressed by questions evade true answers. All to ensure safety. Self-inflicted
torture, fastings, and wounds in the body will not avail to save the soul.
Humiliation and hypocrisy in the devotees of religion are hateful to God, who
demands “simplicity and godly sincerity.” Never do evil that good may come.


Curist WounpDED IN THE Houss or His Friznps.—Verse 6.


Many apply the words to the Messiah. It seems rather difficult, but very
natural, so to apply them.

I. He was rejected by his countrymen. Christ was born a Jew, attended the
Jewish synagogue, and lived and laboured among them. Yet “he came unto his
own, and his own received him not.” He was rejected by the whole nation. who
shouted, “‘Crucify him, crucify him!” II. He was forsaken by his aisciples.


OHAP. XIII.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 687











He longed for human sympathy, and required human aid in his work. But the
best friends are weak, fall short of duty, and desert their duty. His disciples fell
asleep. One denied, and another sold him. All forsook him and fied away.
‘““My friends have forsaken me,” cried a great statesman. ‘‘ My friends, there are
no friends,” uttered Socrates. Christ looked for pity in his chosen few, and there
was none. III. He is wounded now by his people. In the domestic and social
circles friendship decays and creates grief. What hurts more than lack of confid-
ence, especially after long acquaintance? Christ is wounded—l. By the incon-
sistent conduct of his people. When their life does not accord with their profession
they crucify him afresh, and put him to an open shame, They act the deed afresh,
and inwardly approve of the treatment which he received (Heb. vi. 6). 2. By
coldness and indifference. Treating things for which he died as of no moment.
Disregarding his authority, and neglecting the means of grace which he established.
Christ is pierced yet, and his sorest wounds are often in the house of his friends.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. 1. The great spring. Iwill of their former deeds, and repudiate


pour out. 2. The great agent. The
Spirit of grace and supplication. 3. The
effect. They look; they mourn; they
see the fountain opened [McCheyne].
Vers. 2—4. False prophets. 1. Put-
ting on garments to deceive, to impose
upon the people, and impress them with
an idea of superior sanctity. 2. Uttering
words which are false. The false was
always prevalent among the Jews; is
with us; and seeks to meet a craving of
our nature. The Word of God is com-
plete. Nothing more can be given by
pretenders to Divine inspiration. ‘“ Be-
ware of false prophets,” &c. 3. Zeal
against false prophets may be great, but
should always be in a legitimate method,
and with prudence. 4, When false
prophets are converted they are ashamed


their calling.

Ver. 3. Zeal for God against error
and profanity. Zeal requiring parental
sacrifice and punishment of those whom
we love. Dearest friendships should not
prevent the exposure of false teaching.

Ver. 6. Wounded. There are four
kinds of such wounds, 1. Those arising
from their just reprehensions. 2. Those
that result from their sufferings. 3. Those
produced by our being bereaved of them.
4, Those inflicted by their improper
conduct. Again; if the Lord Jesus
be the sufferer, he is wounded in the
house of his friends by their negligent
conduct, by their selfishness, by their
gloomy conduct, by their unholiness.
His question is—Is this thy kindness to
thy friend ¢ [Jay].


HOMILETICS.
Tas Smitten SHEPHERD AND THE SOATTERED FLoox.— Verse 7.


These words are a direct prophecy concerning the sufferings of the Saviour, and
are appropriated by him to himself (cf. Matt. xxvi 31). We condense and arrange
Wardlaw’s thoughts on the subject.

L The victim smitten. First, the ufficial character. ‘‘ My shepherd.” The
designation presupposes a flock, and Jehovah's flock. A shepherd and a flock are
essential to each other. The shepherd here is one who fulfils a shepherd’s functions
by the appointment of another. He had himself a proprietary right in the flock
as well as he for whom he acted; but here he appears, as elsewhere, in the capacity
of a servant. Jehovah many times represents his people—both the typical and the
spiritual Israel—under the image of a flock. Here they are his flock, cared for by
a jan and guide. Under the character of a shepherd Messiah is


repeatedy predicted (Exek. xxxiv. 23; Isa. xl 10, 11) Then we have the


888 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP. X1IL





personal aspect. “The man who is my fellow.” Various renderings have been
given to the worls: the man, my companion ; my friend ; my associate ; my con-
fidant ; my equal; the man whom I have associated with myself; the man who is
united to me. They convey the idea of communion, fellowship on equal terms,
union, equality (cf. John x. 27—30; xiv. 9). Since Jehovah himself declares this
“man” to be his fellow, we shall not rob him of his own appropriate and exclusive
glory by rendering homage to Christ according to his own representation. II. The
deadly stroke. ‘The “sword” here invoked, under a bold figure, is the sword of
Divine justice—of punitive, retributive righteousness (cf. Deut. xxxii. 40, 41 : Jer.
xlvii. 6, 7: Ezek. xxi. 1—5). It is addressed as slumbering, and summoned to
“awake.” The language is prophetic, and looks forward “to the fulness of time”
when the “max”—Jehovah’s fellow—was to appear. Manifestations of God’s
justice had been seen, but from the entrance of sin into the world this sword
might be said to have slept in its scabbard. Now the law must be vindicated, a
nobler victim smitten; not sinners themselves, but their willing and Divine
substitute. The smiting, then, includes all the sufferings—the substitutionary and
atoning death of Jesus. Jehovah himself summoned the sword. ‘ He bruised
him.” “ He put him to grief,” &c. Yet were all in the strictest sense voluntary.
Jesus undertook the task with the full view of all it would cost. ‘Lo, I come,”
&e. III. The twofold result. First, “the sheep shall be scattered.” We are
naturally led to see by the language of our Lord that the “scattering” from him of
his adherents and friends—which formed a part, and to a spirit of sensibility like
his not a trifling one, of his sufferings—was included in this prediction (cf. Matt.
xxvi 31—56). The verse which follows relates to the dispersion of the mass of
unbelieving Jews—an act of judicial vengeance for their unbelief and rebellion.
The second result is, “I will turn (or turn back) my hand upon the little ones.”
“The little ones” here describes tender affection (cf. Matt. xviii. 6, 10, 14). Jesus
appeared to his disciples, and accosted them as “children” and “little children.”
The language is that of love and kindness, not, as some think, that of threatening
and judicial severity. The hand is that of God; the “little ones,” children of
God in Jesus Christ ; and it is “turned,” or turned back, “ upon them” for gracious
care and protection. The hand of avenging justice had smitten the victim and was
fully satisfied, but these “little ones” were set free. They may be scattered for a
time, but not lost. He will “turn his hand” to gather, bless, shield, and save
them. The fulness of blessing rests in Jehovah’s favour.


In Tae Furnace; on, Tworoup Errrors or Triau.—Verses 8, 9.


These words predict the destruction of two-thirds of the inhabitants of Judea,
by famine, pestilence, and wars; but the remaining third part, after severe testing
and affliction, will come out of the furnace a spiritual and purified people, enter
into a new relationship with God, and enjoy all the blessings of his covenant. The
former part has been fulfilled ; the latter part is carried on now, and will terminate
in the conversion of the Jews to God.

I. Some are destroyed. There will be a frightful sweep of judgments, and
‘two parts therein shall be cut off, and die.’’ In the visible Church there is a
mixture of good and bad, sound and unsound, When God tests the Church by
affliction, many are proved unworthy; receive not the correction, but harde::
themselves, and perish in their sin, II. Others are preserved. “The third pai
shall be left therein.” They will pass through the fire, and be refined as silver and
gold by the process. The process is slow, but the issue certain, even with the
Jews. How is it in our afflictions} All will have to pass through the fire. The
reprobate metal will be cast away, the genuine gold will be refined and ennobled.
“ Afflictiens sent by Providence melt the constancy of the noble-minjed, but con


OHAP, XIII.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. 689





firm the obduracy of the vile. The same furnace that hardens the clay liquefies
gold; and in the strong manifestations of Divine power Pharaoh found his


punishment, but David his pardon” [Colton].
‘Tis a physic that is bitter to sweet end” [Shakepeare},


AFTER THE Furnace; on, Pouririgp INTERCOURSE.— Verse 9.


The purifying effect of trial will be
intercourse with him. ‘The door of t


Christians pray best when they have endured trials.


I. The exercise. ‘They shall call.”


not in pompous tones nor lengthy words.
2. How earnest is true prayer! A call, an intense feeling for


infant lips can try.”


God, a crying out for his help. 3. How constant is true prayer!


call,”
“On my name.”


A constant practice with them.


believing application to God who answers.


earnest calling upon God, and reciprocal
he furnace leads to the closet,” says one.
We adapt this Outline—

1. How simple is true prayer! A “call,”
“The simplest form of speech that


“They shall
4. How sure the ground of true prayer !


Not a venture, not an uncertain cry for pity, but a personal,


II. The mutual joy. First, God


says, ‘It is my people,”—chosen to stand in special and loving relation to him. He


spares them in trial, and fits them for their high destiny.


He turns to them in


covenant grace, and with renewed and complacent delight “lifts upon them anew


the light of his countenance.”


Second, they renounce their unbelief, and cling to


him. Weaned from idolatry by affliction, they declare in gratitude and humility,


“ Jehovah is my God.”
him as their portion.
than life.
I in heaven but thee? and there is none


His gifts are precious, but he himself exceeds them all.


They not only worship him above other gods, but own
His favour to them is life, and his loving-kindness is better


“Whom have
upon earth that I desire beside thee.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7. The little ones. How amuaz-
ung is this promise of God, when we
contemplate this hand in its omnipotence,
and think at the same time on our own
utter insignificance, our deep unworthi-
ness, our woeful weakness! We count
it much to stoop one day in the year to
be little with little ones. God stoops
anew from time to time to bless the
most humble with special favour. Christ
preached the gospel to the poor; chose
his first subjects from fishermen and
publicans. Animating truth! Almost
before we are aware of our lost and low
condition the outstretched hand presents
itself, a token and pledge of communion,
strength, and guidance. What evidence
more clear that he has no thoughts of
anger towards us? In the aid which
our fellow-men render there is alternately
much hardness and much weakness, so
much unwillingness and distrust, that it
is often better to be forsaken than sur-
rounded by men. But God’s tender


hand brings balm to the most painful
wound wrought by men’s hands, and our
littleness or weakness, if possible, brings
us yet more within his beneficent reach.
May this, so rich a fountain of consola-
tion, ever be to us a sanctifying thought !
We must stoop low ere we can taste the
consoling truth. Humility is the found-
ation of all spiritual blessings; nay,
God himself can build upon no other.
Direct yourselves constantly to this
promise. Though he may turn his
hand upon the little ones, it is not, as
some think, that they may always remain
weak and little, but grow in the know-
ledge and grace of Christ. Show, then,
that his hand is not stretched out to you
in vain, and in turn be followers of God
by your care over the little ones that
surround you [J. Van Costerzee].

Vers. 8, 9. Learn—1. In the times
of severest judgments upon the visible
Church, God may have a few preserved.
“The third part shall be left.” 2. Al-

44


630


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


(cHAP. xnY





though these few may be preserved, they
will not be entirely free from trial.
They must be tested and exercised in
the fire. ‘I will bring the third part
through the fire.” 3. The design of this
trial is to purify them from dross, and
make them shine the brighter in God’s
service. ‘TI will refine them as silver,”
&c. “Fiery trials make golden Chris-
tians.”

To them a God. I will be that wherein


they shall be satisfied, I will be all
things that men righteously desire: life
and health, and food and abundance,
glory and honour and peace and all
things [Augustine]. The promise is often-
times renewed through the prophets,
oftentimes fulfilled in Christ, whenever
the Church is recalled from listlessness
by fiery trials, and through them her
children are restored to deeper devoted-
ness and closer union with God [Pusey].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIII.


Ver. 1. Unclean. If we did not first
take great pains to corrupt our nature,
our nature would never corrupt us
[Clarendon]. That must needs be deadly
which could be healed by no other way
but the death of Christ. Who, therefore,
seriously considering that his sins could
in no other way be expiated than by the
death of the Son of God himself, would
not tremble to tread as it were this most
precious blood underfoot by daily sinning?
| Bishop Davenport}.

Vers. 2—4. Jdols. Idolatry has its
origin in the human heart. Men love
sin, and do not want to be reproved for
it; therefore they form for themselves
a god that will not reprove them [J. H.
Evans}.

“With what unutterable humility
‘We should bow down, thou blessed God, to thee,
Seeing our vanity and foolishness,


When to our own devices left, we frame
A shameful creed of craft and erueity ”


[Landon],
Vers. 4, 5. Lees. All deception in
the course of life is indeed nothing else
but a lie reduced to practice, and false-
hood passing from words into things


[South]. It is too much proved that
with devotion’s visage and pious action
we do sugar over the devil himself
[Shakspeare].

Ver. 7. Little ones. Louis TX, king
of France, was found iustructing a poor
kitchen-boy ; and being asked why he
did so, replied, “The meanest person
hath a soul as precious as my own, and
bought with the same blood of Christ”
{Arvine].

Vers. 8,9. Fire. I remember some
years ago I went into a glass-house; and,
standing very attentive, I saw several
masses of burning glass, of various
forms. The workman took a piece of
glass, and put it into one furnace, then
he put it into a second, and then into a
third. I said to him, “ Why do you
put this through so many fires?” He
answered, “QO, sir, the first was not
hot enough, nor the second, and there-
fore we put it into a third, and that will
make it transparent.” Thus we must
be tried and exercised with many fires,
until our dross be purged away, and we
are made fit for the Masters use
[ Whitfield}.





CHAPTER XIV.


Critioas, Notes.] Day] specially appointed to inflict judgments and manifest his glory. 3poil)
accumulated by inhabitants of Jerusalem and fit for the enemy. 9 Nations] to take and plunder


- the holy city, to rob houses and ravish women (cf, Isa, xiii. 16).


Half) ‘Fhe able-bodied sold


imto slavery or condemned to work in mines. Bes.) Poorer not eut off] ¢. mot transported, but


OHAP. XIV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 691





permitted to perish in ruing. 3. Against) The enemy doomed in turn to destruction by Jehovah,
as when he fought for Israel at Red Sea. 4. Mount] Which for situation and height is most con-
venient to help his people. His feet] touch, and the result is an earthquake (Ps. lxviii. 8: Nah.
i. 5). The mount is split through the middle latitudinally; one half falls to the north, and the
other to the south. A great valley] is formed for the escape of God’s people. §. The] Lit. my
mountains—Zion and Moriah specially sacred to Jeliovah [ Moore]—or mountains formed by my power.
He had given them separate existence. The level opening would extend to Azal] a place near Jerusalem,
of which no trace exists at present. Like as] the flight from the earthquake—swift, universal, and in
fear, as in the days of Uzziah (Amosi. 1). The Lord] The second person indicates the joy of the
prophet in hailing the shining retinue of Jehovah’s appearance. Saints] Holy angels (Deut. xxxiii,
2,3: Dan. vii, 9,10: Matt, xxv, 31: Rev, xix. 14). Some say redeemed men as well as holy
angels. 6.] A period of unmitigated calamity, which comprehends the long centuries of oppression,
cruelty, and scorn to which Jews have been subjected since the destruction of Jerusalem [Henderson].
Clear] Lit. precious, splendid (cf. Job xxxi. 26). ‘There the moon is described as walking prectously,
or splendidly, i.e. in brightness ; but dark] lit. condensed, from a word to contract, to draw together.
“The words describe the passing or vanishing of the brightness of the stars, answering to the pro-
phetic announcement that on the day of judgment sun, moon, and stars will lose their brightness
or be turned into darkness” (Joeliv. 15: Matt, xxiv. 29) [Hei/]. 1%. One day] Solitary in its kind,
and unparalleled by any other ; neither perfect day nor perfect night. ‘One continuous day without
night (Rey. xxii. 5, 25). The millennium described” (Rey. xx. 3, 7) [Henderson]. Known] only
to Jehovah, and should restrain the curiosity of men. 8. Living]i.e. running, perennial, refreshing ;
opposed to stagnant, noxious waters, an image of copious streams of gifts and grace from the Church,
the source of all blessings. Hastern,i e, Dead sea; Western, i. e. Mediterranean. 9.] In conse-
quence of the universal spread of the gospel, Jehovah will be king] i.e. supreme, and his name one].
Idolatry will cease, and the unity of the Godhead unanimously recognized. 10.] The whole land
turned] levelled to a plain to elevate Jerusalem, which will be restored to its former grandeur (Mic.
iv. 1). This figurative of spiritual elevation. The boundaries cannot be determined with certainty.
11. Dwell] securely, without fear of attack or captivity (Isa. Ixv. 19). Utter destruction] Exemp-
tion from eurse the ground of this security. No more civil or national punishments on account of
sin, implying that the nation is holy, 12—15.] The hostile nations forming the final confederac
will be punished (cf. Iga. lix. 38: Ezek. xxxvii: Rey. xix), Plague] always an infliction from Go
This stroke most terrible. ‘‘A living death; the corruption (Gal, vi. 8) of death combined in ghastly
union with the conscious sensibility of life’ [Fawsset]. 18. Tumult] Civil discord another way of
destruction, created by panic (cf. Jud. vii, 22: 1 Sam, xiv. 20). Lay hold] Seeking help, but finding
arms turned against one another. ‘The grasp of the other’s hand is a hostile one in this case, the
object being to seize him, and, having lifted his hand, to strike him dead” [Ked/]. 14. Judah] The
whole covenant people will carry on the conflict at Jerusalem, seize as booty the costly possession of
the heathen, and visit them with retribution for the plunder of Jerusalem (ver. 2). 15.] So complete
will be the destruction, that beasts of burden, used in warfare, and all cattle will be destroyed by the
same plague as men [ Keil]. 16.] Some heathen will be preserved, converted to God; go up]i.e, join
in solemn acts of worship. 17. Not] come up; penalty will be inflicted upon absentees. Upon thern
no rain]i. e. the blessings of Divine grace will be withdrawn from them. 18. If] The menace repeatsd
with special application to Israel’s hereditary foe, “Egypt will join the procession Zionwards, or
feel the retributive curse.” 19.] Sin including its effects (cf. Num. xxxii, 28), 20. Bells] sus-
ee from the neck, as tinkling ornaments. Holiness, &c.] The sacred symbol engraved upon the

iadem of the high priest (Ex. xxviii. 36). The distinction between sacred and profane would cease,
The commonest things would be holy, because devoted to God. Pots} Vessels used for cooking would
be as holy, be upon a par with those considered most sacred, viz. ‘‘the bowls before the altar.”
21.] The same idea carried out fully. Not only temple-pots would be equal to sacrificial bowls, but
every common pot in the oy and in the land would be deemed as nO as the utensils of the temple,
and would be freely used for sacrifice. Canaanite] No more godless members of the covenant
nation; all worshippers would be righteous and sincere, and “the whole kingdom of God will be
transformed by the Lord into a holy of holies (see Rev. xxi. 22, 27)” [Kev],


HOMILETICS.
Tue Granp ASSAULT AND Tak WoNDERFUL DxELIvERANCE,— Verses 1—6.


Interpreters take this chapter, some literally and others symbolically, believe it
to have been partially or to be fulfilled wholly in future ages. In whatever sense
explained, it sets forth the great contests of the Christian Church and the great
principles of God’s moral government.

I. The grand assault. All nations are gathered together for battle against
Jerusalem. 1. An assault at the appointed time. “The day of the Lord cometh.”
God suffers his people to be reduced and to pass through fiery trials ; but as “‘day”


892 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. [CHAP. XIV.





dawns after night, so a period is chosen to vindicate his judgment and punish his
foes. 2. An assault in accordance with the Divine purpose. “ For I will gather al]
nations.” God is supreme over “ all nations,” and will accomplish his purpose in
spite of the opposition and often by the wrath of man. Historians record events
and look no higher. But prophecy exhibits “God in history.” He predicts, and
he fulfils. 3. An assault with partial success. We have assault, capture, and
plunder, and sad is the picture of rifled houses and dishonoured women. This
should remind us of future conflict with the powers of darkness—teach us not to
expect peace and calm. A fearful encounter may be at hand, the outlook may soon
darken, and the onslaught may convulse the Church. But when the enemies seem
to triumph victory will be snatched from them. “ Then the Lord shall go forth
and fight against those nations.” II. The wonderful deliverance. God is not
hidden in obscurity. He comes forth in wondrous deeds. ‘‘ Thou wentest forth
for the salvation of thy people.’’ 1. Deliverance by supernatural means. The
mount was cleft asunder, “a very great valley” was made, and a place of escape was
provided by the special power of God. Nothing can prevent the escape of God’s
people. Mountains are removed and valleys are filled for the way of God’s
redeemed. ‘* Behold, the Lord cometh forth out of his place, and will come down,
and will tread upon the high places of the earth. And the mountains shall be molten
under him, and the valleys shall be cleft.” 2. Deliverance under God’s leadership.
God himself goes forth against the foe, and fights for his people. (1) God was
clad in awful majesty. Again, “the glory of the Lord stood” upon the mount ;
the earth quaked beneath his feet, and the stars above grew dim. The physical
world marked the events in the spiritual. (2) God was attended by splendid
retinue. “ My God shall come, and all the saints with thee.” Angels stand before
his throne, wait orders, and fly on missions of mercy and judgment. They are
represented as going with God for the execution of his purpose. They attended
the first, and will come with the second appearance of the Lord Jesus. “ Behold,
the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints, to execute judgment.”


THe RemarKaBLE Day.— Verses 6,7


Many refer these words to different periods, but we take them as connected with
one event. The coming of the Lord will produce great changes in nature. The
day will bring night, and the evening light. Its order will be reversed. When the
natural course of events would bring darkness, a bright light shall dawn.

I. A day of mingled light and darkness. “ Not the clearness of unclouded
day,” says Wardlaw, from whom we borrow, “nor the darkness of a starless night.
Something between both, or a combination of both—darkness here and light
there.” A representation of the dispensation before and since the days of Christ.
Mercy and judgments, comforts and afflictions in the Christian Church. In the
world truth and error, Christ and antichrist in mighty conflict. Now night, and
then day. “The light is neither clear nor yet dark,” “not day nor night ;” but the
darkness will pass away and the true light soon shine. II. A day only. “It is
one day.” Some say one long, continuous day of grief, which makes the saints cry,
“ How long?” But take itin another sense. Whatever be the length, it is only a
day. In the darkness light is not wanting in which we may work and walk. The
sun does nor entirely set. The clouds willsoon be scattered. Brief, comparatively,
is the period, though the joy of day and the repose of night be absent. This
should uphold and console in our “ fight of afflictions.” III. A day of remarkable
close. When evening is naturally expected, lo, the splendours of day break forth.
“ At evening time it shall be light.” To God’s people life may be clouded, and to
God’s cause night may be dark. But ere long “the Lord shall be” their
“ everlasting light, and the days of” their “ mourning shall be ended” IV. A


OHAP, XIV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : ZECHARIAH. 693








day only known to God. “Which shall be known to the Lord.” Its changes
and consequences, its precise duration, are not revealed to men. We should not
be curious in asking, “‘O, my Lord, what shall be the end of these things ?”
Let us obey the injunction, “Go thou thy way till the end be,”—wait in patience
and earnest preparation,—‘ for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of
the days.” (Dan. xii. 13),


Lieut at Evenine.— Verse 7.


The promise or prophecy, says one on this verse, is that “ light shall come at a
time when it is not natural, when in the common course of things it is not looked
for. It would be no surprise that light should come at noonday ; we expect it
then; it is just what we are accustomed to see, But if, when the twilight shadows
were falling deeper and deeper, with a sudden burst the noonday light were to
spread around, that would be a surprise. Lua é tenebris has received and
continually receives manifold fulfilments” [Jacoz].

I. In human experience. Few lives are spent from early day to evening time
in the light of God. Sometimes at midday, and often in the night, light shines.
1. In the conversion of the sinner. Sin is darkness. The penitent struggling with
sin and temptation, forsaking the world and turning to God, sees no light and
often feels forsaken. At length hope dawns, a voice is heard, and mercy shines.
2. In the life of the Christian. Abraham learned that God could provide in
extremity, “Jehovah Jireh.” Jacob found that things which appeared against
him at one time were only passing clouds for a brighter light. Israel in Egypt and
David in trial discerned ‘the silver lining.” God turns the shadows of life into
morning, and to those who trust him the night shineth as the day. “Light is
sown ”—like seed cast into the ground—“ for the righteous,” and will in due time,
and after needful process, be reaped in golden harvest (Ps. xcvii. 11). II. In the
history of the Christian Church. In Jewish and apostolic, in the dark and
middle ages, in the Reformation and times of revival, this truth has been illustrated.
The Church has passed through days of gloom and starless nights; dreary years
of tempest, frost and snow, in wintry blasts and wearisome times, but light has
come. God’s ways may seem dark and mysterious, impenetrable and hostile, but
in him no darkness dwells. Light and truth will break forth from his word
and providence to chase away superstitions and error, to make the world happy,
intelligent, and pure. ‘At evening time,” improbable or impossible as this may
appear, “it shall be light.” “ The light of the knowledge of the glory of God shall
cover the earth as the waters cover the seas.” III. Inthe end of life. In “ life's
evening” light is desired. ‘‘ Nothing is more common than the craving and demand
for light a little before death,” says an author. “Open the windows,” cried M. de
Lescure, on his dying bed. Rousseau wished to have “ a parting look at the glorious
orb of day.” Goethe’s request was for “‘ more light, more light.” Dark indeed has
been the evening time to many. But as the sun often struggles through the clouds
of day and sinks in brilliant light, so the chamber of death has been filled with light
and glory from the Sun of righteousness. ‘To Bunyan’s Mr. Fearing “all was well
at last.” The gloom of the poet Cowper endured long, but passed away at length.
Dr. Johnson dreaded death through life, but metit with hope and unusual patience
(Secular Annotations). Happy those to whom the valley of the shadow of death
* is lit up with God’s presence! Unhappy those whose darkness is eternal night |
“Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness.”


“ Through night to light. And though to mortal eyes
Creation’s face a pall of horror wear, = é
Good cheer, good cheer! The gloom of midnight flies,
There shall a sunrise follow, mild and fair” (Rosegarten},


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.


(CHAP. XIV





HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Vers. 1—5. 1. God is supreme in the
calamities of the Church and the events
of nations. 2. His supremacy may be
questioned through the triumph of the
enemy and the inactivity of his people.
3. But a day will come when this
supremacy will be finally settled, to the
comfort of one and the destruction of
the other. Christ must be acknow-
ledged to be Lord of heaven and earth.

Ver. 3. As in the day of battle.
Former experience a comfort in after
ages. What a fund of consolation in
God’s past dealings for present use !

Ver. 5. The Lord my God shall
come. Bright visions in dark days.
The prophet lifts up his head, sees the
coming help, and joyfully exults in the
vision. 1. The Lord shall come. 2.
When he does come he is my help.


‘“* My God.” Hence some may deny and
others scoff, but I will patiently wait
and constantly trust in him.

Vers. 1—7. God’s providence. 1
Strangely checkered. 2. Wonderfully
perplexing. 3. Benevolently working.
Or, “1. The mixed condition of the
righteous in this world: in knowledge,
outward circumstances, inward comforts,
and wavering holiness, 2. God’s wisdom
in allowing it: to subdue their corruption,
to exercise their graces, to bring them
to dependence upon himself. 3. Our
consolation under it: God notices it, the
mixed events work together for good,
the scene is short. 4. The happy ter-
mination of all: in a state of unmingled
good, in an unexpected hour. Finally,
Are we the people concerned in it!
[Bradley].


HOMILETICS.
Tue Livine Strreamu.— Verses 8—11.


The blessings which should diffuse themselves in their abundance and value are
set forth under the image of a stream; a parallel to which is found in Ezekiel’s
waters which swept through the desert, healing stagnant pools and fertilizing
scenes of death (xlvii. 1—12). Notice—

I. The source of the living stream. “ Living waters shall go out from Jerusalem.”
Connected with the Christian Church are all the means of grace and the blessings
which result from the diffusion of Divine truth. “There is a river, the streams
whereof shall make glad the city of God.” II. The direction of the living stream.
“Half of them toward the former, i. e. the eastern or Dead Sea, into which they
might naturally flow, and toward the hinder, i. e. the western or Mediterranean Sea,
which natural waters could not reach.” It flows in all directions, without hindrance,
“from sea to sea.” III. The perpetuity of the living stream. The heat of
summer shall not dry them, like the deceitful brook of Job; the frosts of winter will
not bind them. These streams are not transient, like Cherith, nor muddy, like the
Nile; but an unfailing supply in all seasons, turning the desolate heritages into the
garden of the Lord. “In summer and winter shall it be.” IV. The fertility of
the living stream. The effect of this stream will be to subjugate the world to
God. Idolatry will be renounced, and he will be acknowledged universal King.
Kingdom after kingdom shall be won, until all willingly bow to him and crown
him Lord of all. “ All nations shall serve him.”


+


Tue Forurs Exartation or Zion.— Verses 9—11.


Nothing will prevent the perpetual flow of the living waters. The land will be
levelled to a plain, the city elevated and restored to former grandeur. “Je
as the residence of the God-King, is the centre of the kingdom of God; and in the
Sure this is to tower high above all the earth. The figurative description is


CHAP, XIV.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; ZECHARIAH. 604


attached to the natural situation of Jerusalem, which stood upon a broad mountain
ridge, and was surrounded by mountains which were loftier than the city. The
exaltation is a figurative representation of the spiritual elevation and glory which
it is to receive” [Ke7l].

I. Zion will be completely restored. It will recover from the ruin of verse 1.
The rubbish of cities and countries in which God delights shall be taken away,
and calamities end in the complete restoration of the Church. There will bea
great moral awakening, from which streams of life shall issue to reconstruct society
and change the world. II. Zion will be securely inhabited. None shall go out
by flight, nor be taken as captives (vers. 2 and 5). 1. The city will no more be
exposed to danger. Neither captured nor plundered again. “No more utter
destruction.” 2. The city will be no longer under a curse. Sin brought a curse,
and a curse extermination (cf. Josh. vi. 18). It will be holy, no more tainted with
an accursed thing (Mal. iv. 6), and a type of that city where “there shall be no
more curse” (Rev. xxii. 3). 3. The city will be perpetually secure. No danger
without from hostile assaults, no danger from desolation within; not only safely
inhabited, but permanently secure from that time. ‘There shall be no more utter
destruction.” III. Zion will be gloriously exalted. ‘And it shall be lifted up.”
Lifted up above danger and ruin into perfect security and glory. 1. Honoured above
other societies and cities. 2. Honoured by the supremacy of Jehovah (ver. 9).
Gross polytheism and refined idolatry will cease. No other object of worship, no
other God but Jehovah will be acknowledged. Fading crowns encircle the brows
of earthly monarchs, but an eternal diadem belongs to him “on whose vesture and
thigh is written the name King of kings and Lord of lords,”


THe CHASTISEMENT OF THE Enemy.— Verses 12—15.


These words might be taken in connection with verses 1—-7, but the prophetic
pause in description of the purified Church directs special attention to the chastise-
ment of the hostile nations.

I. The enemy are smitten with the plague from God. The Lord smites “all
the people that have fought against Jerusalem.” The picture is most horrible and
appalling. While standing their flesh shall consume away, their eyes decay in
their sockets, and their tongue petrify in their mouth. II. The enemy are con-
fused with panic among themselves. “A great tumult from the Lord shall be
among them.” Fear will disturb their ranks. Each will find a foe in his com-
rade, and while grasping another’s hand for help will find “every man’s sword
against his fellow.” ‘ When there is no unity in God each seeks his own, suspects
another, and is ready to be fanned into a flame.” III. The enemy are completely
frustrated in their designs. 1. They failed in their means of defence. The
cavalry, mules and camels, the entire encampment shared in the consternation and
destruction (ver. 15). 2. They were overcome by God’s people. “ Judah also shall
fight at Jerusalem.” The whole covenant people took part in the conflict, and were
victorious through God. 3. They were robbed of all their spoil. The wealth and
apparel which they had taken from others were taken from them. Whatever the
world takes from the Church shall be regained, and converted nations shall bring
their treasures for the adornment and defence of Zion (cf. Isa, lx. 16, 17).


Tuer CoNvERTED REMNANT.— Verses 16—19.


The nations that have taken part against Jerusalem shall be humbled; a remnant
will acknowledge Jehovah, and as friends and allies worship with the people whom
they sought to destroy. Their conversion is described as going up yearlv to the
feast of tabernacles at Jerusalem.


696 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. (CHAP, XIV.








I. They observe the feast in the spirit of unity. Homage will be psid to
Jehovah by voluntary worshippers and “commissioned representatives” in com-
munion with the chosen race. Religious ordinances will become as a bond of
union among the nations of the earth, make them feel and act asone people. From
all quarters will they come; not in the spirit of enmity as before, not as in the days
of monkish superstition, but in the spirit of love and fealty. II. They observe
the feast in a spirit of gratitude. The great feast reminds them of past deliver-
ances and mercies. “In like manner the nations will celebrate the go dness which
has brought them through their tedious and perilous wanderings in this life to the
true and everlasting kingdom of peace and rest” [Lange]. In every heart Zion will
be enthroned as the city of the great King. Then shall prayer and praise wait for
God, and the vow be performed, To all the members of God’s family on earth will
“her walls become salvation, and her gates praise.” III. Nations who refuse to
observe the feast will be punished. A punishment which God alone is said to
inflict. 1. Absence of rain to some. ‘Upon them shall be no rain.” God only
“gives rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness.” 2. Plague is threatened to others. “If the family of Egypt go noz up
there shall be plague.” This is accounted for by some in the natural peculiarities
of the country, which was refreshed by channels cut in the ground (Deut. xi. 10).
But Egypt was an old and special enemy of Israel, depended upon rain for the
overflowing of the Nile, and must either join in procession to Zion or feel the curse
of God. What a lesson for us! The worst are not excluded from hope, may join
the Church of God and receive his mercy. But God will suspend his favours from
those who despise his ordinances. No rain will fall upon those that refuse his
grace, “The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish ; yea, those
nations shall be utterly wasted.”


THe Hoty Crry.—Verses 19, 20.


The meaning of these words seems to be, that the day will come when holiness
will be the prevalent feature, and the actions of common life will be as much the
worship of God as the sacrifices on the altar; when common things will be conse-
crated to God, and “ Holiness to the Lord” inscribed everywhere.

I. The inhabitants of the city will be holy. “ No more the Canaanite in the
house.” No Canaanite in the Church, self-righteous in spirit and unholy in life;
no Canaanite among the people. No godless member in the covenant nation ; no
people laden with sin and under the curse. “ Upon Mount Zion shall be deliver-
ance, and there shall be holiness.” II. The transactions of the city will be holy.
Business in the market will be as sacred as worship in the temple ; the furniture of
the house as holy as the vessels of thesanctuary. Wars and contentions will cease,
trades and handicrafts will be hallowed, cooking-pots and drinking-cups consecrated
to God. Restrictive ceremonies will be abolished, and everything in ordinary use
will be employed in the spirit of devotion. ‘There shall in no wise enter into it
anything that defileth.”


Reuicion 1n Common Lirs.— Verses 20, 21.


The holiness of that day penetrates things secular as well as sacred, and is set
forth in three symbols. Bells upon the horses as holy as the mitre of the priest ;
the meanest vessels of the temple as sacred as the holiest; and the utensils cf
domestic life consecrated as sacramental cups. We adapt from Wardlaw.

I. The religious spirit will predominate in the ranks of common life. No
Canaanite to make gain or take advantage ; no enmity between priests aud people,
but all ranks of life bound together by loyaltv to Jehovah. II. The religious


OHAP. XIV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH. 697
a ee Oe A EEE FE Te IR awe OPA TORE


spirit will predominate in the actions of common life. “Men are not to become
monks or anchorites ; the ordinary conditions of human life are not to be reversed ;
but, on the contrary, the infusion of grace will be so large and general that every
rank and class will feel it, and its effects will be seen in all the relations of life,
purifying and elevating without upturning or destroying” [Lange]. 1. There will
be no divorce between secular and sacred things. No divorce between morality and
religion, between domestic life and the service of God. 2. There will be a recogni-
tion of Giod’s claims in secular and sacred things. Nothing withheld from God.
The most solemn acts of the temple and the common duties of life—the offering of
sacrifices and the yoking of horses—will be done for God. Persons and property
devoted to him, and every department of life under the domain of conscience.
“‘ Her merchandise and her hire shall be for holiness to the Lord: it shall not be
treasured nor laid up” (Isa. xxiii. 18).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers, 9—15. 1. The mercy of God ness is the sweet result of all dispens-
(vers. 9—11). 2, The severity of God ations toward the Church. 2. Nothing
(vers. 12—15). is so profane but it may be sanctified





Vers. 12—15. The precedent pro- and made holy. 3. Holiness doth then


mises that were so great and glorious the
prophet doth now further enlarge and
illustrate. First the conquest of the
enemies (12—15); next the profession of
Christ among all nations of the world
(16—19) ; and lastly the sanctity of the
Church (20, 21). The conquest of the
enemies is set forth, jirst, by God’s
strange judgments upon them (12);
secondly, by the means—both they shall
despatch one another, and Judah shall
fight bravely against them (13, 14);
thirdly, their wealth and substance shall
become a prey (14); fourthly, their horses
of service and all the beasts they bring
with them shall be as strangely plagued
as the men themselves (15) [ Trapp].
Vers. 16— 21. 1. The worship of
God’s house. 2. The holy character of
its attendants. 3. The punishment of
those who neglect. ‘Those who desire
to partake of the grace and salvation
provided by Christ must ‘come to
Mount Zion, the city of the living God.’
They must partake faithfully, joyfully,
and reverently of the word and sacra-
ments and other means of grace, and the
refreshing rain and dews of the Holy
Spirit will fall upon them. But if they
will not comply with these conditions
their souls will be parched and will
wither away with spiritual drought”
{ Wordsworth].
” Ver. 20. Prevalent holiness. 1. Holi-


bear full sway when that which was
against God shall be consecrated to him,
for the bells of the horses had been em-
ployed against the Church [Hutcheson].

Vers. 20, 21. Three things specially
characteristic of “that day” — the
period of the restoration of Israel, and
of the fulness of the Gentiles. 1. The
cessation of all the distinctions of cere-
monial holiness. The sanctity of mere
things shall no longer exist. No places
give holiness or acceptance to sacrifices.
Men “everywhere lift up holy hands”
and find the same acceptance. 1. The
universal prevalence of personal and
domestic consecration to God. 3. Purity
of ministry and membership in the
Church of God. Learn—1l. The necessity
of seeking true holiness — holiness of
heart. 2. Study practically the duty of
carrying religion into everything. 3.
Let the Churches of Christ aim more and
more at scriptural purity of communion
[ Wardlavo}.

Holiness to the Lord. 1. The aim of
worship. 2. The beauty of common
things. 3. The rule of daily life. “In
davs of yore nothing was holy but the
beautiful” [Schiller]. Happy day when
holiness shall mark the Church of God,
when seen in every purpose and in every
action! ‘Then shall Jerusalem be holy,
and there shall no strangers pass through
her evy more.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ZECHARIAH.





(CHAP. XIV





ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIV.


Vers. 1—3. The Lord goes forth.
How sweetly doth God dispose of all
second causes, that while they do their
own will they do his [Bp. Hall]. Didst
thou never hear that things ill got had
ever bad success? [Shakespeare].

Vers. 4, 5. Mountain removes.
Nature is but a name for an effect whose
cause is God [Cowper]. In nature
things move violently to their place, and
calmly in their place [Bacon].

Vers. 6, 7. Light. As surely as a
good man’s sun goes down it shall rise
again. If the darkness be caused by
depression of spirit the Holy Ghost
will comfort him; if by pecuniary loss


or personal bereavement the presence’


of Christ shall be his solace; and if by
the cruelty and malignity of men the
sympathy of the Lord shall be his
support. It is as ordinary for the
righteous to be comforted as for the
day to dawn. Wait for the light, and
it will surely come; for even if our
heavenly Father should in our last
hours put us to bed in the dark, we
shall find it morning when we awake
[Spurgeon].

Ver. 8. Living waters. The grand
feature of the latter day is copious and
continuous effusions of grace ; no longer
intermittent and scanty, or of small
extent, but radiating in all directions at
once, permanently filling every channel,
and limited only by the wants of the
race. Quickly but surely, with the
same noiseless energy with which the
great providential forces work, do these
spiritual agencies perform their work
[Lange].

Safely.


Ver. ll. The weakest be-


liever is safe, because, believing, he
is within the strongest of all defences
[ Anon. }.

Vers. 12—15. Plague. It is one of
the greatest praises of God’s wisdom
that he can turn the evil of men to his
own glory [ Bp. Hall}.

Vers. 16—18. Worship. It is for the
sake of man, not of God, that worship
and prayers are required ; not that God
may be rendered more glorious, but that
man may be made better, that he may
be confirmed in a proper sense of his
dependent state, and acquire those pious
and virtuous dispositions in which his
highest improvement consist [ Blatr].


“Look to thy actions well ;
For churches either are our heaven or hell”
[G. Herbert|,


Vers. 20, 21. Aoliness to the Lord.
Zechariah is one of the most sublime
and impassioned among ‘‘the goodly
fellowship of the prophets.” It seems
as if the Spirit designed to teach the
world by him, the last but one in the
prophetic line, that if prophecy was to
become mute (as it became for about
four centuries after Zechariah) its silence
was not due to any failure or exhaustion
of power in the Divine author of
prophecy. No; the light of the sunset
of prophecy in Zechariah is brilliant
and glorious as its noonday splendours.
He passes on to the evangelization of
the heathen, the conversion of the Jews,
to the last struggle and overthrow of all
antichristian powers, and to the full
and final victory of Christ and the
everlasting glory and felicity of his
Church [ Wordsworth].


: HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


MALACHL


INTRODUCTION.


Tas Writer. It has been a subject of doubt whether Malachi was a reat ox
official name. Little is known of his personal history. The Book of Nehemiah
does not mention him, “although he was a zealous fellow-labourer with that
patriotic governor, and greatly aided him in his endeavours to secure a willing and
grateful obedience to the Divine law. In this, however, he does but share the fate
of those psalmists who, on the return from captivity, composed many songs for the
temple service. They too are unknown to fame. Their songs found a place in ths
Hebrew Psalter, but no chronicle carried down their names to after ages.” Dead
to name and fame, “‘they are not dead to ‘use.’ Even to this day their works do
follow them” [Coz].

Tue Aes. According to the tradition of the synagogue, he lived after the
prophets Haggai and Zechariah, and was contemporary with Nehemiah, This
statement is fully borne out by the affinity of the book written by the prophet
with that written by the patrict. Both presuppose the temple to have been
already built. The same condition of the Jews is described. They both condemn
foreign marriages, and enforce the due payment of tithes, which had been neglected,
They likewise correct abuses which had crept in with respect to sacrifices, and
reprove their countrymen for their want of sympathy with the poor. In all
probability, Malachi occupied the same place with respect to Nehemiah which
Haggai and Zechariah did with respect to Zerubbabel. That the former was
assisted in the discharge of his duties by prophets may be inferred from the charge
brought against him by Sanballat (Neh. vi. 7). He may therefore be conceived
of as having flourished somewhere about the year B.c. 420 [ Henderson].

Tue Boox Malachi is composed of four short chapters in English, and three in
Hebrew. Jt is tho last of the Minor Prophets, and is called “The Seal of the
Prophets.” He completes the Old Testament, and prepares the way for the New, and
is therefore fitly called a messenger [cf. Words.]. “ Malachi is like a late evening
which closes a long day, but he is at the same time the morning twilight which
bears in its bosom a glorious day” [ Pusey].


{ tNTRODUCTION.


eae








Tue Contents ar chiefly of a threatening character. ‘The most enforced and
orderly division is that which is now generally adopted. The book opens with a
brief introduction or preface (chap. i. 1—4.), the theme of which is, God’s love to
Ierael a reason fo a response of love to him. After the introduction come the three
main sections of the book: 1. (from chap. i. 6 to ii. 9) on the impiety and prefanity
of the priests , 2. (from ver. 10 to ver. 16, chap. ii.) on the heathen marriages of
the priests d people; and 3. (from ii. 17 to iv. 4) on the day of the Lord” [Coz].

Tax Sryxe differs from the earlier prophets, and the book has been classed in the
stivs age of the Hebrew language. He lacks the grandeur of Joel and the passion
of Habakkuk, and indicates the influence of the Great Synagogue “in his formal
and scholastic tone.” ‘Though his language is pure and beautiful, and has a >
certain poetic rhythm, he is not so much a poet ‘ singing in full-throated ease’ as a
scholar elaborating an edifying discourse. It is curious to note how faithful he is
to a single form of composition, and that a very simple one, whatever the theme
he takes in hand. Invariably, without a single exception, he develops his subject
in the following order :—first, he briefly states his thesis; then he states the
sceptical objection with which he supposes it may be met; and lastly, he triumph-
antly refutes the objection” [Coa]. This method is simple, but the meaning
deep. He speaks of moral and religious duties to God, and of justice and mercy
to man. We are reminded of the thunders of Sinai and the claims of the Jaw.
Our thoughts are carried forward to the terrors of the Great Day, and the curse that
will fall upon the impenitent. But the Sun of righteousness will shine with
unclouded splendour, and the morning star is already seen to announce its advent.
Thus at the close of the Old Testament “we get a glimpse of Christ, whom we are
to meet and with whom we are to walk in the New Testament; and of the Baptist,
who came before him in the power and spirit of Elijah, to prepare his way, and te
attest that this was he of whom Moses and the prophets did write.”


OHAP. I.] HOMILET(C COMMENTARY: MALACHT,


ocsceeetc eit Ue AU SE a aN a a eae


CHAPTER L


Critica Nores. |] Burden] (Massa) A heavy vision full of toil and weight, “ What is the burden
of the Lord ?’’ was asked scoffingly from the prophets, As a punishment for the blasphemy of the
people, God declares, ‘‘I will burden you” [cf. Lange: Jer. xxiii. 33—40]. 2. Loved] A fact n
their history and the foundation for reproof. Hated] Not a proper and formed hatred (for God
could not hate Esau before he sinned), but only a lesser love, which, in comparison of the great love
for Jacob, seemed as if it were not love [Pusey]. Jacob and Esau are illustrations of God’s purpose
in the election of grace, Their history typified and conditioned that of their posterity (cf. Rom. ix.
11). 8.] The condition of the country, desolate and iahabited by (dragons) jackals of the wilderness,
a proof of this hatred. 4. Edom] cannot recover herself. Her perpetual ruins illustrate love to
Israel rather than to her. Border] still the resort of marauding tribes of the desert. Indignation]
Curse (cf. Isa, xxxiv. 5). 5. See] the ineffectual attempts of Edom, and then acknowledge the greatness
of Jehovah in and beyond the land of Israel. 6.] Expostulation to priests, who should dove Jehovah
as sons, and fear] him as servants (Ex. xx. 12), Say] Instead of confessing guilt, deny the charge
and demand proofs. 7%. Polluted] i.e. any sacrifices the bread or food of God (Lev. xxi. 6, 8; xxii.
25: Num. xxviii. 2). Blind and lame were polluted bread. 8, Governor] If customary to offer
heathen rulers presents proportionate to the dignity of the receiver, the circumstances of the giver,
and the value of the favour sought, should God be insulted by offering things which they would
reject? 9, Pray] An earnest call to repentance say some; others, that it is ironical. Think you that
God will be persuaded by polluted gifts? No; amend your ways. This] Contemptible offerings your
doing. Means] Lit. from your hand. Will God regard] you? 10. Nought] So avaricious were they
that the meanest things were not done without payment, Some say this frees the priests from excuse
for carelessness, for the least service, such as shutting the door, was paid for. Others regard the words
asa wish; “ Oh that some among you would not open my sanctuary to such profane intruders (close
the doors against such worshippers and sacrifices), and would not kindle the fire on mine altar to no
purpose !’’ Better without worship than such as this [cf. Kei and Words}. 11.] The name of God,
treated with contempt by priests, will receive universal homage, Jewish worship will be rejected,
and Gentiles offer spiritual worship in the Church of Christ (Matt. xxi. 43). Place} (John iv.
21—23: 1 Tim. ii. 8). Incense and pure offerings] Prayers (Rev. v. 8), thanksgiving, and praise
{Heb. xiii. 15, 16). 12. But] a renewal of charge against priests in verse 7. Profaned] habitually.
Bay] by acts and life. Table]i.e. the altar, polluted by worst offerings. Fruit] and food,1.e. the pro-
vision of the altar. 18. Weariness] An oppressive drudgery, not an honourable privilege. Snuff] Do
not hide your contempt. Torn] Taken by violence; not fit to eat, and unlawful to offer (Ex. xxii. 30:
Lev. vii. 24: Ezek. iv. 14). 14, Deceiver] The hypocrite, professing one thing and intending another.
The people now reproved. Male] required by law (Lev. 1. 3, 10). King] An argument for service
from the majesty of God. Dreadful] Jews had no fear nor reverence for Jehovah. The heathea]
will reproach all who offer to God corrupt and offensive sacrifices.


HOMILETICS.
Spzorat Favours DEMAND SproraL Returns.— Verses 2—5


The sovereign benevolence of Jehovah and the ingratitude of the Hebrews in
the time of the prophet are strikingly contrasted. To the petulant question,
“ Wherein hast thou loved us?” which is only the first of a series which are put
in the course of the book, the answer is direct and conclusive—in showing greater
kindness to their progenitor Jacob than he had done to his brother Esau [ Hend.].

I. Distinction above others an act of Divine love. From the first Israel were
chosen and set apart, and to the last were they loved in chastisement and rebuke.
Nothing was due to their own industry and virtues. 1. Their temporal blessings
were greater than those of others. We have only to look around to see Divine
goodness, Protected homes, restored health, and fruitful lands, The land of Israe]
was specially favoured, while Idumea was sterile, desolate, and the haunt of jackals.
Israel had been restored, but Edomites were under the ban. 2. Their religious
privileges were greater than those of others. Edom and heathen nations had not
the temple and the oracles of God. ‘He hath not dealt so with apy vation” as


10% HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. LOHAP. I


with the Jews (Ps. exlvii. 10). God’s love is the source of every blessing. He
makes one differ from another. The distinctions of men and the advantages of
nations result from his sovereign goodness. Thus the love of God is—(1) proved
from his word : “I have loved thee;” and (2) confirmed by our life. In our past
and present condition we are reminded of gratuitous love. ‘The Lord had a
delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even you
above all people, as it is this day.” II. Distinction above others a reason for
implicit submission. The people ask for proofs of love. God appeals to facts to
silence scepticism. 1. God’s love may be questioned. ‘“ Wherein hast thou loved
us?” If God afflicts we think him unkind; if he withholds what we desire we
question his mercy. Pride and petulance have dimmed our vision. We have
formed the habit of doubting until it has grown strong, and we constantly cry
“ Wherein;” 2. God's love may be denied. Men cry, “Give me the ocular proof ,
make me see’t.” Jf evidence of God’s providence is not seen they deny it. The
Jews could only say, We are few and feeble, unable to defend our houses and gather
our harvests, the frequent prey of some and the perpetual scorn of others. This
insolent challenge is a common, a prolific root of sin, a fountain of ingratitude and
rebellion. The doctrine of election may be mysterious, but greater difficulties arise
from its rejection. God says that he loves us, and gives abundant proof of it.
What more do we wish? All misery is due to ourselves. We must be silent, for God
is just. ‘‘ Why dost thou strive against him ? (quarrel with and dispute his dealings,
Isa. xlv. 9) for he giveth not account of (be answereth not) any of his matters” (Job
xxxili. 13). ITI. Distinction above others an inducement to grateful service.
The election of Israel was “ not of works, but of him that calleth.” Descent from
one and the same patriarch was not the 1eason of their choice. The prophet and
the apostle declare it to be of free grace. This a reason—l. For grateful service.
God’s love lays us under obligation to love him in return. But amid striking proots
of it we are blind, ungrateful, and dissatisfied. ‘“ Wherein hast thou loved us?”
2. For constant service. ‘ God’s everlasting love was uniform in itself, manifold
in its manifestations” [Pusey]. If God never ceases to bless we should never cease
to serve. “Iam constant as the northern star, of whose true, fixed, and resting
quality there is no fellow in the firmament” [Shakespeare].


“ Love me little, love me long’’ [Marlowe].


LgEssons FRoM THE Ruin oF Epom.—Verses 3—5.


Jacob and Esau were brothers, but God did not deal with them both alike.
Their personal history was repeated in their “oster'ty. The doom of one was pointed
to as a lesson of providence and love to the vin.

I. The ruin of Edom a monument of God’s anger. “I hated Esau.” In
whatever sense we take the word “hated,” greater love was shown to Jews than to
Edom. But God has reasons for his acts. The Edomites were “the children of
the sword,” and “he that taketh the sword shall perish by the sword.” Hence
they brought the anger of God upon themselves in “a form of that Divine
and wholesome law of retribution which we find in our own lives no less than
in the written word,” says one. II. The ruin of Edom a warning to other people
What happened to them may happen to us. “ Your eyes shall see.” God's
people may be assured of his love towards them and his providence over them when
they see the enemy punished and frustrated in their designs. The world should
learn that God “ will be magnified from the border of Israel.” III. The ruin of
Edom a proof of Jehovah’s supremacy over all nations. The judgments thai
fell upon Edom taught the Jews, and tho world through the Jews, that God was
not only the God of Israel, but the God of the whole earth. By contrasting the
condition of Israel with that of Edom we learn that Jehovah is supreme over all


CHAP, I. |


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI.


793





nations, saying to one, Thou shalt live, and to another, Thou shalt perish ; that his
government is merciful to his people and retributive to his enemies.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. Malachi’s message. 1. The
nature of the message. ‘The burden.”
2. The authority of the message. ‘ The
word of the Lord.” 3. The design
of the message. ‘“ To Israel.” 4. The
medium of the message. “ By Malachi.”

Ver. 2. Learn—1l. That God’s love is
not dispensed according to any merit in
us. “JT have loved thee.” 2. That God’s
love cannot always be seen in our out-
ward condition. ‘ Wherein hast thou
loved us?” 3. That love may often be
seen when we compare our condition
with that of others. ‘I loved Jacob,
and I hated Esau.” 4. That God’s love
should always beget gratitude to God in
return. “‘I have loved you,’ God would
say, ‘with a special love, a more than
ordinary love, with greater tokens of
love than to others.” So God brings to
the penitent soul the thought of its
ingratitude” [Pusey]. 5. That when
there is no gratitude in return for his
love God will punish. The sequel proves
this. Lycurgus, when asked why he set
down no punishment in his laws for in-


fied, &ec.


gratitude, replied, “I have left it to the
gods to punish.”

Vers. 2, 3. Jacob viewed chiefly in
his national capacity as Israel, and taken
by the apostle as a type of the elect
(Rom. ix. 13). sau viewed as the
Edomite nation show that the accept-
tance or rejection is not spiritual, that
a principle of election runs through all
history, and that God, as absolute sove-
reign, bestows religious privileges and
Divine blessings.

Ver. 4. The world’s defiance of God’s
decree. It breaks down, he builds up ;
it builds, he breaks down [Lange].

Vers. 5, 6. Observe the repetition of
the word border in the contrast between
them. Edom is the border (gebil) of
wickedness ; but the Lord will show his
power and love over the border (gebil)
of Israel [Words.|. The Lord magni-
1. By his gracious acts to
Israel. 2. By sending his word to the
Gentiles. 3. By his judgments over al)
the earth (Rev. xv. 4).


HOMILETICS.
Bumpine vp witHout Gop.-—Verse 4.


Edom’s temporal desolation and her resolve to repair it may be taken as a figure
of our moral condition and the efforts of men to improve it.

I. Man’s moral condition is a ruin. ‘“ We are impoverished; lit. ruined.”
Sin creates distance from God, and brings poverty and ruin. There is no misery
like that which sin brings, and no misfortune so disastrous as that in which it ends.
Sin “brought death and all our woe into the world ;” and death is passed upon all
men, for all have sinned. II. Men try to repair their moral condition by wrong
means. ‘They are sensible of their misery,—“ we are impoverished,’—feel their
distance,—“ we will return,”—and resolve to build up their broken fortunes,—we
will “ build the desolate places.” 1. Men’s efforts are directed to a wrong end.
“We will return.” Return to what? Return to our kingdom and associations.
Thus men cling to creeds, societies, and institutions, and not to God. “If thou
wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return unto me.” 2. Men’s efforts are put
forth in a wrong spirit. “ But we will return and build.” Here we have pride,
presumption, and opposition to God. Men resolve, but God will hinder. At Babel
men were frustrated in purpose, confused in tongues, and scattered over the earth.
3. Men’s efforts are built on a wrong foundation. “They shall call thera the border
of wickedness.” If the foundation be bad, the highrr it is run ep the more labour


105 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. (CHAE 4.


a


is lost, and the more tremendous the fall. Empires, houses, and fortunes built on
selfish principles will never stand. “Woe unto him that buildeth his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong” (Jer. xxii. 13). III. When men
try to repair their moral condition by wrong means God will overthrow their
efforts. “They shall build, but I will throw down.” Providence pulls down as
well as builds up (Ecce. iii. 3). God can crush every effort and break down every
edifice of man. ‘I will work, and who shall let?” (hinder, turn it back, Isa
xiv, 27) (xliii. 13). He overturns our bodies by disease and death ; our families by
discord and bereavement; business by failure and loss; nations by famine and sword.
1. This overthrow +s terrible. Places were desolate, buildings thrown down, broken
into fragments. The firmest foundation, the most fortified walls of sin, will not
avail before God. “The Lord hath stretched out a line (not to build, but destroy,
2 Kings xxi. 13: Isa. xxxiv. 11), he hath not withdrawn his hand from destroying :
therefore he made the wall and the rampart to lament” (Lam. ii. 8). 2. This
overthrow is irrevocable. The “indignation” is “ for ever.” The destruction can
never be repaired. This seen in the tower of Babel and the cities of the plain.
Joshua’s curse fell upon the rebuilding of Jericho (cf. Josh. vi. 26: 1 Kings xvi.
34). The apostate Julian could not contravene the word of God concerning
Jerusalem. When he had gathered materials and commenced the work the tempest
from heaven filled him with dismay, and forced him to confess the hand of God.
“‘ He breaketh down, and (so that) it cannot be built again” (Job xii. 14). But is
there no way of building that we may be secure and happy? Must our efforts to
recover ourselves perpetually fail, and our hopes be for ever disappointed? Build
on Christ, the true foundation, for no other foundation can any man lay; build by
the aid of the Spirit, and in humble confidence in the promise of God, then your
work shall abide. ‘“‘ Building up yourselves on your most holy faith.” “ I commend
you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give
you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.”


TITLES witHout Honours.—Verse 6.


Upon the fact that respect is shown by inferiors to superiors Jehovah founds his
right to honour and reverence due to him as Creator and Ruler. But God condemns
the contempt priests and people displayed in offering blemished sacrifices,

I. God is our Father, and should be honoured. The prophet does not appeal
to the law, but lays down the truth, which none will dispute, that Jehovah is the
Father of Israel. If God, therefore, is a father, the honour of sons is due to him.
Heathen philosophers taught that parents were household gods, and were to have
all possible respect. “To God and our parents,” said Aristotle, “we can never make
recompense.” 1. God claims honour from us. “Honour thy father and thy
mother” (Ex. xx. 12). ‘“ Doubtless thou art our father” (Isa. lxiii. 16: Mal. ii.
10). 2. Men withhold the honour due to him. “ Where is mine honour?” They
do not honour him with their substance, but despise him in heart and act. “Do
ye thus requite the Lord?” II. God is our Master, and should be served. “If
I be a master, where is my fear?” God is acknowledged to be our Lord. He
should be served in filial not in slavish fear. We are not to find fault with his
employment, or engage in it by force and constraint. “They say and do not.” Our
service must be earnest and constant. In all fear should we obey and submit to
him (1 Pet. ii. 18). Fidelity to our conscience will ever be rewarded. “ He that
waiteth on his master shall be honoured ;” here by the promise and presence of
God, at length by the approval of God. “ Well done,” &. “If any man serve ma
him will my Father honour.”


“ Bad cervante wound their master’s fame” [Gey}


CHAP. 1] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. 708








Tue Sins or THE Priests,— Verses 6—10,


Turning from the people, the prophet addresses the priests, who should be leaders
in holiness, but are foremost in bringing the service of God into contempt. They
were under special obligations to sanctify him, but they profaned his name and
caused Israel to sin.

I. Their services were a violation of all law. A son should honour his father,
and a servant obey his master (ver. 6); but they withheld from God what they
demanded from the people, and slighted him more than any creature. 1. The law
of nature was dishonoured. Fair words and grand titles require consistent life.
Nature teaches honour to parents and respect to masters, reproves want of reverence
to God, and testifies against those who honour in werd and dishonour in life.
“Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?” 2. The law
of God was violated. God expressly forbade the offering of the blind, the lame, or
any evil-favoured sacrifice. ‘ Whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer :
for it shall not be acceptable for you. Ye shall not offer unto the Lord that which
is bruised, or crushed, or broken, or cut” (Lev. xxii. 20, 24). If it be lame, or
blind, or have “any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the Lord thy God”
(Deut. xv. 21: Neh. v. 14,15). 3. The law of common civility was disregarded.
“ Offer it now unto thy governor ; will he be pleased with thee?” (ver. 8). What
insult to offer God what a mortal would disdain! Yet what a contrast between
God’s table and that of our princes! If an earthly monarch would neither accept
our gift nor espouse our cause with such approach, can we expect God to bless!
“‘ Will he be pleased with thee or accept thy person?” II. Their services were
offensive to God. ‘They despised his name and offered polluted bread upon his
altar. 1. Their offerings were mean in substance. ‘‘ Ye offer the blind for sacrifice ;
is it not evil?” They put God off with what was worth nothing. Darius probably
supplied them plentifully with victims for sacrifice, but they offered the worst.
“‘God despises not the widow’s mite, but he does despise the miser’s mite,” says
Moore. 2. Their offerings were mercenary in spirit. They would neither kindle
a fire nor shut the door without pay (ver. 10). ‘ What will ye give me, and I
will deliver himunto you?” How niggardly we are in God’s service! Ever crying,
“What profit shall we have?” Thinking more of gain than duty. The meanest
service for God will not be unrewarded. The servants of the temple had their
tithes, cups of cold water have their benediction, and God is not unjust te forget
labours of love. But if we become covetous and unfaithful, every one for his
gain, from his quarter (Isa. lvi. 11), then we pollute the altar and bring the service
of God into contempt.


Trop Spiritual Sservice.— Verses 7, 8.


In the condemnation of what was evil in the spirit and substance of ancient
sacrifice we learn the right method of approaching God, the true nature of spiritual
service,

I. It should be intelligent. We should never offer the blind or ignorant service,
and worship we know not what. “For he hath no pleasure in fools.” II. It
should be earnest and hearty. Not Jame and half-hearted, but upright and sincere;
not sick and feeble, but vigorous and cheerful. The homage and communion of the
highest part of man ; for God is a spirit, and can only hold communion with spirit.
“Tf my soul is not engaged in my worship, it is even as though I worshipped not”
[Confucius|. III. It should be reverential. If heathens were careful to offer
sacrifices without blemish, how reverential should we be in the sanctuary of God.
Never enter without due preparation ; never utter hasty and ill-arranged thoughts,
nor offer slovenly prayers and praise. Be oF anxious to worship God as to discharge


106


secular functions.
and grudged gifts.
of that which doth sost me nothing.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI,


[CHAP, 1.





God deserves our best, let us not dishonour him with unsuund
“ Neither will I offer burnt offerings unto the Lord my God


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 6. It becomes us to do what
God enjoins. First, because he has a
right to command us. He is Sovereign,
we are subjects; Master, we are servants ;
Father, we are children. Secondly, be-
cause all his commandments are reason-
able. None arbitrary or tyrannical.
Chirdly, because his commands are be-
seficial. All enjoined has special regard
to our welfare. “In keeping his com-
mandments there is great reward.”
Fourthly, because God’s commands are
vracticable. All imply power to obey.
{f not possessed, yet attainable ; if not in
nature, yet in grace ; if not in ourselves,
yet in him whose authority we recog-
nize, and who is always accessible [Jay].
God is the Father of the faithful—(1) By
creation; (2) by preservation and govern-
ance ; (3) by alimony ; (4) by fatherly
care and providence ; (5) by faith and
grace, Whereby he justifies and adopts
us sons and heirs of his kingdom
( Pusey].

Ver. 7. Is it not evil? If we worship
God ignorantly and without understand-
ing we bring the blind for sacrifice ; if
we do it carelessly and without considera-
tion, if we are cold, and dull, and dead
in it, we bring the sick; if we rest in
the bodily exercise, and do not make
heart work of it, we bring the lame ;
and if we suffer vain thoughts and dis-
tractions to lodge within us, we bring
the torn [Matt. Henry].

Polluted bread. Because—1. 1t does
not correspond with the requirements of
God’s law. 2. It is offered with impure
mind and life. If temple purifications
were necessary of old, how much holiness
is needful now!  Contemptible table.
In what way can we now pollute the
table of the Lord? (1) In the Sacra-
ment, when we ourselves partake of it
unworthily, or do not enough arouse the
consciences of others. (2) Jn life, when
we allow in ourselves, or in others com-


mitted to us, a half-way devotedness to
the Lord [Lange].

Vers. 9, 10. These words are difficult,
but may contain—l. A churge against
the priests. You begun, and continued
to insult God, by worthless sacrifices, and
brought all the consequences upon the
people. Not from aliens, not from the
custom of your fathers, but from your
hand hath this been. 2. “ An ironical
appeal, covering an implied menace.”
Bring your maimed sacrifices, press God
with your prayers, will he regard your
persons, in the spirit in which you serve
him? Some say—3. A call to repent-
ance and prayer for the mercy of God.
“J pray you, beseech God, that he will
be gracious unto you.” 4. A rejection of
priestly “intercession. An indignant
appeal is made to their own consciences,
If you have brought this evil upon the
worship of God, if your hands are
tainted with sinful offerings ; are you fit
to pray for the rest? Try it on, you
will not succeed. God will reject you !
“ He sums up with an entire rejection
of them, present and future: J have no
pleasure in you ; it is a term of repudi-
ation (cf. 1 Sam. xviii. 25), sometimes
of disgust (Jer. xxii. 28; xlviii. 38:
Hos. vili. 8), neither will I accept an
offering at your hands” [Pusey]. 5. To
silence excuse. You have nothing to say
for such careless offerings You know
what is right, and you are paid for the
smallest service you perform. 6. A wish
to close the doors against such proceed-
ings. Who among you will shut the
doors, and keep such worshippers out of
the temple? Better close the sanctuary
than open it to subserve selfish and
hypocritical purposes—better have no
offerings at all than vain offerings which
God will not accept (Isa i. 11—15)
“ Away with your vain oblations!
What purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices to me |”


OFLAP. 1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. 70H





HOMILETICS.


Tue Great Name Honourgp.— Verse 11.


The priesthood is to be transferred, and the Gentiles will become worshippers of
Jehovah in sincerity and truth. A prediction is given of the future glory of God’s
name.

I. Great by the universality of its revelation. ‘‘ Great among the Gentiles,”
“great among the heathen,” great “from the rising of the sun, even unto the going
down of the same.” The name, the perfections of God, shall be known from east
to west-——the greatness of God shall be clear and prevalent as the orb of day.
“Gentiles shall come to the light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising (lit. sun-
rising, Isa, lx. 3). IL Great by the purity and prevalence of its worship
When Jehovah’s greatness is known, then incense and sacrifice will be offered to
him, which are not defiled. 1. Pure worship. ‘A pure offering ”—“ not the
blind, the lame, and the sick,’—pure from carnal ordinances and the corruptions
of human life. Offerings which spring from hearts sanctified by the Holy Ghost,
and fragrant as incense from the altar. Prayer, praise, and thanksgiving will be
holy and acceptable to God. 2. Universal worship. ‘In every place,” not
confined to Jerusalem, Canaan, or any locality. This implies the abrogation of the
old dispensation, and the universal spread of the Gospel. ‘‘ From the rising of the
sun unto the going down of the same, the Lord’s name is to be praised” (Ps.
exiii. 3).

Man’s Estimate or Gop’s Worsuip.— Verses 12, 13.


The people were poor, and offered the worst sacrifices. The priests connived at
this to secure their gains, and thus profaned the name and despised the service of
God.

I. God’s service was burdensome. “ Behold, what a weariness is it!” God
requires willing service. Nothing is a greater drudgery than service without love.
Many are weary in God’s cause. What should be a pleasure is a toil. The Sabbath
is a loss of time. Money and gifts presented to God are wasted. Everything done
for God is useless. ‘ Wherefore this waste?” II. God’s service was despised.
“Ye have snuffed at it,” treated it contemptuously, think it a trifle to blow away
with your breath. If we wrongly estimate God’s service, we shall be vexed with
his demands. Who likes to give to any person whom they disregard? To despise
anything God-like is a symptom of a base heart. ‘“ He that despiseth his ways
shall die.”

“Such acts
Of contumacy will provoke the Highest
To make death in us live” [Milton].


Gon’s Estimatr or Man’s Worsuipr.


These words may be taken in another sense (orig.) “ You have said, behold what
a weariness it is, a matter of weight, whereas you might have blown it away, it
was so trifling.”

I. What we think to be great is very little. Little in its substance and spirit—
little in comparison to our ability, and God’s claims upon us. What paltry gifts we
offer to him who gave himself for us! “Stiff in opinion, always in the wrong”
[Dryden]. II. What we think will be acceptable may be rej ected. Sacrifices
unsuitable and wicked will be cursed (ver. 13). 1. Because offered in a spirit of
indifference. We put God off with anything. 2. Because offered in a spirit of
deception. Jews offered a female under pretence they had no male in their flocks.
3. Because offered in a spirit of falsehood. “The liar, under stress of danger or
desire, vows a pure, and then when the peril is past or the desire gratified, offers an
impure or blemished beast.” God cannot be deceived, and w'll not be mocked |


#08 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. (OHAP. 3





Gov’s Maszsty a Motive ror True Ssrvicre.— Verses 12—14.


Because God’s greatness is known and God’s majesty dreaded among the heathen,
they should offer the best sacrifice. David prepared the materials, and Solomon
built the temple, under a deep sense of God’s greatness. “Thine, O Lord, is the
greatness” (1 Chr. xxix. 11; 2 Chr. ii. 5). I. God’s great majesty calls for
due reverence. “Honour to whom honour is due,” is a maxim of social
intercourse. What honour, then, must there be due to the Omnipotent, the Infinite,
and only wise God ! How unreasonable for man to reflect upon his majesty by offering
inferior when we can offer superior service! ‘Our hearts should adore a spiritual
majesty, which it cannot comprehend, and, as it were, lose itself in his infinitude.
We must believe him great without quantity, omnipresent without place, everlasting
without time, and containing all things without extent ; and when our thoughts are
come to the highest, let us stop, wonder, and adore” [Bp. Hall]. “‘ Who 80 great a
God as our God?” II. God’s spiritual nature calls for spiritual worship.
Formal worship and bodily exercise in waiting upon God, do not honour him. “ If
this hypocrisy, this resting in outward performances, so odious {o God under the
law, religion full of shadows and ceremonies, certainly it will be much more odious
to do so under the Gospel, a religion of much more simplicity, and exacting so much
the greater sincerity of heart, even because it disburdens the outward man of the
performance of legal rites and observances” [Chillingworth]. Christian sacrifice of
prayer and praise must be intelligent and sincere, not outward, slight, and superficial ;
internal, for only with the spirit can we he earnest and sincere ; spiritual as opposed
to ritual, to anything outward. God is a Spirit (not matter or form), and they
that worship him must worship him in spirit (spiritually and sincerely) and in
truth (truthfully in desire and life) (John iv. 24). III. God’s universal dominion
demands loyal obedience. ‘My Name is dreadful among the heathen.” Men
have no fear of God before them, treat him as they do a fellow-creature whom
they regard, and by whom they are overawed. This is the root of ignorant, heartless
service, of irreverent systems and theologies of the present time, says a writer. To
correct this error, God reveals his name, insists upon his demands, and sets forth
his supremacy and universal dominion. He is a God to whom we have to render
account, whose presence and power we cannot shun—a Father who loves and
redeems us; we should therefore constantly and cheerfully submit to his authority,
and obey his will. God is not dethroned, nor does he reign over a decaying
empire. He must and will be obeyed in freedom or force. “The Lord most high
is terrible ; he is a Great King over all the earth.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 11. The Jewish sacrifices had
defects, partly incidental, partly inherent.
Incidental were these, with which the
prophet had upbraided them ; inherent
(apart from their mere typical character),
that they never could be the religion of
the world, since they were locally fixed
at Jerusalem. Malachi tells them of a
new sacrifice which should be offered
throughout the then heathen world,
grounded on his new revelation of him-
self tothem. For great shall be my name
among the heathen. The prophet antici-
pates an objection which the Jews might
make to him. What then will God do


unto his great name ? Those by whom he
would replace them would be more worthy
of God in two ways—(1) in themselves ;
(2) in their universality [ Pusey].

Every place. 1. Canonical hours abol-
ished. 2. Holy places abolished—since
we cannot be alwaysinthem. 3. Every
time and place consecrated (cf. Treas. of
David, Ps. exiii. 3), or the daily univer-
sality and purity of Divine worship.

Ver. 14. King. God is a King—a
great King—a great King who is feared.
“As God is alone Lord, through his
universal providence and his intrinsic
authority, so he alone is King so grest,


CHAP. 3 ]





that of hic greatness, or dignity and
perfection, there is no end” [Pusey].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI.


709





Cursed, The description and doom of
the false worshipper.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER I.


Vers, 2—5. Loved you. Ingratitude
is too base to return a kindness, and too
proud to regard it; much like the tops
of mountains, barren indeed but yet
lofty ; they produce nothing, they feed
nobody, they clothe nobody, yet are
high and stately, and look down upon
all the world about them [Dr. South].

Ver. 3. Waste. Divine curses are
not merely imprecations, impotent and
fruitless desires ; they carry their effects
with them, and are attended with
all the miseries denounced by God
[Cruden].

Ver. 6. Honoureth. One of the best
elements of character as well in a child
as in a man, is reverence. ‘This is the
feeling due to parents and to God, our
Father in heaven. It is more than
respect ; it is respect blended with awe.


One void of reverence unconsecrates al
the mysteries and sanctities of life
[Dulce Domum].

Vers. 7, 8, and 12, 13. Accept person.


‘* When once thy foot enters the Church, be bare
God is more there than thou, for thou art there
Only by his permission. Then beware ;

And make thyself all reverence and fear.”
(G. Herbert, ]


Ver. 10. Nought. ‘ His money perish
with him,” said the pious marquis of
Vico, “who prefers not one hour’s
communion with Christ before all the
riches and pleasures of the world.”
“ Covetousness debaseth a man’s spirit ”’
[Tillotson].

Ver. 14. Deceiver. We never deceive
for a good purpose ; knavery adds malice
to falsehood [Bruyére].


CHAPTER IL


Critica, Nores.} The charge 1s stil urgea against the pries
reform they will be deprived of enjoyments, and made objects o
Have cursed] Lit. have cursed them severally. The curse has
Blessings pronounced by the priests upon the people


denounced (Deut. xxvii. 15—26).
already begun in each one of their blessings.


are intended, say Ket/ and others, and not tithes, revenues, and portions of sacrifices.


do not
curse


who are warned if the
shame, 2. A] Lit. ¢


The word may


be taken generally. 3. Corrupt] Lit. rebuke the seed] ¢. ¢. forbid its growth, and bring failure in
crops (cf. Joel i. 17: Hag. i. 11). Though priests did not cultivate land, yet they would suffer
from dearth, Some give, rebuke the arm, ¢. e, dry up the strength, neutralize the duties performed
by priests at the altar. Dung] of victims, which should be burned outside the camp (Ex. xxix. 14;
Lev, xvi. 27), would be spread upon their faces; a sign of ignominy and contempt. One] Lit. they
(indefinite) will carry you away to it (where it is deposited) ; and treat you as dung (1 Kings xiv,
10). 4. Know] by experience, that this commandment] #.¢. the decree to punish, shall henceforth be
substituted for my covenant with Levi, or the priesthood, They forfeited the blessing, and turned the
covenant of peace into woe, Better understand, that they were warned to take heed that the covenant]
might continue with the priestly tribe as in the beginning, and not become null or void, 5,] Nature
of the covenant described. Life and peace] Nouns not in the genitive case. ‘ Peace’? is the sum of all
the blessings requisite for well-being. Jehovab granted life and salvation to Levi, #, ¢. to the priest-
hood, for fear, viz, as the lever of the fear of God; and Levi, ¢. ¢, the priesthood of the olden time,
responded to this Divine intention. “ He feared me” [Ket/]. Afraid} Often united to fear, expressing
terror, which men are forbidden not to feel before men (Isa. vili, 12—13) [Pusey]. 6.] Levi pre-
served this fear in office and lite. Truth] Instruction in the law was in truth, Iniquity] Ne
injustice was practised in his life, nor was truth bettas by selfishness and self-interest Walked)
Intereourse with God was progressive and confidential. In peace] “ Equipped with the salvation


710 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACEI. (CHAP. I.





bestowed upon him by God” (ver. 6) [Keil]. And equity] Lit. plainness and straightforwardness,
opposed to deceit, or crooked dealing. The consequence of faithful discharge in duty was the bringi
back, ¢. ¢, the turning of many from sin to God’s fear, 7.] This was the duty, the vocation of Levi,
i. e. of the priesthood. Beautiful description of priestly functions. Keep] Preserve, store up, to
distribute. Knowledge] The negative and positive precepts of the law; for people seek the law]
t. e. instruction in God’s will, from his lips. Messenger] Interpreter (cf. Hag. i. 13). 8. But] A
remarkable contrast to their pious fathers. ‘They taught for hire, and had respect to persons;
departed from God themselves, and caused others to fall by their scandalous example. Corrupted]
by false teaching, made the law not a light for duty, but a license for sin, 9. Therefore] Jehovah,
no longer bound by a covenant which they have broken, withdraws blessings, and makes them con-
temptible. 10.] A fresh section, ‘‘the condemnation of marriages with heathen women (vers, 10—12),
and of the frivolous dissolution of marriages with Israelitish women, which was the natural conse-
quence of the former’’ (vers. 13—16) [Hei/]. The same course as in previous rebukes adopted
(cf. Neh, xii. 23—31 wit this section). One] Common origin, which gave them a new relation to
each other. Treacherous] A violation of duty to God was an offence against each other, on account of
this common relationship, Covenant] (Ex. xix. 6, 6; xxiv. 8: Deut. xiv. 2.) 11. Holiness] Pro-
faned or desecrated by marriages expressly forbidden. Judah] ¢. ¢. the whole nation, commits this
abomination in Israel] a holy nation !—and in Jerusalem] the capital of the nation. 12. Cut] Punish.
Master and scholar] Lit. him that watcheth, and him that answereth. The watcher goes his rounds
by night to keep guard, the other answers, ¢. e. responds to his cry (cf. Illus. end of ch.), 18. This]
A second sin performed, Tears] By ill treatment their wives were driven to weep at the altar. Hence
God will not accept the offering] nor bless the offerer. 14. Say] Why does he not accept? Witness]
The people are not ashamed, and wickedly ask why? Jehovah declares himself (an avenging witness,
some) of the marriage which took place (cf. Prov. ii. 17), which should have been sacred. The
divorced wife tenderly called a wife and companion of joys and sorrows of youth, and a wife of the
covenant for life made between them. 15.] Most difficult verse of all prophecy, Taken by many
as recalling the institution of marriage, of Divine sanction from the beginning. Did Jehovah not
make one jiesh (Gen. i. 27), why only one pair? Had he not the residue of the Spirit? His
creative power was not exhausted ; he might have created many women for one man. That he might
seek to perpetuate a godly seed], a design counteracted by frequent divorce [Lange]. Others say,
that the Jews defended their conduct by the precedent of Abraham, who took Hagar to the injury
of Sarah, his lawful wife. To this the prophet replies : ‘‘ No one (ever) did so in whom there was
a residue of intelligence (discriminating between good and evil) ; and what did the one] (Abraham, to
whom you appeal for support) do, seeking a goodly seed? His object (vig. not to gratify passion,
but to obtain the seed promised by (tod) makes the case inapplicable to defend your position” [Hengs.].
Many explain it according to ver. 10. He made (us Israelites) one. Our isolation from other
nations was not because there was no residue of the Spirit left for the world. Why, then, did he thus
isolate us? One] (Heb. the one) people? That he might have a goodly seed, ¢. ¢, have a nation, the
repository of his will, and a witness for him among idolatrous peoples. 16. Putting away] Divorce.
Covereth] They wrap up or cover their sins as with a garment, 17.] This verse really belongs to
the following chapter. A class of murmurers addressed (Jewish sceptics, or wicked heathens), who
enjoyed prosperity, excused themselves (wherein?) declared, that God delighted in evil doers, and
sneer, Where is the God of judgment?


HOMILETICS.
Prizatity BugessiInas TURNED INTO a Curse.— Verses 1—5.


The rebuke to the priests is followed by an admonition to hear the Word and
reverence the name of God, lest he curse their blessings and dishonour their persons.

I. The nature of the curse upon the blessings. In whatever sense the curse
may be taken, it is an awful judgment, a solemn warning to all. 1. Their own
persons were cursed. ‘‘I will even send a curse upon you.” This was a reversal
of the original promise for obedience, “I will command my blessing upon you.”
2. Their blessings were cursed. ‘ He does not say, I will send you curses instead
of blessings, but I will make the blessings themselves a curse” [ Pusey]. (a) Spirit-
ual blessings may be cursed; the ministry of the Word, and the means of grace ;
Sundays and sermons may be despised, increase the guilt and aggravate the
condemnation of men. (6) Temporal blessings may be cursed. “ Corrupt your seed.”
Riches, children, and the very food we eat may do us no good. The curse from
heaven may fall uponthem. “Let their table be made a snare before them, and
that which should have been for their weifare, let it become a trap.” IL The
reason for the curse upon the blessings. 1. They neglected the Word of God,


OHAP, IL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. 711





“Tf ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart.” The Word was personal
in appeal; “this commandment is for you ;” and solemn in authority, yet they
heeded not. The Word must not simply be heard, but pondered in the mind.
God’s authority must be seen and felt in it. It isa matter of life or death, and
must not be trifled with. ‘“ Ye do not lay it to heart.”

2. They despised the Name of God. “Give glory untomy Name.” Glory is due
to God, and should be the aim of priestly and Christian conduct—the rule of life
for the house vf Aaron and the house of Israel. But God is dishonoured by
despising the ordinances of his house and living heedless of his Word. “To the
greater glory of God,” was the motto of Ignatius Loyola. III. The design of the
curse upon the blessings. ‘Yo shall know that I have sent this commandinent
unto you” (ver. 4.). 1. They were admonished to return to God. God desired to
keep his covenant with them, and punishment was intended to reform them. This
would they feel, and bitterly confess. God ever designs to make men happy, and
keep them from misery. 2. They were admonished for the sake of others. “God
willed to punish those who at that time rebelled against him, that he might spare
those who should come after them. He chastised the fathers, who showed their
contempt towards him, that their sons, taking warning thereby, might not be cut off.
He continues to say what the covenant was, which he willed to be if they would
repent” [Pusey]. Every warning given to men concerning their sins, is a proof of
God’s mercy, and will convince them that their destruction results from their own
ways. “T have sent this commandment unto you.”


Favre in Orricia, Dutiss.— Verses 2, 3.


By cursing blessings, God means that he will render the instructions and efforts
of the priests ineffective. When they raised the hand to bless, he would manifest
displeasure. He would neutralize their duties performed at the altar [cf. Keil].

I. By rendering them incapable of official duties. “He will rebuke their
arm,” 7. e. dry up their powers, like the waters of the sea, The arm is the symbol of
strength and active labour, From him that hath may be taken away what he hath,
if abused. God can wither the force and fervour of ungodly ministers. Power is
lost by continuance in office for which men are not qualified. Their prayers ars
sin, their knowledge hardens, and their “arm shall be clean dried up.” II. By
righteous punishment in discharging official duties. God threatens sore evils.
1. They would be treated with contempt. As they had despised him, so they would
be repaid in ignominy and shame— be made as the refuse of their sacrifices.
2. They would be swept out of office. As mere cumber, and unworthy of the temple,
“One shall take” them away with the dung. “I will iake away the remnant of
the house of Jeroboam, as a man taketh away dung, till all are gone” (1 Kings
xiv. 10).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


ness of the curse.


Ver. 2. Curse. Things which should 2. The gradual oper
bless, become an occasion of falling ; to
the proud, the things which lift them
up; to the gluttonous, their abundance ;
to the avaricious, their wealth ; which,
if used to the glory of God, become
blessings, do, when self, not God, is
their end, by God’s dispensation and

rovidence, become a curse to them
Pusey). I have cursed them, Lit. it, ¢. 6
each blessing. Hence-—l. The minute-


ation of the curse. ‘Cursed already ;”
and will continue until you repent.
3. The insensibility under the curse.
“Ye do not lay to heart.” 4. The severity


of the curse. ‘Curse blessings.”
“Whom oils and balsams kill, what salve can
cure ; ”


Ver. 5. Thecovenant. 1. Its blessings.
“ Life and peace ;” é.¢, of being and well.


712





being ; for all the blessings that make
up human welfare, were summed up for
the Hebrew in one word—peace [Coz].
2. Its conditions. ‘ Forbear.” Jews
claimed its privileges, while neglecting its
conditions —thought God would bless
them, while they were free from oblig-
ations to obey him. 3. Itsinfluence. “ He
feared” me, had great reverence, and was
afraid ; had profound and holy terror


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI.


(oHaP. 11





God in his whole heart and soul. For
these reduplications and emphases sug-
gest to the hearer how rooted in virtue
are those thus praised ” [Pusey]. It is
better to fear too much than to presume
but a little [Abp. Abdot]. “ Sanctify the
Lord of Hosts himseif (venerate his
glorious majesty), and let him be your
fear (be not dismayed at man), and vour
dread (lest ye provoke him by distrust)”


before me. “He received the fear of (Isa. viii. 13).


HOMILETICS.
Tue True Ministar.— Verses 6, 7.


The prophet looks backward to the fidelity and zeal of Phinehas, which should
have been copied by his successors. But ‘the lines of character are too large and
fair to be those of mortal man. It is the ¢deal priest whom the prophet has in his
mind, the archetype to which every true priest will seek to be conformed ; not
any single member of the priesthood—-as indeed he himself intimates by using the
tribal name ‘ Levi’ in ver. 4, instead of the personal name, ‘ Phinehas,’ and by
employing the abstract term, ‘ the priest,’ in ver. 7” [Coz].

I. The true minister is holy in character. He stands in awe of God who
has chosen him, and made a covenant of life and peace with him (ver. 5). As “the
messenger of the Lord of Hosts,” he feels his responsibility, and walks worthy of his
high vocation. Spiritual work requires spiritual character as a prime qualification.
“None but he who made the world can make a minister of the Gospel,” says Newton.
II. The true minister is devout in life. “He walked with God.” Consistency
harmonizes conduct and creed. Holiness, like the law of gravitation, should regulate
every motion of life. Men judge of the minister’s practice more than the minister's
sermon. The missionary Eliot resolved to leave something of God, heaven, and
religion with all that came near him. In character and conduct we must be blame-
less, “ unrebukable;” for, says Bp. Horne—‘ He who undertakes to reprove the world,
must be one whom the world cannot reprove.” III. The true minister is incor-
ruptible in doctrine. “The law of truth was in his mouth.” He believes the
truth of God, and it is the law, the staple of his instructions. No fear, no sinister,
selfish principles lead him to keep back or pervert the truth. He conceals nothing,
however unpleasant—shuns not to declare the whole counsel of God. “ In doctrine
showing incorruptness (untainted sincerity), gravity (dignified delivery), sincerity,
sound speech (healthy discourse in public and private), that cannot be condemned ”
(Tit. ii. 7, 8). IV. The true minister is successful ia labours. “ And did turn
many away from iniquity.” Success in one respect may not be realized. God can
bless or withhold. One sows, and another reaps. But if we fail to convert, we may
reprove, enlighten, and edify. But God promises success to faithful labour. We
must not therefore set the sovereignty in opposition to the faithfulness of God Aim
to “convert the sinner from the error of his way,” and your work will not be in
vain. Remember, as a motto and encouragement, “They that turn many to right
eousness (shall shine) as the stars for ever and ever.”


>


Tus Fatsx Minister.— Verses 8, 9.


In the former words we have a pattern priest described, te contrast the baseness
and falsehood of those now reproved.
I. The false minister is negligent in duty. “Ye have not kept my ways”


OHAP. 11. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. 718





”


1, He perverts the truth in teaching. “Ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi.
They violated and defeated the intentions of “it, and made it contemptible by false
expositions and partiality. ‘But have been partial in the law.” 2. He departs
from the truth in life. Not merely falls short of it, the best do that, but openly,
insolently renounced and reversed it. ‘“ Ye are departed out of the way,” of know-
ledge, fear, and truth. “ Her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have done
violence to the law.” II. The false minister is pernicious in example. “Ye
have caused many to stumble at the law.” Instead of keeping integrity of character,
and skedding light on the path of peace, by doctrine and example, he misleads,
casts a stumbling-block in the ways of others, and causes them to fall. Fenelon
says, “that moral instructions have no weight nor influence, when they are neither
supported by clear principles nor good examples.” “The sin of the young men
was very great before the Lord; for men abhorred the offering of the Lord.”
III. The false minister is cursed in his work. ‘I also made you contemptible
and base before all people.” God is no respecter of persons—if men are—and the lot
of the unfaithful minister will be as his service. ‘‘ According as ye have” acted, so
will be your punishment. In spite of office, unholy men will be held in contempt
by the mass of the people. Careless and unprincipled clergy will ever sink in public
estimation. 1. They break the covenant of peace. Therefore forfeit all its blessings.
2. They deeply disgrace themselves. These are made base, and made base before al/
the people. 3. They exclude themselves from office. ‘I said indeed that thy house,
and the house of thy father, should walk before me for ever; but now the Lord
saith, Be it far from me; for them that honour me I will honour, and they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 6,7. I. The priest's character.
(a) Intelligent : If he must keep, he must
get, knowledge. (b) Consistent ; he must
walk with God. (c) Truthful; and (d)
holy. ‘The lips of the righteous feed
many.” II. The priest’s dignity not a
common calling, but an ambassador of
Christ (2 Cor. v. 20). “For he is
the messenger of the Lord of Hosts.”
III. The priest’s vocation. 1. To give
instruction, ‘‘They should seek the
law at his mouth.” 2. To be impartial.
“Doing nothing by partiality.” 3. To
restore men to God. ‘Turn many away
from iniquity.”

Here is a solemn warning to the
Christian clergy. If such was the duty
of the Levitical priesthood, and such
the penalty for not performing it aright,
how much more imperative is the obli-
gation of the Christian priest to “ keep
knowledge,” and to instruct the people
in sound doctrine; or, as St. Paul ex-
presses it, “ to give attendance to reading,
to exhortation, to doctrine, to meditate on
these things, and give himself wholly to
them” (1 Tim. iv. 13, 15); “to speak
the things which become sound doc-


trine” (Tit. ii. 1); “to hold fast the
faithful word, so that he may be able
by sound doctrine to convince the gain-
sayers” (Tit. i. 9). And how much
sorer will be his punishment if he fails
to discharge it! (cf. Tit. i 7, 9: 2 Tim.
ii, 2). It is to be feared that this
warning is greatly needed in the present
day ! [ Words. ].

Ver. 6. He “walks” with God in a
happy consent and progress ; for “how
can two walk together except they be
agreed $” To walk is not only to move,
but to move onward. He not only
walks with God, but he walks with
him “in integrity and peace:” two
lines of advance are specially marked
out for him—the generous uprightness
which saves his teaching from sinister
perversions, rules his personal conduct,
so that he is drawn aside by no selfish
or impure motive; and, moreover, he
possesses himself ever more fully of all
the biessings which conduce to peace or
well-being. Thus, by his own pure and
happy life, no less than by his whole-
some and unperverted doctrine, he
“brings back many from guilt,” con-


714


vincing the sinful of the mistake they
have made, and leading them, through
repentance, to that way of life and
peace in which he himself is advancing
[S. Coa].

Ver. 8. (cf. Neh. xiii. 29). Prophecy
a comment on history.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI,





[cnaP. I.


ministers. 1. It is in proportion to
their exaltation in office. 2. It is
impartial. 3. It is public before all
In partiality and pleasing men, they
bring upon themselves contempt: in
faithfulness and pleasing God, they gain
the testimony of a good conscience and


Ver. 9. Punishment to unfaithful the approval of God.


Unuawrut Marriaers.— Verses 10—12.


Reproof is now administered to the people, especially the priests, for flagrant
violation of law in marrying foreigners, and divorcing their wives when married.
This was—

I. A violation of God’s law. Marriage with the Canaanites and with all
idolaters was forbidden (Ex. xxxiv. 16: Deut. vii 3: 1 Kings xi. 1,2). The high
priest was to take a virgin of his own people (Lev. xxi. 14, 15); and the priests
who married strange wives defiled “the covenant of the priesthood” (Neh. xiii.
29). “Be not unequally yoked together with unbelievers.” II. A desecration of
the community. Israel was a holy people, but this was an “ abominaften com-
mitted in Israel.” If they allied themselves with those from whom God had set
them apart, they broke the national league, and profaned the covenant of their
fathers. Hence—1l. They polluted the temple. The very seat and centre of God’s
presence. “In Jerusalem.” 2. They polluted the people. They fell from their
lofty dignity, and tainted others by their influence. ‘“ Why do we treacherously
every man against his brother?” III. A condition of hopeless calamity. The
imprecation or menace is severe. 1. Posterity will not escape the punishment. In
whatever sense these words be taken, the master and the scholar, or (as marg.) him
that waketh and him that answereth—the camp would be silent. The posterity of
hira that violated the marriaye law would be cut off, and not one left in “the taber-
nacles of Jacob.” 2. Sacrifice will not atone for the sins. There will be none to
offer a sacrifice for the sinner, or if there were, they could not shield from the penalty.
“ Tnsomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more.”


A Common Fatoernoop.— Verse 10.


God was the Father, the Creator of Israel in a special sense (Isa. lxiii, 16). But all
men have a common relation to God, who is our common Father and Creator. God
is looked upon as Judge and Ruler of men, but the Fatherhood of God is forgotten.
Hence the evils which afflict society. .

I. In the Fatherhood of God we have an argument for personal piety.
As dependent creatures, we should acknowledge him. ‘ Hath not one God created
us?” We are not simply God’s creatures, but his offspring, children in paternal
likeness (Acts xvii. 28). Hence—l. A motive to obedience. As children, we should
seek to know and practise God’s will. 2. A protest against idolatry. Material,
intellectual, and spiritual idolatry should be forsaken. Our filial relation should
teach us the spirituality of the Godhead, and the folly of atheism. ‘‘ Be ye, therefore,
followers (imitators) of God, as dear children” (Eph. v. 1). II. In the Fatherhood
of God we have a bond of human brotherhood. He “hath made of one blood
all nations of men.” In the common origin we have the unity of the human race
—a natural tie to cement them together in their migrations and settlements. But
nations have broken asunder, set up divinities, and forgotten God’s purpose in
organizing them. Science and philosophy, treaties and commerce, have failed to
unite them again. Wars, selfishness, and lusts still prevail. Only when men
are taught that a Father in heaven rules their interests, and settles their rights and


OMAP, II.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. 716





wrongs, will they cease to hate. ‘O foolish people and unwise, is he not thy
Father that hath bought thee ?—hath he not made thee and established thee?”
III. In the Fatherhood of God we have a motive to philanthropy. In our
creation we have a natural, in Christ a spiritual, relation to God ; every offence is a
violation of these relationships to God, and an injury to our fellow-men. Sin
against the brethren is sin against Christ (1 Cor. viii. 12). “ Why deal treacher-
ously every man against his brother?” Social sins are treachery against the
community, violations of faith and confidence. ‘‘ Did not he that made me in the
womb make him?--and did not one fashion us in the womb?” “Love one
another.”
Unnoty Marriages.— Verse 11.


The Jews commanded to keep themselves separated from nations around them—to
maintain their position as custodians of revelations, and abiding witnesses of God's
existence. But they often disobeyed, and formed idolatrous connections. Thus,
the holiness of Jehovah was profaned, and Judah became an aboriiation.
Nehemiah and Ezra sought to remove the evil which Malachi condemns.

I. This evil may now be committed literally. Strange gods are worshipped
in every community. Names and shapes of idols have changed, but in essential
characters remain the same. Every woman not truly devoted to Jehovah is “a
daughter of a strange god,” under the influence of the god of this world.
Christian men, for the sake of sensual and worldly considerations, sometimes marry
such. 1. They marry women who sacrifice their noblest feelings for wealth.
2. Women who have bound themselves upon the altar of fashion. 3. Women who
sacrifice their holiest impulses for pleasure. 4. Women who are devoted to the
triumphs of ambition. Christians should never violate their union with Jehovah
to unite themselves with idolaters. This, under even the most plausible circum-
stances, is—(1) to disobey a Divine command; (2) to lose the Divine blesssing ;
(3) to incur the Divine displeasure. II. This evil may be committed spiritually.
Union to God often represeuted in Scripture as marriage—the closest of bonds.
God has right to our devotion, service, and love. From this celestial marriage
spring all virtues and graces. But the worship of strange gods has been most
prolific in pernicious customs, degrading vices, and dangerous errors. These evils
abound, captivate, and allure, as heathen women did the Jews. Men marry the
daughters of a strange god spiritually: 1. When they join themselves with
popular customs which have emanated from the spirit of idolatry. 2. When they
embrace false and erroneous systems of religion. 3. When they associate them-
selves freely with unholy religionists. God requires his people to separate them-
selves from all fascinating forms of evil, and to be wholly his. He has no agree-
ment with idols, nor must his people with evils arising out of idolatry. All
unholy unions are breaches of a marriage covenant—a voluntary preference of evil
to God. III. This evil, whether committed literally or spiritually, will
produce disastrous results. 1. Literally. It results in—(1) domestic unhappiness ;
(2) a divided household ; (3) ill-trained children—probably generations of evil-
doers ; (4) neglect of true religion on the part of both. “If David marry Maacah,”
says Adams, “their issue proves an Absalom. If Solomon love idolatrous women,
here is enough to overthrow him, with all his wisdom; by joining his heart to
theirs, he shall disjoin it from God. One religion matching with another not
seldom breeds an atheist—one of no religion at all.” 2. Spiritually. It results in
—(1) blindness in spiritual things; (2) loss of Divine favour ; (3) wandering in
deceptive errors; (4) loss of religious influence; (5) being given up by God.
“‘ Ephraim is joined to idols ; let him alone.” Learn to guard against uniting with
anything which separates us from God. An evil association has often been a
devil’s chain, binding the soul to everlasting wretchedness (The Study and


Puipit). ;


716 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. [OHAP, Ii.





Umsuawrut Divorcs.— Verses 13—16.


“This have ye done again;” a second accusation is brought against them. To


marry strange women, they divorced their lawful wives, drove them in tears to the
sanctuary, and brought contempt upon their worship. Men add one sin to another,
until the wrath of God is poured out upon them.

I. Divorce shamefully cruel. They afflicted their own wives so cruelly that they
fled to the altar, and covered it “with weeping and loud cries.” These who are
wronged and insulted may obtain redress before God’s throne. He hears the cries
of the helpless. The tears of the innocent rise above the incense and worship of
their persecutors. II. Divorce strangely aggravating. The offence was committed
against constant warning, was most aggravating in its nature and results. 1. They
broke the tenderest ties of humanity. ‘‘ The wife of thy youth,” who plighted her
troth to thee in the freshness of life. ‘ Thy companion,” sharing thy joys and
sorrows, hopes and interests, thy associate and help-meet in all the circumstances —
of life. Above all, “the wife of thy covenant,” given and taken with most solemn
pledges, yet now cast away in scorn and lust! Even the heathen believed marriage
to be a sacred act, and guarded it by solemn sanctions: what, then, must be the
guilt of divorce under such circumstances! 2. They defied the witness of God.
“The Lord hath been witness” to the solemn engagement between them. To him
the appeal was made. To violate this covenant is to deal treacherously, and God
will aveng'e the transgressors. ‘‘ Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and for-
getteth the covenant of her God.” III. Divorce boldly defended. Some take
ver. 15 as alluding to the example of Abraham, who sinned against Sarah the wife
of his youth, by taking Hagar. This seemed to sanction their sin, and the prophet
meets the objection or defence, “ What did that one?” God promised Abraham
seed, a child who should be the hope of the chosen people, and the blessing of the
world. He mistakenly followed the counsel of his wife, instead of the counsel of
God, and sought that seed by marrying the Egyptian. But you have not the
promise of Abraham, nor are you actuated by the same motives. If you were pure
in motive, you are sinful in act ; for God hates divorce, and acts of cruelty which
you commit. “Therefore, take heed to your spirit ; ” have no light thought of this
offence ; for you cannot excuse yourselves by the errors of great men. IV. Divorce
which frustrated the design of lawful marriage. Others take ver. 15 as referring
to the first pair, between whom and between all others born after them, God willed
that there should be one indivisible union. This law should not therefore be broken.
But “wherefore one?” That he might see a godly seed. From lawful marriage,
religious offspring may be secured by God’s blessing. Divorce and polygamy counter-
act the interests of piety, and have even been unfavourable to the education and godly
training of children. V. Divorce which ended in serious consequences. The unity
of marriage faithfully kept is in harmony with God’s will, but violated is pernicious
to society. 1. It is treachery to society. “ Deal not treacherously” (ver. 16). 2. it is
insulting to God. ‘The Lord God of Israel saith, that he hateth putting away.”
God permitted Israel, on account of hardness of heart, to divorce (Matt. xix. 8:
Mark x. 5). But the legislation of Moses was in advance of the common morality
of the time, and taught that marriage was not “a mere natural tie and temporary
alliance,” but a solemn covenant to be dissolved only in cases of adultery (1 Cor.
vii. 15) and flagrant infidelity, and by a legal bill given into the hands of the
offender (Deut. xxiv. 1). 3. I¢ is detrimental to Christian worship. “ Insomuch that
he regardeth not the offering any more” (ver. 13). God rejects the gift when the
heart of the giver is wrong. He does not “ receive it with good will” at his hand.
Family discords and family quarrels hinder worship, and prevent access to God.
Let parents and children take heed, and dwell in peace, “ that your prayers be not
hindered.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MALACHI. TT





Practica [nFiweuity.— Verse 17.


The prophet’s words are directed against the spirit of discontent and murmuring
which prevailed among the people, who lost faith in all the promises of God, because
the expected manifestation of the glory of the Lord for the good of his people did
not take place at once, and in their despair called even the holiness and justice of
Cie in question, and began to deny the coming of the Lord to judge the world
Keil}.

I. ee had perverted views of God’s character. Men, impatient under
affliction, murmur. Because God prospers the wicked, and does not help them,
they think that he approves of sin, and delights in the sinner. ‘‘ Every one that
doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them.” II. They
had perverted views of God’s providence. God had no concern for men at all,
or, if he had, he was not just and impartial. “ Where is the God of judgment ?”
Men carve out a providence of their own reason, as they would like things to be.
They do not see Divins justice: sentence 1s not executed upon wicked men, therefore
they say God iii o» panisn. Thev see the prosperity of the wicked, and conclude
that God delights in them. First. men ouarrel with God’s dispensations, and then
deny his providence. Thus are they proud under the rod, and tempted to atheism.
When they cherish this evil disposition. and break out into blasphemous expressions,
God is offended, and will make them feel that he is of purer eyes than to behold
sin, and cannot endure to look upon it with pleasure (cf. Hab. i 13: Ps. v. 4).
“Ye have wearied the Lord with your words.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 11. Scandalous sin in the Church.
1. Belies Christian profession. 2. Vio-
lates sacred obligation. 3. Profanes dis-
tinguished privileges.

Ver. 12. Master and scholar. Unfit
for their place, sent out of the school, and
Divinely punished. ‘ The Lord cuts off,”
and sends them “ out of the tabernacles
of Jacob,” where he deals impartially
with sin, and without respect of persons
with men.

Vers. 14, 15. The sanctity of mar
riage. 1. Undertaken in solemn cove-
nant. Both parties mutually bound to
love and help each other. Sosacred the
obligation, that it is termed ‘the cove-
nant of God” (Prov. i. 7). 2. Witnessed
by a Holy God. If undertaken in his
fear, the knot is tied by his hand.
“ What, therefore, God hath joined to-
gether, let not man put asunder.”


“Speak it not lightly! Oh! beware, beware ;
Tis no vain promise, no unmeaning word ;
Lo! men and angels list the faith ye swear,
And by the High and Holy One ’tis heard.
O, then, kneel humbly at his altar now,
And pray for strength to keep the marriage
vow.’ [Anon.]


Ver. 16. Garment. Violense, like an


outer garment, as in Ps. lxxiii, 6. A gar-
ment hiding sin, and exposing to shame
and punishment. The livery of the
devil—opposed (1) to the garment of the
meek, by which the godly cover them-
selves (Eph. iv. 24: Col. iii, 10); (2) to
the white robes of the redeemed saints
in heaven (Rev. vii. 14). “The figurative
expression may be explained from the
idea that the dress reflects the inward
part of a man, and therefore a soiled
garment is a symbol of uncleanness of
heart” (cf. Zech. iii. 4: Isa. lxiv. 5: Rev.
iti. 4) [Ker?].
“6 The soul of this man is in his clothes” tSheke
‘‘ The apparel oft proclaims the man” [ Shake,
Ver. 17. Wearying God. Spoken
afterthe manner of men. God is said to
be tired, fatigued—1. With their formal
worship. 2. With their blasphemous
words; and 3. with the justification of
themselves in sin. God is infinitely
patient with our infirmities and prayers,
but wearied with our sins and impenitent
hearts. ‘‘Thou hast made me to serve
(burdened, overcome by labour) with
thy sins, thou hast wearied (disgusted)
Pra thine iniquities ” (Is. xliii 23,
24


718





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI,


[ CHAP. I,





ILUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER II.


Vers. 1—4. Curse blessings. Those
who despise the upper springs of grace,
shall find the nether springs of worldly
comfort prove their poison. To the
rejecters of Christ even those things
which are calculated to work their
spiritual and eternal good become occa-
sions for yet greater sin. Wretched are
those men who not only have a curse
upon their common blessings, but also on
their spiritual opportunities [ Spurgeon].

Ver. 5. Fear. “All fear but fear of
heaven betrays guilt, and guilt is villany”
[Dr. Lee].

Vers. 6—9. It really is fine to observe
with what native ease Malachi rises into
the higher region of thought. While
dwelling on the sins of the priests he
moves in the lower, the ceremonial
elements ; he insists on the maimed rites
and blemished sacrifices, on the per-
functory and the contemptuous spirit
with which they lounged through the
service of the Temple. But no sooner
does he attempt to frame a conception
of what the true priest should be, than
all that is forgotten ; we hear no more of
altar and sacrifice: his thoughts are
riveted on the moral aspects of the
priestly vocation—how holy a man, how
wise a teacher, how careful and friendly
a guide, the priest should be. When


we are thinking only to hear that the
sons of Levi are to offer clean and per-
fect, instead of blemished and polluted,
sacrifices, to delight in the ministrations
of the sanctuary instead of despising
them, as much to our surprise as pleasure,
he places before us a lofty spiritual ideal
of character and service, well-nigh. if
not altogether, beyond the reach of
mortal powers: he pronounces a eulogium
on Levi which we should hardly dare to
inscribe, as an epitaph, on the tomb of the
holiest saint, or even on that of an
inspired apostle [,S. Coz].

Ver. 10. Father. Man is thy brother,
and thy father is God [Lamartine}].
The universe is but one great city, full of
beloved ones, Divine and human, by
nature endeared to each other [Seneca].

Ver. 12. Master. To a single teacher,
the hope of an entire city is often en-
trusted [Scriver]. Scholar. The greatest
scholars are not the wisest men [ Regnier).
Men must be taught, as though you
taught them not [ Pope].

Vers. 13—16. Marriages are styled
matches, yet amongst those many that
are married, how few there are that are
matched! Husbands and wives are
like locks and keys, that rather break
than open, except the wards be answer-
able [W. Secker].





CHAPTER TL


CuiticaL Norrs.] Messenger] The prophet, in first instance ; applied to the Baptist (Matt. xi.
10: Luke vii. 27). Prepare] Clear away, like a pioneer before an Eastern prince. Suddenly]
Unexpectedly. 2.] Judgment will begin at the coming of the Lord. Who] #. ¢, no one can endure
it (cf. Joel a, 11). Abide and stand] As opposed to falling under judgments, The double figure
has one meaning. ‘The smelter’s fire burns corrupt ingredients of metals (cf. Zech. xiii, 9); the lye
or alkaline salt cleanses the dirt out of clothes (cf. Isa. iv. 4). 3.] As smelter the Lord sits], temper-
ing the fire and keenly watching the process, Levi’s] sons, the objects of the trial, to be purified.
When priests morally cleansed, offer sacrifices in righteousness, 4] The whole nation will be
pleasant to God as in old time. 5. I] whom ye challenged (ch. ii. 17) will be a judge and eye-
witness against sins named. 6. I Jehovah] am unchangeable in gifts and calling, heroes sons of
Jacob] (contrasted with Jehovah) will not be destroyed. ‘The Divine immutability secured the
preservation of the Jewish people from destruction, notwithstanding their flagrant wickedness, til!
he had accomplished all his purposes of mercy” [Henderson]. 7.] Reproof for non-payment of
tithes, which was the cause of national calamities. Wherein] In what respect return? indicates 2


CHAP, It.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MALACHI. . 19





self-righteous spirit. 8,] They did what none should dare to do. Rob] Defraud God. Tithes had
been withheld, though they were severely punished. 9.] Ch. ii. 2. 10—12.] Nature of curse,
10. All] Not a portion, and thus defraud God. Storehouse] Treasuries (Neh. xiii, 12), Prove] if
I am not holy and righteous, an attitude which they had questioned, Then shall promised blessings
flow like pouring rain, Pour] Lit. empty out (2 Kings vii. 2). Enough] Lit. till there is no
more need; #. ¢. superabundance [Ke7/]. Where sufficiency can have no more place; more than
sufficient ; superabundantly [Henderson]. 11]. The thought individualized. Devourer] Locusts and
other noxious creatures. Rebuke} Practically; ¢,¢, to frustrate the intention.’ Nothing shall then
miscarry. 12. Blessed} In consequence of God’s blessing. Delight.] An object of pleasure to
every one (Zech. viii. 138: Deut. xxxiii, 29), 18—18.] Impatient murmuring is most unreasonable ;
the day is coming which will bring to light the distinction between the righteous and the wicked.
13. Stout] (bold) sig. to bind fast, make firm, and in a bad sense to be hard or obstinate, such as
that in Jude 15. [Henderson]. Keil gives, to do violence to one, to overpower him (cf. Ex. xii.
33: 2 Sam. xxiv. 4). Specimen words are given, 14.}] God has no regard to well doing, therefore
there is no advantage in serving him (ef. ch. ii. 17). His ordinance] Lit. what he requires to be
observed, prescribed rites. Mourn.] In black or mournful garb, as a sign of penitence, Voluntary
fasting is brought into prominence, 15.] Because God does not reward their works with prosperity,
they call proud] sinners happy men, favourites of God when blessed (cf. Ps. lxxiii, 12). The
wicked are set] Lit. built up, 7. ¢. flourish (cf. Jer. xii, 16, 17: Ex. i, 21), and though they have
tempted God, are delivered, 16. Then] When the wicked were openly talking one with another; so
the godly held mutual intercourse, and defended the providence of God, Jehovah noticed their con-
versations, and wrote them in a book]. A custom borrowed from a Persian king, recording the
names and merits of any who deserved well, that they might be rewarded (cf. Esther vi. 1, 2). God
keeps a book also (cf. Ps. lvi. 9: Dan. vii. 10). Before] To lie open before him, and remind him
of righteous deeds. 17. Jewels] Lit. private, peculiar property, “expressing the highest estimation
of God’s people and their perfect security in the day of judgment.” Spare] (Ps. cili. 17, 18) Con-
trasted with punishment. 18, Return] to a bettcr mind. Discern] the falseness of your calumny
against God’s dealings (ef. Ex. xi. 7). The day of judgment will change many opinions concerning
God’s ways and God’s people.


HOMILETICS.
Tae CoMING OF THE Lonce. Verses 1—5,


These words are an answer to the sceptical question of the people—“ Where is
the God of judgment? If there be a God, why does he permit good to be over-
come of evil? Why does he delay his coming to rectify things which seem wrong,
to make life plainer, and his peuple easier?” The prophet replies, He will come ;
I am his messenger; be warned by me, lest you be caught unprepared.

I. The coming of the Lord is a certain event. ‘He shall come, saith the
Lord of Hosts.” Do not judge of this event by what you see. Remember the
prediction, which can never be falsitied by the unbelief and contempt of man, or
by the events of nature. II. The coming of the Lord will be an unexpected
event. ‘The Lord shall come suddenly.” He may come when men are not pre-
pared for him, when they do not anticipate the appearance of the Judge of all the
earth. “This suddenness is repeated in all the acts and judgments of the Lord.
The Lord of glory always comes as a thief in the night to those who sleep in their
sins” [Schmieder]. Therefore “be ye also ready.” III. The coming of the Lord
will be a solemn event. ‘ Who may abide the day of his coming?” It will be
very different from ‘that which carnal Jews expected. He comes not to flatter
national pride, nor gratify personal wishes, but to subject their principles and
actions to a severe trial. He was to test them by fire. 1. A day of magnificence
to the temple. He will come “to his temple,” to beautify and adorn it by his
glory, to purify it for his worship by judicial expulsion of all who profane it (Matt.
xxi. 12, 13). 2. A day of solemnity to the world. ‘“ Who shall stand when he
appeareth?” (a) He will judge the wicked (ver. 5). (b) He will purify the godly
(ver. 4). To some the day will be a revelation of wrath, to others a manifestation
of grace, to all a solemn trial, Hence question not God’s justice, murmur not at
his delay, but prepare for the decisive day. ‘The day of the Lord is great and very
terrible, and who can abide it?” IV. The coming of the Lord is an event of


"20 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. (car. on





which men are warned. “Behold, I will send my messenger.” Lest men should
be unprepared, warning is given, messenger after messenger is sent to prepare the
way. The moral condition of men is not what God desires. In the ministers of
the gospel God urges to repentance, helps to remove hindrances and to prepare for
the presence of Christ. ‘To make ready a prepared people (supplied like an army
with all necessaries) for the Lord” (Luke i. 17).


Tue MEssENGER OF THE CoveNaNnt.— Verse 1.


Observe the character under which the Messiah is here presented to our notice.
He is described in three ways. First, by his person: “The Lord.” The word
signifies authority and dominion. He is King of kings and Lord of lords, “‘ Ruler in
Israel,” and “ Governor among the nations.” Though all power is given to him as
Mediator, yet he had a previous claim to dominion before his obedience and death.
Secondly, he is described by his office: ‘The Messenger of the covenant.” The
covenant of grace, ‘ ordered in all things and sure,” to which David fled for refuge
and solace, and in which he found all his salvation and desire. He is the “ Medi-
ator,” the “ Surety,” and the ‘‘ Messenger” of the covenant, because he not only
procures and possesses its blessings, but bestows them. He announces and makes
them known, prefaces all invitations and disclosures with a declaration of his com-
mission from the Father. This inferior title does not detract from his glory as
“the Lord,” but displays it, magnifies it, because it shows infinite condescension
and grace. Thirdly, he is described by the estimation in which he was holden:
““Whom ye delight in.” Carnal Jews, mistaken, viewed him as a temporal prince,
did “seek” him, and “delighted” in him. It applies, in a nobler sense, to
spiritual Jews. He was desired and delighted in by all the people ef God from
the beginning. To seek and delight in him will always characterize the redeemed
—those who believe in him; for “to them that believe he is precious.” All that
is desirable, all that is delightful to us we find in him. He is our “sun” in dark-
ness, our “shield” in danger, our “physician” in sickness, our “ righteousness,”
our “ bread,” the “ water of life,” and ‘all in all.” Let the hearts of them rejoice,
therefore, that seek the Lord [ W. Jay].


THe REFINER AND THE CRUCIBLE.— Verses 2, 3.


I. The severity of the trial. II. The agency by which the trial is wrought.
“He,” that is, the Lord, is “like a refiner’s fire.” He alone appoints it; he alone
effects it. He is present all through the operation. III. The utility of the
trial. 1. It is a sign of preciousness, We never prune the bramble, nor try the
worthless. 2. It is a test of genuineness. 3. It isa medium of purification. 4. It
‘sa preparation for service [C. Stanford].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. This word “ Behold” signi-
fieth that this coming of Christ in the
flesh should be—-1. New, admirable,
and stupendous. 2. Sure and certain.
3. Desirable and joyful. 4. Famous
and renowned [7rapp].

Ver. 2. Who may abide the day?
There is something awful even in refer-
ence to Christ’s coming in the flesh.
First, in the occasional emanations and
displays of hie majesty. Herod “was


troubled, and all Judea with him.

With a whip only he rushed into the
temple and drove out the monsy-
changers. Qn the mount of transfigura-
tion, in the garden, at death, and in his
resurrection were displays of majesty.
Secondly, it may be exemplified in his
detection of character. All through his
ministry his eyes were a flame of fire.
He silenced those who ensnared him,
knew al] men, and needed not that any


OMAP, III. ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI.


72\





should testify of man. Thirdly, it may
be exemplified in the calamities which
were to follow the rejection of him. They
said, “ His blood be upon us,” and it fell
upon them, and rests upon them now.
But their unspeakable sufferings were
only emblems of those more dreadful
punishments to which they are exposed
“who have trodden under foot the Son
of God,” &c. For there is another
coming and appearance of Christ. Only
those who have a better righteousness
than their own can stand [W. Jay].
Vers. 3, 4. The refining process.
1. The objects of it. “The sons of
Levi.” The purest Church and the
holiest saints need refining. Gold, the
thing valued most, is tried or proved by
fire ; but God’s people are more precious


just the right heat, neither too hot nor
too cold, keeping the metal in the fire
the exact time, for none of heaven’s pure
ore will be destroyed. What tender-
ness, care, and anxiety. 3. The design
of it. To “ purify,” that they may offer
an offering in righteousness. Right
service springs from purified men. There
may be gilt, but not gold. Hence “ the
fining-pot is for silver, and the furnace
for gold; but the Lord trieth the
hearts.”


Ver. 5. 1. Monstrous evile in their
source. They “fear not me.” 2. Mon-
strous evils in their detection. “I will


be a swift witness against ” them in pro-
vidence and the ministry of the gospel.
3. Monstrous evils in their resulis, “1
will come near to you,” though you cry,


than gold. 2. The method of it. “He
sits” tempering the fire, and making it


Where is the God of justice? &.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Unowanaine Gop.—Verse 6.


God judges the wicked and purifies the righteous to carry out his immutable
purpose of love. He changes not, therefore the sons of Israel do not perish.

I. God is unchangeable, therefore his character should not be maligned. “I
Jehovah, I change not.” Sin may triumph, judgments appear long, but we must
never infer from this that God has changed. God is the same in essence and act
as ever. He is not less wise and mighty, just and true, than at the beginning.
Whatever be the character of his dispensation, he is the eternal and immutable
One, “with whom is no variableness (vicissitudes, eclipses, and decreases, like
planets), nor shadow (adumbrations, like stars in different sites and positions) of
turning” (Jamesi. 17). II. God is unchangeable, therefore his covenant abides.
Man’s word is recalled, altered, or forgotten. Man’s conduct is fickle, self-willed,
and sinful. But “ God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man,
that he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken,
and skall he not make it good?” God’s covenant with Israel is “ equipped and
sure” (2 Sam. xxiii. 5). The ingratitude and unfaithfulness of man can never
aanul it. Nothing can be reversed. ‘The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance” (i ¢. immutable and unalterable) (Rom. ii. 29). III. God is
unchangeable, therefore his people are not consumed. “Ye sons of Jacob are
uot consumed.” We are fretful and impatient with one another, despair of
umendment and love; but God waits patiently, never casts off entirely, and abides
by his word of promise. We provoke him to anger, but he remembers his covenant,
“‘It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not.”

Divine Biessixes SusPenpED.— Verses 7—12.


In these words God explains why his blessings have been withheld, reproves the
people for keeping back tithes and offerings, and promises abundant blessings on


condition of repentance. : :
L Why are Divine blessings caer The reason is not found in God, but


722 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. (CHAP. Il!





in the people. God is not unwilling to bless, nor slack concerning his promise, but
they do not fulfil the conditions. 1. They have rebelled against God. “Ye are
gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them” (ver. 7). Their sins
were of long continuance, imitated by posterity, and defended with pertinacity.
2. They have robbed God. They defrauded God in a twofold sense. The priests
did not discharge their sacrificial duties rightly, and the Levites could not officiate
for God, because driven away in destitution. How, therefore, can God bless them
in their apostasy? The reward of obedience cannot be given to the disobedient.
II.. On what conditions will Divine blessings be given? They are called upon
to prove God, to test him, by complying with his wish (ver. 10). 1. Return to
God. “ Return unto me, and I will return unto you” (ver. 7). If they return in
‘penitence, he will return in blessings. Distance from God will hinder the fulfil-
ment of every promise. 2. Pay God his dues. “ Bring all the tithes into the
storehouse” (ver. 10). No wonder men do not morally conform to the Divine will
‘when they neglect the smaller duty of sacrifice. All, not a part of the tithes must
be given. Nothing must be kept back, for God has a right to the firstfruits and
the best of everything. Then, if these conditions are complied with, the curse will
be removed, blessings like fruitful showers will fall upon them. 1. The temple
will be blessed. The treasury will be filled. There will be meat, not superfluity,
for those who minister in my house. 2. The land will be blessed. The devouring
locusts will be rebuked, the fruits of earth shall not be destroyed, and the grapes of
the vintage shall not miscarry. ‘Ye shall be a delightsome land.” 3. The people
will be blessed. ‘All nations shall call you blessed” (ver. 12). If we honour
God with our substance and free-will offerings, we shall not lose in this world.
The windows of heaven will open, and no ‘real good will be withheld. So happy
will be our condition, so fertile our farms and lands, that all men will call us
blessed. ‘Honour the Lord with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all
thine increase ; so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst
out with new wine.”


Rossine Gop.— Verse &


When exhorted to return, they reply in a spirit of pride and self-righteousness.
Return to God! In what? Have we, the chosen race, the holy people, departed
from God? Yes, replies the prophet, in those very things in which you profess to
be exact. You do not duly pay tithes and offerings, though rebuked by the famine
for neglect. You defraud God, therefore, of his dues. This is a common sin in
Christian worship and daily life.

I. Men rob God of worship. Man is made to worship. God alone is the
proper object of worship. To him we owe reverence, homage, and praise. But to
withhold these or transfer them to the creature is to rob God. II. Men rob God
of time. Our times are in his hands. But time is not valued nor turned to good
account. The Sabbuth, expressly claimed for God, is neglected. Youth, “the
morning of life, and maturity of age are given to pleasure,” ‘‘ Redeem the time.”
“ Time wasted is existence, used is life” [Young]. III. Men rob God of talents.
All gifts are bestowed by God, should be improved and consecrated to him. But
to devote them to sinful conversation and unlawful pursuits is to rob God. ‘‘ What
hast thou that thou didst not receive ? now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou
glory, as if thou hadst not received it?”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 7, 1. The charge of defection. ‘ From the days of your fathers.” Pos-
Gone away and not kept the ordinances terity walking in the steps of their
of God. (1) Defection of long standing. fathers, and thus entailing a curse upon


OHAP. III. }


generation after generation. (2) Defec-
tion of stubborn spirit. ‘ Wherein shall
we return?” In wilful ignorance and
prejudice, in frivolous excuses and self-
righteousness, they challenge the charge
and demand particulars. 2. The invita-
tion to return. ‘“ Return unto me,” &c.
(1) This invitation displays the grcat
mercy of God. After such long and
grievous apostasy he offers to be recon-
ciled. (2) This invitation aggravates the
impenitent conduct of men. No excuse
can be made. “I will return unto you.”

Ver. 8. Rob God/ How base; what
presumption, and what folly! “In
what? God specifies two things only,
obvious, patent, which, as being material
things, they could not deny. In tithes
and offerings” [Pusey]. A striking in-
stance found in Neh. xiii. 10.

Ver. 10. Prove me. 1. Prove God
concerning his promise of mercy to the
penitent sinner and the troubled Chris-
tian. 2. Prove God concerning the
blessings promised to his house. 3.
Prove God concerning his predictions of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI.


728


good to his Church. In these and in
other ways God shows marvellous love
and-condescension, and pledges himself
in a way in which he can verify his
word, ‘‘Azariah the chief priest of the
house of Zadok answered him, and
said, Since the peeple began to bring the
offerings into the house of the Lord, we
have had enough to eat, and have left
plenty : for the Lord hath blessed his
people ; and that which is left is this
great store (2 Chron, xxxi. 10).

Vers. 10—12. How much depends
upon giving ourselves an offering wholly
unto the Lord! The offerings now
required are our hearts, and all that
comes from them. But ifthe Lord was
so strict in tithes, how much more with
our hearts! Dost thou wish the full
blessing of God? then be exact in what-
ever is thy duty. What is our duty!
Whatever God requires of us, in great
or little, in his service or in every-day
life. How can he who is not strict ir
duty hope or pray for the full blessing
of God 4 [ Lange}.


HOMILETICS.
1b.


The people still murmur against God, and openly declare that there is no profit
in serving him, because the righteous have no advantage over the wicked. But
this murmuring is unjust, and the coming judgment will make a distinction
between those who fear God and those who fear him not. Some of their hard
words are given. The common sentiment of the time was that piety brings no
reward, and the religious error of the time that observance of outward forms was
the service which God should bless.

I. God’s service is falsified. “It is vain to serve God.” 1. This sentiment
springs from a wrong estimation of God's service. It is not a mercenary service.
{he Jews waited not upon God in love, but in hope of being well paid. Religion
is not a bargain, but affection, obedience, and gratitude to God. It is not a
mournful but a delightful service. ‘What profit that we have walked mourn-
fully,” in black and in grief? Fasting, prescribed or voluntary, was considered
meritorious, had claims upon God, and when left unrewarded, they complained
against God. “ Wherefore have we fasted, and thou seest not? Wherefore have
we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge?” 2. This sentiment is
denied by Scripture. Paul seems to give some truth to it when he says, “ If in this
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.” But from
the same person we learn that “Godlinese is profitable unto all things, having
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.” God himself told
the Jews that the meanest act for him would not be left without reward (ch. i. 10).
In every sense, “ wisdom’s ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
paths of peace.” ‘Riches and honour are with me; my fruit is better than gold,
yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than choice silver.” 3. This sentiment ts


Harp Sayines aGainsr Gop.— Verses 13





14 HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: MALACHI. (CHAP. Im





contradicted by Christian experience. God’s people have found God’s service theiz
highest happiness and joy. They have tasted that the Lord is good, and that the
man who trusts in him is blessed. Whatever be their outward condition, their
spiritual experience gives the lie to such an impudent statement concerning God's
service. ‘Blessed are they that do his commandments.” II. God’s justice is
impugned. Because they met with no reward for their services; because the
wicked seemed to prosper rather than the righteous; they openly declared that
God’s favourites were proud and ungodly men. The wicked have put God to the
test, they reply, calling down vengeance from heaven; but they are built up, and
flourish, and though they have tempted God by breaking his laws, yet they are
delivered from misfortune. Hence they gave wrong verdicts, and set at nought the
decrees of God. ‘‘ We call the proud happy.” We should not cavil against God’s
dealings for many reasons. 1. We cannot read the heart. How do we know who
are happy, and who are not happy. Men most prosperous outwardly may be most
miserable inwardly. Beneath the splendid show may be “the worm, the canker,
and the grief.” And men most afflicted may be most happy. The glare of
prosperity should not blind our judgment. “Be not rash with thy mouth, and let
not thine heart be hasty to utter anything before God; for God is in heaven, and
thou upon earth.” 2. We forget the future. For a time the proud may be happy,
but their happiness is shortlived, “only for a season,” and does not satisfy. The
wicked may be set up, but they build on a wrong foundation, and great may be
their fall. Those who tempt and defy God, may be delivered for the present ; but God
is often most angry with men when he seems best pleased; sweeps them away
when their inward thought is to continue for ever. On earth what a curse, and
how uncertain their prosperity! But at the great day, how sudden, complete, and
terrible their overthrow! Headlong their fall, without escape, and without hcpe.
“How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! They are utterly
consumed with terrors.”


DivingE REcoGNITION oF CHRISTIAN FELLOWsHIP.— Verses 16—18,


The propbet now contrasts the faithful few with the sceptical many. While
the ungodly were uttering hard sayings, those who feared God held mutual inter-
course, defended God’s dealings, and encouraged one anether to love and trust
him. A remnant has always been found in the darkest days, whom God has
noticed and blessed.

I. The practice they adopted. In character and conduct they stand out in
remarkable contrast. 1. They were secretly pious. They “thought upon his name.”
The wicked do not think upon God ; or if they do, their thoughts concerning him
are sinful and vain. The righteous, in contrast, esteent and ever seek to honour
the name of God. They meditate upon his perfections, works, and words, and their
meditation is sweet. 2. They were personally sincere. They “feared the Lord,”
not in slavish terror, but with awe and filial reverence. They were loyal and true
in their profession. The root of the matter was in them. Fear was the secret
spring, the hidden power of holy life. 3. They openly encouraged one another.
So powerful was their piety, that it was revealed in their speech. (a) They spoke
openly “ one to another,” without fear or shame. (6) They spoke often, to encourage
and strengthen one another. Amid the atheism and ungodliness of the times, they
mutually talked not about the politics of the nation, but of personal religion and
the God they feared. II. The distinction they gained. Those who disregarded
God would ridicule his people. But here is a caution to the wicked, and an
encouragement to the godly. 1. God heard thetr conversation. “The Lord
hearkened and heard it.” God was thought to be forgetful, or an idle spectator of
events, But not a sigh nor a prayer, not a loyal word nor a feeble meeting, escape
his notice. 2. God remembered their worke. As earthly monarchs record the


. OMAP. IT.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI.


728





deeds and remember the names of their servants, so the King of Heaven keeps a


record of his people.
memorial in a book.”


The meanest service will not be forgotten.
3. God spared them on earth.


“Write this a
“T will spare them,” in con-


trast with the doom of the wicked: “as a man spareth his own son,” in tender


compassion (Ps. ciii. 17, 18).
reward them at judgment.
and confess the justice of God.


earth, will be easy at the great day.


All of mercy, nothing from merit.
In the coming day men will “return” to a right mind,
(a) They shall be separated from the wicked.
“‘Discern between the righteous and the wicked.”
(6) They will be claimed as peculiur treasure.


4. God will


This not always possible on


“They shall be mine, saith the lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my


jewels,”


They are precious to God, and will be owned and honoured by him.


There is a solemn, an eternal distinction between those who serve God and those


who serve him not.
tinction we can attain.


The reward of God’s servants is the greatest, the highest dis-
What are all the distinctions of the world to refuge on


earth and blessedness in heaven? Follow the example that you may share the


honour and happiness of the saints.


“Verily, there is a reward for the righteous :


verily, he is a God that judgeth in the earth.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 14. Vain. They themselves are
vain and most vain, for two reasons, and
in two respects. First, they take them-
selves to be servers of God. Secondly,
they stick in the bark, serve him with
the outside only, honour him with the
lips, and not with their hearts; they
bring vain oblations, empty perform-
ances, serve him with formalities which
he rejects with scorn as he did the
Pharisees’ devotions (Luke xvi. 15)
[Trapp].

Ver. 15, Proud, happy. A sentiment
—1]. At variance with the truth of God.
“Thou hast rebuked the proud, who are
cursed” (Ps. cxix. 21). 2. Displaying
ignorance. How do we know that the
proud are happy? Can we read their
hearts? (Prov. xxi. 24). 3. Indicative
of pride. They boast of their superior
intelligence. “We call.” “Pride is
increased by ignorance; those assume
the most who know the least” [ Gay].

Ver. 16. The Divine jewels. My
jewels, It is a strong expression of
value. Much in this world even on
which God sets high value, though much
that he condemns. Something which
he distinguishes from all that sparkles
and glitters with material lustre—from
things which earthly and carnal men
have most coveted and idolized. These
jewels are scattered here and there,
among earthly things; not in a collected
state, except in God’s view. By him


they are seen as one sacred company and
fraternity. Unequal in degrees of purity
and lustre, accounted the dross and off-
scouring of society; but He to whom
they belong sees them in a different
light ; a beam of his radiant light falls
on each, and all will see them at last.
There will be a collecting, an assembling
of them together. The grand act of
righteous separation must bring the
saints together, that the effect of re
demption may be conspicuously dis-
played. Think of that stupendous know-
ledge and power which will secure that
none of them shall be missing, or will be
lost! Mot one lost in the vastness of
the scene; not one that was even in the
utmost obscurity in mortal life; not one
in the remotest corner of the earth, or
island of the sea. When each sees all,
each may wonder at the vigilance, the
affectionate care, and the mighty power
that will have brought them all together,
after preserving them all separately, in
infinite variety of circumstances and so
many ages. Then, when the jewels are
“‘ made up,” he will pronounce, “ they are
mine.” What triumph to hear it! What
congratulation with one another! And
what a situation that must be—in place
and circumstances, felicity and glory—
in which he will assign their abode
within the immediate manifestation of
his presence! Looking at this pro-
spect, which of us can be content that


728


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MALACHY.


[omap. Im.





his soul should be wanting when “the
Lord of Hosts” shall “make up his
jewels!” Who can bear the thought of
being cast among the haser rejected
things of creation, and for him to say,
“That is not mine; take it away!”
Be cfovedy

Ver. 17. Spare them. If a man
spares any one, it will surely be his own
son. The very relation pleads for him.
He spares them as to exemption. He
spares them as to correction. They are


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1—5. Come. The last day
will assign to every one a station suitable
to his character; ranks will then be
adjusted, and precedency set right ; then
virtue will be rewarded and vice
punished [Wilson]. A due considera-
tion of this important subject is calcu-
lated to rouse our minds, and to set on
work those two grand engines and
mighty springs of activity—viz., hope
and fear [J0.}.

Ver. 3. Refiner. A few ladies once
met in Dublin to read the Scriptures
and converse together. One lady said
that the fuller’s soap and the refiner of
silver were only the same image intended
to convey the same view of the sanctify-
ing influences of the grace of Christ.
“No,” said another, “they are not just
the same image; there is something
remarkable in the expression in this
verse: ‘he shall sif,”” &c. All thought
it possibly might be so. This lady was
to call upon a silversmith, and report to
them what he said on the subject. She
went, without telling the object of her
visit, and begged to know the process of
refining, which he fully described to
her. ‘But do you sit while you are
refining?” asked she. ‘O yes, madam;
I must sit with my eyes steadily fixed
on the furnace, since if the silver remain
too long it is sure to be injured,” said
he. ‘And how do you know when it
is sufficiently refined?” ‘ Whenever I
see my own image reflected in it, I know
the process is completed.” She at once
saw the beauty and comfort of the
expression [ Whitecross].

‘Ver. 6. Ohange not. In commercial


afflicted, but have alleviations. He
spares them as to exertion. He con-
siders their strength, and will not require
of some what he ordains for others. He
spares them as to acceptance. Their
best actions are imperfect. Their obedi-
ence needs pardon. He views all through
Christ. He spared not him, that he
might spare you. Never forget the
kindness of God, and spare not your
selves in his cause [Jay].


TO CHAPTER III.


crises manhood is at a greater discount
than funds are. Suppose a man had
said to me last spring, “If there comes
a pinch in your affairs, draw upon me
for ten thousand dollars.” The man
said so last spring, but I should not
dare to draw on him this fall. I should
say, “Times have changed; he would
not abide by it.” But God’s promises
are “from everlasting to everlasting,”
and he always stands up to them. There
never was a run on heaven that was not
promptly met [Beecher].

Ver. 8. Rob. Special favours call
for special gratitude and service, as those
who rent the largest farms generally pay
the most for them [Wilson]. In tithes.
Well may we think our substance due
where we owe ourselves [Bp. Hall].

Vers. 9—12. Prove. The conde-
scending goodness of God gives not ouly
to the godly, but sometimes to the un-
godly, opportunity and challenge to
prove his truth and power ; and it is the.
duty of a minister of God, as it was of
the prophet, not only to point both
classes to it, but even to offer them this
proving of God, confident as Elijah
against Ahab, as Isaiah against Ahaz,
that God will not forsake his servants,
but will by the event put to shame all
unbelief [Lange].


Vers. 13—15. Stout words. Rash,
undigested, ill-considered speech, is


responsible for much of the heart-burn-
ing and trouble in the Churches. Ex-
pressions which convey the impression
that the Lord acts unjustly or unkindly,
especially if they fall from the lips of
men of known character and experience,


omar. ry 7}


are as dangerous as fire-brands among
stubble ; they are used for blasphemous
purposes by the ill-disposed, and the
timid and trembling are sure to be cast
down thereby, and to find reason for yet
deeper distress of soul [Spurgeon].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHLI.


127


repress it. When a fire burns low, the
coals that are alive should be brought
near together, that they may be blown
into a flame. So when all is cold and
dead, living Christians should draw near
and seek the breathings of the Spirit,


and kindle each other by mutual utter-
ance. The words thus and then spoken
shall be heard and recorded in heaven
[ Lange].
“ The Chronicles of heaven shall keep
Their words in transcript fair ;


In the Redeemer’s book of life
Their names recorded are ” [ Dodéridge}.


“‘ Language is the dress of thought” [Johnson].


Vers. 16—18. Spake often. When
the wicked are talking against God, the
righteous should talk for him. Religious
conversation is necessary, all the more,
for the very reasons that chill and


CHAPTER IV.


Crrrroat Norss.] The ungodly adnionished for the day] of judgment. Results to the wicked
awful. Burn] as an oven] or furnace (cf. Matt. vi. 30). “A fire burns more fiercely in a furnace
than in the open air” [Hengs.]. The proud] called happy (ch. iii. 15), and all the wicked] like
stubble] fit for fire: destroyed “root and branch,” ¢.¢. utterly. 2.] To the righteous, the day an
advent of justice and salvation, Sun] The Messiah set forth as most glorious and beneficent. What
the sun is to the natural, he is to the moral world; the source of light, life, and beauty. Wings]
t.e. beams, ‘on account of the velocity and expansion with which they spread over the earth ” (cf.
Ps, exxxix. 9) [Henderson]. Go forth] as from the prison of darkness and misery. Grow up] Lit.
leap in joy and freedom, like calves let loose from the stall. “The simile is designed to convey the
ideas of he adots from outward restraint and the enjoyment of self-conscious liberty’ [Henderson].
8. Tread] The wicked, who were said to prosper, will be overcome; destroyed by the fire of judg-
ment, they will lie like ashes on the ground. The condition of the godly reversed then. 4—6.]
Exhortation to avert coming judgment. Since no further communications were to be given, they
were to remember those they already possessed. ‘he law] A solemn admonition to Israel and to
us, not to disregard God’s word with its statutes] and judgments], its morals and religion. 5.}
To avert the curse from Israel the prophet] would be sent to reform the nation—a prophet in the

' power and spirit of Elijah. This applied to the Baptist (Matt. xi. 14; xvii. 12, 13. Dreadful day]
(ef. Joel ii. 31), the destruction of Jerusalem, but applicable to the last day; for “all God’s judg-
ments are hours, marked on the dial-plate, and struck by the alarm of that great day’”’ [ Words.].
6. Turn} Family harmony restored, say some ; better, a reconciliation of ungodly, estranged from
the piety of their ancestors and pious forefathers, by repentance. John’s ministry removed family
feuds, prepared multitudes for the Messiah, and thus laid the foundation for the recovery of
thousands to the faith of the Gospel (cf. Luke i. 16, 17 : Acts xxi. 20). A course] Lit. a ban, one of
the most awful words the Jews could use; fell upon Judea, by which it is devoted to destruction and
excluded from common use—a desolation remaining to this day. This word, which closes the
prophecy, aud with it the Old Testament, should ever riag in our ears, and remind us of the more
awful curse of the ungodly (1 Cor. xiv, 22: Rev. xx. 16).


HOMILETICS.
Ture Arrsoaon or THE JupaMENT Day.— Verses 1—5.


The prophet confirms the preceding truth, awakens sinners in their alumber, and
encourages saints in their faith by the prospect of a day of judgment: to punish
some, reward others, and vindicate the ways of God.

I. A day of retribution to the wicked. To the ungodly “the day cometh


28 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MALACHI. (OnAP. 1%


that shall burn as an oven.” Those who are called blessed will then be cursed, and
like stubble consumed by the fire. 1. Utter destruction. “It shall leave them
neither root nor branch.” ‘‘ There is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will
sprout again ;” but if torn up by the roots there is no hope, no chance of life. So
there will be no escape nor mitigation of punishment. 2. Universal destruction.
“ All the proud” and “all that do wickedly” will be unable to resist when God
reveals his justice. That day will test every man’s character and condition. Wood
and hay will be consumed, gold and silver will abide and be purified. ‘“ Every
man’s work shall be made manifest; for the day shall declare it (lay it open),
because it shall be revealed by fire (judgment) ; and the fire shall try (prove) every
man’s work of what sort it is” (1 Cor. iii. 13). II. A day of salvation to the
godly. The day will be as an oven to the wicked, but a source of joy, a sun to the
righteous. ‘‘ Unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise.”
The sceptical complained that judgment did not fall upon the ungodly, and that
justice was not given to the godly. But health, light, and everlasting salvation are
promised. 1. The light of life. Darkness and disease shali be scattered away ;
warmth and gladness shall shine in Divine effulgence “Thy sun shall no more go
down, for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light.” 2. The joy of freedom. ‘Ye
shall go forth” from darkness and captivity ; become free and active, frisky end
playful “as calves of the stall.” This freshness of first love is only a foretaste of
“the joy unspeakable, and full of glory.” 3. The conquest of foes. Not mere
freedom from oppression, but complete triumph over enemies. The wicked often
prosper and trample upon the godly; but a reversal shall come to both classes.
‘“‘ He that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be
exalted.” III. A day of warning toall. “For, behold, the day cometh,” and lest
any, even sinners, should be surprised, the trumpet-blast warns every one. 1. By
teachers commissioned from God. ‘‘ Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet.”
Ministers and messengers announce the coming King, are sent to prepare the way,
and call upon proud scoffers and wicked priests to heed the word. 2. By the
writien word of God. Prophecy and preaching may be temporary and uncertain,
but the law of God is never suspended. The Scriptures warn and invite, encourage
and threaten. If men forget the living voice, they must remember the written law.
3. By the corrective providences of God. Compassionate judgments come before the
final judgment—providences which correct and do not destroy. God seeks to
separate and purify men now, before the final separation and settlement, “ to bring
the disobedient to the wisdom of the just.” Heed the warning now, lest you be
smitten “ with a curse ” hereafter.


Tue Sun or Rieutrousness.— Verse 2.


There can be no doubt with respect to the application. Our Lord is elsewhere
called Light, which in Hebrew poetry is used of the sun, as the source of light.
What the sun is to the natural world, that the Messiah is to the moral. The
invaluable spiritual blessings which he dispenses are all comprehended under the
two heads here specified—righteousness and moral health (cf. Isa. lvii. 19). Both
of these are indispensably requisite to the happiness of our guilty and depraved
race, and from no other quarter can they be obtained than from him ‘‘ who of God
is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption”
[Henderson]. In this image we have many truths suggested.

I. Christ is the source of light. Whatever be the radiance of other lights,
they borrow from him. The moon in her beauty ard the stars in their brilliance
only shed reflected lustre upon the world. Amid ignorance, error, and sin, he is
the light of truth, holiness, and God, in person, doctrine, and work. “I am the
light of the world.” II. Christ is the source of life. ‘‘ With healing in his
wings.” Sin brought death into the world. Christ quickens the dead in trespasses
and sins, As the sun in spring rouses dormant energies of nature, and clothes trees


CHAP, IV. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: MALACHI. 128


and fields with beauty, so Christ is the essential principle and primal source of
spiritual life. ‘In him was life; and the life was the light of men.” III. Christ
is the soures of heauty. To the sun we owe the bright colours which delight our
eyes, and the golden beams which gladden our hearts. He tints the sky, paints
the flowers, and adorns all nature. Beauty “is the fringe of the garment of God.”
Christ blesses the soul and beautifies the life with purity and praise. His grace
removes moral deformity, and prepares for eternal perfection. IV. Christ is the
source of joy. When the sun bursts through the clouds, and pours floods of light
over the earth, the birds begin to sing, and children shout for joy. It smiles upon
the cottage of the poor, cheers and brings new life to the fainting heart. Joy in
Christ may be overcast, but will break out again with greater sweetness and
splendour. “ And as the morning light he shall arise—a sun” (2 Sam, xxiii. 4).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND OUTLINES.


Ver. 1. The oven, the fuel, the in-
tensity of the heat. The throne (of the
Ancient of days) was a fiery flame, and
his wheels as burning fire. A fiery
stream issued and came forth from
before him.

Ver. 2. Sun of righteousness. 1. As
asserting and vindicating the righteous-
ness of God, called in question by blas-
phemers. 2. As bestowing upon his
people a double righteousness (imputed
and imparted), as the sun doth light
(John i. 16). It is further said that he
shall arise, that is, he shall appear and
show himself on earth, who now lieth
hid, as it were, in heaven, as the material
sun doth under the horizon. 1. He was
manifest in the flesh, out of the bosom
of the Father, out of the types of the
law. 2. In the whole course of his life
he enlightened and warmed the dark
and dry hearts of men, and filled them
with fruits of righteousness (John xv. 5).
3. He is still in continual motion for the
good of the Church, as the sun in
heaven for the good of the world.
Under a cloud in his passion, he broke
forth again in his resurrection. From
heaven he daily darts forth his beams of
righteousness, and showers down all
spiritual blessings in heavenly privileges
(Ephes. i. 3). Lastly, at the great day
he will show himself in a special manner
a “Sun of righteousness ;” clearing all


obscurities, bringing to light the hidden
things of darkness, causing his people’s
most holy faith, that now lies hid in
great part, to be found to praise, honour,
and glory, cheering up their spirits after
manifold tribulations, and healing all
their spiritual maladies [ Trapp].

Healing in his wings. 1. Moral sick-
nessof men. 2. Christ the great Physi-
cian. 3. Faith the method of cure
Trust, rest wnder his wings, for shelter
and salvation.

Go forth and grow up as calves. The
figure sets forth—1. Slavery. 2. Free
dom. 3. Activity. 4. Growth. 5. Joy.
“Grow up; more probably bound, as
the animal which has been confined
exults in its regained freedom, itself full
of life and exuberance of delight”
[Pusey]. They were before in darkness
and disease, both of which confine. But
the Sun of righteousness arises, health is
restored, they become free and active.
They go forth and grow up as calves of
the stall. No creatures, perhaps, in-
crease so rapidly and observedly as these,
when, as here, they are well attended
and fed, for the very purpose of fatten-
ing [Jay].

Ver. 3. The great reversal. The
wicked overcome, trampled upon as
ashes. Victory visible and complete to
the saints (Micah iv. 12, 13: Joel iii
14: Rom. xvi. 20).


HOMILETICS.
REMEMBERING THE Law.—Veree 4.


The prophet closes with special directions to the people. Since no other
messenger was to follow him, till Jesus and his forerunner should come, they must


730 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MALACHI. [OHAP. Iv.


consult and remember the written word. Malachi thus closes by showing what
must be done to escape the curse and secure the salvation of God at the judgment
day. A needed lesson for us.

I. Remember the end of the law. To be the standard of faith and practice ; to
guide our feet in paths of righteousness ; to help in times of darkness and perplexity ;
and never to supersede, but ever confirm, the teaching of the ministry. The law
foreshadows the gospel. Malachi, the last of the prophets, exhorts us to remember
Moses, and preaches Christ, in whom the law and the prophets are fulfilled. Thus
in. every age we learn the importance and the necessity of a careful study of the
written word. II. Remember the authority of the law. “ Which I commanded
him.” ‘The law of Moses is the word of God, given in thunder and smoke, by
the ministry of angels and the finger of God. Nature teaches that if we believe in
the existence we should submit to the authority.of God. Hence Numa, Lycurgus,
and Mahomet derived their laws from heaven to secure obedience on earth. The
Bible takes the place of “open vision,’ and is the representative of God in the
world. To neglect it is to despise and to disobey it, to reject the authority of ‘tod.
“Obey my voice, and do all which I command you.” III. Remember the
reward of obedience to the law. Duty is performed not by respect to some
enactment, nor by general consent, but sincere obedience to the whole law, “ with
the statutes and judgments.” Forgetfulness is the source of every evil. Faithful
remembrance will lead to Christ, and prepare for judgment. ‘I have set before
you life and death, blessing and cursing ; therefore choose life, that both thou ana
thy seed may live.”


Enisan’s Ministry a Tyre oF THE CHRISTIAN MINIstTRY.— Verses 5, 6.


Christ is not easily recognized in his coming among men. Hence, lest they
should mistake, warnings are given, and messengers are sent to prepare the way.
Elijah’s ministry is again realized in the person of the Baptist. Like the prophet.
John was to be endowed with extraordinary gifts to fit him for his work. His
ministry is commended for the aim and the efficacy of it, and may be taken as a
type of the Christian ministry.

I. A ministry Divinely commissioned. ‘I will send you Elijah.” It was pre-
sumption to intrude into the priestly office of old, and to take unwarranted commis-
sion is to usurp authority in the Church. Christ himself was not self-commissioned.
How then shall his servants “ preach except they be sent”? An ambassador must
have express authority and instructions from his sovereign. ‘“‘ He who is called to
instruct souls is called of God, and not by his own ambition,” says Bernard. John
appeared by command, in the name of a royal personage, and made a royal proclam-
ation. What John’s preaching was all preaching should be—the voice, the voca-
tion of God to men. To the uncalled awful failure may result. “I sent them not,
nor commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this people at all, saith the
Lord” (Jer. xxiii, 32). II. A ministry moral in its design. John was a
reformer. Political theories and metaphysical] disputes were not for him to settle. °
“ Repent,” was the cry which resounded in the wilderness, “for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand.” 1. It prepared for Christ. “1 send my messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.” The true minister by his life and
preaching will “make ready a prepared people for the Lord.” 2. Jt saved from
curse. Hlijah was to come to prepare God’s people, lest at his coming he “ smite
the earth with a curse.” The destruction of Jerusalem, the curse of Judea, and the
sufferings of the Jews remind us of the Canaanites in the past, and of the impeni-
tent in the future. But the minister of God will warn every man, and urge every
man, to flee for refuge to the hope set before him in the gospel. III. A ministry
blessed in, its results. ‘‘ He shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children,’ .
&c. Alienated from God, men are alienated from one another The Jews had


GHLAP, IV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : MALACHI, 78)





fallen away from the faith of their ancestors, and were at strife with the Gentiles.
But John, in the spirit and power of Elias, brought back the faithless generations of
his day to the God of their fathers, and “ restored (regulated, reformed) all things ”
(Matt. xvii. 11). Families are now disturbed by worldliness, hatred, and apostasy.
Ungodly sons are at variance with godly parents. Society is estranged from God.
Love, the bond of union, is broken. Ministers have to fill up the chasm, unite all
classes, and bring men back to God. Their work is a reformation, a restitution to
original peace and purity, “to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and
the disobedient to (by) the wisdom of the just” (or righteous) (Lukei. 17). Thus
men will be restored to mutual affection, benevolence will accompany true religion,
and morally a new heaven and earth will be created by the gospel. Hearts and
lives will be prepared for the coming, and people will enroll themselves as willing
subjects of the heavenly kingdom. ‘“ The number of the children of Israel shall be
as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Both fell on evil times; both witnessed
fearlessly for God; neither was much


Ver. 4. 1. Men never left without a
rule of life. If not the living voice,


they have the written law, a law “ for


all Israel.” 2. Men apt to forget this
rule of life. “ Remember the law of
Moses.” “ Even when we have made


considerable advances in knowledge, we
must still retain the first principles of
practical religion, and resolve to abide
by them. Those that study the writ-
ings of the prophets and the Apocalypse
must still remember the law of Moses
and the four Gospels.”


“Men are men ; the best sometimes forget ”
[Shakespeare].


Ver. 5. John’s resemblance to Elijah.
1. In the endowments of his mind. 2.
In the habits of his life. 3. In the
exercise of his ministry. There were
many points between Elijah and John.
Both prophesied in a time of great un-
belief and apostasy from the law ; both
sought to bring back the people to the
piety of their fathers ; both prophesied
before great and terrible judgments.
The historical circumstances in which
they lived were remarkably parallel.
Ahab appears in Herod, Jezebel in
Herodias. The words of Mark vi. 20,
where he speaks of Herod fearing John,
and did many things, may apply without
any alteration to Ahab. Their very ap-
pearance, the fashion of their dress, and
their mode of life were identical [ Lange].


seen save in the direct exercise of their
ministry; both were at the head of
schools of disciples; the result of the
ministry of both might be expressed in
the same terms: “many (not all, nor
even the majority, but still many) of
the children of Israel did they turn to
the Lord their God [D. Brown].

Ver. 6. The words indicate the work
of the Christian minister. A reconciler
turning men’s hearts towards God and
one another. A herald to announce the
approach of Christ. A pioneer to pre-
pare the way. He has to awaken right
feeling, warn of coming judgment, and
point to Christ as the only hope of
escape. ‘Flee from the wrath to come.”

The closing of the Old Testament in
Malachi is unspeakably solemn. On its
last leaf we find the blessing and the
curse, life and death, set before us. As
its first page tells us of the sin and curse
of our first parents, so its last speaks of
the law given by Moses, of sin, and the
curse following, mingled with promises
of the grace which was to come by Jesus
Christ. So on the last page of the New
Testament we read of “ plagues written
in this book,” but its last words are
gracious words: “Surely I come quickly.
Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus!
The grace of our Lerd Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amer ’ [Langel.





133 HOMILETIC COMMEN MALACHI., (omar. I¥
ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IV.
Ver. 1. Proud. Heaven often regu- Men, roused from their spiritual slum-


lates effects by their causes, and pays
the wicked what they have deserved
[Corneille].

Ver. 2. Sun. The self-same sun that
shines upon his court hides not his
visage from our cottage, but looks on
both alike [Shakespeare].

‘0 sun! of this great world both eye and soul ”
[ Afiiton].

Ver. 4. Law. Prize the word of
God by the worth of it, that you may
not come to prize it by the want of it
ee There never was found, in any
age of the world, either religion or
law that did so highly exalt the public
good as the Bible [Bacon]. Remember.
Memory, like books which remain a
long time shut up in the dust, needs to
be opened from time to time; it is
necessary, 80 to speak, to open its leaves,
that it may be ready in time of need
[Seneca].

Ver. 5. Elijah. Since the days that
John began to preach, since he began to
call the world to repentance, there has
been @ rush into the kingdom of God.


bers, startled by a sense of their own sin
and ruin, have earnestly applied for
pardon and salvation. The echo of the
words he proclaimed on the Jordan still
lingers and rings in the souls of men,
and the result is a pressing every day
into the empire of redemptive truth
[Dr. Thomas].

Ver. 6. Curse, Parting words are
always solemn, as closing the past, and
opening out a future of expectation
before us. ‘The position of Malachi, as
the last of the prophets, bids us more
solemnly prepare for that dread day—
our Lord’s second coming — which he
foretol, in one with the first, warning
us that we deceive not ourselves, in un-
consciousness of our own evil and re-
membrance of our seeming good, until
he profess unto us, “I never knew you;
depart from me, ye that work iniquity ”


nee of the twelve prophets let the
memorial be blessed, and let their bones
flourish again out of their place (Kcclea
xlix. 10).


INDEX.


E GENERAL SUBJECTS.


Acsor, valley of, a door of hope, 31

Actions, spring from thoughts, 73, 641;
man’s highest social, 87

Affliction, needful, 42; sanctifies, 108;
two-fold effects of, 688; results of, 689

Age, importance of, 14; requirements of,
87


Ammon, judgment on, 250

Angels, ministry of, 625

Apostasy, steps in, 19; the threefold, 62 ;
warning against, 538

Assyria, judgment on, 545

Atheism, practical, 98, 717, 723

Athens, corruption of, 135

Avariciousness, the sin of 502 ; hurtful, 509

BAcKSsLIDING, the way hedged up, 21;
tendency to, 156; aggravated guilt of,
355

Beauty of Christian life, 190, 193, 654;
Bands and, 669; Smart on, 657

Bethel, 65, 165.

Bethlehem, 433, 437

Blessings, restoration of lost, 219, 221;
spiritual, symbolised by rain, 223 ; God
the author of, 658; political, from God,
661; priestly, cursed 710; Divine, sus-
pended, 721; and curse, 640

Brotherhood, national, formed by Christi-
anity, 599, 675; in the fatherhood of
God, 714; Seneca on, 718

Burden, the servant's, 464

CaALAmity,. the final, 322

Character, discrimination of public and
private, 130; God's, a ground of con-
solation in distress, 492

Chastisement, Divine, 23, 195; of a cove-
nant people, 260; withcut reformation,
273; consideration of, 579; of the
enemy, 695, cf. affliction

Children, training of, 135, 138; God's care
for, 392, 689 ; Fribel on, 136; gathering
of, 219

Christ, headship of, 14; a glorious con-
queror, 183; his reign described, 239;
resurrection, 362; titles, 412; kingdom,
423, 598; the Shepherd King, 431; the

aceful rule of, 433, 434, 437; the
esire of all nations. 575; the Branch,


606; twofold of his mission, 597; hia
congregation and work, 437 ; the Builder
of the temple, 627, 628 ; upon his throne.
629; the price of, 672; wounded in the
house of his friends, 686; messenger of
the covenant, 720; a refiner, 720; the
Sun of righteonsness, 728, 729

Church, great days of, 14; a revived, 32;
idolatry in, 39; endangered by the
world, 101; a corrupt, 112; the future,
421; militant, 429; gathering of, 553;
Divinely protected, 588, 590; joy of,
599; the golden light-bearer, 610;
future prosperity of, 642, 329

Cities, great, and great ruin, 400

City, the unprofamed, 237; bloody, 504;
guilty, 548; doomed, 532; measured,
593

Community, a reckless, 299

Conduct, unbrotherly, 338

Confidence, vain, destroyed, 418 ; exulting
in God’s mercy, 458

Conquest of death and the grave, 182

Conscience, sting of, 66; testimony of,
75; a book of record, 84; a witness,
291

Conversion described, 95;
God, 166, 186

Court, the Divine, 508

Covenant, blessings of renewed, 34; with
beasts, 39; breakers of, 93; in life, 96;
brotherly, 251; God’s undervalued, 326;
unchangeable, 183; blessings of, 711

Covetousness, the deeds of 314; the curse
of, 315, 320; sin of, 502; evils of, 503,
504

Creation. the mirror and mind of God, 325;
affected by sin, 49

Cups, the three, 506

Damascus, judgments on, 247

Day, a glorious, 505; a lost, 149; the
terrible, 206; of judgment, 207; of the
Lord, 289; of small things despised,
613; the remarkable, 692; of judgment
approaching, 727

Days, dark, 4; of rebuke, 79; solemn, of
life, 128; of Gibeah, 132; better guaran.
teed by Christianity, 422: last, 427


a return to


134





Death, sometimes preferable to life, 145 ;
a ruling power, 182; typical of moral
disease, 97; the shadow of, turned into
morning, 284; not always desirable,
290; Horace on, 303; an imaginary
remedy, 387

Defence, the vain and great siege, 472

Deliverance, the wonderful and great
assault, 691

Deprivation, a terrible, 51

Destruction, slow and sure, 80; open and
violest, 82; terrible, 235

Dew, God as, to Israel, 190; laws of, 191;
nature of, 438; Israel as, 435.

Dirge, the funeral, 280

Discovery, a sad, 97

Distress, the howling of, 107

Divorce, unlawful, 716

Drunkards, solemnly warned, 202, 211,
100, 506, 510

Duty, Flavel on, 152.; social, violated, 339 ;
flight from, disgraceful, 349 ; the call to,
563, 375; excuse for delay in, 564;
vindicated by Divine government, 568;

erformance of, neglected, 579; neg-
ected, contaminates character and con-
duct, 578; courage in, 639; failure in
official, 711

EARNESTNEssS, nature of 77; with both
hands, 451

Earth, a wilderness, 31; beautified, 38 ;
fruitful seasons of, 222; Christians
called from, 410; cursed by sin, 455;
double curse of, 569

Edom, judgment on, 250; lessons from its
ruin, 702, 337

Empires, changes of, 5; overthrown, 580

Encampment, the Divine, 649

Ephraim, left alone, 65

Ethiopia, doom of, 545

Evil, threatened, eacaped by return to
God, 275

Example, influence of, 61, 87, 99; pro-
genitors imitated, 163; for noble, Israel
indebted to God, 255

Execution, Divine, and intentions, 261

Experience, God’s appeal to human, 408 ;
revived, 367

Expostulation, the filial, 17

FarrH, Jonah’s confession of, 355; the
triumph of, 467; life of, 510

Fatherhood, a common, 714

Fathers, Jessons from the lives of, 587,
592

Fellowship, Divine recognition of Chris-
tian, 724; needful, 727 4

Fire, Divine, and national fuel, 666; sin a
furnace of, 99, 274; Divine justice a
consuming, 282 ; God contending with,
805; God's people a flame of, 343; the


pot ef, 679





INDEX.





Flock, of slaughter, 668; of Christ, 424;
a wretched, 668; the scattered, and
smitten shepherd, 687

Folly, exposure of, 26

Fountain of earthly enjoyment fails, 188 ;
opened for sin, 685; a glorious, 239

Fretfulness, the folly of, 388; Divine cor
rection of, 389

Friendship, duties of, 51; worldly, re
nounced, 410

Fruit, summer, 312; from a heavenly
orchard, 313

GARMENT, typical, 717

Gaza, judgments on, 248, 541

Gifts, God dislonoured in, 24; of grace,
223

Glory, vanity of earthiy, 143; transitory,
151; God’s, in days of old, 514; of
Messiah’s kingdom, 598

God, the end of life, 6; the living, 14;
fear of, 45; gifts of, 38; forgetting, 565,
98; restoration to, 29, 158, 166; true
seekers after, 83 ; retirement from, 83,
135; cast off, 115; seeking, 83, 149;
perfections of, 161; paternal care of,
153; the penitent’s return to, 158; con-
version to, 166, 186; the only Saviour,
175; the only king, 180; army of, 214;
the great things of, 221; camp of, 216;
walking with, 262, 264; preparing to
meet, 276; a gracious, 386; a jealous,
465 ; keeping from, 549; robbing, 722;
building up without, 703

Good, God the chief, 105; seeking, and
God enjoyed, 287; forsaken, and evil
pursued, 113; cast off, 115, 124.

Goodness, the Lord’s, and fear, 45; me-
morial of God’s, 171; to the ungrateful,
177; of God, and anger, 466; the
Lord’s, 467 ; and beauty, 657

Grace honours a worthless people, 132;
abounding, 189 ; reviving, 190; Divine,
the source of all strength, 613

Gratitude, return for, 67, 701

Guilt aggravated, 121

Hasits, power of evil, 73, 99, 100

Health and Divine favour, 189

Heart, a divided, 141, 151; hardness of,
302, 634, 635; pride of, 334

Bee the converted, 360; the doom of,

7


Help, Divine, and moral suicide, 179

Heroism, spiritual, 679

History, warnings of, 82, 100, 119, 130,
144


Holiness attained, 118; beauty of, 190;
lost, restored, 637; in life, 697; to the
Lord, 698

Honoured, and dishonoured, 132

Hope, the last, destroyed, 481; discour-
aged, 552; prisoners of, 653


INDEX.





House of God, experience in, 367; judg-
ments in, 527; mourning for, 557; a
eall to, 643, 644; worship in, 697

Humility, exalts, 173; Christian, 540;
Reynolds on, 184

Husbandmen, disappointed, 204

Husbandry, moral, 149

Hypocrisy and perjury, 142

Ipo.aTRY, its nature, 5, 144; origin and
effects, 116, 174; abolished, 32, 117;
dishonourable, 133 ; unprofitable, 507;
evils of, 715

Ignorance, of God, 26; covering sin, 71;
inexcusable, 63; of God, a warning to
the people, 53; and to priests, 54; evils
of, 73

Indulgence, sinful, 57; selfish, 178; reck-
less, 299

Influence, extensive, 152; religious, mea-
sured by self-estimation, 173; refreshing,
190

Ingratitude, its source and fruit, 26 ; to

od, 178

Inheritance, the measured, 516

Injustice conceived and practised, 404

Insensibility, religious, 102; under national
calamities, 209; sinful,299 ; rebuked, 439

Israel, restoration of, 13; pride of, 76;
judgment on, 254 ; ruler of, 430; return
of, predicted, 159; glory of, 402; glo-
rious future of, 412; a lion, 436, 438 ;
the true, 555; sin and sorrow of, 680;
purified and reformed, 686

JEHOSHAPHAT, valley of, 231

Jehu, his character and service, 8; pun-
ished, 9

Jonah, his great commission, 347 ; disobe-
dience, 349; roused from sleep, 352;
a sign to the Ninevites, 373; second

’ call, 374; obedience, 375; strange dis-
pleasure, 385 ; prayer, 387

Joy, nature of, 138; withered, 390; God
the perpetual fountain of, 520; of the
redeemed, 556; national, revived, 222;
the religion of, 661; fasts turned into
festive, 641

Judah, judgment on, 253

Judgments, the three, 7, 12; impartial,
75 ; severe, 82; as light, 91; like wind,
184; likea flood,293; administration of,
233 ; timed, 304; great, and great sins,
477


Justice in apparent conflict with mercy,
157 ; turned to wormwood, 283 ; God’s,
proved to a guilty people, 550

Kines, times of, 5; duties of, 70; errors
of, 83; feastings of, 100; fall, 101,
144; ambition, 152

Kingdom, God’s, established, 575, an
asylum, in danger, 342; regained and
enlarged, 342


733


Knowledge, its nature, 54; of God, 38,
49; its rejection, 55; practical, 87; its
pride, 103

Lazoour, vain, 357; profitless, 446

Law, God’s, corrupted, 69; perverted, 418 ;
natural, 99; unchanging, 618; of Moses
remembered, 729

Leaders, guilty, 417

Lies, spoken, 99, 107; fruit of, 149;
injurious, 162; defended, 253

Life, family, 12; quickened, 87; a great
want, 177; a seed-time, 119, 148; a
sinner’s joyless, 126; an artist on, 66 ;
solemn days of, 128; acall to reforma-
tion of, 148 ; help in exigencies of, 176 ;
a Christian’s, a pilgrimage, 257; sad
pictures of human, 269; value of, 270,
282; contrasts in the voyage of, 351;
moral contrasts in, 369; impatient of,
385 ; enigmas of, 493; lessons of, 574;
without God, 703

Light in darkness, 454; despised, 122;
at evening, 693; God as, 89, 91; in
experience, 698

Locusts, the scourging, 304; God’s army,
311

Loss, the irreparable, 336

Lots, casting, 354

Love to the undeserving, 6; wonders of,
41; power of, 46; of God and its
wonderful display, 637

MAaGIsTRATES, ungodly punished, 414; op-
pression of, 285; warned, 415

Man, ingratitude of, 108, 154; weal or
woe of, 104; distressed, 107; sinful,
93; self-corrupted, 133; morally sick,
81; incurable, 399; God testifying
against, 74; God’s method of teaching,
168; the mighty, 657; given up and
God withdrawn, 671

March, the royal, 518

Marriage, a typical, 40; symbolic, 5; un-
lawful, 714; unholy, 715; sanctity of
717

Masters, the two, 39

Maturity required by God, 450

Men, God’s ways and destinies of, 194;
covetous, 317; moral condition of, 426;
wise, 443 ; as briers, 452 ; godly, scarce,
449; four classes of ungodly, 528;
insensibility of, 209; should consider
their ways, 566; of wonder, 606; of
signs, 607, 609; observant, 671+: con-
duct of, determines God’r -elat.on to
them, 579

Mercy and jucgment, 9; or justice, 90;
not sacrifice, 92; God’s delight in, 457

Message, Goc's, demands constant atten-
tion, 199; the man and his, 244; the
solemn, 333; the prophetic, 397

Messiah, person and work of, 626; glory


736


of his kingdom, 598; results of his
mission, 607; the peaceful king, 650;
(cf. Christ)

Mind, a fretful, 388; deserts of, 18

Ministers, lives of, 57; sad transformations
of, 94; Luther on, 91; charges against,
131; examples of piety in days of
calamity, 205; shepherds, 266; true,
416, 712; slumbering, 482; worthless,
673; qualifications of, 602; sins of,
705 ; punishment of, 714

Ministry, an earnest, the want of the times,
77; of alarm, 213; Christian typified
by Elijah’s, 730; work of the, 731

Miracle, the great, 361

Mirth turned into mourning, 27,39; Bridge
on, 320

Moab, judgment on, 252, 542

Morality, corrupt, 49, 315; and ritual, 292 ;
and consumption, 445; commercial,
444

Mothers and children, 15, 38

Music without melody, 292; abused, 300

Name, the memorial, 165; God’s great,
honoured, 707; despised, 711

Nations, destruction of, 9, punished, 50,
621; sins of, detected, 69; spurious
remedies for sickness of, 81; amend-
ment, 86; strength, 123, 134; decay,
185, 138; lamentations, 203; great
calamities, 201, 208; disgrace, 265;
fuel for Divine fire, 666

Nature, laws of, 99, 1830; government,
36; worshippers, 528 ; order of, violated,
147; similitudes, 169; joy of, 205;
indifference to, 326

Nineveh, Jonah in, 374; repenting, 379;
reformed, 380, 382; beseiged and plun-
dered, 473; effaced, 474, 483 ~

OBEDIENCE better than sacrifice, 92, 633 ;
in duty, 570; due to God’s universal
dominion, 708

Obligation of man to God for temporal
mercies, 153, 178, 569, 576, 579; for
religious favours, 701

Observant, the few, 671

Omri, statutes of, 447

Oracles, misery of consulting false, 659

Order in conversion 19 ; creation, 37, 165;
needful, 215

Overthrow, the terrible, 235

Oxen, God’s care for, 392

PaRrpon, none like God’s, 458, 460

Past and present, or once a curse, now &
blessing, 640

Peace, its nature, 709; notes, 712

People, like priests like, 57; controversy
with a guilty, 47, 52; a cast off, 11,12;
worthless, honoured, 132; glory and
grief of, 134 ; God’s method of teaching,
168; suffering and triumph of God’s,


INDEX.





425 ; a hopeless, 802; God's redeemed.
468; ruinous to their enemies, 676;
defended, 453; established, 660; restor-
ed and settled, 663; a listless, rebuked,
439 ; waiting attitude of God's, 552

Persecutors punished, 229; perils of, 596

Picture, a sad, 129

Pit, in the deep, 365; the horrible, 368;
delivered from, 371, 651; an Eastern,
656

Policy, state without principle, 71, 82;
put to shame, 143; short-sighted, of
sinners, 155; honesty the best, 168;
failure of worldy, 337

Posterity affected by sinful indulgence,
61, 296

Power, hidings of Divine, 515; God’s, a
guarantee of truth, 324; all-sufficient
in trouble, 521 ; supreme in the world,
702, 284; nor by might, 611

Prayer, nature of, 164 ; words in, 187, 188;
Young on, 171, 366; and natural law,
220,351; pagan 359; and distress, 366 ;
wonderful answers to, 457; importunate,
486; spirit of, 681

Preaching, Jonah’s, 376; earnest, 513;
Baxter on, 79

Pride, destructive, 9, 103; exalted, 178;
defeated, 110; of heart and conse-
quences, 335; Starke on, 540

Process, the sifting, 327

Promises, great, on special conditions, 605

Prophet, encounter of, with priest, 307; a
true and political priest, 309; lamenta-
tion of, 400

Prosperity, temporal, 5; turned to adver-
sity, 28; danger of worldly, 55; abused,
139; unlawfully gained and taken away,
167; not the glory of a people, 134; of
the wicked short, 175; mora! conditions
of, 641

Philistia, judgment on, 648; converted
remnant of, 648, 649 ;

Places, sacred, polluted, 94; dishonoured
by immorality, 65

Plumb-line, the measuring, 305, 306

Privileges, external, 327; glory of reli-
gious, 402; restoration to lost, 222

Providence, its nature, 40, 106, 196; pun-
ishing sin, 170; corrective measures of,
272; Spurgeon on, 15; dispensations of
God’s voice, 443; carrying out the
designs of grace, 277 ; omniscient, 323;
sifting, 327, 533 ; mysterious, 373; slow,
499; guards the interests of the Church,
624; three aspects of, 647

Punishment, nature of, 136; delayed, 68,
470; sure, 80; future, of iniquity, 181;
grievous, and hereditary sins, 294;
retributive, 478; of sin, or the flying
roll, 619


INDEX.


Purposes, execution of Divine, 261

Pursuits, unsuccessful, 20; evil, 114

Questions, urgent, 291,335,354, 357; God's
answers to man’s, 440 :

Rain, God as, 89; needful, 95; Christ as,
89; withheld, 272, 279; asked of God,
659, 655

Recompense, the double, of God’s people,


Redemption of God’s people, 468; judg-
ments of God a scheme of, 544

Reeds, reliance on broken, 336

Refiner and crucible, 720

Religion, decline of national, 48; vain,
112; enjoying the comforts and refusing
the duties of, 147; honest, 168; growth
in, 191; in common life, 696, 441

Remnant, the miserable, 266; a converted,
695; a saved, 226; the restored, 554,
of Baal, 529; of Philistia, 648

Repentance, late, 75; calls to, 217, 538,
586; described, 161; space for, 216;
benefits of, 217; Brooks on, 84; necessity
of, 538; evangelical, $82

Reproof, Divine, 388

Resistance to God powerless, 468

Resolutions, three, 453

Restraints, Divine, 23

Restoration, the wonderful, 558

Retribution, Jezreel, or Divine, 7; taught
by nature, 15; slow, 80; natural, 114;
the fowler of, 104; righteous, 231, 634;
national, upon sinful indulgence, 300;
and Divine scrutiny, 533

Return, the ungrateful, 108

Revelation, advantages of, 407

Revival, preparation for, 263; of God's
work, 512; in America, 513 ; character-
istics of genuine, 644

Ruin, irretrievable, 483

Rulers, cowardly, 482

SaBBaTH, Bp. Henshawe on, 320; benefits
of, 11

Sacrifice, the required, 356; calm and,
360; day of Jehovah's, 580; the Lord’s,
531; Jewish, ineffectual, 714

Salvation, Divine attributes harmonized in,
36; source of, 226; the Lord’s, 370;
the great, 371; of God, 372; the chariots
of, 516; certainty of, 680

. Satan resisting Joshua, 601; an adversary,

603, 609

Saying, hard against God, 723

Scriptures, slighted, 122; invitations of,
180; excellency of, 196; right use of,
367; influence of, 413 (cf. the Word).

Security, castles of false, 123

Self, exaltation of, 174; indulgence of,
178 ; dependence upon, 187

Selfishness, Harris on, 151; reign of, 405

Service, lip, 187; waiting in God’s, 497;


47


ye


best, required, 450; true spiritual, 705 ;
methods of training men for, 147; weari-
ness in, 440; God's majesty a motive
for true, 708

Shame, separated unto, 133; of sin, 67;
Bp. Taylor on, 510; effect upon nations,
143

Sight, the lamentable, 487

Silence, times of, 286; prudent, 530;
before God, 509, 600

Sin, hereditary, 6,61; bitter, 66; entailed
18; a curse, 49, 128, 152; Divine re-
membrance of, 97; encircled in, 99;
slavery, 84; silly, 103; mischief of
109; corruption of, 182; the beginning
of sorrows, 121; its pursuit, 20, 24, 113.
118; its Divine detection, 69, 71; a lic,
107 ; imitated, 145; evil of evils, 150 ;
and punishment bound together, 446 ;
reproved by virtue, and punished hy
God’s providence, 169, 181; self-de-
structive, 180; renounced, and God
sought, 281 ; manifold and mighty, 285;
God’s disapproval of, 493

Slumbering, a scourge for souls, 297 ;
words to, 352, 363; shepherds and scat-
tered flocks, 482

Society, away from God, 88

Sorrow, Christian, for fallen greatness,
667

Spirit, Holy, poured out as rain, 225;
quickens, 182; dispensation of, 224, 228;
resisted, 294; not straitened, 409; a
spirit of grace, 683; a spirit of suppli-
cation, 681

Stewardship, man’s and God’s claims, 576

Stream, a living, 694

Stupidity in. national calamity, 209

Success, not always given, 4; abused,
491

Suicide, moral, and Divine help, 179

Syria, judgment on, 646

TABERNACLE, the fallen, reared and en
larged, $28; the spiritual glory of, 329

Teachers, ministry of false, 411

Teaching, methods of Divine, 573

Thoughtlessness, human, 566

Thoughts and deed, 98; wicked, 109;
and things, 169

Times, good coming, 12, 32; call from
God in special, 245; men for the, 591

Titles, without honour, 704

Transformation, a sad, 94

Triumph, a song of, 519; worldly uncer
tain, 185

Truth, its perpetuity, 5; nature, 48; a
bond of union, 48; Jerome on, 52

Tyre, judgment on, 249; Volney on, 647

UNBELIEVER, contrasted with believer, 499

Ungodly life and formal worship, 271;
life of, pictured, 118


738


Universe, governed in the interests of hu-
manity, 86; in sympathy with man, 38,
50, 210, 246


VussE.s, dishonoured, 119; domestic, de-
voted to God, 696

Victory, the glorious, and mighty struggle,
655; the complete, 729, 182

Vineyards in the wilderness, 31

Virtue, national, 71; of progenitora a
reproof of sin, 169; gives stability, 175

Visions, of Amos, 307; appointed, 498 ;
night, 169

Visitations, days of, 130; Divine, 266, 267,
659


Voice, God's, and human fear, 512; in
cities, 264 ; in providence, 443 ; hearing,
447

Vows made, 361; debts, 370.

Was abolished, 33, 436; the holy, 233;
preparation of, 471

Warning, from the doom of men, 63;
Bishop Pilkington on, 67; given before
execution, 262; to some, from the fate
of others, 479; of past and present
judgments, 632 ; indifference to, 298

Ways, God’s and man’s, 105

Wickedness, great, and great punishment,
136; great, 477; justified by success,
669

Wind, feeding upon, 162; typical of judg-
ments, 184

Wine, a deceiver, 501; its associates, 501 ;
a cup of, 506

Wolves, evening, 490

Word, the, power of, 91,380; Dr. Thomason,
5; famine of, 318; nature of, 403, 398 ;


Il. QUOTATIONS AND CHOICE


AppIson quoted, 552

Ambrose quoted, 623

Aristotle, on ignorance, 73

Arnot, W., quoted, 84, 560

Arthur, W., on power, 419

Augustine, on rest, 21, 539; habit, 73;
God’s mercy, 158; prayer, 187, 366;
pride, 546; sayings of, 66, 132, 133,
155, 620, 690

Bacon, on mind, 18; vice, 138; riches,
172; knowledge, 195; law, 283 ; vanity,
510; nature, 698; the Bible, 732

Bailey quoted, 508, 575, 578, 645

Barrow, on holy men, 172; peace, 438;
integrity, 448

Baseley quoted, 617

Bates quoted, 559

Baxter, spirit of, 77 ; om earnestness, 79 ;
on preaching. 51


INDEX.





opposition to, 311, 407; does not invali-
date God’s covenant, 326; neglected,
710; cf. Scriptures.

Words, their nature, 195; influence, 4;
kind, 48; blasphemous, 109; idle, 129;
in prayer, 188; God’s, demand attention,
199; humane, 357; comfortable, 589;
stout, 726

Work, personal, 14; God’s, 456 ; wonder-
ful, 488; accomplished, 489; call to,
567; despondency in, 573; Joshua
established in, 601 ; God’s, greater than
man’s conception, 638

World, folly of alliance with, 120; advice
of 310; wisdom of, fails, 337; described,
410; the new, 238; call to quit, 596

Worship, benefit of national, 11; corrupted,
70; external, 121; perverted, 122; true
and false, 159; formal and ungodly life,
271; contempt for, 315; contrasts in,
424 ; God’s estimate of man’s, 707

Wound, the incurable, 399

Wrath, Divine goodness turned into, 177

YourH, vigour of, 32; influenced by
example, 662, 61

ZEAL of idolators an incentive to Christian
life, 423 ; for God against error, 687.

Zion, at ease in, 296; the unprofaned city,
237; enlarged, 328, 329; law out of,
422; foes destroyed, 426, 427; built by
wrong means, 419; mourning for, 557 ;
wonderful restoration of, 558; latter
glory of, 577; leaders of, 678; metro-
polis of a converted world, 238; defence
of, 678, 341; future exaltation of, 694;
conquests over enemies, 680


EXTRACTS FROM AUTHORS.


Beecher, on penalties, 68, 160; hope, 124;
humility, 470; children, 138, 537; justice
of God, 560; duties, 636; God’s un-
changeableness, 726

Bentham, on words, 142

Bernard, St., quoted, 180, 730

Beza quoted, 428

Binney quoted, 461

Blair quoted, 250

Bonar, Dr., quoted, 467, 471

Brewer, on the earth’s condition, 582; evil
example, 259

Bridge quoted, 320, 445, 510, 512, 582

Brooks, quotations from, 66, 84, 259, 419,
448, 536

Browne, Sir T., on ambition, 489; good
habits, 538

Browning, Bishop, quoted, 470

Burroughs quoted. 14


INDEX.





soit on love, 154; misery, 419; riches,

Butler quoted, 278

Byron, quotations from, 324, 677, 684

CaLvIL quoted, 9, 272, 302, 323, 370, 433.
522, 530, 536, 540, 551, 564, 569, 587

Carlyle, on life, 140; silence, 530; edu-
cation, 611; light, 617; penalty, 633;
wonder, 644; the human heart, 670;
heroism, 684

Caryl quoted, 39, 84, 93, 291, 330, 427,
504, 599, 600, 614

ween on preaching, 377; consideration,

2


Chalmers, Dr., on ignorance, 54; fruit of
sin, 51; the world’s vanity, 185; God's
ways, 522

Channing quoted, 511

Charnock quoted, 516, 600, 630

Chatham, Lord, on music, 300

Cheever, on retribution, 15

Chillingworth, on worship, 708

Cicero, on Roman laws, 424; methods
of instruction, 636; doing good, 645;
design of government, 665

Clement, on man, 59

Coleridge, on religion, 96; prophecy, 581 ;
the past, 636; Divine loathing, 670

Collier, Jeremy, on truth, 48, 641; God’s
power, 295; hope, 653

Chrysostom, on the prayer of Nineveh,
382; charity, 540

Confucius quoted, 631, 632

Cowles, on nations, 9; pride, 272; Christ

. the Branch, 606

Cowper quoted, 303, 438, 521, 528, 669,
675; 683, 698

Cox, S., quotations from, 281, 542, 546,
556, 560, 718

Cumming, Dr., quoted, 447

Dr Fok quoted, 444

Devenport, Bp., quoted, 690

Dickens on cruelty, 241

Dryden quoted, 266, 413, 540, 654, 707

Duncan quoted, 279, 470

Dyer, quotations from, 271, 330, 468

Epwarps, on kindness, 154

Eliot, George, on children, 39; kings, 631

Elizabeth, Queen, on cowardice, 649; trial,
602

Elzaz, quoted, 264, 268, 272

Emerson, on beauty, 190; selfishness, 337 ;
good men, 449; silence, 497; power,
665

Epicurus on self-love, 668

Erasmus quoted, 502

Exell quoted, 350, 353, 368, 375, 382

FrirHaM quoted, 295, 420

Fenelon, on good example, 713; temper,
394

Ferguson quoted, 344


7189





Festus quoted, 487

Fichte, on life, 58

Foster, J., on conquest, 185; deliverance.
362; lots, 363; war, 422; despising
small things, 615, 617; Divine jewels,
726

French quoted, 273

Fuller, quotations from, 76, 447, 495, 662

Gay quoted, 679, 704, 725

Goethe, confc-ssion of, 143; on great men,
674

Goldsmith quoted, 283

Gregory, St., quoted, 470, 502, 571

Grindon quoted, 330

Grotius, on holiness, 578

Gurnal, on ingratitude, 39; morality, 92;
promises, 427; pride, 489

Guthrie, Dr., on gray hairs, 102

Ha tg, Sir Mt., quoted, 617

Hall, Bp., on mirth. 39, correction, 63,
591; prayer, 171; discretion, 286; pride,
344, 543; scorners, 271; God's majesty,
698, 708

Hallam, on idolatry, 511

Hare, on ministry of angels, 592; the
future, 330

Henry, Mt., quoted, 24, 26, 55, 428, 448

Henry, Philip, on self-conceit, 103; heaven,
410

Herbert, G., on example, 87; truth, 142;
duty, 564; joy, 662; worship, 698,
709

Hodge, on holiness, 514

Fed. T., quoted, 536, 566

Hooker, on prayer, 188; pride, 501

Howe, on hardness of heart, 64; creation,
330; men of signs, 609; power, 617,
657

Hume, on principle and morality, 90; good
men, 449


JEROME quoted, 52, 158, 275, 413, 536,
560


Johnson quoted, 470, 497, 631, 727

Jones, Sir W., on Scripture, 124

KEBLE, quotations from, 488, 492, 530, 655

Kingsley quoted, 623

Knox, V., on Christian joy, 600

LAMARVINE quoted, 718

Lavater quoted, 645

Layard quoted, 475

Legge, on God’s Word, 403; spread of
Christianity, 438

Leighton quoted, 447, 510

L’ Estrange, quotation from, 559

Liddon, on the Word, 348

Lincoln, A., on slavery, 231

Locke, on Divine revelation, 573

Longfellow quoted, 387. 645

Louth, W., on conversion, 637

Luther quoted, 23. 44, 62, 374, 376, 388,
492, 499, 510, 567


440


INDEX,





Lytton, Lord, on life, 373 ; disappointment,
639


MacCuL1ocs# quoted, 600

McCosh quoted, 635

Machiavelli, rule of, 309, 337

Mackintosh, Sir J., on fortitude in afflic-
tion, 522

Mant, Bp., on honesty, 168; providence,
428

Manton, on station in life, 251; pride,
634

Martin, Hugh, quoted, 350, 354, 357, 362,
363, 375,

Mason quoted, 571, 574

Massinger quoted, 490

Maurice quoted, 310

Mede, on the house of God, 171

Medhurst, on Buddha, 116

Melville quoted, 665

Mill, J. S., on worth of a state, 134

Milton quoted, 160, 251, 438, 341, 344,
377, 420, 446, 522, 540, 591, 732

Moore, Dr., on virtue, 494; political
changes, 625; the events of life, 567

Moore, H., quoted, 394, 609

NaPoLEon, exiled, 119; aftlicted, 18; la-
menting, 21, 127; on war, 72

Neander quoted, 437

Newton, J., on the Bible, 124; a minister,
712

Nichols quoted, 559, 582

OWEN, quotations from, 92, 287, 461, 512,
604

PALEY, on enthusiasm, 77; actions, 641;
perjury, 142; Divine limits, 645

Parker, Theodore, on justice, 631, 644

Pascal, on unity, 684

Payson, on concern for men, 569; small
things, 615

Penn, advice to children, 142

Pilkington, Bp., quoted, 67, 470, 512

Pitt, on gratitude, 177

Plato, on wine, 662 ; covetousness, 502

Pliny quoted, 226

Polhill, on hope, 428

Pollock, on hypocrisy, 161

Pope quoted, 344, 381, 422, 433, 436, 457,
495, 523, 559, 718

QUARLES, on repentance, 161; merit, 187;
prosperity, 321

RALEIGH, Dr., quoted, 359, 363, 366, 384

Renan, on Christ's reign, 651

Reynolds, Bp., quoted, 178, 184, 246, 633,
684


Richter, on nature, 353 ; solitude, 497

Rollin quoted, 674

Ruskin, on evil, 61; justice, 172; God's
kingdom, 428; Divine wrath, 586

massed Lady, on life, 394

Ryan, quoted, 265, 268, 274, 277, 285, 287,
291, 295, 303, 314


a
——$—$—$—$— ——





SanpERSON, Bishop, quoted, 384

Schiller, on peace, 639; beauty, 697

Scott (commentator), quoted, 264, 274

Scott, D., experience of, 184

Scott, Sir W., on ambition, 478

Secker, on marriage, 718

Selden, on Romish priests, 420

Seneca quoted, 211, 502, 718, 732, 669

Shakespeare quoted, 48, 113, 138, 169,
229, 259. 287, 295, 320, 334, 384, 403,
415, 417, 469, 476, 483, 508, 527, 531,
611, 623, 673, 731

Shelley quoted, 428

Sherlock, Bishop, on love, 634

Shute, N., on God’s mercy, 461

Sibbes quoted, 510, 513

Sibthorp quoted, 351, 354, 348, 362, 372

Socrates, on envy, 495; friendship, 687

Sophocles, on truth, 642

South, on covetousness, 56; wages of sin,
623 ; lies, 690

Southey quoted, 428

Speke, Captain, on ingratitude, 177

Spencer, Herbert, on rank, 50; right, 295

Spinoza, on men’s affairs, 614

Spurgeon quoted, 15, 22, 36, 263, 297,
320, 358, 370, 600, 604, 628

Stanley, on Palestine, 523

Stillingfleet, on vengeance, 470

Stoughton quoted, 95, 211,279

Swift quoted, 173, 450

Swinnock, on worship, 645

Tayor, Bishop, on love to the world, 55;
God’s service, 77; justice, 166, 201;
sin, 295,487; prayer, 359; shame, 510;
amendment, 592

Tennyson, on prayer, 311; sorrow, 372;
duty, 636

Thomas, Dr., 14, 27, 33, 80, 241, 268,
344, 656, 732

Tillotson, on habit, 99; guilt, 75; Ged,
86; covetousness, 503

Tyndal, Professor, on matter, 515; prayer,
658 :

Vauexan, Dr., quoted, 459, 499 .

Virgil quoted, 359, 361, 364, 460, 580,
610


Volney quoted, 201, 227, 491, 647

Voltaire quoted, 560, 636

WarBugtTon, Bishop, on prosperity, 68

Wardlaw, quotations from, 592, 598, 604,
608, 612, 621, 642, 655, 660, 662, 681

White, Kirke, quoted, 571

Whitfield, on earnestness, 78

Whittier quoted, 272

Wilberforce, on mirth, 39

Wordsworth quoted, 261, 330, 490, 566

Youne quoted, 39, 226, 258, 266, 298, 808,
313, 426, 460, 477, 503, 536, 540, 560,
592, 609, 722


INDEX 74)


II. ANECDOTES AND ILLUSTRATIVE INCIDENTS.


ApgIAN, College of, 137

Zésop, on pride, 335

Alexander, great army of, 67; kindness
to enemies, 154, 540; besieging Tyre,
232, 249; bestowing a boon, 456; con-
quests, 656

Alma, wounded soldier in battle of, 111

Alphonsus, on clemency, 166

Apollo, oracles of, corrupted, 418

Arnold, Dr., affliction of, 42; pleasures of,
126

Augustine on sea-side, 171

Aurelius, Emperor, on the soul, 279

Baupwin II. and Turks, 234

Beecher, Dr., on saving souls, 77

Bees in Barbadoes, 185

Bolingbroke's, Lord, aversion to the Bible,
154

Bradford, in prison, 366; saying of, 256

Brainerd, earnest and compassionate, 84

Browne, Sir T., a remarkable answer of,
142

Bunyan, saying of, 513

Burke, bereavement, 135 ; loss, 137

Burns, death of, 130

Byron, confession of, 130

Csark, om earthly glory, 151; sword of,

. 458
Caliphs, the, and palace of Zehra, 143

Cambyses invading Ethiopia, 67

Campbell, the poet, on fame, 58

Cecil, on cruelty, 278

Charles V. resigning his crown, 58; battle
of Tunis, 129; motto, 540

Chesterfield, Lord, on life, 66

Chili, disaster in, 1868, 325

Cincinnatus, call of, 245

Constantine building Constantinople, 598

Cornelia, children of, 134

Courtier, Persian, reclaimed, 129

DemosTHENEs reproves Athenians, 47

Diocletian, monument of, 677

Diogenes, on citizenship, 410

Drink, a girl sold for, 241; fall of a sober
man by, 259

Epwarb the Black Prince and King John,
185

Edward VI., prayer of, 157

Edwards, on New England revival, 512

Elizabeth, Queen, on time, 149; Spanish
invasion, 218

Euler and Queen of Prussia, 295

Eyam, plague in the village of, 303

¥Eneon, home of, 191

Gop, the French philosopher on, 98


Goethe, dying request of, 693

Goodwin, Dr., death of, 183

HALL, Bp., on his affliction, 68

Hall, Robert, on affliction, 96

Henry IV. (France), death of, 84

Henry, M., mother of, 549

Henry, Philip, on prayer, 78

Herbert, G., resolve on entering life, 87

Hervey, and dying man, 76

Hill, R., earnestness of, 77

Huntingdon, Lady, and Whitfield, 42

INFIDEL in a storm, 363

Influence, a dying man’s, 152

Jounson, Dr., death of, 693

Jones, Thomas, on providence, 496

KinG, the, and minstrels, 635

a preaching before Henry VIIL,

11

Lincoln, President, assassinated, 684

Livingstone, death of, 170

London, wreck of, 270

Louis IX. (France), on truth, 186; in-
structing a kitehen boy, 690

Loyola, Ignatius, motto of, 711

Luther, in the closet, 164; afflicted, 261

MaccaBazus, Judas, answer of, 654

Malta, plague in, 1813, 303

Mothers and children, 39

NAPOLEON, and little girl, 15; bitter expe-
rience, 130; at Jaffa, 251; at Waterloo,
259, 473

Newton, John, preaching in Newgate, 41

Nicephorus, Phocas, and night cry, 125

Nobleman, dying, regret of, 152

Payson, self-will of, 389; death, 183

Paulinus, on sacking of Nola, 567

Pericles and the gods, 78

Perkins preaching at Cambridge, 218

Persian emperor and scorpions, 259

Philip of Macedon, drunk, 100; at the
games, 501

Philosopher, heathen, on God, 511

Pirates, story of, 635

Pitt deserted, 24

Plato reproved, 137

Priestley, Dr., 521

Pythagoras, on truth, 142

Rivet, Andrew, before the king of France,
677

Robertson, Fred., on life, 151

Rousseau, dying request, 693

Rufus, William, saying of, 12>

Rutherford, letter, 591; saying, 58

Sartors, remarkable story of, 67

Scott, Thomas, death of, 138

48


142


Severus, Emperor, death of, 78

Shelley’s liberality to Leigh Hunt, 42

Simeon, Bp., martyrdom, 129

Soldiers, two, in valley of Jehoshaphat,
241

TAMERLANE, eyes of, 324; mercy of, 540

Tarrington, Earl of, 140

Vanz, Sir Harry, execution of, 426

Vico, Marquis of, on communion with ,
Christ, 509 |


(INDEZ.








Wepsster, Daniel, responsibility, 71

Wesley, John, mimicked, 279

Whitecross, on refining, 726

Whitfield, on trial, 690; at Glasgow, 218;
home, 196

William of Normandy, 140

Williams, missionary enterprises, and
chief, 186

Wycliffe, bones of, 259

XERXES, madness of, 33


IV. TEXTS ILLUSTRATED OR EXPLAINED.


Gen. ix. 9, p. 653; xliii. 30, 153 (notes).

Lev. xxvi. 23, 263

Num. xiv. 24, 376

Deut. xv. 9, 633; xxxii. 10, 132

Judges x. 16, 671

1 Sam. xiv. 38, 661

2 Sam, xxiii. 5, 721

Job xiii, 4, 659; xvii. 9,679; xx. 12, 445
Xxviii. 26, 658; xxxiii. 13, 702; xxxill.
17, 23 : ay,

Psa, xi. 4, 647; xxxix. 6, 674; Ixiii. 8, 6;
Ixxvi. 5, 677; Ixxviii. 55, 516; Ixxvili.
57, 110; Ixxxvii. 4, 599; cxix. 18, 111

Prov, xi, 18, 148; xi. 31, 667

Eccl. v. 16, 118; vii. 14, 632; xii. 13, 105

Isa. viii. 13, 712; xliii. 23, 717; xxxvil.

_ _ 17, 657.

Jer. xi. 8, 588
Jos. ii. 23, 17 (nobea); v. 2, 68 (nodes).


Joel ii. 29, 225

Amos iii. 13, 14, 267; v.

Mic. vi. 8, 442

Zech. i. 6, 588; iii. 7,605 ~

Mal. ii. 15, 709 (notes); 716

Matt. ii. 6, 431, 433; xii. 40, 362; xvih
11,731; xxiv. 15, 672

Luke i. 17, 720, 731

John iv. 24, 708

Acts xi. 29, 652; xvii. 28, 714

Rom. ch. i., 184; ii. 29, 721; ii. 32, 652;
ili. 12, 13; v. 20, 619

1 Cor. iii, 13, 728; iv. 9,606 a» 11, 58%

Ephes. v. 1, 714

Col. i. 11, 660

1 Tim. v. 24, 619

Titus ii. 7,712

Heb. iv. 18, 647

Jas. i. 17, 724


9, 286





























BS491 .P65/vol20
The Preacher s complete homiletical com





BS
o4/
PbS

70 THEOLOGY LIBRARY

SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY

AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA
91711


A A A 4 3 ) JOf Gd
oh ck) ch OE hee ;


Aiea te

CRE
Wy
ad


eS


Saeco oe
SSS


Seo
Reise
SSeS eS


Soar,


eN.
=


Mkt ¢
Ath es ik die
¢ OID
LAS
GAA
Madr he
A Ady
GOLA AA
Me,


Aas


ita
URRY
Orr rent eased ABH Ass dae
rae ve Meee Wa ane ed tas ee
RA et ty attain aa AAA
Pat Mla A At kat tea TAR Bt
Tae dd eae aude as A HA eee vf
Te gt ad ga add gd ity A Anat
OME itd tN Mn talaga deg tont ! vy AHS,
oy te ayy f ths Pia ade
AMON a PGRN ig a 4 Mtns OUe


Sos


Reve


PA asd

Parry cs

rae ion ‘ 7 Me y ay

CAE AA Aas dette HAE ALTE SUG Maen
i esas


SS


TN


aR


AU
Me PAA A dtl aI EAL
PA A SR eh
egestas digi
Et Wit Aids Add 2 se NW A
: CUES
¢ y ; nuit
Bedale cai is Bay
an Asie


SS

So
ene
Se


A
BOOM ALA
aren igre


SO"


aetna


he

pinnae

eae hi
Pel


SS


vi
WAdtaes
aban
Pit ar re aa ae
Se Oe at
PEO IMS II
Nee Aig
ran
AY


=
Se


tad my
HS OUT Ty asta stale
SR aa Se SRL Rot Asta
Medes aE rea AU
fabs MG GGG 5 Meee sy
gaat, EEE Ho| A d Ait
fits a seg ste Smit od Critters é # $ 4 vA ae y
zie Aah aey
see etal Saeed ett hel ciati


3


SR A ae Lt

cileueyniareseae as ahsh d 1 Parner

Be nnate ate ike \ i POT de
ier ie ‘ ; aie faaanee saat, ‘i Eee ee dys,

: PES PLE EN Wi rae ¢ Syelas ae ee Senay habit

7“ sine dad aa de ye Ags mi

Raya dese ff,

ae,

iy


ei cietedede essere ity sande etn i ae eat
dete agit tea ‘ CAS , DOR Pale yas
eae Ratatat a ah
Tabak ease eran a eed Sahay Areatetatanaianaie ange
fa ty BGA ig sah) Ba aes 4 a esas
Ae i H e Meats alueenet ataltoge rs ede tay 3 3
stata a Oe eae arartsageateeeifaa aioe Aaataaeds CA aay
ELAN OLR SCM MPS E PM LTT ature PMD POD TIG
PEEVRCH SOHC Rear OL PRES ar eM aT HEL An Pane
OECD PEMD LH PA IE oc PEM Hy Py LIONS oe

Api ptatysahecas 4 sutaietad Atal ake A Perea

Race é Idee ets aha pelea ti geats $ ayaaee YD DS
OE ale i af itatasacetaiatasate 4 RSP
Eat ae Fad vit Passes rat aPhereie ares
SCH Snare ae Ly eae sar hetpta 7; Andreea saan ataeceseaes eta
sisi stems esata Pi Peele year f PAPaP Paar aTAEa OE pep?
Petr eae Aer iaiengase ans testes TRS fas agignaedialaeay
meee tat ae Fi Peunoutantan caudal ae esas atin PPMP PA Via ats £
Nash ea DP ralaeiey: % NAD Amok She U rare es

4 tye hte


ahah y aha
OR SLOP Prva *
PRA rtongeaae Bone an Peet ee SaT ese at oi f
arwistahanay CPLTOES Pur APaP ECD gE be Jas data gs Bape eases gees ghee
REE eee Malad eaegrenghgig tate) ¢ PpaaNey, Wea asgt ute SPAPAPAT ALE A Be DET ATA As ade
Hadas eats Mek aut ioelataataeanen neat Toei 3
SPAN A , BIPM ELLCAC AC Ac EHO Pa PPL ys ahabatseaeasat
fateh get i DIR Dei MONS PLAID TALL Fiegtan Aen,
at Sha metunzeasebea7’ ees ae
nates 4
tata
ots : i Be Seasiahsea ty
gh ty kaa ane HOGues ‘| TOE aEae r
428, ats, 4 ; Cras i ae
JELIOR es esyeetinsrasehy' r ange
SUNN Pah Pa OP Peay
eb beh i ‘¢ Rae ge sen eN,
he uA 4
4


mh


4

Paka sana
PLP DO bear aah ‘
Rt ay tahatangretpipag hone” % CCL aay tata
EA eA A negate CSE Red


hae we


Keres


Bape fidarnvase eas oh Sat} PPP ats rata? :
AG a NGaRadesas Moletatpeu A pSeaeie gies MeeE Eee
phe nah GaN ot pT esd bahar fan
Boats ese Petar} USER Oe Ra on
< fave res aS Hae SMa OLe Mra Sah pe ar BeaT aS i
She leech enetys es ssetgnevate DOH Mea DL Mi A espe tag suis
pepanhai gia BPE i aaa : x. De krsan Spray Ra Sad, strate
A Nutgh Ao Wea exer en 28 Peat aigtate Sepa Heo One)
aes 2% i Musee Hoe h EAI CRORE rata) Meares
Paseh Ne tahe ata a uceaai ga dag tae, SEA aus ek asthe piak
Rie ateraaynsrsiaeaea nea stent ave kl hata ye Coxsone Earn rayelay TAs Ae
ROCHON TER Oh PROS rt POLL Rrra : OES hres atys
BAGG RU Haetaineaeet sag 2 ean iciearanay
PRATAP ae Rio Baap 4S Sakgsaseahshen tae
. : Ke FOP EAE Ph PEPE SL PUh PLL ROL DPI PAPI SEN Ponty as
Lee 4 ‘i; S ere ta esas ah vavave SPaPer Sead: NOLP Pisa rue Lrar ent or se
s Naey eaastans Wah saan e Teh A 1UNS A, z aN uses a if ASy iy ahotah as 3 Paras hanna at
Sarat REM Mitoasspsammearrase na aswiedy 2 4b sa ryaku aaa a NTNU PAM Peat rer)
Fete Atte ih i PAL i rar Paton Rash aR enetssa sated tg Waaetaey ue H ea eK,
y Teta Sac PU CELE PEE RII BOS PRPs Da EE 3 : OSD
fee Tat ne ) SUPE RER IER PPS On SNE Aidt Gael Paraeat
MMs en MER 1 : : SHES et HOLL athe
- Femme C! Aida et as, Saeed vy abe! s aaNet PSP) Ay fe DUS he is
Sen ont : ‘ 2 é Pe ate abn, % PPR OL Sas mS
SAMA UATE “ 2 ie i LRP aS Pee Pa array NERC Bas hipaa tae
Noida nae , te 4 2 Syaea ete hae as pease dlasbekangee Kite
Nee nets tad ‘i RRC MOED PAR Ara Ea § CRA ret xp he aka igee yey Nae e
SN pa ERS PLL eh MAL SEOC DEM ISS T i ta th PPE LE bebe heats re ka bats ea CRN MUN EIN IIS
Pr PN NCL CHS Rag Pane CARRS SRC DC Rh oS RL ALEC Ue PAP PATO) PD SAN wera,
AES 13 DEEPLY SPLUL PS a he PACT) sas, ¢
i


etstat a’


4 us Tithe TEENS TS PRE niea
Ap MON ET i Tagiesig taney BoPN LP as 4 ay
FER EEEROR PCED REL EL Athi eal sane HMA esateia tas an seergeage wn. DASNY,
Ais DREN RC ED POPS Ph Pare PPD OL AL ER PARS Mow IQA Ne Vi be es Watagtatse tas SaaS SP PaPe Pate
Soya aes Pas hewlg ahs, 5 ie Pryeat Ta y4 5 4 aha kana eng ee aE P rs PL
Doo yes FS ar Mebe ABN Nats hee We bee hPL PLEL th Po Fh Pha MS Paihrari leather are
ti PLO I ; : EPP rarane! 4a S, Saat asa eats Ena hus aS ee bey
SPPe etre, stew i Meat trans eyetota tg kasanane
. ¥ SPCR IP ES Patera SPL PL reps Pathe g
SPIEL OLE Pasta pS 4 SPPaPRE RED TaheveNey,
EON Pie SRP Ok ALPINA PA Ph aps rare Ph
RP PEDSRE LILES BUMP SPAT SERRA X Foeses,
puch MachP ht are rb Acar Rts yesh eS, ‘ aS ethers
pppoe Sheath K pita Test8
: eDerahaaghe
rf a
Kone
ales


Se ICEL EL Peay ts
te ot Cee ha 7; NevE v
aight MW Nev eta neag te sass aan
Seren eR MR AL ENG PS el SPL
Pera a SHEE ie
aN, KAN ates


! ;
5 1 324, e)
Sane PR eh HM Ba
ty s2 HEPDPR ORT CEL OS to PP Pa PhS

eh ehisestetasuetetes Nee
10, ny SOLS,

BG PAS Cain eS ec aR ACO DSP : reap ee earn A
Pe PeeWee Wet Nas aIUN eh, ay DOPE ACEO Moh tS PS Pa

MP Teh ea Pat Sian? ora ‘ agate Ng i CPPS Po Pal

OLE bS SPaPA Ts aE may aaete ) PnP : AQ ie
: ‘ % 4 % Reis


Pe ee
Kok


Wee,


Wrtiegves
SPE NIEGN oe Ora aA
tid pao oy aa aay SP
s PPP Nene pe MOHELA
Yt SUA aa ate TES,
en te tg s IE erect Gate ete Ne sah EOP RNS
LOPAP RRA SEE DOR A 4 ‘ NohINS. Tey m SSSI Natoa age tetet tak
“ eae ‘ 5 Shalt CORNAUAO DCA WER DR an PL EM Re PARA A . at
3 fab amo teNy VAR NETG S SONA EAA ADD DASHES Ba BSP Pa RID OD Pal ahs WASPS PAR PS DS
VA le b state) PTL ORRCRC ACD PPA RLRD PAS Ee ih ba ba rah & MVE, CRSA Neo Ne
ey SY ar py des eet aT AUN, arnt Cot
is Wom aA tet Tete aN.
\ aC:


ALAN
REIGN AN,
Bee By eeey * PDEA SAG,
5 * i ne We orate
SSA. . Wey, Parhratheks Wty Veer r a
ey AS SUN Nomee ase ne nets Weta ty tae cs Fal Sa
wrath SIN as, PREP OAPS PE RSPRG rage thy
POAT ACEO ALN, PAPE PLAOS Pah hy AN
PPR EARS Pah?


.
ROR a, a
Stat Pa sous, 5. temas AG
nt Sree A ) %, a Lado ate i Yo
Ja tadhas : ANNU ON TRY SHA
WANs NW oadhaa Pash beth Recbth BS
4 BE ats fT ORCL Ae
gee Paearhra. hens
PREM SRIDEECRERC HEI PASTS Ba
SEN PER MPN Noe EAE NN : :
Y i) ete VaR SUN Pe RP Pa STOPS Mehta
OWN e a8 te Wa eT NS AR,
VAAN RY,
s ame


We
Hy PUSERr ASL bbc Ri
Mnoveaea a ACA RtSTa AS PaO
Steen ANG Apa yaa
SORA tats Baits EPSP taPa tials
PLES TASHA E as Rea Pai Mephesto
mess SAMSON ASSAM Petite
ane Met, Peet .,
eM, \ No 3, ! Pa SParat bid eS
Nah 5 " Seta
ci GOAN A PEALE tt No
oF ‘; Lehr tae) ov ‘ N, s i PLTA 0S Perera cara obs Neve,
Noah * z Saas. x Ray aN. 8
phat Asie, S, naa CREP P OS ER SAS
My A, % ., NTIS Pa tt Pe Pa)
yea aes < Meee nT ae
Ghee DELP R RRS Ba era eariene tos
tes Mae hen WAL
ih Pa a is Teh heh a Pa +5 , Pi
oh Sata sea A SOS?
MN ATT, NOVOM NNN
MAY Ne
“ SATAN TOTS NAY ij
DEARMOND A


phat!
Sta
Nass
Dera ANSoo WSS NE NY, '
NAST ITSM AR ATOR Tag ts NG Sy Ma ae : tah SPARS Bh? AN
APSE PM ML DCR De DA DAT Bi te Oh Dh RA Da PSO TATE UTR UNS PCAN TON W9,
MEN NES Mea TO NN alaTest * N t SOSMCAC AESOP a)
4 TON i MENON TENE NEA G RUNS TONS NG Tata yu, TNR ely,
A Te ON RMN NACI, ae, tN
a aa PALACES DLP RA PRA Wh Po a Dh a a ea
WN 4) MA MONEY N, 4 Tyee WY,
rade tath 5 eee arehy


PAB SRD

NEWT
Pea eanCN
: s
SAP


Petia)
1
Ss
