3 
u 7. Oo 
ZOO 
> te iL 
Amy 
LiLo 
(i 

Sol 

a s oe 
mw 


Neill ww 7 2 5 


Ned 


4 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


httos://archive.org/details/gospelofjohnO000gaeb 


The 
MOFFATT 
NEW TESTAMENT COMMENTARY 


Based on The New Translation by the 
REV. PROFESSOR JAMES MOFFATT, D.D. 
and under his Editorship 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


The Moffatt 
New Testament Commentary 


Now Ready , 
MATTHEW 
BY THEODORE H. ROBINSON, D.D. 
MARK 
BY B, HARVIE BRANSCOMB, PH.D. 
Le OSD 
BY W. MANSON, D.D. 
JOHN 
BY °G. H. C. MACGREGOR, D.D. 
THE ACTS OF THE 
APOSTLES 
BY F. J. FOAKES-JACKSON, D.D. 
ROMANS 
BY C. H. DODD, D.D. 
I CORINTHIANS 
BY JAMES MOFFATT, D.D. 
II CORINTHIANS 
BY R. H. STRACHAN, D.D. 
GALATIANS 
BY GEORGE S. DUNCAN, D.D. 
PHILIPPIANS 
BY J. H. MICHAEL, D.D. 
HEBREWS 
BY THEODORE H. ROBINSON, D.D. 
COLOSSIANS, PHILEMON 
AND EPHESIANS 
BY E. F. SCOTT, D.D. 
THE TPASTORAG EPISTLES 
BY) E.)|F-.SCOTT) D:D: 
THE GENERAL EPISTLES 
BY JAMES MOFFATT, D.D. 
Other Volumes to follow 


THE MOFFATT BIBLE 
A NEW TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE 
BY JAMES MOFFATT, D.D. 
In One Volume 
Also NEw TESTAMENT separately 
VARIOUS EDITIONS 


THE 
GOSPEL OF JOHN 


BY 


G. H. C. MACGREGOR 
D.D., D.Lirr. 


(8 


LONDON: HODDER AND STOUGHTON 


First published. . . . November, 1928 
Reprinied Te on el arch, 035 
Reprinted . » . . . « April, 1936 
Reprinted . . . . «. November, 1937 
Reprinted . . « « « October, 1938 


Made and Printed in Great Britain for Hodder & Stoughton, Limited, 
by C. Tinling & Co., Ltd., Liverpool, London and Prescot. 


EDITOR’S PREFACE 
MOFFATT’S NEW TESTAMENT COMMENTARY 


THE aim of this commentary is to bring out the religious 
meaning and message of the New Testament writings. To 
do this, it is needful to explain what they originally meant 
for the communities to which they were addressed in the 
first century, and this involves literary and historical criticism ; 
otherwise, our reading becomes unintelligent. But the New 
Testament was the literature of the early church, written 
out of faith and for faith, and no study of it is intelligent 
unless this aim is kept in mind. It is literature written for a 
religious purpose. ‘ These are written that ye might believe 
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.’ This is the real 
object of the New Testament, that Christians might believe 
it better, in the light of contemporary life with its intellectual 
and moral problems. So with any commentary upon it. 
Everything ought to be subordinated to the aim of elucidating 
the religious content, of showing how the faith was held in 
such and such a way by the first Christians, and of making 
clear what that faith was and is. 

The idea of the commentary arose from a repeated demand 
to have my New Testament translation explained ; which 
accounts for the fact that this translation has been adopted 
as aconvenient basis for the commentary. But the contri- 
butors have been left free to take their own way. If they 
interpret the text differently, they have been at liberty to 
say so. Only, as a translation is in itself a partial com- 
mentary, it has often saved space to print the commentary 
and start from it. 

As everyman has not Greek, the commentary has been 
written, as far as possible, for the Greekless. But it is based 
upon a first-hand study of the Greek original, and readers 

v 


EDITOR’S PREFACE 


may rest assured that it represents a close reproduction of 
the original writers’ meaning, or at anyrate of what we 
consider that to have been. Our common aim has been to 
enable everyman to-day to sit where these first Christians sat, 
to feel the impetus and inspiration of the Christian faith as 
it dawned upon the minds of the communities in the first 
century, and thereby to realize more vividly how new and 
lasting is the message which prompted these New Testament 
writings to take shape as they did. Sometimes people 
inside as well as outside the church make mistakes about 
the New Testament. They think it means this or that, 
whereas its words frequently mean something very different 
from what traditional associations suggest. The saving thing 
is to let the New Testament speak for itself. This is our desire 
and plan in the present commentary, to place each writing 
or group of writings in its original setting and allow their 
words to come home thus to the imagination and conscience 
of everyman to-day. 

The general form of the commentary is to provide a running 
comment on the text, instead of one broken up into separate 
verses. But within these limits, each contributor has been 
left free. Thus, to comment on a gospel requires a method 
which is not precisely the same as that necessitated by 
commenting on an epistle. Still, the variety of treatment 
ought not to interfere with the uniformity of aim and form. 
Our principle has been that nothing mattered, so long as the 
reader could understand what he was reading in the text of 
the New Testament. 


JAMES MorFFATT. 


PREFACE 


SCHOLARSHIP in this country for long clung to the tra- 
ditional view of the Fourth Gospel, and we still lack in 
English a satisfactory commentary on the whole text written 
from the standpoint of the more moderate among recent 
continental commentators. That the present volume will at 
all adequately fill up a very obvious blank I can hardly hope ; 
but it is offered as an attempt, however imperfect, to give 
the English reader in commentary form the results of the 
modern criticism of the Gospel so admirably set forth, e.g. 
in E. F. Scott’s The Fourth Gospel, its Purpose and Theology. 

The aim of the commentary is critical and exegetical rather 
than homiletic. Everything else has been subordinated to the 
attempt to elucidate the primary meaning of the words in 
their original setting. My aim, so far as possible, has been 
to allow the Gospel to interpret itself. Hence the large 
number of cross-references which I hope will not distract the 
more cursory reader, but will, I bclieve, repay the attention 
of the closer student. Throughout the earlier chapters, 
where the exposition is of necessity fuller, the text has been 
printed in blocks at the head of each section, the salient 
clauses being repeated in black type thoughout the exposition. 
In the later chapters it has been found possible simply to 
weave the text into the comments, so emphasizing it by the 
use of black type that text can be isolated from exposition 
at a glance. This plan has alike saved space and made it 
possible to read the book not as a catenation of snippets 
but as a continuous piece of prose. 

Where one is conscious of having entered into the labours 
of so many scholars only general acknowledgment is possible. 
My indebtedness to E. F. Scott’s masterly volume will appear 
on every page, and is far from exhausted by the numerous 
quotations I have ventured to make. Of modern com- 

vii 


PREFACE 


mentaries I have found most helpful Bauer’s revision of 
Holtzmann’s volume in Handcommentar zum Neuen Testa- 
ment, which is probably the most satisfactory commentary 
we possess. Loisy has proved most stimulating, if only 
because one is so often provoked to disagreement. Of the 
older commentators Westcott is still indispensable and Godet 
often wonderfully suggestive. In preparing the Introduction 
I have been much helped by Schmiedel’s Die Johanneischen 
Schriften, and by Dr. B. H. Streeter, whose relevant section in 
The Four Gospels is quite admirable. My book appears too 
early to admit reference to the late Dr. Bernard’s volume 
in the International Critical Commentary, which is understood 
to be in the press. One more tribute duty and affection 
alike demand—to my own revered teacher, Prof. H. A. A. 
Kennedy, of New College, Edinburgh, to whom for inspiration 
received at his feet and for encouragement in the years since 
one of his pupils is sincerely grateful. 

It was with some hesitation that this commentary was 
undertaken five years ago at the request of the General 
Editor ; it has been carried through as a loved Parergon in 
the midst of a busy city ministry; and with even greater 
diffidence it is now offered to ‘everyman.’ That he will 
agree with all my conclusions is not to be expected, especially 
as the English commentaries to which he has had access 
may not have prepared his mind for findings which for a 
generation have been the commonplace of the study. My 
prayer is that this book may enable him to understand better 
the meaning and message of Jesus Christ for the great age 
in which this Gospel was written, and thereby for the age 
in which he himself lives. Amid many engrossing critical 
problems I have tried to remember that author and readers 
alike can merit no sterner rebuke than the Master’s own: 
“You search the Scriptures . . . but you refuse to come to 
me for life.” 


G. H. C. MAcGREGOR. 


St. JoHNn’s AND RENFIELD CHURCH, GLASGOW. 
July, 1928. 


viii 


INTRODUCTION 


No book in the New Testament has provoked conclusions 
more diverse than has the Fourth Gospel. ‘ The book,’ it has 
been said,! ‘is a Janus-like reality.’ It presents now this 
face, now that ; it is full of contrasts, even of seeming contra- 
dictions, and this union of opposites has led to the most 
divergent views regarding its character and intention. Here 
we find inextricably interwoven reminiscence with reflection, 
history with its interpretation, narrative often intensely 
pictorial and dramatic with a profound philosophy of religion. 
This has been recognized by critics of all schools. Lightfoot ? 
speaks of ‘the accurate historical narrative of the facts, 
which forms the basis of the Gospel, and the theological 
teaching which is built as a superstructure upon this founda- 
tion.’ Sanday * defines the Gospel as ‘ a blending of fact and 
of interpretation.” Drummond‘ suggests that an Apostle 
may have ‘ portrayed the Master of his heart’s devotion in 
colours drawn from half a century of vivid experience of his 
indwelling spirit, and blended together the actual and ideal 
in lines which are no longer separable.’ Ernest Scott > sums 
up admirably when he says, ‘ The author, writing in a period 
of transition, is continually striving to find place within the 
same system for opposite types of thought and belief’; he 
has made his work a ‘ union of opposites,’ and a ‘ blending of 
various tendencies.’ Little wonder that, with a personality 
so elusive at the bar, the verdict of scholarship is still held in 
suspense. The problem is at least as many-sided as the 
solutions propounded for it. 

1 A. E. Garvie, The Beloved Disciple, p. xiii. 

3 The Fourth Gospel, tts Authorship, p. 151. 

3 Criticism of the Fourth Gospel, p. 169. 

* Character and Authorship of the Fourth Gospel, p. 397. 

5 The Fourth Gospel, pp. 10, II. 

ix 


INTRODUCTION 


I. THz FourtH GOSPEL AND THE SYNOPTICS 


1. The Evangelist’s Knowledge of the Synoptics 


All criticism of the Fourth Gospel must begin with an 
attempt to relate the book to the Synoptic Gospels. And 
firstly, to what extent was ‘ John’ (the proper name is used 
throughout without prejudging the question of authorship) 
acquainted with the three earlier Gospels, and what use did 
he make of them? Of late it has been generally assumed 
that he knew and used Mark; but ‘ that he knew either of 
the others seems more than doubtful.’ Perhaps this state- 
ment should be so far modified as to say that the evidence, 
while supporting the conclusion that John did not use 
Matthew, favours the theory that he is dependent on Luke 
as well as on Mark. That John knew Mark intimately can 
hardly be questioned, and is sufficiently proved by a repro- 


duction, which cannot be accidental, of a number of the 


out-of-the-way phrases of Mark. Compare, e.g., Jn. 6:7 


|) with Mk. 6:37, Jn. 12:3 and 5 with Mk. 14:3 and 5, Jn. 
\I4:3I with Mk. 14: 42, Jn. 18:18 with Mk. 14:54, Jn. 


18:39 with Mk. 15:9, Jn. 5: 8-9 with Mk. 2: 11-12. It 
may be noted also that where there is verbal variation between 
the Synoptics, John usually agrees with Mark as against 
Matthew and Luke. We are not, however, to suppose that 
John necessarily wrote with a copy of Mark open before him. 


| “The materials he uses have all been fused in the crucible of 


his creative imagination, and it is from the image in his mind’s 
eye, far more vivid than the written page, that he paints his 
picture.’* Yet quite clearly John presupposes a knowledge 
of Mark on the part of his readers, and can therefore omit 
explanations which would otherwise be necessary (e.g. 3 : 24). 
‘The fact that this Gospel is written, so to speak, on the top 
of St. Mark, is the key to many difficulties,’ * 

That John was familiar with Luke’s Gospel may be argued 


Stanton, The Gospels as Historical Documents, p. 2204 
2 Streeter, The Four Gospels, p. 397. 
* Charnwood, According to Si. John, p. 89« 
x 


INTRODUCTION 


from the remarkable points of contact between the two 
Gospels in regard to the story of Martha and Mary. John 
assumes that his readers are acquainted with the story of the 
two sisters as told by Luke, and shows a peculiar interest in 
elaborating the balder Marcan narrative by a somewhat 
artificial cross-identification of persons and places as between 
Mark and Luke. It must suffice to refer the reader to the 
notes on 11: 1 ff. and especially 12 : 2 ff., where John’s version 
of the anointing is obviously the result of a conflation of 
Mark and Luke. There are also notable resemblances 
between the accounts of the Passion in Luke and John. Com- 
pare Jn. 19: 1 with Lk. 23 : 22, where both Evangelists regard 
the scourging by Pilate as an attempt to induce the Jews to 
be content with something less than the death penalty ; 
Jn. 20:3 ff. with Lk. 24:24, to which John’s story gives 
detail and precision ; Jn. 20: 19 and 20 with Lk. 24: 36 and 
40 respectively (but in both these cases the parallel words in 
Luke are rejected by Hort). Literary dependence on Luke 
seems suggested by a comparison of Jn. 18 : 10 with Lk. 22 : 50, 
Jn. 19: 41 with Lk. 23: 53, Jn. 20: 12 with Lk. 24: 4 (two 
angels, not one as in Mark and Matthew), and especially Jn. 
13:38 with Lk. 22:34, where John’s wording is almost 
identical with Luke’s just where the latter differs from Mark’s 
(14:30). Finally, we find the most notable coincidence 
between John and Luke in the fact that both place the first 
Resurrection Appearance to the Disciples at Jerusalem, not 
(as do Mark and Matthew) in Galilee. (See also notes on 
4247, 6: 3; 20 2209.) 

Between Matthew and John there are but few points of 
contact and none sufficiently striking to prove literary depend- 
ence; Streeter! notes a number of minor agreements of 
Matthew and John against Mark, but denies that they have 
any significance. The evidence for John’s use of Matthew is 
quite inconclusive, and the probability is that he had no know- 
ledge of it, or else that knowing it he ignored it on account 
of its Judaistic and Apocalyptic outlook. 


1 Op. cit., p. 410 ff. 
xi 


etna, 


INTRODUCTION 


2. The Fourth Gospel compared with the Synoptics 


To pass from the Synoptic Gospels to that of John is to 
breathe a different atmosphere. The contrast is so sharp 
that the question forces itself upon us: If the Synoptic picture 
of Jesus is to be accepted as relatively trustworthy, what 
relation does this Fourth Gospel bear to the actual facts of 
our Lord’s life? True, the similarity of view-point, to which 
the first three Gospels owe the name ‘ Synoptic,’ is by no 
means complete. Each is written from a different angle, and 
only relatively to John do they share the ‘common view.’ 
Yet taken together they present a sufficiently consistent 
picture; and although ‘the day is now over, or almost 
over, when the Fourth Gospel and the Synoptists could be 
played off against each other in a series of rigid antitheses,’ ! 
a summary of the main points of contrast must be 
attempted. 

(a) Chronology.—Mark leads us to suppose that Jesus’ 
ministry began only after the imprisonment of the Baptist 
(Mk. 1: 14), while John quite definitely asserts that the two 
ministries overlapped (Jn. 3: 23 ff.). The two narratives can 
be brought into harmony only by assuming that the first call 
of the inner circle to discipleship is dated back by John toa 
period prior to the opening of the Synoptic narrative—a 
suggestion which is to be rejected (see note, p. 46). 

From the Synoptic narrative, though a definite period is 
never actually named, it would appear that Jesus’ ministry 
covered only a single year, while John lengthens it to a period 
which includes at least three Passovers (2: 13, 6: 4, II: 55), 
and must therefore have lasted something over two years. 
But even the Synoptics contain hints that Jesus visited 
Jerusalem oftener than the condensed narrative of Mark 
might lead us to suppose, and if this be so John’s chronology 
may wellbe nearer the truth. Atwoanda half years’ ministry 
would agree better with the following three chronological 
data—that Christ was born under Herod, who died 4 B.c. 
(Matthew), that ‘he was about thirty years old when he 

1 Moffatt, Introd. to the Literature of the N.T., p. 540. 
xii 


INTRODUCTION 


began to preach’ (Luke), and that he was crucified in A.p. 
29 or 30 (according to patristic tradition and most modern 
reckonings). (See also note on 5: 1.) 

There is an important discrepancy concerning the day of 
Jesus’ death. According to all four Gospels the Crucifixion 
took place on a Friday. But according to the Synoptics this 
was the 15th of the month Nisan, the first of the seven days 
of the festival and the day immediately following the celebra- 
tion of the Passover meal (Mk. 14:12, 15:1, etc.), while 
according to John it was the 14th of Nisan, the day on the 
afternoon of which the Paschal lambs were slain, to be eaten 
the same evening after sunset, when the first day of the festival 
had begun ; for amongst the Jews the new day, in this case 
the 15th, began with sunset (Jn. 13:1, 29; 18:28, 19: 14, 
31, 42). From this divergence it follows that according to 
the Synoptists Jesus’ supper with his disciples on his last 
evening was the regular Passover meal, while according to 
John the Last Supper took place on the evening before the 
Passover, and when the Jews were eating the Paschal lamb 
twenty-four hours later, ‘Christ our Passover’ had already 
been slain. In this case John’s date is almost certainly cor- 
rect. There are hints even in the Synoptics that Jesus died 
before the Feast (e.g. Lk. 22 : 15, interpreted as meaning that 
the desire was not fulfilled); and indeed secular business 
such as the Arrest, the Trials, the buying of spices, not to speak 
of the Crucifixion itself, would have been impossible during 
the most sacred hours of the Festival. On the other hand 
it is argued that the Synoptists must themselves have been 
conscious of this difficulty, and would hardly have dated the 
events as they have if they had not been sure of their ground. 
There is also some force in the argument that, whereas the 
Synoptists have no motive for changing the correct date of 
the Crucifixion, it would be nothing more than characteristic 
of John were he to make the change for purely dogmatic 
motives, in order to emphasize Paul’s saying that ‘ Christ 
our Passover is sacrificed for us’ (1 Cor. 5: 7) by making it 
appear that Jesus died at the very time when the Paschal 
lambs were being slain. (See also notes on 1:29, 18: 28, 

xill 


INTRODUCTION 


19: 29, 31.) But the balance of evidence is strongly in favour 
of John’s date. 

(b) The Scene of the Ministry, according to the Synoptists, 
is laid almost entirely in Galilee, and, while they mention 
certain journeys outside Galilean territory (Mk. 7: 24, 8: 27, 
10:1), they record no visit to Jerusalem until that which 
resulted in Jesus’ death. John, on the other hand, concen- 
trates attention on a ministry in Judea and in particular at 
Jerusalem, and when Jesus does appear in Galilee it is to stay 
there only for a brief interval (2:1ff., 4: 43 ff., 7:1 ff.). 
Doubtless the Synoptic and the Johannine representations 
are not mutually exclusive, especially if it can be argued that, 
with the transposition of chapter 5 to follow chapter 6, John 
has ‘ brought in the whole of his additional matter relating 
to a ministry in Jerusalem and Judaea partly before ’—this, 
however, we have ventured to question above— and partly 
after the limits of the Galilean ministry, as they are marked 
out in the Synoptic Gospels.’! The discrepancy may be 
partly due to a difference of choice of matter natural enough 
if the Fourth Gospel incorporates the testimony of someone 
who had a special connexion with Jerusalem and records 
incidents which have come within his own experience. The 
Synoptics do not explicitly deny a Judean ministry, and 
indeed in such a passage as Jesus’ lament over Jerusalem 
(Mt. 23 : 37), with its suggestion of repeated rejection after 
efforts often renewed, hint that our Lord may have frequently 
visited the capital before the fatal Passover. Nevertheless 
allowance must be made for the idealistic tendency of our 
Evangelist, who desires to show that Jesus, so far from being 
an obscure teacher in such an outlying region as Galilee, 
taught and died at the headquarters of the national religion. 

(c) In his placing of certain tncidenis and his analysis of 
the determining factors in the course of Jesus’ ministry, John 
departs: from the Synoptic tradition. According to the 
Fourth Gospel the ‘ Cleansing of the Temple ’ occurred at the 
beginning of the ministry, while the Synoptists evidently 
regard it as an act of provocation which finall, precipitated 

Stanton, op. cit., p. 229, 
XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


Jesus’ death. That there were actually two ‘cleansings’ 
will hardly be maintained, and though it may be argued in 
favour of the Johannine placing that a protest against the 
desecration of the Temple would be called for on Christ’s 
first public appearance, such an act whenever performed must 
inevitably have provoked arrest, and the balance of probability 


is against our Gospel. Once again John is influenced by | 
dogmatic motives and by the desire to secure a suitable intro- 
ductory incident to illustrate the theme, which is the key to/ 


the first section of the Gospel, that the new gospel of Christ 


is to supersede the old religion typified by the Temple. Hav- | 
ing thus antedated the ‘ Temple-cleansing’ John is under | 
the necessity of substituting another incident as the event | 
which precipitated the dénouement, and this he finds in the | 


story of the raising of Lazarus, a miracle of which the Synop- 


tists know nothing. That John is at variance with the earlier | 


Gospels, even with regard to the event which provided the 
occasion for the arrest, is one of the greatest difficulties facing 
the harmonist. 

(a2) In his attitude to miracle John presents an interesting 
contrast to the Synoptists. As regards the type of miracle 
recorded it is noticeable that the cure of demoniacs, a class of 
miracle which not only, according to the Synoptists, was 
the most frequently performed, but also to the modern mind 
is the most credible, is entirely omitted. Or the other hand 
‘nature miracles,’ that is, miracles performed on inanimate 
objects, such as the turning of water into wine, the multiplica- 
tion of the loaves, the walking on water—a type of miracle 
which presents peculiar difficulty—receive special emphasis. 
This is in line with John’s tendency everywhere to heighten 
the miraculous. Those on whom the miracles are wrought 
have been ill for thirty-eight years, born blind, dead for no 
less than four days. Corresponding with this tendency is a 
new conception of Jesus’ motive in performing miracles. 
According to the Synoptists it is because he is ‘moved with 
compassion’ (Mk. 1: 41, 8:2), according to John Jesus’ 
‘ signs ’ are evidence of his divine power (and the more miracu- 
lous the more convincing the proof) and therefore ‘ display 

XV 


INTRODUCTION 


' his glory’ (2:11). Whereas for the Synoptists faith is a 
conditién of miracle (Mt. 13:58), John regards miracle as 
the supreme inducement to faith (14:11). Hence we find 
that according to the Synoptists Jesus, when asked for a 
‘sign’ as a prop to faith, refuses it (Mk. 8:12) ; whereas in 
Jn. 2: 18-22, when met with the same request, he does not 
decline it, but points forward to his miraculous resurrection 
(the similar reference, which in Mt. 12: 40 is added to the 
Marcan passage quoted above, seems due to a misconception 
of the true meaning of ‘ the sign of the prophet Jonas ’), with 
the result in the sequel that when his disciples ‘ remembered ’ 
they ‘ believed.’ At the same time one admits that a twofold 
attitude towards the miraculous may be traced throughout 
the Gospel, for passages do occur in which faith based upon 
miracle is depreciated (e.g. 20:29). Wendt, for example, 
recognizes this when he distinguishes passages in which the 
term ‘ works’ is used of miracles from those in which ‘ signs’ 
is used, assigning the latter, in which the evidential value of 
miracle for faith is emphasized, to the ‘ evangelist ’ as distinct 
from his original ‘source.’ In other words the Gospel, in so 
far as it may reflect the authentic tradition of a ‘ witness,’ 
approximates to the Synoptic point of view regarding miracle ; 
and while the distinction which we have drawn in the main 
holds good, it is no doubt true that ‘the difference of con- 
ception between the Synoptic and Johannine miracles may 
be greatly exaggerated’; and ‘ while it is true to say that in 
the Johannine miracles the motive of compassion recedes into 
the background,’ nevertheless it is equally true that ‘ even in 
the Synoptic miracles something much greater than the com- 
passionate sympathy of Jesus is hinted at.’ } 

(e) We turn now to Jesus’ discourses, and again feel the 
sense of contrast. And first in respect of their form. The 
reader of the Synoptics will agree with Justin Martyr’s verdict 
when, speaking of ‘the very doctrine delivered by Christ 
himself,’ he says: ‘Short and pithy are his discourses; no 
sophist was he’ (Apol. 1:14). The Johannine discourses 
impress one as discursive and dialectical, a limited number 

1 R. H. Strachan, The Fourth Evangelist, pp. 164, 166. 
xvi 


INTRODUCTION 


of great themes being repeated again and again on the most 
varied occasions. Yet, while this distinction is broadly true, 
our Gospel is not lacking in just such concise and axiomatic 
sayings as characterize Jesus’ speech in the Synoptics.!. No 
doubt to the casual reader they are almost lost in the Evangel- 
ist’s elaboration of them, but a more careful study reveals 
them dotted here and there like gems in a cunningly wrought 
setting. In the Synoptics the most characteristic and 
fascinating of Jesus’ discourses are the parables. But the 
Fourth Gospel does not contain a single true parable, the only 
passages which approach the parabolic form (e.g. ‘ the Vine,’ 
15:1-8; ‘the Good Shepherd,’ chap. 10) being rather 
“allegories ’ or figurative discourses. 

The same contrast is presented in respect of the content of 
Jesus’ teaching. In the Synoptics we find practical precepts 
adapted to concrete situations. Jesus deals with life’s great 
moral problems, the relation of Man to God and to his fellows ; 
he speaks little of the mystery of his own Person and of his 
relation to the Father. His teaching deals almost exclusively 
with the question, What must one do to enter the Kingdom 
of God? In the Fourth Gospel, on the other hand, we find 
set discourses, abstract rather than practical in character, 
abounding in enigmatic allusions and the elucidation of mis- 
understandings, which often in themselves are not a little 
artificial, and bearing constantly on such subjects as Christ’s 
own divinity, his relation to the Father, or on mysteries of 
faith such as the indwelling of the Spirit or the efficacy of the 
sacraments. But nowhere is the contrast greater than in the 
demands which Jesus makes upon his followers. In the 
Synoptics indeed Jesus requires faith, but there ‘ faith’ is 
rather an act of moral ‘trust.’ In our Gospel his demand is 
for belief in the divinity of his own Person. ‘ What he asks 
of people is not, as in the Synoptics, moral conduct, but 
acceptance as true of his assurance that he has come from 
heaven.’ * 

But again one must beware of pressing too far the contrast 


1 Cf. Drummond, op. cit., p. 18 f., and p. xxiv below. 
_ 2 Schmiedel, The Johannine Writings, p. 42. 
6 xvii 


INTRODUCTION 


with the Synoptics. There must have been a mystical as 
well as a practical side to Jesus’ teaching, and there are pas- 
sages of a distinctly ‘ Johannine ’ flavour even in the Synop- 
tics. The most remarkable examples are Mt. 10: 32 ff., and 
in particular Mt. 11: 25 ff.; and if such conceptions have 
found a place in the Synoptics at all, they cannot have been 
merely passing thoughts, but must reflect a real element in 
Jesus’ teaching. 

(f) But above all when one passes from the Synoptics to 
John one is conscious of an alteration in the portrait of Jesus 
himself. True, the earlier evangelists agree with John in 
' sketching the picture with a majesty above all human stand- 
ards. Yet they have no hesitation in recording incidents 
which suggest Jesus’ common humanity. John, on the other 
hand, often seems deliberately to suppress such traits. The 
’ Synoptists record that Jesus was baptized by John like any 
| other seeker for the Kingdom ; our Evangelist tells only how 
John witnessed the descent of the Holy Spirit on the chosen 
, Christ. In our Gospel we have no hint that Jesus was subject 

to human temptation, nor that in an agony of human weakness 
' in the Garden he prayed that the cup of death might pass 
from him. In fact such a prayer is implicitly denied (see 
| note on 12:27f.). Similarly the cry of dereliction from the 
' Cross is omitted. From Mark (e.g. I: 35) we learn that Jesus 
_ often sought a renewal of strength in prayer. But how John 
thinks of Jesus’ prayers is clear from 11: 41f., where at 
Lazarus’ grave it appears that Jesus did not need to pray 
for his own sake, but only that he might confirm the by- 
standers’ faith. To this may be added the emphasis placed 
by John on Jesus’ omniscience (cf. 1: 42, 48; 2:24, 4: 16, 
6:61, 64; 5:6, 13:18, 16:19), and specially on his 
inviolability and what has been termed his ‘ self-determina- 
tion * (7:30, 83.20, 5936107300120 36, 28: 6 sq5anE) 
It is a postulate with John that Jesus can be compelled by 
no external force, that he chooses his own time and at the 
last ‘lays down his life of his own accord’ (10: 18, and see 
notes on 2:4, 7:10, 1:76, 23% 27,, etc.), ~Such Shuman 
characteristics as do appear in the portrait of Jesus are 

XVIil 


INTRODUCTION 


somewhat artificial (e.g. I : 35, where see note), or seem to 
have been deliberately introduced with the purpose of com- 
bating current ‘ docetic’ teaching, according to which Jesus 
was human only ‘in semblance’ (cf. notes on 4:6, 6: 20, 
19 28,°34); 20°20). 

(g) Finally we miss in the Fourth Gospel the sense of any 
development in Jesus’ understanding of his own Person and 
Mission. The great turning-points, so clearly marked by the 
Synoptists, by which he passed to a fuller realization of his 
vocation—the Baptism, Temptation, the Confession of Peter 
after the rejection in Galilee, the Transfiguration, the Institu- 
tion of the Supper—all are ignored, or so transformed and 
misplaced as to lose their real significance. Accordingly we 
find that, whereas in the Synoptics it is only comparatively 
late that even the inner circle recognize their Master as 
Messiah while from his hearers as a whole the secret is hidden 
until the final Passover, in this Gospel Jesus begins to publish 
his own personal claim from the first and is openly proclaimed 
as Messiah by the Baptist before ever he enters on his public 
ministry. Here at least there can be no doubt which is the 
truer representation ; John, writing long years after, has had 
his perspective foreshortened and has lost that sense of develop- 
ment which is still evident in the work of the earlier evangel- 
ists, whether or no they themselves were conscious of any 
such development. 

Certain conclusions are inevitably suggested by such a 
comparison as the foregoing between the Synoptists and the 
Fourth Gospel. Admitting that when John alters details of 
the Synoptic story ‘he is not flying in the face of a universal 
Church tradition embodied in three separate Gospels,’ but is 
in fact differing from only one Gospel (Mark), on which the 
other two depend, and that not a Gospel ascribed to an 
Apostle, so that ‘to speak . . . as though there were a three- 
to-one agreement against John is quite misleading,’ when as 
a matter of fact ‘ the chronology of the Life of Christ is simply 
a question of Mark against John’!; admitting again that 
sometimes a certain harmony between two apparently diver- 

1 Streeter, op. cit., pp. 418, 424. 
xix 


INTRODUCTION 


gent accounts may be attained ; admitting finally that even 
when we seem reduced to a categorical ‘ either—or ’ there is 
much to be said for the Johannine representation ; neverthe- 
less the contrast presented by the two traditions remains 
sufficiently striking, and we cannot but feel that the scale is 
weighted in favour of the Synoptists, who write at an earlier 
date and are not influenced, at any rate so consciously as is 
John, by motives which are admittedly doctrinal and apolo- 
getic. We are left with the impression that a writer who is 
evidently primarily dependent on Mark, yet at times makes 
so injudicious a use of his sources (as e.g. in the account of the 
‘anointing,’ 12:1ff.), and in the end gives us a Gospel 
differing so signally from that of his predecessors, is hardly 
likely to have been himself an Apostle. Yet the free and 
masterful way in which he deals with earlier material suggests 
that he writes with a certain sense of independent authority. 
At any rate the hypothesis that behind the Gospel lies some 
such authority would considerably ease the critical difficulties 
arising from a comparison with the Synoptics. 


II. History or Dipactic DRAMA ? 


1. How far is John a Biographer ? 


When estimating the value of the Fourth Gospel, we have 
been too ready to criticize it for not conveying information 
which it never professes to convey. Admittedly the Evan- 
gelist’s chief motive is not historical. If he is a biographer at 
all, then he is a biographer whose aim is not to convey facts, 
but to impart spiritual truth; a mere selection of incidents 
has been made, and the selection has been dictated by the 
desire not to communicate information, but to bestow upon 
the reader ‘life’ through faith: ‘ These signs are recorded so 
that you may believe Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and 
believing may have life through his name’ (20:31). This, 
one admits, is partially true also of the Synoptists. They too 
portray Jesus not merely as seen by the outward eye, but as 
interpreted by the Spirit and appropriated by faith. And 
indeed all true history must involve a subjective as well as 

es 


INTRODUCTION 


an objective element. But in the Fourth Gospel ‘the 
reflective element is less unconsciously and more creatively 
and artistically present.’! Even to-day there is much 
biography whose main end is not informative but didactic. 
In the introduction to a volume of biographical essays the 
author,’ after quoting John Howe’s summing-up of his own 
purpose in a funeral sermon, ‘the little that I shall say of 
my subject shall be, not by way of history, but of character,’ 
continues as follows: ‘This admirably expresses my own 
motif in these lectures. . . . In the present case it does not 
at all come within my province to tell the external story of 
any of my worthies. I assume that the life itself is in each 
case less or more familiar to my readers... . My main 
design is from selected characteristics of their Life and Life- 
work to incite and quicken to higher and nobler service of 
the Master in our day and generation. This being so, I am 
perfectly at ease . . . in anticipation of being charged with 
“improving ’’ Howe and Baxter, Rutherford and Henry, as 
the old divines called their reading of lessons from special 
events and circumstances. To draw such lessons and to drive 
them home into heart and conscience 1s my purpose and 
endeavour. . . . If anyone choose to fling stones at me as 
“didactic,” ‘‘ hortatory,” “‘ moralizing,’’ and so on, so be 
it!’ Truly the Fourth Evangelist might retort in exactly 
similar terms to some of his modern critics! He does not 
profess to give us an exhaustive survey of Jesus’ life, but 
selects those incidents which have the richest didactic value. 
Thus we have seven typical miracles each chosen as a frontis- 
piece illustrating some great spiritual truth which is forthwith 
developed in a discourse by Jesus. The Gospel thus becomes 
a kind of ‘ historical sermon’ which reminds us of the later 
Jewish homiletic method known as ‘ Haggadah’ in which 
religious teaching is driven home by the all egorizing of sacred 
history. In choosing a ‘Gospel’ rather than a treatise or 
‘epistle’ as the medium of his instruction, John shows 
himself conscious that the Christian life must always have 
1 Strachan, op. cit., p. 23. 
2 A, B. Grosart, Representative Nonconformists. 
pea 


INTRODUCTION 


the sanction and quickening influence of a historical example. 
For the living of that life nothing less will suffice than the 
dynamic fact of the Incarnation of the ‘ Word ’ of God in the 
historical Jesus. Hence John chooses to impart Christian 
doctrine not in the abstract but through the works and the 
words of one who himself comes forward and says: ‘ A new 
commandment I give unto you’; ‘I am the Light of the 
World, the Bread of Life, the Resurrection and the Life.’ 

The Gospel may be well described as a didactic meditation 
on the drama of Christ’s life. Indeed the author is essentially 
' dramatist rather than historian. ‘ The earthly life of Jesus 
in this Gospel appears as a dramatic interlude in the life of 
the Eternal Logos.’ The Gospel is a drama? in which the 
protagonists are Jesus, the Word of God, and the evil powers 
of darkness and unbelief. The Prologue is the Prelude; the 
dramatic climax is reached at the Passion, the moment when 
Jesus’ ‘hour’ has come. Hence the material is chosen 
primarily for its dramatic effectiveness, and many of the vivid 
details, which have often been claimed as marks of an eye- 
witness, may well be regarded rather as the creation of a vivid 
dramatic imagination. The Gospel abounds in dramatic 
moments—the declaration of Messiahship to the Samaritan 
woman, the withdrawal of Judas into the outer darkness, 
the meeting of Mary Magdalene with the Risen Master—while 
‘dramatic irony’ is apparent in Peter’s boast that he will 
lay down his life for Christ, in Caiaphas’ unconscious prophecy 
that Jesus should ‘ die for the nation, and not for the nation 
only,’ in the Pharisees’ plaint that ‘ the whole world is gone 
after him.’ 

Such a dramatic interpretation must provoke with new 
urgency the question of the Gospel’s actual historical value, 
As will be seen below there is every reason for supposing the 
existence of a substratum of authentic history ; but probably 
criticism has been too much concerned to distinguish such a 


1 Strachan, op. cit., pp. 14, 15, 31. 

2 Hence the form of the analysis of the Gospel adopted below 
(pp. 1-2), for which the writer expresses indebtedness to Von Soden, 
The Books of the New Testament, p. 403 ff. 


XXli 


INTRODUCTION 


substratum, as if therein lay the Gospel’s chief value. A living 
religion will always rest on something more than the necessary 
basis of historical credentials, and it is not the least of our 
Evangelist’s merits that he appreciates the peril of tethering 
Christian faith and doctrine and practice too closely to the 
exact details of particular events in the earthly life of Jesus. 
On any estimation the religious value of this Gospel must 
always be greater than the historical. If it is history at all 
it is history written sub specie aeternitatis and under the 
impulse of a living religious experience. Hence to compare 
the Evangelist’s work with a dramatist’s is not to impugn its 
religious value, for in this case the drama expresses not merely 
the imaginary emotions and opinions of the figures which 
move across the pages, but the writer’s own deepest convic- 
tions. ‘Every scene he depicts . . . is the distilled essence 
of something that has been pondered upon and lived out in 
actual life until it has become of the very texture of his soul.’ ! 
And herein lies the chief value of the Gospel ; it is a transcript 
of the individual religious experience of a great Christian soul 
who is convinced that he also has known the Lord as truly and 
intimately as the first Apostles. ‘ This indeed is the abiding 
value of the Gospel, that it brings Jesus before us at once as 
a historical Person, and as the invisible Lord who is ever 
present with his people.’ ? 

2. We revert to the discourses and ask whether we may 
seek in them authentic sayings of Jesus. Undoubtedly in 
reporting Jesus’ teaching John reflects not the Jewish tradi- 
tion, which sought to preserve, as nearly as possible in their 
original form, the epigrammatic dicta of ‘wise men,’ but 
rather the Greek method, which loved to put into the mouth 
of the speaker not the ipsissima verba spoken on a given 
occasion, but the sentiments which seemed to the writer to 
be proper to that occasion. John’s practice indeed is not 
unlike that of Thucydides, who in a famous passage (I, 22) 
frankly admits that this is his method. But we have a better 
parallel still in Plato who, admitting that he owed his inspira- 
tion to the teaching of Socrates, never claims to reproduce 

1 Streeter, op. cit., p. 383. 2 E. Ba scott, op.vcit:, p; 359: 
xxiii 


INTRODUCTION 


the ipsissima verba of his Master, but rather puts into the 
mouth of Socrates philosophical theories which, though in 
germ Socratic, are in their full development those of Plato 
himself. Asin the Platonic Dialogues the speeches of Socrates 
owe not only style and language but also most of their matter 
to Plato himself, so in the case of the Fourth Gospel. In 
Jesus’ discourses we have John’s attempt to give his contem- 
poraries a systematic summary of Christian teaching as he 
himself, under the inspiration of the Spirit of Jesus, conceived 
it, and his first readers, familiar with current Greek practice, 
would never suppose that Jesus’ speeches were to be accepted 
as a verbatim report. Indeed so little careful is the author to 
distinguish between his own thoughts and those that he puts 
into the mouths of his characters, that it is sometimes im- 
possible to tell where the speech which he is reporting ends 
and his own comment upon it begins. Note especially chapters 
i and 3. ‘ He seems nearly as careless to dissever what he 
himself says (in full persuasion that he expresses the mind of 
Christ) from what Christ actually said as the old prophets 
were in distinguishing ‘‘ the word of the Lord’”’ . . . and the 
testimony which they themselves thereupon proceeded to 
bears 

We do not of course question the probability that John 
has preserved many authentic sayings of Jesus which, it may 
be, provide the core round which a discourse is developed. 
We think of such sayings as: ‘ Unless a man be born from 
above, he cannot see the kingdom of God’; ‘I am the bread 
of life’; ‘If any man thirst, let him come unto me and 
drink’; ‘I am the light of the world’; ‘ He that loves his 
life shall lose it ; and he that hates his life in this world shall 
keep it unto life eternal.’ There is a striking saying of 
Ignatius (Eph. 15) that ‘he that truly possesseth the 
word of Jesus is able to hearken unto his silence.’ John, 
drawing upon his treasury of such authentic sayings as we 
have quoted, seeks as he meditates upon Jesus’ word to fill 
in also ‘ his silences’ and so interpret to his age the mind of 
his Master, But he would claim that his interpretation has 

1 Charnwood, op. cit., p. 55. 
XXi1V 


INTRODUCTION 


come to him through direct inspiration from the risen Christ. 
For did he not believe in a Spirit who should ‘draw upon 
what is Christ’s and disclose it to his people’ (16:15; cf. 
wa asit5i05 26) 2 

3. No understanding of the Gospel is possible without an 
appreciation of the part played by symbolism. What then 
for John is the relation of fact to symbol? Let it be remem- 
bered initially that the symbolic or allegorical use of an 
incident does not necessarily imply that it is not ‘ true.’ And 
if we ask with Pilate, What is ‘ truth ’ ? we are reminded that 
the ‘true’ and the historically accurate are not necessarily 
the same thing. Truth is sometimes better served, even by 
the historian, by the interpretation of the spirit of great 
events and the principles which inspired them, than by a 
meticulously accurate narrative of facts. Thus Baron F. 
Von Hiigel writes in the Encyclopedia Britannica: ‘The 
Fourth Gospel is the noblest instance of this kind of literature, 
of which the truth depends, not on the factual accuracy of 
the symbolizing experiences, but on the truth of the ideas and 
experiences thus symbolized.’ Yet the truth of this dictum 
may be admitted without denying that there may be in the 
Gospel a basis of actual history. The probability is that 
John did not, at least consciously and deliberately, invent 
stories for the sake of their allegorical meaning, though he 
may well have modified and elaborated them, particularly in 
minor details (e.g. numbers, dates, names, etc.) with a sym- 
bolical purpose in view. That is, he selects out of a mass of 
traditional material such stories as when thus elaborated will 
best serve his purpose. Generally speaking, it is likely that 
he believed in his facts and recorded little that he did not 
suppose to be historical, even though his belief may not always 
have been justified. Yet it is not merely the bodily aspect 
of Jesus’ story with which he presents us but its soul. To 
John facts and their symbolical meaning are related as flesh 
to spirit ; the former may be a necessary vehicle, but it is 
the latter which really counts: ‘ What gives life is the Spirit ; 
flesh is of no avail at all’ (6:63). It isin this sense that the 
oft-quoted words of Clement of Alexandria are to be under- 

XXV 


INTRODUCTION 


stood: ‘Last of all John, perceiving that the bodily facts 
had been set forth in the other Gospels, at the instance of his 
disciples and with the inspiration of the Spirit composed a 
spiritual Gospel.’! In the peculiar Philonic language current 
in Alexandria the word ‘ bodily ’ was used to denote the literal 
sense of Scripture and of facts in general, while the ‘ spiritual ’ 
signified their figurative or allegorical meaning. Clement 
therefore means that it is the distinction of this Gospel to 
present the soul of Christ’s life-story rather than its body, and 
to interpret the inward and eternal significance of the Chris- 
tian revelation. And herein lies the peculiar value of our 
Gospel considered as history. ‘In history, as in religion, 
it is the spirit that quickens, and unless we can penetrate the 
spirit of great historical transactions, interpret the principles 
out of which they spring, and throw ourselves with sympathetic 
imagination into the passions which animated the great 
human drama, we miss the only truth that is worth receiving.’ * 
As even one of our most advanced critics admits, John’s 
idealized history is ‘ genuine and true because reflecting the 
heart’s faith of a great Church in a great age.’ 8 


III. Aims AND INFLUENCES 


The past quarter of a century has given us so many excellent 
studies‘ of the purpose and environment of the Fourth Gospel 
that no more is necessary here than the briefest sketch of the 
Evangelist’s aims and the influences which moulded his 
thought. His aims may be classified as (1) interpretative, 
(2) polemical. 

1. The books of the New Testament all had their origin in 
the practical needs of the early Church, and owe their vitality 

1 Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., vi, 14. 

2 Drummond, op. cit., p. 29. 

3 B. W. Bacon, The Fourth Gospel in Research and Debate, p. 14. 

“ The reader is referred specially to the volumes by E. F. Scott and 
R. H. Strachan already quoted, to Percy Gardner’s Ephesian Gospel, 
and, for a more conservative estimate, to Drummond’s Character and 
Authorship of the Fourth Gospel, and Lord Charnwood’s According to 
St. John. Schmiedel, The Johannine Writings, represents more radical 
criticism, 

XXvi 


INTRODUCTION 


to the fact that they sprang directly out of the life of that 
Church at various periods and in given circumstances. Our 
Gospel can be understood properly only as the Evangelist’s — 
attempt to interpret the Christian faith to the Church of his 
own day—a largely Gentile Church, with its headquarters at | 
Ephesus, probably early in the first decade of the second | 
century. ' 

John seeks to interpret the Gospel of Jesus in the light of 
history during three-quarters of a century. By the time he 
wrote the last representatives of the Apostolic Age had passed 
or were passing away, the bonds with Judaism had been 
definitely broken, and a Church now largely Gentile had 
become the custodian of a religion which, severed from its 
historical origins, was unfolding itself into a far wider signifi- 
cance. If the Christian message was to live for a new age, it 
must be re-interpreted in new terms. To understand Christ | 
it was necessary not only to know the actual facts of his life. 
and teaching but also to take into account the great religious 
movement to which those facts had given the impulse. Hence. 
almost unconsciously John alters the perspective of the earlier 
Gospels, and looking at Jesus’ life across the intervening years 
reads into words and incidents the point of view of his own 
later age. A good example is 4: 35-38, where see notes. 
John ‘ presents the facts of the divine life, not as men saw them 
at the time, but as they appeared long afterwards in the 
retrospect of an enlightened faith.’ + 

Again John interprets the Gospel in the light of personal 
religious experience. He seeks so to portray the Jesus of 
history as to emphasize the abiding power of the Christ of 
_ faith. As Ernest Scott well remarks, once Christianity was 
separated from its historical beginnings it was in danger 
‘either of evaporating as a philosophy or petrifying as a 
mechanical tradition,’ and it is John’s supreme service that 
by insisting that the inward fellowship of the Spirit was even 
closer than the outward one with the earthly Jesus, while at 
the same time giving the historical fact of Christ’s incarnation 
its full value, ‘he ensured for all time that the Christ of 

1 Scott, op. cit., p. 6. 
XXVii 


INTRODUCTION 


inward experience should be no ideal abstraction, but the 
living Master who had once been manifest in the flesh.’ ! 

Yet again John interprets the life of Jesus in the light of 
Paul’s teaching. It is disputed whether John has to any 
great extent been directly influenced by Paul, or whether his 
theology should not rather be regarded as an independent 
and collateral development. Probably those are nearer the 
truth who hold that John owes a deep debt to his predecessor. 
It is true that the language of the Fourth Gospel differs from 
that of Paul, and that some of the Apostle’s greatest con- 
ceptions appear to be insufficiently realized by the Evangelist. 
See for example notes in the commentary on faith (p. 80), sin 
(pp. 29, 218), the significance of Christ’s death (pp. 28 f., 265). 
Yet, apart from special doctrines, John’s whole outlook upon 
the Christian revelation is determined by Paul, for it was the 
latter, not John, who first conceived the glorified Christ of 
experience, rather than the human Jesus of history, to be the 
real object of faith. In minor details of doctrine also John 
and Paul touch at innumerable points—in the matter of the 
relation of faith to works (6: 29), in the function assigned to 
Christ in creation (1:3; cf. Col. 1: 16f.), in the claim that 
believers are spiritually free (8 : 31 ff. ; cf. Gal. 4: 21 ff., etc.), 
in the recognition that in Christ Jew and Gentile are one 
(4: 21-24; Eph. 2:11ff.). It was inevitable that the 
religious outlook of the Church at Ephesus, which had been 
a chief centre of Paul’s activity, should be strongly coloured 
by Pauline doctrine. It was John’s part to prevent that 
doctrine being ‘ sublimated into a philosophy ’ by relating it 
to the historical facts of Jesus’ life. ‘ The glory which Paul 
ascribes to the exalted Christ is thrown back by John on the 
actual life on earth. . . . The Lord who revealed himself to 
Paul in the experience of faith is to the evangelist one with 
Jesus Christ, who had lived and taught and suffered. Even 
then, while he still dwelt among us, “ we beheld his glory as 
of the only-begotten of the Father.” ’? So important a 
motive has this interpretation of the Pauline message been 
thought, that the ‘ Beloved Disciple’ is frequently regarded 

1 Tdem, pp. 8-9. 2 Scott, op. cit., p. 51. 
XXxViii 


INTRODUCTION 


as an idealized Paul, while several critics have accepted the 
ingenious conjecture that under the figure of Nathaniel Paul 
is actually introduced into the Gospel. 

Finally our Gospel sets out to interpret the Christian story , 
and Christian experience to the new world of Hellenism by 
translating the Gospel into a form intelligible to Greek modes 
of thought. This must be discussed below in connexion with 
the doctrine of the Logos. Meanwhile suffice it to say that, 
whether or no the actual key to the understanding of the 
Gospel is to be found in ‘a transmutation of Jewish and 
Christian ideas into their Greek equivalents,’! John’s great 
achievement was to transplant the Gospel of Jesus into a new 
soil before its roots had time to wither. 

2. There can be little doubt that certain definitely polemical 
aims can be traced in the Gospel. The controversial tone of 
Jesus’ discourses as reported by John is intelligible only if 
they are related to the contemporary situation of the Church 
in John’s own day, and treated as the Evangelist’s attempt 
to repel attacks, to which Christianity was subject, in the 
early years of the second century, though on account of the 
narrative form in which John’s work is cast this controversial 
interest is on the surface less obvious than in Paul’s letters. 

In the Gospel we see carried back into Jesus’ own lifetime 
the Church’s defence against contemporary Judaism which 
had set itself to combat Christianity by maligning the story 
of Jesus and ridiculing his claims. Hence John’s eagerness 
to defend the career of Jesus from misrepresentation. So far | 
from being an obscure missioner, Jesus taught at the head- 
quarters of the national religion (7 : 4, 18 : 20) ; though Judas’ 
treachery might seem to hint that the Master could hold the 
loyalty not even of his closest intimates, the truth is that 
Jesus foreknew and for his own ends permitted the betrayal 
(6:64, 13:11); so far from Jesus dying as a malefactor, 
Pilate could find no fault in him (1g: 4) ; while the supreme 
‘offence of the Cross’ is overcome by John’s characteristic 
teaching that it was self-determined and a step necessary to 
Christ’s achievement of ‘glory.’ In a word just as ‘the 

1 Manson, The Incarnate Glory, p. 37. 
XXIX 


INTRODUCTION 


Jews,’ irrespective of their different sects in Jesus’ own day, 
appear in the Gospel as a kind of official opposition to Christ 
(see note on 1:19), so do the objections brought by them 
against Christ—‘ He makes himself equal to God’; ‘ Art 
thou greater than our Father Abraham ?’; ‘Can this man 
give us his flesh to eat ? ’—suggest the disputes between Jew 
and Christian of a later age, when Christian theology had been 
definitely formulated and Christianity and Judaism faced 
each other as rivals. In particular the Eucharistic discussion 
(6 : 32-59), which would be quite impossible in Jesus’ own day 
before the sacrament was even instituted, becomes intelligible 
when related to a later Jewish attack upon Christian sacra- 
mental teaching. 

It is possible that John has coloured his picture of the 
Baptist in the interest of his polemic against the Jews. 
Baldensperger indeed held that the Gospel was primarily 
intended as a polemic against a Jewish sect of Baptist disciples 
who exalted their Master above Christ. In support of this 
theory Acts 18 : 25, I9 : 3-4 are quoted as proving the exist- 
ence of such a sect at Ephesus. Reference is also made in 
the Clementine Recognitions (1:54), which date perhaps 
from the early third century, to the fact that, ‘ Some even of 
the disciples of John, who seemed to be great ones, have 
separated themselves and proclaimed their own Master as 
Christ.’ It is certainly significant that, on every mention 
of the Baptist, John pointedly emphasizes his subordination 
to Jesus (notes on 1:6, I9, 34; 3:13, 4:1), and it may 
well be that he wishes to counteract a contemporary Jewish 
movement which sought to buttress its opposition to the 
spread of Christianity by exalting the Baptist at the expense 
of Christ. Possibly the infection had spread even into the 
Church itself. But any such Baptist controversy cannot be 
more than a quite subordinate motive in John’s mind, and 
may have to be eliminated altogether if, as appears to be the 
case, there is evidence that some at least of the Baptist 
passages are due to the hand of a Redactor. 

There is little evidence that our Evangelist was influenced 
to any great extent by the contemporary Hellenistic ‘ Mystery 

XXX 


INTRODUCTION 


Religions.’ Of these any lengthy discussion would here be 
out of place.1 It will be enough to allude to two conceptions 
conspicuous in them which may be thought to have influenced 
John among other New Testament writers. First there is 
the conception of ‘ regeneration ’ or ‘ new-birth,’ whereby the 
initiate became partaker of a divine essence and was thereby 
“reborn into eternity.” Each cult had its myth of the God 
who died and rose again, whether it be Osiris, Attis, or Diony- 
sus—a myth which was dramatically enacted before the eyes 
of the assembled multitudes, and through a mystic sympathy 
with which the initiate himself was thought to obtain the 
guarantee of undying life. Secondly must be noted the 
sacramentalist tendencies of the Mystery Cults, which may 
be summarized thus: so far as the symbol was concerned, its 
virtue was thought to lie, not only in the spiritual reality 
it symbolized, but in the symbol itself as such ; so far as the 
worshipper was concerned the validity of the sacrament de- 
pended, not purely on spiritual receptiveness, but on the ex 
opere operato efficacy of the rite itself; so far as the gift 
communicated was concerned, it was thought of, not as a 
purely spiritual bestowal, but as an impersonal semi-physical 
influence, for the communication of which, not grace and 
faith, but the symbol itself was the indispensable channel. 
Now it must be remembered that not even the use of much 
of the actual terminology of the Mysteries, as in the case of 
both Paul and John, necessarily involves the adoption of the 
ideas which it expresses. The Christian community at 
Ephesus, following upon the influx of heathen converts, must 
have been flooded with quasi-magical conceptions of religion 
drawn from the atmosphere of the Mysteries. Nor is it 
surprising to find our Evangelist using the language of the 
Mysteries, in chapter 3, when he speaks of the ‘ birth from 
above,’ in chapter 6 as he develops his profound sacramental 
teaching. Like Paul, in his eagerness to find a common 
standing ground with those whom he would win for Christ, 
he sometimes uses categories which are theirs rather than his 
own, if indeed he does more than use imagery which is the 
1 See Angus, The Mystery Religions and Christianity, 
xxxi 


INTRODUCTION 


common property of all mystics. And while adopting 
Mystery conceptions he infuses them with new meaning and 
new life. He speaks of ‘regeneration,’ but gives it a new 
ethical connotation, borrowed not from the Mysteries but 
from Paul; the Spirit blows where it will and is confined to 
nomaterial channel. It is only of Spirit that Spirit is born, and 
only by the power of the Spirit that regeneration is achieved. 
He accepts without question the ‘ real’ efficacy of the Sacra- 
ments. Yet he clearly desires to counteract the prevalent 
tendency towards a materialistic view of them, and all the 
emphasis is on their spiritual aspect : ‘ What gives life is the 
Spirit : flesh is of no avail at all’ (6 : 63). 

There remains for consideration the Evangelist’s attitude 
towards certain internal controversies of the Church and in 
particular towards ‘ Gnosticism,’ the battle of which with 
the orthodox faith had already begun at the time of writing. 
The Gnostic heretics of the second century were men who 
attempted to interpret the figure and message of Christ in 
such a way that they would fit into a preconceived Hellenistic 
theology, every Gnostic system being ‘an attempt to blend 
Christianity with the theosophical speculations of the age.’ ? 
Fundamental is the idea of a dualism running through the 
whole universe. Godis by nature good and pure : the material 
creation evil and tainted. Therefore by no possibility can a 
world essentially evil be the creation of the supreme deity, nor 
can there be any direct contact between God and the material 
world. Hence the conception of subordinate divine beings, 
intermediate agencies, eons, emanations of the Deity, which 
bridge the gap between God and the world. These were 
thought of as the ‘archons’ or rulers of a huge system of 
concentric spheres over-arching the earth, and were originally 
identified with the heavenly bodies themselves, whose move- 
ments were supposed to sway human destinies, and provided 
the astrologer with his stock-in-trade. A similar dualism was 
thought to exist in the nature of man, whose soul and body 
are as alien one to the other as are God and the world. The 
soul is a spark emanating from God Himself, while the body 


1 Foakes-Jackson, Hist. of the Christian Church, p. 122. 
XxXXii 


INTRODUCTION 


is but part of the impure matter of which all created things 
consist, From such a prison there is no escape for the soul 
save in a ‘ gnosis ’ or knowledge of its divine nature. That is, 
man’s salvation is to be wrought out, not by moral effort, 
but by the communication of a certain esoteric ‘ knowledge ’ 
which will enable the possessor to propitiate the intermediate 
powers, often malignant, and so open the way to God. Thus, 
as Dobschiitz has well put it, ‘ Gnosticism is, in the first place, 
intellectualism ; one-sided over-valuation of knowledge at the 
expense of moral activity.’ Finally, holding this dualistic 
conception of the universe, Gnostic thinkers within the Church 
naturally scouted the idea that the Logos, the highest emana- 
tion of the Father, could in any true sense take upon himself 
a material body. Hence the denial of the reality of the 
Incarnation, and the refusal to admit the true humanity and 
real suffering of Jesus ; in a word what is known as‘ Docetism.’ 
We have within the New Testament clear indications of 
the spread of such more or less developed Gnostic tendencies. 
In particular may be noted the heresy which Paul attacks in 
his letter to the Colossians. As regards the Fourth Gospel’s 
relation to Gnosticism two extreme positions have been taken 
up. It has by some been definitely claimed as a product of 
Gnostic Christianity, and was indeed referred, in antiquity, 
to the Gnostic Cerinthus as its author; by others it has been 
as definitely regarded as a polemic against the rising heresy. | 
The truth is midway between the extremes. Tinged with > 
Gnostic influences John certainly is. He shares with the. 
Gnostics a certain dualism in his conception of both man and 
the world (note on 1: 5, 1: 10, 15: 18), and a certain intellec- | 
tualism in his conception of faith (note on 3: 15) and in his 
insistence upon the necessity of ‘knowing’ God (note on | 
8:19, 6:69, 17:3). There is a dualism which envisages a 
deep division set between light and darkness (1 : 5), the child- 
ren of God (1: 13) and those of the devil (8 : 44), spirit and 
flesh (3 : 6), the Church and the world (17: 16). On the other 
hand this dualism is balanced by a glorious universalism (3: 16, 
etc.) which enabled Johannine Christianity to win the world 
as Gnosticism, with its Gospel for the privileged few, could — 
¢ XXXIii 


INTRODUCTION 


never have won it. Again there are certain terms and ex- 
pressions (e.g. ‘ gnosis,’ ‘ pistis,’ ‘ sophia ’) which John signifi- 
cantly avoids except in verbal form, apparently because of 
their Gnostic colouring. The hierarchy of spiritual inter- 
mediaries entirely disappears. There is no trace in the Gospel 
of the Gnostics’ contempt of the Old Testament, whose God, 
they held, was but a lower divinity and creator of the evil 
material universe. Above all John combats Gnostic ‘ Docet- 
ism ’ by insisting emphatically on the reality of the Incarna- 
tion, true humanity, sufferings and death of Christ (1:14, 


4:6, 6: 20, 19 : 28, 34). 


We conclude then that, though in some degree sympathetic 
towards Gnostic philosophy, John with studied insistence 


. repudiates its more glaring errors. Possibly he may at one 


time have been a more advanced Gnostic, and in the Gospel 
we see him moving away from Gnosticism while still feeling 
its attraction. Or alternatively we may suppose that, without 
ever being in the true sense a Gnostic, John may have reached 
by his own individual thinking views which seem akin to 
Gnosticism, but were in truth simply part of the common 
culture of his day, and were only later specially identified 
with one prominent school. In any case ‘ He did a great 
service to his age by showing that one could be a thinker, 
appreciate knowledge, stand in the midst of a stream of 
thoroughly intellectual movements, and yet remain a faithful 
son of the Church.’ ! 


IV. THE DocrrRINE OF THE LoGos 


John’s interpretation in terms of Greek philosophic mysti- 
cism of the Hebrew conception of a Personal God, illuminated 
anew by the Christian revelation and the religious experience 
of the Early Church, is summarized in the Prologue of his 
Gospel, which is cast in the form of a hymn, whose keynote 
is the ‘ Logos’ or ‘ Word.’ ‘ The author has so uttered this 
thought at the outset that to the simple or quite-awake reader 
it is present right through to the end. It is somewhat as in 


1 Schmiedel, The Johannine Writings, p. 236. 
XXXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


a certain movement of Beethoven—one single note is kept 
vibrating . . . from start to finish.’! There has been much 
discussion as to whether John’s conception of the Logos owes 
more to Jewish or Alexandrian influences—a singularly futile 
dispute since John must certainly have been indebted to 
both ; if he was able adequately to present the Gospel to a 
heterogeneous Church, it was just because in the forefront of 
his Gospel so many converging streams of thought are gathered 
into one clear pool in which is reflected the face of Jesus Christ. 

In nearly all religions is found the idea of some intermediary 
vehicle whereby God is to reveal Himself to man. In the 
Old Testament, and particularly in the prophetic writings, 
the idea of the ‘Word of the Lord’ as such a vehicle is of 
frequent occurrence ; in poetical passages that ‘Word’ is 
sometimes all but personified. The process is carried farther 
in the popular Aramaic paraphrases of the Old Testament 
known as Targums, in which reverence forbids the assumption 
of direct contact between God and the world, and the ‘ Memra,’ 
or Word of God, is supplied as the vehicle of intermediate 
action in God’s dealings with men. Thus Gen. 3:8 in the 
Targum reads, ‘ They heard the voice of the Memra of the 
Lord God walking in the Garden.’ The parallelism of the 
first verses of the Prologue with the opening verses of Genesis 
seems to prove that John is moulding his thought of the 
creative Logos upon this Old Testament conception of the 
Word as the vehicle of Divine activity. 

A similar stream of thought may be traced in Greek philo- 
sophy. But the Greek expression for ‘ word’ (logos) means 
at the same time ‘ reason,’ and from Greek philosophy comes 
the idea that not only the individual man but also the world 
possesses a ‘ reason ’—the reasonable order which rules in the 
world and holds it together (cf. Paul’s thought of Christ in 
Col. 1:17: ‘All things have been created by him and for 
him; he is prior to all, and all coheres in him’). In this 
sense Heraclitus (c. 500-450 B.C.) introduced the term ‘ logos ’ 
into Greek philosophy, and the Stoics (from c¢. 300 B.C.) 
adopted this idea that the ‘logos’ is the reasonable order 

1 Charnwood, op. cit.,p. 54. 
XXXV 


INTRODUCTION 


that rules the world; in particular we have the notion of a 
plurality of ‘logoi,’ corresponding with the plurality of 
‘ideas’ in Plato, of which the highest represents the deity, 
and of the ‘ spermatikos logos’ as the agent of the deity in 
creation. Parallel with this conception is the idea, of which 
there are traces in the Old Testament, of the ‘ Wisdom ’ of 
God, as a second divine being distinguished from God Himself, 
who is represented as assisting God at the creation—a figura- 
tive way of saying that at the creation God made use of His 
Wisdom (cf. Job 28:12 ff.; Prov. 8:22 ff.; Wisdom of 
Solomon 7 : 22 ff.). 

But it was Philo, the famous Jewish thinker of Alexandria 
(c. 20 B.C.-c. A.D. 50), who combined these Greek and 
Hebrew conceptions and brought the idea of the Logos to its 
fullest development. He took over the main Stoic concep- 
tion, but so identified it with Plato’s idea of the ‘Good’ and 
the Hebrew thought of the ‘ Wisdom ’ of God, that instead of 
being merely immanent in creation the Logos for him became 
endowed with an independent existence. In the Philonic 
‘Logos’ the Greek idea of immanent reason is combined 
with the Hebrew idea of divine creative-energy and self- 
revelation. Yet Philo’s Jewish faith forbade the identification 
of the Logos with the Deity Himself, and it therefore sometimes 
appears as a kind of ‘second God’ independent of but sub- 
ordinate to the God of the Old Testament, though Philo’s 
monotheism makes it unlikely that this assertion of the 
existence of a second divine agent is intended in anything 
more than a figurative sense. There is in fact an inevitable 
clash between the primary Greek conception and the demands 
of Hebrew monotheism, an antinomy which is never wholly 
reconciled. 

It must be admitted that ‘ the underlying intention of the 
usage in Philo and the Targums is absolutely different. Philo 
is working out a philosophical system designed to effect a 
synthesis between . . . the religious tradition of the Hebrews 
and Greek Neoplatonism. The Targums are popular render- 
ings of the Old Testament lessons intended for congregations 

- who were sufficiently advanced to find difficulty in the 
XXXV1 


INTRODUCTION 


more startlingly anthropomorphic expressions of the Old 
Testament.’ Phrases such as the ‘Word of the Lord’ 
(Memra) ‘are merely reverential paraphrases.’ ‘To Philo, 
on the other hand, the Logos is the name of a Divine Principle 
conceived of, along the lines of Greek philosophical thinking, 
as a connecting link between Transcendent Deity and the 
material universe.’! Now John was no doubt impregnated 
with Old Testament thought ; he may well have been in- 
fluenced by the Targumic idea of the Memra (though it is 
uncertain whether that usage was earlier than his time) ; but 
in so far as the Prologue is quite clearly a philosophically con- 
ceived attempt to build a bridge between Greek and Hebrew 
modes of thought, John must be pronounced indebted for his 
Logos-doctrine to Philo, who was the first to attempt such 
a synthesis by popularizing the term ‘Logos.’ Through 
Alexandrian usage the ‘ Logos’ had become a current philo- 
sophical term, much as is ‘ evolution’ or ‘ élan vital’ in our 
own day; John seized upon it as an invaluable category for 
the interpretation of the Gospel; and to that extent he is 
indebted to Philo, even though he may have read the works 
of the great Alexandrian no more closely than many who use 
their categories have read Darwin or Bergson. But one 
supreme distinction between John’s thought and Philo’s must 
be noted. Even admitting that sometimes Philo ascribes a 
real personality to the Logos ‘ he is thinking all the while of 
the divine reason and activity, which he personifies as the 
intermediate agent between God and the world. John, on 
the other hand, starts from an actual knowledge of the earthly 
life of Jesus, and the conception of the Logos is always blended 
in his mind with the impression left on him by the Person.’ 4 
John is primarily concerned not with the Word as a philo- 
sophical principle but with the Word made ftesh and mani- 
fested in human history in the whole life of Jesus Christ. 

It is for this reason that the theory—backed though it is 
by so great a name as Harnack’s—according to which the 
Prologue is a mere introduction, added it may be as an after- 
thought, falls to the ground. As we have already noted, the 

1 Streeter, op. cit., p. 375. 2 Scott, op. cit., p. 62. 
XXXVII 


INTRODUCTION 


thought of Jesus as the revelation of the Logos in history is 
the key-note which vibrates throughout the entire Gospel. 
The Logos-doctrine is everywhere presupposed in the body of 
the Gospel, though the actual use of the term ceases with the 
Prologue. It is this that explains the insistence on the 
omniscience and omnipotence of Jesus, his inviolability, the 
minimising of the purely human elements in his personality, 
his continual reference to his own Person as the source of life, 
and in particular such claims to pre-existence as we have in 
I:30, 17:5, 8:58. Finally, though the term ‘ Logos” is 
never used of Christ in the body of the Gospel, its content 
reappears under the categories of ‘ Truth,’ “ Light,’ and “ Life.’ 

The word ‘truth’ is used to describe the Logos in his 
reality. The conception runs back to Plato’s doctrine of 
‘ideas,’ the fixed forms which are regarded as the original 
patterns of which all particular things in the material world 
are only copies, the highest idea, the Idea of the Good, repre- 
senting God. Thus for John ‘truth,’ the supreme reality, 
becomes an equivalent for the divine nature. God is ‘ the 
only real’ (17: 3), and all other things are ‘ true’ or ‘ real’ 
only in so far as they reflect God’s thought and purpose. 
Thus Christ, being the Logos, whose supreme mission is to be 
the medium of the divine revelation, is in his own Person ‘ the 
truth,’ and the only means whereby men can lay hold of the 
eternal reality. 

Closely akin to ‘ truth’ is the idea of ‘ light,’ under which 
category John expresses the thought of the Logos as the 
source of divine revelation. Indeed ‘light’ for John is 
broadly speaking identical with ‘truth,’ with the further 
implication that the higher reality is ever seeking to manifest 
itself. As essentially one with that higher reality Christ the 
Logos is ‘the truth’; as one, who in his own Person reveals 
that reality, he is ‘the light.’ Yet no one definition can 
exhaust the content of this characteristic Johannine word. 
“The term is chosen because of its very largeness and vague- 
ness. Light is the immemorial symbol of all that is divine 
and holy ; it suggests gladness, security, quickening, illumina- 
tion. . . . Taken generally, however, light is the equivalent, 

. XXXVIii 


INTRODUCTION 


in the language of the imagination, of what is abstractly called 
“ the truth.” ?! 

Finally, John sums up the spiritual gift communicated 
through Christ the Logos under the category of ‘ life.’ Some- 
times the expression used is ‘eternal life,’ but the epithet 
does not postpone the promise to the future, for John insists 
that through Christ ‘ life ’ is bestowed here and now, but rather 
suggests the origin of such life in the higher ‘ eternal’ world. 
John gives us no exact definition of what he means by ‘ life,’ 
for 17 : 3 defines not ‘life’ itself but the means of its communi- 
cation, and ‘life’ is something greater than the knowledge of 
God through Christ by which it is conditioned and mediated. 
John assumes that in God, the supreme ‘ reality,’ and in the 
Logos, who is the ‘ light ’ revealing Him, there exists a ‘ life’ 
different in kind from mere physical life, which is the ‘ real’ 
or ‘eternal’ life (cf. 1:4, 5:26). It has been held indeed 
that in some passages John appears to regard this ‘life’ as 
an almost ‘semi-physical’ bestowment, particularly in the 
Eucharistic discourse in the sixth chapter (6: 51-59): Men 
to possess true life must become incorporate with Christ and 
absorb his divine substance into their own nature. But this 
is just an instance of how the Evangelist may use the current 
language of the ‘ Mysteries’ without in any way consciously 
committing himself to their semi-magical conceptions. Such 
teaching would be utterly out of harmony with the general 
trend of his thought. It may be that, in accordance with 
the Logos hypothesis, the true life is regarded as a higher 
kind of being, almost as a substance which can be transferred 
from person to person. But for John the divine life is pre- 
eminently the life of Jesus; and the gift of Jesus to men is 
just the secret of his own moral and spiritual personality. 
‘The words that I speak unto you,’ says Jesus, ‘ they are 
spirit, and they are life’ (6: 63). 


V. LITERARY STRUCTURE 
Whether or no the Gospel is a literary unity, the integral 
‘work of a single author, has been keenly debated. While 
1 Scott, op. cit., p. 254. 
XXX1X 


INTRODUCTION 


the famous judgment of Strauss is still staunchly upheld, 
that the Gospel can be divided no more than the seamless 
coat of our Lord, others would suggest that, broadly true 
though the comparison may be, ‘ the seamless coat had also 
a warp and woof and a tasselled fringe,’ ! that the Gospel is 
full of gaps and seams, textual dislocations and logical incon- 
sistencies, which can only be explained on the theory either 
of a combination of several documents, or of a later editorial 
revision. According as they adopt the first or second theory 
the upholders of the composite nature of the Gospel may be 
divided into two groups—‘ partitionists ’ and ‘ revisionists.’ 
The former will distinguish between an original source or 
sources and the later complete work into which they have 
been incorporated ; the latter will explain discrepancies and 
dislocations by arguing that a later Redactor has ‘ recast the 
Gospel for purposes which originally it was not intended to 
serve.’ ? 

It must be confessed that the various partition theories 
have been generally discredited. They are vitiated to begin 
with by the desire to rescue some preferred element, e.g. an 
original Johannine Grundschrift, at the expense of the rest 
of the Gospel ; the principles of any such analysis must always 
be too subjective to command assent ; and indeed the whole 
process is based on a false analogy with the methods of 
Pentateuchal criticism. One feels that every attempt to 
analyse the Gospel in detail, giving this verse to one hand and 
that verse to another, is foredoomed to failure—whether the 
aim be to distinguish theology thrust into older history, or 
history superimposed upon an earlier doctrinal dissertation. 
Whether it be Wendt separating from the Gospel an original 
source composed of ‘ Logia’ of Jesus, or Wellhausen with his 
‘foundation-document’’ resembling a Marcan outline, the 
process savours too much of“ scissors and paste.’ As Streeter® 
caustically remarks: ‘ If the sources have undergone anything 
like the amount of amplification, excision, rearrangement and 


1 Bacon, Introd. to the N.T., p. 268. 
2 Moffatt, Introd. to the N.T., p. 551. 
3 Streeter, op. cit., p. 377. 


INTRODUCTION 


adaptation which the theory postulates, then the critic’s 
pretence that he can unravel the process is grotesque. As 
well hope to start with a string of sausages and reconstruct 
the pig.’ 

The truth is that the Gospel impresses us, as few books do, 
by its unity. Even Wellhausen! admits this: ‘In spite of 
its different strata it can be historically regarded as essentially 
a unity.’ Every page bears the stamp of the genius and 
experience of one unmistakable and tremendous personality, 
whose individuality is so marked that it never permits him 
to hide himself, as Shakespeare does, for example, behind the 
characters he creates. If there be diverse elements in the 
Gospel, then they have been fused together and recreated in 
the mind of an original thinker. ‘A poet of strong powers of 
thought and marked individuality, who has undertaken to 
raise an entirely new song, is here.’ ? 

Detailed analysis of the Gospel into several supposed strata 
is therefore ruled out ; but not necessarily the general hypo- 
thesis that an earlier hand than the Evangelist’s (possibly 
even an earlier written source) has played a part in the Gospel’s 
growth. No doubt the author has so far assimilated the 
earlier material and stamped it with his own hall-mark that 
the separation of the two strata is no longer possible. But 
it may still be argued that as he wrote he had the earlier 
tradition at his disposal as a source distinct both from the 
Synoptics and his own recollections, probably actually as a 
written document. It appears to the present writer that the 
special characteristics of the Gospel are best explained by the 
supposition that the Evangelist, not himself an eye-witness 
of the historical Jesus (or possibly a witness only during his 
closing days), but rather one whose concern was to interpret 
to his own age the significance of Jesus in men’s experience, 
had before him the written memoirs of an actual eye-witness, 
which he incorporated in his own work, leaving upon the whole 
the unmistakable stamp of his own individuality, yet retain- 
ing something of the vivid touch of the earlier narrative, 

1 Das Evangelium Johannis, p. 119. 


2 Schwartz, quoted by Stanton, op. cit., p. 41. 
xli 


INTRODUCTION 


whereby he adds life and vigour and colour to his own master- 
piece. The material of the Gospel did not spring into being 
in a day. It passed through a formative period before it 
finally became crystallized, a single gem with many facets, 
in the mind of that ‘ poet of strong powers of thought ’ who 
gave it to the world. During that period the memoirs of an 
eye-witness may well have played an important part as a 
nucleus around which would gather the tradition and teaching 
which ultimately took form in our Gospel. One is therefore 
disposed to assume some sort of mediate authorship, i.e. that 
a later writer, relying in part for his facts upon memories of 
a witness, transmitted orally or more probably in writing, 
has given us the Gospel in its present form. Features which 
give colour to such a supposition may be briefly summarized : 

(a) The combination of dependence and freedom already 
noted in the Gospel’s relation to the Synoptists (see p. xx). 

(5) The Gospel, while in general a mirror of the Evangelist’s 
own time, frequently reflects the view-point of an earlier day. 
(Seee.g. note on 5:2.) The controversies about the Sabbath 
in chapters 5 and 7 are true to the historical circumstances of 
Jesus’ own time, though they are merged into discussions, 
which can have had reality only to the Evangelist’s contem- 
poraries, about the Person of Jesus himself. 

(c) There is sometimes a similar diversity of standpoint in 
regard to doctrine. Some passages seem to reveal the out- 
cropping of an older doctrinal stratum, ‘ concessions’ to an 
earlier point of view, ‘isolated ideas which cannot be recon- 
ciled with the characteristic Johannine thought,’ but ‘ can 
only be regarded as fragments of earlier doctrine that have 
simply been taken over without any, or with a very imperfect, 
attempt at assimilation.’! Note, e.g., diversity of teaching 
with regard to the conceptions of Resurrection, Judgment, 
the Ascension, the Parousia, and see note, p. 29. 

(d) Passages occur which are apparently ‘ conglomerates.’ 
Good examples are 4: 35-38 and 10: 1-16. Two or more 
extracts, through which it is difficult to trace a single sequence 
of thought, have been placed together in a single paragraph 

1 Scott, op. cit., p. 9. 
xlii 


INTRODUCTION 


as dealing with similar topics ; a reasonable theory would be 
that a collection of passages dealing with kindred subjects has 
_been made from an earlier source, which, in the examples 
quoted, is clearly not the Synoptics, though echoes there may 
be of Synoptic imagery. 

(e) Very suggestive, finally, is the extraordinary vividness 
of much of the detail combined with a strange lack of sustained 
interest in history as such. Just as we are looking for the 
climax of some dramatic scene the narrative drifts over into 
a doctrinal meditation. The author introduces his characters, 
rivets attention upon them, only to allow them to ‘ evaporate 
from the stage.’ See e.g. the scene with Nicodemus, and the 
interview with the Greeks. It is noticeable too that some of 
the most realistic touches occur in scenes which quickly resolve 
themselves into discourses which can hardly be historically 
accurate reports; e.g. the conversation with the Samaritan 
woman. In short, while there are many touches of detail 
which are convincingly life-like, the general setting of most of 
the scenes is unconvincing. Itisin the relatively unimportant 
detail, not in its larger outlook, that the Gospel manifests its 
interest in history, which would seem to suggest that we must 
look for an eye-witness, if anywhere, in the compiler of 
memoirs which have been incorporated, rather than in the 
author of the Gospel as a whole. 

If such an earlier source indeed lies behind the Gospel, 
why have we no clearer traces of it? Eusebius, in a well- 
known passage (3:24) writes: ‘Nevertheless, of all the 
disciples of the Lord, only Matthew and John have left us 
written memoirs. . . . Matthew, having previously preached 
to the Hebrews, when he was about to go to other peoples, 
committed to writing the Gospel that bears his name in his 
native tongue; . .. John, having spent all his time in oral 
preaching, at last came also to write.’ Now, scholarship is 
agreed that if we owe anything to Matthew’s own hand, it is 
not ‘the Gospel that bears his name,’ but the hypothetical 
collection of Logia which we know as ‘Q.’ May not the 
facts be similar in the case of the Fourth Gospel, into which 
may have been merged an earlier source, which itself has 

xliii 


INTRODUCTION 


vanished as completely as Matthew’s Logia ? In all ancient 
literature it is notorious that once a lesser work has been 
incorporated into and superseded by a greater one, which has 
itself become authoritative, the earlier work soon ceases to 
circulate separately. 

There are also unmistakable signs in the Gospel of revision 
by a later Redactor. Parenthetic comments occur which so 
clearly misunderstand the real point of the context as to prove 
that they are due toalater hand. (See notes on 2: 21,6: 46, 
8:27, 12:16, 18:9.) ‘A writer may be negligent and 
maladroit, and once in a way even a little forgetful, but he 
must know what he himself means and cannot lose forthwith 
all idea of what he has himself said.’! To the Redactor, too, 
is probably due the dislocation of the original order of the 
text which we shall have frequent cause to suspect, and the 
abrupt insertion of certain brief passages which seem to mar 
the artistry of the Evangelist’s original scheme. Most of the 
traces of redactional interference seem to be due to the 
throwing back into the body of the Gospel of the view-point 
of the Appendix (chap. 21), which will demand special 
discussion later. 

As to the Gospel’s structure we conclude then that an 
earlier source may have been incorporated, but has been so 
far assimilated as to be no longer separable. Certain redac- 
tional passages, which have not received the unifying stamp 
of the Evangelist’s own mind, will be more easily isolated. 


VI. THE ‘ BELOVED DISCIPLE’ AND THE AUTHORSHIP 
OF THE GOSPEL 


1. If we assume that the historical background of the 
Gospel has been filled in from details drawn from the memoirs 
of an eye-witness, we naturally find this witness in ‘the 
disciple whom Jesus loved.’ But who is he whose identity 
is veiled by this beautiful title ? 

(2) At one extreme is the traditional view that the Beloved 
Disciple is John the son of Zebedee. The possibility of this 


1 Wellhausen, Ev, Joh., p. 4. 
xliv 


INTRODUCTION 


may be admitted—at any rate if we are content to accept 
John merely as Witness and not as Evangelist—but there 
are powerful arguments against it. What we know of the 
temperament of the son of Zebedee reflects little either of 
the nature we would look for in one deemed worthy of such 
peculiar intimacy with Jesus, nor of the spirit of the Gospel 
to which tradition has attached hisname. Ambitious quarrels 
about precedence in the Kingdom, passionate eagerness to 
call down fire upon the inhospitable Samaritans—these are 
the memories which the Synoptics leave us of John, a ‘Son 
of Thunder’ rather than ‘the Apostle of Love.’ And if it 
be argued that the grace of God may have transformed the 
fiery zealot into the tender intimate of Christ, the reply is 
that the title “Beloved Disciple’ has reference not to the 
Apostle’s old age, but to the days of his ‘ thundering.’ Add 
to this the fact that the historical and doctrinal affinities of 
the Fourth Gospel make it extremely unlikely that the son 
of Zebedee had any connexion with it. Is it probable that 
John, whom the Synoptists represent as the close companion 
of Peter, can be the source of a stream of tradition so divergent 
from the Synoptic stream, which Mark is said to have derived 
from Peter? Finally, as the curtain falls upon John’s appear- 
ances on the New Testament stage, we find him belonging to 
the Judaic party in the Church, while the Gospel, even those 
parts which it is most natural to trace back to the Witness, 
has a clear anti-Judaic bias. 

(b) At the other extreme is the theory that the Beloved 
Disciple is an ideal figure, whether it be John the Apostle 
who is idealized, or whether ‘ Paul, and whosoever has had 
Paul’s experience ...is the Disciple whom Jesus loved,’ 
but in any case a purely symbolic character, ‘that ideal 
disciple whom Jesus would choose and who reads his soul 
aright.’! It is unnecessary to discuss this theory, which is 
admirably dealt with by Dr. Stanton.? Suffice it to say that 
if the Evangelist introduced the figure as a device to illustrate 
the ideal attitude of the believer to Christ and his Gospel, 
his readers would certainly never guess his purpose, nor are 

1 Bacon, op. cit., pp. 326, 320. 2 Stanton, op. cit., p. 134 ff. 

xlv 


INTRODUCTION 


his allusions either numerous or pointed enough to create any 
well-defined impression of the ideal which he means to portray, 

(c) The middle course is probably the safest, and, admitting 
that in any case the figure has to some extent been idealized, 
a more attractive theory is that which finds the Beloved 
Disciple in a young Jerusalemite of good family, possibly with 
priestly connexions, not one of the Twelve, but a “super- 
numerary,’ whom Jesus admitted to peculiar intimacy during 
the closing period of his ministry. This theory was first put 
forward by Delff, was cautiously commended by Sanday, and 
appears to be finding increasing support. The evidence has 
been so exhaustively examined, particularly by Dr. Garvie 
in his ‘ Beloved Disciple,’ that here only the briefest summary 
is necessary. The external evidence agrees well enough with 
this theory, while Sanday is certainly justified in his state- 
ment that ‘if we confine ourselves to the indications con- 
tained in the Gospel itself, it would not follow with any 
stringency that the eye-witness of the events was the Apostle 
John, the son of Zebedee.’! Dr. Garvie would trace the 
Beloved Disciple in the anonymous follower of : 35; but the 
words of 13:23 (the Last Supper scene) read like the first 
introduction of a character not previously mentioned, the 
other definite references being 18: 15 (but the identification 
here is doubtful; see below, p. xlviii), 19:26, 20: 2, 
21:7, 20ff. If this surmise be correct, then presumably the 
Beloved Disciple was in intimate fellowship with Jesus only 
during the closing days, though he may well have been a 
constant witness and hearer, while as yet perhaps an uncon- 
fessed disciple, whenever our Lord was in Jerusalem. Here 
surely we have the most natural explanation of the focusing 
of interest on scenes and discourses at or near Jerusalem and 
on Passion Week in particular, and the comparative neglect 
of the Galilean episodes. Dr. Garvie suggests that the 
Beloved Disciple may have been the householder who pro- 
vided the Upper Room, and this fits in admirably with much 
of the evidence (Garvie, p. 144 f.) and possibly would help to 
explain his desire for anonymity (p. 203 f.). 


' Sanday, Criticism of the Fourth Gospel, p. 97. 
xlvi 


INTRODUCTION 


2. But though we may accept this picture of the Beloved 
Disciple as a Witness, it does not follow that he was also 
the author of the Gospel. To begin with, it is more likely that 
the predicate ‘whom Jesus loved’ was used of the disciple 
by another. That he should so distinguish himself would be, 
to say the least, an affectation; but it would be natural 
enough for a devoted follower so to speak of his idealized 
teacher. The tradition that the Witness is also the Evangelist 
rests on 21: 24, which, as even Westcott admits, cannot be 
from the hand of the original author, and represents a later, 
and probably erroneous, identification. Apart from this verse 
there is really nothing to suggest that the Beloved Disciple 
is the author. And even 21: 24 is hesitating. In any case 
it is on the ‘ witness’ rather than on the ‘ writing ’ that the 
emphasis is laid. ‘The words “and wrote these things” 
seem to be added to “ beareth witness concerning these 
things,” as a kind of afterthought. Most prominence at all 
events is given to his having borne witness. From the position 
and form of this reference to writing, it is not unfair to infer 
that there may have been some uncertainty in the mind of 
the framer of the statement as to the extent to which it 
was to be attributed to the same disciple.’! Even the 
Redactor, though sure that the Beloved Disciple is the 
Witness, is not quite so sure that he is the actual author of 
the Gospel. 

Other passages quoted as proof that the Evangelist was 
himself an eye-witness may be otherwise explained. The 
words (1:14) ‘we have seen his glory’ do not necessarily 
imply more than spiritual perception, and even if, as is 
perhaps more likely, physical sight is also implied, the words 
might be taken not as the personal testimony of the author, 
but merely as the general witness of the Christian community, 
which once long ago had seen and known the Word made 
flesh. Still more weight has been laid on 19: 35 (‘he who 
saw it has borne witness; his witness is true; God knows 
he is telling the truth’) where, it is argued, the Evangelist 
is definitely bearing testimony to his own authorship, and 

1 Stanton, op. cit., p. 134. 
xlvii 


INTRODUCTION 


asserting that he himself was a witness of the events. But 
see note in loco; the verse should almost certainly be 
assigned to the Redactor, and is an example of how the point 
of view of the Appendix is thrown back into the body of the 
Gospel in order deliberately to identify the author with the 
disciple whom Jesus loved—one of the chief aims of the 
Redactor (see below, p. 368). ‘ Whoever heard of a writer 
employing such ambiguities (as 19 : 35) to make the simple 
statement, ‘‘I myself saw this” ?’! The truth is that the 
Gospel’s so-called ‘ self-testimony raises more riddles than it 
solves.’ # 

We conclude then that the Evangelist was not himself the 
Beloved Disciple-Witness, but rather a younger contemporary 
and admiring follower of the latter, standing in much the 
same kind of relation to him as did Mark, the author of 
another of our Gospels, to Peter. It is not even necessary 
to suppose that he had seen a great deal of the Beloved 
Disciple. ‘A brief and, as it seemed in the halo of later 
recollection, a wonderful connexion—perhaps also a few 
never-to-be-forgotten words of Christ derived from his lips— 
would make the attitude towards the Beloved Disciple ex- 
pressed in the Gospel psychologically explicable.’ § 

An interesting suggestion has recently been made‘ that 
the Evangelist, as distinct from the Beloved Disciple, actually 
appears in the Gospel at 18:15 under the guise of the 
anonymous disciple who was ‘an acquaintance of the High 
Priest.” It would then follow that he was probably a young 
man of aristocratic connexions and of priestly family ; other 
interesting implications suggested by this theory are mean- 
while reserved (see p. lxiv). 


VII. THE RELATION OF THE APPENDIX TO THE QUESTION 
OF AUTHORSHIP 


We have already seen cause to suppose that the Gospel 
has undergone revision at the hands of a later Redactor, to 
1 Bacon, op. cit., p. 192. 
2 Jackson, The Problem of the Fourth Gospel, p. 39. 
* Streeter, The Four Gospels, p. 433. * Strachan, op. cit., p. 49. 
xlvili 


INTRODUCTION 


whom the final chapter and certain kindred sections in the 
body of the Gospel are to be assigned. The aim of the 
Appendix and its relation to the Gospel are fully discussed in 
an introductory note to chapter 21. The purpose of the 
Redactor’s revision so far as it affects the question of author- 
ship expresses itself in an attempt to establish for the Gospel 
a guarantee of Apostolic authorship. This he endeavours to 
secure— 

(a) By the identification of the Evangelist with the Beloved 
Disciple-Witness, which is definitely suggested in 19: 35 
and 21:24, and which once so suggested would be likely 
quickly to gain acceptance. As time passed there would 
naturally be a disposition to magnify the Beloved Disciple’s 
connexion with the book, and, assuming the Evangelist to 
have been a disciple of the Witness, it is likely enough that 
one who had been a teacher of the actual author and whose 
testimony was embodied in his work, would become in the 
estimate of the Church transformed into the author. This 
tendency is deliberately encouraged by the Redactor. 

(b) The Apostolic guarantee is clinched by the further 
identification of the Beloved Disciple with John the son of 
Zebedee. At 21:2, by introducing by name ‘the sons of 
Zebedee ’ for the first time, the Redactor cautiously suggests, 
by a process of elimination, that the Beloved Disciple is to 
be identified with one of them. It may even be argued with 
some show of reason! that the absence throughout the Gospel 
of any mention of John, the son of Zebedee, by name, and the 
presence of certain awkward anonymous expressions which 
apparently refer to him, is due to the deliberate cancellation 
by the Redactor, in the interest of his theory that the Beloved 
Disciple is John, of all independent references to John by 
name. In other words, the use of anonymous expressions in 
situations where the reader would instinctively supply the 
name of John, as for example at the call of the disciples at 
I: 35 ff., would lead the reader to assume that the reference 
was to the great anonymous Beloved Disciple—and this was 
deliberately intended by the Redactor. If it be objected 

1 Bacon, op. cit., p. 138 ff. 
d xlix 


INTRODUCTION 


that this is an incredibly vague way to assert that the Beloved 
Disciple is the son of Zebedee, the reply is that the Redactor’s 
aim is not so much to prove the identification as to secure 
that nothing in the Gospel will cause perplexity to those who 
have already accepted a gradually hardening tradition. Here, 
too, the Redactor is but adding momentum to a tendency 
already wellunder way. By the time the Gospel was published 
the Beloved Disciple would have become a very indefinite 
figure, his personality having become merged in that of his 
disciple the Evangelist. If, as will now be argued, the latter 
is to be identified with John the Elder of Ephesus, then once 
the view gained ground that the latter was indeed the Beloved 
Disciple, it was almost inevitable that the Anonymous Witness 
should in turn also be identified with the Apostle who bore 
the same name ‘ John.’ 


VIII. JoHN, THE ELDER OF EPHESUS, AND THE EXTERNAL 
EVIDENCE 


Tradition is practically unanimous that the Fourth Gospel 
had its origin at Ephesus, and that its author was that ‘ John’ 
who figured there as a leader in the Church during the closing 
years of the first century, and was early identified with the 
Apostle John, the son of Zebedee. ‘The Christian writers 
who look upon him (the son of Zebedee) as the author do 
not say that the Apostle composed it, no matter where he 
lived, but they say, ‘“‘ the John who was head of the Church 
of Asia Minor wrote it,” so that the Apostle may be held to be 
the author of the Gospel only if we can think of him as living 
in Ephesus.’! Does the external evidence prove the residence 
of the son of Zebedee in Ephesus, or does it rather point us 
to another ‘ John’ with whom he has been confused ? 

Our critical study of the evidence afforded by the Gospel 
itself has pointed to the conclusion that the author is one who 
does not himself claim to be an Apostle and yet writes with the 
authority of one who is familiar with first-hand tradition and 
possibly has some personal connexion with Jesus’ immediate 


* Schmiedel, The Johannine Writings, p. 179 


INTRODUCTION 


disciples. Such a figure appears in the person of ‘ John the 
Elder,’ and the theory that the Evangelist is to be found in 
this John, who is distinct both from the Apostle John and 
the Beloved Disciple, seems to the present writer best to meet 
the facts. 

“The Elder’ appears in the New Testament as the writer 
of the Second and Third Epistles which have been traditionally 
ascribed to ‘ John,’ and Dr. Charles, in his Commentary on 
Revelation,’ gives an analysis of the language of the Gospel 
and Epistles of ‘ John’ which confirms the impression made 
even on a casual reader that, not only the First Epistle, but also 
the Second and the Third are by the same writer as the Gospel. 
That ‘ John the Elder’ is a person quite distinct from the 
Apostle of the same name seems clearly proved by the famous 
passage of Papias (written probably c. 140-150) quoted by 
Eusebius (Hist. Eccl. iii, 39): ‘And again on any occasion 
when a person came who had been a follower of the Elders, 
I would inquire about the discourses of the Elders—what was 
said by Andrew, or by Peter, or by Philip, or by Thomas or 
James, or by John or Matthew or any other of the Lord’s 
disciples, and what Aristion and the Elder John, the disciples 
of the Lord, say.’ As Eusebius himself proceeds to point out, 
the name ‘ John’ is twice mentioned, and the second John, 
coupled with Aristion under the designation ‘Elder,’ can 
hardly be the same person as the first John, who is classed 
with six other Apostles. True both are called ‘ disciples of 
the Lord’; but with the end of the first century and the 
passing of those who had known Jesus in the flesh the title 
‘ disciple ’ was used to include others besides those who could 
claim a personal acquaintance with the Master. Moreover, 
the change of tense from ‘said’ to ‘say’ suggests that the 
second John was still alive when Papias gathered his informa- 
tion, while the first John and those classed with him were 
dead. ‘So that,’ concludes Eusebius, ‘ Papias hereby makes 
it quite evident that their statement is true who say that 
there were two persons of that name in Asia, and that there 
are two tombs in Ephesus, each of which even now is called 

1 p, xxxiv ff, 


li 


INTRODUCTION 


the tomb of John.’ In confirmation of the theory that 
there were two Johns it is interesting to note that the ‘ Apos- 
tolic Constitutions,’ a fourth-century document based on 
older materials, names as contemporary Bishops of Ephesus 
‘Timothy ordained by Paul, and John ordained by John.’ 
This would suggest that before A.D. 100 (up to which date 
the list of Bishops is compiled) a second John, ordained by 
the Apostle of the same name, had already attained promi- 
nence in Asia; if the ordination of the second John by the 
first implies, as in the case of Paul and Timothy, a close 
relationship, the subsequent confusion of the two will become 
the more credible. 

The theory that the ‘ John ’ who was leader of the Ephesian 
Church and author of the Fourth Gospel was not the Apostle 
but ‘the Elder’ accords well with the following lines of 
evidence : 

I. The evidence for the early death as a martyr of John the 
Apostle. This may be briefly summarized : 

(a) The prophecy of Jesus in Mk 10: 35 ff., which would 
certainly gain point if, at the time when Mark wrote, the 
prophecy had been fulfilled. 

(5) According to the ‘ De Boor fragment ’ of Philip of Side, 
a Church historian of the fifth century, and the Chronicle of 
George Hamartolus, a tenth-century chronographer, Papias, 
in his second book, recorded that ‘ John the Divine and James 
his brother were killed by the Jews.’ 

(c) The Syriac Martyrology, dated a.D. 411 and drawn up 
at Edessa, commemorates the martyrdom of ‘ John and 
James the Apostles ’ on December 28th. This, if a fact, must 
have happened before A.D. 70. 

(d) Certain minor pieces of evidence contained in allusions 
by various early Christian writers, including Heracleon, 
Clement of Alexandria and Chrysostom, are summarized by 
Dr. Charles.! 

Each of these pieces of evidence is disputed and alone 
would be inconclusive; but the cumulative effect is con- 
siderable, and there is an increasing readiness to accept the 

1 Revelation, vol. i, p. xlv ff. 
lii 


INTRODUCTION 


probability of John the Apostle’s early death. ‘The wonder 
is that any evidence at all should survive of a tradition 
apologetically so inconvenient.’ ! 

2. The hesitation of our authorities as to John the Apostle’s 
residence in Asia : 

(a) The book of Acts is silent on the subject, while in 
Acts 20:29 Paul, in taking leave of his Ephesian friends, 
warns them of the ‘ fierce wolves which will get in among you ’ 
—words which the writer would hardly have put into Paul’s 
mouth had he supposed that the most prominent of. Paul’s 
successors in Ephesus was the Apostle John. 

(6) Ignatius of Antioch, in his letter to the Ephesian Church 
written on his way to martyrdom (c. 110-117), claims that the 
Church is an Apostolic foundation on account of Paul’s 
affection for it, but is silent about any residence of John in 
the city ; yet had he known of it, what stronger claim for the 
community’s Apostolic dignity could he have adduced? 
‘ The tradition of Asia Minor,’ writes von Dobschiitz, ‘ knows 
but one John only’ (in spite of the passage from Eusebius 
quoted above) ‘who accordingly must be either the Apostle 
or the Elder.’ The silence of Ignatius strongly suggests that 
the only John resident in Asia was the Elder. 

3. The Apologetic tone of many of the early references to 
the Gospel, which suggests that the claim to Apostolic author- 
ship was challenged from the first. 

(a) The fact that such a guarantee of authorship as Jn 21 : 24 
was required at the time the Gospel was published hints that 
at the beginning of the second century there was already a 
divergence of opinion. 

(6) The strange argument of Ireneus (c. 185) whereby he 
endeavours to prove a priori, by the analogy of the four 
winds, the eternal necessity of four Gospels, and that ‘all 
those are vain, unlearned and also audacious, who represent 
the aspects of the Gospel as being either more in number than 
four or fewer,’ can only be explained by the existence of a 
considerable party who rejected the authority of the Fourth 
Gospel. 

1 Streeter, op. cit., p. 435. 
lili 


INTRODUCTION 


(c) Hippolytus, the Roman theologian (¢. 190-235), wrote a 
Defence of the Gospel and Apocalypse of John. But no one 
defends what nobody attacks. And the defence becomes all 
the more significant when we discover that the attack on 
the Apocalypse at least, and therefore perhaps also that on 
the Gospel, was being made not by heretics outside the 
Church, but by the presbyter Gaius. ‘The opposition to the 
Gospel can be definitely localized in orthodox circles in 
Rome.’ ! 

(d) The reference to the Gospel in the Muratorian Fragment 
on the Canon is strongly apologetic. The document may 
be held to reflect the official view of Rome about A.D. 200. 
Whereas Luke is dealt with in seven lines, no less than twenty- 
five are given to John. The writer insists that neither Mark 
nor Luke claims to be an eye-witness, but he expressly defends 
John’s claim: ‘It was revealed to Andrew, one of the 
Apostles, that John was to write all things in his own name, 
and they were all to certify. And, therefore, though various 
elements are taught in the several books of the Gospel, yet it 
makes no difference to the faith of believers, since by one 
guiding Spirit all things are declared in all of them.... For 
so he declares himself (in the opening words of the First 
Epistle) not an eye-witness and a hearer only, but a witness 
of all the marvels of the Lord in order.’ This reads like a 
defence of the Gospel against the charge that it could not be 
Apostolic on account of its divergencies, particularly as regards 
order, from the Synoptics: if there be a divergence, John is 
to be preferred, as he was a witness and the others were 
not. 

4. The lateness of the evidence for the full recognition of 
the Gospel as Apostolic compared with the earliness of the 
evidence for its use. Significance lies in the fact that in 
certain quarters it was not the antiquity, but the apostolicity, 
of the Gospel which was held in question. Would there have 
been this hesitation if all the world knew beyond doubt that 
round about the year 100 the Apostle John was still alive 
at Ephesus? Thus: 

1 Streeter, op. cit., p. 438. 
liv 


INTRODUCTION 


(a) About A.D. 175 there existed at Rome a small sect 
nicknamed by their opponents ‘the Alogi’ (a pun, for the 
Greek might be translated both ‘ Anti-Logosites’’ and ‘ Un- 
reasonable folk’) who rejected the Gospel, and actually 
ascribed it to the Gnostic Cerinthus. The existence of such 
a sect, while testifying to the wide use of the Gospel, shows 
that its authority was not yet universally accepted. In other 
respects the Alogi seem to have been conservative rather than 
heretic, and perhaps numbered among themselves that Gaius 
against whom Hippolytus directed his Defence. 

(0) Justin Martyr (died c. A.D. 165 as a martyr at Rome) 
almost certainly knew and used the Gospel, for he refers in 
his First Apology to the ‘ Memoirs of the Apostles which are 
called Gospels,’ which may be assumed with some probability 
to be the Gospels of Matthew and John, and in the Dialogue 
with Trypho to ‘ Memoirs which were composed by the Apostles 
and their followers ’—presumably Matthew and John on the 
one hand, and Mark and Luke on the other. But whereas 
Justin quotes the Synoptics over one hundred times, he quotes 
John only thrice. Frequently inappropriate texts are quoted 
from the Synoptics in support of an argument, while sayings 
recorded in the Fourth Gospel, which if quoted would have 
been conclusive, are ignored. Are we to conclude that 
Justin himself doubted the Apostolicity of the Gospel, or at 
any rate felt that in the eyes of the Church as a whole it had 
not yet the authority of the earlier Gospels? ‘In fact 
Justin acts like a modern apologetic writer trying to establish 
the pre-existence of Christ, but, in deference to critical 
objections, attempting to do so without reference to the 
Fourth Gospel.” ! 

(c) A similar conclusion is suggested by a study of the 
Epistles of Ignatius of Antioch (c. 115), whose testimony to 
the Gospel is thus summed up by Dr. Streeter?: ‘ His whole 
outlook and his theology have been profoundly influenced 
by the study of this Gospel ; but his use of it suggests that it is 
not yet recognized in his own Church as on the same level of 
authority as Matthew.’ 

1 Streeter, op. cit., p. 441. 2 Idem, p. 455. 
lv 


INTRODUCTION 


(d) Similarly, though the influence of the Fourth Gospel 
may with some probability be traced in the Didaché (dated 
by Harnack between 130 and 160; by others even earlier), 
the Epistle of Barnabas (variously dated between 70 and 140, 
the later date more probable), the Second Epistle of Clement 
(c. 120-150), the Shepherd of Hermas (c. 130-140), the Epistle 
to Diognetus (date and locality uncertain), it is only when 
we come down the years as far as Theophilus of Antioch 
(c. 180) that the Gospel is unequivocally quoted as inspired 
scripture and expressly ascribed to the Apostle John. 

To sum up, though the influence of the Gospel is evident 
quite early in the second century, and apparent quotations 
are found thus early in contemporary writings, but without 
authentication of authorship, it is not till c. 180 that the 
Gospel is quoted as definitely Apostolic. Would this be so if 
the author were indeed the Apostle John or even that ‘ Dis- 
ciple,’ distinct from the son of Zebedee, ‘whom Jesus 
loved ’ ? 

5. The significant use, with reference to the ‘ John’ who 
lived in Ephesus and wrote the Gospel, of the title ‘ disciple ’ 
rather than ‘apostle.’ This would suit the Elder, especially 
if he had already become identified with the Beloved Disciple, 
better than the Apostle John. 

Even Irenaeus, though he speaks of John some sixteen 
times as ‘the disciple of the Lord,’ only twice, and that 
merely by implication, allows him the title Apostle. Is this 
unconscious evidence that the ‘ John,’ of whom Irenaeus 
claimed to have heard Polycarp and the Elders speak (see 
below, p. lvii), was not the Apostle but the Elder? In 
the evidence of Polycrates too (p. Ix) there is a significant 
absence of the decisive title Apostle. The same thing is true 
of the Monarchian Prologue to the Gospel (probably to be 
dated during the first third of the third century) which, while 
it refers to John as ‘ Evangelist ’ and ‘ Disciple,’ never ex- 
pressly designates him as the ‘ Apostle John.’ 

6. Even such evidence as is usually claimed most strongly 
to confirm the residence of John the son of Zebedee in Asia 
and the Apostolic authorship of the Gospel may be otherwise 

lvi 


INTRODUCTION 


interpreted. It is admitted, of course, that once tradition 
had hardened, belief in the Apostolic authorship became 
universal. Among the great names, Origen (A.D. 185-254), 
Clement of Alexandria (died c. 200), Eusebius (Bishop of 
Caesarea, A.D. 314-340), though the latter emphasizes the 
existence of a second ‘ John,’ have no doubt that he who 
ruled the Asian Church and wrote the Fourth Gospel was 
John the Apostle, the disciple whom Jesus loved. But 
stress has been laid specially on the evidence of three 
witnesses : 

(a) Irenaeus (Bishop of Lyons, died c. 200), in a series of 
references to the residence in Asia of a John whom he regularly 
styles ‘the disciple of the Lord,’ states that ‘ John, the 
disciple of the Lord, who also leaned upon his breast, published 
a Gospel during his residence at Ephesus in Asia’ (Eusebius, 
H.E., v, 8), that the Gospel in question began ‘In the begin- 
ning was the Word, etc.,’ and that ‘all the elders, they of 
Asia who had conferred with John the disciple of the Lord, 
bear witness that their tradition had been delivered to them 
by John, for he remained on with them until the days of 
Trajan’ (sb7d., iii, 23). But the most important evidence is 
contained in the letter written by Irenaeus to his old friend 
Florinus, then resident in Rome (c. 190): ‘ For I saw thee, 
when I was still a boy, in lower Asia in company with Poly- 
carp, while thou wast faring prosperously in the royal court, 
and endeavouring to stand well with him. For I distinctly 
remember the incidents of that time better than events of 
recent occurrence . . . so that I can describe the very place 
in which the blessed Polycarp used to sit when he discoursed, 
and his goings out and his comings in, and his manner of life, 
and his personal appearance, and the discourses which he held 
before the people, and how he would describe his intercourse 
with John and with the rest who had seen the Lord, and how 
he would relate their words’ (Eusebius, H.E., v, 20). This 
would be conclusive evidence of the residence of the Apostle 
John in Asia, had we not already seen that Papias, also 
according to Irenaeus a friend of Polycarp, witnesses to the 
existence in Asia of another ‘ John ’ who was commonly styled 

lvii 


INTRODUCTION 


a‘ disciple of the Lord.’ Is it possible that Irenaeus is mistaken 
when he identifies the ‘ John,’ of whom Polycarp spoke, 
with the Apostle? In general we have little reason to trust 
Irenaeus’ critical judgment; witness his extraordinary 4 
priori argument for the eternal necessity of a fourfold Gospel. 
In the passage in question he is evidentlymaking the most of his 
connexion with Polycarp ; it is not likely that he was himself 
long resident in Asia, or was anything more than a youthful 
and casual hearer of Polycarp at Smyrna. That his knowledge 
of Polycarp was slight is evident from his statement that 
Polycarp ‘received his appointment in Asia from Apostles 
as Bishop in the Church of Smyrna’ (Adv. Haer., iii, 3, 4), 
whereas according to the Eastern tradition (e.g. in the Life 
of Polycarp ascribed to Pionius) he was merely ordained 
deacon and nominated as his successor by one Bucolus, 
Bishop of Smyrna, and not even Bucolus was the first Bishop. 
If then Irenaeus’ connexion with Polycarp was but slight, he 
may well have been guilty of a misunderstanding. Possibly 
Polycarp, like his contemporary Papias, was in the habit of 
alluding to John the Elder as the ‘disciple of the Lord,’ and 
Irenaeus, at the time a mere lad, may simply have assumed 
that John the Apostle was meant. In any case it is not a 
little significant that Irenaeus regularly styles ‘ John’ a ‘ dis- 
ciple of the Lord’; the decisive title ‘ Apostle ’ is absent from 
his testimony, though he habitually uses it of Paul. Indeed, 
Dr. Burney, on the basis of this fact, has seriously questioned 
whether Irenaeus ever made the mistake, usually attributed 
to him, of identifying the John of his informants with the 
Apostle. ‘We conclude,’ he says, ‘ without hesitation that 
by “ John the disciple of the Lord ” Irenaeus means John the 
presbyter. ... It is Eusebius who, jumping to the conclusion 
that John the Apostle must be the Evangelist, attaches to 
Irenaeus the charge of misconstruing Papias’s evidence which 
has stuck to him ever since. In reality Irenaeus appears to be 
an impeccable witness as to the early Asian tradition in 
regard to John; and he completes our evidence that John 
the Evangelist and disciple of the Lord, who survived to old 
age at Ephesus, was not the son of Zebedee, but the Presby- 
lvili 


INTRODUCTION 


ter. Burney’s argument is very attractive, though it may 
not carry complete conviction. 

(5) The evidence of Papias which, according to Burney, 
Irenaeus has been falsely charged of misconstruing, is con- 
tained in the famous passage already quoted (p. li). Irenaeus 
(Adv. Haer., v, 33, 4; Eusebius, H.E., iii, 39) states that 
Papias, ‘a companion of Polycarp,’ and Bishop of Hierapolis 
in Asia Minor, was ‘a hearer of John ’—meaning apparently 
the Apostle. For this Eusebius takes him to task, quoting 
Papias himself to prove that the ‘ John’ in question is not 
the Apostle but the Elder. Supposing (pace Burney) that 
Irenaeus does indeed mean the Apostle, it seems probable that 
Eusebius is right and Irenaeus is again guilty of confusing the 
two Johns. Once assume that, as a young man, Irenaeus 
misunderstood Polycarp’s references to ‘ John,’ and it is easy 
to see that, when later he came to read Papias, he would take 
it for granted that the latter was referring to the same John 
as his contemporary and friend Polycarp. ‘Hence any 
reference to John which Irenaeus found in Papias that was 
in the slightest degree ambiguous he would invariably interpret 
on the assumption that Papias, like Polycarp, when speaking 
of the personality or the writings of John, the disciple of the 
Lord, in Asia, could only mean the Apostle and author of the 
Gospel. Besides Irenaeus, we know, accepted 2 John as 
the work of the disciple of the Lord, who wrote the Gospel, 
whom he identified with the Apostle. The author of 2 
John styles himself ‘the Elder.” By Irenaeus, then, “ the 
Elder ” would naturally be taken as an alternative title of 
the Apostle.’ ? 

The passage from Papias which we are considering ends 
with the words: ‘I did not think that I could get so much 
profit from the contents of books as from the utterances of a 
living and abiding voice.’ Would not this agree better with 
the view that Papias himself considered the Gospel to be the 
work, not of the Apostle, but of the Elder? If he really 
possessed a written record, which he was convinced to be from 

1 C, F. Burney, The Aramaic Origin of the Fourth Gospel, p. 141. 

2 Streeter, The Four Gospels, pp. 447-8. 

lix 


yy 


INTRODUCTION 


the hand of the Apostle John himself, how could he suppose 
that any second-hand oral tradition was to be preferred as 
evidence for ‘ what was said by... John or Matthew or any 
other of the Lord’s disciples ? ’ 

Finally, though Eusebius tells us that Papias used ‘ testi- 
monies,’ or proof-texts, from the First Epistle of John, he is 
silent about any use by Papias of the Fourth Gospel. But 
suppose that Papias knew the Gospel to be by the Elder, 
and when he quoted it did so under such a title as, e.g., the 
‘Memoirs of the Elder,’ it would never occur to Eusebius, by 
whose time the Apostolic authorship had long ceased to be 
questioned, that such a work was to be identified with our 
Fourth Gospel. The ‘Silence of Eusebius,’ on which theme 
volumes have been written, would thus be explained. 

(c) Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, in a letter to Victor of 
Rome, written A.D. 195, says: ‘ Moreover John, who was both 
a martyr and a teacher, who leaned upon the bosom of the 
Lord, and became a priest wearing the sacerdotal plate—he 
fell asleep at Ephesus.’ The interesting point here is the 
reference to the priestly connexions of John of Ephesus, which 
would fit in well with the allusion in Jn. 18: 15, whether the 
‘disciple who was an acquaintance of the high-priest’ be 
identified, as we have suggested, with the Evangelist himself, 
or with his teacher, the Beloved Disciple, from whom, by the 
time of Polycrates, the Evangelist would no longer be dis- 
tinguished. It is generally assumed, probably rightly, that 
Polycrates, like Irenaeus and Papias whom he may have read, 
confused the two Johns and understood the John, to whom he 
alludes in the passage quoted, to be the Apostle. And, if he 
had any doubt in the matter, there would be every temptation 
to make the assumption. For Polycrates here is hardly an 
unbiased witness. The whole purpose of his letter to Victor 
is to defend the Churches of Asia, which had just been ex- 
communicated by Rome for declining to conform to the 
Roman practice in regard to the keeping of Easter. He is 
concerned to prove that in Asia as well as in Rome ‘ great 
lights have fallen asleep,’ and he claims for Asia the graves 
of Philip and his daughters, John, Polycarp, and other lesser 

Ix 


INTRODUCTION 


lights. And what better defence than to hint that Ephesus, 
too, no less than Rome, had her Apostle? ‘ Tradition always 
errs on the patriotic side, and in much less time (than that 
which had elapsed between John’s death and Polycrates’ 
letter) would have contrived to identify John of Asia with 
the only Apostle who could compare with Peter in prestige.’ ! 
Yet it is significant that, while Polycrates definitely calls 
Philip an Apostle, John has no such title here given him ; 
also Polycrates gives him a curiously lowly place in his list of 
the ‘lights of Asia.’ Philip stands first, then his daughters, 
then John. Does Polycrates unconsciously preserve a tra- 
ditional order of precedence dating from a time when ‘ John’ 
was not yet regarded as an Apostle, and was therefore inferior 
in dignity to Philip ? 

From the foregoing study of the external evidence it is 
easy to understand how within one hundred years John the 
Elder and Evangelist of Asia would almost inevitably come 
to be identified with the Apostle of the same name. The 
Redactor himself did much to set the tendency under way, 
and the naive desire to secure Apostolic authority for the 
Asian tradition would hasten it. Indeed, there is a strong 
suspicion that a similar confusion has taken place between 
Philip the Apostle and Philip the Evangelist. At any rate 
it is a curious coincidence that the Evangelist of Acts 21: 8 
and the ‘ Apostle ’ of Polycrates’ letter to Victor should both 
have had daughters who were prophetesses. The ease with 
which such confusion would take place is also shown by the 
fact that John the Seer, who (as was remarked as early as 
Dionysius of Alexandria, 248-265) must have been quite a 
different person from our Evangelist, was also identified with 
the Apostle by Justin Martyr. If John the Elder and writer 
of the Gospel also lived in Asia tradition would almost cer- 
tainly fail to distinguish these two Asian Johns from one 
another and from the Apostle of the same name. ‘ However 
diverse in character, language and doctrinal standpoint, the 
four anonymous writings of the Ephesian Canon (the three 
Epistles and the Gospel) would inevitably come to be 

1 Streeter, op. cit., p. 454. 
Ixi 


INTRODUCTION 


attributed to the same apostolic hand as the pseudepigraphic 
fifth, the Revelation.’ } 


IX. THE DATE OF THE GOSPEL 


In attempting to determine the approximate date of the 
Gospel’s composition we may fix two extreme limits. 

The terminus a quo is the date of the latest of the 
Synoptics to which John has been shown to be indebted, in 
this case Luke, which may be dated c. 80, or, if it be held 
proved that Luke used Josephus, c. 95. 

As for the terminus ad quem, by no possibility can it be 
pushed back later than say c. 180, by which time, e.g., Irenaeus 
regarded all four Gospels as Holy Scripture. As we have seen, 
references to the Gospel, but without authentication of its 
Apostolic origin, may be traced with various degrees of 
probability in earlier writings. A cautious conclusion would 
be that, although ‘the first reliable traces of the existence of 
the Fourth Gospel are found in the Afology of Justin 
Martyr,’? yet its use by ec. 135 by Basilides (flor. 117-138) 
and the Valentinian Gnostics seems so probable that the 
terminus ad quem may be safely brought forward at least 
to that date. There is a certain amount of evidence, incon- 
clusive in detail but in its cumulative effect impressive, 
that the Gospel was known considerably earlier. If it be held 
proved that John the Elder is the author, the date of com- 
position can hardly be later than 100-110. If Papias’ descrip- 
tion of ‘ John’ as a ‘disciple of the Lord’ and Polycarp’s 
as one ‘ who had seen the Lord ’ are to be taken literally, it 
will be almost necessary to bring the date forward to the 
previous decade ; this would certainly be the case if we identify 
the anonymous disciple of 18: 15 with the Evangelist. But 
even so, a date earlier than 95 is not necessary. Both 
Gospel and First Epistle leave the impression that they are 
the work of an old man. The Gospel is clearly the fruit of 
a lifetime of Christian experience, meditation and communion, 
while a writer who in one paragraph can address his readers 

1 B. W. Bacon, Jesus and Paul, p. 200. 
2 Heitmiiller, Die Schriften des Neuen Testamentes, ii, Pp. 709. 


Ixii 


INTRODUCTION 


as both ‘fathers’ and ‘little children’ (x Jn. 3 : 13 and 18), 
is likely to have been a man of venerable age. Perhaps 
A.D. 95-105 is the likeliest decade in which to date the 
Gospel. 


X. CONCLUSION 


We conclude then that three persons have played their 
part in reducing our Gospel to its present form, of whom the 
second is the author in the true sense of the word, who has 
stamped upon the book the marks of his genius and welded 
it into an organic whole. 

(1) Behind the Gospel stands the figure of the Witness, 
the ‘Disciple whom Jesus loved,’ a young Jerusalemite 
disciple, outside the number of the Twelve, but admitted to 
the inner circle during the closing days. In his memoirs, if 
indeed he ever wrote such, he probably recorded mainly what 
he himself had seen and heard, though he may well have 
also questioned the Eleven, and of the information thus 
gained some might point ultimately to, amongst others, John, 
the son of Zebedee, who on that assumption might, as Harnack 
says, ‘stand in some way or other behind the Fourth Gospel.’ 
More than this we cannot claim for John the Apostle. The 
Witness must remain shrouded in his self-chosen anonymity 
unless we care to venture into the perilous realm of conjecture. 
Perhaps the most plausible suggestion is Dr. Swete’s, which 
identifies the Beloved Disciple with the ‘ Rich Young Ruler.’ 
The latter is introduced by the Synoptists towards the close 
of the ministry, just as is the Beloved Disciple in our Gospel ; 
he questions Jesus about ‘eternal life,’ a theme which 
dominates the Fourth Gospel; and finally we are told that 
‘ Jesus beholding him loved him.’ He may have repented 
of his ‘ great refusal’ and thrown in his lot with Jesus, and 
after the tragedy of the Crucifixion the old hesitation and 
diffidence may have reasserted itself in his desire to remain 
anonymous. The same qualities appear in Nicodemus, that 
other ‘ ruler’ who ‘ came to Jesus by night,’ who, it has been 
suggested, is the Fourth Gospel parallel to the Young Ruler. 
Can it be that the Witness had once been among those men- 

Ixili 


INTRODUCTION 


tioned with reproach in 12: 42f.? But, to use a phrase of 
Sanday, all such conjecture must, however interesting, remain 
nothing more than ‘ pious speculation.’ 

(2) The Evangelist himself, afterwards John the Elder of 
Ephesus, we conceive to have been a younger contemporary 
and disciple of the Witness. If he appears in the Gospel as 
the anonymous disciple of 18 : 15, we may assume that he had 
priestly connexions, from which it would follow that he 
may originally have been a Sadducee.! Such a supposition 
might help to explain the absence of the name ‘ Sadducee ’ 
from the Gospel (perhaps because John regarded it as a nick- 
name), the complete ignoring of the demon-world, and the 
conception of the resurrection appearances held by the 
Evangelist, who certainly does not unduly stress their bodily 
aspect : for, says Luke, ‘the Sadducees say there is no resur- 
rection, neither angel nor spirit’ (Acts 23:8). If 18:15 be 
taken to refer not to the Beloved Disciple, but to the Evangel- 
ist, Polycarp may still be right in classing John among those 
who had ‘seen the Lord.’ Jn. 1:14 and the opening verses 
of the First Epistle suggest that the Evangelist, though perhaps 
a mere boy at the time, may himself have seen and heard 
Jesus in the flesh. Though not old enough to have been a 
personal follower, Jesus may have had a place in his child- 
hood’s memories, so that he felt himself to belong to the 
generation (‘we,’ 1:14) to which the great revelation had 
been made. 

Whoever he was, the Evangelist was almost certainly a Jew, 
and in all probability, at least by birth and early training, a 
Jew of Palestine. He appears to havea first-hand knowledge 
of the topography of Palestine, and especially of Jerusalem, 
and also to be acquainted with Rabbinic tradition and the 
usages of the Temple system, though it may be argued that 
such knowledge might be acquired by a pilgrim to Jerusalem. 
Again, steeped though he is in Greek culture, the cast both 
of his thought and his language is essentially Hebraic. Though 
free from the grammatical mistakes which betray the Hebraic 
origin of the Apocalypse, John’s Greek style, with its limited 

‘ Cf. Strachan, The Fourth Evangelist, p. 158 ff. 
lxiv 


INTRODUCTION 


vocabulary, paratactic clauses, and poetic parallelisms, betrays 
a Jewish mind not yet complete master of the full resources 
of the Greek language. Indeed, on the strength of this lin- 
guistic evidence Dr. Burney! concludes that the Gospel as 
we now have it is a translation of an Aramaic original. 
Specially interesting are his examples of passages, difficult 
and obscure in the Greek, which become perfectly intelligible 
on the assumption of mistranslation of the Aramaic original : 
e.g. 7: 37-8, 8: 56, 10:29. Only a Semitic expert is qualified 
to judge whether or no Burney has proved his case, but at 
least he has made it clear that the Evangelist was a man 
whose thoughts naturally expressed themselves in Aramaic 
idiom. The Gospel’s close, sometimes even verbal, depen- 
dence upon the Greek Gospel of Mark would seem to weigh 
against the theory that it was actually written in Aramaic. 
Curiously the phenomena, on which Burney bases his argu- 
ment, occur much more frequently in the discourses than in 
the narrative portions of the Gospel, which suggests that the 
discourses alone may have been translated from an original 
Aramaic draft. Would this imply that they embody a larger 
proportion of authentic sayings of Jesus, originally spoken 
in Aramaic, than is usually granted ? Dr. Burney’s researches 
have at least shown that more prominence, than has of late 
been allowed, must be given to the Jewish basis of much that 
is distinctive in our Evangelist’s thought. 

Removing later in life from Jerusalem to Asia Minor the 
Evangelist would come into touch with the Alexandrine 
modes of thought which have left so clear an influence on his 
Gospel. Eventually we are to suppose that he settled in 
Ephesus (though Burney, in order to secure the necessary 
Aramaic-speaking readers, suggests that the Gospel may have 
been written at Antioch in Syria, where John is presumed 
to have resided for a time before his final settlement at 
Ephesus), where in his old age he wrote the Gospel for the 
benefit of the largely Hellenistic Church of which he had 
become the leader. The relation of the First Epistle to the 
Gospel has been much disputed, but any discussion of the 

1 C, F. Burney, The Avamaic Origin of the Fourth Gospel, 1922. 


lxv 
B 


INTRODUCTION 


problem is outwith the scope of the present volume. If, as 
we have seen reason to conclude, the Epistle is from the same 
hand as the Gospel, we may suppose that its purpose was to 
commend to the Churches of Asia the general standpoint and 
teaching of the Gospel, and to conciliate such conservative 
opinion, as might look askance at this new-fangled ‘ spiritual 
Gospel,’ by insisting, as does the Epistle from its very first 
words, that ‘ for all his sympathy with the philosophic intel- 
lectuals, the author will have nothing to do with any kind of 
Gnostic ‘docetism’ which makes the humanity of Christ 
unreal,” } 

(3) Before it reached its final form the Gospel was revised 
by a later Redactor. The occasion of this revision may have 
been the death of John of Ephesus. Certainly the latter 
was dead by the time the Appendix was added, for 21 : 20-24 
is obviously intended to correct some current misconception 
of a traditional saying of Jesus about the Beloved Disciple, 
which the latter’s death, or rather the death of the person 
who had come to be identified with him, had made a stumbling- 
block to faith. Whether or no the Gospel had been published 
earlier without the Appendix must remain uncertain. But 
with the death of the great leader of the Ephesian Church the 
need would be felt of a permanent record of his teaching, and 
it may be that the Gospel, which hitherto had been reserved 
for the instruction of an inner group of advanced disciples, 
was now revised for publication to a wider circle. This re- 
vision was undertaken by the Redactor, who evidently felt 
himself free to rearrange the order of the sections, and also, 
it may be, to interpolate a certain amount of new material 
and to emphasize certain polemical topics (e.g. the question 
of the ‘ Baptist Sect ’) which had become of greater urgency 
since the time when the Evangelist first wrote his Gospel, 
If it be held proved that the Gospel was originally written 
in Aramaic, an attractive theory would be that it was the 
Redactor who translated it into Greek. Such a theory has 
the great advantage that it provides a more definite occasion 
not only for the interpolation of new material, but also for 

1 Streeter, op. cit., p. 470. 
Ixvi 


INTRODUCTION 


the disturbance of what appears to have been the original 
order of the text. This cannot always be put down to accident, 
nor is it quite easy to understand why a chance ‘ editor ’ should 
have set himself to rearrange and to insert additions into a 
Gospel already in circulation in much the same form as that 
in which now we have it. But if at some point it was neces- 
sary for the Gospel to be translated and adapted for the use 
of a new and wider circle of readers, we may well suppose 
that the translator might take the opportunity of making 
what additions he felt to be necessary: and, as will be noted 
in the commentary, the most obvious cases of disarrangement 
of the text occur just at the points where interpolation is 
suspected.? 

Finally, be it said that to hold the Redactor responsible for 
encouraging the tendency to identify the Evangelist with the 
Beloved Disciple and the latter with John the son of Zebedee 
(both parts of which double identification we hold to be 
incorrect) is not, as Sanday alleges, ‘ wantonly to accuse him 
of untruth’ and thereby to ‘libel the dead.’ To write, or to 
publish another’s work, under a pseudonym was a recognized 
literary device of the age, and no blame whatever attached 
to those who did so. Witness the second-century writer who 
published the story of Paul and Thecla under the name of the 
Apostle Paul, and when reproached for doing so merely 
replied that he did it out of love for Paul. Tertullian, who 
. records the incident, imputes no blame to him, but merely 
ridicules him, ‘as if his work could do anything to increase 
the fame of Paul!’ Ancient literary ethics were not ours, 
and we must refrain from reading back modern standards into 
a remote past. 

Have we not been apt to overestimate the importance of 
the question of our Gospel’s authorship ? Is the Gospel any 
the less precious if John the son of Zebedee had no part in its 
composition ? One recalls the oft-quoted words of Thiersch : 
‘If there were a great picture which tradition had affirmed to 
be painted by Raphael, and it was proved not to have been 
painted by Raphael, but by some otherwise unknown artist, 

1 See an article in The Expositor, November 1923, p. 370 ff. 


Ixvii 


INTRODUCTION 


the world would have not one great painting the less, but 
one great painter the more.” Whoever wrote it, the Fourth 
Gospel will always be the Holy of Holies of Christian litera- 
ture. Whoever Witness, Evangelist, Redactor may have 
been, to all three the world owes its gratitude for the book 
which is, as Luther puts it, the ‘chiefest of the Gospels, 
unique, tender, and true.’ 


xviii 


PHE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


ANALYSIS 


PRELUDE. CHAPTER I 


I. Prologue: The Incarnation of the Logos (1-18). 
2. Historical Introduction: The Old Master and the New 
(19 -51). 
Act I. THe NEw GosPEL AND THE OLD 
I. The Relation of the New to the Old. 
Illustrations : 
(i) Water turned into Wine. (2: I-II.) 
(ii) Cleansing of the Temple. (2: 12-22.) 
Themes : 
(i) The New Birth—in relation to Pharisaism. 
(2623-3 213453 31-30.) 
(ii) The New Master—in relation to the Baptist. 
(3 : 22-30.) 
(iii) The New Worship—in relation to the Samari- 
tans. (4: I-42.) 
2. The Appropriation of the New Gospel. 
Illustrations : 
(i) The Officer’s Son healed: Christ restores Life. 
(4: 43-54.) 
(ii) The 5,000 fed: Christ sustains Life. (6: I-15.) 
(iii) Christ walks on the Water: The ever-present 
Saviour. (6: 16-21.) 


Theme : 
The partaking of Christ the Bread of Life. 
(6 : 22-71.) 
3. The Result of the New Gospel. 
Illustration : 
The Lame Man healed on the Sabbath. (5: 1-16.) 
Theme : 


Religion not restrain but Life. (5: 17-47; 
7215-24; 8: 12-20.) 
I 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Act II. Tue ConFLict oF THE NEW GOSPEL WITH THE OLD 
I. The Divine Origin of the Christ. 
Illustration : 
Jesus and his Brothers. (7: I-14, 25-27.) 
Theme: 
Christ’s Divine Commission. (7:28-8:11 ; 8: 2I- 


59.) 
2. The Divine Nature of the Christ. 


Illustration : 
The Blind Man healed. (9: 1-38.) 
Theme : 
Christ the Light, the Good Shepherd, the Door. 
(9 : 39-10 : 42.) 


3. The Divine Work of the Christ—the Gift of Life and the 
Awaking of Faith. 
Illustration : 
The Raising of Lazarus. (II : I-57.) 
Themes : 
(i) The Homage of a Disciple. (12: 1-8.) 
(ii) The Homage of the Jews. (12 : 9-19.) 
(iii) The Homage of the Gentile World. (12: 20-36.) 
Conclusion : 
The Struggle of Faith with Unbelief. (12 : 37-50.) 


Act III, THE ENJOYMENT OF THE NEW GOSPEL: CHRIST’S 
COMMUNION WITH HIS OWN 
Illustrations : 
(i) The Washing of the Disciples’ Feet. (13 : 1-38.) 
(ii) The Allegory of the Vine, (15 : I-17.) 
Themes : 
(i) The Time of Separation. (15 : 18-16: 33.) 
(ii) The Promised Communion. (14: I-31.) 
(iii) The Prayer of Consecration. (17: 1-26.) 
FINALE 
1. The Arrest and Trial. (18 : 1-19: 16.) 


2. The Crucifixion of Christ. (19 : 17-42.) 
3. The Resurrection of Christ. (20 : I-31.) 


EPILOGUE 
The Appendix. (21: 1-25.) 
2 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


PRELUDE 


SECTION I. PROLOGUE: THE INCARNATION OF THE 
Locos (1: 1-18) 


THE first eighteen verses form an introductory preface to the 
Gospel. This ‘ Prologue’ is poetical in structure, and is 
virtually a Hymn to the Logos, consisting of a scheme of 
distiches and tristiches, each showing a more or less complete 
and characteristically Hebraic parallelism within itself, with 
the addition of two prose parentheses at verses 6-8 and 15. 
Though the Prologue cannot be fully understood except in the 
light of the Gospel itself, it may be regarded as a summary in 
the sense that it adumbrates the three cardinal ideas of the 
Gospel: (1) Jesus Christ in his Person is the Revelation of 
God (vers. r and 14); (2) the peculiar work of Jesus was 
to impart life (ver. 4) ; (3) this life is communicated through 
union with Christ (vers. 12-13). 

St. John, says Chrysostom, ‘ made ready his soul as some 
well-fashioned and jewelled lyre with strings of gold, and 
yielded it for the utterance of something great and sublime 
to the spirit,’ and here we have the prelude to his symphony. 


The Logos existed in the very beginning, 
the Logos was with God, 
the Logos was divine. 
He was with God in the very beginning: 
through him all existence came into being, 
no existence came into being apart from him. 
In him life lay, 
and this life was the Light for men : 
amid the darkness the Light shone, 
but the darkness did not master it. 

} 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


The first sentence strikes the keynote which rings through 
1 the whole Gospel: The Logos existed in the very beginning. 
The appearance on earth of the Incarnate Logos is the first 
act of a New Creation to be compared and contrasted with 
the first creation of the universe. (Paul voices the same idea 
in 2 Cor. 4:6.) Here, as in Gen. 1: I, the beginning is 
the initial moment of the world’s creation, but the word 
_ existed implies the e¢ernal pre-existence of the Logos in the 
sense of Prov. 8: 23 (of Wisdom): ‘Iwas set up from ever- 
lasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.’ (Cf. 
17:5 andi Jn. 1: 1, Rev.3: 14.) The term Logos, though in 
the N.T. used absolutely only here and at 14, is introduced 
without any explanation as one of those semi-popular scientific 
terms current at the time which all would understand. (See 
Introduction, p. xxxiv ff.) 

The Logos was with God : ‘ towards God,’ ‘not absorbed 
in Him, but standing over against Him as a distinct person’ 
(E. F. Scott). The word with (in the Greek), while em- 
phasizing the communion of the Logos with God, yet safe- 
guards the idea of his individual personality: it expresses 
nearness combined with the sense of movement towards God, 
and so indicates an active relationship. The Logos and God 
do not simply exist side by side, but are on terms of living 
intercourse, and such fellowship implies separate personality. 
The Logos, as Chrysostom says, is ‘ not in God but with God, as 
person with person, eternally.’ This distinction of persons, so 
strongly emphasized by the second proposition of verse 1, 
though still implied, is resolved into a community of essence in 
the third proposition, the Logos was divine. John does not say 
“the Logos was God’ ; still less does he imply merely that the 
Logos possessed certain divine qualities. He means that the 
Logos was partaker of the divine essence. In what sense 
Christ can thus be ‘ God’ and yet not the whole Godhead but 
a Person distinct from God, is just the problem which the 
doctrine of the Trinity seeks to solve. 

2-3 After summing up in a single sentence the three propositions 
of verse I, John dwells upon the part played by the Logos in 
the World’s Creation. Through him all existence came 


4 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 1-5 


into being : the last three words imply a subtle contrast with 
the eternal being of the Logos (cf. 8: 58, ‘I have existed before 
Abraham was bom’); through implies that the Logos 
is not the Source of Creation but the agent of God, who is 
Himself the Source, a distinction which Paul also makes in 
I Cor. 8:6, ‘ There is one God the Father from whom all 
comes .. . one Lord Jesus Christ by whom all exists.’ The 
repetition of the same truth in a negative form is an example 
of the poetic parallelism which we have remarked in the 
Prologue, but it is characteristic even of John’s prose (cf. 
3:16, 1 Jn. 1:5, 5:12). In the words no existence... 
apart from him John disowns the multitude of intermediate 
spiritual beings who, according to the Gnostics, mediated the 
creative activity of the supreme God—‘ the angelic Rulers 
and Powers’ of Col. 2: 15 (see Introduction, p. xxxii). 

In John’s conception of the creative activity of ‘ the Word’ 
_ we have an echo both of the Stoic doctrine of the ‘ Sper- 

matikos’ or ‘ generative’ Logos, and also of the formula of 
creation in Gen. r ‘and God said.’ ‘ John gathers up all 
these sayings of God into a single saying, living and endowed 
with activity and intelligence, from which all divine orders 
emanate’ (Godet). God’s instrument of creation was the 
Word of power in which He uttered Himself. 

Westcott and others join the last words in the Greek of 
verse 3 (A.V. ‘that was made’) with verse 4, and translate, 
‘Without him was not anything made. That which hath 
been made was life in him,’ i.e. ‘creation has not “ life in 
itself” (5: 26), but it had and has life in the Word ’ (Westcott). 
But the natural expression would then be not ‘ was life,’ but 
“had life’ ; this punctuation, which has the support of the 
earliest ‘ Fathers’ (the usual punctuation being ‘little if at 
all earlier than the Fourth Century ’—W. H.), was possibly 
suggested by the apparent tautology of verse 3 as usually 
punctuated. 

If it be retained as the earlier and more difficult and therefore 
undoubtedly the preferable reading, an interpretation other 
than Westcott’s seems necessary. Loisy takes ‘that which 
was made’ as a ‘nominative absolute,’ picked up with a 


5 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


change of case in the following clause (for which construction 
cf. 1: 12,15: 2, 17: 2, 24), and gives the meaning ‘ as for that 
which was made (i.e. the created world), in it there was life’ 
(ce qui était devenu, en lui—en cela, dans le monde—fut vie). 
‘In it’ then refers not to the Logos but to creation: through 
the activity of the Logos the life-principle first appeared in 
the world. With one slight modification this seems a perfectly 
acceptable interpretation: take ‘life’ not as subject, but as 
predicate (the Greek has no definite article) and supply ‘ the 
Logos’ as the subject: ‘as for creation, in it the Logos was 
the principle of life, and this life (this time with the article) 
was the light of men.’ 

4 Whatever rendering be adopted the central thought remains 
that in him life lay. If we accept the punctuation in the 
text there is a gradation from the ‘ through him’ of verse 3 
to the in him of verse 4. Creation, which came into being 
through the Word, now finds the spring of its life 7m him: 
‘having been the root of the tree the Logos was also its sap’ 
(Godet). (For the significance in the Gospel of the term 
‘life’ see Introduction, p. xxxix.) The meaning here is more 
comprehensive than usual, and can hardly be restricted to any 
particular form of life: from the Creative Logos springs life 
in its most perfect development for every form of existence 
according to its measure (cf. Acts 17: 28, ‘in him we live and 
move and exist’). The reference is still to the pre-incarnate 
Logos, and the force of the imperfect tense lay is to suggest 
the ideal possibility rather than the realized enjoyment of 
‘life.’ The Word alone had power to give life; but it was 
only by the manifestation of the Word and his acceptance by 
men that the power could be released and the ideal realized in 
experience. 

This life was the Light for men: could men but have 
appropriated this life, they would have been partakers of the 
hght—another important Johannine term (for which see 
Introduction, p. xxviii). That life, which for all things else 
was but the fountain of existence, for man, as a rational and 
moral being, contained the promise of light, a term chosen 
perhaps just because of its largeness and vagueness and almost 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 1-5 


impossible to sum up in one definition, but referring generally to 
the divine truth (for which see Introduction, p. xxxviii), which 
illuminates both reason and conscience. In the case of man 
the ideal life manifests itself specially in the knowledge of moral 
good, a gift accessible only to the possessor of both reason and 
conscience, the two faculties which distinguish man from the 
rest of creation. As beauty is the normal accompaniment of 
life in a flower, so should light be the normal accompaniment 
of life in man. For this connexion of life and light we may 
compare Ps. 36: 9, ‘ With Thee is the fountain of life: in Thy 
light shall we see light.’ 

But though amid the darkness the Light shone, the darkness 5 
did not master it. The divine truth was seeking to reveal it- 
self even before the Incarnation—for the reference in shone 
is not yet to the appearance of the Logos in Christ. In no age 
did God leave Himself without the witness of ‘the Light’: 
in the very heart of humanity given over to moral and 
spiritual darkness the light was shining had men but the 
spiritual insight to ‘comprehend it’ (A.V.). In this opposi- 
tion of light and darkness (cf. 8: 12, r Jn. 1: 5-7) there is 
perhaps an echo of the Gnostic antithesis of two worlds, 
the lower and the higher, the earthly and the heavenly, the 
world of light and the world of darkness (see note, p. xxxii). 
But John is concerned not with a metaphysical or cosmic 
but rather with a moral antithesis, and he can hardly be 
accused of the physical dualism with which the Gnostics 
were tainted. The Prologue, like the Gospel, contemplates 
the conflict not of a dualistic universe but of faith with 
unbelief. 

The darkness did not master it: the word in Greek, as 
indeed in English, has two senses: either (a) to ‘ grasp,’ 
‘comprehend’ (of mental grip: so we speak of ‘ mastering a 
problem ’) ; or (2) to ‘ overcome,’ ‘subdue.’ The Greek inter- 
preters, Origen, Chrysostom, etc., take the word in the latter 
sense, e.g., Theophylact says, ‘The darkness pursued the 
light, but found it invincible.’ The word occurs in just this 
sense in 12: 35, ‘ Walk while you have the light, that the 
darkness may not overtake you’ (cf. 1 Thess.5: 4). The clause 


7 


6 
d 


8 
) 


Io 


II 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


would then mean that the surrounding darkness could not 
subdue the light. ‘The whole phrase is indeed a startling 
paradox. The light does not banish the darkness ; the dark- 
ness does not overpower the light. Light and darkness 
co-exist in the world side by side (Westcott). But the first 
(a) interpretation gives the word its radical meaning, which is 
to ‘seize’ or ‘ take possession of’ (cf. Rom. 9: 30, ‘ attained 
righteousness’; 1 Cor. 9: 24, ‘ gains the prize’; Phil. 3: 12, 
‘I press forward to appropriateit’). By Plato the word is used 
of mental comprehension, as here in the A.V. rendering. 
According to this interpretation the reference is to the failure 
of men in their moral darkness to appreciate and appropriate 
the light, a meaning which, in view of verses g-II (which in 
the original draft of the Gospel perhaps followed immediately 
after verse 5, see below), seems most in harmony with the 
context. Dr. Burney, apparently preferring the sense of 
(b), but recognizing that (a) is the natural meaning of the Greek 
word, explains the difficulty by the suggestion that, when the 
Gospel was translated into Greek, one Aramaic word meaning 
“to darken’ was confused with and translated as another 
almost identical word meaning ‘to receive,’ the sense of the 
original Aramaic being ‘ the Light shone in the darkness and 
the darkness did not obscure it.’ 


A man appeared, sent by God, whose name was John: he 
came for the purpose of witnessing, to bear testimony to 
the Light, so that all men might believe by means of him. 
He was not the Light; it was to bear testimony to the 
Light that he appeared. The real Light, which enlightens 
every man, was coming then into the world : 

he entered the world— 
the world which existed through him— 
yet the world did not recognize him ; 
he came to what was his own, 
yet his own folk did not welcome him. 


12 On those who have accepted him, however, he has conferred 


13 


the right of being children of God, that is, on those who 
believe in his Name, who owe this birth of theirs to God, 
8 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 6-13 


not to human blood, nor to any impulse of the flesh or 
of man. 


The anticipation in verses 6-8 of John’s witness, to which 6 
we recur at verse Ig, seems very abruptly introduced into the 
Prologue. Verses 6-8 interrupt the exposition of the Logos 
doctrine, and verse 9 would very fittingly follow immediately 
after verse 5; nor is there any place for these verses in the 
rhythmical scheme into which the Hymn to the Logos falls. 
The whole passage 1-18 is so carefully composed that we can 
hardly believe that the original author is responsible for the 
violent interruption caused by these verses, which should prob- 
ably be assigned to the Redactor (see p. xliv). The motive 
for the addition is in the first place the Redactor’s desire 
to assert the superiority of Jesus to John, which we have 
noted as one of the polemical aims of the Gospel (see p. xxx). 
The introduction of John at this point also serves to connect 
the theological doctrine of the Logos with the historical 
narrative in such a way that the Gospel is brought more into 
line with the Synoptic tradition—another characteristic aim 
of the Redactor. ‘Dans la tradition synoptique le baptéme 
du Christ appariit comme la consécration de son réle mes- 
sianique; . . . dela vient que la définition méme de l’incarna- 
tion du Logos se trouve maintenant comme enchassée dans le 
paragraph consacré au Baptiste; ... mais la combinaison 
appartient au rédacteur qui a surchargé le prologue ’(Loisy). 

Aman appeared, sent by God—the words man, appeared 
imply a subtle contrast (but is it intentional?) with the 
eternal existence of the divine Logos, while in sent we have 
a reference to Mal. 3: 1, another echo of the Synoptics (Mk. 
I: 2, etc.; cf. also Jn. 3: 28)—whose name was John. It 
has been noted that our author alone among the Evangelists 
omits the epithet ‘ Baptist,’ by which tradition distinguished 
the Prophet from John the Apostle, from which omission it has 
been rather gratuitously deduced not only that ‘the author 
of our Gospel must have known the forerunner otherwise 
than by tradition’ (Godet), but even that he is ‘ himself 
the other John of the Gospel history,’ and that therefore ‘ it is 


9 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


perfectly natural that he should think of the Baptist, apart 
from himself, as John only’ (Westcott). As no other John 
is mentioned by name in the Gospel the distinguishing epithet 
is unnecessary. Moreover, our Evangelist, in contrast to his 
predecessors, ignores the fact that Jesus was baptized by John 

7 (see p. 33). He came for the purpose of witnessing, one of 
the fundamental ideas of the Gospel, for indeed ‘the whole 
of the Gospel is a citing of witnesses’ (Dods). The first of 
this ‘ cloud of witnesses’ is John, who came to bear testimony 
to the Light both by fanning, by means of his call to repent- 
ance, the light of conscience wherein the Logos was already 
immanent in men’s hearts (cf. 46), but chiefly by pointing 
them to him who was himself the Logos incarnate. Here, as 
throughout the Gospel, the end of all witnessing is that all 
men might believe by means of him, that is, believe in Christ 
through John, not believe in God through Christ ; the point 
in question is the support lent to faith not by Christ but by 
John. For the significance of the term believe in the Gospel 
compare 3:15. While from one point of view the life-giving 
power of Christ is self-evident (5: 34), yet if all men are 
to believe, there must be many who ‘ believe though they have 
never seen’ (20: 29), and whose faith must be supported by 
the witness of others. 

8 He was not the Light: the emphasis is not on the verbal 
idea but on the subject: ‘it was not John who was the 
Light, but another’; it was merely to bear testimony to the 
Light that he appeared (the last word being added to supply 
an awkward ellipse in the Greek). Though the same contrast 
between Christ and John appears also in the Synoptics (Mt. 
3: II-12, etc.), the absolute superiority of Jesus would hardly 
be so emphasized and reiterated throughout the Gospel 
(I: 15, 3: 28-30, 5: 36, 10: 41) were it not being denied in 
certain quarters. Our Gospel insists that John is not the light, 
but merely a lamp that burns and shines with a borrowed 

9 glow (5: 35), in contrast to the Logos who is the real Light. 
‘True’ or ‘real’ in our Gospel (cf. 6: 32, 15: I, 17: 3, etc.) 
signifies not so much the true in opposition to the false as the 
ideal and perfect pattern in contrast to the imperfect or sym- 

Io 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 6-13 


bolical imitation. There is here an obvious kinship of thought 
with the Platonic theory of ‘ideas,’ but, as Loisy rightly 
remarks, ‘It does not follow (from this trace of Hellenism) 
that the spiritual world is the “ world of ideas” (Heitmiiller) : 
it is the world of divine and heavenly realities.’ John is 
preparing the way for his claim that in Christ we have the 
absolute revelation of God, a message which may be capable of 
new and larger interpretation (cf. 16: 14, ‘ He—the Spirit— 
will draw upon what is mine and disclose it to you’), but will 
always be the same message revealed through him perfectly 
and therefore once for all. The forerunners of Christ, even 
John, the greatest of them, were only reflections of the light 
which was directly manifest in him, who is accordingly the 
only genuine light which enlightens every man (cf. ver. 4)— 
the words on which the Quakers found their doctrine that to 
every man God gives a sufficiency of inward light and grace: 
every conscience in some degree is illuminated by the im- 
manent Light, which from the beginning of time, and now 
particularly in the days of the Baptist, was coming into the 
world. The last words should almost certainly be connected 
with ‘ the real Light,’ and not with ‘every man,’ as under- 
stood by most ancient commentators and some modern, who 
translate with the A.V. ‘ (the Logos) was the true light, which 
lighteth every man that cometh (or ‘‘as he is coming’’) 
into the world,’ implying that the inner light is a man’s birth- 
gift bestowed in largest measure at the moment when he enters 
life, an idea which, ‘ in spite of Wordsworth’s greatest Ode, is 
hardly true’ (Westcott). In support of this reading it may 
be noted that there seems to have been a common Rabbinic 
phrase, ‘ all comers into the world’ (e.g. see a striking parallel 
to our passage from the Midrash Rabba on Leviticus, par. 
31,6: ‘ Thou givest light to those that are above and to those 
that are below, and to all comers into the world’). But here 
‘coming into the world’ seems to demand the same reference 
as ‘entered the world’ in the following verse, and indeed in 
our Gospel the phrase is applied almost technically to the 
appearing of Christ (3:19, 6:14, 12: 46, 18:37). Here 
the words are not explanatory of the relative clause—‘ which 
II : 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN — 


lighteth every man by coming into the world’ (Godet)— 
but contain in themselves the main verbal idea of the sen- 
tence, ‘was’ and ‘coming,’ though widely separated in the 
Greek, being linked together as a periphrastic imperfect (cf. 
II: 1, 18: 18, etc.), possibly with the intention of ‘ describing 
a coming which was progressive, slowly accomplished, 
combined with a permanent being’ (Westcott). This gradual 
self-manifestation of the immanent Logos reached its consum- 
10 mation when he entered the world. Those who delight in 
meticulous analysis may find a gradation in the three phrases, 
‘entered the world,’ ‘ came to what was his own’ (11), ‘ tarried 
among us’ (14), understanding the first of the vague ‘ mani- 
festation of the Light as immanent’ (Westcott), the second 
of the more definite O.T. revelation, and the third, and this 
only, of the appearance of the Word incarnate in Christ. 
Though not excluding altogether the wider reference, we may 
assume that from Io onwards John has chiefly in view the 
personal revelation of the Logos in Christ. The gradation 
is not so much one of time as of emphasis: the Logos ‘ was 
on his way to the world,’ ‘he arrived,’ ‘he came to his own 
folk,’ ‘he actually made himself one with them.’ The world 
should no doubt be understood here in its primary sense of 
the sum total of the results of the creative activity of the 
Logos, the world which existed through him. The Logos 
filled the world ‘as the Spirit of an artist fills his work’ (Godet), 
and yet the world did not recognize him (cf. 1 Cor. 1: 21). 
Here is the first hint of that tragic opposition of the world to 
the Christian community which is everywhere presupposed in 
the Gospel, and is doubtless due to the historical conditions 
under which it was written (cf. 7: 7, 15: 18, 16: 20, 17: 14, 
etc., I Jn. 2: 15-17, 5:19). Though there are frequent 
traces of the Synoptic conception of God’s universal love 
for all the world (1: 29, 3: 16, 4: 42, 6: 33, 8: 12, I2: 47, 
etc.), John in general conceives the work of Christ to be to 
draw to himself certain disciples out of the unbelieving mass 
and to consecrate them as a people apart, within the world 
and yet “his own’ and no part of it (13: 1, 14: 19, 22; 17: 9, 
etc.), just as Yahweh chose Israel as His ‘ peculiar people.’ 
12 


GHAPTER I, VERSES 6-13 


Here is the significance of the next verse, he came to what 11 
was his own, or to his own home (cf. 19: 27, 16: 32), a 
phrase no doubt applicable to the world in general, thought 
of as the property of the Logos who created it, but more 
probably referring to a smaller circle within the larger one 
(13: I—‘ his own which were in the world’), that is, to the 
land and people of Israel, who in a special sense were God’s 
“peculiar treasure’ (Exod. 19:5, Deut. 7: 6-7). Yet his 
own folk did not welcome him, gave him no reception, the 
word used of welcoming a traveller to his rightful home, 
as in 14: 3—‘I will come back and take you to be 
with me.’ 

The Logos finds his own home shut against him, and yet 12 
there is a minority of individuals, so few as almost to be a 
countable number (the force of the Greek pronoun), who have 
accepted him, and on these he has conferred the right of being 
children of God. The man who ‘accepts’ (not so strong a 
word as ‘welcome’ above, but implying the desire to take 
something which is within reach: cf. 13 : 20) the Logos receives 
a legitimate title or warrant, a faculty not inherent (as main- 
tained by the Gnostic doctrine of the higher nature) but 
bestowed (Gk. exousia—not dynamis), in virtue of which 
he may become (A.V.) a child of God. The gift in view is not 
yet sonship but rather the title to sonship, which becomes a 
reality through the ‘new birth.’ There is an interesting 
parallel from Philo (Conf. ling. 28, quoted by E. F. Scott, 
The Fourth Gospel, p. 153): ‘ They who have real knowledge 
of the one Creator and Father of all things are rightly addressed 
as the sons of the one God. And even if we are not yet fit to 
be called the sons of God, still we may deserve to be called 
the children of His eternal image, of His most sacred Logos.’ 
When speaking of man’s relation to God John regularly uses 
‘child,’ not ‘son’ as does Paul, the reason being that Paul’s 
view of sonship is governed by the legal idea of ‘ adoption,’ 
which carries with it a new standing as ‘son’ in God’s sight 
(cf. Rom. 8: 15, Gal. 4: 5, Eph. 1: 5), whereas John’s view is 
wholly mystical, and is focused on the begetting of the ‘ child’ 
by the direct communication of God’s life: ‘son’ implies the 


c 13 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


dignity of heirship, ‘child’ a community of nature. We 
perhaps have here an echo of the language of the Greek 
Mystery-Religions, which employed the word here translated 
‘right’ (exousia) to express the ‘power’ bestowed upon 
the ‘reborn’ man to become as God Himself. But John’s 
interest is not in pagan mysticism but in Christian experience : 
he knew, as we all do, that what prevents a man from being a 
‘ child of God’ is not a disability of nature, but an inability of 
will which makes it impossible for him to believe that God is 
a Father. He therefore defines the new power which comes 
with the acceptance of the Logos by describing its possessors 
as those who believe in his Name, that is, acknowledge him 
to be all that he professes to be (name implying the sum of 
the qualities which belong to its bearer), for it is only through 
faith that they can claim their right to sonship (I Jn. 5: I, 
and for the part which must be played by the believer in the 
realization of sonship, cf. 2 Pet. 1: 3 ff., 10; Phil. 2: 12-13). 
In this verse John substitutes for Jewish nationalism the 
great Christian idea of individualism in matters of faith, while 
in his conception of a minority who have welcomed the light 
we have a parallel both with the Synoptic idea that ‘ many 
are called and few chosen,’ and also with the Pauline doctrine 
of a divine election: ‘only while Paul insists on the direct 
agency of God in choosing or rejecting, John makes use of the 
idea of predisposition on the part of men themselves ’ (Scott, 
Op. Cit:; <p.273): 

13 This believing minority is now further described as those 
who owe this birth of theirs to God, not to human blood, 
nor to any impulse of the flesh or of man—the negative clauses 
bearing no particular significance in themselves, but em- 
phasizing by way of contrast the true source of life, which is 
neither ordinary physical generation, nor sexual instinct, nor 
human purpose, but God Himself (cf. Rom. 8: 4 ff., Gal. 
5: 16 ff.). Unless the relative clause be taken rather un- 
aaturally not with the preceding words ‘ those who believe ’ 
but by a construction ad senswm with ‘ children of God,’ 
as descriptive of divine sonship in the ideal, the past tense of 
the verb (A.V. ‘were born’) would appear to imply that 


14 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 6-13 


regeneration, instead of being the result of the right bestowed 
by the Logos on believers, is anterior to faith, and due to an 
inherent spirituality of nature. This would be a Gnostic 
but hardly a Johannine conception. Perhaps this is to insist 
too rigorously on strict grammar; but the difficulty would 
be overcome and the sense greatly improved were it possible 
to adopt the Latin variant, according to which the relative 
sentence is a definition of the source of the life not of believers 
but of the Logos, who being born of God was thus able to give 
to those who received him power to become the children 
of God (cf. a somewhat similar thought in 6:57). Dr. 
Burney (Aramaic Origin, p. 34) shows that assuming an 
Aramaic original the difference between the two readings 
involves solely the insertion or omission of a single letter. 
He would render ‘ he has given them power to become sons of 
God in as much as he was born... .’ But even if this reading 
be accepted it is hardly true to say with Burney that ‘ the 
writer is drawing out the mystical import of the Virgin 
Birth,’ for the words in question would exclude the idea of 
human mother no less than of human father (cf. Heb. 7: 3). 
The thought of the Virgin birth is outside John’s perspective 
altogether ; indeed, he would seem to replace that doctrine 
by the doctrine of the incarnation of the Logos, who even 
before his birth in time was the eternal Son of God, and became 
man by his own voluntary act. Hence the transition to the 
next verse. 


So the Logos became flesh and tarried among us; we have 
seen his glory—glory such as an only son enjoys from his 
father—seen it to be full of grace and reality. (John 
testified to him with the cry, ‘ This was he of whom I said, 
my successor has taken precedence of me, for he preceded 
me.’) For we have all been receiving grace after grace 


14 


15 


16 


from his fulness; while the Law was given through 17 


Moses, grace and reality are ours through Jesus Christ. 
Nobody has ever seen God, but God has been unfolded by 
the divine One, the only Son, who lies upon the Father’s 
breast. 

15 


18 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


14. So the Logos became flesh and tarried among us—the 
most amazing of all paradoxes, the effect of which is heightened 
by the implied contrast with verse 1: he who ° existed in 
the very beginning’ ‘ became’ ; he who ‘ was divine’ ‘ became 
flesh’; he who ‘was with God’ ‘ tarried among us.’ Fiesh 
or ‘ flesh and blood,’ though no doubt descriptive of humanity 
from the side of its weakness and mortality, is the regular 
Jewish term for a human ‘ personality’ in its totality, and does 
not exclude the idea of ‘soul’ and ‘spirit.’ The meaning is 
that the Logos became a real human person. True, at the 
Incarnation the Logos became not ‘a man” but ‘man,’ 
‘flesh.’ He did not then acquire personality, for he already 
possessed it, but he identified his pre-existent personality 
with real human nature. John thus combats prevalent 
‘Docetic’ ideas concerning the person of Christ, which held 
that he was man only in appearance (cf. 1 Jn. 4: 1-3, 2 Jn. 7). 
The Logos became a real man and a whole man, and 
that without ceasing to be himself. Beyond noting that as 
compared with Paul’s letters the emphasis is removed in our 
Gospel from Christ’s death to his coming in the flesh we 
need not concern ourselves here with the mass of theological 
speculation which has grown up around these words. By 
the vague word became John commits himself to no precise 
theory of the incarnation. His purpose was not to reason out 
the ‘how’ and the ‘why’ of the union of the Logos-nature 
with human nature, but to impress it upon his readers as a 
fact already realized in his own experience, by the knowledge 
of which they too ‘might have life.’ The difficulty begins 
when one attempts to define in terms of metaphysics a con- 
viction based on actual religious experience. But John 
does not trouble himself about such questions: ‘The Logos 
doctrine as John accepted it was only an attempt, and neces- 
sarily a vain attempt, to define by reason a truth which he had 
apprehended by faith’ (Scott, The Fourth Gospel, p. 163). 

The words the Logos became flesh mark the transition 
to the subject of the Gospel proper, which is not metaphysics 
but ‘spiritualized’ history, not the Logos but Jesus Christ. 
Hence the Logns is never again expressly mentioned. Yet 

16 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 14-18 


John did Christianity a great service by thus bringing the 
historical faith into relation with contemporary philosophic 
thought and holding the balance between the two. By his 
emphasis on inward religious experience he saved Christianity 
from the danger of either dissolving into philosophical allegory 
or degenerating into mere historical reminiscence. The 
antithesis between the ‘eternal’ and the historical is once for 
all resolved in the Logos who became flesh and tarried among 
us, or (to give the Greek word its original force, though 
in late Greek it meant simply ‘to dwell’) ‘ tabernacled 
among us,’ as Yahweh tabernacled among His people in the 
Wilderness (2 Sam. 7:6, etc.). The Logos, like Yahweh, 
was ‘himself a pilgrim among his pilgrim people’ (Godet), 
perhaps with the notion of a transient sojourn, as suggested 
by the idea both of a tent and of the shortness of human life 
in the flesh (2 Cor. 5: 1; 2 Pet. 1: 13). In the form of the 
Greek word there is probably an allusion to the ‘ Shekinah’ 
or ‘ divine presence,’ the word used in the Targums, or Rab- 
binic expositions of the O.T., to denote God as manifesting 
Himself in human life—it being thought irreverent to bring 
God Himself into too close touch withhumanity. (Cf. Gen. 28: 
16, where Jacob’s words, ‘God is in this place,’ are interpreted 
by the Targumist ‘ the glory of the Shekinah of Yahweh is in 
this place.’) The same reference should probably be traced in 
Rev. 21: 3. It is obvious that the writer’s affinities are far 
more with Jewish than with Hellenistic thought ; thus when 
he adds we have seen his glory there is almost certainly a 
reference to the second term used in the Targums to describe 
God’s self-manifestation, the ‘ Yekara’ or ‘ glory ’ of the Lord 
(Hebrew ‘ kabhodh.’ Cf. Exod. 3: 6, ‘ he was afraid to look 
upon God,’ which is interpreted by the Targumist ‘he was 
afraid to look upon the manifestation of the Yekara of the 
Lord’). This lends probability to the view that for his 
Logos conception John is largely indebted to the idea of the 
‘Memra’ or ‘ Word’ of God—the third Targumic term used 
of God’s self-manifestation—as well as to contemporary 
Hellenistic thought. As the glory of Yahweh filled His 
Tabernacle (Exod. 40: 34, etc.), so, says John, did the divine 
17 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


glory manifest itself in the person of Christ among us 
men, and we have seenit. This clause is held to prove that 
the writer was an actual eye-witness of Jesus. No special 
force can be claimed for the word translated ‘ seen,’ for though 
it originally implied a prolonged intense gaze it came later 
to mean simply ‘see.’ If the aorist tense seems to be too 
definite to imply a mere generalization—‘ we’ referring to 
Christians in general and ‘ have seen’ ‘ not to physical sight 
but to the penetrating vision of enlightened faith ’ (Loisy)— 
then we may perhaps assume that the writer, though not 
necessarily a personal follower of Jesus, had as a child come 
into personal contact with him, and so felt himself to belong 
to the generation (‘we’) to which the divine revelation had 
been made in a form perceptible to the senses (cf. I Jn. 1: I-3). 
Yet the idea of spiritual contemplation is certainly not ex- 
cluded: ‘This beholding John treasured as the wealth and 
joy of his life’ (Dods). The glory of Christ was unigue— 
glory such as an only son (cf. 3: 16, I Jn. 4: 9) enjoys from 
his father—for it is the reflection of a sonship which is quite 
unique, to which ‘the right of being children of God,’ pos- 
sessed by the rest of mankind, presents no parallel. The 
term only-son (Gk. monogenes) had already been applied by 
Philo to the Logos, and so provided John with a speculative 
basis for the doctrine of Christ’s sonship, and affords a link 
between the Prologue and the Gospel proper. But the 
translation ‘ only-begotten’ tends to obscure the sense, for the 
emphasis is not upon the generation from the Father— 
as is usually the case when Philo applies the term to the 
Logos—though of course the idea of oneness of essence is im- 
plied, but to the uniqueness of the ethical relationship existing 
between father and son—a good illustration of the difference 
in outlook of the two writers: Philo uses the word as a 
technical term of philosophy, John to express the unique 
relationship of an only son who is united to his father by a 
bond of mutual love supreme and unique (cf. 17: 23, 24, 26; 
and for use of word to denote an ‘ only child’ Lk. 7: 12, Heb. 
11:17). The unique Sonship of Christ is one of the central 
themes of the Gospel, which, as contrasted with the Synoptics, 
18 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 14-18 


regards the confession of Christ’s sonship not as faith’s climax 
(Mt. 16: 16) but as its starting-point, almost its presupposition. 
To describe Christ as the ‘only Son’ of God is simply to 
acknowledge the divine character of his nature and teaching. 
Hence the reference to his glory, which implies his divine 
majesty and power; this John no doubt considered to be 
manifested in a special degree in Christ’s miracles (2: 11), but 
he here acknowledges that it consists primarily in his unique 
filial consciousness, ‘the inward certainty of his exceptional 
relation to the Father and the moral splendour which the 
certainty of such a bond spread over his whole person’ 
(Godet). In other words, Christ’s ‘ glory’ is primarily not 
metaphysical but ethical and spiritual, and John therefore 
further defines it by saying that it is full of grace and reality 
(‘full’ is to be taken not as a nominative referring back to the 
Logos, but as an indeclinable form in agreement with the 
accusative ‘glory’). The two supreme qualities having their 
source in the Logos, which are defined metaphysically as ‘life’ 
and ‘light,’ when viewed from the ethical-standpoint become 
grace and reality respectively. The phrase ‘mercy and 
truth’ is frequent in the O.T. (cf. Ps. 25: 10, Exod. 34: 6, etc.), 
but for ‘mercy’ John substitutes ‘ grace,’ thus emphasizing 
the truth that God does not merely spare men out of com- 
passion, but that in Christ he actively loves and blesses them 
(3: 16). Just because the glory of Christ is revealed above all 
in his grace we find that the word ‘ glory ’ is frequently used in 
our Gospel with special reference to the Cross, which is the 
supreme symbol of his grace. Note specially 13: 31, ‘ now— 
immediately after Judas goes out to betray him—is the Son 
of man glorified,’ and see notes on 7: 39 and11: 4. (For the 
force of ‘ reality ’ see note on ‘real’ (ver. 9) and on 17 below, 
and Introduction, p. xxxviii.) 

The testimony of the Baptist, suddenly reintroduced at verse 
15, interrupts most awkwardly the clear connexion between 14 
and 16, and seems a rather superfluous anticipation of 27 and 
30. Moreover, the text is doubtful, and it is not clear to what 
occasion the Baptist refers in the words ‘This was he of whom I 
said.’ The verse is almost certainly interpolated by the 


19 


Leal 


5 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Redactor with the purpose of setting once again in the fore- 
front of the Gospel the truth of Christ’s eternal existence and 
his consequent superiority to John. We may postpone con- 
sideration of John’s testimony till verses 27 and 30. 

16 When 15 is omitted the next words continue the thought of 
14, 16 developing the idea of ‘grace,’ 17 and 18 that of 
‘reality.’ We know Christ’s glory to be full of grace and reality 
for—as a fact of experience—we have all been receiving grace 
after grace from his fulness. By the addition of the word 
all John extends the scope of his words to include not only 
the witnesses of 14 but all Christians who ‘ believe even though 
they have never seen.’ Fulness picks up the thought of 
‘full’ in 14, and in both there is probably an implied denial 
of the Gnostic doctrine that the Logos-Spirit merely descended 
temporarily, out of the divine ‘ fulness,’ upon the man Jesus. 
John like Paul insists that the ‘fulness’ is his—Christ’s— 
own, that ‘it is in Christ that the entire Fulness of deity has 
settled bodily’ (Col. 2:9 and cf. Col. 1: 19, Eph. 1: 23, 
3: 19,4: 13). The totality of the divine attributes is summed 
up in Christ, and from him, as from a spring of divine life, 
Christians are daily receiving grace after grace. The literal 
meaning is ‘ grace in exchange for grace,’ implying not merely 
that one grace is heaped upon another, but that every grace 
appropriated and used is made good by the gift of more grace 
to take its place. There is an interesting parallel in Philo 
(Post. Cain. 43): it is not God’s will that men should be 
sated with one grace, for He gives them ‘a second grace in 
exchange for the first and a third in exchange for the second 
and ever new graces in exchange for old.’ As one wave follows 
another from the depths of the ocean, so there flows from 
Christ’s fulness ‘ wave upon wave of grace.’ And it is from 
Christ’s fulness alone that it flows ; for, though it is true that 

17 the Law was given through Moses, yet grace and reality 
are ours, not through Moses or any other religious leader, 
however great, but only through Jesus Christ. Here we 
have at last the express identification of the eternal Logos 
with Jesus, who is here mentioned by name for the first time. 
John contrasts the Gospel of Jesus with the Law of Moses. 

20 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 14-18 


The Law was given ‘as an addition to the essential scheme 
of salvation’ as though ‘designed to meet special circum- 
stances’: the Gospel is ours, ‘came,’ ‘ according to the due 
course of the divine plan ’ as something which ‘ satisfies man’s 
essential nature’ (quotations from Westcott), The Law 
demanded obedience from men: the Gospel revealed the 
grace of God to men. The Law spoke only through symbols, 
and gave men but ‘a mere shadow of the bliss that is to be’ 
(Heb. ro: 1, Col. 2: 17): in Christ we have not symbol but sub- 
stance, not the shadow of bliss but its reality. According to 
John this ‘reality,’ this ‘eternal life,’ which is the supreme 
reward of faith, is identical with the knowledge or vision of 
God (17: 3), and it can be bestowed only by Christ, because 
nobody has ever seen God (a favourite Johannine thought ; 
cf. 5: 37, 6: 46, r Jn. 4: 12, 20) with the vision of sense, not 
even Moses, who prayed to be granted that vision (Exod. 33: 
18 ff.) ; but God has been unfolded by the divine One, the only 
Son, who lies upon the Father’s breast, a position symbolical of 
the tenderest possible relationship (cf. 13: 23, Num. Ir: 12, 
Deut. 13: 6), which John assigns to Christ not merely in virtue 
of his Ascension (an incident for which John has no place in his 
scheme of thought, see p. 359 f.), but in virtue of that glory 
which he had ‘ before the foundation of the world’ (17: 5). 
The correct reading is almost certainly not, as in A.V., ‘ the 
only-begotten Son,’ but ‘God only begotten,’ referring of 
course to Christ. There is little difference in the meaning 
except that the latter reading emphasizes more strikingly the 
unique divinity of Christ’s Person by combining in one 
phrase the two great predicates which have already been 
applied to the Logos—his divine nature (ver. 1) and his 
unique Sonship (ver. 14). In any case some such periphrasis 
as that in our translation is necessary to bring out the full 
meaning. The word here translated unfolded is used of 
‘interpreting ’ dreams (Gen. 41: 8, etc.), and tne substantive 
form, ‘interpreter’ or ‘ exegete,’ was the name given in the 
language of the Greek Mysteries to the priest who initiated 
the worshippers into those rites through which they hoped to 
‘see God’ and thereby be ‘reborn and become themselves 
aI 


THE ‘GOSPEL OPS ON 


immortal and divine. In Christ alone, says John, do we 
find the real interpretation, the true ‘ exegesis’ of God. Thus 
the Prologue ends: henceforth we quit speculation for the 
sure ground of history, for John realized that ‘ the knowledge 
of God cannot be the result of a philosophical investigation ’ 
(Godet) ; our theme is therefore no longer the Logos but 
Jesus Christ. 


Section II. Hustor1cAL INTRODUCTION: THE OLD MASTER 


AND THE NEw (1: 19-51) 


The attitude of our writer to the Baptist has already been 
noted (p. xxx). The witness to Christ by his ‘ Forerunner,’ 
already anticipated in the Prologue (6-8, 15), is now resumed 
in greater detail with the customary emphasis upon John’s 
subordination to Jesus. 


19 Now here is John’s testimony. When the Jews of Jerusalem 


20 
21 


22 


23 


24 
25 


26 


27 
28 


despatched priests and Levites to ask him, ‘Who are you ? ’” 
he frankly confessed—he did not deny it, he frankly 
confessed, ‘I am not the Christ.’ They asked him, 
‘Then what are you? Elijah?’ He said, ‘I am not.’ 
‘Are you the Prophet?’ ‘No,’ he answered. ‘Then 
who are you?’ they said ; ‘tell us, so that we can give 
some answer to those who sent us. What have you to 
say for yourself?’ He said, ‘I am 

the voice of one who cries in the desert, 

“ level the way for the Lord ’’— 
as the prophet Isaiah said.’ Now it was some of the 
Pharisees who had been sent to him ; so they asked him, 
saying, ‘Then why are you baptizing people, if you are 
neither the Christ nor Elijah nor the Prophet?’ ‘Iam 
baptizing with water,’ John replied, ‘ but my successor is 
among you, One whom you do not recognize, and I am 
not fit to untie the string of his sandal.’ This took place 
at Bethany on the opposite side of the Jordan, where 
John was baptizing. 


The Jews in our Gospel are regarded as the ‘ official 


opposition’ to Jesus and his party, a point of view which 


22 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 109-28 


reflects conditions at the time of the Gospel’s composition, 
when Judaism and Christianity were confronting each other 
as rivals: note especially the conflict between Jesus and ‘ the 
Jews’ in chapter 6, which centres on questions in dispute, not 
in Jesus’ own day but at the end of the first century, when 
the Supper was one of the objects of the Jewish attack on 
Christianity. The term ‘ Jews,’ which originally denoted the 
inhabitants of Judaea, had since the Exile come to be applied 
to all Israelites, including, e.g., the Galileans (6: 52), and 
here has a distinctly official flavour signifying the ‘ entire 
theocratic community as summed up in its official heads and 
as historically fixed in an attitude of hostility to Christ’ 
(Whitelaw). The nation in its religious capacity was officially 
represented by the Sanhedrim, here vaguely called the 
Jews of Jerusalem, one of whose functions was to test the 
claims of ‘ prophets.’ Hence the deputation sent to question 
John. We may compare Mk. 11: 27, where the Sanhedrim 
claims the same authority to test Jesus’ claims ; but whereas 
Mark accurately describes the members of the Sanhedrim as 
“chief priests and scribes and elders,’ John, ‘who has no 
thought of the Sanhedrim as it was constituted in reality’ 
(Loisy), more loosely calls the delegates ‘ priests and Levites,’ 
that is, the two classes representative of the religious side of 
the nation, ‘ the higher and lower order of Temple Officials’ 
(Holtzmann). 

In exercise of their authority as guardians of the people’s 20 
religion the deputation demand of John ‘ Who are you ? what 
notable personage do you claim to be?’ John in reply 
energetically denies his identity with any of the religious leaders 
of popular expectation. He is not the Christ or the Messiah 
(the pronoun is emphatic), a denial the force of which lies 
not so much in the negation as in the implication that someone 
else is the Christ. He is not Elijah, whose personal return 21 
would, according to current expectation, herald the appear- 
ance of the Messiah (Mal. 4:5). In contrast to our Gospel 
the Synoptics persistently identify John with Elijah, and that 
upon the authority of Jesus himself (Mt. 11:14, 17: 12, 
Mk. 9: 11-13, and compare Mk. 1: 6 with 2 Kings1: 8). But 


23 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


it was in a spiritual sense that Jesus accepted John as Elijah 
(cf. Lk. 1: 17, ‘ He will go in front of him with the spirit and 
power of Elijah’), whereas the Jews looked for a personal 
return of Elijah in the flesh. Neither is John the Prophet ; 
that is, ‘ the prophet like unto Moses’ of Deut. 18: 15, another 
of the leaders who, according to current expectation, would 
usher in the Messianic age. It seems that the Jews distin- 
guished him from the Messiah (7: 40, 41; but are they identi- 
fied in 6: 14 ?) ; Christian tradition, on the other hand, came to 
identify them (Acts 3: 22, 7: 37), Christ being regarded as a 
second and a higher Moses, whose Gospel had supplanted the 
Mosaic Law. In the Synoptics, instead of this definite allu- 
sion to ‘the Prophet’ we have the vaguer phrase (used of 
Christ) ‘one of the prophets’ (Mk. 8: 28), and a possible 
identification of Jeremiah with ‘the Prophet’ (Mt. 16: 14). 

22-23 When the deputation, loath to return with their mission 
unaccomplished, insist on an answer, John, unwilling to claim 
for himself any personality worthy of investigation (for this 
modesty cf. 3: 25-30; Westcott aptly quotes, ‘ Thou art to 
me No bird, but an invisible thing, A voice, a mystery’), 
replies that he is merely the voice of one who cries... 
The quotation from Is. 40: 3 (based on the Synoptic form 
rather than on the text of the LXX), which in the Synoptics 
(Mk. 1: 2-3 and par.) is applied to John, is by our Evangelist 
put into John’s own lips, and conveys an obvious hint as 
to the significance of his mission. Just as a special road 
must be levelled when a king desires to cross a desert—a 
fruitless waste symbolical of the spiritual condition of the 
world to which Christ came—so is John to prepare the way 
for the Messiah. Though our Evangelist omits all reference 
to John’s ethical message of repentance, yet it is implied here, 
for the recognized preparation for the Messiah was repentance : 
“If Israel repent but for one day the Messiah will come.’ 

24 Though the priestly party, from whom the deputation was 
drawn (19), was for the most part Sadducean, the Evangelist, 
possibly to explain the reason for this very subtle and minute 
interrogation, adds that on this occasion John’s questioners 
were either Pharisees themselves (so our translation: those 


24 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 19-28 


sent were of the Pharisees), or at least had been primed by 
the Pharisees (if we translate with other scholars: ‘ (they) 
were sent from the Pharisees ’), and were therefore particularly 
interested in questions of ritual such as baptism (4: 1). This 
is more natural than to suppose that the reference is to a 
second and separate deputation. Our Evangelist (7: 32) 
gives the composition of the Sanhedrim as ‘high-priests 
(Sadducean) and Pharisees,’ the latter of whom he regards 
rather unhistorically not as a popular party scattered 
throughout the whole country, but as a competent religious 
authority with its headquarters at Jerusalem. It was this 
section of the Sanhedrim which stood behind the deputation. 
The Evangelist undoubtedly stage-manages the whole scene 
in order to lead up to his reference to the ‘ Baptism by the 
Spirit,’ which is its chief motive. 

The rite of Baptism had a Messianic significance, for it was 25 
expected that a general purification of the people would take 
place before the coming of the Messiah (Ezek. 36: 25, 
Zech. 13:1, Is. 52: 15). If John denies his identity with 
any of the expected Messianic figures, why then does he 
baptize ? The connexion between answer and question is 
not very clear, perhaps because, as Heracleon says, ‘ John 26 
frames his answer to the Pharisees’ deputation to fit not their 
question but his own desire,’ i.e. to lead up to his testimony 
to Christ: ‘It is true that I am baptizing, and from that 
fact you rightly conclude that I have some connexion with 
the Messiah ; but my baptism is not the true Messianic purifi- 
cation: it is but symbolical, with water, but the symbol 
will soon give place to the reality (the ‘‘ baptism with the Holy 
Spirit ’’ of 33), for my successor is—or stands—among you, 
One whom you do not recognize ’ (a variant reading adds the 27 
words ‘ who has taken precedence of me,’ possibly an inter- 
polation from 30, q.v.). The words may be taken either 
literally as implying that Jesus is present in person though 
unrecognized among John’s hearers (the emphatic word 
‘stands’ favours this), or more probably in the general sense 
(cf. 10) that the Christ they are looking for is already dwelling 
all unknown to them upon the earth. Justin (Trypho 8: 49) 


25 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


alludes to the Jewish tradition of a hidden Messiah who was 
to be revealed by Elijah. John, so far from seeking to rival 
that Messiah, holds himself unworthy to perform for him even 
the most servile task (Mk. 1: 7), and one generally considered 
below the dignity of a disciple: ‘ Every service which a ser- 
vant will perform for his master, a disciple will do for his Rabbi, 
except loosing his sandal thong’ (Talmud). 

28 Our Evangelist characteristically (see p. xliii) has no further 
interest in the result of the deputation, a historical incident 
introduced simply for the sake of the testimony to which it 
has led. He now seeks to lend this testimony an air of 
greater authority by the precision with which he fixes the 
locality. The name Bethany is to be preferred to ‘ Betha- 
bara’ (A.V.), both on textual grounds and also because the 
addition beyond Jordan is obviously meant to distinguish 
it from the better-known village of the same name near 
Jerusalem. The substitution of ‘ Bethabara’ is probably due 
to Origen, who himself states that all the old MSS. read 
‘Bethany,’ but that he could find no place of that name on the 
banks of Jordan, while a place was pointed out to him called 
‘Bethabara.’ But where was this Bethany? Furrer identi- 
fies it with a place now in ruins called Betane, and possibly the 
same as Betonim (Josh. 13: 26). But this place is some way 
from Jordan, which would be at variance with the Synoptics. 
Conder thought the Evangelist referred to the province of 
Batanea, the ancient Bashan, over into which the ford 
‘ Abara’ leads, but an allusion to so wide an area seems point- 
less. ‘Bethany’ may mean ‘house of the ferry-boat,’ in 
which case the site may be identical with that of ‘ Bethabara’ 
which has the same meaning. The only argument in favour of 
the latter reading is the rather too ingenious one (Loisy) that 
‘Bethany ’ might possibly have been substituted for an original 
‘ Bethabara’ on the strength of Io: 40 and 11: 1, where the 
name ‘ Bethany ’ occurs immediately after a reference to ‘ the 
place where John baptized.’ The locality is quite uncertain, 
but whatever its name it was probably an obscure village in 
Peraea, not to be confused with the Bethany on the Mount 
of Olives. 

26 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 29-34 


Next day he observed Jesus coming towards him and exclaimed, 29 
‘Look, there is the lamb of God, who is to remove the 
sin of theworld! That is he of whom I said, ‘‘ The man 30 
who is to succeed me has taken precedence of me, for he 
preceded me.’’ I myself did not recognize him ; I only 31 
came to baptize with water, in order that he might be 
disclosed to Israel.” And John bore this testimony also : 32 
‘I saw the Spirit descend like a dove from heaven and 
rest on him. I myself did not recognize him, but He who 33 
sent me to baptize with water told me, ‘‘He on whom 
you see the Spirit descending and resting, that is he who 
baptizes with the holy Spirit.’”’ Now I did see it, and I 34 
testify that he is the Son of God.’ 


This narrative is the Evangelist’s substitute for the Synoptic 29 
account of Jesus’ baptism. The next day (for these precise 
notes of time cf. 35, 43, 2: I, etc.) John observed Jesus coming 
towards him. The question whence and why Jesus came 
is quite irrelevant. ‘Christ was probably coming directly 
from the Temptation’ (Westcott) ; but such artificial attempts 
to harmonize our Gospel with the Synoptics are to a degree 
‘musty’ (Holtzmann). The meeting of John with Jesus, 
which in the Synoptics (Mk. 1: 9) has for its object Jesus’ 
baptism, has here an entirely different significance. So far 
as our Evangelist has any interest at all in the baptism, he 
appears to regard it as already past (see below, 1: 32). Jesus 
is brought upon the scene at this point simply to furnish John 
with another occasion to bear witness to him: this he does 
in the words, ‘ Look, there is the lambofGod . . .’ The definite 
article would seem to imply that this was a recognized Messianic 
title (cf. ‘the prophet’) ; but it is likely that the Evangelist 
is throwing back into John’s words a title which, as applied 
to Christ, had in his own day become stereotyped (1 Pet. 1: I9, 
Rev. 5: 6,12). The title does far more than merely designate 
Jesus as ‘one whose confidence had never been disturbed, 
whose steadfast peace no agitations of life had ever ruffled’ 
(Seeley). It seems to be jointly derived from the sacrificial 
ritual and from the ‘ Servant’ passage in Is. 53, and therefore 

27 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


includes the threefold idea of patient submission, vicarious 
suffering and redemption from sin. The last of these con- 
ceptions in particular is implied in the almost certain allusion 
to the Paschal Lamb with which our Gospel throughout 
appears to identify Jesus (see 19: 29, 31, and Introduction, 
p. xill 5) chy qlso*s Cor. 5.7). 

Christ is the lamb of God, not merely as the lamb 
provided by God (Gen. 22: 8), or offered to God, though 
both these ideas may be present, but rather as being the 
‘only Son’ of God (18, and cf. Is. 53: 11, ‘ my righteous 
servant’); it is as such that he is to remove the sin of 
the world. The thought of redemption inherent in the 
conception of the Paschal Lamb, rather than of vicarious 
suffering drawn from Is. 53, seems to be carried out by the 
word remove (airein), which in LXX and N.T. Greek 
regularly means not to ‘take upon oneself’ (the ‘ bearing’ 
of sin in Isaiah is translated in the LXX by fpherein or 
lambanein), but to ‘take out of the way’ (cf. 20:1 and 
esp. I Jn. 3:5). But the latter thought, while enriching the 
former, also includes it, for a lamb can only ‘remove’ sin 
by vicariously ‘bearing’ it, and this Christ did (Mt. 8: 17) 
for the sin of the world—a thought grandly universalistic 
(cf. 3: 16, I Jn. 2: 2) to which it is often objected that the 
Baptist, with his narrowly patriotic outlook, could hardly 
have attained. Moreover, apart altogether from the dis- 
crepancy with the Synoptic account, is it possible that thus 
early the Baptist could have appreciated and proclaimed the 
redemptive efficacy of Christ’s death, a faith which only 
came home to the disciples themselves after the Resurrection 
(Lk. 24: 21, 26) and of which we have the earliest expression 
in 1 Cor.15:3? We have here a good example of the ‘ inter- 
pretative function ’ of our Evangelist, who is putting his own 
thoughts into the Baptist’s words, and presenting under the 
guise of history the truths of his own spiritual experience. 
Yet it should be remembered that even the Synoptics hint 
that the Baptist did not limit the work of the Messiah to his 
own people (Mt. 3:9): he may have been influenced by the 
universalistic outlook of passages such as Gen. 22: 18, Is, 

28 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 29-34 


Ig: 23-25, 52: 15, while, as even Strauss admits, ‘a pene- 
trating mind like that of the Baptist might, even before the 
death of Jesus, gather from the O.T. phrases and types 
the notion of a suffering Messiah, and his obscure hints 
on the subject might not be comprehended by his disciples 
and contemporaries.’ It must be remembered also that the 
Baptist may have known something of the mind of Jesus 
himself, to whom he was related, and whose meditations on the 
meaning of Messiah’s mission he may have shared. Never- 
theless one cannot escape the conviction that we have here 
not literal history, but its interpretation. Indeed, even the 
‘interpretation’ is not strictly true to the thought of the 
Gospel as a whole, a fact which lends some colour to the 
suspicion that the Redactor’s hand may be traced in the 
“Baptist ’ sections (see p. xxx). According to our Evangelist 
the work of Christ is rather to bestow life than to remove sin, 
the problem of which, so central in the mind of Paul, to him 
is of quite subordinate interest. Thus in this great saying 
of the Baptist, ‘it is fairly certain that we have nothing but 
a vague concession to earlier doctrine’ (Scott, The Fourth 
Gospel, p. 219). The writer who ‘ found the expression already 
coined’ (Holtzmann) may have taken it over from current 
doctrine without fully appreciating all its implications. (For 
similar ‘ concessions’ cf. 1: 43, 4: 41, 6: 63, 14: 3, 20: 17.) 
In the approaching Christ John now discovers to the people 30 
him of whom he had previously hinted: That is he of whom 
I said, ‘The man who is to succeed me (in point of time) has 
taken precedence of me (in dignity: ‘mightier,’ Mk. 1: 7), 
for he preceded me’ (in eternity, in virtue of his pre-existence, 
ver. 2). The allusion contained in of whom I said, if not to 
a previous unrecorded testimony, may be to 27, at any rate 
if it be possible to retain the longer reading in that verse, 
q.v.; ver. 15 we have held to be an interpolation anticipating 
this verse. But it is exceedingly probable that both verses, 
as well as the longer reading in 27, may be redactional addi- 
tions due to the desire to emphasize Christ’s pre-existence 
and his consequent superiority to John, in which case it is 
the interpolator, not the Baptist, who is in reality harking 


D 29 


Ses 


32 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


back to words which he has previously put into the Baptist’s 
mouth. 

‘I myself did not recognize him ’ (possibly with an allusion 
to 26, ‘you do not recognize’), that is as Messiah, though 
probably the two were acquainted as friends (Mt. 3: 14). 
According to our Evangelist the chief significance of the 
vision about to be related is to be found not, as the Synoptists 
imply, in the divine recognition vouchsafed to Jesus and the 
consequent heightening of his own divine self-consciousness, 
but in the revelation of his Messiahship, hitherto unrecognized, 
to John. Hence it is John who sees the vision, not Jesus, 
as in the Synoptics (Mk. 1: 10-11, Mt. 3: 16-17). The sole 
object of John’s mission is that he may discover to the people 
‘the hidden Messiah’; the call to baptize had come to 
him from God simply that thereby there might be provided 
the occasion for the manifestation of that Messiah by means 
of a prearranged vision; John now bears testimony that 
Jesus must be Messiah, for in his case alone the promised 
vision had been granted: ‘I saw the Spirit descend like a 
dove from heaven and rest on him.’ The reference to the 
descent of the Spirit on Jesus, borrowed from the Synoptic 
account of the baptism, proves that our Evangelist thinks 
of the baptism as already past. The Spirit was a recognized 
Messianic endowment (Is. Ir: 2, 42: 1, 61:1). The figure 
of the dove may be borrowed from the thought of Gen. 1: 2, 
which the Talmud explains: ‘ The Spirit of God was borne 
over the waters as a dove which broods over her young’ 
similarly Noah’s dove is a symbol of a new creation. But in 
what sense did the Baptist ‘see’ the Spirit ‘ descend like a 
dove’? The word implies a steady contemplative gaze, and 
is probably used here of inward vision. It is the manner of 
the Spirit’s descent, gentle and peaceful (in contrast to the 
expected warrior Messiah), not his bodily appearance, which 
is compared with a dove, and the language need not imply 
that an actual dove was visible, though Luke (3: 22), from his 
usual materialistic standpoint—so characteristic of the 
Physician—describes the vision as an objective fact apparent 
to all. But such visions are granted only to the spiritually 


30 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 29-34 


receptive (cf. 12: 29). It was not the descent of the dove 
(omitted altogether from the corresponding words in 33) 
that was the sign to John of Jesus’ Messiahship, but his pos- 
session of the Spirit. This is brought out by the addition 
of the word resting; for Christ, as distinguished from the 
prophets and heroes of old on whom the gift came inter- 
mittently (2 Kings 3: 15), the Spirit was a permanent endow- 
ment: ‘God gives him the Spirit in no sparing measure’ 
(3: 34). That Jesus thus possessed the Spirit was abundantly 
evident to John—‘as plain as if he had seen the Spirit in 
visible shape alighting upon him’ (Dods). The Baptist there- 33 
fore recognized that in Jesus, ‘whom I myself did not recog- 
nize’ (as Messiah), there had been revealed to him One who, 
in virtue of his own possession of the holy Spirit, was able to 
baptize not merely with water, but with the holy Spirit. For 
the pouring out of the holy Spirit as a Messianic phenomenon 
parallel with the Messianic ‘sprinkling’ (Ezek. 36: 25), of 
which the ‘ baptism with water’ is symbolic, we may com- 
pare Joel 2: 28. But what is meant by the ‘ baptism with 
the holy Spirit’? It implies the positive bestowal of new life 
as contrasted with the negative cleansing from past sin implied 
by water-baptism. In our Gospel John is typical of the old 
order, Christ of the new—and, as opposed to Judaism, the 
characteristically Christian graces are all positive. Luke 
(3: 16) brings this out by the addition, ‘he will baptize you 
with the holy Spirit and fire,’ in which connexion the author 
of Ecce Homo writes, ‘Baptism means cleansing and fire 
means warmth. How can warmth cleanse? The answer is 
that moral warmth does cleanse. No heart is pure that is 
not passionate; no virtue is safe that is not enthusiastic. 
And such an enthusiastic virtue Christ was to introduce.’ 
Similarly R. L. Stevenson (aptly quoted by Strachan), ‘ We 
are not damned for doing wrong, but for not doing right ; 
Christ would never hear of negative morality ; “ thou shalt” 
was ever his word, with which he superseded “ thou shalt 
Bote 
On the strength of the vision (‘now I did see it’) John is 34 
able to testify that Jesus ‘is the Son of God ’—a Messianic title 
31 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


the stages in the development of which may be traced in the 
O.T:-thus*).2' Sam..714) Pso 2 7, Dalle .+25-00 2 Mistgreat 
declaration, which in the Synoptic account comes from God 
Himself (Mt. 3 : 17,in third person, addressed to the bystanders; 
Mk. 1: 11, Lk. 3: 22, in second person, addressed to Jesus), 
our Evangelist puts in the mouth of John. The perfect tense 
‘I have testified’ may refer either to John’s witness in 
general, or more particularly to verse 29, in which case 
‘Son of God’ is equivalent to ‘lamb of God,’ each being a 
designation of the Messiah. Some early authorities read 
‘the chosen one of God,’ another Messianic title (Is. 42: I), 
but the Synoptic parallels make the former reading more 
probable. (For the full content of the phrase ‘ Son of God,’ 
see ver. 14 and again ver. 49.) If here the title seems to be 
used merely as an equivalent for ‘ Messiah,’ it is not that the 
phrase here lacks its full Johannine content, but rather that 
our Evangelist throughout interprets the Messiahship in a far 
higher sense than do the Synoptists. The narrow national 
conception is so completely absent that ‘throughout the 
Gospel the Messianic title denotes nothing more definite than 
the higher nature and dignity of Jesus as the Son of God. It 
is still retained in accordance with the consecrated tradition, 
but its meaning is entirely merged in that of the other title. 
“The Christ” and “the Son of God” are again and again 
co-ordinated as simply equivalent terms (II: 27, 20: 31, 
I: 49)’ (Scott, The Fourth Gospel, p. 183). 

What of the relation of this whole section to the first three 
Gospels? Like the Synoptists our Evangelist finds in John’s 
testimony to Jesus a starting-point for his Gospel history. 
Moreover, the section appears to be largely built up of Synoptic 
material. Verses 23-28 are clearly based on Mk. 1: 2-8, 
verses 29-34 on Mk. 1: 9-11. The visit of the deputation 
may have been suggested by the similar investigation into 
Jesus’ authority, and the conversation which follows may be 
a purely literary compilation based partly on Herod’s specula- 
tion about Jesus (Mk. 6: 14-16) and partly on the questions 
leading up to Peter’s confession (Mk. 8: 27 f.). On the other 
hand, it is hardly probable that the Evangelist would have thus 


32 


CHAPTER 1, VERSES 29-34 


boldly related to the Baptist material used by the Synoptists 
in relation to Christ. It must be remembered that such 
questions, reflecting as they do current Messianic expectations, 
would be frequently asked, and it is just possible that we 
have incorporated here actual reminiscences of ‘the Witness,’ 
though no doubt they have been considerably idealized by 
the reflections of the Evangelist upon them. In favour of the 
substantial independence of the narrative is the fact that 
in one or two points it runs counter to the Synoptic tradition : 
the Baptist denies that he is Elijah, whereas the Synoptics 
repeatedly insist on the identification; our Gospel again 
alludes to ‘the Prophet,’ and distinguishes him from the 
Messiah, whereas the Synoptic phrase is ‘ one of the prophets,’ 
and traditional Christian doctrine identified ‘the prophet’ 
with the Messiah. Any fair comparison between the Synoptic 
and Johannine accounts of the Baptist must begin with the 
observation that, while the Synoptic account leads up to and 
virtually ends with the baptism of Jesus, the Fourth Gospel 
regards the Baptist’s testimony as subsequent to the baptism, 
which, though no doubt taken for granted as a recognized 
tenet of the Christian faith (Acts I: 22), is tacitly ignored— 
even the traditional title ‘the Baptist’ being dropped. Our 
Evangelist introduces John simply for the sake of his testi- 
mony to Jesus, and omits all reference both to his work as a 
preacher of repentance and to the baptism of Jesus which 
crowned it. His reserve concerning the baptism may be 
partly due to the desire to take the wind out of the sails of 
the ‘ Baptist-party ’’ who, on the strength of Jesus’ baptism 
by John, would claim that their Master, far from being inferior 
to Christ, was in reality his patron. But it is of more impor- 
tance to note that the Johannine theology has little room for 
the baptism and its accompanying bestowal of the holy Spirit, 
or at any rate for the interpretation which the Synoptists 
put upon these events. The Incarnate Logos needs no further 
attestation of his Sonship. The baptism is therefore omitted 
altogether, while the descent of the Spirit, though retained 
out of respect for tradition, is narrated not as a divine acknow- 
ledgment of Jesus but as a divine guarantee to John, and 


33 


aS 
36 
ay 
38 


39 
40 


41 


42 


35 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


as the occasion of the latter’s testimony to Jesus’ Messiahship. 
‘The descent of the Spirit is nothing more than the sign by 
which John recognizes the Incarnate Logos’ (Loisy). We 
thus have here another concession (cf. 29) to earlier doctrine, 
the Synoptic tradition being adapted to the Johannine theology 
of the incarnation. Yet it would be a mistake to assume that 
there is no place in the thought of our Evangelist for the 
bestowal of the Spirit upon Jesus. The Spirit is always 
clearly distinguished from the Logos, and therefore may be 
bestowed even upon One in whom the Logos has already 
become incarnate. Christ may, as the Logos, ‘come from 
above and testify to what he has seen and heard’ there 
(3: 31-32) ; but if his testimony has authority as ‘ the words 
of God,’ it is because ‘ God gives him the Spirit in no small 
measure’ (3: 34). 


THE OLD MASTER AND THE NEW (TI: 35-51) 


Next day again John was standing with two of his disciples ; 
he gazed at Jesus as he walked about, and said, ‘ Look, 
there is the lamb of God!’ The two disciples heard 
what he said and went after Jesus. Now Jesus turned, 
and when he observed them coming after him, he asked 
them, ‘What do you want?’ They replied, ‘ Rabbi’ 
(which may be translated, ‘teacher ’), ‘where are you 
staying?’ He said to them, ‘Come and see.’ So they 
went and saw where he stayed, and stayed with him the rest 
of that day—it was then about four in the afternoon. One 
of the two men who heard what John said and went after 
Jesus was Andrew, the brother of Peter. In the morn- 
ing he met his brother Simon and told him, ‘We have 
found the messiah ’ (which may be translated, ‘ Christ ’). 
He took him to Jesus; Jesus gazed at him and said, 
‘You are Simon, the son of John? Your name is to be 
Cephas ’ (meaning ‘ Peter’ or ‘ rock’). 


The witness of John, dealt with in the last paragraph, is now 


repeated, this time in the presence of two of the Baptist’s 
disciples ; the calling of the first disciples is thus brought back 


34 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 35-42 


into a quite definite relation to John’s testimony to Christ 
as Messiah. The Baptist calls the attention of his disciples 
to Jesus as he walked about, by repeating in shorter form 
the tribute of verse 29: ‘Look, there is the lamb of God! ’ 36 
Again, it is superfluous to enquire concerning the where and 
whence of Jesus’ ‘ walking.’ The scene is staged in order to 
throw into relief the transference of the disciples’ loyalty 
from the Old Master to the New. John does not definitely bid 
his disciples follow Jesus, for his words are to be understood 
as addressed to a wider circle ; but by repeating in their hearing 
his testimony of the previous day he hints that here is the 
Master greater than himself, for whose coming he has prepared 
them. The disciples took the hint, and of their own free 
will went after Jesus. The phrase is used in a double sense, 37 
implying not merely that they followed in Jesus’ tracks, but 
that ultimately they became his disciples, an almost technical 
use of the word ‘ follow,’ both in this Gospel and the Synoptics. 
(MES VI 10, 2. 14, etc.) 

The difference of outlook between our Gospel and the 
Synoptics is well illustrated by the fact that while the latter 
(Mt. 11: 2-6) represent the Baptist as sending two disciples 
to demand of Jesus whether he is the Christ, according to 
our Evangelist it is to the Baptist’s own testimony that 
Jesus owes his first disciples. Observing the two follow- 38 
ing him Jesus turned round, no doubt desiring to encourage 
their first timid advances. This thought of the ‘ divine 
initiative’ is constantly emphasized in the Gospel (1: 48, 
and especially 15: 16, ‘ You have not chosen me, it is I who 
have chosen you’). From the would-be disciples’ answer, 
‘Rabbi’ (which may be translated, ‘teacher ’), it has been 
inferred that they did not trust the Baptist’s witness to 
Jesus as Messiah, and therefore refrained from addressing him 
by any higher title than ‘ teacher’ ; but in 49 the same mode 
of address is combined with the Messianic titles. ‘Rabbi’ was 
a title which seems to have come recently into vogue, and 
means ‘ my greatness’ (compare ‘ His Majesty,’ ‘ Monsignor,’ 
etc.), and the use here of the title ‘ teacher’ perhaps implies 
a hint that the speakers are ready to be disciples. Whatever 


35 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


expectations the two may have cherished concerning Jesus, 
the immediate impression he created was that of a wandering 
‘teacher,’ and therefore they ask ‘ where are you staying?’ 
evidently in the hope that an invitation to Jesus’ lodging 
will provide an opportunity for a more intimate conversation 
than is possible in the open air. Jesus at once responds with 
39 the invitation to ‘come and see,’ and the unforgettable 
moment which marks the disciples’ first interview with their 
Master is precisely fixed as about four in the afternoon, that 
is, just the time when men would leave their work. This is 
the only interpretation of ‘the tenth hour’ admissible in the 
N.T., though Westcott argues for 10 a.m., in order—surely 
quite needlessly—to allow more time for the talk. Though 
the Romans probably calculated their civil day, by which 
leases, etc., were dated, from midnight to midnight, through- 
out the whole Graeco-Roman world the hours of each day 
were reckoned from sunrise to sunset. This method of 
reckoning suits perfectly the other references in the Gospel 
(43. 6952 30.10) 14). 
From the precise fixing of the hour it has been inferred that 
the writer must have been present in the person of the un- 
named disciple of 40, a possibility which, in view of our 
hypothesis that the memoirs of a witness may lie behind the 
narrative, cannot be altogether ruled out. But it is unlikely 
that ‘ the Witness ’ was so early a member of Jesus’ company, 
and if any particular significance is to be attached to ‘the 
tenth hour’ it is probably symbolical; thus in 11:9 the 
twelve hours of the day perhaps represent the duration of the 
universe, ‘ the last hour’ (x Jn. 2: 18) would be the Evangel- 
ist’s own day, while ‘ the tenth hour,’ the number of perfection, 
would mark the beginning of the Christian era. It is inter- 
esting to compare this incident with that narrated in Lk. 24: 
13-35. In each case two disciples spend the evening hours 
with Jesus (Lk. 24: 29), one of them is unnamed (18), and 
the outcome is that the Master’s true nature is revealed to 
them (31). 
40 Andrew is defined as the brother of Peter, who by the time 
the Gospel was written had completely overshadowed him. 


36 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 35-42 


The second of the two disciples, here unnamed, has been univer- 
sally held by tradition to be the Evangelist himself in the 
person of John the son of Zebedee. This has been inferred 
from the reading of the A.V., ‘ He (i.e. Andrew) first findeth his 41 
own brother,’ which was supposed to imply that John after- 
wards found his brother James, the tally of the first four 
disciples according to the Synoptics thus being completed. 
It must be confessed that such an exegesis could hardly have 
occurred except to one already biased in favour of the 
traditional theory of authorship. If the expression ‘ first ’ 
is to be retained at all, the suggestion probably is that this is 
the first instance of that providential ‘finding’ which is 
repeated at 43 and 45. But a better reading is, as in our 
text, in the morning he met his brother Simon. The phrase, 
“Hts own brother’ (A.V. and R.V.), does not necessarily imply 
the corresponding thought of someone else’s brother, for at 
this period the Greek word (‘idios’) probably meant little more 
than ‘fis.’ Dr. Garvie (The Beloved Disciple, p. 80) in the 
unnamed disciple also traces ‘the Witness,’ whom however he 
identifies not with John but with the ‘ Beloved Disciple’ who, 
he considers, is not one of the Twelve (Introduction, p. xlvi). 
But it is surely improbable that the writer should have merely 
implied his own presence in a manner so impossibly vague that 
the allusion would never be recognized save by those already 
on the lookout for it in the interests of a particular theory of 
authorship. If it be insisted that the mention of one of the 
two men (40) demands a reference, if not explicit then implied, 
to the second of the two, then the most natural explanation 
is to suppose that in the original Gospel John was mentioned 
by name as the second of the two disciples, that he also was 
described as having found his brother, and that the whole 
clause was subsequently cut out by the Redactor in the 
interests of his identification of the Gospel’s anonymous disciple 
with the son of Zebedee (Introduction, p. xlix, and Bacon, 
The Fourth Gospel in Research and Debate, pp. 202-3). 

The impression made by Jesus during the evening's inter- 
course is illustrated by Andrew’s words to his brother, ‘We 
have found the Messiah,’ upon the lips of a Jew ‘the most 

37 


42 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


comprehensive of all Eurekas’ (Dods). The discovery, so 
slowly worked out in the Synoptics, is here reached with a 
leap in the first moments of enthusiastic discipleship. The 
Baptist’s circle has hitherto been on the tiptoe of expectation 
for ‘the hope of Israel’: in Jesus they have found him. The 
Hebrew form ‘ Messiah’ is used only here and at 4: 25 in 
the N.T., and is therefore for the benefit of Hellenist readers 
translated ‘ Christ.’ 

When Peter is introduced Jesus gazed at him: the word 
(cf. 36) suggests a glance which reads the heart, a super- 
natural power ascribed to Jesus in the Gospel (2: 25). With 
what our author probably regards as divine prescience rather 
than a natural psychological insight Jesus recognizes at first 
sight that here is a man whose character is likely to prove 
hard and firm, and he therefore greets him with the words, 
‘You are Simon, the son of John? Your name is to be Cephas’ 
(meaning ‘Peter’ or ‘Rock ’). The future tense of the last 
clause is perhaps meant to imply a miraculous forecasting of 
the later incident (Mt. 16: 18), where Jesus says ‘ Peter is 
your name.’ There is probably an echo of the latter passage 
in the half-ceremonious ‘ thou art Simon’ (Mt. 16: 18: ‘thou 
art Peter,’ which in this context is natural enough as picking 
up Peter’s previous words, ‘ thou art the Christ,’ in 16). Mark 
(3: 16) more naturally dates the renaming of Simon after a 
longer period of acquaintanceship, and on the whole it is 
more probable that our Evangelist has antedated the scene 
than that we have here a separate incident previous to that 
recorded in Mt. 16: 18. Just as Simon has already recog- 
nized Jesus as the Christ, so does Jesus without more delay 
recognize Simon as ‘ the Rock.’ The Hebrew form ‘ Cephas,’ 
which is translated into its Greek equivalent ‘ Peter,’ is used 
elsewhere in the N.T. only by St. Paul. A change of name was 
thought to imply a change of life and of character, e.g. 
Abram, Jacob, Levi. Peter's father is given as ‘ John’ 
(21: 15) rather than Jonas, a Greek abbreviation, which is the 
name in Mt. 16: 17, Our Evangelist would probably explain 
Jesus’ acquaintance with Peter’s name and family relationships 
by his own supernatural knowledge rather than by any com- 

38 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 43-51 


munication from Andrew. This power of ‘second sight’ is 
stressed again and again (1: 48, 2: 24-25, 4: 18, etc.). 


Next day Jesus determined to leave for Galilee ; there he 43 
met Philip and told him, ‘ Follow me.’ Now Philip be- 44 
longed to Bethsaida, the same town as Andrew and Peter ; 
he met Nathanael and told him, ‘We have found him 45 
whom Moses wrote about in the Law, and also the prophets 
—it is Jesus, the son of Joseph, who comes from Nazaret.’ 
‘Nazaret!’ said Nathanael, ‘can anything good come 46 
out of Nazaret?’ ‘ Come and see,’ said Philip. Jesus saw 47 
Nathanael approaching and said of him, ‘ Here is a genuine 
Israelite! There is no guile in him.’ Nathanael said 48 
to him, ‘How do you know me?’ Jesus answered, 
“When you were under that fig tree, before ever Philip 
called you, I saw you.’ ‘ Rabbi,’ said Nathanael, ‘ you 49 
are the Son of God, you are the king of Israel!’ Jesus 50 
answered, ‘ You believe because I told you I had seen you 
under that fig tree? You shall see more than that.’ 
He said to him, ‘ Truly, truly I tell you all, you shall see 51 
heaven open wide and God’s angels ascending and descending 
upon the Son of man.’ 


The sudden transference of the scene to Galilee in the midst 43 
of the account of the calling of the disciples is a little strange. 
Possibly our Evangelist is making a concession to the prevalent 
Synoptic tradition according to which the call of all the 
disciples took place there (Mk. 1: 16). Alsoprophecy demanded 
that Galilee should be the scene of Jesus’ revelation of him- 
self as Messiah (Is. 9: 1, Mt. 4: 12-16; cf. 2:11). The 
mention of Jesus’ determination to leave for Galilee probably 
implies that he did so, and that it was there he met Philip, 
who was the first disciple ‘found’ by Jesus himself. The 
more advanced critics consider that our author confuses the 
Apostle Philip with ‘ the Evangelist ’ of the same name, and 
that Philip is specially chosen for mention here because ‘ the 
Evangelist ’ was well known in the Asiatic communities in 
which our Gospel would be current. (For other references 


39 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


to Philip and hints concerning his character see 6: 5, 12: 21, 
14: 8, and Introduction, p. 1xi.) 

The summons ‘ Follow me’ is not merely an invitation to 
accompany Jesus home, but both in this Gospel and in the 
Synoptics is a solemn formula for calling to discipleship 
(Mt. 8: 22, 9: 9, 19: 21, Lk. 9: 59, and see note on 1: 37, 

44 21:19). Philip belonged to Bethsaida, which, we are told, 
was also the town of Andrew and Peter, though the Synoptists 
connect the latter pair with Capharnahum (Mk. 1: 29). The 
meaning of the name Bethsaida is ‘ Fishertown,’ the only hint 
that the Gospel contains, apart from the Appendix, that the 
earliest disciples were fishermen. The town lay on the east 
bank of Jordan a short distance from its entrance into the 
Sea of Galilee and was rebuilt by the tetrarch Philip and 
named Julias, in honour of the daughter of Augustus. Some 
authorities, however, think that there were two towns of this 
name, and that the one here mentioned is defined in 12: 21 
as ‘ Bethsaida of Galilee’ in order to distinguish it from 
Bethsaida Julias. The movements of Jesus in 6: 16-22 are 
also supposed to prove the existence of two Bethsaidas, in 
which case Philip’s town may have been a suburb of Julias 
on the west bank of Jordan or farther along the coast at 
"Ain Tabigha. But on the whole it is probable that there 
was only one town of the name (see Sir G. A. Smith, Historical 
Geography of the Holy Land, p. 457). 

45 ‘One lighted torch serves to light another’ (Godet), and 
so Philip next met Nathanael, a fellow-countryman from 
Cana of Galilee (21: 2); but possibly the Redactor merely 
deduces this from the fact that Jesus is found at Cana in 
Galilee (2: 1) immediately after his call. The identity of 
Nathanael is one of the riddles of the Gospel, the discussion 
of which will be best reserved till the end of the paragraph. 
Philip, unlike the downright Andrew, introduces Jesus in 
roundabout fashion as ‘him whom Moses wrote about in the 
Law (Deut. 18: 15), and also the prophets,’ a circumlocution 
which implies ‘the Messiah’ (cf. Lk. 24: 27, Acts 3: 22, 24, 
and note on I: 21). The fact that Jesus is here called the son 
of Joseph has been accepted as proof that the Evangelist was 


40 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 43-51 


unacquainted with, or did not subscribe to, the doctrine of the 
Virgin Birth ; but the relationship between Jesus and Joseph 
must in any case have been taken for granted (see note on 
DPerTsianw Chao 42). 

For the prejudice against Nazaret revealed in Nathanael’s 
rejoinder, ‘ can anything good come out of Nazaret ?’ various 
explanations have been given: it is in Galilee, against which 
the same prejudice is shown in 7: 52; it isa small insignificant 
village not even mentioned in the Old Testament ; its people 
were ignorant and disreputable—a charge for which there is 
no independent evidence whatever ; Nathanael, hailing from 
the neighbouring village of Cana, was biased by the petty 
jealousy so characteristic of small communities. But perhaps 
the most probable explanation is that the Evangelist, by an 
anachronism, is reading back into the early days of Jesus’ 
ministry the prejudices of his own day, when Nazaret would 
be held in disrepute both among Jews, as the place of Jesus’ 
origin, and among Christians, because of Jesus’ rejection there 
recorded in Mk. 6: 4. 

Philip rather than argue bids Nathanael ‘ Come and see ’— 
‘the best remedy for preconceived opinions’ (Bengel), ‘ the 
true solution of religious doubts’ (Westcott), ‘ the simplest and 
profoundest apologetic’ (Godet). At first sight of Nathanael 
Jesus remarks to his companions, ‘ Here is a genuine Israelite ! ’ 
In spite of the Evangelist’s undoubted anti-Jewish bias (see 
note on 1: 19) the term ‘ Israelite’ is here used as a title of 
honour, as in Rom, 11:1; 2 Cor. 11: 22, and here we have 
one of those apparent contradictions so characteristic of the 
Gospel: it is to be explained by noting that our author makes 
a distinction between the true community of Israel, at last 
realized in the Christian Church, and the Jews as a religious 
party opposed to the Church. Rev. 2: 9g illustrates exactly 
the same distinction. In harmony with this twofold attitude 
of the Evangelist towards his own people are Jesus’ next 
words: ‘ There is no guile in him’ (Ps. 32: 2, Rev. 14: 5). 
Nathanael, the genuine Israelite, is honestly willing to test the 


truth of the Gospel, as contrasted with the counterfeit Jews 


of 8: 44 who, while priding themselves on their birthright as 
41 


46 


47 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Israelites (8 : 39), are in reality possessed by the devil of false- 
hood. The words also contain an allusion to Jacob who, on 
receiving the title ‘ Israel’ (Gen. 32: 28), was proclaimed to 
be no longer a ‘ supplanter ’ or ‘ deceiver’ (Gen. 27: 35-36), but 
a ‘conqueror of God,’ that is, one who, like Nathanael here, 
relies for victory not upon guile but upon wrestling with God 
in prayer. 

48 Nathanael is surprised that Jesus should thus sum him up 
in a moment: possibly his blunt honesty desires no empty 
compliments, whereupon Jesus replies, ‘When you were under 
that fig tree... I saw you.’ ‘To sit under one’s fig-tree’ 
was a proverbial expression meaning ‘to be at home,’ 
which perhaps confirms our conclusion (43) that the call of 
Philip and Nathanael took place after Jesus’ arrival in 
Galilee and perhaps at Cana, where Nathanael’s home was 
(21: 2). Augustine tells us (Confesstons, VIII, 12, 28) that 
his conversion also took place under a fig-tree, which on 
account of its shady foliage would be a favourite place for 
meditation. Jesus’ words seem at first to imply a miraculous 
power of vision from a distance; but the extraordinary im- 
pression they make on Nathanael shows that he regards them 
as a proof of something still more wonderful, of the divine 
intuition already illustrated at 42. He is amazed not ata 
mere feat of physical long-sightedness, but at the divine clair- 
voyance which is able to read at a glance both the scene and 
the subject of his secret meditation, and by relating the two 
has discovered an index to his character as a ‘ genuine Israelite 
in whom there is no guile.’ For it is possible that the mention 
of the fig-tree is meant to have some bearing on Jesus’ verdict 
on Nicodemus. It was ‘ under his fig-tree’ that prophecy 
pictured the ideal Israelite of the Messianic age as sitting 
(Micah 4: 4, Zech. 3: 10). Nathanael may be supposed to 
have been meditating on the coming of the Messiah, and 
Jesus’ mention of the fig-tree in conjunction with his expres- 
sion ‘a genuine Israelite’ would call Messianic associations 
to his mind, and thus convince him that Jesus has read his 
secret thoughts. Can one who enters thus mysteriously into 
the Messianic dreamings of a complete stranger be any other 


42 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 43-51 


than the Messiah himself? Accordingly he at once hails 49 
Jesus as ‘Son of God’ and ‘ king of Israel,’ two of the highest 
titles which could be applied to the Messiah, for the first of 
which compare 11: 27, and for the second 12: 13. Messiah 
is alike the elect of God and the theocratic chief of the chosen 
people. The two titles are combined in Ps. 2: 6-7. In the 
use of the phrase ‘ king of Israel,’ we perhaps have another 
hint of the distinction made by our Evangelist (see ver. 47) 
between the divine community of {srael and the Jews as a 
hostile religious party. ‘ King of Israel’ is a title of supreme 
honour, but in 18: 33 ff. Jesus scorns the title ‘ King of the 
Jews. The title ‘ Son of God’ on Nathanael’s lips no doubt 
bears merely its theocratic significance of ‘ Messiah’; but 
regarded as expressing the thought of the Evangelist through 
the lips of Nathanael it is pregnant with the full metaphysical 
and mystic meaning characteristic of the Gospel (cf. 34 above 
and note on ver. 14). Faith’s perfect fruit ripens in a moment, 
and we can say truly enough with Godet, ‘ Nathanael’s faith 
will never possess more than it embraces at this moment. It 
will only be able to possess it more distinctly. The gold- 
seeker puts his hand on an ingot; when he has coined it, 
he has it better, but not more’: a good illustration of the 
Evangelist’s limited sense of the development of faith. 
Jesus’ question implies not blame of Nathanael’s too easy 50 
credulity, but rather joyful surprise at such ready faith; 
for the full significance of the word Believe in the Gospel 
see note on 3:15. Jesus’ promise, made not only to 
Nathanael but to the whole circle, that you shall see more 
than that, is fulfilled in the next chapter, where the miracle 
of omniscience just recorded is followed by a miracle of 
creative power, from the popular point of view an even 
greater marvel, the changing of water into wine. The phrase 51 
‘ Truly, truly,’ occurs in the N.T. only on the lips of Jesus: 
hence the title ‘the Amen’ (Rev. 3: 14). The double form 
of the phrase is peculiar to this Gospel. In the promise of 
a vision of ‘ heaven open wide and God’s angels ascending and 
descending upon the Son of man,’ an allusion has been vari- 
ously supposed to the recorded appearance of angels at the 


43 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Temptation, the Agony (Lk. 22: 43), the Resurrection, the 
Ascension. But it is more probable that the prediction is an 
echo of Mt. 26: 64 than that there is a reference to any 
particular angelophany recorded in the Synoptics. Just as 
John had seen the heaven open (32-34), so should the disciples 
in the days to come; but now heaven is more than moment- 
arily opened ; it is open and remains open (note the perfect 
tense in the original, well brought out by our translation “wide 
open’). For the ‘open heaven,’ as symbolical of the near 
approach of God, compare Is. 64: 1, Acts 7: 56. The order 
of the words ‘angels ascending and descending,’ an apparent 
reversal of the natural order, is the same as in Gen. 28 :12, and 
proves that there is a reminiscence of Jacob’s vision. The 
thought is that the angels are ever at men’s side on earth, 
and therefore ‘ they first bear the prayer up to God before 
they bring down the answer from Him’ (Westcott). What 
Jacob saw in a dream the disciples shall experience in reality, 
for with the incarnation of the Logos living communication 
has been established between earth and heaven, which are 
now no longer two, but one whole (cf. Eph. 1: ro, Col. 1: 20). 
The angels in our verse are no less than symbolical mediators 
of the miraculous power of God Himself, which is now so 
fully revealed in the works of the Messiah that it ‘ brings 
God to man and makes earth a Bethel, and the gate of 
heaven’ (Dods). 

‘Son of man’ is in the Synoptics the favourite title used by 
Jesus of himself, probably because it contained a veiled 
claim to the Messiahship. A full discussion of the origin of 
the title belongs rather to Synoptic criticism, and would be 
out of place here. It was probably borrowed from the 
famous Messianic passage Dan. 7:13, a verse which is 
directly reflected in Mt. 26: 64. Our Evangelist is true to 
the Synoptic tradition in using this title as Jesus’ description 
of himself. Others may call him ‘Son of God’ and ‘king 
of Israel,’ thus stressing his relation to God and to His 
Chosen People: Jesus, as one ‘who is to remove the sin 
of the world,’ prefers to emphasize his relation to mankind 
in general, and therefore calls himself the ‘Son of man.’ For 

44 


GHAPTER I, VERSES 43-51 


it should be noted that, as compared with the Synoptic use, 
the title in our Gospel has undergone a certain modification. 
The Synoptists employ it to hint at Jesus’ Messiahship, our 
Gospel primarily to emphasize the reality of his manhood, 
though no doubt there is still the underlying suggestion of 
mystery and unique dignity. Thus our verse implies a con- 
trast between the present humanity of the Christ and the 
true glory of his divine nature which will one day be revealed, 
while nearly every occurrence of the title in our Gospel is 
in passages which suggest that he who to-day appears to be 
merely the ‘ Son of man,’ will one day be manifested in power 
and glory as ‘Son of God’ (compare 6: 62, 12: 23, 13: 31, 
G27, €tC,). 

Two questions remain: firstly, who is Nathanael? Three 
solutions are put forward. First, if he be regarded as one 
of the Twelve, he should probably be identified either with 
Bartholomew, on the ground that the latter is coupled with 
Philip by the Synoptists (Mk. 3: 18, etc.), while Nathanael 
is similarly coupled with Philip in our Gospel; or with 
Matthew (or possibly Matthias), on the ground that the two 
names have a similar derivation—‘ gift of God.’ ‘ Bartholo- 
mew ’ is itself a patronymic meaning ‘ son of Ptolemy,’ and it 
is claimed that the disciple’s personal name may quite well 
have been Nathanael. Secondly, at the other extreme, there 
is the view that Nathanael is a purely ideal figure, the repre- 
sentative of those true ‘ Israelites’ who have professed faith 
in Christ in opposition to the ‘ Jews’ of 8:44. He is the 
symbol of the perfect disciple. Thirdly, and midway between 
the two extremes, is the theory that in Nathanael we have a 
symbolical counterpart of a real person, either the ‘ Beloved 
Disciple’ who, according to the point of view of the critic, 
may or may not be the author himself, or even, as has been 
speciously argued, St. Paul. The latter, like Nathanael, 
professed his faith in Christ only after he had met him face 
to face; yet he had been preordained to Christ’s service 
while still under the shadow of the law (typified by a fig-tree 
in Lk. 13: 6 ff.), just as had Nathanael under his fig-tree. 
Paul also, like the ‘ genuine Israelite,’ prided himself that ‘I 

E 45 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


also am an Israelite’ (Rom. I1: 1), while the promise made 
to Nathanael of the vision of ‘heaven wide open’ suggests 
the ecstasy of Paul who ‘ was caught up to the third heaven ’ 
(2 Cor. 12:2). Probably the Evangelist brings forward 
Nathanael as a figure half real, half ideal. As the fifth disciple 
to be called he corresponds to Matthew (Mk. 2: 14), whose 
name, ‘ Gift of God,’ he has taken. His call is also curiously 
reminiscent of that of the other famous tax-collector of the 
Synoptic tradition, Zacchaeus. The latter is called down 
from his sycamore tree, Nathanael from under his fig-tree, 
the one to be greeted by Christ with the words ‘here is a 
genuine Israelite,’ the other with the words (Lk. 19: 9), 
‘Zacchaeus here is a son of Abraham.’ But the figure of 
Nathanael, whoever he be, has undoubtedly been idealized : 
he is the model disciple, and as such represents the viewpoint 
of the Evangelist himself. 

Lastly, what of the relation of this section to the Synoptic 
tradition? Just as Jn. 1: 19-28 and 29-34 are the equiva- 
lents of Mk. 1: 5-8 and 9-12 respectively, so is it natural to 
see in 1: 35 ff. the Johannine parallel to Mk. I: 16-20. 
But it is obviously impossible to harmonize the two accounts, 
if indeed they refer to the same occasion. Place, time, persons 
and circumstances are all different. Accordingly in the 
interests of harmony Westcott and others argue that our 
account refers to a meeting of Jesus with his first disciples 
preliminary to their formal call recorded at Mk. 1: 16, which, 
it is held, implies a previous acquaintanceship. This possi- 
bility cannot be altogether ruled out. But that our Evangelist 
regards this occasion as the actual ‘call’ of the disciples is 
far more probable, as appears from the use of the recognized 
formula ‘ follow me,’ and also from the fact that the disciples 
are henceforth found in Jesus’ company without any more 
definite call being recorded. We conclude that John has 
replaced the earlier account by one modified to suit his own 
purpose, in order to emphasize the passing over of the 
disciples from the Old Master to the New. Whereas in the 
Synoptic account Jesus leaves the Baptist immediately after 
his baptism, and the forty days in the wilderness, the tempta- 


46 


CHAPTER I, VERSES 43-51 


tion and a period of preaching in Galilee (Mk. 1: 13-15, to 
which there is no parallel in our Gospel) intervene before the 
call of the disciples, in our Gospel he remains for three days 
(vers. 29, 35, 43) in the neighbourhood of the Baptist, actually 
collecting his disciples from among the latter’s followers. 
According to John it is the recognition of Christ’s Messiahship 
and Divine Sonship which draws his first disciples to him ; 
indeed, his object in narrating their call is to emphasize the 
testimony it affords to that Messiahship which the Baptist 
has just proclaimed. Starting from the presupposition, which 
is without doubt historically probable, that Jesus would find 
his first disciples among the adherents of the Baptist, John 
combines this idea with material drawn from the Synoptics, 
reading back the faith of his own time into the profession of 
the earliest disciples, and thus producing an account which is, 
strictly speaking, not accurate history, but admirably serves 
the purpose of his apologetic. The main theme of this intro- 
ductory section is, as already noted, the passing over of the 
disciples from the Old Master to the New (vers. 7, 8, 15, 20, 


25-27, 30). 
ACT I. THE NEW GOSPEL AND THE OLD 


SEcTION I. THE RELATION OF THE NEW TO THE OLD 
Illustration (t): Water turned into Wine (2: I-11) 2: 


Two days later a wedding took place at Cana in Galilee ; the 1 
mother of Jesus was present, and Jesus and his disciples 2 
had also been invited to the wedding. As the wine ran 3 
short, the mother of Jesus said to him, ‘They have no 
wine.’ ‘Woman,’ said Jesus, ‘what have you to do 4 
with me? My time has not come yet.’ His mother 5 
said to the servants, ‘Do whatever he tells you.’ Now 6 
six stone water-jars were standing there, for the Jewish 
rites of ‘ purification,’ each holding about twenty gallons. 
Jesus said, ‘ Fill up the jars with water.’ So they filled 7 
them to the brim. Then he said, ‘Now draw some out, 8 
and take it to the manager of the feast.’ They did so ; 9 
and when the manager of the feast tasted the water 


47 


Io 


LE 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


which had become wine, not knowing where it had 
come from (though the servants who had drawn it knew), 
he called the bridegroom and said to him, ‘ Everybody 
serves the good wine first, and then the poorer wine 
after people have drunk freely ; you have kept the good 
wine till now.’ Jesus performed this, the first of his 
Signs, at Cana in Galilee, thereby displaying his glory ; 
and his disciples believed in him. 


In contrast to the Synoptists, according to whom Jesus 
opened his public ministry by teaching in Capharnahum (Mk. 
I: 21), John sets in the forefront a miracle which presents 
peculiar difficulties. It is recorded by none of the Synoptists ; 
unlike the better attested miracles it is performed in the realm 
of inorganic matter by a process which it is hardly possible 
to conceive ; finally, and this is of chief importance, from the 
ethical point of view it is unintelligible and purposeless. 
Strauss terms it truly ‘ a miracle of luxury,’ than which nothing 
could be less in harmony with the spirit of Jesus. From these 
difficulties relief can be obtained only by resorting to an 
interpretation more or less allegorical. But this is not to 
deny that behind John’s account there may lie an actual 
historical incident, for the fact that an incident is capable of 
being allegorized is no proof that it has no basis in history. 
That the original account, taken over it may be from the 
memoirs of ‘the Witness,’ has been embellished by the 
Evangelist in the interest of his symbolism we may admit 
all the more readily in the case of a Galilean episode, and 
therefore one at which it is unlikely. that ‘the Witness’ was 
himself present. In any case for the proper understanding 
of the section it is not the historical basis of the miracle 
that is of importance but the elaborate symbolism which 
the Evangelist builds up upon it. 

The theme is the transmuting of the water of the old 
Jewish ceremonial into the wine of the new Christian Gospel : 
the stone vessels represent the old Judaism whose content 
Christ has transformed from a mere ceremonial ,cleansing the 
exterior, (water) into a spiritual life renewing the heart (wine). 


48 


CHAPTER IT, VERSES 1-11 


The O.T. bestowal of water (Exod. 17: 5-7) is paralleled by 
the N.T. bestowal of wine. Water appears throughout as 
the ‘symbol of the symbolical’ (Holtzmann) as opposed to 
that which belongs to the realm of ‘ Spirit and reality’ (cf. 
3:5, 4: 13-14). Thus John the Baptist, as the representa- 
tive of the age of symbol, baptizes with water (1 : 26), while 
Jesus, who was ‘the real Light’ (1: 9), baptizes with the 
holy Spirit (1: 33). 

Wine, on the other hand, is the symbol of the new spiritual 
Gospel. The use of such a symbol would be suggested by 
many passages in the Synoptics. Thus the Gospel is the new 
wine that bursts the old bottles (Mk. 2: 22); the Baptist 
fasts, but the Son of man drinks wine (Mt. 11: 18-19) ; wine 
is the symbol of the new covenant and of heavenly joy (Mk. 
14: 24, 25) ; the Kingdom of God is a Vineyard (Mk. 12: 1-9), 
just as Jesus himself is the ‘real Vine’ (Jn. 15: 1). 

Suggestive also is the frequent use by the Synoptists of 
wedding metaphors in connexion with the teaching of the 
Kingdom. Thus the Kingdom is compared to a feast (Mt. 
8: 11), and to a royal marriage (Mt. 22:2): Jesus is the 
Bridegroom and the disciples the guests (Mk. 2: 19-20; 
compare Jn. 3: 29, where Jesus is the Bridegroom and the 
Baptist the ‘best man’); elsewhere the Church is the 
bride (2 Cor. 11: 2, Rev. 21: 2), and the bond between Christ 
and the Church that of wedlock (Eph. 5: 32). 

In Mk. 2: 19-22 the wine-symbolism and the wedding- 
symbolism are combined in one paragraph, and some critics 
suppose that this passage alone may have suggested to John 
the entire scenery of the miracle at Cana. 

It should be noted finally, in favour of an allegorical inter- 
pretation of this section, that one of the chief ‘ miracles’ 
performed at the Dionysian Mysteries seems to have been the 
changing of water into wine. Possibly we have a hint of the 
same idea in the ritual of the Feast of Tabernacles, when wine 
was mixed with water brought with elaborate ceremonial 
from the Pool of Siloam. 

‘The third day’ in Greek always means ‘the day after 1 
to-morrow,’ that is, two days later (cf. Lk. 13: 32) ; the point 

49 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


ot departure is no doubt the day of Nathanael’s call. Loisy 
notes that ‘ according to the Redactor’s artificial chronology ’ 
Jesus ‘ manifested forth his glory’ on the seventh day, seven 
being the number of perfection. Chapter I, verses 19, 29, 35, 41, 
43, each marks the beginning of a new day, and two days later 
the miracle occurs. He holds that the passages dealing with 
the Baptist are later insertions, and that therefore in ‘ the 
fundamental document’ three days only were alluded to: 
the first would mark the call of Andrew and Peter, the second 
the call of Philip and Nathanael, while the miracle at Cana 
would take place literally on ‘ the third day.’ Cana of Galilee 
should probably be identified with the village of Chirbet-Kana, 
which lies some twelve miles north of Nazaret, rather than 
with the Kefr-Kenna of the older tradition which is distant 
only four and a half miles north-west. If this identification 
be correct, then the qualification ‘of Galilee’ is probably 
intended to distinguish it from the Phoenician Cana, situated 
in the territory of the tribe of Asher (Jos. 19: 28) about 
eight miles south-east from Tyre. If it be insisted that this 
Cana also belonged to Galilee in the wider sense, then we must 
conclude that the words ‘ of Galilee’ merely mark the transi- 
tion from Peraea in this passage, and from Judaea at 4: 46. 
In this case it is even possible that it is the Tyrian Cana to 
which our Evangelist refers, and indeed the note of time at 
4: 52 seems to favour this identification. 

2 The fact that the mother of Jesus was present at the wedding 
does not necessarily imply that her permanent home was now 
at Cana. At verse 12 she leaves the place along with Jesus. 
There has been much speculation as to why Jesus and his 
disciples happened to be invited to the wedding, but in the 
case of a narrative so full of symbolism one is inclined to agree 
with Loisy that ‘ nothing is more vain than to speculate about 
the historical conditions of a fact which does not belong to 
strict history.’ A wedding festival might last for a week 
(Gen. 29: 27), and it would be on one of the last days that 

3 the wine ran short, a serious matter, for, as a Jewish saying 
puts it, ‘ without wine there is no joy.’ The mother of Jesus 
(perhaps symbolical of the O.T. Church, Rev. 12: 1) appeals 


50 


CHAPTER IIL SVERSES A%-11 


to Jesus with the words ‘ They have no wine’: the old legal 
religion ‘ lacks wine,’ all the life energy is gone from it. Bengel 
supposes that Mary’s words are a hint to Jesus to withdraw 
with his disciples and so relieve the embarrassment caused 
by the shortage of wine. Rather by calling attention to the 
need Mary indirectly challenges Jesus to help (cf. 11: 3): 
now is the time to manifest that miraculous power fore- 
shadowed at 1:51. But Jesus is at once on his guard; the 
words are those of a tempter; they savour too much of 
Satan’s suggestion in Mt. 4: 3 (cf. note on 6: 15). ‘Woman,’ 4 
said Jesus, ‘what have you to do with me?’ The term 
‘woman’ in the original has none of the harshness it suggests in 
English, but is perfectly respectful and even intimate ; Jesus 
even addresses his mother by it from the Cross (1g: 26) 
in ‘a moment of unutterable tenderness ’(Godet). The 
rebuff lies in the words that follow: ‘What have you to do 
with me?’ (For the form of phrase cf. 2 Sam. 16: Io, etc., 
Mk. 1: 24, etc.) ‘ Your point of view, your aims and inter- 
ests are quite different from mine.’ The old ties of home must 
now be replaced by higher ties ; Jesus is now independent of 
every human influence, and even his mother is nothing to him 
in the accomplishment of his divine mission. We may com- 
pare Lk. 2: 49, Mk. 3: 33, thoughts which here become as it 
were forged into a sword which ‘ pierces through Mary’s soul’ 
(Lk. 2: 35). Jesus’ apparent harshness has provoked endless 
discussion ; but when it is remembered that the words must 
ultimately be construed allegorically all difficulty disappears. 
The expression loses its last hint of offence when it is realized 
that John is picturing to us not a clash of wills between son 
and mother, but a conflict of two contradictory types of faith. 
The Divine Logos and the Theocratic Church are set over 
against each other. ‘The motive of my actions,’ says the 
Christ, ‘is not to be sought for in the spirit of the old faith. 
I am not to be regarded as a wonder-working Messiah, as you, 
the representative of the old faith, judge me, but as the dying 
Son of God proclaimed by the new faith.’ It is this last 
thought that is hinted at in Jesus’ next words, ‘My time 
has not yet come.’ (For the phrase compare 7: 30, 8: 20, and 
51 


THE GOSPEL Of] JOHN 


for the converse idea 12: 23, 13: I, 17: 1.) The words which 
on the surface seem to refer to the time for Christ to display 
his miraculous power and thereby ‘ manifest forth his glory ’ 
(ver. 11) have, as in all the parallels quoted above, a secondary 
and deeper reference to his death. The time for granting his 
mother’s request and changing water into wine has not yet 
come, for it is an axiom of our Gospel that the transformation 
of the symbolical into the ‘ real’ can only come about with the 
bestowal of the Spirit, which in turn cannot take place till 
after Jesus’ death (7: 39). 

Our Gospel several times emphasizes Jesus’ unwillingness 
to be ‘rushed,’ especially by the claims of those he loved. 
(Compare specially 7: 3, 6, and 11: 5-6.) ‘ In all three cases 
human affection sought to bring pressure to bear on Jesus in 
connexion with his vocation, and in each case the interference 
is resented and repelled. Jesus does the will of God, and not 
the will of man’ (R. H. Strachan). Yet in each of the three 
cases Jesus ultimately yields. If in this case it appears in- 
consistent to perform the miracle immediately after insisting 
that the time for so doing had not yet come, the explanation 
is that in the intention of our author both the ‘ time’ and the 
‘Sign’ (ver. 11) have a significance quite other than one would 
judge from the letter of the narrative. 

5 Mary, perhaps hoping from the qualification ‘not yet’ that 
Jesus’ refusal is not final, said to the servants—possibly sym- 
bolical of the Christian ministry—‘ Do whatever he tells you,’ 

6 words reminiscent of Gen. 41:55. The six stone water-jars, 
standing either actually in the banquet room or in the vestibule, 
would each contain about twenty gallons, or about 120 gallons 
in all, the Greek metretes being equivalent to eight or nine 
gallons. Similar jars have actually been discovered at Cana in 
modern days. These jars would be used for the Jewish rites 
of ‘ purification,’ that is, for the washing of the guests’ hands 
and of the various utensils as required by the ordinary social 
customs of the day (Mk. 7: 3-4). Here they are symbolical 
of the old Jewish faith, whose content Christ was to transform 
from an outwardly purifying ritual to a life-giving religion 
instinct with spiritual power. John tells us that the jars were 

52 


CHAPTER II, VERSES 1-11 


filled to the brim in order both to emphasize the lavishness of 
Jesus’ gift and also to suggest that there was no room left for 
adding anything to the water: the genuineness of the miracle 
is thus certified. Commentators have been needlessly con- 
cerned to explain why Jesus placed such a large quantity of 
wine at the disposal of the company. John’s intention is 
simply to emphasize the superabundant liberality of Christ’s 
bestowments: he gives his gifts ‘from his fulness’ (1: 16), 
and ‘in no stinting measure’ (3: 34). From the words 
‘ draw some out’ some have supposed that it was only the water 
so drawn which was changed into wine: Jesus is thus relieved 
of any responsibility for encouraging excess, but surely at 
the cost of obscuring the main point of the symbolism which 
is to emphasize the fulness of Christ’s grace. The wine would 
be taken to the manager of the feast in order that he might 
taste it before it was served to the guests. This official is 
not, as some have supposed, the ‘ chairman’ at the banquet, 
Horace’s arbiter bibendi or ‘toastmaster, but rather the 
maitre dhétel or chief steward, or indeed ‘head waiter,’ 
who was responsible for the service of the meal. The note 
that, when he tasted the wine, he did so not knowing where 
it had come from, suggests that his judgment was therefore 
quite unbiased. The reality of the miracle is thus em- 
phasized. The custom of serving the good wine first is not 
clearly alluded to elsewhere, though parallels have been sought 
in Pliny, Martial and Cassius Iatrosophistes: the words are 
intended as a pleasantry, and are not to be taken too rigorously. 
Lk. 5: 39 is sufficient comment. The Evangelist, with char- 
acteristic lack of interest in the story for its own sake (cf. 
Introduction, p. xliii), does not tell us either the reply of the 
bridegroom or the effect of the miracle upon the guests. It is 
enough that the wine has been praised by the best judge and 
the miracle thereby attested. 

The point of verse 11 is not that this is the first ‘sign’ 
performed in Galilee (that at 4:54 being the second), but 
rather that this miracle is of primary significance as being 
the first of all Jesus’ Signs, and therefore the one by which 
he first displayed his glory. For glory see note on I: 14: 


os 


7 


THE GOSPEL’ OF JOHM 


the claim made there is warranted by the miracle recorded 
here. There are three main terms used in the Gospels of 
Jesus’ miracles: ‘acts of power’ (never used in this Gospel), 
‘works’ and signs. ‘ Works’ is the word usually but by no 
means always used by Jesus himself in our Gospel, but 
‘signs’ is the term which best suits the point of view of the 
Evangelist, for it emphasizes the evidential value of miracle 
for faith. In our Gospel the motive of compassion, so evident 
in the Synoptic accounts (Mk. 1: 41), is almost lost sight of, and 
Jesus’ miracles become rather exhibitions of divine power 
whereby he ‘displays his glory’ and inspires belief in his 
claims (cf. 9: 3). Hence the miraculous element is deliber- 
ately enhanced. The nobleman’s son is healed from a distance 
by a mere word, the blind man is blind from birth, Lazarus 
has lain in the grave four days: the miracle thus becomes 
a more convincing ‘sign’ of Jesus’ ‘glory’ and a more 
effectual incentive to faith (see Introduction, p. xv f.). To 
our Evangelist the miracles are also ‘signs,’ in the sense that 
they are symbolical, important not for their own sake, but as 
types of spiritual truth. Each of the seven miracles recorded 
is selected designedly for the sake of the spiritual teaching 
to which it leads up: e.g. the Feeding of the Five Thousand is 
a ‘sign’ that Jesus is the ‘ Bread of Life,’ the Healing of the 
Blind Man a ‘sign’ that he is ‘ the Light of the World,’ the 
Raising of Lazarus a ‘sign’ that he is ‘the Resurrection 
and the Life.’ Thus the present miracle is a ‘ sign’ that one 
has appeared who will introduce a new and spiritual worship. 
On the strength of this ‘sign’ his disciples believed in him. 
The Synoptists always represent miracle as preceded and 
conditioned by faith (Mk. 2:5, Mt. 13: 58, etc.): in our 
Gospel, on the other hand, belief is the consequence of miracle 
(4: 53, 14: 11, etc.). Yet nothing is here said of the effect 
of the miracle upon the company at large: it is only the 
disciples who are said to believe, which suggests that even our 
Evangelist considers miracle to have significance only for 
those who already have some measure of faith. 

One other question remains: how far ought this section 
to be read in connexion with the Feeding of the Five Thousand 


54 


CHAPTER II,. VERSES. 1-11 


(chap. 6) and with it related to the ritual of the Last Supper 
as a symbolical illustration of the drinking of Christ’s blood ? 
The Evangelist undoubtedly intends his narrative of the 
distribution of the loaves to be understood as symbolical of 
the eating of Christ’s flesh, and 6: 53-56 seems to require a 
parallel illustration of the drinking of his blood. The dis- 
tribution of the wine to the guests would then represent 
the shedding of Christ’s blood, and the whole incident would 
be read as a symbolical elaboration of Mt. 26: 28. The two 
miracles in question are, however, placed so far apart in the 
text of our Gospel that any reference in this section to the Last 
Supper is probably quite secondary, the Evangelist’s main 
intention being to set in the forefront of the Gospel the 
thought of the supplanting of the Old by the New. This 
is the theme of the whole section 2: 1-4: 42, which deals 
with the New Birth (3: 3-8), the supplanting of the Baptist 
by the New and greater Master (3 : 22-30), the exaltation of a 
New worship above the Old (4: 20-24): to this whole series the 
two incidents of the Marriage at Cana and the Cleansing of 
the Temple serve as ‘title-page vignettes’ (Holtzmann). The 
section 2: I-II well illustrates the ingenuity and independence 
of the Evangelist who gathers together, probably around a 
nucleus of actual history, widely scattered Synoptic material, 
and out of it creates an entirely new picture to subserve his 
own apologetic aims. He no doubt intends his narrative to 
be accepted as at any rate approximately true history. Yet 
it is not facts but their spiritual significance which interests 
him; in his own words (6: 63) : ‘ What gives life is the Spirit : 
flesh is of no avail at all.’ 


Illustration (11): Cleansing of the Temple (2: 12-22) 
After this he travelled down to Capharnahum, with his mother 12 


and brothers and his disciples ; they stayed there for a 
few days. 


After this Jesus travelled down from the hill country of 12 
Cana to Capharnahum, which lay near the shore of the Sea of 
Galilee nearly 700 feet below sea-level. The exact site of the 


35 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


town is uncertain, but it is probably to be found not at Tell- 
Hum, as early Christian tradition held, but at Khan Minyeh, 
situated at the north end of the plain of Gennesaret, at the 
point where the Damascus Road leaves the lake-side. Caphar- 
nahum would thus be an important trading centre (Lk. 5: 27). 
Mk. 3: 21 suggests that Jesus’ family may have resided there, 
which would explain the reference here to his mother and 
brothers. The latter, whose names are given (Mt. 13: 55) 
as James, Joses, Simon and Judas, were either the sons of 
Joseph by a former marriage, or more probably the sons of 
Joseph and Mary, and younger brothers of Jesus. Capharna- 
hum is elsewhere (Mt. g: 1) called Jesus’ ‘own town.’ Notice 
that from this point Jesus is represented as accompanied as 
a matter of course by his disciples, though no further detailed 
account of their call has been given (see note at end of chap. I). 
Jesus remains only a few days at Capharnahum in view of 
the near approach of the Passover. 

This visit to Capharnahum may correspond to that men- 
tioned in Mt. 4: 13. It is possible that our Evangelist may 
have introduced it merely out of respect to the Synoptic 
tradition. But the apparent aimlessness of verse 12, when 
considered by itself, adds probability to the supposition that 
he has incorporated it from the historical memoirs of ‘ the 
Witness.’ ‘If the Gospel is all an artificial composition with 
a dogmatic object, why should the author carry his readers 
thus to Capernaum—for nothing ?’ (Sanday). 

At this point Moffatt inserts the section 3: 22-30 on the 
ground that Jesus’ journey (3: 22) ‘into the country of Judaea’ 
requires Galilee as its point of departure. The section is 
certainly misplaced in its present context, but on the whole it 
seems preferable to place it immediately before chapter 4, 
where see note (p. 88). 


13 Now the Jewish passover was near, so Jesus went up to Jeru- 
14 salem. There he found, seated inside the temple, dealers in 
15 cattle, sheep and pigeons, also money-changers. Making 
a scourge of cords, he drove them all, sheep and cattle 
together, out of the temple, scattered the coins of the 

56 


CHARTERIS VERSES* 13-22 


brokers and upset their tables, and told the pigeon-dealers, 
‘ Away with these! My Father’s house is not to be turned 
intoashop!’ (His disciples recalled the scripture saying, 
I am consumed with zeal for thy house.) Then the Jews 
accosted him with the words, ‘What sign of authority 
have you to show us, for acting in this way?’ Jesus 
replied, ‘ Destroy this sanctuary and I will raise it up in 


16 


17 
18 


19 


three days.’ ‘ This sanctuary took forty-six years to build,’ 20 


the Jews retorted, ‘and you are going to raise it up in 


three days!’ He meant the sanctuary of his body, 21 
however, and when the disciples recalled what he had 22 


said, after he had been raised from the dead, they believed 
the scripture and the word of Jesus. 


(For the general question of Jesus’ visits to Jerusalem see 
Introduction, p. xiv.) The passover here mentioned is the 
first of the three which, according to John, fell within the limits 
of Jesus’ ministry, the second occurring at 6: 4, and the third 
at 11:55. The passover (Exod. 12) was celebrated at the 
vernal equinox. John characteristically calls it the Jewish 
passover (cf. 2: 6, 5: 1, 7: 2, etc.), either because he writes 
mainly for Hellenistic readers or possibly in order to dis- 
tinguish the feast from the Christian Easter celebration. 

Christ’s visit to the temple is ‘a commentary on Mal. 3: 1 ff.’ 
(Westcott), and is clearly intended to have Messianic signifi- 
cance. In the outer Court of the Gentiles a regular market was 
established where worshippers might obtain the animals 
necessary for sacrifice. Here too were the tables of the 
money-changers who found a lucrative business in the exchange 
of the Roman currency into the Jewish, which alone might be 
paid into the temple treasury. A small fee was exacted for 
changing a shekel into the half-shekels required for the pay- 
ment of the annual ‘ temple-tax’ of half ashekel (Exod. 30: 13 ; 
Mt. 17:24). That profiteering was rife in the temple market 
is proved by Edersheim, who relates that on one occasion, 
through official intervention, the price of a pair of doves was 
brought down from 15s. 34. to 4d. 

John alone mentions the scourge of cords. Jewish tradition 


57 


13 


14 


T5 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


held that the Messiah at his coming would bear a lash 
for the chastisement of evil-doers, which suggests that the 
scourge is to be regarded rather as an emblem of authority 
than as a weapon of offence. The words he drove them all, 
sheep and cattle together are so phrased in the Greek as to 
suggest that the tradesmen themselves were not subjected to 
violence. Some hold that Jesus is here represented as dealing 

16 more gently with the pigeon-dealers than with the other 
traders, possibly because they supplied the requirements of 
the poorer worshippers. But naturally it would be impos- 
sible to ‘ drive out’ the birds in their cages, and therefore 
Jesus bids their owners ‘Away with these!’ The words ‘My 
Father’s house’ (cf. Lk. 2: 49)—not ‘ our Father’ or ‘ your 
Father ’—contain a veiled Messianic claim. ‘Jesus felt 
himself to be the Son of Him who in a unique way had con- 
secrated this place for His temple, and he exercised the 
authority of a Son against the turmoil which defiled his 
Father’s house’ (Weiss). The Synoptists give Jesus’ words 
as ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer, but you make 
it a den of robbers’ (Mt. 21: 13), apparently a composite 
citation of Is. 56: 7 and Jer. 7: 11. Here the taunt, ‘My 
Father’s house is not to be turned into a shop’ recalls Zech. 
14: 21, ‘ There shall be no more the Canaanite (the typical 
trader) in the house of the Lord of Hosts.’ 

17 John characteristically records the twofold effect of Jesus’ 
act according to the moral predisposition of the witnesses. 
His disciples, on the one hand, recalled the Scripture saying, 
‘I am consumed with zeal for thy house ’ (Ps. 69: 9), that is 
to say, they recognized in their Master’s reforming zeal a trait 
of the Messiah: from 15: 25, 19: 28, Acts r: 20, Rom. Ir: 9, 
15: 3, it is clear that Ps. 69 was generally given a Messianic 
significance. In the Greek the form of the word translated 
‘I am consumed ’ is strictly future, whence some have sup- 
posed an allusion to the Passion: ‘l’auteur a pu songer a la 
passion et a la mort de Jésus comme objet éloigné de la 
prophétie’ (Loisy). In this reference to the effect made on 
the disciples Sanday finds ‘a bit of autobiography’ (for 

18 his disciples recalled cf. ver. 22 and 12:16). The Jews, 


58 


CHAPTER II, VERSES .13-22 


on the other hand, who do not see that such an act as Jesus’ 
carries with it its own moral justification and is in itself a 
‘sign,’ demand of Jesus, ‘ What sign of authority have you to 
show us, for acting in this way?’ Notice that they do not 
question the justice of his act: they merely demand his 
authority for thus exercising the jus reformandi. Jesus, 
they realize, has put forward Messianic claims: let him 
then produce his credentials and give visible proof of his divine 
authority. Jesus, following the analogy of Mt. 12: 38-40 (the 
sign of Jonas), refuses any immediate proof, but holds out 
the prospect of one great ‘sign’ which will be his warrant for 
all previous acts of authority: there will be no sign to-day, 
but to-morrow will show: ‘ Destroy this sanctuary, and I will 
raise it up in three days.’ ; 

The following four verses afford one of the cruces of Johan- 
nine interpretation. We will for the moment postpone the 
larger problems and deal merely with the letter of the text, 
remembering, however, that there runs throughout the verses 
a twofold reference to the temple building and to the body of 
Christ regarded as a spiritual sanctuary. 

In the words ‘ Destroy this sanctuary ’ we have a ‘ prophetic’ 
imperative, whereby Jesus’. foes are challenged to do their 
worst. On the supposition that the words ‘I will raise it up’ 
refer to the Resurrection, it may be noted that John regularly 
thus ascribes it to the power of Christ himself (10: 17-18), 
while elsewhere in the N.T. it is the Father who raises the Son 
(Rom. 4: 24, 8: 11, Acts 3: 15, 4: 10). Possibly this follows 
from John’s Logos-philosophy, according to which it was not 
the whole Person of Christ which died and rose again, but only 
the body which perished and was afterwards raised to life 
by the imperishable Logos. The expression ‘in three days’ 
may mean not ‘on the third day,’ but ‘ within the period of 
three days,’ that is, ‘within a very short time ’—the exact 
day not being defined. 

The Jews take Jesus’ words to refer to the temple buildings, 
and, contrary to the impression left by the Synoptic account 
(Mk. 14:58, etc.), apparently consider them ‘ more absurd than 
blasphemous’ (Loisy). ‘This sanctuary took forty-six years 


59 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


to build, and you are going to raise it up in three days !,’ 
Herod’s temple was begun in 20-19 B.c., and was completed 
under Herod Agrippa II in a.p. 64. Forty-six years from the 
tormer date would bring us to A.D. 27-28, ‘ which suits the 
chronology of the Life of Christ as well as any date could do’ 
(Sanday). ‘The coincidence is sufficiently striking’ (Light- 
foot) to suggest that John may have had first-hand evidence, 
in the memoirs of ‘ the Witness,’ for the words here recorded. 
‘It is most unlikely that a Greek teased himself with this 
troublesome investigation, and then allowed his antiquarian 
knowledge to slip out in such a way that no one would take 
any notice of it’ (Drummond). True the temple was not 
actually completed at this date, but the words need mean no 
more than that the temple had ‘ already been forty-six years 
under construction.’ But whether or no ‘the Witness’ has 
preserved the words as originally spoken in connexion with 
the temple, it is probable that the Evangelist, true to the two- 
fold line of thought running through the passage, sees in them 
a symbolical reference to the age of Jesus. Starting from the 
allusion in 8: 57 to Jesus’ age as ‘ not yet fifty,’ Loisy thinks 
that our Evangelist has made his age correspond to the seven 
‘year-weeks’ of Dan. 9: 25-27. He begins his ministry at the 
age of forty-six: the ministry is prolonged for ‘ half a week’ 
(3 years), so that at his death Jesus would be nearly fifty, 
and his exaltation would take place in the ‘ year of Jubilee.’ 
21 The Evangelist here inserts one of those explanatory com- 
ments so characteristic of the Gospel (see Introduction, p. xliv) : 
he meant the sanctuary of his body. Christ is thus made to 
claim that he is the ‘real’ sanctuary of God, in whom all 
previous dreams of a dwelling-place of God among men are 
realized (cf. 1: 14). Paul frequently compares the human 
body to a temple. In 2 Cor. 5: 1 he speaks of ‘ this earthly 
tent of mine’ ; in 1 Cor. 6: 19 his readers are reminded that 
“your body is the temple of the holy Spirit within you.’ 
Hence he in whom ‘the entire Fulness of deity has settled 
bodily ’ (Col. 2: 9) may well claim to be the ‘real’ temple. 
According to John the underlying meaning of Jesus’ words is 
‘ Kill me, and I will rise again from the dead!’ 
60 


CHAPTER II, VERSES 13-22 


John’s reference to the subsequent reflections of the disciples 22 
shows us how he himself came thus to interpret Jesus’ words. 
Had not his claim been justified by the event? Jesus 
had been raised from the dead. Accordingly John, who is 
typical of all disciples, believed the word of Jesus, that is, he 
assented to the claim implied in that word, and believed the 
scripture, namely, those passages in which a resurrection of 
the Messiah seemed to be foreshadowed, e.g. Ps. 16: 10, 
-Hos. 62 2, etc. 

In considering the foregoing section two questions must be 
kept separate: first, supposing the narrative to have a basis 
in history, what were the actual words spoken by Jesus and 
what was their inner intention ? second, taking the words as 
we actually have them in the text, what is the primary signifi- 
cance which the Evangelist intends them to bear? Consider 
the historicity of the incident first. That some such saying 
as that reported in verse I9 was actually spoken by Jesus is 
fairly clear from the evidence of the false witnesses (Mk. 
14: 58) and the references in Mt. 27: 40 and Acts6: 14. The 
evidence at the trial distorts Jesus’ challenge into a threat. 
According to John Jesus challenges his opponents to destroy 
“this sanctuary,’ in order that he may have the opportunity 
to ‘raise it’—the same sanctuary; according to the false 
evidence Jesus threatens himself to ‘ destroy this temple made 
with hands’ that in three days he may ‘ build another temple 
not made with hands.’ Thus the general impression left by 
Jesus’ words was that they referred to the temple buildings ; 
and, as it was with regard to an action in the temple buildings 
that Jesus had been challenged, it is certainly more natural 
that the ‘sign’ with which he answers the challenge should 
have the same primary reference to the temple buildings. 
It is impossible to recover the exact form of Jesus’ words. 
He evidently said something which lent itself to misconstruc- 
tion, something which, at least on the surface, appeared to 
refer to the temple buildings. But can Jesus have intended 
his words (not necessarily as we have them here, but as they 
were actually spoken) to carry a secondary reference to his 
resurrection? Though it would be easy enough for the 

F 61 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


disciples to read such a meaning into his words after his 
death, Jesus himself is hardly likely to have spoken thus in 
riddles, or to have been understood even by his disciples had 
he done so. He could not have alluded thus to his resurrec- 
tion before even warning them of his approaching sufferings 
and death. If the incident is placed, as by our Gospel, at the 
beginning of the ministry, this consideration is almost decisive. 
But if the Synoptic setting of the incident (see below) is 
correct, then the certainty of death must have been at this 
moment clearly before Jesus’ eyes, and his words may well 
have contained a veiled allusion to what lay before him. 
But it seems clear from the disciples’ behaviour after the 
crucifixion that Jesus can hardly have thus definitely pre- 
dicted the exact day of his resurrection. On the whole, 
critical opinion tends to the conclusion that, whatever Jesus’ 
actual words both on this occasion and on that described 
in Mt. 12: 38-40, the sign intended was not primarily the 
Resurrection, though this intention was very early read into 
the words by the Church. 

The exact significance which the Evangelist intends the 
words, as he here gives them, to bear is a second and quite 
different question. The fact that the whole incident is appar- 
ently introduced as a second illustration of the supplanting 
of the old faith by the new makes the following the most 
probable interpretation: Jesus sets over against the dese- 
cration of the temple by the devotees of the old religion his 
own promise of the raising up of a new and spiritual religion. 
‘Continue these practices,’ he says, ‘ till you have reduced 
your religion to a mockery, and on its ruins I will raise up in 
a very short time (“in three days’’) the worship of God 
“in Spirit and in reality” (4: 24).’ True, according to this 
interpretation the new ‘sanctuary’ thus raised up would, 
strictly speaking, not be ‘it,’ ie. the same sanctuary, but 
‘another,’ as in Mk. 14:58. But on this point see below: 
‘the old Church is transfigured and not destroyed ’ (Westcott). 
Is then the reference to the Resurrection to be ruled out 
altogether and verses 21-22 assigned to the Redactor as out 
of harmony with the Evangelist’s thought? It may be so; 

62 


CHAPTER II, VERSES 13-22 


in the case of several similar ‘comments’ it is undoubtedly 
so (cf. 4: 2, 18:9, etc.). But John is notoriously fond of 
a ‘double entendre’; and a secondary reference to the 
Resurrection, though it might be a misinterpretation of the 
strictly literal meaning of Jesus’ words, would be quite in 
line with the Evangelist’s method. We may quite well have 
here, not an interpolated comment by the Redactor, but a 
comment by the Evangelist himself, possibly upon matter 
which he is incorporating from the memoirs of ‘ the Witness’ 
(cf. Introduction, p. xli). Moreover, in these early sections 
John has been illustrating the gradual growth of faith in the 
disciples’ hearts (cf. especially 1: 50, 2: II, 2: 22), and may 
well have thought to utilize this incident not only as an 
illustration of the supplanting of the old faith by the new, but 
also as the medium whereby he might place in the forefront 
of his Gospel his conception of that full resurrection faith of 
which 20: 26-29 is the most perfect expression. It may be 
noted that this interplay of two lines of thought, that relating 
to the temple and that relating to the physical body of 
Christ, is rendered the more easy by the common Pauline 
analogy whereby the Church, the Christian counterpart of 
the temple worship, is equated with the mystical ‘ Body of 
Christ) 3(Col, <1 #26)e24'>) Eph 1423). “Thus the temple 
not made by hands’ (Mk. 14: 58) in the sense of the mystical 
body of Christ, the spiritual Church which is the expression 
of the new faith, becomes a mediating conception which links 
together and unites into one thought two ideas apparently 
so disparate as ‘ this temple made by hands’ and the actual 
physical body of Christ. We see too how it is possible for 
John, with the Pauline analogy in mind, to think of the new 
spiritual religion which Jesus is to raise up as in truth the 
same ‘ sanctuary ’ as that which has been destroyed (‘I will 
raise it,’ not ‘another, as in Mark). ‘The old Church is 
transfigured and not destroyed’ (Westcott), because ‘if it 
is in the person of the Messiah that the Temple is laid in 
ruins, it is in his person also that it shall be raised again’ 
(Godet). 

Finally, what is the relation of this section to the Synoptic 

63 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


account, which places the incident of the temple cleansing 
at the close of the ministry, and finds in it the motive for 
Jesus’ arrest ? Note that John retains the Synoptic connexion 
of the incident with a question concerning ‘authority ’ 
(Mk. 11: 15-18, 28), but unites the latter with the request 
for a ‘sign,’ which the Synoptists give in a different context 
(Mt. 12: 38-40). John’s account cannot be reconciled with 
that of the Synoptists, unless indeed Jesus twice “ cleansed ’ 
the temple, at the beginning and at the close of his ministry. 
Though in the interests of harmony this view has been main- 
tained, we must agree with Stanton that ‘ when in different 
ancient documents we find two accounts in many respects 
so similar referring to different times, it is on the whole most 
probable that we have to do with different traditions about 
the same event’ (op. cit., p. 235). 

There is no hint in the Synoptics of any knowledge of an 
earlier cleansing, nor in John of a later. Which dating then 
is historically correct ? Preference has sometimes been given 
to John on the ground that the Synoptists, as a result of 
their omission of this earlier visit to Jerusalem, may have 
misplaced an incident which belonged originally to the 
earlier date. But it seems more natural that the saying 
which (Mk. 14: 58) was brought up in evidence against Jesus 
at his trial should have been spoken immediately before the 
catastrophe. Furthermore, it was only the presence in Jesus’ 
train of a large number of Galilean pilgrims which made 
the act possible. At the beginning of the ministry Jesus’ 
Messianic claims had not won sufficient recognition to make 
possible such an act of violence under the very eyes of the 
Sanhedrim. On the other hand, supposing the Synoptic 
chronology to be correct, it is easy to understand John’s 
motive for thus antedating the incident. He no longer 
requires it to lead up to the dénouement, for this purpose is 
served in our Gospel by the Lazarus story ; rather does he 
utilize it as an eminently suggestive inaugural act. Jesus 
is represented as beginning his work of religious reform in 
the fittest and most obvious place. John’s ‘ one consideration 
is that if Jesus is to offer himself to Israel as the Christ he 


64 


CHAPTER II, VERSES 23-25 


should do so at once, at the Passover, before the assembled 
nation in his “ Father’s house’”’’ (Bacon, p. 395). 


Theme (1): The New Birth—in relation to Pharisaism 
(2: 23-3: 13; 3: 31-36) 


When he was in Jerusalem at the festival of the passover, 23 
many people believed in his name, as they witnessed the 
Signs which he performed. Jesus, however, would not 24 
trust himself to them ; he knew all men, and required 25 
no evidence from anyone about human nature ; well did 
he know what was in human nature. 


To this section 2 : 23-25 form a preface indicating in general 23 
terms the results of Jesus’ stay in Jerusalem. We are re- 
minded that the incident just narrated occurred immediately 
before the festival of the passover. Pilgrims went to Jerusa- 
lem shortly before the festival in order to purify themselves 
(II: 55), and on the 13th Nisan, the eve of the festival, this 
purification was completed by the removal of leaven from 
every house. John probably intends us to understand that the 
day on which every Israelite purified his house was that on 
which Jesus purified ‘his Father’s.’ During the festival 
season, when Jerusalem would be crowded, many people 
believed in his name, that is, they believed Jesus to be what 
he professed to be, namely, the Messiah, as they witnessed 
(day by day—the word is emphatically present tense) the 
Signs which he performed. John has not recorded any 
such ‘ Signs’ in Jerusalem up to this point ; but the narrative 
makes no claim to be exhaustive. Note that while in the 
Synoptics Jesus almost needs to be constrained to work 
miracles, our Gospel represents him as freely employing them 
as proofs of his divine authority. A close relation is obviously 
intended between the words ‘believed’ and ‘ witnessed’: 
John hints that the people’s faith ‘has little more duration 
than the sight’ (Godet). It is one of John’s curious inconsis- 
tencies that, while he insists on the evidential value of 
miracle, he yet disparages faith based upon miracle (4: 48, 

65 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


20: 29), as nothing more than what Luther calls ‘ milk faith.’ 
Miracle cannot produce true faith, though it may consolidate 
it ‘by unveiling to it completely the riches of its object’ 
(Godet). 

24 There is a play of words in verse 24, rendered possible by 
the elasticity of the concept of ‘ faith’ in our Gospel (cf. 3: 15 
note). Though many trusted in his name, Jesus would not 
trust himself to them, that is, he had no faith in their 
faith. The meaning is, not merely that Jesus refused to have 
personal intercourse with his would-be adherents, but rather 
that he refused to enter into a moral and a spiritual relation- 
ship with them, as he had done for example with Nathanael, 
because on their part, a faith based merely on ‘ Signs ’ implied 
no moral relationship to him. True discipleship demands such 
a relationship ; but ‘as they did not give themselves morally 
to him, he did not give himself morally to them’ (Lut- 
hardt). A commentary on this statement is afforded by 
6:14 f., where Jesus rejects homage based upon false 
beliefs and hopes (cf. Mt. 7: 21 ff.). 

25 John justifies Jesus’ mistrust of his fellows by the fact that 
he knew all men (21: 17). Because he knew the nature of 
‘all’ he did not ‘trust himself’ to the ‘many’ mentioned 
above. The same thought is then characteristically (cf. 1: 3 
note) repeated negatively : he required no evidence from any- 
one about human nature, for well did he know (‘he’ is em- 
phatic—‘ of himself, without need of any human medium ’) 
what was in human nature. This faculty of Jesus, wherein 
we have the supreme illustration of ‘the gift of distinguish- 
ing spirits’ (1 Cor. 12:10; cf. 1 Jn. 4:1) is repeatedly 
emphasized by our Evangelist. It has been held that John 
does not claim supernatural knowledge for Christ, but simply 
a higher degree of that insight, born of experience, which may 
be possessed by allmen. Thus the word here used for ‘ know ’ 
signifies an acquired and not an innate knowledge. And yet 
this trait appears so often in our Gospel (cf. esp. 1: 48, 
4: 18, 6: 61, etc.) that it is difficult to believe that John does 
not ascribe to Jesus, in virtue of his Logos nature, a super- 
natural knowledge which quite transcends that moral and 

66 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 1-10 


spiritual insight into the inner life of others which even the 
Synoptists claim for him (Mk. 2: 8). ‘ An impression is borne 
home to us, in every episode of the history, that while he 
tabernacled with men he was more than human—that he 
was a heavenly being who could exercise at will the pre- 
rogatives of God’ (E. F. Scott, The Fourth Gospel, p. 166). 


Now there was a Pharisee named Nicodemus, who belonged 
to the Jewish authorities ; he came one night to Jesus 
and said, ‘ Rabbi, we know you have come from God to 
teach us, for no one could perform these Signs of yours 
unless God were with him.’ Jesus replied, ‘ Truly, truly 
I tell you, no one can see God’s Realm unless he is born 
from above.’ Nicodemus said to him, ‘How can a man 
be born when he is old? Can he enter his mother’s 
womb over again and be born?’ Jesus replied, ‘ Truly, 
truly I tell you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, 
he cannot enter God’s Realm. What is born of the 
flesh is flesh : what is born of the Spirit is Spirit. Do 
not wonder at me telling you, ‘‘ You must all be 
born from above.’’ The wind blows where it wills ; 
you can hear its sound, but you never know where it 
has come from or where it goes: it is the same with 
everyone who is born of the Spirit.’ Nicodemus answered, 
‘How can that be?’ Jesus replied, ‘You do not under- 
stand this ?—you, a teacher in Israel!’ 


Though as a rule Jesus ‘did not trust himself’ to men, 
he showed his insight into human nature by his occasional 
compliance no less than by his habitual reserve. In the case 
of Nicodemus he makes an exception, the more remarkable 
because the latter is a Pharisee, who belonged to the Jewish 
authorities, that is, a member of the Sanhedrim, and as such 
one of the ‘ official opposition ’ to the Christ-party (cf. note 
1:19). Nicodemus is not mentioned by the Synoptists, 
and is otherwise unknown, though the Talmud frequently men- 
tions as one of Jesus’ followers a person of this name still 
living at the time of the destruction of Jerusalem who possibly 


67 


H 
jo) 


H 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


may be identified with the present character, or at least may 
have provided the original for the character-study. (For other 
references in the Gospel see 7:50, 19:39.) Nicodemus 
provides the Johannine parallel to the ‘ Rich Young Ruler ’ 
(Mk. 10: 17ff., etc.) In both cases the discussion centres 
upon the difficulty of entering the Kingdom (Mk. Io: 23-25), 
while the immediately preceding verses in Mark (Io: 15) 
touch on the subject of ‘ re-birth.’ 

2 Nicodemus is represented as coming by night, probably 
out of ‘ fear for the Jews’ (19: 38), though it may be that he 
desired the privilege of a private interview. Possibly the 
Evangelist regards the darkness of the night as symbolical 
of Nicodemus’ ignorance. Some even suspect a reference 
to 3: 20, but Nicodemus cannot fairly be reckoned among 
those who, in an ethical sense, ‘ hate the light.’ He is rather 
the representative of the ‘ light half-believers’ of 12: 42, and 
he desires to compromise neither himself nor his colleagues 
in whose name, as well as in his own, he says, ‘ Rabbi, we 
know you have come from God toteachus,’ (For the con- 
ciliatory mode of address compare Mk. 12: 14, and for the 
thought that Jesus’ teaching is ‘from God,’ Jn. 7: 15-16. 
For the title ‘ Rabbi’ seenote on 1: 38.) Nicodemus belongs 
to the category of those mentioned in 2: 23, whose faith 
in Christ is based merely upon his miracles. In his opening 
words we seem to hear echoes of the argument of Gamaliel 
(Acts 5: 38-39), who, like Nicodemus (7: 50), defends the cause 
of Christ without identifying himself with it. 

3 Nicodemus’ admission that Jesus has ‘come from God to 
teach’ is virtually a challenge to Jesus to make his unique 
teaching known. It is to this challenge that Jesus replied— 
answering not the immediately preceding words but the 
question which he knew to be on the tip of his visitor’s 
tongue: this, to judge by Jesus’ reply, was that of Nico- 
demus’ Synoptic prototype (Mk. 10:17), ‘Good teacher, 
what must I do to inherit life eternal ?’ 

Jesus’ reply gives us the thesis of the characteristic Johan- 
nine discourse which follows: ‘No one can see God’s Realm 
unless he is born from above.’ Jesus seeks in the first place 

68 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 1-10 


to correct Nicodemus’ undue emphasis on miracle ; he desires 
to lead him from a trust based on ‘Signs’ to one which is 
ethically and spiritually mediated ; to one who sees in por- 
tents a proof that God’s Realm is at hand he replies, as he 
did to the questioning Pharisees (Lk. 17: 20-21), ‘ the Reign 
of God is not coming as you hope to catch sight of it—for the 
Reign of God is within you’—it can be realized only by the 
renewal of the inward, personal nature. 

The phrase ‘see God’s Realm’ isnoteworthy. It is unlikely 
that any contrast is intended between ‘see God’s Realm’ 
here and ‘enter God’s Realm’ in verse 5, as if the latter 
applied to the genuine ‘ citizen of the Kingdom,’ the former 
only to ‘ the mere intelligent spectator of its constitution and 
character ’ (Westcott).. The word see is used as in Lk. 2: 26, 
Acts 2: 27, I Pet. 3: 10, with the sense ‘ to have experience 
of. ‘Realm of God’ is a Synoptic expression (it occurs 
only three times in our Gospel: 3:3, 5; 18:36); John’s 
ordinary usage would lead us to expect him to say here, ‘ No 
one can see life unless he is born from above’ (cf. 3: 36). 
Curiously, while John here employs the Synoptic word 
‘Realm,’ in the corresponding Synoptic passage (Mk. 10: 17) 
the favourite Johannine word “ life’ occurs, though doubtless 
without the full mystical content which it always bears in 
our Gospel. A comparison of Mt. 7: 14 and 7: 21 suggests 
that the way to ‘ find life’ is to ‘enter the Kingdom.’ Hence 
for our present purpose the ‘realm of God,’ and ‘ life’ may 
be regarded as almost synonymous terms. Though John 
here employs the former, his usual conception of ‘life’ 
colours the significance which he gives to it. Even ‘life’ 
in the heavenly ‘realm’ implies the necessity of ‘ birth,’ for 
procreation and birth are everywhere the presuppositions 
of life. 

The would-be citizen of God’s Realm must then be born 
from above, or ‘born anew’ (Gk. anothen). The word may 
be used with both meanings, and which is the sense in- 
tended here can be decided only by reference to the context. 
In favour of the translation ‘from above’ is John’s usage in 
-3: 313 19: 11, 23, with which we may compare Mk. 15: 38 

69 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


James 1:17, 3:15. In favour of the sense ‘anew’ is Nico- 
demus’ reply in verse 4, and the general bearing of the section, 
the intention of which appears to be to illustrate the nature 
of the ‘ New Faith’ by the necessity of a ‘ New Birth.’ On 
the other hand the immediate context favours the translation 
‘from above’: the condition of entrance into the heavenly 
realm is a heavenly birth, a ‘birth from above.’ John’s 
choice of an ambiguous word and its use with a double 
entente is probably deliberate. For the dramatic develop- 
ment of the scene it is necessary that Nicodemus should 
understand the word literally as referring to a second physical 
birth: but the Evangelist intends us to interpret his words, 
in the light of such passages as Mk. 10: 15, Mt. 18: 3, in the 
ethical sense of a birth from above. He thus transforms the 
pagan ideas of ‘ rebirth’ which were prevalent when he wrote. 
The entrance upon eternal life is conditioned not by a magical 
renewal of the physical nature to be obtained by prescribed 
rites, but by a birth from above, from God, who alone can give 
men ‘ power to become his sons.’ John’s conception of the 
New Birth stands directly related to the teaching both of 
Jesus and of Paul. On the one hand we hear echoes of Jesus’ 
words (Mt. 18: 3): ‘ Unless you turn and become like children, 
you will never get into the Realm of heaven at all,’—“‘ the 
same essential thought of a new life taking its departure from 
an entire break with the past’ (E. F. Scott). On the other 
hand we are reminded of the Pauline doctrines of a heavenly 
‘adoption’ (Rom. 8: 15, Gal. 4:5 ff.), and a ‘ new creation’ 
(2 Cor. 5:17, Gal. 6:15; cf. Col. 3: 9-10). The closest 
parallel to John’s thought is in 1 Pet. r: 3, 23. 

On the supposition that in verse 3 we have the actual 
words of Jesus, analogies have been sought in such O.T. 
passages as Deut. 10: 16, or Ezek. 11: 19. But such parallels 
are very imperfect, and it is easier to suppose that the Evan- 
gelist, under the influence of his Ephesian environment, is 
reflecting the language of the Mystery Religions. The con- 
ception of ‘ rebirth’ as a condition of ‘ salvation’ was widely 
current ; even the Jews spoke of Gentile proselytes baptized 
into their religion as ‘new-born’; at Rome those initiated 


7O 


CHAPPER WIT SVERSES \x270 


into the Taurobolium and Kriobolium of the Great Mother 
and Attis were termed ‘ renati in aeternum.’ Isis too had her 
“renati,’ while the rite of ‘ rebirth’ was the principal content 
of the Mithras-mysteries. Tertullian tells us that the heathen 
were baptized ‘ in regenerationem ’ (cf. Rom. 6: 1-11). John 
of course transforms the whole conception, but his thought 
undoubtedly clothes itself in terminology which reflects the 
current usage of his day. 

Nicodemus misses the point of Jesus’ challenge, for he has 4 
not the insight to see below the analogy by which it is ex- 
pressed. He understands Jesus’ words in their literal sense: 
‘How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter his 
mother’s womb over again and be born?’ Or can it be that 
Nicodemus’ reply is not so much stupid as wistful? Does 
he understand well enough that it is of a spiritual rebirth that 
Jesus speaks, but argues that such a radical change of heart, 
after a man’s habits of thought and life are fixed (‘when he is 
old’), is no more conceivable than the physical miracle by 
which Jesus symbolizes it? To discuss the exact force of 
‘when he is old’ is superfluous, for clearly a man’s old age 
neither adds to nor takes from the impossibility of his ‘ en- 
tering his mother’s womb over again.’ Possibly there may 
be an allusion to Nicodemus’ own age: more probably the 
words merely express conversely Jesus’ thought of becoming 
‘like a child’ (Mk. 10:15). Indeed, the whole Nicodemus- 
section awakens so many Synoptic echoes that little save the 
setting can be regarded as strictly original to our Evangelist, 
whose purpose in this verse is not so much to report a historical 
conversation as to illustrate the Pauline truth that ‘the 
unspiritual man rejects the truths of the Spirit of God; to 
him they are sheer folly, he cannot understand them ’ (1 Cor. 
22 Id) 

fates reply is to follow up his assertion of the necessity of 5 
the new birth with a definition of its conditions. The verse 
is an elaboration of verse 3. Instead of ‘see’ we have enter : 
‘born from above’ is expanded into ‘born of water and the 
Spirit.’ It isnot, says Jesus, of a physical birth that he speaks, 
a birth ‘from the womb,’ but of an ethical and mystical rebirth 

71 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


‘ from water and the Spirit.’ How are we to understand these 
last words? Probably not as a description, under two 
collateral symbols, of the creative power of God (for “ water ’ 
in such a sense cf. 4: 14, 7: 38, and for ‘wind’ 3:8. So 
Loisy), but rather as an echo of 1: 33, where ‘water’ and 
‘Spirit’ are contrasted with special reference to the rite of 
Baptism (cf. Mt. 3: 11, Acts 1:5). John’s ‘water’ baptism 
was symbolic only: Jesus, who also employed the symbol 
(3: 22), though perhaps giving it a subordinate place (4: 2), 
brought also to men the ‘spiritual’ reality for which the 
symbol stood (1: 33). The Evangelist here emphasizes the 
significance of Baptism perhaps because the Pharisees, of 
whom Nicodemus was the representative, had refused the 
rite (Lk. 7:30). At the same time he guards against a 
superstitious view of the sacrament by conjoining ‘ water’ 
with ‘ Spirit.’ The entrance into the Kingdom of God is a 
spiritual act of which the outward rite is only the seal; a 
higher agency must co-operate with the material element ; 
water is but the vehicle and instrument of the Spirit: ‘ The 
entrance to the Church is through a sacrament not outward 
only, but spiritual also’ (Westcott). Yet ‘water’ and 
‘Spirit ’ are here so closely co-ordinated that it is hardly true 
to say that the former stands for mere symbol. For the 
Evangelist even the symbol has real efficacy: water, by cleans- 
ing (Ps. 51:2, 7; Zech. 13:1, Eph. 5: 26), supplies the 
negative side, as the Spirit, by quickening, supplies the positive 
side, of the new creation. (Compare Ezek. 36: 25-27, Titus 
3: 5 for this twofold aspect of regeneration, and see note on 
I: 33.) This implied reference to the Christian rite of Baptism, 
though strictly speaking an anachronism on Jesus’ lips, 
comes naturally enough from the pen of one who consistently 
writes with the conditions of the Church of his own time in 
view. 

6 ‘Birth from the Spirit’ is necessary because man’s natural 
origin is not ‘ Spirit ’ but ‘ flesh,’ and according to the universal 
law that like springs from like (cf. Aristotle, Eth. Maj., 1, Io: 
“Every nature generates its own substance,’ not merely 
perpetuates its own qualities; similarly here we have the 


72 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 1-10 


substantive ‘flesh,’ not merely the adjective ‘ fleshly’), 
‘what is born of the flesh is flesh,’ and only ‘ what is born of the 
Spirit is Spirit.’ Man’s natural birth therefore can produce 
only ‘ flesh.’ Entrance to the Kingdom thus demands as its 
condition not only an ethical change, as in the Synoptic 
demand for repentance, but a metaphysical transmutation of 
nature (cf. Scott, op. cit., p. 281). In the Pauline phraseology 
‘flesh’ (Gk. sarx) is the symbol of the sin-ward side of 
human nature (‘ Though it does not of itself include the idea 
of sinfulness it describes human nature on the side which 
tends to sin’—Westcott), and together with the ‘ sensuous’ 
(Gk. psychikos) side is contrasted with the ‘ Spiritual’ 
(Gk. pneumatikos), which alone can ‘inherit the Realm of 
God’ (rz Cor. 15: 50). 

Nicodemus having expressed wonder at this necessity, Jesus 7 
repeats that not even the foremost representatives of religious 
Israel (plural you) are exempt from it: Nicodemus would 
cease to wonder could he but understand that it is as im- 
possible to explore the ways of the Spirit as to trace the foot- 
steps of the wind and to guess ‘ where it comes from or where it 8 
goes’ (Loisy notes that John applies the same thought to 
Jesus, 7: 27-28, 8: 14, 9: 29-30). ‘The operation of the 
regenerating principle is not bound to any rule, but is revealed 
only by its divine effects in the human soul’ (Godet). Simi- 
larly, Socrates says (Xen. Mem., 4, 3), ‘the winds are invisible 
though their effects are plain ; the soul of man is itself unseen ; 
therefore despise not the unseen but honour God.’ Colour 
is added to the illustration by a play on words impossible to 
reproduce in English, the Greek pnewma like the Hebrew 
ruach bearing the double meaning of ‘wind’ and ‘ Spirit.’ 
The point is that the Spirit, like the wind, is self-creative, and 
accountable to itself alone (1 Cor. 12: 11, ‘as he pleases’), and 
its workings are not unnaturally puzzling to Nicodemus, for 
they are understandable only in the light of an experience 
of which he as yet knows nothing (1 Cor. 2: 14). How far 
is this demand for a new birth—an echo of the Synoptic idea 
that man may become perfect (Mt. 5: 48)—consistent with 
the original Johannine view, which appears to contemplate 


73 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


not the changing of sinners into saints, but the division of men 
once for all into those who have and those who have not 
been partakers of the divine generation (1: 12-13) ? 


g Nicodemus, realizing now that it is of a supernatural process 


Io 


LE 


I2 


13 


II 


that Jesus speaks, asks, ‘How can that be?’ Jesus ironically 
expresses surprise at his perplexity: ‘ You do not understand >— 
you, the accredited teacher (the article is emphatic) in Israel! ’ 
This conception of the creative might and spontaneous action 
of the Divine Spirit and its opposition to ‘the flesh’ is no new 
doctrine, but should be easily recognizable to an expert in the 
Scriptures from passages such as Jer. 31: 33, Ezek. 36: 26-28, 
Ps#r3giny7. 


‘Truly, truly I tell you, we are speaking of what we do under- 
stand, we testify to what we have actually seen—and yet 
you refuse our testimony. If you will not believe when I 
speak to you about things on earth, how will you believe 
if I speak to you about things in heaven? And yet the 
Son of man, descended from heaven, is the only one who 
has ever ascended into heaven.’ 


Nicodemus lapses into silence, and the passage passes into a 
monologue by Jesus, which in turn merges into the reflections 
of the Evangelist ; from this point Nicodemus recedes into 
the background, and interest centres upon Jesus and in and 
through him upon his Church in the midst of an unbelieving 
world. Though for another two or three verses the words 
are still ostensibly those of Jesus, and merge almost insensibly 
into those of the Evangelist, from verse Ir onwards Jesus is, 
in fact, not the speaker but the subject of the Evangelist’s 
meditation. Thus when he says ‘ We are speaking of what we 
do understand,’ the use of the plural is not merely rhetorical, 
nor a linking up of Jesus with John the Baptist, nor, as some 
old expositors held, an allusion to the three Persons of the 
Trinity ; rather it reflects Christ’s consciousness of his univer- 
sality, hints that the Christ Spirit is now incarnate in the 
Church. Jesus’ words have passed insensibly into a declara- 
tion of the community: the writer, as the representative of 


74 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 11-13 


that community, testifies that he has himself been conscious 
of a change wrought within him through the Spirit of Christ, 
and that he has actually seen a similar change in the lives of 
others.) The claim of tT: 14; 19:35, 21: 24° .x Jn. 1: 1-373 Jn. 
12 is here put on Jesus’ own lips—but it is the Risen Jesus 
speaking through the voice of his Church. ‘ And yet,’ in spite of 
such credentials, ‘you refuse our testimony.’ The reference in 
‘you’ is firstly to the Pharisees of whom Nicodemus is the 
representative, and secondly to those in the Evangelist’s own 
day of whom he is the type (cf. 1: 10-11). 

Nicodemus’ lack of spiritual discernment has proved him in- 12 
capable of understanding ‘ things on earth’: how then can he be 
expected to believe when Jesus speaks of ‘things in heaven’? 
The force of these two phrases is much disputed. The meaning 
must obviously be gathered from the immediate context, and 
it seems at first most natural to see in ‘things of earth’ a 
reference to the subject under discussion, i.e. the ‘second 
birth.’ Is it possible that this regeneration, as a process 
at any rate experienced on earth, can be thought of as 
‘earthly,’ in contrast to the consummation foreshadowed in 
I Jn. 3:2? Hardly, when regeneration already has its own 
earthly counterpart in the natural birth, while Jesus expressly 
speaks of it as due to the Spirit and as being ‘ from above.’ 
Possibly the reference is not exclusively to regeneration but 
to the whole content of ‘ our testimony ’ (11). Then, as Godet 
puts it, ‘ Jesus contrasts the events which transpire on the 
theatre of human consciousness, and which man can test by 
self-observation, with divine counsels and plans which can 
only be known by means of a revelation.’ But perhaps the 
following would be an explanation more characteristic of our 
author. In Lk. 16: 11 the riches of heaven are called ‘ true’ 
riches, that is ‘ real’ as opposed to symbolical, from which it has 
been conjectured that in our passage the contrast suggested by 
‘things of heaven’ and ‘ things of earth’ may be the same as 
that drawn in 16: 25, where to ‘ speak earthly things’ is to 
‘ tell in figures,’ to make use of symbol as Jesus has here done 
with his analogy of the wind, while ‘ to speak heavenly things ’ 
is to drop the use of symbol, which makes understanding easier 


75 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


to the child, and deal in terms of pure thought—‘to let 
you know plainly about the Father.’ 

13 In the face of such teaching by Christ the world remains 
sceptical; ‘and yet’ if anyone can claim credence he can, 
in virtue of that unique relationship to ‘heavenly things’ 
which enables him alone to speak of them at first hand ; for 
he is ‘the only one who has ever ascended into heaven.’ The 
question asked in Deut. 30: 11-12, Rom. 10:6 is here 
answered. A knowledge of God, which could have been ac- 
quired by men themselves only by an ascent into heaven— 
which is an impossibility—has been communicated through 
‘the Son of man, descended from heaven.’ (For this co-ordina- 
tion of the ideas of ‘ascent’ and ‘ descent ’ compare 16: 28, 
Eph. 4:10.) It is the descent of Christ from God which is here 
emphasized, with reference to such passages as I: 14, 16: 28, 
etc. If the words are to be accepted strictly as an utterance 
of Jesus himself, the meaning can only be that the Son, des- 
cended from heaven in the Incarnation, has received a divine 
revelation through a mystic fellowship with ‘things in 
heaven’ (as experienced, e.g., at the baptism, when ‘the 
heavens opened’), which is here called ‘an ascent into 
heaven,’ in virtue of which he lives, even in the course of his 
human life, in immediate intuition of divine things. Such 
would then be the meaning of the disputed clause (see A.V.) 
omitted in our translation ‘ which ts tn heaven.’ ‘Heaven’ is 
not so much a locality as a condition of being which can be 
experienced even on earth; the words would be equivalent 
to the phrase (in 1: 18) ‘upon the Father’s breast,’ which 
might similarly be interpreted of a mystical fellowship ex- 
perienced on earth. But the verse, though put on Jesus’ 
lips, is probably to be taken rather as a reflection of the 
Evangelist in the light of Christ’s subsequent death and 
Resurrection. ‘Ascended into heaven’ can then be taken, 
more simply, as a definite allusion to the Ascension as an 
event of history (cf. 6: 62, 20: 17). ‘Which ts in heaven’ 
(a phrase which may possibly be genuine but would be readily 
omitted because of the difficulty of referring the words to 
Jesus himself) would then be an echo of Dan. 7: 13, 1 Cor. 


76 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 11-13 


15: 47-48, where the ‘ Son of man’ is thought of as a purely 
heavenly being, and the meaning would be not that ‘ he used 
to be in heaven and has left it,’ nor that ‘ he still holds mystic 
fellowship with heaven,’ but that he has returned to heaven 
as exalted, and thence inspires through his Spirit the teaching 
of his Church ; 1: 18 is also more naturally interpreted thus. 
Baldensperger finds the force of the words ‘the only one’ in a 
supposed allusion to the Baptist Sect who held that Elijah 
was incarnate in John the Baptist, who had thus ascended 
and returned in John’s person as a revealer of heavenly things. 

From this point to the end of the chapter the text shows 
unmistakable signs of disarrangement. The obvious con- 
tinuation of verses 12-13 is verse 3I, where the contrasted 
ideas of ‘heaven’ and ‘earth’ are again picked up. There 
is general agreement that verses 22-30 are out of place, this 
section as a rule being transposed to follow 2:12. A better 
position is after 3: 36, where see note. But the sequence of 
chapter 3 would be greatly improved if 14-21 were also removed 
from their present context, verses 13 and 31 being thus 
brought into immediate juxtaposition. The only point of 
connexion between 13 and 14 is the very artificial one afforded 
by the cognate ideas contained in ‘ascended into heaven’ 
and ‘lifted on high.” The whole section 14-21 should, it is 
suggested, be transposed to follow 12: 32, 3: 14-15 taking the 
place of 12: 33 (which is obviously a gloss), and 3: 16-21 
being inserted between 12: 34 and 12: 35-36. By this re- 
arrangement the sequence of chapter 12 is also greatly im- 
proved, while 3 : 14-21, which in its present context has always 
been felt to end very abruptly and unsympathetically, finds 
the most appropriate possible climax in 12: 35-36. (See 
note following 12: 32.) 

We pass therefore straight to 3: 31. 

For convenience, however, the commentary on 3: 14-21, 
together with a note on its setting in chapter 12 is inserted, 
within brackets, at this point. 


[‘ Indeed the Son of man must be lifted on high, just as Moses 14 
lifted up the serpent in the desert, that everyone who 15 


“ 77 


NY) 


20 


aI 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


believes in him may have eternal life. For God loved the 
world so dearly that He gave up His only Son, so that 
everyone who believes in him may have eternal life, in- 
stead of perishing. God did not send His Son into the 
world to pass sentence on it, but to save the world 
by him. He who believes in him is not sentenced ; 
he who will not believe is sentenced already, for having 
refused to believe in the name of the only Son of God. 
And this is the sentence of condemnation, that the Light 
has entered the world and yet men have preferred darkness 
to light. It is because their actions have been evil ; 
for anyone whose practices are corrupt loathes the light 
and will not come out into it, in case his actions are 
exposed, whereas anyone whose life is true comes out into 
the light, to make it plain that his actions have been divinely 
prompted.’ 


This section, which is out of place in its usual context, admir- 
ably supplements the conversation recorded in 12: 30 ff., 
which is clearly incomplete as we now have it. The question 
of the people in 12: 34: ‘ Who is ¢Ats Son of man ?’ requires an 
immediately previous use of the title by Jesus. This would be 
obtained by inserting 3: 14-15 after 12: 32 (12: 33 has the 
appearance of a gloss which has taken the place of 3: 14, and 
indeed is explanatory of it rather than of 12: 32). Moreover, 
12: 35 contains Jesus’ answer to 12: 34 only on the supposition 
that he shirks the question. The real answer to 12: 34 is 
supplied by 3 : 16-21, which should be inserted here, 12: 35-36 
affording a most appropriate climax to the paragraph, which 
in its usual position in chapter 3 ends most abruptly. Notice 
that the allusion in 3: 14 to Christ’s sacrificial death is pre- 
pared for by 12: 24-25, that the reference to ‘ judgment’ in 
12: 31 is followed up by a development of the same idea in 
3: 18 ff., and that the theme of God’s universal love for all 
the world, which rings throughout the passage 3: 16 ff., is in 
complete harmony with the situation brought about by the 
visit of the Gentile Greeks (12: 20 ff.). For the sequence of 
the text as rearranged see commentary in loco, chapter 12. 


78 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 14-21 


Immediately following 12: 32 we therefore insert 3: 14-15, 
which continue the veiled allusion to the Cross in 12: 32. 
The ultimate triumph of the crucified Christ is as certain as 
the divine decree, whereby first ‘the Son of Man must be lifted 
on high’ (‘ must’ is emphatic: see note below). 

‘Lifted on high’ is a phrase with a double meaning. In Luke 
(10: 15, 14: 11, 18: 14) it is used in opposition to the idea of 
‘humbling’ (cf. also 2 Cor. 11: 7, James 4: 10, 1 Pet. 5: 6). 
But here, as also in 8: 28 and 12: 32, there is a direct reference 
to the ‘lifting up’ on the Cross. It is characteristic of our 
Evangelist to relate Christ's exaltation to his death. Com- 
pare his use of the words ‘glory’ and ‘glorify’ (note on 
I: 14 and 13:31). See also Is. 52: 13, and especially 
Acts 2: 33 and 5: 31, both of which passages are immediately 
preceded, in 2: 23 and 5: 30, by a reference to the Cruci- 
fixion (cf. also Lk. 24:26). The exaltation on the Cross is the 
first step of the ascent to the throne. 

Christ then musé be ‘lifted up ’—‘ just as Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the desert,’ the reference being to Num. 21: 8-9, 
which was read by the Alexandrian School as a type of the 
Crucifixion. Probably it is not so much the comparison of 
Christ with the serpent which is emphasized as the divine 
necessity (must; cf. Mt. 16: 21, Lk. 24: 26) of the ‘ lifting 
up’ whereby salvation is mediated. At the same time there 
is real force in the words ‘ justas’ . . . thus, upon a stake, in 
contrast to the glorious Messianic exaltation promised by the 
Pharisees. Again, unlike the god at the esoteric Mysteries, 
Christ like the serpent was not shown to a few selected persons, 
but was exalted where all the world might see him and ‘ be 
drawn to him.’ 

The Israelites were saved by looking at the serpent, a thought 
to which we have an exact parallel in 6: 40. Here we are 
told that ‘everyone who believes may in him have eternal life.’ 
(Note that ‘in him’ should be taken not with ‘ believes ’— 
which would require a different Greek preposition—but with 
‘have’; cf. 1: 4.) It is important to grasp the peculiar 
Johannine force of the word ‘ believe,’ but not always easy to 
do so, for the Evangelist ‘has but one word to denote all the 


79 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


different stages of belief’ (Sanday, Criticism of the Fourth 
Gospel, p. 161). It is noticeable that he never uses the word 
in its substantive form ‘faith,’ probably because the word 
had been appropriated in a technical sense by the Gnostic 
theology, and our writer wishes to guard himself from any 
possible confusion of his teaching with that of the heretical 
systems. But under its various verbal forms the idea of 
‘ believing ’ dominates the whole Gospel. In general we may 
admit that the ‘ believing’ insisted on by John ‘ is something 
much narrower and poorer than the Pauline “faith.” It 
implies not so much an inward disposition of trust and 
obedience, as the acceptance of agiven dogma. To“ believe” 
is to grant the hypothesis that Jesus was indeed the Christ, 
the Son of God.’ But at the same time John’s conception of 
faith issomething more than mere intellectual assent, because 
‘the act of belief . . . is the summing up in an intellectual 
judgment of a previous religious experience. The confession 
that Jesus is the Son of God implies that you have been drawn 
to Jesus, and have recognized his saving power and the 
divine character of his life.’ Once again ‘ assent is demanded 
not merely to a bare fact, but to the claim of a person, and it 
therefore partakes in some measure of the character of trust 
(cf. 12: 44,14: 1). . . . Sincea living Person is the object of the 
act of belief, that act, in itself a mere intellectual one, becomes 
involved with morai elements’ (quotations from E. F. Scott, 
The Fourth Gospel, pp. 268-70). Note that while in the 
Mystery Religions the culminating rite through which ‘life’ was 
communicated was the vision of the Godhead (Gk. epofteia), 
our Evangelist here deliberately omits this thought (though 
the gazing of the people at the serpent presented an obvious 
parallel), and makes ‘life’ conditional upon a ‘ believing’ 
which, as we have seen, has real moral content. Even 6: 40 
adds the necessity of ‘ believing’ to that of ‘seeing.’ More- 
over, John, like Paul, makes life conditional upon union with 
Christ: for Paul life may only be had ‘in Christ Jesus’ ; 
John’s believer “has im him eternal life’ (cf. 15: 4). This 
life is spoken of as eternal, not so much as contrasted with 
the temporary prolongation of life which was the reward of 
80 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 14-21 


looking at the serpent, but rather as having its origin in the 
higher, eternal world. ‘Eternal’ is a qualitative and not 
merely a quantitative conception: it refers to the character 
and not merely to the duration of life. This life is not a future 
promise, but a present possession of the believer, in virtue 
of that act of faith which has put him in touch with the realm 
of ‘ the eternal’ (cf. also note on 10: 15, 14: 9). 

Here, according to our rearrangement, there follows 12: 34: 
So the people answered, ‘We have learned from the Law that 
the Christ is to remain for ever ; what do you mean by saying 
that the Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of 
man?’ If the usual order of the text be retained (12: 35 
immediately following 12: 34), then in replying to the people 
‘Jesus vouchsafes no direct solution of their difficulty’ 
(Dods). If, as suggested above, we here insert 3: 16-21, Jesus 
no longer appears to shirk the question. Then Jesus said to 
them (the opening words of 12: 35), ‘ I will tell you who this 
Son of man is and why he must be lifted up. It must be so, 
for God so loved the world . . .’ God’s love embraces all the 
world, not merely ‘elect believers’ (Loisy), though the following 
clause limits the gift of life to these. Our Gospel accepts the 
universality of Christianity more fully than any other N.T. 
book. (For the twofold sense of the word ‘world’ see note 
on1z:10.) It is here regarded as the arena in which the salva- 
tion of believers is wrought out and as such the object of 
God’s universal love. (Compare 4: 42, 6: 33, 12:47, and 
contrast 17: 9, 14-16, etc.) This world-embracing love of God 
is proved by the fact that ‘He gave up His only Son’: the 
meaning is not merely that God ‘sent’ His Son (1 Jn. 4: 9), 
but that He ‘ gave him up to death’ (cf. Rom. 8: 32), with an 
obvious reference to Gen. 22: 2. It is asasin-offering that the 
Son of man is to be ‘ lifted up.’ 

God’s love is limitless, but it can only be appropriated by 
faith ; accordingly love’s gift is confined to ‘everyone that 
believes in him,’ the promise being that all such shall ‘have 
eternal life instead of perishing.’ In the Greek the tenses are 
significant. ‘Perishing’ is spoken of as a momentary event, 
‘ eternal life’ as an enduring possession. 

81 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


17 We are here met with another of those apparent contra- 
dictions which are a constant difficulty in the interpretation 
of the Gospel—the Evangelist’s seemingly inconsistent state- 
ments concerning the place held by Christ in the world’s 
‘judgment.’ In many passages Christ claims supreme power 
of judgment (cf. 5:22, 5:27, 9:39, 12:31). Here, as 
in 12: 47 (another proof that this section belongs to chapter 
12), we are told that ‘God did not send (‘‘ the word, which con- 
tains the root of ‘ apostle,’ suggests the thought of a definite 
mission and a representative character in the envoy ’’’—West- 
cott) His Son into the world to pass sentence on it, but to save 
the world by him.’ In contrast to the Jews’ vindictive con- 
ception of the purpose of Messiah’s coming, and possibly also 
with an allusion to the Baptist’s excessive emphasis on 
‘judgment,’ it is here stated that judgment is not the motive 
but rather the inevitable consequence of Christ’s coming. 
Christ comes to pass sentence on the world ‘ as little as the sun 
comes to throw a shadow,’ but ‘ judgment like the shadow is 
the natural consequence of the world’s constitution and 
circumstances’ (Holtzmann). The apparent contradiction 
is thus reconciled: ‘The judgment is on Christ’s part in- 
voluntary, for his whole desire is to draw men unto him and 
save them. But none the less it is a real judgment’ (Scott, 
p. 215). Christ’s appearance compels men by their attitude 
to him to show themselves up in their true colours, and there- 
by they pass sentence on themselves: ‘he who believes in 

18 him is not sentenced ; he who will not believe is sentenced 
already, for having refused to believe in the name of the only 
Son of God.’ Just as a man who disparages a great work 
of art condemns not the masterpiece but himself, so does the 
unbeliever stand self-condemned. Note that for John such a 
man ‘is sentenced already’; judgment is taken out of the 
future and carried back into the present with the result that, 
though sometimes John appears to approximate to the 
Synoptic view of a judgment ‘at the last day’ (cf. 5 : 28-20, 
12: 48), in reality this judgment is for him merely the 
summing up of a process which is already going on. Each 
of us has already pronounced a clear enough verdict on 

82 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 14-21 


our own moral tendency, and the Judge will only have to 
confirm it. 

It should be noted that the Greek word here translated 
‘sentenced’ (krinein, krists) bears the double sense of ‘ to 
judge ’—usually adversely—and ‘to separate.’ The process 
referred to in verses 17-18 is perhaps not so much ‘ condem- 
nation’ as the ‘separation’ of those who are to be partakers 
of life and those who are not. Salvation is offered to all: 
some by faith appropriate it, others by disbelief reveal their 
natural unfitness to receive it. In other words‘ it needs to 
be observed that this judgment is not, in the first instance, 
an ethical one. Rather it connects itself with John’s semi- 
Gnostic distinction of two great classes in the human race, 
those who are from above and those from below, children of 
light and children of darkness. The work of Christ was to 
sift out, as by a magnet, the purer element in mankind from 
the lower and grosser’ (Scott, p. 215). Yet this statement must 
be modified in so far as we have seen that for John the act 
of ‘ belief’ has real moral content. This idea of the pre- 
disposition on the part of men themselves either for or against 
Christ may almost be said to take the place in John’s thought 
of the Pauline doctrine of divine election (cf. notes on 5: 21 ff.). 

This thought is carried on in the following verse, the point 
of which is that ‘ judgment is not an arbitrary sentence but 
the working out of an absolute law’ (Westcott). How it is 
that this ‘ sentence of condemnation ’ is passed John illustrates 
by the use of the word light (which here occurs for the first time 
since the Prologue, and, as there, in conjunction with the word 
‘life ’), a characteristic Johannine term which unites the two 
ideas of ‘knowledge of the truth’ and ‘moral integrity.’ 
‘ Light ’ is ‘ holiness clearly revealed to the human conscience ’ 
(Godet) (cf. Introduction, p. xxxviii). The emphasis here is not 
so much on the fact that men have rejected salvation when it 
was at their very doors as on the fact that the entrance of ‘ the 
Light ’ into the world has provided the occasion for men’s own 
self-condemnation on the evidence that they have ‘ preferred 
darkness to light.’ The coming of Christ has compelled men 
to range themselves on one side or the other (cf. 12: 48—yet 

83 


20 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


another link between this passage and chap. 12). Previously 
men sinned through ignorance: they now do so by deliberate 
choice. To say ‘ Evil be thou my good ’ is to “ sin against the 
Holy Ghost,’ and thereby pass on oneself an irrevocable sen- 
tence of condemnation. The reason for so strange a preference 
is that ‘ their actions have been evil’ ; that is, their whole moral 
conduct is corrupt, and they therefore shun the light ; for sin 
they must, but even a bad man does not care to sin in the full 
light of day. Hence it is a universal law of psychology that 
‘anyone whose practices are corrupt (or rather ‘ paltry,’ 
‘worthless,’ ‘such as will not stand the test’ ; cf. 2 Cor. 5: 
10) loathes the light and will not come out into it, in case his 
actions are exposed’ (cf. 16: 8, Eph. 5: 13, I Cor. 3: 13). 
A bad man hates the light because it shows up his true char- 
acter not only to his own conscience but also to his fellows. 
The converse is equally true: ‘anyone whose life is true comes 
out into the light.’ The A.V. has ‘doeth the truth.’ (Cf. 
I Jn. 1:6.) The phrase occurs in the O.T. (Gen. 327 Zo, 
47: 29, Neh. 9: 33), but whereas there it denotes little more 
than conduct conformable to one’s nature or position, here 
(as a result of the deepening of the concept of ‘truth’ by 
John) it denotes conduct conformable to the divine reality as 
revealed in conscience. To ‘do truth’ is to make ‘truth’ 
in its full Johannine sense (see I: 9), the determining factor 
in one’s actions, ‘ to aim at reality—in the first place as regards 
ourselves’ (R. H. Strachan). The man with such an aim does 
not fear the light, but ‘ comes out into the light, to make it plain 
that his actions have been divinely prompted’ ; for otherwise 
they could not stand the test. That is, when a man’s aim is 
to see himself and let others see him as he really is (‘ doeth the 
truth’), he welcomes the most searching scrutiny, all the 
more so if his conduct is sound through and through ; for he 
knows that when light falls on ‘truth’ the only result is to 
show up its genuineness. To ‘have one’s actions divinely 
prompted’ (A.V. ‘wrought in God ’) is almost a synonym for 
“doing the truth,’ and means to act always with a true appre- 
ciation of what the action means to God. 

Notice how this paragraph emphasizes the relation of the 

84 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 14-2r 


will to the understanding. However ‘ intellectual’ John’s 
conception of faith may be, only the man who ‘ does the truth’ 
is able to ‘ come to the light’ and finally ‘ believe.’ ‘ Light,’ 
which for John means goodness revealed to the intellect, is 
Closely related to ‘truth,’ which means goodness revealed to 
the conscience and will. If ‘right action is true thought 
realized’ (Westcott) the converse is equally valid that a man 
can understand the truth only when he is willing to do the 
right. (Cf. 7: 17: ‘If any man will do his will, he shall know 
of the doctrine.’) How much of our modern ‘ unbelief’ is due 
not at all to the ‘ intellectual perplexities ’ of which we hear 
so much, but to the fact that our wills shirk the moral con- 
straint which Christ lays upon us. By thus insisting that 
“enlightenment ’ is attainable only by way of ethical goodness 
John once again repudiates Gnostic doctrine, and takes his 
stand on Jesus’ own teaching: ‘ Blessed are the pure in heart, 
for they shall see God.’ 

Here follows 12: 35-36, wherein the paragraph reaches the 
fittest possible conclusion with a practical exhortation ‘to 
redeem the time.”] 

The connexion with 3: 13 is now picked up. 


‘He who comes from above is far above all others ; he who 31 
springs from earth belongs to earth and speaks of earth ; 
he who comes from heaven [is far above all others. 32 
He] is testifying to what he has seen and heard, and 
yet no one accepts his testimony. Whoever does accept 33 
it, certifies to the truth of God. For he whom God has 34 
sent utters the words of God—God gives him the Spirit 
in no sparing measure ; the Father loves the Son and has 35 
given him control over everything. He who believes in 36 
the Son has eternal life, but he who disobeys the Son 
shall not see life—God’s anger broods over him.’ 


" “He who comes’ was a customary title of Messiah: John, 31 
by adding the words ‘from above,’ carries on the thought of 
verse 13, and thereby identifies ‘the Son of man’ with the 
promised Messiah. In virtue of his heavenly origin he speaks 


85 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


with an authority ‘ far above all others ’ (cf. 8: 23, Acts 10: 36, 
Rom. 9: 5), who, being ‘ sprung from earth ’ continue to ‘ belong 
to earth,’ and accordingly ‘speak of earth’—the last words refer- 
ring not so much to the content of their message as to its 
source: their words come with no greater authority than a 
mere earthly source of information can bestow. Christ, on the 
other hand, in virtue of the fact that he ‘comes from heaven’ 

32 can claim the unique authority of one who ‘is testifying to 
what he has seen and heard.’ Just as verse 31 picks up 
verse 13, So does verse 32 pick up verse 11. Though Christ 
speaks with supreme authority as one who has first-hand 
knowledge ‘ yet no one accepts his testimony.’ That is to be 
expected from people of like spirit with Nicodemus (ver. 12), 
who have not yet experienced the heavenly birth, and whose 
thoughts therefore move only in the sphere of earthly things 
(r Jn. 4:5). Notice that this verse would come most un- 
naturally after verse 26, ‘everybody goes to him ’—another 
argument in favour of placing the section 3 : 22-30 at the end 
of the chapter. 

33 And yet, after all, the rejection of Christ’s testimony has 
not been quite universal, and ‘whoever does accept it, certifies 
to the truth of God,’ or more literally, ‘sets his seal to God’s 
trustworthiness.’ Just as the affixing of a seal guarantees 
the validity of a document, so does the man who accepts 
Christ’s testimony to the extent of being willing to put his 
personal seal upon it, thereby give his guarantee to the 
trustworthiness of God; for Christ is God’s ambassador, and 
as such represents God (8: 26, 28, etc.), so that to trust Christ 
is to trust God. Conversely disbelief in Christ ‘makes God 
a liar’ (x Jn. 5: 10). Christ is ‘the ‘“‘ yes” that affirms all 
the promises of God’ (2 Cor. 1: 20, and notice the similar 
use of the word ‘seal’ in 2 Cor. 1: 22. Lightfoot quotes 
a fine old Jewish saying, ‘ the seal of God is truth.’ Compare 
also 6: 27). 

34 To accept the testimony of the ambassador is to certify to 
the truth of God because ‘he whom God has sent utters the 
words of God’ (7: 16, 8: 28, 12: 49, 14: Io, etc.), so that to 
trust the Ambassador is to trust Him who sends him, all 


86 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 31-36 


the more so that the former comes as a ‘ plenipotentiary’ ; 
for ‘God gives him the Spirit in no sparing measure.’ Though 
in the Greek both subject and indirect object are omitted, 
this is undoubtedly the force of the words, for the following 
verse makes it clear that the Father is the giver and the Son 
the receiver. True, the omission gives the statement the 
appearance of a general proposition, but it is one which (with 
obvious reference to 1: 32-33) applies especially to Christ. 
The words ‘not by measure’ (A.V.) mean not ‘ beyond all 
certain reckoning,’ but rather ‘beyond the measure expe- 
rienced by all who are sent by God.’ The thought is that for 
each of His messengers God has given a measure of His Spirit 
proportionate to his task, and that this is surpassingly true 
of Christ, who has a unique mission, and of whom it can there- 
fore be said in a unique sense that he is one ‘whom God has 
sent.’ Christ 7s sent in a unique sense because of the unique 35 
love-relationship between Father and Son, in virtue of which 
he has received a full commission in contrast to the frag- 
mentary revelation vouchsafed to earlier prophets, who, 
though also ‘sent by God,’ yet enjoyed but a fitful and im- 
perfect experience of the Spirit (13: 3,17: 2; Mt. 11: 27, 
28: 18; contrast Mt. 13: 17, Heb. 1: 1-2): ‘the Father loves 
the Son and has given him control over everything.’ 

When such an ambassador appears each man’s attitude to 36 
him determines his eternal destiny: ‘he who believes on the 
Son has eternal life,’ that is, as a present possession (cf. 5: 24), 
while ‘he who disobeys shall not see life,’ not even if he waits 
an eternity for it (note the similar contrast in tenses in 3: 16). 
It is significant that even for John the antithesis of faith is 
not merely intellectual unbelief, but ‘disobedience.’ Un- 
belief may be a dissent from truth either of the intelligence 
(Acts 14: 2) or of the will (Rom. 11:30). For John the 
will plays an important part in the act of faith (cf. notes on 
3:15 and 3:21); for faith ts an act, and similarly here 
‘disbelief is regarded in its activity’ (Westcott) as dis- 
obedience. When aman is guilty of such, ‘ God’s anger broods 
over him,’ that is, he is punished by the enduring wrath of 
God. God’s anger is said to ‘abide on him’ (A.V.), either 


87 


22 


23 


24 
25 
26 


27 
28 


29 


30 


22 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


because it is thought of as already directed upon unregenerate 
man even before his act of disobedience (cf. 3: 18, Rom. 
1: 18, esp. Eph. 2: 3: such men are ‘ objects of God’s anger 
by nature’), or because God’s anger is regarded as a never- 
ending reaction of the divine nature against sin. 


Theme (ii): The New Master—in relation to the Baptist 
(3 : 22-30) 

After this Jesus and his disciples went into the country of 
Judaea, where he spent some time with them baptizing. 
John was also baptizing at Aenon near Salim, as there 
was plenty of water there, and people came to him and 
were baptized (John had not yet been thrown into prison). 
Now a dispute arose between John’s disciples and a Jew 
over the question of ‘ purification’; and they came 
and told John, ‘Rabbi, the man who was with you on 
the opposite side of the Jordan, the man to whom you 
bore testimony—here he is, baptizing, and everybody 
goes to him!’ John answered, ‘No one can receive 
anything except as a gift from heaven. You can bear 
me out, that I said, ‘‘I am not the Christ ’’ ; what I said 
was, ‘‘I have been sent in advance of him.’? He who 
has the bride is the bridegroom ; the bridegroom’s friend, 
who stands by and listens to him, is heartily glad at the 
sound of the bridegroom’s voice. Such is my joy, and 
it is complete. He must wax, I must wane.’ 


At this point, rather than after 2: 12, we insert the section 
dealing with the renewed testimony of the Baptist to Christ. 
The reference to baptizing and the Baptist-disciples’ jealous 
questioning concerning the comparative efficacy of Jesus’ 
baptism and John’s come more naturally after than before 
the discussion on the ‘ second birth’ with its emphasis pon 
the need for baptism (3: 5). Furthermore, 3: 25-30 provide 
a most appropriate introduction to 4:1, which verse has 
much more point if immediately preceded by 3: 26: ‘everybody 
goes to him.’ 

Jesus now left the town of Jerusalem and went into the 

88 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 22-30 


country-side of Judaea. (For this use of the Gk. ge in the 
sense of the country districts as opposed to the town compare 
the similar use of chéra in Mk. 1:5 and Jn. 11: 54-55.) 
There is no need to assume that Jesus is moving from some 
place outside Judaea (e.g. from Galilee) into that province 
as is urged by those who place this section after 2: 12, at 
which point Jesus is in Galilee. Escaping then from the city 
crowds Jesus spent some time with his disciples baptizing. 
In the light of 3: 5 it is quite probable that the Evangelist 
regards Jesus’ baptizing not merely as a preparatory rite 
like John’s, but as that perfect baptism ‘ with water and the 
Spirit,’ which is the essential condition of the new-birth. 
By a characteristic anachronism the full Christian rite of 
Baptism, which was introduced into the Church only after 
Jesus’ death (cf. 7: 39), is thought of as being administered 
by the Founder himself. That this statement caused some 
embarrassment to future readers is shown by 4: 2, where 
see note. 

In order to bring Jesus and John face to face once again 23 
for purposes of comparison, we are told that John was also 
baptizing at Aenon near Salim. There is some doubt about 
the exact position of these villages. It is just possible that 
the names are symbolic, John’s baptism at Aenon (‘ springs ’) 
near to Salim (‘ peace’) signifying the baptism ‘ preliminary 
to that of the true Melchisedek, the Prince of Peace’ (Loisy; 
cf. 14: 27, 20: 19-23). But this is very far-fetched, and 
Salim is probably to be placed four or five miles east of 
Shechem, where to-day there is a small village of the 
same name. There is also an Ainun some eight miles 
distant to the north-east by north, and between the two 
places lies the Farah valley, where there is plenty of water. 
By some objection has been taken to the distance between 
these two sites, and also to the fact that Aenon would be in 
Samaritan territory, where it is felt that John would not be 
likely to minister. Furrer accordingly suggests an alterna- 
tive site in Ain-Fara, some seven miles north-north-east from 
Jerusalem. 

The statement that John had not yet been thrown into prison 24 


89 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


is either a gloss by a later scribe, who noticed the discrepancy 
of the Johannine with the Synoptic chronology, or more 
probably a deliberate correction by the Evangelist himself 
of Mk. 1: 14, Mt. 4: 12, whereby he justifies his statement 
that Jesus and John were baptizing side by side. Efforts 
have been made to reconcile the chronology by the argument 
that Jesus’ return to Galilee narrated in Mk. 1: 14 is not 
reached in our Gospel till 4: 3, such earlier activities of Jesus 
in Galilee as are mentioned in our Gospel being antecedent 
to the opening of the Marcan account. (But for this see 
note at end of chap. 1.) Tradition is wholly against the 
supposition that at any time Jesus’ ministry overlapped 
John’s. Our Evangelist’s correction of the Synoptic account 
is prompted by apologetic motives. The Johannine mtse-en- 
scéne serves to provide a final opportunity for placing Jesus 
and John side by side in such a way that John’s witness to 
the Christ may be renewed and Jesus’ superiority to his 
forerunner dramatically set forth. 

25 The occasion for the Baptist’s final testimony is provided 
by a dispute between John’s disciples and a Jew (not ‘ the 
Jews’ as A.V.; a still more attractive conjecture is ‘ with 
Jesus ’), who as a typical representative of the general public, 
prejudiced against both Jesus and John alike, would be an 
impartial judge of their respective claims. The argument is 
over the question of ‘ purification.’ Verse 26 makes it plain 
that the general topic of discussion was ‘Baptism,’ both 
John’s and Jesus’ baptism being thus classed as a rite of 
‘ purification,’ and thereby brought into connexion with the 
Jewish ceremonial (cf. 2: 6). It is superfluous to discuss at 
length the particular point in dispute: several suggest 
themseives. If Jesus be Messiah, why then does John, whose 
baptism is merely preparatory to Messiah’s coming, still 
continue to baptize? If Jesus be Messiah, why is he merely ~ 
repeating the preparatory rites of his forerunner instead of 
supplanting symbol by reality ? But more probably we are 
meant to understand that the dispute is about the comparative 
efficacy of Jesus’ baptizing and John’s. The Baptist’s 

26 disciples, when they came and told John about their discussion, 

go 


CHAPTER III, VERSES 22-30 


were evidently in a jealous mood: ‘here he is, baptizing, and 
everybody goes to him ! ’—clearly an exaggeration springing 
from wounded pride. This assumption also fits in better 
with John’s answer in the following verse that jealousy is 
beside the mark, for ‘no one can receive anything except as a 27 
gift from heaven,’ that is, all true success in spiritual work 
can come from God alone, and Jesus’ popularity is therefore 

a mark of God’s favour. (For the expression ‘from heaven’ 
compare Mk. 11: 30, and for the thought Jn. 3: 2, 6: 65, 
Ig: 11, and especially Acts 5: 38-39.) 

“Recollect too,’ continues John, ‘what my testimony to 28 
this man was, and you will see how unreasonable is this 
jealousy’: ‘I said, ‘‘I am not the Christ ; ...I have been 
sent in advance of him.’’’ The reference is to 1: 19 ff, 
especially verses 20 and 23 ; but whereas in 1: 23 John quotes 
Is. 40: 3, here his words are rather an echo of Mal. 3: 1. 

The marriage simile springs from the current O.T. con- 29 
ception of the bond subsisting between Yahweh and Israel 
(Is. 54:5, Hos. 2: 19f., etc.), and is a reflection of the 
Synoptic passage, Mk. 2: 18f. The marriage bond between 
the Christ who comes in place of Yahweh, and the Christian 
Church, which is Israel renewed, is about to be sealed 
icone eer ern 2, hpn 5) 32; "Rey, 910277, etc.) ie Lhe ‘very 
tact that the people are rallying to Jesus is proof enough that 
he is the Christ, for ‘ he who has the bride is the bridegroom.’ 
The Baptist himself is but ‘the bridegroom’s friend,’ whose 
part it was, according to Jewish custom, not only to participate 
in the wedding ceremonial, and to preside at the wedding 
feast (doubtless there is an echo here of 2: 1 ff.), but also to 
arrange the details of the marriage contract—a particularly 
apt illustration of the part played by John the Baptist. The 
ratifying of the contract, so far from giving cause for jealousy, 
is the consummation of John’s life-work. So far from 
grudging Jesus his supreme dignity John is ‘heartily glad at 
the sound of the bridegroom’s voice.’ The last words refer 
to no particular part of the wedding ceremonial, but are merely 
expressive of wedding rejoicing in general (cf. Jer. 7: 34, 
16:9, 25: 10). At the recognition of Jesus as Messiah John 

gi 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


rejoices as one whose mission is fulfilled, and who asks no more, 
for his joy is complete (cf. 15: II, 16: 24, 17: 13). 

30 Just as the morning star, herald of the dawn, must fade 
before the rising sun, so must John the herald give way to 
Christ himself : ‘He must wax, I must wane.’ It is interesting 
to note that while at Christmas the day begins to lengthen, 
on St. John’s day, which the Church appropriately celebrated 
at the summer solstice, it begins to wane. 


Theme (itt): The New Worship—in relation to the Samaritans 
(4: I-42) 

The interest is now transferred from Jesus’ relations with 
the Baptist to the opening of his wider ministry. But the 
comparison between ‘ water’ and ‘the Spirit,’ under which 
symbolism the Evangelist emphasizes the distinction between 
the New Gospel and the Old, is still maintained. 


I Now when the Lord learned that the Pharisees had heard 
of Jesus gaining and baptizing more disciples than John 
(though Jesus himself did not baptize, it was his disciples), 
he left Judaea and went back to Galilee. He had to pass 
through Samaria, and in so doing he arrived at a Samaritan 
town called Sychar ; it lay near the territory which Jacob 
had given to his son Joseph, and Jacob’s spring was there. 

Jesus, exhausted by the journey, sat down at the spring, 

just as he was. It was about noon. 

i Now when the Lord learned that the Pharisees had heard of 
Jesus gaining and baptizing more disciples than John: the 
reference to the Pharisees is unexpected and the language is 
clumsy and involved, and shows signs of editing, as so often 
at the point of juncture before or after a section which has 
fallen out of its original context (see Introduction, p. lxvii). 
Possibly the text as we have it is the result of a combination 
of the original words of the Evangelist and the Redactor’s 
editing. Excopt at 6:23 and 11:2, both of which are 
parenthetic statements and may also be due to the Redactor, 


g2 


An PW ND 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 1-6 


the term the Lord is used of Jesus in this Gospel only after 
the Resurrection. As verse 2 is probably also an addition by 
the Redactor, we may perhaps assume that the Evangelist 
originally wrote: ‘ When therefore Jesus knew that he was 
making and baptizing more disciples than John, he left Judaea, 
and went away again into Galilee.’ According to the Evangel- 
ist the reason for Jesus’ departure is that he may not appear 
to be a rival to John: the Redactor, to whom rather than to 
the Evangelist himself is probably due the persistent exaltation 
of Jesus at the expense of the Baptist (see Introduction, p. lxvi), 
changes the motive by an abrupt allusion to ‘ the Pharisees.’ 
Jesus withdraws because the Pharisees show signs of alarm at 
the increasing number of his adherents, and he desires to avoid 
a collision with them, for ‘his time was not yet come’ ; 
the Jewish party are not to be thought of as favouring John 
(though no doubt the ‘ Baptist sect’ at Ephesus, to which 
the Redactor may vaguely allude, would be largely com- 
posed of Judaizing opponents of orthodox Christianity) ; 
but they are still more jealous of his greater successor. Notice 
that all whom Jesus baptizes at once become disciples, 
for the Evangelist regards this baptizing not merely as a 
preparatory rite parallel to that of John, but as the full 
Christian sacrament foretold in 1: 33, whereby men are sealed 
by the Spirit as members of the Church. He is thereby guilty 
of an anachronism which alike anticipates Jesus’ commission 
to baptize given in Mt. 28: 19, and clashes with the idea that 
it was not till after Jesus’ death that the Spirit was given 
(7: 39) and therefore, by inference, that spiritual baptism 
could be dispensed. It is probably because he is conscious of 
this difficulty that the Redactor adds the modification in 
verse 2 that Jesus himself did not baptize, it was his disciples. 2 
The anachronism, indeed, still remains, but it is less glaring 
when a ministerial function subsequently fulfilled by the 
Twelve is ascribed to them even during Jesus’ lifetime— 
but not actually assigned to the Master himself. It may be 
noted too that by his correction the Redactor once again subtly 
emphasizes Jesus’ superiority to the Baptist. The latter 
himself baptized with water: Jesus, whose function was to 


H 93 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


baptize with the Spirit, like Paul (x Cor. 1: 14-17) left the 
mere outward rite to his disciples. From this point of view the 
twelve are thus early regarded almost as ministerial ‘ officials 
(see E. F. Scott, The Fourth Gospel, p. 137). It may be noted 
that, though John is by general consent regarded as the great 
N.T. teacher on the subject of the sacraments (mediaeval 
artists regularly pictured him with the Cup, while Peter 
held the keys and Paul the sword), it is characteristic of this 
Gospel to minimize the importance of the mere outward rite. 
The mechanical act is nothing apart from the Spiritual gift 
which constitutes its inner meaning ; and it was to bestow this, 
not to perform rites, that Christ came. Indeed, the whole of 
this section, with its implied contrast between the barren 
Samaritan rites and the ‘ free gift of God’ through Jesus, is 
a working out of this thought. (Compare also the treatment 
of the Lord’s supper, and see note on 6: 63.) 

3 Jesus then, as a result apparently of the dispute recorded in 
3: 25 ff., left Judaea and went back to Galilee, which he had left 
at 2: 13, according to our Gospel after a previous brief ministry 
there (I: 43-2: 12), whereas according to the Synoptists 
(Mk. 1: 14, Mt. 4: 12) the Galilean ministry opened at this 

4 point. John takes advantage of the fact that he had to pass 
through Samaria to introduce, as a link between the early 
Judaean incidents and the ministry in Galilee, a picture of 
Jesus in contact with a non-Jewish people. The Evangelist’s 
universalist outlook (cf. 3: 15-16), and the fact that he writes 
at a time when Christianity had become mainly a Gentile 
religion, demand that he should correct at an early stage in 
his Gospel the impression made by such sayings as Mt. 10: 5, 
Mk. 7: 27, and the objection that, according to the earlier 
accounts, Christ’s own ministry had been limited to the Jews. 
The following narrative almost certainly rests on some 
authentic record ; but even ‘real history has its ideal side: 
otherwise it would only be an accumulation of facts without 
significance’ (Godet) ; and John means to imply that Jesus 
himself anticipated the first extension of the Christian Church 
beyond Jewish boundaries. Jesus had to travel through 
Samaritan territory, because the main pilgrim road from 


og 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 1-6 


Jerusalem to Galilee ran that way, and otherwise a détour 
through Peraea would be necessary (Mk. 10: 1). Josephus 
uses the very words of our Evangelist : ‘ Those who wish to go 
away quickly (from Galilee to Jerusalem) must needs go 
through Samaria.’ A similar visit, but on the way south, 
is mentioned in one of Luke’s ‘ travel-narratives’ (Lk. 9: 51 ff). 
Samaria or Shomron was built by Omri as the capital of the 
Kingdom of Israel (1 Kings 16: 24), and gave its name to the 
surrounding country. Destroyed by Hyrcanus, it was rebuilt 
by Herod and called Sebaste ; in the time of Christ the ter- 
ritory of Samaria was included in the tetrarchy of Archelaus 
under the Procurator Pontius Pilate. 

Jesus then arrived at a Samaritan town called Sychar, a5 
place unknown to the O.T., which at one time was commonly 
identified with Shechem (Gen. 33: 18) or Sychem (Acts 7: 16), 
subsequently Neapolis, now Nablis. It is suggested that the 
name Sychem may have been altered in derision by the Jews 
to Sychar, which means ‘city of drunkards’ (cf. Is. 28: 1). 
But this identification is now abandoned, and Sychar (called 
in the Samaritan Chronicle ‘ Ischar’) is to be placed at the 
site now called ‘ Askar, a few ruins and hovels at the foot of 
Mount Ebal, about one mile and three-quarters east-north-east 
from Nablis and little more than half a mile north from Jacob’s 
Well’ (G. A. Smith, Historical Geography of the Holy Land, 
p- 371). This site is near the territory which Jacob had given to 
his son Joseph at Shechem (Gen. 33:18, 48: 22—where 
“shechem’ is the Hebrew word translated ‘ portion ’— 
Jos. 24: 32) and half a mile to the south, at the point where 
the great north road through Samaria forks, is Jacob’s spring. 6 
The writer obviously has a definite geographical background 
before him, and the place-names are even less likely to be 
merely symbolical than are Aenon and Salim (3: 23), though 
it may be that the exact position of the sites should be fixed 
with a like degree of latitude. The tradition regarding 
Jacob’s well does not depend upon the O.T. Why was a well 
dug there at all in a district abounding in copious streams ? 
Was it that Jacob, a stranger in the land, might avoid disputes 
with his neighbours about water-rights? lLoisy well notes 


95 


7 
8 


) 


10 


Il 


12 


13 
14 


7 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


that Jacob’s well ‘ symbolizes the ineffectual regime of legal 
purifications as compared with that of the living water, 
Christian baptism, the source of immortal life.’ 

Jesus, exhausted by the journey, sat down at the spring, just 
as he was—without more ado, ‘not on a throne, not on a 
cushion, but simply, as he was, on the ground’ (Chrysostom). 
As so often (II: 35, 19: 28, I Jn. I: I-3, 4: 2, etc.) our writer 
strongly emphasizes the real humanity of Jesus probably in 
opposition to the prevalent views of the ‘ Docetists’ who 
regarded Jesus as a ‘phantom’ without any true material 
existence. It was about noon (the sixth hour; see note on 
I: 39), when the heat would be at its height and the well 
deserted (evening being the usual hour for the drawing of 
water), thus providing an opportunity for an undisturbed 
téte-a-téte. In the exact note of time we may perhaps trace 
the hand of ‘ the Witness.’ 


And a Samaritan woman came to draw water. Jesus said to 
her, ‘Give me a drink’ (his disciples had gone to the 
town to buy some food). The Samaritan woman said, 
‘What ? You are a Jew, and you ask me for a drink—me, 
a Samaritan!’ (Jews do not associate with Samaritans.) 
Jesus answered, ‘ If you knew what is the free gift of God 
and who is asking you for a drink, you would have asked 
him instead, and he would have given you ‘living ” 
water.’ ‘Sir,’ said the woman, ‘you have nothing to 
draw water with, and it is a deep well ; where do you get 
your ‘‘living’’ water ? Are you a greater manthan Jacob, 
our ancestor ? He gave us this well, and he drank from it, 
with his sons and his cattle.’ Jesus answered, ‘ Anyone 
who drinks this water will be thirsty again, but anyone who 
drinks the water I shall give him will never thirst any 
more ; the water I shal] give him will turn into a spring 
of water welling up to eternal life.’ 


And a Samaritan woman came to draw water. Why, we 
ask, during the heat of the day and at half a mile’s distance 
from her home in Sychar ? Possibly on her way home from 


96 


CGHAPTER IV; VERSES 9-14 


work in the fields (4: 35). Why draw from the well when 
there are abundant supplies of running water nearer the 
village ? Possibly because of ‘ the fondness of tradition which 
. . . drew Jacob’s fanatic children to its scantier supplies ’ 
(G. A. Smith, p. 374) ; for the same reason, John may have 
felt, that men cling to dead ritual when they might draw from 
the Spirit of the living Christ. 

Jesus creates his own opportunity by a simple request, 
‘Give mea drink,’ for ‘ Jesus knows well that the way to gain 
a soul is often to ask a service from it’ (Godet). His reason 
for appealing to the woman is that his disciples, who other- 
wise would have drawn water for him, had gone to the town to 
buy some food (cf. Lk. 9: 52), thus showing that they, as well as 
their Master, were superior to the Rabbinic prejudices, accord- 
ing to which ‘ to eat the bread of a Samaritan is as eating the 
flesh of swine.’ 

‘The woman is one of those whose hold on religion is a 
slender one, viz., a knowledge that divisions exist among 
religious people’ (R. H. Strachan), and recognizing Jesus as a 
Jew, possibly by something distinctive about his dress or 
accent, she expresses wonder that he should thus disregard the 
customary barriers not only of sex but even of religious caste 
(cf. Acts 10: 28). ‘What? You area Jew, and you ask me 
for a drink—me, a Samaritan woman!’ Here follows an 
explanatory note that Jews do not associate with Samaritans, 
probably added by the Redactor, it may be when he translated 
the Gospel for the use of Gentile readers (Introduction, p. lxvif.). 
The hostility between the two peoples, which lasts to the 
present day, dates back to the colonization of Israel by the 
Assyrians (2 Kings 17: 24), from which resulted the opposition 
of the Samaritans to the Jews at the Return (Ezra 4, Neh. 6), 
and finally the building of a rival temple on Mount Gerizim. 

Jesus tries to find some point of contact whereby he can 
meet the woman’s spiritual need: he says in effect: ‘ You 
speak of giving and taking between two such as you and me ; 
if you had the insight to distinguish between earthly and 
heavenly riches and understood my power to pass on God’s 
free gift to you, then you would have been the first to ask 


97 


Jen 


12 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


and I the first to give.’ ‘She would have become the peti- 
tioner and not have wondered at the petition’ (Westcott). 
‘The free gift of God’ is either to be taken as an indefinite 
expression meaning ‘the freeness of all God’s giving,’ or 
else points more definitely to the gift by God of His own Son 
(3: 16), or, more probably in this context, to the gift of the 
holy Spirit which is the Father’s peculiar ‘ good gift’ (Lk. 
11:13). The words ‘living water’ may have been suggested 
by the scene before Jesus’ eyes as he spoke, the contrast 
between the stagnant water of the old well and the running 
water which flowed close by. The primary meaning of 
‘living water’ is spring water as opposed to that contained 
in cisterns (Gen. 26: 19, Lev. 14:5). Already in the O.T. 
the expression is used in a figurative sense (Jer. 2: 13, 17: 13, 
Zech. 14: 8), and here ‘living water’ is symbolical of a 
spiritual life which never grows stagnant but has the property 
of perpetually reproducing itself. (Cf. 7: 37-39, which in 
turn is an echo of Is. 55:1.) In a desert country running - 
water is the most precious of God’s gifts ; indeed, the favourite 
name for a spring in Asia Minor is ‘ Huda-verdi’ or ‘ God 
hath given’; it is thus a fitting symbol of ‘ God’s free gift.’ 

As so often in our Gospel (2: 20, 3: 4, etc.) Jesus’ com- 
panion picks up his words in a material sense and by another 
question gives him the chance to develop his theme. ‘ Sir, 
you have nothing to draw water with, and it is a deep well.’ 
The present depth of the well is said to be some one hundred 
feet, and formerly it must have been much deeper. Note that 
the watering-place is here called a ‘ well,’ while in verse 6 it 
isa ‘spring.’ Asa matter of fact it isa deep ‘ pit’ lined with 
rough masonry. But ‘ Robinson says there is a spring in 
it, Conder that it fills by infiltration. If either of these be 
correct, then we can understand the double titles given to it 
in the narrative’ (G. A. Smith, p. 374). ‘Where do you get 
your ‘‘ living water’’? Are you a greater man than Jacob 
our ancestor? He gave us this well, and he drank from it, 
with his sons and his cattle.’ The woman says in effect: 
‘If you can’t get water from the well and yet have another 
and a better kind of water, then you must be one greater 

98 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 7-14 


even than Jacob, who felt the need of the well and found 
it good enough for himself and copious enough to satisfy 
both his family and his flocks.’ The Samaritans set great 
store by their claim to descent from Jacob through Joseph, 
the representative of the northern tribes of Ephraim and 
Manasseh. (Compare the similar boast of ‘the Jews’ in 
8: 33, 39, 53-) 

Jesus corrects the woman’s misconception that the question 
is still merely the quenching of physical thirst by showing her 
that he is speaking not of ‘ this water’ in a material sense of 
which ‘ anyone who drinks . . . will be thirsty again, but of the 
water I shall give him, of which anyone who drinks . . . will 
never thirst any more.’ Unlike the water of Jacob’s well, 
which at best merely satisfies the need of the moment, Jesus 
offers a spiritual draught which will banish thirst for ever 
(cf. 6: 35). Asaying surely which provokes thought. Should 
the growth of our spiritual life be towards complete satis- 
- faction (as pictured here) or towards a more and more intense 
thirst after holiness (Ps. 42: 2, etc., Mt. 5:6)? Even in 
the life of heavenly perfection there will be thirst to be 
quenched (Rev. 7: 17, 21: 6; ‘22: 1). The -truth-is that 
Christ both excites the desire for spiritual good and also 
satisfies it. ‘ Thou, O Christ, art all I want, More than all in 
Thee I find.’ Christ satisfies a man not by banishing his 
thirst, which would be to stunt his soul’s growth,! but by 
bestowing upon him by the gift of his Spirit an inward 
source of satisfaction which perennially and spontaneously 
supplies each recurrent need of refreshment: ‘the water I 
shall give him will turn into a spring of water welling up 
to eternal life.’ The gift which Christ offers is no material 


1 We have the converse truth in Eccl. 24:21, when Wisdom 
says, ‘Those who eat me will always hunger for me again; those 
who drink me will always again thirst for me.’ 

Compare Faber : 

“‘ The lack of desire is the ill of all ills ; 
Many thousands through it the dark pathway have trod 
The balsam, the wine of predestinate wills 
Is a jubilant pining and longing for God.” 


99 


15 
16 


17 


18 


19 
20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


25 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


water which at best springs from the earth and returns to 
the earth, but the Spirit which is the secret of eternal life. 
An ordinary fountain may spring heavenward, but the force 
of gravitation draws it back to earth: this spiritual fountain 
leaps upward till it attains to eternal life. ‘The thoughts 
of worldly men are for ever regulated by a moral law of 
gravitation, which like the physical one holds them down to 
earth’ (Charles Dickens). Christ gives the inward power 
whereby this spiritual law of gravitation is overcome. Hence- 
forth man may have within himself a spiritual force which 
will raise him to eternal life. Note that our Gospel, by 
emphasizing not merely the tradition of Jesus’ teaching, but 
rather the spontaneous and self-renewing power of his ever- 
present spirit, has above any other N.T. writing secured to 
Christianity a principle of inward life and ever-fresh develop- 
ment. 


‘ Ah, sir,’ said the woman, ‘ give me this water, so that I need 
not thirst or come all this road to draw water.’ Jesus 
said to her, ‘Go and call your husband, then come back 
here.’? The woman replied, ‘I have no husband.’ Jesus 
said to her, ‘You were right in saying, ‘‘I have no 
husband ’’ ; you have had five husbands, and he whom 
you have now espoused is not your husband. That was 
a true word.’ ‘ Sir,’ said the woman, ‘I see you are a 
prophet. Now our ancestors worshipped on this moun- 
tain, whereas you Jews declare the proper place for 
worship is at Jerusalem.’ ‘Woman,’ said Jesus, ‘ believe 
me, the time is coming when you will be worshipping the 
Father neither on this mountain nor at Jerusalem. You 
are worshipping something you do not know; we are 
worshipping what we do know—for salvation comes 
from the Jews. But the time is coming, it has come 
already, when the real worshippers will worship the 
Father in Spirit and in reality ; for these are the wor- 
shippers that the Father wants. God is Spirit, and His 
worshippers must worship Him in Spirit and in reality.’ 
The woman said to him, ‘Well, I know messiah (which 

100 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 15-26 


means Christ) is coming. When he arrives, he will 26 


explain it alltous.’ ‘I am messiah,’ said Jesus, ‘I who 
am talking to you.’ 


The woman, whose chief desire appears to be ‘ to have her 
life made more comfortable’ (Godet), and who still imagines 
that Jesus is speaking of some magic water which, being 
within the recipient, can satisfy without the labour of drawing, 
says half in earnest half in jest, ‘ Sir, give me this water, so 
that I need not thirst or come all this road to draw water.’ 
Jesus’ reply seems lacking in logical sequence. Westcott 
thinks that the woman’s last words contain a veiled reference 
to her home, and imply that in them ‘the speaker passed 
beyond herself.... The greatest gift was not complete unless 
it was shared by those to whom she was bound.’ Accordingly 
‘Christ . . . bids her summon him to whom it was her duty 
to minister.’ A less far-fetched explanation is that Jesus 
finding her not only spiritually obtuse but even inclined to 
be flippant, tries to sober her by confronting her with the 
shady side of her own life and thereby to reach a part of her 
nature wherein he can awaken some response. He therefore 
bids her ‘Go and call your husband, then come back here.’ 
No doubt here and in verse 18 John thinks of Jesus as using 
his supernatural knowledge (note on 2:25). The woman, 
surprised and embarrassed at this sudden turn in the con- 
versation, tries to extricate herself by fencing—‘I have no 
husband,’—but only gives Jesus an opening to confound 
her still more with the words, ‘ You were right in saying, 
‘<T have no husband ”’ ; you have had five husbands, and he 
whom you have now espoused is not your husband. That 
was a true word.’ Owing to the frequency of divorce the 
woman may well have had five legitimate husbands; but 
her present consort is a mere lover. Those who (e.g. Loisy) 
regard the woman merely as a type of the Samaritan people 
see in the five husbands the gods of the five nations settled 
in Samaria by the Assyrians (2 Kings 17: 24-34), the sixth 
presumably being the God of Israel, whom they ‘do not 
know’ (verse 22), and who is therefore to them at least no 

IOI 


T5 


17 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


true husband (cf. Ezra 4: 2-3). The Samaritans worship 
the true God, but with irregular rites. This theory, at first 
sight improbable, has weight lent to it by the turn taken 
by the conversation in the very next verse, where there 
emerges this very question of the validity of the Samaritan 
worship. Otherwise we must suppose that in her anxiety 
to avoid the dangerous ground on to which Jesus is leading 
her the woman tries once again to change the subject. Cer- 
tainly her retort shows no consciousness of sin, but only 

1g surprise at Jesus’ uncanny insight. ‘Sir, I see you are a 
prophet ’—for such insight, and not merely foresight, is the 
chief characteristic of the prophets. Perhaps a reference 
to religion, a prophet’s own province, will entice Jesus on 
to safer ground. She therefore ‘ directs attention from her 
own case by proposing to him a point of controversy’ 
(Astié, quoted by Godet). Mount Gerizim, lying directly 
before her eyes, readily suggests a subject—a burning topic 
then, and indeed even to-day, when some two hundred men, 
the remnants of the Samaritan Church, still carry on the cult 
upon the mountain. 

20 ‘Ourancestors,’? says the woman, ‘worshipped on this 
mountain,’ that is, on Gerizim. At Deut. 27: 4, where the 
site of the first offering is stated to be Ebal, the Samaritan 
text reads ‘ Gerizim,’ the mountain from which the blessings 
were pronounced (Deut. Ir: 29, 27: 12). The rival temple 
erected here by the Samaritans after the return from the 
exile had been destroyed by Hyrcanus in 129 B.c., and in Jesus’ 
day was lying inruins. By ‘our ancestors’ may be meant 
either the Israelites of Joshua’s days, who, according to the 
Samaritan reading of Deut. 27: 4, worshipped on Gerizim ; 
or—with a more definite contrast with ‘you Jews ’—‘ our 
forefathers ever since the time of Nehemiah’ when Sanballat 
built the rival temple; or, possibly, ‘the patriarchs,’ from 
whom in common with the Jews the Samaritans claimed to 
be descended (note on 4:12). The woman would then be 
contrasting the immemorial practice of the patriarchs who 
worshipped on mountain-tops, and therefore by inference on 
Gerizim, with the more recent localized cult ‘at Jerusalem, 

I02 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 15-26 


where you Jews declare the proper place of worship is.’ 
According to a Samaritan tradition it was on Gerizim that 
Abraham prepared for the sacrifice of Isaac; here also he 
met with Melchizedek. Note that the woman asks no 
definite question, but she implies, ‘ Which point of view is 
right ?’ 

The gist of Jesus’ answer is that it is not the Church to 
which we go, but the spirit in which we go that counts. 
His words reflect the thought of such passages as Is. 66: 18-23, 
Jer. 3:16, Mal. 1: 11: with the revelation which Christ 
brings ‘the time is coming when you will be worshipping 
the Father neither on this mountain nor at Jerusalem.’ The 
word ‘Father’ is the key-word. Once the true nature of 
religion is realized, all sectarian rivalries are forgotten. It is 
the object of worship which determines its conditions ; once 
God is revealed to be the universal Father, and such is the 
content of Christ’s revelation, the limitations of place are 
done away, and both the knowledge and the worship of 
God are mediated by purely spiritual means. Jesus thus 
expressly abrogates Deut. 12:5, which in the eyes of such 
as the Samaritan woman would be the seal set upon Jewish 
exclusiveness. “Nowhere does the Evangelist’s spiritual 
universalism shine more brightly than in the discourse to the 
Samaritan woman. .. . Until one has fully realized what 
Jerusalem was to the Jews, how completely it represented 
their national religion, their pride of race, their past history, 
and their hopes for the future, one cannot fully understand 
at what cost of self-suppression, and through what painful 
following of the higher light any Hebrew could reach that 
utterance. When the author of the Apocalypse writes of the 
future, his highest hope is to see a new Jerusalem: the 
Evangelist is willing to see Jerusalem for ever eclipsed’ 
(Percy Gardner, The Ephesian Gospel, p.222f.). By the time 
John wrote, the temple at Jerusalem, like its rival on 
Gerizim, was lying in ruins. 

It is not the place of worship which is of account, but its 
object and its spirit: as regards its object, ‘You are wor- 
shipping something you do not know.’ The neuter pronoun 

103 


21 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


refers to God abstractly as the object of worship rather than 
to God as a Person. (For the force of know in the Gospel, 
see note on 8:19, 10:15.) The Samaritans, who are typical 
of the heathen world, worship they know not what in the 
characteristic manner of Gentiles (Acts 17:23). Of the 
O.T. Scriptures the Samaritans acknowledged the Pentateuch 
only, and were thus without the knowledge of God as revealed 
by the prophets and in the history of His chosen people. 
The Jews’ worship, on the other hand, is intelligent: ‘ we are 
worshipping what we do know—for salvation comes from the 
Jews’ (cf. Rom. 3: 1-2, 9: 4-5, Ps. 76:2). We have the 
exact opposite of this thought in 8: 54-55, where Jesus 
says to ‘the Jews’: ‘ You say, “ He is our God,” but you 
do not understand Him.’ For this reason it has been supposed 
that in the words ‘we are worshipping what we do know,’ 
John, speaking through Christ’s lips, intends to contrast the 
Christian manner of worship with all other religions, including 
both the Jewish and the Samaritan. But the following 
words ‘ salvation comes from the Jews’ surely make this quite 
impossible. The contrast here is between the unintelligent 
Samaritan rites and the Jewish religion regarded as the soil 
from which Christianity sprang. ‘The peculiar relation 
between this people and God’ springs from the fact that 
“according to the divine plan the history of this people must 
issue in the salvation of the world’ (Godet). Though all 
such sectarian distinctions are about to be transcended in 
Christ, Jesus frankly confesses himself a Jew, and claims 
superiority for his faith (cf. verse 9 and notes on I: 11 and 
2:16). By thus insisting upon the permanent worth of the 
O.T. revelation John perhaps intends to combat the Gnostic 
doctrine that the God of the O.T. was a lower God and the 
ancient revelation worthless. Judaism is the only religion 
hitherto in which the truth has partially been revealed, and 
which is therefore fitted to be the ‘ mother’ of Christianity 
(cf. Rev. 12: 5, and note on 19: 27). The apparent incon- 
sistency of 8: 54-55 is explained by the distinction already 
noted (see note on 1: Ig and esp. 1: 47), which our author 
draws between the true community of Israel at last realized 
104 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 15-26 


in the Christian Church and ‘the Jews’ regarded as a 
religious party opposed to the Church. 

But though of all faiths hitherto the Jewish is the highest, 23 
‘the time is coming’ when every difference, such as that 
between Jew and Samaritan, will lose its significance ; indeed, 
with the appearance of Christ that time ‘has come already, 
when the real worshippers,’—that is, those whose ideas of wor- 
ship pass beyond limitations of time and place and symbolic 
rites and ceremonies, which belong to the sphere of the flesh, to 
the reality which lies beyond the symbol and belongs to the 
sphere of the Spirit—will be raised above all limitation and all 
symbolism, and ‘will worship the Father in Spirit and in reality’; 
that is, worship will manifest itself in the sphere of the Spirit 
(Rom. 1: 9, Eph. 6: 18), in a man’s inner life, as opposed to 
worship at any particular site, for ‘the wind blows where it 
will’ (3: 8), and spiritual worship cannot be bound to any 
one place; and it will be worship of God as He really is, 
that is, worship with first-hand knowledge as opposed to that 
mediated through symbolism; hitherto men have seen 
“only the baffling reflections in a mirror,’ but henceforth ‘ it 
will be face to face’ (m1 Cor. 13: 12). Here the word ‘ reality’ 
further defines ‘ Spirit,’ as in 1: 17 it defines ‘ grace.’ 

Thus ‘the rival claims of Gerizim and Jerusalem are not 
determined by the Lord; for they vanish in the revelation 
of a universal religion’ (Westcott) which being ‘in Spirit’ 
will correct the defect of Jewish worship which was too 
largely symbolical, and being ‘in reality’ will correct the 
defect of Samaritan worship which was vitiated by an imper- 
fect knowledge of God. It should be noted perhaps that this 
passage does not condemn outward forms of worship as such, 
but only the sectarian spirit which counts them sufficient 
cause for division. 

The necessity for such ‘spiritual’ and ‘real’ worship 
springs from the very nature of the object of worship: ‘these 
are the worshippers that the Father wants,’ for ‘God is Spirit.’ 
It is the nature not the personality of God which is de- 24 
scribed (cf. note on 1:1, ‘the Logos was divine’). The 
nature of God is spiritual, as distinguished from the earthly, 

105 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


material nature of man, and, as only Spirit can hold converse 
with Spirit (3: 6), ‘His worshippers must worship Him in 
Spirit and in reality,’ for even the worship of the temple 
becomes an irrelevance unless it is accompanied by worship in 
the inward sanctuary of the heart. (Compare 1 Kings 8: 27, 
Is. 66: 1, Micah 6: 6-8, Mk. 14: 58, Lk. 17: 21, Acts 7: 48, 
17.25.) 

25 It has been commonly held that the woman’s reply—‘ Well, 
I know messiah is coming ; when he arrives, he will explain 
it all to us ’—implies that she is ready to be taught and that 
“her spirit longs for the full light to be brought by the 
Messiah’ (Godet). But the scene becomes much more 
dramatic if we suppose that she remains stubborn and flippant 
up to the point of Jesus’ startling pronouncement in the 
following verse. She is still smarting under Jesus’ innuendo 
(ver. 18), and now tries to break off the conversation with the 
remark that she is content to leave the solving of all these 
riddles to ‘ Messiah.’ The Samaritans based their expecta- 
tions of Messiah upon Deut. 18: 18, and looked for him to 
come not as a Davidic king, or political leader, but rather 
as one who would restore and reform the cult upon Gerizim 
and convert both Jews and heathen to it. Josephus tells 
us that during the later years of Pilate’s procuratorship there 
was a rising of the Samaritans under the influence of these 
Messianic expectations, so that it is possible that they were 
at their height during Jesus’ ministry, and may have been 
actually stimulated by him. It is objected that a Samaritan 
woman would not use the term ‘ Messiah’ as a proper name, 
for the Samaritans used the name ‘ Hashab,’ ‘ the Converter,’ 
or ‘El Muhdy,’ ‘the Guide.’ But the Jewish term may 
well have been popularized among the Samaritans by Jewish 
apostates who are said to have been numerous at this time. 
In any case John makes no claim to be reporting the actual 
words of the conversation. The explanatory parenthesis 
(which means Christ) is of course an addition, probably by 
the Redactor, for the benefit of his Hellenist readers. (Cf. 
note on I: 41.) 

There follows the tensest and most dramatic moment in 
106 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 27-38 


the whole of N.T. narrative. The woman has persistently 
sought to hold Jesus at arm’s length; to escape Jesus’ 
scrutiny she has invoked ‘ Messiah,’ only to find herself 
utterly confounded by his rejoinder, ‘I am messiah, I who 26 
am talking to you.’ Christ will not allow her to postpone 
the solving of her difficulties: they can be solved now; her 
decision must be made now; the Messiah whom she awaits 
ishere. (For the question of the historicity of this declaration 
by Jesus of his Messiahship so early in his ministry (contrast 
Mt. 16: 20) see note at the end of this section.) 


At this point his disciples came up; they were surprised 27 
that he was talking to a woman, but none of them said, 
‘What is it ? ’ or, ‘Why are you talking to her?’ Then 28 
the woman left her water-pot, and going off to the 
town told the people, ‘Come here, look at a man who 29 
has told me everything I ever did! Can he be the 
Christ?’ They set out from the town on their way to 30 
him. Meanwhile the disciples pressed him, saying, 31 
‘Rabbi, eat something.’ But he said to them, ‘I have 32 
food, of which you know nothing.’ So the disciples 33 
asked each other, ‘ Can anyone have brought him some- 
thing to eat?’ Jesus said, ‘My food is to do the will 34 
of Him who sent me, and to accomplish His work. You 35 
have a saying, have you not, ‘‘ Four months yet, then 
harvest ’’’? Look round, I tell you ; see, the fields are 
white for harvesting ! The reaper is already getting his 36 
wages and harvesting for eternal life, so that the sower 
shares the reaper’s joy. That proverb, ‘‘ One sows and 37 
another reaps,’’ holds true here: I sent you to reap a 38 
crop for which you did not toil ; other men have toiled, 
and you reap the profit of their toil.’ 


At this point we have a good illustration of John’s char- 27 
acteristic lack of interest in a story for its own sake, apart 
from the doctrinal truth which it is intended to illustrate (see 
Introduction, p. xliii). Jesus’ conversation with the woman 
has reached its climax; but just as we are looking for the 

107 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


dénouement in the woman’s conversion she ‘ evaporates from 
the stage.’ Was she, or was she not converted? As in 
the case of Nicodemus and of the Greeks (12: 20) we are not 
told. Meantime the interest of the narrative passes over 
to the disciples who at this point came up, and were surprised 
that Jesus was talking toa woman. It was contrary to custom 
for a Rabbi to converse with a woman, whose sphere was 
held to be not learning but the home. It was a saying of the 
doctors that it was ‘ better that the words of the law should 
be burnt than delivered to women,’ and that ‘ each time that 
the man prolongs converse with the woman he causes evil 
to himself, and desists from the Thorah and in the end inherits 
Gehinnom’ (Pirke Aboth). But though surprised, like the 
woman herself (ver. 9), that Jesus should thus despise the 
barriers both of sex and of national caste, the disciples are 
either too shy or too respectful to ask ‘What is it that 
you want with the woman? Or, if you want nothing, Why 
are you talking to her?’ 

28 In the phrase the woman left her water-pot, commentators 
have suspected symbolism, but they have drawn from it 
directly contradictory inferences. The pitcher is abandoned 
either because the woman is thought of as leaving the water 
of life behind, or, on the other hand, because, now having 
that water within herself, she no longer requires her pitcher. 
Godet sees in her action ‘a pledge of her speedy return, the 
proof that she goes to seek someone.’ The words are simply 
a vivid touch intended to emphasize the speed with which 
the woman hurries off to the town to spread her news and 
bring out her neighbours to put this possible Messiah to the 

29 test. ‘Come here, look at a man who has told me every- 
thing I ever did,’"—merely the exaggeration characteristic of 
a gossip, though some commentators have read into the 
words a hint that her many marriages were due not to the 
husbands’ deaths, but to her own contrivance. ‘Can he be 
the Christ ? ’—a question framed as if in expectation of a 
negative answer (cf. Mt. 12: 23): ‘ Surely this can’t be the 
Christ!’ She is still more than half doubtful, and wishes 
to have her own impressions confirmed by her neighbours, 

108 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 27-38 


who, stirred by curiosity, set out from the town on their way 30 
to Jesus. Meantime the interest passes to the disciples, 
who meanwhile—that is, in the interval while the woman 31 
was still away and her fellow-townsmen had not yet arrived 
—offered Jesus the food just brought from the village and 
pressed him, saying, ‘Rabbi, eat something.’ ‘To the prosaic 
invitation of the disciples Christ makes a mystical response ’ 
(Loisy). He has been buoyed up by the joy of work and 
the evident promise of speedy results. Spiritual exaltation 
or pressure of work not seldom rendered Jesus oblivious of 
his bodily needs (Mt. 4: 2, Mk. 3: 20, 6: 31); he replies, 
“T have food of which you know nothing,’ words which the 32 
disciples interpret in a literal rather than the intended 
spiritual sense: ‘Can anyone have brought him something to 33 
eat ?’ or rather, ‘ Surely no one can have brought him any- 
thing to eat—in Samaria of all places!’ The disciples’ 
misunderstanding is a favourite artifice of the Evangelist 
(cf. 3: 4, 4: 15, etc.; also Mk. 8: 16) to give point to Jesus’ 
explanation which follows: ‘My food is to do the will of 34 
Him who sent me, and to accomplish His work,’ 1.e., ‘ the means 
whereby I sustain my being lie in the endeavour to fulfil 
the will of my Father, which is the true purpose of my mission.’ 
Jesus implies that spiritual life alone is true life, real life, and 
to nourish this is more important than merely to sustain 
our bodily existence which has worth only so far as it is 
the symbol and medium of spiritual endeavour. (Cf. 6: 27, 
Mt. 4: 4.) We have interesting parallels in Browning’s Fra 
Lippo Lippi ‘to find its (the world’s) meaning is my meat 
and drink,’ and Sophocles, Electra, 363, ‘For me be it food 
enough that I do not wound my own conscience.’ Our 
Gospel lays much emphasis upon the will of God, a word which 
may almost be said to take the place of the Synoptic term 
‘kingdom ’ as expressive of the sovereignty of God (cf. 5: 30, 
O35-30,) 6: 40, 75-17, 9° 3%, etc.).’ ~The expression” His 
work refers not only to the conversion of the Samaritans, 
which is the task of the moment, but to the whole of Jesus’ 
vocation (cf. 5: 36, 17: 4). 

In the verses that follow we seem to have echoes of Mt. 35 


10 
I 9 


THE GOSPEL ‘OF sJOHN 


9: 37-38, Lk. 10: 2, and of the Parable of the Sower. The 
difficulty of tracing a consistent sequence of thought through- 
out 35-38 has led to the conjecture that we may have here a 
‘ conglomerate ’ passage composed of sayings originally uttered 
on various occasions, and subsequently brought together on 
account of their similarity of subject, in this case sowing and 
reaping. Needless difficulty has been caused by the supposi- 
tion (e.g. by Westcott) that ‘ the sower ’ of 36 is not Jesus but 
his predecessor the Baptist. By avoiding this error a tolerable 
sequence may be secured. 

Jesus justifies his exalted mood by pointing out with what 
marvellous rapidity fruit is springing up from the seed sown at 
the well side. ‘You have a (proverbial) saying, have you not, 
“Four months yet, then harvest’? ?’ Some have taken these 
words as an actual remark of the disciples overheard by 
Jesus and taken as his text, and have seen in them a hint 
that the visit to Samaria took place four months before 
harvest, that is, in December or January. But verses 6-7 
suggest the season of heat, and in any case the words sound 
unmistakably like a proverb. The proverb in Mt. 16:2 
is similarly introduced by the phrase ‘ye say.’ In the Greek 
the form of the words is metrical, which suits the supposition 
that we have here a popular adage, or at any rate a quotation 
from an unknown context used in a proverbial sense. The 
words can hardly be intended to mark accurately the usual 
interval between seedtime and harvest, for in Palestine the 
sowing begins in October and the harvest in April—an interval 
not of four months but of six. ‘Four months’ is simply 
expressive of any short interval; the proverb, as generally 
used, would teach the need of patience, while also encouraging 
with the hope that after no long interval results will follow 
effort—but an interval there 1s bound to be (Cf. Eccl. 11: 1, 
2 Tim. 2:6). Jesus’ meaning would then be this: In the 
ordinary course of nature men have to wait ere they can reap 
a harvest from their sowing. But here is an exception: so 
speedy has been the result of my spiritual sowing that seedtime 
and harvest have been miraculously brought together: ‘Look 
round, I tell you; see, the fields are white for harvesting ! ’ 

IO 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 27-38 


It is but a few minutes since Jesus sowed the first seed in the 
woman's heart, and yet in that stream of Samaritans hurrying 
out of the village towards him he sees a harvest already ripe 
for reaping. If, as we suppose, the Evangelist has built up 
this scene out of reminiscences of ‘ the Witness,’ we may well 
suppose that the metaphor of sowing and reaping was sug- 
gested to Jesus by the country-side on which he was looking : 
the district is still famous for its corn. Lightfoot writes: 
“When we once realize the scene, when in imagination our eye 
ranges over that vast expanse of growing corn—so unusual in 
Palestine, however familiar in corn-growing England—we are 
at once struck with the truthfulness and the significance of this 
allusive parable.’ (For the phrase ‘lift up your eyes...’ 
compare Is. 49: 18ff., a passage which offers interesting 
parallels in thought and language.) 

The sowing is but newly begun, and yet ‘ the reaper is already 36 
getting his wages and harvesting for eternal life’ : whereas 
usually the harvester has to wait months before he can get to 
work, in this case he is already getting his reward, and is 
gathering a harvest of souls into the store-house of eternal 
life. But who is the reaper—Jesus or his disciples? If 
Jesus, as is certain, is ‘the sower’ in the words that im- 
mediately follow, then it would seem more natural to see his 
disciples in ‘ the reaper’ both here and below. But the dis- 
ciples have so far not put their hand to the Samaritan harvest. 
But neither indeed has Jesus. Probably the word is used 
simply in a general sense, the meaning being: ‘The work of 
reaping, bringing with it reward for the toil of sowing, is 
already beginning,’ so that it may be truly said that in this 
case ‘ the sower shares the reaper’s joy’: that is, the sower has 
not yet left the field when the crops are ripe for harvesting, so 
that, without any interval of waiting, he actually has his share 
in the joy of harvest. Sowing was proverbially regarded as 
a work of painful toil, harvesting as a joyous festival (Ps. 
126: 5-6, Is. 9: 3), but on this occasion, so rapidly has the 
seed borne fruit that the sower finds himself taking part in 
the harvest festival. He ‘ sees of the travail of his soul, and is 
satisfied’ (Is. 53: 11). The sower here is clearly Jesus him- 

III 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


self—if indeed anything more definite is implied than that 
the quick response of the Samaritans has brought it about that 
sowing-toil and harvest-joy are almost instantaneous. The 
‘reaper’ will then be both Jesus himself and his disciples, 
both the ‘ labourers’ and the ‘ Lord of the harvest ’ who sends 
them forth (Mt. 9: 37-38). The whole force of the passage 
is ruined by supposing with Westcott that Christ is ‘ reaper’ 
alone, those who preceded him, e.g. the prophets and John 
the Baptist, being the ‘sower.’ Jesus, in our Gospel as in the 
Synoptics, is the Sower par excellence. (For Jesus’ joy at the 
prospect of harvest compare Lk. 10: 21 ff., Jn. 12: 23 ff.) 

37 The difficulty in tracing the sequence of thought at this 
point has been due to a failure to realize that in the next two 
verses we have not so much the actual words of Jesus spoken 
at the time in question, but rather a comment by the Evangel- 
ist, put indeed upon the lips of Jesus, but really spoken from 
the point of view of his own day. Freely paraphrased the 
sequence is this; the Evangelist comments as one writing at 
the beginning of the second century; ‘I say that in this 
exceptional case ‘‘ the sower shares the reaper’s joy”’; for, in 
spiritual work as a general rule, the proverb, “ One sows, 
another reaps,” holds good, and we have an illustration of its 
truth in the fact that Jesus has sent us his missionaries to 
harvest a crop at the sowing of which not we but others toiled.’ 
‘That proverb, ‘“‘ One sows, another reaps,’’ holds good here.’ 
Where? Certainly not in Jesus’ experience narrated in the 
preceding verses, for his opportunity of playing the part of 
sower and reaper simultaneously is the exception which 
proves the rule stated in the proverb. The Greek pronoun, 
which has been translated here, in our Gospel refers regularly 
to something which follows (cf. 9: 30, 15: 8). An illustration 
which gives reality to a mere saying follows in verse 38. Pro- 
verbs are often popular cynicism crystallized, and in its 
original sense this one might easily be cynical and despairing 
in its tone (cf. Job 31:8; and for the proverb in general 
Deut. 6: 11, Josh, 24: 13, Micah 6:.15, Is. 65: 21-22, Mt. 
25: 24, and Plutarch—quoted by Dods: ‘ It was objected to 
Pompey that he came upon the victories of Lucullus, and 

112 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 27-38 


gathered those laurels which were due to the fortune and 
valour of another’); yet when referred to spiritual work it 
has its true side ; and here is an illustration: ‘I sent you to 38 
reap a crop for which you did not toil.’ The Sower of the 
parable here appears as he who sends out the reapers, the 
“Lord of the harvest’ (Mt. 9: 38). The past tense ‘sent’ 
supports the contention that the words are written from the 
point of view of the future, not spoken by Jesus himself with 
reference to the original choice of the Twelve as ‘ apostles,’ 
in which choice such a ‘ sending’ might be held to be implicit. 
To put on Jesus’ lips the reflections of a later age is a common 
Johannine artifice: another good example is 17:18. The 
Evangelist reflects that well might Jesus say to the Christian 
teachers of his (John’s) own time, ‘ other men have toiled, and 
you reap the profit of their toil.’ Here is an exception to the rule 
laid down in, e.g., 2 Tim. 2: 6: ‘ The farmer who has done the 
work must have the first share of the fruit.’ Who is meant by 
‘other men’? Those who accept 37-38 as strictly the words 
of Jesus himself see a reference to John the Baptist or even to 
the earlier prophets. But if we are to abide strictly by the 
historical setting, it is rather into Jesus’ own personal labours 
that the disciples are about to enter. Jesus sowed the seed 
at the well side: they are about to reap the harvest. The 
use of the plural ‘other men’ is better explained as due to 
the future viewpoint from which the verses are written. 
The Evangelist is thinking of all those first Christian mission- 
aries into whose labours he and his fellow-workers at the 
beginning of the second century have entered. Some critics 
see a reference to the Evangelist Philip as the original con- 
verter of the Samaritans (Acts 8: 5-8), or to St. Paul, who had 
‘laboured more abundantly than they all’ (x Cor. 15: 10). 
Though it is needless thus to particularize, it is most probable 
that the writer has in mind the first Christian mission to the 
Samaritans as recorded in Acts 8, on which passage Holtz- 
mann (quoting Bugge) remarks that, in fulfilment of the 
prophecy of Jn. 4: 21, the Samaritans abandon the worship 
on Gerizim and yet are not brought to Jerusalem, an envoy 
being sent to them (Acts 8: 14). 
II3 


39 


40 
4I 


42 


39 


40 


H 


4 


42 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Now many Samaritans belonging to that town believed in him 
on account of the woman’s testimony, ‘He told me 
everything I ever did.’ So when the Samaritans arrived, 
they pressed him to stay with them ; he did stay there 
two days, and far more of them believed on account of 
what he said himself. As they told the woman, ‘We 
no longer believe on account of what you said ; we have 
heard for ourselves, we know that he is really the Saviour 
of the world.’ 


The Evangelist now sums up the result of Jesus’ mission to 
Samaria. On account of the woman’s testimony (ver. 29) 
many Samaritans belonging to that town believed in him, with 
the result that, when they arrived at the well side (a reference 
back to ver. 30), they pressed him to stay with them ; and he 
did stay there two days—a very brief stay, perhaps thus limited 
by John out of deference to the Synoptic tradition according to 
which (Mt. Io: 5) Jesus actually forbade the evangelization of 
Samaria. With the hospitality here shown by the Samaritans 
contrast Lk. 9: 53. Their incipient ‘ faith’ is due in the first 
place to curiosity and the desire to see more miracles ; but a 
truer faith is revealed later when more of them believed not on 
account of the woman’s story, but on account of what he 
said himself. True faith is the result of personal experience 
(‘we have heard for ourselves ; we know’) based upon Jesus’ 
witness to himself, not the result of mere hearsay or idle gossip 
(‘what you said ’—the woman’s ‘ talk’ being contrasted with 
Jesus’ ‘ word’). The Samaritans, through personal contact 
with Jesus, have had the same revelation made to them as had 
the woman in verse 26: they ‘ know that he is really the Saviour 
of the world.’ This title is clearly put upon the Samaritans’ lips 
by the Evangelist himself, for it is a Johannine expression 
(i Jn. 4: 14) which seems to have its roots neither in Judaism 
nor in the Synoptic tradition, but rather in the soil of the 
later Gentile Church: it savours of the terminology of the 
Mystery Religions. 

This early avowal by the Samaritans of the Messiahship 
of Jesus can hardly be accepted as historical, but should be 

II4 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 39-42 


regarded as an anticipation of history such as we have in 1: 41, 
49. The only consideration which might have induced Jesus 
thus early to break through a reserve, which elsewhere he 
maintains to all save the innermost circle of his disciples, and 
openly to declare himself Messiah, is, as Stanton (p. 227) 
suggests, that ‘there was not indeed among the Samaritan 
population, cut off as it was from the life of the Jewish people, 
the same danger that mischief would arise from false expecta- 
tions as there was in other districts where he preached.’ But 
this weighs little against the inherent improbability that Jesus 
would reveal to a flippant woman a secret which he withheld 
for long even from his closest friends. This consideration leads 
up to the question of the historicity of the whole incident. It 
is true, as even Renan admits, that ‘most of the circumstances 
of the narrative bear a striking stamp of truth.’ Yet there 
is much in the dialogue which it is difficult to accept as an 
accurate report of an actual conversation. Quite apart from 
the difficulty caused by Jesus’ avowal of his Messiahship, 
it must be admitted that neither could Jesus’ revelation of the 
spirituality and universality of his Gospel be intelligible to 
a heathen woman, nor the subtle allusions of verses 35-38 to 
the disciples ; indeed, the latter become understandable only 
when read, as we can read them, from the point of view of a 
later generation. In any case there can hardly have been any 
reliable report of the conversation with the woman even if it 
took place—for there was no eye-witness present (ver. 8)— 
unless indeed Jesus himself recounted it verbatim, or the 
disciples went to the woman for information, both of which 
suppositions are unlikely. The possibility, however, cannot 
be entirely ruled out that the Beloved Disciple, not being 
strictly one of ‘the disciples’ of verse 8 (see Introduction, 
p. xlvi), may have been present as witness. As for the general 
setting of the narrative, there is much here too which suggests 
the presence of an eye-witness. Nowhere in the Gospel are the 
topographical allusions more accurate: the great high-road 
passing through Samaria through which ‘he must needs go’ 
on his way from Judaea to Galilee, the deep well, the reference 
to the overhanging heights of Gerizim, the illustrations drawn 
II5 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


from the ripening corn, for which the locality is noted. 
And yet we cannot but feel that the tout ensemble of the 
scene is thoroughly artificial. If the sites mentioned are 
literally and historically accurate, why should the woman, 
whether she lived in Sychem or Askar, have come to Jacob’s 
well for water, especially as verse 11 seems to hint that the 
well was not generally used? Critics remark that springs are 
a favourite site for important occurrences in Eastern life 
(Gen. 24: 11 ff.; 1 Sam. 9g: 11; 1 Kings 17: 10), and that this 
explains John’s choice of a venue, to which Dods makes the 
telling rejoinder : ‘ In other words, wells are common meeting- 
places, therefore this meeting at a well cannot have taken 
place!’ And yet the difficulty remains. Indeed, Synoptic 
passages such as Mt. 10: 5 almost forbid us to accept this 
section as strict history, while it is most improbable that the 
disciples would so far offend against Jewish prejudices as they 
do in verses 8 and 31. Once it is admitted that the narrative 
is largely artificial there is of course endless scope for symbolical 
interpretation, and one feels that this has been carried to 
extremes. Is it really likely that by the ‘five husbands’ 
John intends to symbolize the gods of the five nations settled 
in Samaria by her conquerors (though the five nations seem to 
have had seven gods: contrast 2 Kings 17: 28-31 with idem, 
verse 24, and cf. Josephus, Ant. IX., 14, 3), or that under 
any circumstances he would intend by the paramour Yahweh 
Himself ? Hardly less far-fetched is the suggestion that the 
lover symbolizes the Samaritan religious leader Simon Magus, 
whom Acts 8: 9-13, 18-24, brings into intimate connexion with 
the original conversion of the Samaritans, or Dositheus, who 
is mentioned along with Simon as another Samaritan heretic. 
The probability is that the Evangelist is here utilizing reminis- 
cences preserved by ‘ the Witness’ of a somewhat similar scene, 
and that, to serve his own didactic purpose, he builds up the 
section as we have it out of hints supplied by other sources 
already at his disposal. We have echoes of Mt. 9: 37-38, and 
of the Parable of the Sower. We note too how, in dependence 
on Luke, John exaggerates Jesus’ kindly feelings towards the 
Samaritans, of which we have hints in the earlier Gospel (Lk. 
116 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 39-42 


9: 52-55, 10: 30-37, 17: 11-19). Holtzmann notes that this 
section, together with the Nicodemus section, takes the place 
in our Gospel of the Synoptic ‘Sermon on the Mount.’ But 
whereas in the Synoptics Jesus, like a second Moses on a second 
Sinai, delivers a higher law which fulfils the old law to the 
letter (Mt. 5: 17-18), according to John the old law passes 
away altogether and becomes new (cf. 2 Cor. 5: 17). Like 
Paul, John would consider the old Jewish faith to be un- 
spiritual and exclusive (Gal. 3: 3, 4: 3-7; 2 Cor. 3: 6-8, 17), 
whereas in the spiritual faith of Christ national divisions are 
done away (Jn. 4: 21, Gal. 3: 28). The section is therefore 
to be treated, like the Nicodemus section, as another illustra- 
tion of the triumph of the new faith over the old. Just asa new 
birth must follow the old, so must the old religion of sense 
and symbol pass over into the new religion of ‘ spirit and truth.’ 
The triumph of the new faith is summarized in a personal 
triumph of its originator Jesus, who at the beginning of his 
ministry here receives the recognition which historically he 
claimed only at the end of his career. 


SecTIon II]. THE APPROPRIATION OF THE NEW GOSPEL 


Iilustration (1): The Officer's Son healed: Christ restores Life 
(4: 43-54) 

A new section begins at this point. Hitherto the theme has 
peen the relation of the New Gospel to the Old, the superiority 
of Christianity to the older religions. This was introduced 
by two appropriate illustrations, the changing of water 
into wine and the cleansing of the temple, and was developed 
along three lines. We now pass to the ‘ appropriation of the 
New Gospel,’ this theme, like the former, being introduced by 
several suitable illustrations drawn from incidents which the 
Evangelist has selected from the store at his disposal on account 
of their didactic value. 


When the two days were over, he left for Galilee (for Jesus 43 
himself testified that a prophet enjoys no honour in his 44 
own country) ; on reaching Galilee, he was welcomed 45 

117 


46 
47 
48 
49 
50 


51 
52 


53 


54 


43 
44 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN .¢ 


by the Galileans, who had seen all he did at the festival in 
Jerusalem—for they too had gone to the festival. 

Once more he came to Cana in Galilee, where he had turned 
the water into wine. There was a royal official, whose 
son was lying ill at Capharnahum ; when he heard that 
Jesus had arrived in Galilee from Judaea, he went to 
him and begged him to.come down and cure his son, who 
was at the point of death. Jesus said to him, ‘Unless you 
see signs and wonders, you never will believe.’ The © 
official said, ‘Come down, sir, before my boy is dead.’ 
Jesus told him, ‘ Go yourself, your son is alive.’ The man 
believed what Jesus told him, and started on his journey. 
And on the road his servants met him with the news 
that his boy was alive. So he asked them at what hour 
he had begun to improve ; they told him, ‘ Yesterday at 
one o’clock the fever left him.’ Then the father realized 
that it had left him at the very time when Jesus had said 
to him, ‘ Your son is alive’ ; and he became a believer 
with all his household. This was the second Sign which 
Jesus performed again after leaving Judaea for Galilee. 


Verse 43 picks up verse 3: When the two days (ver. 40) were 
over, Jesus left for Galilee (for he himself testified that a prophet 
enjoys no honour in his own country). The saying occurs, 
Mk. 6:4, Mt. 13:57, Lk. 4: 24, with reference to the ill- 
welcome Jesus received at Nazaret. John emphasizes the 
fact that Jesus himself quoted the proverb, probably because 
otherwise he would have hesitated to apply it to the Christ. 
But what locality is here intended by his own country? 
Most interpretations are based upon the supposition that the 
natural motive for Jesus’ departure (for presumably gives 
the motive) would be the wish to go to a place where he would 
be honoured from a place where he was not being honoured. 
Hence the conclusion that ‘his own country’ must be Judaea, 
which Jesus has left at verse 3. He goes to Galilee presumably 
in the hope of finding a more receptive audience. But this 
theory must be rejected: not only must the Evangelist have 
been aware that the saying which he quotes from the Synoptics 

118 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 43-54 


was spoken with reference to Nazaret, but he himself else- 
where regularly regards Nazaret as Jesus’ birthplace (x: 46, 
19: 19) and Galilee as his native country-side (2: 1, 7: 52). 
Moreover, a glance back to 4: 3 reminds us that Jesus’ motive 
for leaving Judaea was not that he might obtain elsewhere 
honour which he was not meantime receiving. On the con- 
trary his success was becoming embarrassing, and threatened 
to involve him in collision with the Pharisees (3: 26, 4: 1), 
so that he withdrew in order to escape publicity. John now 
tells us that he goes to his ‘ own country’ of Galilee knowing 
that there at least he will not be ‘lionized,’ for a prophet 
enjoys no honour in his own country. But the sequel was not 
exactly what he anticipated: on reaching Galilee, he was 45 
welcomed by the Galileans, who had seen all he did at the 
festival in Jerusalem, that is, his ‘cleansing’ of the temple and 
the miracles alluded to in 2: 23. After his successful mission 
in Jerusalem Jesus seems of some account even to his own 
fellow-countrymen, who belong to the class of ‘ believer’ 
mentioned in 2 : 24-25, and manifest the type of faith criticized 
by Jesus in 4: 48. We conclude therefore that ‘his own 
country’ (Gk. patris) is here used in the broader sense of 
‘birthland,’ not in the narrower sense of ‘ birth-place’ (as 
in Mk: 6: 4), and is applied to the province of Galilee. 

Other solutions may be briefly mentioned. Early com- 
mentors take the verse as an explanation of Jesus’ neglect of 
Nazaret while he goes on to Cana. Meyer thinks that the 
meaning is that Jesus, having first substantiated his Messianic 
claims in Judaea, now returns with new credentials to his 
own country in the hope that now at length he may be able 
to surmount the vulgar prejudice to which the proverb gives 
expression. Loisy suggests that ‘ his own country ’ is merely 
a general expression for the whole of Palestine, the Ancient 
Kingdom of Jesus’ own people, and thus may be con- 
sidered to include Samaria. The verse gives Jesus’ reason 
for leaving Samaria. He feels that it is unfitting that—in 
contradiction to the proverb to which he has set his own 
approval—he should be so highly honoured in any part of that 
‘country’ where his incarnate life is to be spent. His re- 

I1g 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


ception in Samaria seems almost a violation of a divine decree 
expressed in 1:11. He shrinks from receiving during his 
earthly life honours which he feels are due to him only as Risen 
Lord. Ingenious but too far-fetched! No explanation is 
entirely satisfactory, and it may be that the verse is misplaced 
or has been interpolated here under a misconception that 
Judaea was Jesus’ ‘ own country.’ 

46 So once more Jesus came to Cana in Galilee. Why to Cana ? 
It is just possible that Jesus’ family lived here (note on 2: 1), 
but there is no evidence. As a matter of history the miracle 
about to be recorded probably took place at Capharnahum. 
But our Evangelist stages the scene at Cana, because this was 
the place where Jesus had turned the water into wine. The 
first miracle at Cana provided the illustration with which the 
Evangelist introduced the previous section of his Gospel: 
now with his usual love of symmetry he brings Jesus back to 
Cana in order that he may open the present section with an 
illustration drawn from the second miracle performed at the 
same place. In verse 54 he deliberately emphasizes the 
parallelism. The choice of Cana rather than Capharnahum as 
the scene of the miracle serves the double purpose of giving 
balance to the narrative and of heightening the miracle 
by increasing the distance at which the cure was performed. 
There was a royal official, whose son was lying ill at Caphar- 
nahum, the place (for which see note on 2: 12) where, according 
to the Synoptics (Mt. 8: 5-13, Lk. 7: 1-10), the miracle 
actually took place. Josephus’ use of the Greek word 
basilikos shows that it means not a kinsman of the king 
(A.V. ‘ nobleman ’) but one of his military officials: hence the 
‘centurion’ of Matthew and Luke. The ‘king’ would be 
Herod Antipas who, though strictly only a ‘ tetrarch,’ was 
allowed the courtesy title of ‘king.’ It is suggested that the 
father of the sick boy may have been ‘Chuza, Herod’s 
steward’ (Lk. 8: 3) or ‘Manaen’ (Acts 13: 1)—apparently 
for no better reason than that these happen to be the only 
two of Herod’s courtiers whose names we know! Note 
that while Luke calls the sick lad a ‘slave’ (doulos) and 
Matthew uses the ambiguous word ‘boy’ (pais, used by 

120 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 43-54 


John in ver. 51), John tells us that he was a ‘son’ (hutos). 
The father when he heard that Jesus had arrived in Galilee from 47 
Judaea, went to him and begged him to come down (the road 
from Cana to Capharnahum being a descent to the Lake-side) 
and cure his son, who was at the point of death, the same ex- 
pression as Luke’s (7: 2), whose narrative our Evangelist 
clearly has in view. If Jesus’ reply—‘ Unless you see signs and 48 
wonders, you never will believe ’—seems undeservedly harsh, 
the explanation is that it is ‘not an answer to the father’s 
request, but a reflection of Jesus occasioned by it’ (Godet). 
The words are a warning rather than a rebuff, and are aimed 
not so much at the father as at his fellow-Galileans: theirs is 
the faith which believes only when it sees; he, on the con- 
trary, is shown by the sequel to be one of those ‘ who believe 
though they have never seen’ (20: 29). The combination 
“signs and wonders’ occurs in the Gospels only here and in 
Mk. 13: 22, Mt. 24: 24, but is common in Acts. The two 
words ‘severally mark the two chief aspects of miracles: 
the spiritual aspect, whereby they suggest some deeper truth 
than meets the eye, of which they are in some sense symbols 
and pledges ; and the external aspect, whereby their strange- 
ness arrests attention’ (Westcott). (For another apparently 
harsh retort by Jesus to a request to heal see Mk. g: 19.) 
Undaunted by Jesus’ seeming unwillingness, the official said, 49 
‘Come down, sir, before my child (paidion : a more tender 
note this time) is dead.’ He will take norefusal ; it is enough 
for Jesus to ‘come down,’ for if he does so healing is certain— 
a faith like that of Mk. 9: 24. But now, as if in dismissal, 
Jesus told him, ‘ Go yourself, your son is alive.’ The last words 
are repeated twice before the end of the chapter (51, 53), and 
emphasize the appropriateness of this miracle as an intro- 
duction to the theme of Christ, the Bread of Life. Jesus has 
healed simply by a word, as indeed he was asked to do accord- 
ing to the Synoptic version (Mt. 8: 8, Lk. 7: 7). Accordingly 
we are told that, though Jesus’ claim to have healed from a 
distance must have been a new trial to his faith, yet, without 
seeing any miracle, the man believed what Jesus told him 50 
(literally, ‘ believed the word’), and set out on his journey. 
I2I 


THE-GOSPEL OF sjORW. 


His faith, in contrast to the Galileans’ of verse 45, is com- 
parable with that of the Samaritans of verse 41. 

51 Meanwhile the officer’s servants, noting an improvement in 
the boy’s condition, had set out to reassure their master, and 
on the road they met him with the news that his boy was 

52 alive. So he asked them at what hour he had begun to 
improve. The Greek phrase here translated ‘ improve ’ seems 
to have been a technical medical expression: Arrian also 
uses it with reference toa sick man. To the father’s question 
the servants reply, ‘ Yesterday at one o’clock (i.e. in the 
afternoon) the fever left him.’ In Matthew’s account the lad 
was suffering not from fever but from paralysis. The time 
which is here stated to have elapsed between the healing of 
the boy and the meeting of the father with the servants is 
greater than would be expected, for the generally accepted 
site of Cana (see note on 2: I) isnot more than about 15 miles 
from Capharnahum. Critics have been much exercised to 
explain the discrepancy. Various excuses have been invented 
for the father’s dilatoriness! His beast may have been 
tired, or he may have had business to do for Herod! Westcott 
seeks to shorten the interval by supposing that the hour 
intended is (contrary to all usage) 7 p.m., while others suppose 
that from the point of view of one speaking after sunset any 
hour before sunset might be regarded as ‘ yesterday.’ But 
all such discussions are really beside the mark. It may be 
that ‘the seventh hour’ has a symbolical intention, seven 
being the perfect number, and therefore suitable for use in 
connexion with a miracle of the Christ. In any case it is 
certain that John is not the least concerned with problems 
of time and distance. It is enough for him that the healing 
occurred simultaneously with the word of Jesus, and that 

53 the father realized that the fever had left his son at the very 
time when Jesus had said to him, ‘ Your son is alive.’ John 
adds that so impressed was the officer by this miraculous 
coincidence that he became a believer with all his household 
(cf. Acts 10: 2, 16: 34, etc.). Again we are reminded that 
in our Gospel the word ‘ believe’ covers many gradations of 
faith. In this man’s case faith had been present even before 

122 


CHAPTER IV, VERSES 43-54 


the certification of the miracle (50) ; now that faith is con- 
firmed. Previously he had trusted in a promise; now he 
believes in the absolute sense, that is, that Jesus is the Christ. 
(See note on 3: 15.) 

The account concludes with the note that this was the 54 
second Sign which Jesus performed again after leaving Judaea 
for Galilee. (For the purpose of this remark see note on 
ver. 46 above.) The meaning is not that this is the second 
miracle performed by Jesus in Galilee, but that for the second 
time Jesus’ return to Galilee from Judaea is marked by a 
miracle at Cana. A second series of miracles, with an 
appropriate didactic discourse appended, begins with this 
healing at Cana, just as the earlier section of the Gospel was 
introduced by the account of the Cana wedding feast. 

The paragraph 4: 46-54 provides a close parallel to 2: 1-11, 
with which, as we have seen, the Evangelist pointedly links 
it. Note that in both narratives Jesus replies to a request 
for help with apparent harshness (2: 4, 4: 48), the petitioner 
continues to trust (2:5, 4: 49), and finally Jesus grants the 
request with unexpected fulness. 

Note finally that, in addition to the points already men- 
tioned, our narrative differs from the account of Mt. 8: 5-13, 
Lk. 7: 1-10 (the incident does not occur in Mark) in the 
following particulars. Unlike the ‘ centurion’ John’s ‘ royal 
official’ appears to be not a heathen (though the contrary 
has been urged in the interests of identifying the Synoptic 
and the Johannine stories) but rather a Galilean Jew. Again 
Jesus here expresses no surprise at the man’s faith, as he 
does in the Synoptic account: the Johannine outlook would 
hardly permit this. It is also characteristic of John to heighten 
the effect of the miracle by making it appear that it was per- 
formed at a greater distance than is the case according to the 
Synoptists. As a result of this change in the conditions 
under which the cure takes place, the Johannine officer appears 
as the representative of an even higher type of faith than 
does the Synoptic centurion. At first the latter’s faith might 
seem the higher, for (Mt. 8: 8) he believes that a word from 
Jesus is enough, whereas the officer urges Jesus to go with 

123 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


him in person (Jn. 4: 47). But in the sequel the officer’s 
faith rises superior even to the centurion’s in proportion as 
the distance at which he trusts that Jesus can heal is greater. 
The centurion’s home was close by, this man’s in another 
town. Yet, in vivid contrast to his fellow-countrymen of 
verse 45, ‘he believed in the word.’ Holtzmann suggestively 
remarks that herein he becomes the type of the true believers 
of later days—the actual readers of our Gospel—who continue 
to trust, though they are distant in time from Jesus’ miracles, 
as he was in space. 


Illustration (ii) : The Five Thousand fed: Christ 
sustains Life (6: I-15) 

It is likely that at this point a dislocation of the text has 
taken place, and that chapter 6 ought to precede chapter 5. 
In its present position 5 provides us with a Jerusalem interlude 
which interrupts the Galilean ministry. The opening words 
of 6, ‘ after this Jesus went off to the opposite side of the sea 
of Galilee,’ connect admirably with 4: 54, and are perfectly 
natural if Jesus is at the moment of departure (as at 4: 54) 
near the Sea of Galilee; but they are not appropriate after 
5:47, which leaves Jesusin Jerusalem. Further, the opening 
words of chapter 7, ‘ After this Jesus moved about in Galilee ; 
he would not move in Judaea, because the Jews were trying 
to kill him,’ are not appropriate to the position at the end of 6, 
when Jesus is already in Galilee; but they would follow 
perfectly immediately after the account of the visit to Jerusa- 
lem in 5, the reference to the attempt of the Jews to kill Jesus 
being then an echo of 5:18 and 7: 19-20 (7: 15-24 being 
restored to its original position at the end of 5. See note in 
loc.). This rearrangement also has the advantage of simpli- 
fying the vexed problem of the unnamed feast of 5:1, as the 
latter may now be regarded as the Pentecost following the 
Passover of 6: 4. The order of events is then as follows: 
after the miracle at Cana (4: 46-54) Jesus for a time continues 
his ministry in Galilee (chap. 6); then, after a crisis there 
(6: 60-71), he goes to Jerusalem for Pentecost (5:1), but is 
compelled by Jewish hostility (5: 16, 18; 7: 19) to return to 

124 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 1-15 


Galilee (7: 1) ; he then returns finally to Judaea in time for 
the Feast of Tabernacles (7:2). It may be noted also 
that as a result of the rearrangement the Johannine account 
falls more nearly into line with the Synoptics. The visits 
of Jesus to Jerusalem before the Crucifixion provide one 
of the chief points of discrepancy between our Gospel and the 
others. But by postponing the visit of 5: 1 until after the 
events of chapter 6, it is possible to regard it as taking place 
subsequently to the close of the Galilean ministry as narrated 
by Mark, so that, if it be admitted that the visit of 2: 13 pre- 
ceded the opening of the Galilean ministry as described by 
the Synoptists (but on this see note at end of chap. 1 and at 
3: 24), it follows that this ministry, so far as it is recorded 
by the Fourth Gospel, remains unbroken by any visit to 
Jerusalem. 

Against the proposed rearrangement it may be urged that 
the crisis of the Galilean ministry described at the end of 
chapter 6 comes too early if placed before chapter 5, its 
appropriate setting being immediately before Jesus’ final 
departure from Galilee at 7: 10, in which position it provides 
a fitting conclusion to the first Section of the Gospel. This 
argument has some force, particularly so if the rearrangement 
results in the first Section of the Gospel ending abruptly at 
7:24 (7215-24 belonging, as noted above, to chapter 5). 
But, as will be seen below, we propose to transpose 8 : 12-20— 
a paragraph clearly out of place in its present position—to 
follow 7: 24 as a fitting climax to the first Section of the 
Gospel. 

Note finally that there is some indication that parts of 
chapter 6 may be due to a later hand than the body of the 
Gospel (see note on 6: 28), in which case the confusion would 
be due to interpolation rather than to dislocation. It is 
possible, on the other hand, that a deliberate displacement 
may have taken place as the result of the Redactor’s editing. 
The original order may have been as we propose to rearrange : 
the Redactor, out of a desire for an artificial symmetry, may 
have transposed the chapters into their present position. He 
thereby secures that for the second time (cf. 2: 13) Jesus 


12 
K 3 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


proceeds to Jerusalem with the laurels of a mighty act per- 
formed at Cana fresh upon him, while each of three Galilean 
miracles (the wine at Cana, the healing of the official’s son, the 
feeding of the multitude) is followed by a feast and a ministry 
at Jerusalem. . 


6. 


1 After this Jesus went off to the opposite side of the sea of 


2 


fo) Nn & 


I 


Galilee (the lake of Tiberias), followed by a large crowd 
on account of the Signs which they had seen him perform 
on sick folk. Now Jesus went up the hill and sat down 
there with his disciples. (The passover, the Jewish festival, 
was at hand.) On looking up and seeing a large crowd 
approaching, he said to Philip, ‘Where are we to buy 
bread for all these people to eat?’ (He said this to test 
Philip, for he knew what he was going to do himself.) 
Philip answered, ‘ Seven pounds’ worth of bread would 
not be enough for them, for everybody to get even a 
morsel.’ One of his disciples, Andrew the brother of 
Simon Peter, said to him, ‘ There is a servant here, with 
five barley-cakes and a couple of fish ; but what is that 
among so many?’ Jesus said, ‘Get the people to lie 
down.’ Now there was plenty of grass at the spot, so 
the men lay down, numbering about five thousand. Then 
Jesus took the loaves, gave thanks to God, and distributed 
them to those who were reclining ; so too with the fish, 
as much as they wanted. And when they were satisfied, 
he said to the disciples, ‘Gather up the pieces left over, 
so that nothing may be wasted.’ They gathered them 
up, and filled twelve baskets with pieces of the five 
loaves left over from the meal. Now when the people 
saw the Sign he had performed, they said, ‘ This really 
is the Prophet who is to come into the world !’ Where- 
upon Jesus perceived they meant to come and seize him 
to make a king of him ; so he withdrew by himself to the 
hill again. 


After this Jesus—leaving Cana and taking ship probably 
at Capharnahum, to which place he returns at verse 17— 


126 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 1-15 ) 


went off to the opposite side of the sea of Galilee, to a spot 
on the north-east coast of the Lake, perhaps a little south 
of Bethsaida, near which place (Lk. 9: 10) the miracle took 
place. (For the position of Bethsaida see G. A. Smith, 
Historical Geography, p. 457.) The description of the Lake as 
the lake of Tiberias (cf. 21: 1), is an indication of the later 2 
date of our Gospel. The name does not occur in the other 
Gospels, nor is it used by writers of the first century A.D., 
Strabo, Pliny and Josephus all employing the designation 
‘lake of Gennesar,’ or ‘Gennesaritis.’ It is found, however, in 
the Greek writer Pausanias, who wrote in the middle of the 
second century, and regularly in the Talmud. The town of 
Tiberias, which ultimately gave its name to the Lake, was 
built by Antipas, and named in honour of Caesar ; in the time 
of Jesus, if built at all, it would be quite new. The use by 
John of both the old name and the new is a hint that the 
Gospel was written during the period of transition from the 
one form to the other, and would suit a date at the very 
end of the first century or beginning of the second. 

Though Jesus had retired in search of rest and solitude 
(Mk. 6: 31), he was followed by a large crowd, who probably 
made their way round by foot across the Fords of Jordan 
(Mt. 14: 13). Mark implies that the crowd’s motive was to 
hear Jesus’ preaching (6: 34), Matthew that they brought 
their sick to be healed (14: 14), Luke combines both motives 
(g: 11); our Gospel implies that the crowd, true to their 
reputation (4: 48), follow chiefly out of curiosity on account 
of the Signs which they had seen him perform on sick folk. 
Meanwhile Jesus, desiring quiet, went up the hill and sat 3 
down there with his disciples. Compare Mt. 15: 29, where the 
scene of the second feeding of the multitude (the 4,000) is 
placed upon a hill, whereas the first feeding apparently took 
place on the level land near the shore. John combines traits 
from both accounts. We also have an echo in this verse of 
the Matthean introduction to the ‘Sermon on the Mount’ 
(Mt. 5: 1), and in the words on looking up (verse 5) an echo 
of the Lucan introduction (Lk. 6: 20). By the hill is meant 
the plateau-land above the Lake, not any particular summit. 

Tay 


THESGOSPEL, ObajOnW, 


4 What is the point of the remark that the passover, the Jewish 
festival, was at hand? It is something more than a mere 
note of time, and may be intended to explain the presence of 
so many people on the march. Yet pilgrim caravans would 
hardly travel without supplies, nor would they be likely to turn 
aside thus from the main route, much less to double back to 
Capharnahum, as we are told they did later (22-25). The 
words are probably symbolical and ‘ designed to give a clue 
to the understanding of the spiritual lessons of the miracle 
which are set forth in the discourse which followed’ (West- 
cott). John conceives that Jesus, in the miraculous meal, 
provided a substitute for the approaching festival, at which he 
did not intend to be present in person, and thereby implies 
that the Christian Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper (which as 
we shall see is symbolized throughout the whole of chapter 6) 
is destined finally to supplant the Jewish Passover, for 
‘Christ our paschal lamb has been sacrificed’ (1 Cor. 5: 7). 
This is the second Passover mentioned in our Gospel, the first 
being at 2: 13. 

The narrative which follows is based upon the two Synoptic 
accounts of a miraculous feeding (Mk. 6: 34 ff. and parallels ; 
Mk. 8: 1 ff. and parallels). There is less cause here than in 
other parts of the Gospel to suppose that the Evangelist is 
relying upon the independent evidence of ‘ the Witness’ (note 
ver. 28 below). In characteristic fashion he selects from the 
mass of Synoptic material dealing with the Galilean ministry an 
outstanding miracle which will serve to introduce the symbolical 
exposition of the meaning of the Lord’s Supper which follows. 
Accordingly there are details in his account of the miracle 
which can be understood at their full value only in the light 
of the discourse with which the chapter ends. 

5 Jesus, then seeing a large crowd approaching, said to Philip, 
‘Where are we to buy bread for all these people to eat?’ 
The peculiarity of the Johannine account is that the anxiety 
about food originates with Jesus himself, not with the disciples 
as in the Synoptic account (Mk. 6: 36-37). Historically 
Mark’s narrative is the more probable: nightfall reminds the 
disciples that the people have been all day without food, a 

128 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 1-15 


much less artificial contingency than that Jesus, as soon as he 
saw the crowd, should begin to feel concern about how they 
are to be fed. But considered symbolically John’s alteration 
is full of significance: Christ ever takes the initiative, and his 
gifts to his own are all of free grace. John alone at this point 
mentions Philip by name. Have we here the recollection of 
an eye-witness? Possibly, for it has been pointed out that 
Philip belonged to this neighbourhood (12: 21), and might be 
expected to know where food might be obtained. John loves 
to add vividness to his narrative by specifying individuals by 
name (e.g.see 18: 10). He seems to have had a special interest 
in Philip (1: 43-44, 12: 21), possibly because the Evangelist 
of the same name (see note on I: 43) was known in the district 
where John wrote. Lest Jesus’ question should seem incon- 
sistent with the supernatural insight so often emphasized 
in the Gospel (note on 2: 25) John explains that he said this 6 
to test Philip—a man who believed only when he saw (14: 8)— 
for he knew what he was going todo himself. Philip, ‘a good 
man of business—more ready to rely on his own shrewd cal- 
culations than on unseen resources’ (Dods), answered that 
‘seven pounds’ worth of bread would not be enough for them.’ 7 
The ‘denarius’ was worth about 94d., and was the ordinary 
daily wage of a working man (Mt. 20: 2). The same sum is 
mentioned by Mark (6: 37) ; was it the contents of the common 
purse at the moment? Rather the sum is a rough calculation 
of what it would cost ‘ for everybody to get even a morsel.’ Mark 
implies that this sum would suffice ; John, as usual heightening 
the effect, says that not even this would be enough. 

One of his disciples, Andrew the brother of Simon Peter, 8 
introduced as if for the first time, in spite of 1: 40—said to 
Jesus, ‘There is a servant here, with five barley-cakes and ag 
couple of fish.’ The details agree with the Synoptic account 
(Mk. 6: 38 and parallels), but John alone mentions the slave- 
boy who brought the food, and adds that the loaves were of 
barley. Possibly these two features, and also the words ‘ what 
is that among so many?’ are borrowed from 2 Kings 4: 
42-44. Elisha’s barley loaves are called ‘ bread of the first- 
fruits, which Lev. 23: 9 ff. treats of in connexion with the 

129 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Passover. John may intend a symbolical reference to the 
paschal loaves, and Loisy suggests that the boy typifies the 
‘auxiliary minister ’ at the early Christian eucharistic services. 
Barley loaves were the food of the poor, and the worst form of 
bread. (See Ezek. 13: 19, Judges 7: 13, and compare Livy : 
‘he ordered barley bread to be given to the cohorts who had 
lost their standards.’) Christ is shown to be one who produces 
mighty results from the slenderest possible means. 

Io Jesus said, ‘Get the people to lie down.’ Now there was 
plenty of grass at the spot, so the men lay down, numbering 
about five thousand. As to the number there is again agree- 
ment with the Synoptists, and if there is any emphasis on the 
word men, it is assumed that the women and children partook 
over and above (Mt. 14: 21). Like Mark and Matthew, John 
notes that the spot was grassy: ‘ the level plain on the east 
of the Jordan, the Butaiha, so fertile that some have claimed 
it for Gennesaret, still helps us to understand how “ there 
was much grass in the place’’’ (G. A. Smith). Are we to 
conclude that John, like the Synoptists, pictures the miracle 
as taking place on the grassy shores of the Lake—in spite of 
the ascent of verse 3? (See note on ver. 15.) 

II Then Jesus took the loaves, gave thanks to God, and— 
himself, apart from any mediation by the disciples (contrast 
Mt. 14: 19, to which reading the Textus Receptus assimilates 
our text)—distributed them to those who were reclining, the 
bread to all asa necessity, so too with the fish, as much as 
they wanted. The lowly personal service of Jesus is similarly 
emphasized in 13: 1 ff., possibly in contrast to the current 
teaching of the Stoics, to whom the thought of being ‘ servant 
of all’ was repugnant and pity actually a vice. Jesus asks a 
blessing on the meal, like the head of the household at the 
Passover Feast, while the sacramental atmosphere of the 
scene is intensified by John’s use of the solemn word euchar- 
tstesas (cf. x Cor. 11: 24) in place of the more common word 
eulogein used by the Synoptists (Mk. 6: 41 and parallels; 
Mk. 8:6, Mt. 15: 36, however, use the word euchartstesas 
in the account of the second miraculous feeding). For our 
Gospel this scene, together with the ‘ Foot-washing ’ in chapter 

130 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 1-15 


13, takes the place of the Synoptic account of the Institution 

of the Lord’s Supper. John alone records that when they 12 
were satisfied, Jesus said to the disciples, ‘Gather up the pieces 
left over, so that nothing may be wasted,’ thus emphasizing the 
sacredness of the sacramental bread. The words sound almost 
like an instruction for the conduct of the eucharistic liturgy. 
Accordingly the disciples gathered them up, and filled twelve 13 
baskets with pieces of the five loaves left over from the meal— 
presumably one basket for each disciple, though ‘ the Twelve ’ 
are first mentioned as such at 6:67. The fragments of fishes 
are not mentioned because, though the fish too was commonly 
used as a symbol of life, it is from the bread only that a sym- 
bolical lesson is drawn in the following discourse, and bread 
only that is used as an ‘element’ at the sacrament. Note 
that after this miracle there was bread to spare, just as there 
was wine to spare at Cana, the abundant fulness of the life 
offered by Christ thus being emphasized. The question of the 
relation of the two miracles in the mind of the Evangelist has 
already been discussed. (See p. 54 f.) 

While the Synoptists tell us nothing about the impression 14 
made upon the crowd when they saw the Sign Jesus had per- 
formed, John records their verdict that ‘ This really is the Pro- 
phet who is to come into the world!’ The last words were 
applied to the Logos in 1: 9, and ‘ the coming One’ was a phrase 
commonly used of the Messiah (Ps. 118 : 26). For ‘the 
Prophet’ cf. Deut. 18: 15; in 1: 21 he is distinguished from 
Messiah, but the distinction was not strictly observed, and here 
the thought seems to be that Jesus is Messiah himself. (See 
note on 1: 21.) This view is confirmed by the statement that 
Jesus perceived they meant to seize him to make a king of him, 15 
that is, to proclaim him Messiah. The Greek word used for 
‘seize’ is the same as occurs in Matthew’s words (II: 12): 
‘the Realm of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent press 
into it.’ The Synoptists do not record this attempt to make 
Jesus king. John, by introducing the incident, prepares the 
way for Jesus’ words to Pilate (18: 36): “My realm does not 
belong to this world.’ The nearest parallel in the Synoptics 
is the temptation narrative (Mt. 4: 8 ff.), from which—unless 

131 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


indeed we have here the independent account of ‘ the Witness’ 
—John may possibly have borrowed the incident. The offer 
of the kingship to Jesus here upon ‘ the hill’ reminds us of the 
‘high mountain’ of the third temptation, just as Jn. 23 
recalled the first temptation. The Christ of the Fourth 
Gospel never allows his hand to be forced (cf. 2: 3-4; 7:3, 6; 
10: 18); ‘his hour had not yet come,’ and therefore he 
withdrew by himself to the hill again, Mark (6: 46) and 
Matthew (14: 23) both mention that Jesus at this point ‘ went 
up the hill to pray,’ naturally enough if, as the Synoptists 
imply, the miracle took place by the shore of the Lake. But 
according to John (ver. 3) Jesus climbed the hill before the 
miracle, which presumably took place on the high ground ; 
no descent has been mentioned, and there is no higher point 
on the flat plateau to which Jesus might have ascended for 
prayer. John apparently borrows this final clause from the 
Synoptic account without noticing that it confuses his own 
narrative ; the word again loosely covers up the difficulty 
of this double ascent. 


Illustration (11): Christ walks on the Water: the ever-present 


Saviour (6: 16-21) 


16 When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea, and 


17 


18 
1g 


20 
21 


16 


embarking in a boat they started across the sea for Caphar- 
nahum. By this time it was dark, Jesus had not reached 
them yet, and the sea was getting up under a strong wind. 
After rowing about three or four miles they saw Jesus 
walking on the sea and nearing the boat. They were 
terrified, but he said to them, ‘It is I, have no fear’ ; 
so they agreed to take him on board, and the boat instantly 
reached the land they were making for. 


When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea— 
another hint that John supposes the miracle to have taken 
place on the high ground. Is this the evening of the same or 
the following day? John seems to place the miracle earlier 
in the day,and to imply that the disciples left the same evening. 

132 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 16-21 


According to the Synoptists it was already evening (Mk. 
6: 35 and parallels) when Jesus fed the crowd: yet, in spite 
of a second mention of the coming of evening (Mk. 6: 47, 
Mt. 14: 23), they too seem to mean that the departure took 
place the same evening (‘straightway,’ Mk. 6: 45). The 
disciples left Jesus to follow, and embarking in a boat (some 17 
MSS read, as Mk. 6: 45, ‘ the boat,’ which would imply that 
it was the same boat in which they had previously crossed 
from Capharnahum) started across the sea for Capharnahum. 
According to Mark Jesus told the disciples to go on ahead 
northwards up the coast towards Bethsaida, perhaps intending 
himself to follow on foot, and to be picked up by the boat at a 
spot on the shore near that town. (See note below on ver. 19.) 
By this time it had become dark, Jesus had not reached them 
yet,—the pluperfects seeming to imply that the disciples, 
perhaps by arrangement, had waited for Jesus before starting, 
and set sail only because the sea was getting up under a strong 18 
wind and they feared that further delay would make the 
crossing dangerous. John is here out of agreement with Mark, 
according to whom the disciples had definite instructions to go 
on ahead, and not to Capharnahum but to Bethsaida. While 
Mark and Matthew say that the boat was ‘ in the middle of the 19 
sea, John, with his love of precise detail, tells us that after 
rowing about three or four miles they saw Jesus walking on the 
sea and nearing the boat. The ‘stade’ was roughly 200 
yards. Mark tells us that the hour was ‘about the fourth 
watch of the night,’ that is, shortly before daybreak: John 
seems to imply an hour at dead of night, thus intensifying the 
symbolical effect of the story. The words translated walking 
on the sea might quite well mean ‘walking by the sea’ 
(cf.21: 1, ‘by the sea of Tiberias,’ 6: 21 ‘at the land’ ; 
Greek efi with Genitive). The meaning would then be 
that the boat was clinging to the shore because of the 
storm, and that the figure of Jesus, waiting for the boat 
to pick him up, suddenly loomed up on the beach. This 
would fit in with the hint dropped by Mark that Jesus 
sent on the disciples towards Bethsaida with the intention of 
rejoining them there before crossing together to the other side 
133 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


ofthe Lake. The meaning of verse 21 would also be simplified. 
It is just possible that some such incident may be the origin 
of this wonder-story about Jesus—one of the most difficult to 
accept literally. Nevertheless, the translation ‘ walking on the 
sea’ is justified here beyond question in the light both of the 
Synoptic narratives, where Matthew even adds the parallel 
incident of Peter walking on the water, and also of the disciples’ 
manifest astonishment. Had John merely implied that the 
disciples caught sight of Jesus on the beach he would hardly 


20 have added that they were terrified. Mark explains their fear 


21 


by saying that ‘ they thought it was a ghost’: John, perhaps 
on account of his strong anti-docetic views, omits this. Jesus’ 
answer is given in the exact words of Mk. 6: 50, ‘It is I, 
have no fear.’ For the phrase ‘It is I’ (Gk. egd eimi), 
so common in the Gospel, see 4: 26, 8: 24, 28, 58; 9:9, 
132-19, 1825; 67 8 5), Mk 13965 Lk 216 heacsured thy, 
the Master’s voice the disciples agreed to take him on board. 
The narrative then ends abruptly, for while Mark and Matthew 
both tell of the stilling of the storm and imply that the boat 
had some distance to go before coming to shore at Gennesaret 
(Mk. 6: 53, ‘ When they had passed over ’), John merely notes 
that the boat instantly reached the land they were making for. 
The Lake at its widest part is some seven miles across; but 
if the passage was merely across the northern bay a row of four 
miles would bring the boat close in to Capharnahum. Some 
critics find in John’s conclusion confirmation of the view that 
Jesus was in fact standing on the shore. Verse 21 may then be 
translated ‘ They wished (giving the Greek verb its natural 
meaning) to take him into the boat, and immediately (before 
they had time to do so) the boat ran aground.’ But if this is 
John’s meaning we would expect ‘ but immediately.’ And 
though the imperfect tense of the verb favours the sense that 
the disciples merely wished to take Jesus into the boat but did 
not do so, the alternative rendering ‘ they were willing’ is quite 
legitimate: at first they hesitated through fear, but at the 
sound of Jesus’ own voice they agreed to take him on board. 
Also the land in question is obviously Capharnahum, which 
“they were making for’ (ver. 17), not some point on the east 


134 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 16-21 


coast where, it is suggested, Jesus might have been waiting 
to be picked up. John agrees with the Synoptists that Jesus 
actually came to the boat over the water, and his statement 
that the boat immediately reached land is intended to heighten 
the miracle by providing a graphic illustration of Ps. 107: 30. 
‘The moment Jesus set foot in the barque he imparted to it... 
that victorious power over gravity and space which had 
been so majestically displayed in his own person’ (Godet). 

It may be noted that the insertion by John at this place of 
the miracle of Jesus walking on the water is governed not only 
by its analogous position in Mark, where it follows the feeding 
of the five thousand, but also by its fitness to serve as an in- 
troduction to the sacramental discourse on ‘ the bread of life.’ 
The miracle in part meets the objection of verses 52 and 60, 
by hinting that Jesus’ corporeality was of a peculiar kind which 
transcended the limits both of gravity and of space. The way 
is thus prepared even for the miracle foreshadowed in verse 
62. It is possible too that John may be seeking to combat 
exaggerated ideas current in his own day as to the exclusive 
presence of Christ in the Eucharist alone: ‘ The storm-tossed 
ship symbolizes the Church, and Jesus communicates himself 
to its needs in a fashion that transcends limitations of sense. 
. . . Not only in the Eucharist, but amid the storms of life does 
Jesus appear. His is a real spiritual presence everywhere’ 
(R. H. Strachan). 


Theme: The Partaking of Christ the Bread of Life (6: 22-27) 


Next day the crowd which had been left standing on the other 22 
side of the sea bethought them that only one boat had been 
there, and that Jesus had not gone aboard with his disciples, 
who had left by themselves. So, as some boats from Tiber- 23 
ias had put in near the spot where they had eaten 
bread after the Lord’s thanksgiving, and as the crowd 24 
saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they 
embarked in the boats themselves and made for Caphar- 
nahum in search of Jesus. When they found him on the 25 
other side of the sea, they said, ‘ Rabbi, when did you get 
here ?’ Jesus answered them, ‘ Truly, truly I tell you, it 26 


135 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


is not because you saw Signs that you are in quest of me, 

27 but because you ate these loaves and had your fill. Work 
for no perishing food, but for that lasting food which 
means eternal life ; the Son of man will give you that, 
for the Father, God, has certified him.’ 


22 The Evangelist having conducted Jesus and his disciples 
to the western side of the Lake, now turns back to the people 
who had been miraculously fed, and gives us a somewhat 
artificial summary of the motives which induced them also to 
cross the Lake. Next day, that is, on the day following the 
multiplication of the loaves, the crowd which had been left 
standing on the other (eastern) side of the sea bethought them 
that (on the previous day) only one boat had been there, that is, 
the boat in which the disciples had departed, and that Jesus had 
not gone aboard with his disciples, who had left by themselves 
for the western shore. Jesus then could not have crossed by 
boat. But had he gone on by foot, to be picked up by the 
disciples, or was he still in seclusion near at hand? This 
doubt is cleared up in verse 24. Meanwhile, a means of 
following Jesus, should it be necessary so to do, providentially 

23 presents itself, as some boats from Tiberias had put in near the 
spot. As these boats had come not from Capharnahum but 
from Tiberias, their occupants would be unaware that Jesus 
had already landed before dawn at Capharnahum. As 
Tiberias was on the west coast, south of Capharnahum, and 
during the night a strong west wind had been blowing (Mt. 
14: 24, ‘the wind was against them’ as they crossed west- 
wards), we may surmise that the boats had been compelled 
by the gale to land on the side of the Lake opposite to their 
home port. We are told that they had put in near the spot 
where the people had eaten bread after the Lord’s thanks- 
giving, an apparently unnecessary reminder of the miracle 
which serves nevertheless to link up the discourse which 
follows with the miracle which has served as its introductory 
illustration. (For the term ‘the Lord’ see note on 4: 1.) The 

24 crowd then as they saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were 
there, that is, when they had made sure that Jesus was not 

136 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 22-27 


still lingering near by and that his disciples had no intention 
of returning for him, at length embarked in the boats themselves, 
and made for Capharnahum in search of Jesus. It is super- 
fluous to ask how it happened that there were sufficient boats 
on the spot, with owners accommodating enough, to convey so 
large a crowd across the Lake. As Mark and Matthew tell us 
that immediately after the miracle Jesus had himself dismissed 
the main body of the people, it may be that only a compara- 
tively few enthusiasts had remained. But John is not con- 
cerned with such questions. His object is to transport the 
crowd across the sea so that the same people who were 
miraculously fed may provide an audience for the sacramental 
discourse, and to do this so speedily that the crowd arrives in 
Capharnahum before Jesus could reasonably be supposed to 
have had time to make his way round by foot. The reality 
of the miracle of Jesus walking on the water is thus presented 
to the crowd and the way prepared for their dramatic surprise 
in the following verse, where we read that when they found 25 
him on the other side of the sea, they said, ‘ Rabbi, when did 
you get here ? ’—and by implication ‘ How did you get here ? ’ 
“They came seeking him, but were surprised to find him’ 
(Dods). They are confronted with yet another ‘Sign,’ yet 
even so they do not understand the significance of the presence 
of Jesus there before their eyes any more than they appreciated 
the true meaning of the miracle of the feeding. Hence the 
point of Jesus’ rebuke, ‘Truly, truly I tell you, it is not because 26 
you saw Signs that you are in quest of me, but because you ate 
these loaves and had your fill.’ Jesus pays no heed to the 
crowd’s question, but points out the unspiritual motive behind 
their pursuit of him. Their recent experiences had appealed 
to them only in so far as their bodily appetites had been 
satisfied. The word used is properly applied to the giving of 
fodder to animals, though in later Greek it is freely used of 
human beings (Mt. 5: 6, etc.). They had indeed seen ‘ signs’ 
—whether the reference be to the two miracles just narrated 
or to Jesus’ miracles in general, as in verse 2—but they had 
missed their true significance. They thought only of material 
nourishment, not of that spiritual ‘life’ which was Christ’s 


137 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


true gift. They had eyes only for the symbol, not for the 
reality which lay behind—in fact, even the symbol appealed to 
them only because it brought with it bodily satisfaction. 
Instead of seeing ‘in the bread the sign,’ they had ‘ in the sign 
beheld only the bread’ (Lange). We may compare the 
disciples’ misunderstanding in Mk. 8: 17-21, after the second 
miracle of feeding. John probably has this incident in view 
for, as we have seen, he borrows traits from both Synoptic 
miracles. 

27 Jesus therefore seeks to point his audience from the symbol 
to the reality: ‘Work for no perishing food, but for that last- 
ing food which means eternal life.’ The word for ‘ work’ 
(ergazesthe) is unusual in this sense of ‘ work to procure,’ but its 
use renders possible the play on words to be noted in verse 28. 
All material food is perishing; its satisfaction is merely 
transitory ; even the divine manna would not keep (Exod. 
16: 20); yesterday Jesus had multiplied loaves for the people, 
yet ‘ they were already hungry again, and had toiled after him 
for miles to get another meal’ (Dods). Indeed, material life 
itself is but a protracted death process (1 Cor. 6: 13). Let the 
people rather seek that better ‘food’ which remains per- 
manently in the man who receives it as the principle and 
perennial source of ‘ eternal life.” (Compare 4: 14.) And such 
food may be had for the asking for ‘the Son of man will give 
you that.’ It was to give this, not merely to multiply loaves 
that the Son of man (cf. 1: 51) came. Jesus does not say ‘the 
Messiah’ lest he should reawaken the false expectations of 
verse 15: he uses for himself a title which alike expresses his 
sympathy for all Auman needs, and also hints to the initiated 
that he ts Messiah. 

To bestow this spiritual food upon men is the chief object 
of Christ’s mission, ‘for the Father, God, has certified him,’ 
that is, commissioned him for this very purpose. (For the word 
‘certified’ or, to give the word its literal meaning, ‘sealed,’ 
see note on 3: 33.) To set one’s seal to anything is to authen- 
ticate its genuineness ; thus a sovereign will give his seal to his 
vicegerent (Gen. 41: 42). God has set His seal upon Christ 
not only in his miracles but also in that miracle of incarnation 

138 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 22-27 


whereby the Logos was consecrated and commissioned to his 
life-giving mission. Some see in the word ‘seal’ a reference 
to the stamping of loaves with the name of the maker ; others 
to the custom that when a person ordered a banquet he gave 
his seal to the steward commissioned to provide it. 

The discourse which follows presents many problems, most of 
which will be best discussed at the end of the section. At this 
point it may be noticed that, on the assumption that two scenes 
are distinguished—the seashore (ver. 25) and the synagogue 
(ver. 59)—and also two audiences—the crowd (ver. 22), and 
the Jews (vers. 41 and 52), it has been suggested that we 
have here a conflation of two separate discourses an address 
to ‘the crowd’ on the seashore and a controversy with ‘ the 
Jews’ in the synagogue. Thus Chastand allots to the seaside 
verses 26-27, 31-35, 41-42, 47-58, and to the synagogue verses 
28-30, 36-40, 43-46, while Loisy would distinguish verses 
26-27, 32-33, 47-48, 51, 53-58 as ‘a poem on the bread of life,’ 
independent of the rest of the dialogue. It may be that the 
Witness’ notes of two addresses spoken on different occasions 
have been worked up by the Evangelist to suit his didactic 
purpose, and grouped together as bearing on the same subject. 
(For a similar conglomerate passage we might compare Io: I- 
18.) But in view of the whole character of this chapter it would 
be dangerous to assume that we have here anything approach- 
ing the words actually spoken by Jesus, so that detailed 
conjecture as to place, occasion and audience seems somewhat 
superfluous. 

One is tempted, however, to suspect that part at least of 
verses 28-33 may have been interpolated. The connexion 
of verse 28 with what precedes is not very clear, consisting 
indeed in little more than the play on the word ‘ work.’ Verse 
34, on the other hand, would follow well enough immediately 
after 27 (we should have exactly the same connexion as 
between 4:14 and 15; there, ‘the water I shall give. . 
Sir, give me this water’; here, ‘the Son of man will give 
you that food .. . Sir, give us that bread’). Finally the 
demand for a ‘Sign’ in verse 30, though it may be partially 
explained along the lines attempted below, comes very un- 


139 


28 
29 


30 
at 
32 
33 


34 
te) 


28 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


naturally from the lips of those who have just been miracu- 
lously fed, especially as the ‘ Sign’ demanded is one comparable 
to the gift by Moses of the manna, a miracle which had, in fact, 
been as nearly as possible reproduced by Jesus already. It 
is possible that verses 28-33 may have been inserted by the 
Redactor with his usual desire to approximate the narrative 
to that of the Synoptists, who (Mk. 8:11, Mt. 16: 1) im- 
mediately after the feeding of the four thousand record a 
similar demand for a‘ Sign.’ But according to Mark it is the 
Pharisees, not the crowd who have been fed, who ask for it, 
and in this fact we perhaps have a hint as to the origin of 
such parts of the present discourse as seem to belong more 
naturally to a controversy with the Jewish leaders than to 
an address to a popular audience. This is, however, purely 
conjecture, and the verses must be dealt with as they stand. 


Then they asked him, ‘What must we do to perform the 
works of God?’ Jesus replied to them, ‘This is the 
work of God, to believe in him whom God has sent.’ 
‘Well, then,’ they said, ‘what is the Sign you perform, 
that we may see it and believe you? What work have 
you to show? Our ancestors ate manna in the desert: 
as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’ 
Then said Jesus, ‘What Moses gave you was not the 
bread from heaven; it is my Father who gives you the 
real bread from heaven—for the bread of God is what 
comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.’ 
‘ Ah, sir,’ they said to him, ‘ give us that bread always.’ 
Jesus said, ‘I am the bread of life ; he who comes to me 
will never be hungry, and he who believes in me will 
never be thirsty again.’ 


The people apparently imagine that in bidding them ‘ work 
for no perishing food,’ Jesus is calling upon them to aim at a 
higher ethical standard, which will express itself in the per- 
formance of acts pleasing to the will of God, and therefore, 
with a play on the word ‘ work,’ they ask him, ‘ What must 
we do to perform the works of God,’ that is, the works which 

140 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 28-35 


God commands? (Fora similar use of the Genitive, cf. Rev. 
2:26.) The crowd have no conception of ‘life’ as a gift: 
it is something which must be worked for. Religion for 
them is not the living of a divinely given ‘ life,’ but the per- 
formance of sundry religious duties. Jesus had indeed just 
bidden them ‘work for lasting tood,’ but it was for food 
which ‘ the Son of man will give.’ ‘ The believer's work does 
not earn a recompense at the last, but secures a gift’ (West- 
cott). We are reminded of the scribe’s question (Mk. 12: 28), 
‘What is the chief of all the commands?’ But whereas in 
Mark Jesus sums up the whole law in the law of love, here he 
replies that ‘the work of God’ consists not even in the 
keeping of the whole law, but in an act of faith: ‘This is the 29 
work of God, to believe in him whom God has sent.’ The re- 
ligious life-relationship depends not on the performance of 
the law and the consequent acquiring of merit, but on a 
freely offered faith. It should be noted that in the Greek 
final construction, ‘to believe’ ‘marks not only the simple 
fact of believing, but the effort directed to and issuing in this 
belief’ (Westcott). (Cf. 4: 34.) There is a sense in which ‘ to 
believe’ is to perform a work. The influence upon our 
writer of Paul’s doctrine of ‘ justification by faith ’ is obvious. 
The verse too provides an interesting point of union between 
Paul and James. ‘ Faith is the highest kind of work, for by 
it a man gives himself; and a free being can do nothing 
greater than to give himself’ (Godet). As J. Réville puts it, 
‘What a pity that St. Paul had no knowledge of these words 
when the Jerusalem disciples were giving him the cold 
shoulder or even excommunicating him in the name of loyalty 
to their Master for having said exactly the same thing.’ 

The words ‘ him whom God has sent’ are an obvious allusion 30 
to the Messiah (cf. 3: 17, 17: 3), and it now dawns on the 
people that Jesus is thus designating himself ; they therefore 
call on him to authenticate his claims: ‘Well, then, what is 
the Sign you perform, that we may see it and believe you ? ’— 
for these folk faith is not, as defined in the last verse, an act 
of trust in a person, but merely assent to that person’s message, 
an assent, too, based entirely on the testimony of the senses, 


L I4I 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


How like much popular ‘faith’ even to-day !—‘ What work 
have you to show?’ The play on the word ‘ work’ is con- 
tinued. Here is a tu quogue to Jesus’ demand of 27 and 29: 
‘ You bid us do the work of God ; well, what have you done ? ’ 
This demand for a ‘Sign’ comes strangely from those who 
just the day before had had proof of Jesus’ power in the 
miraculous feeding. It is true that a similar demand for a 
‘Sign’ is reported by the Synoptists (Mk. 8:11, Mt. 16: 1) 
immediately after the feeding of the four thousand, but 
there the demand is made by the Pharisees who were not 
witnesses of the miracle. For John, on the contrary, the 
interest of the present situation depends on the assumption 
that Jesus is now addressing those whom yesterday he fed. 
The symbolical language of verse 27 loses all force unless 
addressed to those who had been sharers in the ‘ perishing 
food’ of verse 11. The spectators of yesterday’s miracle 
are to-day asking what ‘Sign’ Jesus can perform to prove his 
authority. Moreover, they give a hint of the form they 
31 desire this ‘Sign’ to take: ‘Our ancestors ate manna in 
the desert: as it is written (Exod. 16: 4, Ps. 105: 40, Ps. 
78: 24-25, Neh. 9: 15), ‘‘He gave them bread from heaven 
toeat.’’?’ Now Jesus has just performed a miracle which might 
be deemed to repeat sufficiently closely the O.T. wonder 
which the people quote, and we might suppose that the 
people admit this (as indeed they did by their exclamation 
in verse 14), but imply that, if Jesus is Messiah, then he 
must outdo Moses and perform another miracle greater still. 
Did not Jesus himself hint that he could do so when he said 
(27) ‘the Son of man will give you that lasting food’? The 
people, we might say, have but raised their claims to the 
level of that promise. But there is evidence to show that 
Jewish theology regarded the giving of the manna as ¢he miracle 
par excellence, the non plus ultra even for the Messiah. 
In fact, the Rabbis taught that Messiah would prove his 
authority by repeating just this miracle by which, they held, 
Moses had proved his. ‘As was the first Redeemer,’ so ran 
the Midrash, ‘so shall be the final Redeemer; as the first 
Redeemer caused the manna to fall from heaven, even so 
142 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 28-35 


shall the second Redeemer cause the manna to fall.’ In the 
light of this it seems more likely that John pictures the 
people as insinuating that Jesus has not yet equalled Moses’ 
miracle. He may have fed them once by multiplying ordinary 
loaves and fishes ; but he has not, like Moses, given them bread 
from heaven, though he has hinted that he can do so (ver. 27). 
Let him fulfil his promise, and thereby authenticate his claims. 
Even in the Synoptics a similar demand is made for a ‘ sign 
from heaven’ (e.g. Mk. 8: 11), for some super-miracle to put, 
as it were, God’s own seal upon Jesus’ ordinary miracles. 
Indeed, John’s chief purpose, writing as he does with the 
Jewish-Christian controversies of his own day in view, is to 
illustrate the Pauline saying (x Cor. 1:22) that ‘ Jews 
demand miracles.’ In the days of his flesh, as in the Evange- 
list’s own day, Christ could produce no credential so conclusive 
but that the Jews would demand one more conclusive still. 
To this demand for a further ‘Sign’ Jesus replies that he 
is speaking of a gift far more marvellous than any given by 
Moses ; for, even supposing that manna be regarded as the 
heavenly gift par excellence, ‘ it was not Moses (but God) who 32 
gave you this bread from heaven.’ Jesus’ questioners had 
quoted the words, ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat,’ 
as if Moses were the giver; but in the original context (on 
Moses’ own showing, Exod. 16: 15) the giver is not Moses, but 
God. Moreover, Jesus adds, it is only in a symbolical sense 
that manna can be called ‘ bread from heaven’: ‘It is my 
Father who gives you the real bread from heaven,’ that is, the 
bread ‘ which fulfils absolutely, ideally, the highest conception 
of sustaining food’ (Westcott) (for ‘real’ see 4: 23). Notice 
the contrast implied between what Moses ‘ gave’ and what 
the Father ‘gives.’ The supreme miracle is not in the past, 
but in the present. Once again the New Faith is shown to 
be superior to the Old ; now, as never before, the true spiritual 
nourishment may be had for the asking, ‘for the bread of God 33 
is what comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.’ 
The spiritual nourishment offered by the Father through 
Christ and in Christ’s own person (though this is not definitely 
stated till ver. 35) is ‘real’ for two reasons: first, it is ‘from 


143 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


heaven ’ in a sense far truer than the symbolical sense in which 
manna may be said to be ‘ from heaven’ ; secondly, whereas 
the manna sustained only the Israelites, this bread ‘ gives life 
to the whole world.’ In connexion with John’s comparison 
of Christ with the manna, we may quote an interesting parallel 
from Philo, according to whom the Logos had his type in the 
manna: ‘ The Logos distributes to all the heavenly food of the 
soul, which is called manna’ (Qu. rer. div., 39). “ You see, 
then, what the food of the soul consists in—in the Word of 
God, given continually like the dew’ (Leg. alleg., ili, 59). 
34 To this the people reply, exactly as did the Samaritan 
woman (4:15) when Jesus offered her the ‘living water’: 
‘Ah, sir, give us that bread always.’ Though the word 
‘always’ is in an emphatic position, it is not necessary to 
assume that a contrast is implied with the single meal provided 
by Jesus the day before, as if the people were merely asking 
for a continuous daily supply of the food then provided. The 
words are simply a literary artifice intended, like 4: 15, to 
lead up to the momentous pronouncement which immediately 
follows. Instead of speaking about this bread, let Jesus give 
it, for it will be welcome at all times. We are reminded of 
the Synoptic phrase (Mt. 6: 11, Lk. 11: 3), ‘ Give us to-day 
our bread for the morrow.’ But here Jesus does not merely 
bid us pray for it; he declares himself to be that bread. 
35 Jesus said, ‘I am the bread of life,’ that is, the bread which 
supplies or communicates life. In response to the request to 
give this bread, Jesus replies that he himself 7s this bread, and 
that communion with him will result in perfect satisfaction : 
“he who comes to me will never be hungry, and he who believes 
in me will never be thirsty again.’ (For the phrase ‘I am,’ 
introducing a Messianic claim, see notes on 4: 26, 6: 20, and 
for other pictorial figures used in conjunction with it cf. 
especially> "8s 12) 10 7yeO; pe LOcsT luau 4 Gd Sos eaten 
15:1, 5.) The spiritual need which cries for satisfaction is 
expressed by the double figure of ‘hunger’ and ‘thirst’ 
(cf. Is. 49: 10; Mt.5:6; Rev. 7: 16), whereby it is implied 
that Christ is not only the ‘ bread of life,’ but also the ‘ water 
of life,’ as in 4: 14, where see note. The double metaphor 


144 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 36-40 


prepares the way for the climax of the symbolism in verses 
53-56, with their reference to mystical and sacramental 
‘eating’ and ‘drinking.’ Note that the appropriation of 
this ‘life’ is expressed not by a word suggestive of mere 
physical action, such as ‘take,’ but by ‘come to me,’ ‘ believe 
in me,’ both expressions hinting a protest against a purely 
materialistic conception of sacramental grace, while the 
former (cf. 5: 40) emphasizes the spontaneity which is so 
characteristic a factor in John’s idea of faith. 


‘But, as I told you, though you have seen me, you do not 36 
believe. All those will come to me who are the Father’s 37 
gift to me, and never will I reject one of them; for I 38 
have come down from heaven not to carry out my own 
will but the will of Him who sent me, and the will 39 
of Him who sent me is that I lose none of those who are 
His gift to me, but that I raise them all up on the last day. 
It is the will of my Father that everyone who sees the 40 
Son and believes in him should possess eternal life, and 
that I should raise him up on the last day.’ 


The theme of verse 35 is picked up again at verse 47, verses 
36-40 being in the nature of an aside, while 41-46 are an in- 
terlude, possibly a later interpolation. The people have asked 
for a ‘Sign’ to substantiate Jesus’ claims: ‘But, says Jesus, 
as I told you (we can point to no definite saying, but the 36 
reference is probably to the thought of verse 26), though you 
have seen me, you do not believe.’ Jesus himself is the most 
convincing of all ‘signs’; they have seen his power visibly 
set forth in his life and work, and yet in spite of every induce- 
ment to faith they still refuse to believe, and each new gift 
offered to them serves but to emphasize their lack of recep- 
tivity. And yet the reason for their unbelief is clear enough: 
the motive which has brought them after Christ is a purely 
sensual one (26), whereas it is only a divinely given impulse 
which can truly bring men to Christ—‘ All those (but only 37 
those) will come to me who are the Father’s gifttome.’ (Cf. 65, 
and for the idea that believers are the Father’s gift to the 
Son, cf. 17: 2, 6, 12, 24.) Are we to think of this ‘ giving ’ 

145 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


as an act of eternal election—an echo of the Pauline doctrine 
of ‘ predestination ’—or of present grace? If the latter, then 
the ‘ giving’ is equivalent to the ‘drawing’ of verse 44: if 
the former, then the ‘ giving’ is preparatory to the ‘ drawing.’ 
In any case it is only a divinely inspired impulse which can 
turn to Christ those who come to him: for the individual will 
has its part to play even in the case of the elect. Accordingly 
Jesus singles out of the mass of the elect the individual with 
the responsive will, and promises that such will never be 
excluded from the number of his disciples—‘ never will I 
reject one of them.’ (For the idea of ‘rejection,’ cf. 9: 34, 
12:31.) It should be noted that in this verse the object of 
the ‘ Father’s giving’ is expressed in Greek (as also in 39) 
by a comprehensive neuter, the thought of the believer's 
individuality being thus subordinated to that of the Father’s 
grace (cf. 17: 10). When the Father gives, the Son never 
rejects the gift, for, says Jesus, Father and Son have but 
38 one will: ‘I have come down from heaven not to carry out 
my own will but the will of Him who sent me’ (cf. 5: 30, 
Mk. 14: 36). ‘Come down’ carries on the metaphor of the 
‘bread from heaven’ (33) and contains a direct reference to 
the incarnation (I: 10, 14). Christ welcomes all who come 
to him because the Father’s will is above all a will to save 
39 both in this world and the world to come, because ‘ the will 
of Him who sent me is that I lose none of those who are His 
gift to me, but that I raise them all up on the last day.’ ‘ Where 
the Father leaves off the work the Son carries it on: the 
last act of the Father was to give believers to the Son; the 
Son’s first act is not to allow them to be lost, that is, to meet 
with death, but to welcome them ; his final act, after he has 
carried his work through all its stages, is to raise them up’ 
(Holtzmann). The phrase ‘on the last day’ occurs only in 
our Gospel (vers. 40, 44, 54; II: 24, 12: 48); yet such an 
idea of a final day of resurrection and of judgment (5: 28, 29) 
has little place in John’s scheme of thought, according to 
which life and judgment alike are present and inward rather 
than future and dramatic. We have here one of those 
apparent contradictions so characteristic of the Gospel (see 
146 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 36-40 


note, p. 29), when John appears to desert his own point of 
view and fall back on a primitive eschatology. Unless, indeed, 
the aside (vers. 36-40), together with the interlude (vers. 41-46), 
are to be boldly assigned to the Redactor, we have here one 
of those inconsistencies which ‘ only serve to remind us that 
John, with all his originality of thought, was still partly 
bound to the past. Along with his own conception, he strove 
to make room for the belief that had impressed itself on the 
Church at large, of which he was a member’ (E. F. Scott, 
The Fourth Gospel, p. 216). But in any case John’s chief 
purpose here is to insist that the Father’s will finds expression 
in the Son’s whole redemptive mission. Hence the condition 
of that life, which it is the Father’s will to bestow, is that men 
should respond to the appeal of that mission: ‘It is the will 40 
of my Father that everyone who sees the Son and believes in 
him should possess eternal life, and that I should raise him up 
on the last day.’ Note that the believer’s response is now des- 
cribed not by the idea of ‘ coming,’ as in 37, but—by way of 
emphatic contrast with the people’s unresponsiveness in 36— 
by the idea of ‘seeing and believing.’ (For the emphasis upon 
the necessity of faith as well as of vision, see note on 3: 15.) 
The last clause of the verse, with its sudden change of subject, 
is grammatically awkward, and gives further ground for the 
conjecture that these references to a resurrection on the last 
day may be an addition of the Redactor. 


Now the Jews murmured at him for saying, ‘I am the bread 41 
which has come down from heaven.’ They said, ‘Is 42 
this not Jesus the son of Joseph? We know his father 
and mother. How can he claim now, ‘‘I have come 
down from heaven’’?’ Jesus replied to them, ‘Stop 43 
murmuring to yourselves. No one is able to come to me 44 
unless he is drawn by the Father who sent me (and I will 
raise him up on the last day). In the prophets it is 45 
written, and they will be all instructed by God; everyone 
who has listened to the Father and learned from Him, 
comes to me. Not that anyone has seen the Father—he 46 
only, who is from God, he has seen the Father. 


147 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Verses 41-46 are, like 28-33, a controversial interlude, and 
interrupt the main thread of the discourse, which is picked 
up at 47. We note too that the Galilean crowd fades out of 

41 sight, and we are told: Now the Jews murmured at him (as 
did their ancestors in Exod. 16: 7-9 against Moses at the 
time of the giving of the manna) for saying, ‘I am the bread 
which has come down from heaven.’ Jesus had not used 
these exact words, but they are a fair summary of the content 
of verses 35 and 38. Are we to understand by the Jews 
the deputation from Jerusalem which, according to Mark 
(7:1), challenged Jesus immediately after the feeding of the 
five thousand ? More probably the term is used quite gener- 
ally, as so often in the Gospel, to signify the ‘ official oppo- 
sition ’ to Jesus, in which sense it may include even Galileans. 
(See note on 1:19.) The Jews have the same difficulty in 
accepting Jesus’ claim to a heavenly origin as had Nicodemus 
the possibility of a ‘ birth from above’ (3: 4). The ground 
of their incredulity is that they know Jesus’ earthly origin: 

42 ‘Is this not Jesus the son of Joseph? We know his father 
and mother. How can he claim now (that is, after living so 
long as one of ourselves) ‘‘ I have come down from heaven ’’ ? ’ 
We may compare the scene in the synagogue at Nazaret 
(Mk. 6:3), which John has transferred to the synagogue at 
Capharnahum (ver. 59). The words ‘We know his father 
and mother’ may imply merely knowledge of who his 
father and mother were, not necessarily acquaintance with 
persons both of whom are presumed to be still living. From 
the fact that Jesus is called ‘the son of Joseph’ it has been 
held that John intends to controvert the doctrine of the 
Virgin Birth, surely a rash conclusion from words assigned 
to unbelieving Jews. At the same time it is clear that 
John places no value on the doctrine: ‘ It is his habit, when 
he finds any account or statement in the earlier biographies 
which seems to him unworthy of the Son of God, to alter it 
to make it more appropriate. If he had objected to the 
statement of the paternity of Joseph, it is almost certain 
that he would have found a way of avoiding such statement ’ 
(Gardner, Ephestan Gospel, p. 287.) (See also note on 1: 13.) 

148 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 41-46 


As in the case of Nicodemus (3:5), Jesus does not stay to 43 
answer an objection born of misunderstanding, but after a 
word of rebuke, ‘ Stop murmuring among yourselves,’ repeats 
with renewed emphasis what he has already said (37—39). 
It is beside the mark to attempt to remove such intellectual 
difficulties as are expressed in 41-42, for they are the result 
of unbelief, not, as the Jews pretend, the cause of it. The 
real ground of their unbelief (and is it not the ground of 
much of our unbelief ?) is not a perplexed mind, but an un- 
surrendered will. A man can be led to faith in Christ only 
by a divine impulse brought to bear upon his will. As Jesus 
has already told them (37), ‘No one is able to come to me 44 
unless he is drawn by the Father who sent me.’ We feel 
that in these words John has in view something more than 
the immediate situation, and is endeavouring to remove the 
perplexity which must have existed among Christians of his 
own day on account of the failure of Christianity to win the 
Jews. We may compare Paul’s argument in Rom. 9: 1ff., 
and the somewhat similar thought contained in Jesus’ own 
words in Mk. 4: 11-12, Jn. 12: 40. If Christ is not wholly 
triumphant, it is because there are some whom God has not 
yet ‘drawn’ to Him—a tender word reminiscent of Jer. 31: 3 
(‘with lovingkindness have I drawn thee’). We may, if we 
will, call this ‘ Predestination’; but to ‘say that a certain 
number are not “ given” or “ drawn” to Christ by God is 
simply the Jewish way of saying that unbelief in Christ in 
many cases is unintelligible, but yet must have its place in 
the eternal purpose of God’ (R. H. Strachan). The concluding 
words of the verse, ‘and I will raise him up on the last day,’ 
again have the appearance of a redactional addition. 
Scripture too bears witness to the truth that faith must 45 
be traced back ultimately to the action of God Himself, for 
‘In the prophets (i.e. in that portion of the Scriptures known as 
‘the prophets,’ cf. Acts 7: 42, 13: 40), it is written, ‘and 
they will all be instructed by God.’’’ The argument requires 
that the emphasis should be on God as the ultimate cause of 
believing discipleship. The quotation is from Is. 54: 13, and 
we may compare Jer. 31: 33-34, Micah 4: 2, 1 Thess. 4:9, 
149 F 


46 


47 
48 
49 
50 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


1 Cor.2:13,1 Jn. 2:27. And yet the divine impulse which 
results in faith does not relieve men from the necessity of 
intellectual effort; God influences men’s wills faithwards 
(‘draws them’), but He does so by first asking them to use 
their minds (‘instructed by God’): accordingly, adds Jesus, 
“everyone who has listened to the Father and learned from 
Him, comes to me.’ Before a man can be a believing disciple 
of Jesus, he must first be a hearer and a learner in the school 
of God. With the words ‘listened . . . and learned,’ cf. Mt. 
13: 23, ‘hears the word and understands it.’ There follows 
a characteristic ‘ aside’ or ‘ parenthetic comment,’ in which 
the Evangelist safeguards the necessity of Christ as mediator 
between God and man. It must not be thought, as, e.g., the 
Gnostics held, that such divine instruction can proceed from 
an immediate vision of God: ‘Not that anyone has seen 
the Father—he only, who is from God, he has seen the Father.’ 
Christ alone possesses an immediate knowledge of the Father, 
and therefore he alone can communicate true knowledge (cf. 
1: 18, 3: 13, 14: 6, Mt. 11: 27), and that because he alone 
has come to earth from God (3: 31-34, 7:29). The thought, 
though in contrast with the immediately preceding verses, is 
quite in harmony with the viewpoint of the Gospel as a 
whole, and the words should almost certainly be regarded, 
not as a redactional insertion, but rather as a reflection of 
the Evangelist himself, who seeks to guard against the 
danger of the previous verse being misunderstood, to the 
detriment of the truth that the Father can be known only 
through the Son. Such a ‘parenthetic comment’ would 
become more natural could we suppose that it is interjected 
by the Evangelist in the midst of material which he is in 
process of incorporating from the notes of ‘the Witness.’ But 
such a conjecture is precarious in the case of the present 
chapter. 


‘Truly, truly I tell you, the believer has eternal life. I am 
the bread of life. Your ancestors ate manna in the 
desert, but they died ; the bread that comes down from 
heaven is such that one eats of it and never dies. I am 

150 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 47-51 


the living bread which has come down from heaven ; 51 
if anyone eats of this bread, he will live for ever ; and 
more, the bread I will give is my flesh, given for the life 
of the world.’ 


The theme broken off at 35 is now resumed. The inter- 
vening section has dealt with the unbelief which stands in the 
way of the appropriation of life, and has emphasized the 
truth that the faith which is a condition of life is not merely 
an ethical ‘ work of God ’ (28-29), but the result of an inwardly 
working divine impulse. Christ now harks back to the 
promise of 35: when such faith is present, then ‘ Truly, truly 47 
I tell you, the believer has eternal life,’ and this life can be 
communicated now through a personal relationship, for ‘I 48 
am the bread of life.’ The people had insinuated that the 
only authentic ‘bread from heaven’ was the manna given 
through Moses (31). But, says Jesus, it is clear that such 
manna cannot have been the real ‘bread of life,’ for ‘ Your 49 
ancestors ate manna in the desert, but (in spite of all their 
eating) they died ; (whereas) the bread that comes down from 50 
heaven is such that one eats of it and never dies.’ This trans- 
lation is much to be preferred to the R.V.: ‘ This (i.e. the 
bread I offer) is the bread which cometh down out of heaven 
that a man may eat thereof and not die.’ We have here a 
play upon the word ‘ die’ (cf. Mt. 10: 39) which in 49 is used 
of physical death and in 50 of spiritual death. But such a 
distinction would be less clearly present to Jewish thought, 
according to which the physical death of 49 would be some- 
thing more than mere physical dissolution, bringing with it 
separation from God in the colourless life of Hades, while 
the spiritual life of 50 would also imply continued physical 
existence culminating in a bodily resurrection. The claims 
made for the manna, says Jesus, have been proved false by the 
result ; on the other hand, in contrast to the manna, ‘I am 51 
the living bread which has come down from heaven,’ a claim 
which can be proved true by all who care to put it to the 
test, for ‘if anyone eats of this bread, he will live for ever.’ 
Notice the significant alteration of ‘bread of life’ to ‘ living 

I51 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


bread’: Christ is not merely the bread which gives life; he 
is that, because he is bread which has in itself an everlasting 
store of life (cf. ‘living water, 4:10, 7: 38). Manna, not 
itself being ‘living,’ but ‘perishing food’ (27), could impart 
life only for a season: Christ being ‘living,’ containing in 
himself the very principle of life, can impart life for ever 
(cf. 5: 26, and 6:57). Note that now for the first time Jesus 
definitely claims that in his own person he is the bread 
‘which has come down from heaven ’: in 33 and §0 he did so 
only by implication. At the same time the negative thought 
‘shall not die’ gives place to the positive and more emphatic 
‘will live for ever.’ Also for the first time the content of this 
personal life in Christ is spoken of in so many words as 
something to be ‘eaten’; whereas hitherto, when Jesus has 
definitely spoken of himself as the ‘ bread of life,’ the appro- 
priation of that life has been described by the terms ‘ coming ’ 
and ‘believing’ (35). The way is thus prepared for the 
significant sacramental pronouncement, to which the whole 
discourse has been leading up, ‘and more (marking the 
climax), the bread I will give is my flesh, given for the life 
of the world.’ The thought passes from what Christ 7s to 
what he gives. Just as the Father ‘ gave’ the Son (3: 16), 
so now does the Son ‘ give’ his flesh, and now, as then, it is 
not merely for the deliverance of one nation (as in the Paschal 
feast), but to give life to the whole world. The crucial point 
is the intention of the word ‘flesh.’ Westcott holds that 
it merely ‘describes human nature in its totality regarded 
from its earthly side,’ and that the reference here is to the 
whole manifestation of Christ in the flesh (x: 14, I Jn. 4: 2), 
the purpose of which was to bring new life to the world 
(17: 2); ‘the thought here is of support and growth, and not 
of atonement.’ But in that case nothing new is added to what 
has already been said, and a more satisfying explanation is 
that we have a reference not only to the incarnation, but to 
the atonement. ‘I will give’ points to the future, and the 
word given ‘for the life of the world ’ (if indeed it is to be re- 
tained in the text, which is doubtful ; but in any case it must 
be understood) would be used, as in 3: 16, with the sense ‘ gave 
152 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 52-59 


up to death, to be sacrificed’ (cf. also 1: 29, 1 Jn. 4: 10), 
though John habitually regards the death of Christ not as a 
sacrificial atonement, but rather as the means whereby the 
life-principle or the holy Spirit is liberated into all the world 
(16: 7). But no explanation is adequate which fails to 
recognize that John’s main purpose in thus identifying the 
life-giving bread with Christ’s flesh is at last to bring into 
prominence the sacramental bearing of the whole discourse. 
This becomes abundantly plain in the following verse, where 
the idea of drinking Christ’s blood is added to that of eating 
his flesh. It should be noted, moreover, that throughout 
the present context (32, 34) the word ‘ give’ has been used 
in the sense of bestowing nourishment on men, not of offering 
up a sacrifice to God, as would be necessary here were the 
primary reference to Christ’s atoning death. Note too the 
resemblance of the thought to Mk. 14: 24, Mt. 26: 28. 


The Jews then wrangled with one another, saying, ‘How can he 52 
give us his flesh to eat?’ So Jesus said to them, ‘ Truly, 53 


truly I tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of 
man and drink his blood, you have no life within you. 


He who feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood possesses 54 
eternal life (and I will raise him up on the last day), for 55 
my flesh is real food and my blood is real drink. He 56 


who feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood remains 


within me, as I remain within him. Just as the living 57 


Father sent me and I live by the Father, so he who feeds 


on me will also live by me. Such is the bread which 58 


has come down from heaven: your ancestors ate their 
bread and died, but he who feeds on this bread will live 


for ever.’ This he said as he taught in the synagogue 59 


at Capharnahum. 


The discourse now reaches its climax, and an incredulous 
question, as so often in John (e.g. 3: 4), prepares the way 


for a momentous pronouncement: The Jews then—accepting 52 


Jesus’ words in a material sense and able to make nothing of 
them—wrangled with one another, saying, ‘How can he give 
153 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


us his flesh to eat?’ The Jews’ exasperation and Jesus’ 
claims alike come to a head. While on their part the ‘ mur- 
muring ’ of 43 becomes a ‘ wrangle,’ Jesus’ claims are summed 
up in a definite challenge which, so far from answering his 
opponents’ difficulties (cf. ver. 43), appears rather to add to 
them by repeating in a still more precise and literal manner 
53 the ideas at which they had taken offence: ‘ Truly, truly I 
tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink 
his blood, you have no life within you.’ The title ‘Son of 
man’ is used, as often in this Gospel, in a context which 
alike suggests the divine mystery and the true humanity of 
Jesus’ personality (see note on I: 51). Our exegesis of this 
difficult verse will depend on the interpretation already 
placed on the word ‘ flesh’ in verse 51, where we held that 
there was a quite definite allusion to the sacrament of the 
Lord’s Supper. The use here of the double symbolism of 
‘eating his flesh’ and ‘ drinking his blood’ seems to establish 
the sacramental bearing of the passage beyond question. 
Those who deny the reference to the Eucharist hold that the 
addition of the phrase ‘drink his blood’ is intended merely 
to bring into prominence Christ’s atoning death: ‘ To eat the 
flesh is to contemplate by faith the holy life of the Lord... 
to drink the blood is also to contemplate his violent death, to 
make it our own ransom, to taste its atoning efficacy ’ (Godet). 
But in view of the fact that we have now had reproduced in 
this chapter the whole terminology of the sacramental ritual 
as given in Mt. 26: 26-28, it can hardly be denied that John 
has the sacrament quite definitely in view. If it be objected 
that John uses the term ‘flesh’ (sarx) instead of ‘ body’ 
(soma) as used by the Synoptists and Paul, we may reply 
that John is emphasizing the necessity of appropriating the 
whole personality of Christ, the constituent parts of which, 
according to O.T. phraseology, would be ‘ flesh’ and ‘ blood.’ 
Later N.T. usage shows that ‘ flesh’ was a favourite word in 
the dogmatic writings of the time (1 Pet. 3: 18, 4: 1; x Tim. 
3:16. Cf. also Barnabas 5:6, Hermas Sim. V, 6: 5-7). 
‘Flesh’ is used instead of ‘ body’ in the sacramental ritual 
by Justin and Ignatius. But though John alludes primarily 


154 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 52-59 


to the sacrament, a reference to the atoning death is of neces- 
sity implied. The soul’s sustenance and satisfaction, which 
is symbolized in the sacrament, is found in Christ not only 
as living and working, but as dying. ‘A communion service, 
where men realize the mystery that Jesus died for them, is 
the summit of Christian experience’ (Strachan). At the same 
time it should be noted that John habitually links the sacra- 
ment much less closely to the Passion than does Paul. Thus 
the Institution, instead of taking place ‘on the night he was 
betrayed’ (x Cor. 11: 23), is dissociated from Passion Week 
and connected here with the life-giving miracle of the feeding 
of the multitude, while the place held in the Synoptics by the 
Institution is filled in our Gospel by the incident of the foot- 
washing, which symbolizes not Christ’s death, but his spirit 
of lowly service. That the Church of the second century 
closely connected the miraculous feeding with the sacrament 
is clear not only from the writings of the time, but also from 
the paintings of the Roman Catacombs. We conclude then 
that, taken at its face value, verse 53 amounts to an assertion 
that ‘life’ can belong only to the members of the Church of 
Christ who have made confession of their faith by partaking 
of the Christian Sacrament. Yet the words even as they 
stand are probably meant to bear a spiritual as well as a 
literal interpretation, to express the truth that, just as Jesus’ 
food was to do the will of God (4: 34), so can we obtain spiritual 
sustenance only by making our will and life one with Christ’s. 
Can the literal and spiritual intention of the words be recon- 
ciled? (See note after 63.) 

Verse 54 expresses in positive terms the reward of the man 54 
who fulfils the conditions stated in 53, while the word ‘ eat’ 
gives place to ‘ feed upon,’ the latter implying not a single but 
a continual appropriation of the divine life: ‘He who feeds 
on my flesh and drinks my blood possesses (as a present 
bestowal) eternal life—and I will raise him up at the last day ’ 
(notes on 40, 44)—a promise which is certain of fulfilment, 
‘for my flesh is real food and my blood is real drink,’ as 55 
opposed to that earthly or ‘ perishing ’ food which is merely 
symbolical but not ‘real.’ Note that the climax of John’s 


155 


THE GOSPELOF JOHN 


sacramentalism is reached at this point where the ‘life’ 
which elsewhere follows from faith (40, 47; 3:15, 16, 36) 
is promised as the result of an ‘eating’ and ‘drinking,’ 
whereby the disciple attains to a mystic union with his Master : 
56 ‘He who feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood remains 
within me, as I remain within him.’ The believer is ‘in 
Christ’ (r Jn. 3:6, 24) and Christ is ‘in him’ (15: 4-7). 
Paul also sometimes gives us the one thought, sometimes the 
other (e.g. compare 2 Cor. 5: 17 with Col. 1: 27). ‘ There 
is so to speak a double personality. The believer is quickened 
by Christ’s presence, and he himself is incorporated in Christ ’ 
57 (Westcott). But if it be true that communion with Jesus 
gives life, it is because Jesus has himself access to the source 
of life, for, says Jesus, ‘just as the living Father sent me 
and I live by the Father (‘ by’ expresses not the purpose of 
Christ’s life, the thought of 4: 34, but the ground of his life: 
it is due to the purpose of God that he lives), so he who feeds 
on me will also live by me.’ The mystic union of the believer 
with Christ is a reflection of that of Christ with the Father 
who, because He is living (i.e. ‘has life in Himself,’ 5: 26) 
can give life, just as can Christ in virtue of the fact that he 
is the living bread (51). Compare Paul’s thought (1 Cor. 3: 23), 
“You belong to Christ, and Christ to God.’ Note that in 
this verse we have the expression ‘ feeds on me,’ which is even 
more emphatic than ‘feeds on my flesh and drinks my 
blood.’ On the other hand the double idea of ‘ eating and 
drinking’ has again given place to the single thought of 
‘ feeding upon ’—a hint perhaps that to John it is the spiritual 
truth behind the sacrament that has real significance, not the 
mechanical ritual of receiving two elements, but the spiritual 
appropriation of Christ’s personal life (cf. note on 63). So too 
in the following verse, which sums up the whole argument, 
there is no reference to the second symbol, and Christ becomes 
58 simply ‘ the Bread of Life’: ‘ Such (the reference being to the 
whole description 51-57) is the bread which has come dowr. 
from heaven.’ The discourse then ends as it began with a 
pointed contrast between Christ and the manna: ‘your 
ancestors ate their bread and died, but he who feeds on this 
156 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 52-59 


bread will live for ever.’ The construction in the Greek is a 
little irregular, and in English is best simplified as above. 
The antithesis exactly repeats that of 49-50. The analogy 
between Christ and the manna is paralleled in 1 Cor. 10: 3 f., 
where Paul sets the gift of grace by Christ over against the 
gift of manna by Moses. Note also the word ‘ murmur,’ 
WnsO 4c, LCors 10 2220; 

There follows a note fixing the occasion of the discourse : 59 
This he said as he taught in the synagogue (or rather ‘ in full 
synagogue, the article being omitted just as we say ‘in 
church’) at Capharnahum. There is a similar note at 8: 20. 
Presumably this refers to the whole section from 26; alter- 
natively from 41. (For the problems raised here see notes 
on27and 41.) Apparently John has in mind Jesus’ preaching, 
according to the Synoptists, at Nazaret (see note on 42) in 
the local synagogue; but as it is impossible to carry the 
crowd of 25 to Nazaret, he makes the lake-side town of 
Capharnahum serve his purpose. It may be that the verse 
is an addition of the Redactor, who thus clumsily tries to iden- 
tify with the Synagogue sermon of Mk. 6: 2f. our present 
discourse which, according to the Evangelist’s original pre- 
sentation, was spoken on the seashore (25). 

After what has been said it must be clear that in this 
discourse we have no verbatim report of Jesus’ words, but 
rather a homily by the Evangelist (though possibly based on 
fragmentary sayings of Jesus preserved by ‘the Witness’) in 
which he puts by anticipation into the mouth of Jesus himself 
allusions to the Christian sacrament of the Lord’s Supper 
similar to the reference to Christian Baptism already noted 
at 3:5. It is incredible that Jesus could have addressed 
teaching so advanced to an audience largely composed of the 
common folk of Galilee, or that it should have been compre- 
hensible to them had he done so; such a discussion is incon- 
gruous in Jesus’ lifetime, when the Lord’s Supper had not yet 
been instituted, but suits the Evangelist’s own time when the 
sacrament had become one of the central objects of the attack 
on Christianity. In verse 52 there are put into the mouth 
of ‘the Jews’ objections to the Christian sacramental ritual 


M 157 


60 
61 


62 
63 
64 


65 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


of the Evangelist’s own day. The Jew of the beginning of the 
second century, dwelling as he did in the atmosphere of the 
Greek Mystery Religions, may well have been tempted to ask 
whether, when the Christian spoke of ‘ eating the flesh and 
drinking the blood of the Son of Man,’ he meant anything 
essentially different from what the heathen Greeks around 
him meant when they spoke of ‘eating’ their God at a 
sacrificial meal. At the ‘ Bouphonia’ or ‘Ox-murder’ at 
Athens, for example, to quote Miss J. R. Harrison (Anctent 
Artand Ritual, p. 89), ‘ the ox was slain with all solemnity, and 
all those present partook of the flesh . . . What they wanted 
from the Bull was just that special life and strength which all 
the year long they had put into him and nourished and 
fostered. That life wasin his blood. They could not eat that 
flesh nor drink that blood unless they killed him. So he 
must die. But it was not to give him up to the gods that they 
killed him, not to “‘ sacrifice ’’ him in our sense, but to have him, 
keep him, eat him, live by him and through him, by his grace.’ 
Did the Christian, asked his Jewish neighbour, mean any- 
thing higher than this? John’s purpose—though even he is 
perhaps not wholly untouched by this heathen-mystery con- 
ception of the appropriation of life—is (as will come out more 
clearly at verse 63) to combat this purely material notion of 
the Christian sacrament, while at the same time insisting on 
its real efficacy. 


Conclusion: The Crisis in Galilee (6: 60-71) 


Now many of his disciples, on hearing it, said, ‘ This is hard 
to take in! Who can listen to talk like this?’ Jesus, 
inwardly conscious that his disciples were murmuring at 
it, said to them, ‘ So this upsets you? Then what if you 
were to see the Son of man ascending to where he formerly 
existed ? What gives life isthe Spirit: flesh is of no avail 
at all. The words I have uttered to you are spirit and life. © 
And yet there are some of you who do not believe ’ (for 
Jesus knew from the very first who the unbelieving were, 
and who was to betray him ; that was why he said ‘I tell 

158 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 60-71 


you that no one is able to come to me unless he is allowed 
by the Father ’). 


After that, many of his disciples drew back and would not 66 
associate with him any longer. So Jesus said to the twelve, 67 
‘You do not want to go, too?’ Simon Peter answered 68 


him, ‘ Lord, who are we to go to? You have got words 


of eternal life, and we believe, we are certain, that you are 69 
the holy One of God.’ Jesus answered them, ‘ Did I not 70 


choose you, the twelve ? And yet one of you is a devil! ’ 


(He meant Judas the son of Simon Iscariot ; for Judas 71 


was to betray him—and he was one of the twelve.) 


In the Synoptics also (e.g. Mt. 11: 26 ff., 16: 13 ff.) we have 60 


hints that Jesus became conscious that a sifting-out process was 
inevitable even among his professed followers. Not only had 
the ‘ Jews’ become hardened in opposition, but many of his 
disciples, on hearing it, said ‘ This is hard to take in! Who 
can listen to talk like this?’ The word disciples is here used 
not of the Twelve (who appear at 67) but in the broader sense 
of Jesus’ followers and adherents from whom the Twelve were 
chosen as an inner circle (Mk. 3: 7, 13-14). To these Jesus’ 
words—the reference, as seems clear from 62, being specially 
to 58—are hard, not as being difficult to understand but as 
being difficult to tolerate. Nor is the stumbling-block in their 
case so much Paul’s ‘ offence of the Cross’ as the fact that 
he whom they thought to be Messiah was now, like some heathen 
mystery-monger, stooping to such riddles as ‘eating flesh’ 
and ‘ drinking blood,’ the latter thought in particular being of 
course an abomination to Jews. Once again John echoes 
the thought of his own day, just as Origen later alludes to 
Jewish taunts about ‘ Thyestean Feasts’ (Celsus VI, 27). 


The remark that Jesus was inwardly conscious that his 61 


disciples were murmuring is intended once again to emphasize 
his supernatural insight. (Cf. Mk. 5: 30 and note on 2: 25.) 


His reply is reproachful: ‘Then what if you were to see the 62 


Son of man ascending to where he formerly existed?’ The 
thought of Jesus’ ascending corresponds to that of his ‘ coming 
down from heaven’ in the ‘hard saying’ of 58, while the 


159 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


title ‘Son of man’ again (cf. 53) serves to connect Christ’s 
humanity with an activity which is purely divine. This 
thought of Christ’s return to his pre-existent state is elsewhere 
variously expressed by John under the thought of a return to 
the Father (7: 33, 13: 3, 16: 5, 28), an ascent to the Father 
(20: 17) and an ascent to heaven (3:13). The Evangelist 
does not necessarily think of this ascent as visible to the 
senses, for the word ‘see’ (thedrein) is frequently used of 
mental or spiritual vision (4:19, 8:51, 12:45, 14:17, 
17:24). (For John’s view on ‘ the Ascension’ see p. 359 f.) 
But what is the intention of Jesus’ reply? Not surely to 
minimize the first difficulty by confronting his questioners with 
a difficulty greater still, as if the meaning were, ‘ you are upset 
by this: how much more would you be upset if you saw me 
ascend! ...’ Rather does Jesus hint that ‘ the future will 
solve the riddle of the present’ (Luthardt), and the meaning is: 
“if you were to see the Son of man ascend . . . would you 
still be upset at this demand that you should feed upon him 
as upon a bread of life which has come down from heaven ? 
Would it not rather make it easier for you to understand in 
what sense it 7s possible for you to eat and drink his flesh and 
blood ? Once you have ‘‘ seen” me ascend to where I formerly 
existed and have experienced the power of the exalted spiritual 
Christ, it will become self-evident that no mere material eating 
and drinking could mediate the life of that Christ, and that 
as a matter of fact my words were never intended to bear that 
material interpretation at which you take offence.’ (Cf. 16: 7, 
where spiritual illumination is consequent upon Christ’s return 
to the Father.) It is interesting to note that the Marcan 
passage in connexion with which our passage must be read 
(see note at end of chapter) ends with the same ascension 
imagery (Mk. 8: 38-9: 1). It will be remembered also that 
the point of introducing the miracle of the Walking on the 
Water was to prepare the way for the idea that Christ’s body 
was untrammelled by the limits of time and space, and that 
consequently his flesh and blood were non-corporeal and 
spiritual substances to be appropriated not in a material but 
in a spiritual sense. The following verse drives home just 
160 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 60-71 


this thought: ‘Surely it is evident that all I have said must 63 
be understood in a spiritual sense; material flesh cannot 
possibly have the power to beget spiritual life, for only spirit 
can beget spirit (3 : 6)—‘ What gives life is the Spirit : flesh is 
of no avail at all.’ (Cf. 1 Pet. 3: 18, r Cor. 15: 45, and es- 
pecially 2 Cor. 3: 6 ff., in which passage it is made clear (ver. 
17) as it is here (62) that ‘the Spirit’ is personified in the 
glorified Christ.) 

Christ’s words then are not to be interpreted in a literal and 
material sense, for ‘the words I have uttered to you are spirit 
and life’ ; they are to be accepted in a spiritual sense, but more 
than that, they have in themselves power to mediate spiritual 
life. Just as Christ is an incarnation of ‘the Word’ so would 
John seem to regard Christ’s words almost as an emanation of 
himself sharing his own life-giving power. (For the peculiar 
significance attached by John to Jesus’ words cf. 5: 24, 8: 31, 
47; 12: 48,15:7,17: 8.) Just as inthe O.T. the word of God 
is not a mere utterance but rather a vehicle of power conveying 
to the man to whom it comes a portion of God’s own Spirit, 
so Jesus’ words ‘ are not so much the expression of his thought 
as the emanation of his actual being and power ’ (E. F. Scott). 
So great is the power of Jesus’ words that they may almost be 
equated with the works of God (14: 10). 

Than verse 63 there could be no clearer statement of the 
purely spiritual nature of the believer's communion with his 
Lord ; the problem is how to reconcile this with 53-56, which 
appear to insist with equal clearness that the only guarantee 
of ‘ eternal life’ is in that sacrament wherein the believer par- 
takes under material symbols of the flesh and blood of Christ. 
Some would cut the knot by excising 52-59 as an interpola- 
tion. But this is a counsel of despair, and it is better frankly 
to recognize that we have here side by side two inconsistent 
lines of thought which John tries, not with complete success, 
to harmonize. After appearing to sanction ritualism in 53-56 
he provides the antidote in 63, as we saw to be the case in 
his allusion to Baptism (see note on 3: 5). Verse 63 gives us 
John’s own characteristic point of view, while in 53-56 we 
have one of those concessions to popular ideas which we have 

161 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


noted elsewhere in the Gospel (e.g. note on 39). In 53-56 we 
see reflected popular conceptions of the sacramental mystery 
which had become so ingrained in the faith and ritual of the 
Church that John did not care to ignore them, while 63 shows 
us his desire to interpret and spiritualize these conceptions 
and thus save the Church from superstitious materialism. 
At the same time it must be admitted that John himself 
is not untainted by those very ideas which he seeks to correct, 
as also was Ignatius when he wrote (Eph. 20) of the 
Christian as ‘ breaking one bread, which is the medicine of 
immortality and the antidote that we should not die.’ Just 
as John’s ideas of ‘ life’ (see chap. 3) are metaphysical as well 
as moral, so are his ideas of the sacraments material as well 
as spiritual. The material elements for John do really repre- 
sent the flesh and blood of Christ, who is present in them not 
merely by way of symbol but actually. In mitigation of 
John’s apparent inconsistency it may be said that the two 
points of view would not be so clearly distinguishable to the 
Evangelist as to ourselves; the thought of the day would 
recognize no such complete antagonism as do we between 
matter and spirit, else Paul could hardly speak of a ‘ spiritual 
body’ (zr Cor. 15:44). For John the material side of the 
sacrament might be an unquestioned reality, while its peculiar 
worth, as is true also in the case of miracle and even of 
historical incidents in general, would be in the underlying 
spiritual truth. A similar inconsistency might be traced even 
in Paul. (Notee.g. the emphasis upon the material side of the 
sacramental ritual in Rom. 6: 3-5, 1 Cor. 10: 16-21, I1: 27— 
29, Gal. 3: 27.) Probably neither Paul nor John would con- 
ceive of communion with the Church apart from participation 
in those mystic acts by which that communion was symbolized. 
64 ‘My teaching,’ says Jesus, ‘is hard only because you give 
to it a sense repugnant to its spirituality . . . and yet (in spite 
of this explanation) there are some of you who do not believe.’ 
There follows another reference to Jesus’ supernatural insight. 
In contrast to the surprise of Mk. 6: 6 Jesus is represented as 
knowing the hearts of the disciples and especially of the traitor 
(cf. 13: 27) from the beginning—for Jesus knew from the very 
162 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 60-71 


first (for the phrase cf. 15:27, 16: 4) who the unbelieving were 
(cf. 2: 25), and who was to betray him. Jesus was not surprised 
at his followers’ disloyalty, for he knew that there must be 
unbelief save where a divine purpose ‘ draws ’ to discipleship : 
That was why he said, ‘I tell you that no one is able to come 65 
to me unless he is allowed by the Father ’ (37, 44-45). As in 
the parallel Synoptic passage (Mt. 16: 17) it is not ‘ flesh and 
blood’ but ‘my Father in heaven’ who reveals the truth. 
Here again is an apologetic for the failure of Christianity 
among the Jews both in Jesus’ own day and in John’s: it 
was God’s will, and Christ himself felt no surprise ; why then 
should we ? 

“So the great number of disciples (60) disappears as sudden- 66 
ly as it appeared ’ (Loisy), for after that (i.e. either ‘ as a result 
of this’ or ‘ from this time’) many of his disciples drew back 
(for the phrase cf. Mk. 13: 16 and for the thought Ps. 44: 18) 
and would not associate with him any longer. So Jesus 
said to the twelve—here mentioned for the first time but 67 
assumed by John to be familiar to his readers—‘ You do not 
want to go, too?’ The question does not imply doubt on 
Jesus’ part, which from the point of view of 64 he could not 
feel, but is an invitation to the Twelve to declare their loyalty. 
Accordingly Simon Peter—speaking as in the Synoptics as the 68 
representative of all (cf. 13: 6, 24, 36; 21: 3)—answered him, 
‘Lord, who are we to go to? You have got words of eternal 
life,’ that is, not merely words concerning eternal life, but 
words issuing in eternal life, a direct reference to 63. Peter’s 
confession in Mk. 8: 29 is here so modified and expressed in 
Johannine language as to explain what sort of an attraction 
it was which drew men to Jesus and held them to him. The 
words of Jesus, which ‘ upset ’ mere adherents (61), to the true 
disciple become the source of eternal life (cf. 1 Cor. 1: 18). 
Having heard these words, says Peter, ‘we believe, we are 69 
certain, that you are the holy One of God.’ (Cf. 17: 8 where 
Jesus’ words convince his hearers of his peculiar relationship 
to God—there that God ‘ sent him,’ here that he is ‘the Holy 
One of God.’ For this title for the Messiah cf. 1 Jn. 2: 20, 
Rev. 3: 7, Mk. 1: 24.) It is equivalent to ‘ the Son of God’ 

163 


70 


71 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


with special stress on the ethical side of the relationship (cf. 
Io : 36 where the two ideas of holiness and sonship are brought 
together) and so is exactly parallel to the invocation used 
by Peter in Mt. 16:16. The words ‘we believe, we are 
certain ’ are in the Greek in the perfect tense, the force being 
that the disciples’ minds are already made up so that no claim 
however startling can shake their conviction. For the 
relation of faith to knowledge in the thought of John see note 
on 3:15, 10: 38, 17: 3,8. Knowledge may either precede 
faith (r Jn. 4: 16), or as here follow it—more naturally, for 
‘faith begins as an experiment and ends as an experience.’ 
Here the order has no significance, the double expression being 
simply a strong asseveration of conviction. (Cf. esp. note on 
IO: 15.) 

John is careful to guard against the supposition that Jesus 
was deceived by this declaration of an apparently unanimous 
loyalty ; accordingly we are told that Jesus answered them 
(for Peter spoke as representative), ‘Did not I choose you? 
(Mk. 3224, Lke6223; (Jn. 13528) 15 a0 a0) sand yet — 
in spite of a double election, by God first (65) and then by 
Jesus—one of you is a devil!’ (For devil cf. 8: 44; 13: 2, 
I Jn. 3:8, 10. ‘The fundamental idea seems to be that of 
turning good into evil’ (Westcott). Judas is a devil because he 
is one through whom the devil acts (13: 2, 27)—a tool of the 
devil. Can it be that we have here an echo of Jesus’ rebuke 
to Peter in Mk. 8: 33 ?—‘Get behind me, you Satan!’ 
Luke hesitates to apply the word to Peter and simply omits the 
incident: John, who in this paragraph is dwelling more on the 
treachery of the one than the faith of the eleven, goes farther 
and calls not Peter but Judas ‘devil.’ John will not admit 
that Jesus chose Judas in ignorance of the fact that he would 
turn traitor (6: 64, 13: 18), and accordingly adds an explana- 
tory note: He meant Judas the son of Simon Iscariot ; for 
Judas was to betray him—and he was one of the twelve, the 
last words marking the heinousness of the treachery. This 
anticipation of the betrayal is antedated as compared with 
Mark’s account, where it occurs after the second prediction 
of the passion (Mk. 9: 31). Here and in 13: 26 it is Judas’ 

164 


CHAPTER VI, VERSES 60-71 


father who is called ‘Iscariot’; in 12: 4 and 14: 22 it is 
Judas himself. The generally accepted derivation of the name 
is ‘Ish Keriyoth,’ ‘a man of Keriyoth,’ a village either of 
Judah (Josh. 15: 25) or of Moab (Jer. 48: 24). Another sug- 
gested derivation is ‘man of lies,’ but this would not be so 
naturally applied to both father and son as would the place- 
name. 

The dependence of this concluding paragraph on the 
Synoptics and the fact that one of the most serious disloca- 
tions of the Gospel text has taken place at this point (i.e. 
chap. 5 has been transposed from after to before chap. 6) 
suggests that here, as in other Peter-passages (13: 36 ff., 
18: 15 ff.), the Redactor has been at work. In any case it 
is clear that the paragraph is based on Mk. 8: 27 ff., Mt. 
16: 13 ff. Note, however, that John, like Luke (9: 18 ff.), 
makes the Confession follow immediately after the miraculous 
feeding and its dependent discourse, although the defection 
which comes to a head in 66 might be expected to require a 
longer time to mature. But while Luke simply omits the 
incidents which intervene in Mark, John by subtly linking up 
65 with 37 and 44 makes it appear that there was no interval. 
John says nothing of the various popular estimates of Jesus as 
given in Mk. 8: 28, though it may be that in verse 14 we have 
an echo of Mark. Again John, once more following Luke, 
does not mention the protests of the Twelve at Jesus’ predic- 
tion of his death. The thought of death is implicit in verse 51 
and the Twelve are assumed to assent toit. Indeed, John never 
dwells on ‘ the offence of the Cross.’ Finally note that John’s 
motive in recording the Confession differs from the Synop- 
tists’. According to the latter this is the first open acknow- 
ledgment of Jesus’ Messiahship by the Twelve. But accord- 
ing to John that acknowledgment has already been made 
(I: 4I, 49), and as a result the bestowal of the name ‘ Peter’ 
is also transposed to chapter 1 and omitted here. John’s 
motive is to show that concurrently with the growth of faith 
there was also a hardening of disbelief. His emphasis is not 
so much on Peter’s faith as on Judas’ treachery. A winnow- 
ing process was necessary in the inner circle (66-71) as in the 

165 


Hw 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


outer (60-65). Indeed, there is a close parallelism between 
these two paragraphs of the concluding section: compare 
60 with 67, 63 with 68, 64 with 71. 


SEecTION III. THe RESULT OF THE NEW GOSPEL 
Illustration: The Lame Man healed on the Sabbath (5: 1-16) 


The third section of the First ‘ Act’ of the Gospel sums up 
generally the result of the appropriation of the New Gospel : 
religion for the disciple of Christ means not restraint but life. 
The Master who gives new life also frees from old restrictions 
(5: 11)—in virtue of his authority as one who is ‘ equal to 
God) (5 : 18). This theme, as usual, is introduced by an 
Illustration: The healing of an invalid on the Sabbath 
(5: I-16). 

After this there was a festival of the Jews and Jesus went 
up to Jerusalem. If with some authorities we read ‘the 
festival,’ it is natural to suppose that a Passover is intended, 
this being for the Jews the festival par excellence (2: 23,6: 4). 
But the definite article should probably be omitted, when we 
are left with the following alternatives: Purim in March, 
Passover in April, Pentecost in May, Tabernacles in October, 
Dedication in December. Critics have generally favoured 
Purim or Passover on the ground that 4: 35 indicates a date 
in spring ; but see note im Joc., where we concluded that there 
was no clue as to the season. If chapter 5 be retained in its 
position before 6, it is best to suppose that Passover is meant. 
This would then be the second Passover mentioned before 
that of the Passion, the first being at 2: 13 and the third 
at 6: 4, and the name of the feast may have been suppressed 
here in order to bring the Johannine account more into har- 
mony with the Synoptics, where Jesus’ ministry lasts but one 
year. If, however, we transpose chapter 5 toa position after 6, 
we may regard the present feast as the Pentecost immediately 
following the Passover of 6: 4. (See note at beginning of 6.) 
In the original the name Pentecost was probably mentioned 
here ; but the subsequent transposition of chapters 5 and 6 
would result in an allusion to Passover (6: 4) between Pentecost 

166 


CHAPTER V, VERSES 1-16 


(5: 1) and Tabernacles (7: 2), and the name Pentecost may 
have been omitted to avoid a chronological difficulty. 

In the account of the miracle which follows we have clear 2 
echoes, sometimes verbal (esp. 8-9), of the Synoptic healing 
of the Paralytic (Mk. 2: 1-12) ; while the situation as regards 
the Sabbath is parallel to that of Mk. 3: 1-6. John seems 
to have borrowed traits from both incidents. As the miracle 
is introductory to the main theme which follows, we may 
expect in the account symbolical allusions to the outworn 
legal dispensation which is to be supplanted by the new 
Gospel of Life. 

Now in Jerusalem there is a bath beside the sheep-pool, 
which is called in Hebrew Beth-zatha. In the word‘is we may 
possibly have a hint that the Evangelist is drawing on the 
Witness’ memoirs, though the present tense does not neces- 
sarily imply that the words were written before the destruction 
of Jerusalem in 70 A.D., any more than the past tense in 11: 18 
implies that Bethany and Jerusalem had since vanished from 
the earth! The site of the miracle is still doubtful. The 
words in the Greek run, ‘there is—near the sheep’—(proba- 
tike—an adjective, for which some noun must be supplied) 
‘a pool called B.” Most commentators have understood the 
“sheep-gate’ (referring us to Neh. 3: 1, 32), which is close 
to the north-east corner of the City. But possibly it is easier 
to understand ‘ sheep-pool,’ the word being suggested by the 
reference to ‘the pool called B.’ which immediately follows. 
Another suggestion is that probatike may be not an 
adjective meaning ‘sheep,’ but a substantival reproduction 
of the Aramaic Perobatayah meaning ‘ Baths.’ The trans- 
lation would then be ‘ there is near the Baths a pool called 
in Hebrew B.’ The name also is uncertain and has come 
down to us in three forms: (a) Bethesda (for which textual 
evidence is inferior) with the meaning either of ‘ house of 
mercy’ or of ‘house of emission.’ (5) Beth-zatha, which has 
good MSS. authority and is generally accepted. The word 
suggests ‘ house of the olive,’ and was the name of the quarter 
of the City north of the temple, called by Josephus ‘ the New 
Town.’ (c) Bethsaida, or ‘ house of fishing ’—well supported 

167 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


by MSS., but inappropriate of Jerusalem and improbable. 
As for the site: (1) If we read ‘ Beth-zatha,’ and take proba- 
tike to refer to the sheep-gate or sheep-pool, we must look 
for a site north of the temple near the Sheep-gate, and may 
choose: (a) the Twin Pools near the north-west corner of 
Antonia, or the ‘ Birket Israin’ by the modern Gate of 
St. Stephen, both of which pools might be ‘ disturbed ’ by the 
emptying out of the washings from the Temple. This would 
also suit the reading ‘ Bethesda,’ in the sense of ‘ house of 
emission.’ Both these sites are supported by tradition. 
(b) The Twin Pools at St. Anne’s, near the north-east corner of 
the City, where the remains of arches and ‘ porticoes’ have 
actually been discovered. Tradition since the Crusades 
favours this spot. (2) If we may read ‘ Bethesda,’ and take 
probattke as a proper name, meaning ‘ Baths,’ without 
reference to the ‘sheep’ locality, then a site south of the 
temple is permissible, and we may choose (a) the Virgin’s 
Well or ‘Gihon’ (meaning ‘the Gusher’), which still has a 
reputation for healing disease, or (6) Siloam, which is also 
disturbed by the rush from Gihon. The ‘ disturbing’ of the 
water would then be due to the bubbling up of a natural 
spring, which is much the most natural explanation of verses 
3, 4, 7, and would also suit the name ‘ Bethesda’ in the 
sense of ‘ house of emission.’ The difficulty is that while the 
reading ‘ Beth-zatha’ seems most probable, the northern 
district offers no site where the water is disturbed by a 
natural spring. For the whole question see Sir G. A. Smith, 
Jerusalem, vol. ii, pp. 564 ff. 

3. Wherever this pool be, it has five porticoes—built perhaps 
as a shelter for invalids as at the medicinal baths of Tiberias ; 
hence perhaps ‘ house of mercy ’—where a crowd of invalids 
used to lie, the blind, the lame, and folk with shrivelled limbs 

4 {waiting for the water to bubble. For an angel (cf. Rev. 
16: 5) used to descend from time to time (the idea being that 
the intervals were irregular and due to divine providence) 
into the bath, and disturb the water ; whereupon the first 
person who stepped in after the water was disturbed was 
restored to health, no matter what disease he had been afflicted 

168 


CHAPTER V, VERSES 1-16 


with.] The passage in square brackets is poorly supported, 
and is almost certainly a later addition. If the pool were 
disturbed by a natural spring the legend would easily arise 
that the healing properties of the water were due to the 
action of an angel. In the ‘five porticoes’ a symbolic 
allusion has been supposed to the five books of the Law, 
which so long had held but failed to heal the Jewish people. 
The same symbolism perhaps appears in the following words, 
now one man was there, whose illness had lasted thirty-eight 5 
years—the period of the Israelites’ wandering in the wilder- 
ness (Deut. 2: 14), and also, it seems, the number of centuries 
during which, according to contemporary Jewish theology, 
men had already awaited the coming of the Messiah. Whether 
or no we read in this deeper symbolism, the mention of the 
length of the man’s illness (probably some form of paralysis 
as in the Markan incident, Mk. 2: 1-12) serves alike to 
emphasize Jesus’ compassion, the miraculous nature of the 
healing, and Jesus’ courage in healing on the Sabbath. Why, 
if the sufferer has already lain for so long, can he not wait 
till the Sabbath is past ? Jesus saw him lying, and knowing 6 
—by divine intuition—he had been ill for a long while he 
said to him, ‘Do you want your health restored?’ The 
question might seem to answer itself, but it would serve to 
awaken that receptive spirit without which no healing miracle 
is possible (Mk. 6: 5 f.); for the human will must co-operate 
with the divine. The invalid replied, that his long illness 7 
was due not to lack of will to be healed, but to lack of oppor- 
tunity: ‘Sir, I have nobody to put me into the bath, when 
the water is disturbed ; and while I am getting down myself, 
someone else gets in before me.’ It has been held, without 
reason, that this reply assumes the authenticity of verse 4. 
The point is that, in order to profit by the healing properties 
of the spring, it was necessary to step in immediately after 
the bubbling up; possibly there was room only for one 
invalid near enough to the medicinal spring to receive benefit 
from it before its special properties were lost by its mingling 
with the ordinary pool-water. Jesus said to him, ‘Get up, 8 
lift your mat, and walk.’ The ‘mat’ would be the light 
169 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


pallet on which he would be carried out daily, like the lame 
man in Acts 3: 2, while the fact that in response to Jesus’ 
g command instantly the man got well, lifted his mat, and 
started to walk, alike proves the reality of the cure and 
provides the occasion for the clash with the Jews which 
immediately follows. (Note the close parallelism with Mk. 
2: II-I2.) 
Now it was the Sabbath on that day—the crux of the whole 
Io situation: so the Jews (here probably the members of the 
Sanhedrim ; cf. 1: 19) said to the man who had been cured, 
‘this is the Sabbath, you have no right to be carrying your 
mat.’ Their authority would be such passages as Jer. 17: 21, 
11 Neh. 13:15, Num. 15: 32 ff. To this he replied, ‘ But the 
man who healed me, he told me, ‘‘ Lift your mat, and walk.’ ’ 
He excuses his action by appealing to the authority of him 
who gave him the power to do it, and thereby provides us 
with the key to the proper understanding of this whole 
section: the Christ who gives new life also has the power 
to free from the restraint of the old law. But the Jews are 
concerned not with the cure but with the breaking of the 
12 Sabbatical regulations, and therefore they questioned him, 
‘Who was it that told you, “‘ Lift it and walk ” >—and thereby 
13 encouraged you to break the Sabbath!’ But the man who 
had been healed did not know who it was, for (owing to the 
crowd on the spot) Jesus had slipped away, not wishing to 
14 create a stir. However, later on Jesus met him (literally 
‘found him’ probably with the idea of set purpose as in I: 43, 
9: 35) in the Temple, where presumably he had gone to give 
thanks. The Marcan paralytic when healed goes to his own 
house (Mk. 2: 11): this man, symbolical perhaps of the 
whole nation, goes to the sacred house of his people where 
the stage is set for Jesus’ controversy with the upholders 
of the old order. Here then Jesus met him and said to him, 
‘See, you are well and strong ; commit no more sins, in case 
something worse befalls you.’ (Cf. 8: 11, and for the idea 
that physical illness has an ethical cause Mk. 2: 5-1ro— 
another link between this passage and its Synoptic parallel.) 
While Jesus’ warning assumes that the disease had been the 
170 


CHAPTER V, VERSES 1-16 


effect of sin, 9: I-3 reminds us that illness does not alway. 
presuppose the sin of the individual in question. We have 
here an echo of Paul’s thought that while Christ frees us 
from the law’s restrictions (Gal. 5: 1), this deliverance must 
not become an incentive to sin (Gal. 5: 13; cf. Rom. 6: 1-18). 
By ‘something worse’ is implied either a relapse into worse 
illness (Mt. 12: 45) or more probably the loss of eternal 
salvation (Heb. 10: 26 ff). Meanwhile, having now learned 15 
the name of his benefactor, off went the man and told the 
Jews it was Jesus who had healed him, his motive for giving 
the information being not, as has been suggested, pique at 
Jesus’ allusion to his ‘sin,’ but rather the desire either to 
vindicate himself or to spread Jesus’ fame; compare the 
testimony of the blind man in chapter g. All unwittingly 
he did Jesus a disservice, and this was why the Jews persecuted 16 
Jesus, because he did things like this on the Sabbath,—the 
imperfect tense in the Greek implying that Sabbath-breaking 
had become a habit with Jesus. According to Mark also (3: 6) 
it was a cure on the Sabbath which provoked the Pharisees’ 
first plots against Jesus. It has been pointed out that in 
the time of the Evangelist and in a place like Ephesus, where 
the Jews were in a minority, the question of Sabbath obser- 
vance can hardly have been very acute, and the fact that 
our Gospel here and also in chapters 7 and 9 emphasizes so 
strongly the Jews’ resentment at Jesus’ cures on the Sabbath 
makes it necessary to suppose a substratum of tradition, 
possibly the memoirs of ‘the Witness,’ beneath the work of 
the Evangelist, which reflects generally the thought and the 
problems of his own day. (Cf. Percy Gardner, The Ephesian 
Gospel, p. 227.) 


Theme: Religion not Restraint but Life 
(5: 17-47, 7: 15-24, 8: 12-20) 

The reply of Jesus was, ‘ As my Father has continued working 17 
to this hour, so I work too.’ But this only made the 18 
Jews more eager to kill him, because he not merely broke 
the sabbath but actually spoke of God as his own Father, 

I7I 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 
28 


29 


THE GOSPEL OF @JOHN 


thereby making himself equal to God. So Jesus made 
this answer to them: ‘Truly, truly I tell you, the Son 
can do nothing of his own accord, nothing but what he 
sees the Father doing ; for whatever He does, the Son 
also does the same. The Father loves the Son and shows 
him all that He is doing Himself. He will show him 
still greater deeds than these, to make you wonder ; for 
as the Father raises the dead and makes them live, so the 
Son makes anyone live whom he chooses. Indeed the 
Father passes judgment on no one ; He has committed 
the judgment which determines life or death entirely to 
the Son, that all men may honour the Son as they honour 
the Father. (He who does not honour the Son does not 
honour the Father who sent him.) Truly, truly I tell 
you, he who listens to my word and believes Him who sent 
me has eternal life ; he will incur no sentence of judgment, 
he has already passed from death across to life. Truly, 
truly I tell you, the time is coming, it has come already, 
when the dead will listen to the voice of the Son of God, 
and those who listen will live ; for as the Father has 
life in Himself, so too He has granted the Son to have 
life in himself, and also granted him authority to act as 
judge, since he is Son of man. Do not wonder at this ; 
for there is a time coming when all who are in the tombs 
will listen to his voice and come out, the doers of good 
to be raised to life, ill-doers to be raised for the sentence 
of judgment. 


30 I can do nothing of my own accord ; I pass judgment on men 


17 


as I am taught by God, and my judgment is just, because 
my aim is not my own will but the will of Him who 
sent me.’ 


In face of this threat of persecution the reply of Jesus was, 
‘ As my Father has continued working to this hour, so I work 
too.’ The connexion is a trifle artificial, in so far as in the 
following verses Jesus appears to justify himself not, as is 
demanded by the immediate context, for having encouraged 
the invalid to break the Sabbath, but, as in Lk. 13: 14 ff, 


172 


CHAPTER V, VERSES 17-30 


for having himself engaged in an illegal activity. But the 
emphasis throughout is not so much on the action itself as 
on the truth that it is due to a unity of being and activity 
between Son and Father. The Sabbath regulations were 
based on the doctrine of God’s rest on the seventh day 
(Gen. 2: 1-3, Exod. 20: 11, 31: 17). But, says Jesus, this 
rest must not be interpreted as literal idleness. Even for 
God ‘not rest but worthy labour is the soul of life,’ for 
He must continue to sustain creation (Mt. 5: 45), and 
it cannot be conceived that He will ever suspend a function 
which is characteristically His own. ‘God never stops 
working,’ says Philo (De alleg., ii), ‘for as it is the property 
of fire to burn and of snow to be cold so of God to work.’ 
The question of reconciling God’s continual activity with His 
Sabbath rest much engaged the Rabbis. ‘Why does God 
not keep the Sabbath? May not a man wander through 
his own house on the Sabbath? The house of God is the 
whole realm above and the whole realm below’ (‘ Shem. R..,’ 
30). The idea also seems to have been held that the perfect 
‘rest’ would not be till the end of time (cf. Heb. 4: 9 ff.). 
God, says Jesus, has continued to be active right up to the 
moment of this cure, so that in it is to be seen the work of 
God Himself. Even on the Sabbath God must continue His 
beneficent activity, and, says Jesus, ‘I must do the same.’ 
He thereby claims as it were to be the organ of the perpetual 
activity of the Father (though hardly in so wide a sense as 
1: 3), and declares that this unique relation to God makes 
him even ‘ Lord of the Sabbath’ (Mk. 2: 28). 

Such is Jesus’ defence: but this only made the Jews more 18 
eager to kill him, because he not merely broke the sabbath, 
but actually spoke of God as his own Father—in a unique 
sense quite other than that in which all men may be said 
_ to be ‘sons of God’ (1: 12) ; compare ‘ his own Son’ (Rom. 
8: 32)—thereby (adds the Evangelist, stating his own 
inference rather than the Jews’) making himself equal to 
God. In the last words we have the very essence of the 
Johannine theology, which here, as in 10: 33, is vigorously 
disputed by the Jews. We may compare in the parallel 

N 173 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Synoptic passage (Mk. 2: 7) the Jews’ resentment at Jesus’ 
claim to forgive sins, a function belonging to God alone. In 
our Gospel Jesus never actually claims to be God, but re- 
peatedly that he perfectly represents God (e.g. 10: 30, 14: 9). 

The relationship between Father and Son is variously 
conceived in our Gospel as a unity of nature whereby the 
one is immanent in the other (10: 30-38, 14: Q-II), as a com- 
mon activity whereby the Father acts through the Son and 
shares His functions with him (3: 35, 17: 10, 4: 34), as a 
dependence of the Son upon the Father, wherein he fulfils 
the Father’s commands (5: 30, 6: 38, 57; 8:26, Io: 18, 
12: 49, 14: 31, 15: 10). In a word, the Son’s relation to the 
Father, as hinted in the phrase ‘ the Logos was with God’ (1: I, 
where see note), is one of ‘ free dependence’ (Godet). This 
is brought out in the next verse, the importance of the 
pronouncement being stressed both by the solemn formula 
‘truly, truly,’ and by the double statement in both negative 
and positive terms (cf. I: 3, 3: 18, etc.). 

19 So Jesus made this answer to them, ‘Truly, truly I tell 
you, the Son can do nothing—i.e. is morally powerless to do 
anything—of his own accord, nothing but what he sees the 
Father doing ; for whatever He does, the Son also does the same.’ 
On the one hand the Son is dependent on the Father, for his 
actions are but a reflection of the Father's; on the other 
hand the Son is the representative of the Father, for it is 
through the Son that the Father’s activity is expressed. The 
words ‘ what he sees the Father doing’ are significant. The 
Son is not like some O.T. prophet who must be instructed 
concerning each point as it arises ; rather has he an immediate 
intuition of what is the Father’s will, of ‘ what the Father is 
doing.’ The idea seems to be that the Father’s will is an 
ideal ‘work’ (cf. 4: 34), which is first ‘seen,’ grasped by 
divine intuition, by the Son, and then becomes realized in 
the Son’s action, so that it may be said that ‘ whatever the 
Father does, the Son does the same.’ The Father’s will is 
the archetype of the Son’s action (6: 38, etc.). ‘The Father 
of the universe,’ says Philo (Conf. lingu., 14), ‘has brought 
the Logos into being as His eldest Son ...; and he who was 


174 


OHAPTER V, VERSES 17-30 


begotten, imitating the ways of his Father, and looking to 
His archetypal patterns, kept forming the separate species’ 
(quoted by Scott, op. cit., p. 60). The general truth has of 
course direct application to the immediate circumstances as 
a vindication of Jesus’ action in curing the invalid. He is 
but realizing the Father’s ideal ; his apology is that of Luther 
at, Worms: ‘I cannot otherwise, so help me God!’ 

This divine intuition whereby the Son is able to realize 
the Father’s ideal is due to the fact that ‘the Father loves 20 
the Son ’—a love-relationship which is here regarded not so 
much (as in 17: 24) as a mystical relationship existing from 
eternity between the Father and the pre-incarnate Logos, 
but rather as a moral attribute, eternal indeed, but now 
realized in time in Jesus’ human self-consciousness, so that 
even to the incarnate Logos the Father ‘ shows him all that He 
is doing Himself,’ i.e. reveals the workings of His will to him, 
so that the Father’s active will becomes the spring of the 
Son’s action. (Cf. Mt. 11: 27, and note that the same moral 
relationship is expressed in the sphere of ordinary humanity 
in Mt. 12: 50.) And more than this, ‘ He will show him (the 
Son) greater deeds than these’ (cf. 14: 12, where it is shown, 
once again in the sphere of human life, that a moral relation- 
ship, here of faith, results in a fuller participation in the 
‘works’ of God), ie. soon the will of the Father revealed 
progressively to the Son will express itself in still greater deeds, 
“deeds to make you wonder.’ The awakening of wonder 
might seem to be an inadequate motive, but the emphasis 
is on the pronoun rather than on the verb—‘ deeds to make 
even you, who now scoff, turn to wonder ’—while the motive 
is more fully expressed in verse 23. The place of “ wonder’ 
in religion is well illustrated by a traditional saying of Jesus 
preserved by Clement of Alexandria (Stvom., ii, 9, 45): ‘ He 
that wonders shall reign, and he that reigns shall rest.’ ‘ The 
man who cannot always wonder,’ says Carlyle, ‘is but a pair 
of spectacles behind which there is no eye.’ John’s mind 
leaps forward to the ‘ wonderful ’ achievements of Christianity 
in later days, when Jesus’ words seemed to be fulfilled in such 
incidents as Acts 4:13. The deeds that have been are 


175 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


21 indeed but symbols of greater deeds to be, ‘ for as the Father 
raises the dead and makes them live ’—ihe function par 
excellence of God (1 Sam. 2: 6, 2 Kings 5: 7, Deut. 32: 39, 
and the Shemoneh Esreh, ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who 
quickenest the dead’)—‘so the Son makes anyone live 
whom he chooses,’ thus proving that he indeed has the right 
to ‘make himself equal to God’ (18). The words ‘ dead ’ and 
‘live’ are here used most comprehensively, and must be 
understood both in a natural and in a spiritual sense. No 
doubt there is a forward glance to the physical resurrection 
of Lazarus (chap. 11), but that in itself is symbolical of the 
spiritual ‘ resurrection’ of the elect, who are here differentiated 
from the mass of mankind by the words, ‘ whom he chooses,’ 
and in 29 are described as those who are ‘ raised to life.” Just 
as Jesus spontaneously ‘chose’ the invalid man from the 
crowd at Beth-zatha, so does he ‘ choose’ those whom he 
“ makes live.’ 

Verses 21-29 are difficult on account of a seeming failure 
to distinguish clearly between the idea of a present spiritual 
‘life, and that of an eschatologically conceived physical 
‘resurrection.’ It is possible to interpret 21-23 in a purely 
general sense, 24-27 in an ethical and spiritual sense, 28-29 
in a physical and eschatological sense. But there is no need 
thus to differentiate, for such distinctions are modern, and 
would hardly trouble our author. John, like Paul (Col. 
2: 12-13, Rom. 8: 10-11, 1 Cor. 15: 22), would regard the 
ethical and bodily ‘resurrection’ as one experience of being 
“made alive’—the physical resurrection being but the 
climax of the spiritual rebirth (note on 6:58). That the 
emphasis throughout is on ethical renewal appears alike 
from the introductory illustration—the healing of an impotent 
man, not the raising of one dead in the physical sense— 
and from the recurrence of the word ‘already’ (24, 25). 
At the same time ‘there is no inconsistency between the 
spiritual and the material quickening, both of which are 
taught distinctly in the Gospel. In John there is no dualism. 
The writer conceives of matter as penetrated with the 
divine. Alike God and the Word of God move downwards 

176° 


CHAPTER V, VERSES 17-30 


and outwards, through spirit to the material envelope 
and vesture of spirit’ (Sanday, Criticism of the Fourth 
Gospel, p. 196). 


The idea of ‘judgment’ (for which see notes on 3: 17-21) 22 


is now combined with that of ‘life-giving,’ the connexion being 
suggested by the phrase ‘ whom he chooses,’ which appears to 
transfer to the Son the right to decide who is to live and who 
is to die: an authority is thus claimed for the Son, which Jew 
and Christian alike assigned to God alone. ‘Indeed the Father 
passes judgment on no one,’ that is, He prejudices the chances 
of none to eternal life (3 : 17), for the destiny of each individual 
will be determined by his attitude to Christ; in this sense 
each man is ‘ judged’ by Christ, and it can be said that the 
Father ‘has committed all judgment (i.e. the judgment which 
determines both life and death, the word here including the 
idea of acquittal as well as of conviction, though the emphasis 
is usually on the latter idea, as in 24 and 29 and 3: 19) to the 
Son,’ the Father’s motive in thus delegating His authority 
being ‘that all men may honour the Son as they honour the 
Father,’ the representative and plenipotentiary (note on 18) 
receiving the same honours as the Sovereign himself (cf. 20: 28, 
Phil. 2: r0, and contrast Mk. 10:18). But the intention 
here is rather to emphasize the converse truth that ‘he who 
does not honour the Son does not honour the Father who sent 
him’: to refuse honour to Christ, as did the Jews (18), is to 
dishonour God Himself (cf. 15: 24). 


Christ now shows how his ‘ judgment’ works itself out, and 24 


how his functions as life-giver and judge are related: ‘ Truly, 
truly I tell you, he who listens to my word (6: 63) and believes 
Him who sent me has eternal life ; he will incur no sentence of 
judgment, he has already passed from death across to life’ (cf. 
1 Jn. 3: 14). The believing acceptance of Christ’s word, as 
implying faith in the Father whose representative he is, issues 
in life (3: 36, 17: 3, etc.). The believer thus escapes ‘ judg- 
ment,’ the purpose of which is to determine whether or no he 
is to ‘ have life’ ; ‘ the place of judgment is on the threshold 
between life and death’ (Godet) ; for through faith he has 
already been ‘ judged’ and acquitted, and has thus got past 


177 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


the determining point and beyond the risk of an adverse 
verdict, that is, out of the reach of ‘death’ (cf. 3: 18, which 
stresses the converse truth). His ‘ judgment’ is behind him, 
and already he is tasting of eternal life (Heb. 6:5). As 
Loisy puts it: ‘For him the final resurrection and the last 
judgment are alike superfluous.’ 

25 + Verse 25, like 28-29, has been regarded as an eschatological 
addition, on the ground that 24, 26-27 provide a smooth and 
logical sequence, whereas the verses in question introduce 
confusion between ‘the time’ which ‘has come already’ 
(25) and ‘a time coming’ (28). But see note on 21 above. 
‘Truly, truly I tell you, the time is coming, it has come already, 
when the dead will listen to the voice of the Son of God, and 
those who listen will live.’ On the ground that ‘the voice’ 
is to be identified with ‘his voice’ in 28, some hold that the 
reference here is to the resurrection at ‘the last day.’ But 
the words ‘has come already’ are decisive against this. 
The verse has in view neither the final consummation nor 
even such particular incidents as Mt. 27: 52-53, or the 
miracles of raising the dead recorded in the Gospels—except 
in so far as the latter serve as concrete illustrations (note, 
e.g., the close parallel between this verse and I1: 43-44)— 
but rather the truth, implied in the previous verse, that 
the new order is breaking through into the old (cf. 4: 23). 
As the result of Christ’s ministry the spiritually dead (Mt. 
8: 22, Lk. 15: 24, Eph. 5: 14, Rev. 3: 1) will hear, and such 
as give heed will ‘live’ in the spiritual sense of 21 and 24. 
Indeed, 25 is but a repetition in a more pictorial form of 24, 
both verses being introduced by the solemn formula. Note 
the hint that there are two kinds of hearing: ‘ All the dead 
hear, but not all give ear’ (Weiss). ‘ The question, how can 
the spiritually dead hear and believe ? is the question, how 
could the impotent man rise in response to Christ’s word ? 
Perhaps psychologically inexplicable, it is, happily, soluble 
in practice’ (Dods). 

The power to ‘raise the dead and make them live’ was 
shown in verse 21 to be one which ‘made Christ equal to 
God’ (18). This ‘equality’ is now emphasized once again 

178 


CHAPTER V, VERSES 17-30 


and made the justification for Christ’s claims: ‘For as the 26 
Father has life in Himself, so too He has granted the Son to have 
life in himself’; and as the source of divine life, Christ has power 
to bestow it. The thought is exactly parallel to that of 6: 51, 
57, where see notes. The quality ascribed in 1: 4 to the pre- 
existent Logos is here transferred to the Incarnate Son. The 
emphasis is on the words ‘in himself.’ ‘ Here,’ says Godet, 
“is the boldest paradox uttered by the mouth of Jesus. It is 
given to the Son to live of himself. A paradox which, when 
transferred to ourselves, will help perhaps by analogy to solve 
the psychological riddle of verse 25: ‘ We possess as a thing 
given—the faculty of self-determination, and it was by 
exercising this in a moral decision (5: 6) that the impotent 
man attained to power. 

As 25-26 has repeated 21, so does 27 recall the thought of 22. 27 
Since to give or not to give life constitutes ‘judgment,’ it may 
be said that in virtue of the gift of ‘ life in Himself,’ whence 
springs the power to give life, the Father has ‘also granted him 
(the Son) authority to act as judge,’ a function which he is well 
qualified to exercise ‘since he is Son of man.’ We note that 
(in contrast to I: 51, 3: 13 and Mt. 9: 6, where the thought is 
closely parallel) the article is omitted before both ‘Son’ and 
‘man.’ The effect would seem to be to stress not so much the 
Messianic significance of the title—though no doubt this is still 
present—but rather its human colouring. It is Christ’s true 
humanity which makes him a fitting agent of God’s judgment 
(cf. Acts 17:31 and God’s words in the Testament of 
Abraham: ‘I do not judge you; but every man shall be 
judged by a man’). But why? Both in virtue of his 
human sympathy and understanding (cf. Heb. 2: 14-18, 
4.15, where, however, it is intercession, not judgment, that is 
in question) and also because it is by their attitude to the 
incarnate Son who tarries among them and whose glory 
they have seen (1: 14) that men most surely pass judgment 
on themselves. 

At this point the thought at last becomes purely eschato- 28 
logical, and looks forward to a ‘resurrection’ which is both 
bodily and future, as is clear from the allusion to ‘ tombs’ 


179 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


and to‘a time coming.’ ‘Do not wonder at this,’ that is, at the 
claims already made; the future will remove all doubt as to 
Christ’s present authority (cf. the argument of 6: 62); ‘for 
there is a time coming when all (contrasted with ‘ whom he 
chooses’ in 21 and ‘ those who listen’ in 25: the resurrection 
is now the universal one at the last day) who are in the tombs 
will listen to his voice and come out.’ Contemporary Judaism 
looked for the final resurrection as the supreme demonstration 
of divine power; the part to be played by Christ then will 
vindicate his claim to ‘make men live’ now. Note that 
the signal for the final resurrection is not to be a ‘trumpet’ 
(Mt. 24: 31, 1 Cor. 15: 52) but ‘ his voice,’ which by recalling 25 
perhaps suggests that the signal for resurrection even at the 
last day is not some dramatic word of command, but the word 
of the Gospel which is already being preached, and by their 
attitude to which men are already being judged. The last 
day will but witness the consummation of a process already 
going on. Cf. 12: 48, where we are told that a man’s judge on 
the last day will be Christ’s word to which he is listening 
to-day. Note that the perplexed ‘ wonder’ of this verse is 
quite distinct from the reverential ‘ wonder ’ of 20. 

Whereas Paul, when in 1 Cor. 15: 51 ff. he writes ‘ all of us 
are to be changed,’ appears to have in view only the resur- 
rection of the saved, John, following the thought of Mt. 25: 46, 
shows that the issue of the general resurrection is twofold, 

29 ‘the doers of good to be raised to life, ill-doers to be raised for 
the sentence of judgment’: for the former, judgment being 
already past (24), there is immediate entrance into life ; the 
latter, who in life have refused to subject themselves to the 
judgment of Christ’s Gospel, must now do so (12: 48), and will 
go forth condemned. (Cf. also the thought of 3: 20-21, 
and for this curious outcropping of eschatology cf. note on 
6: 39.) 

30 Verse 30 modifies the claim made in 22 by recalling 19: 
Jesus’ right to judge is based on the unique relationship to the 
Father defined in 19: ‘I can do nothing of my own accord ; 
I pass judgment on men as I am taught by God ’—the idea being 
that Jesus listens to the Father’s verdict (cf. 19, ‘what he sees 

180 


CHAPTER V, VERSES 31-47 


the Father doing’) before he pronounces his own. ‘Nor can 
Jesus’ judgment err, because it is merely as the executor of 
the Father’s will he judges’ (Dods) ; Jesus has no personal 
bias: ‘my judgment is just, because my aim is not my own 
will but the will of Him who sent me.’ The meaning is not 
that Jesus has no distinct will of his own, but that morally 
speaking there was in him but a single will, for his own will was 
always subordinated to the Father’s: ‘ Not what I will, but 
what thou wilt.’ 


Itestify to myself, then my evidence is not valid ; I have 31 
Another to bear testimony to me, and I know the evidence 32 
He bears for me is valid. You sent to John, and he bore 33 
testimony to the truth (though I accept no testimony from 34 


man—lI only speak of this testimony, that you may be 


saved) ; he was a burning and a shining lamp, and you 35 
chose to rejoice for a while in his light. But I possess 36 


a testimony greater than that of John, for the deeds which 
the Father has granted me to accomplish, the very deeds on 
which I am engaged, are my testimony that the Father has 


sentme. The Father who sent me has also borne testimony 37 


to me himself ; but His voice you have never heard, His 


form you have never seen, His word you have not kept 38 


with you, because you do not believe him whom He sent. 


You search the scriptures, imagining you possess eternal 39 
life in their pages—and they do testify to me—but you 4o 
refuse to come to me for life. I accept no credit from 41 
men, but I know there is no love to God in you ; here am 42 
I, come in the name of my Father, and you will not accept 43 


me : let someone else come in his own name, and you 


will accept him! How can you believe, you who accept 44 


credit from one another instead of aiming at the credit 


which comes from the only God ?. Do not imagine I am 45 


going to accuse you to the Father ; Moses is your accuser, 


Moses who is your hope! For if you believed Moses you 46 
would believe me, since it was of me that he wrote. But 47 


if you do not believe what he wrote, how will you ever 
believe what I say ?’ 
181 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


31 The logical sequence at this point is not very clear, and 
indeed the whole section 31-44, as is the case with several of 
the ‘Baptist’ passages (see Introduction, p. Ixvi), hangs 
rather loosely in the context ; 30 would be more aptly followed 
by 45. Verses 31-44 are a unit in themselves, and form the 
most striking of those passages emphasizing the ‘ witness ’ 
to Jesus’ claims (cf. 1: 7 note) which ‘ may be regarded as in 
the first place apologetic, and contain the Evangelist’s answer 
to current objections on the part of Jews and heathen’ (E. F. 
Scott, The Fourth Gospel, p. 196). The passage is connected 
with the preceding verses generally in so far that the thought 
of the unique intimacy between Father and Son is carried on, 
and more particularly by the persistence of the language of 
a law-court: Christ, who appeared in the réle of Judge, now 
comes forward as witness (note how in 8: 14-15 the thought 
conversely passes from ‘witness’ to ‘judgment’). ‘If I 
testify to myself, then my evidence is not valid’: legal usage 
among Jews, Greeks and Romans alike would not admit the 
testimony of a witness in his own case (cf. also Deut. 17: 6, 
Ig: 15). ‘If it were true,’ says Jesus, ‘that in making these 
claims I was bearing unsupported testimony to myself, 

32 then you might well disbelieve me; but the truth is that I 
have Another to bear testimony to me, and I know the evidence 
He bears for me is valid, my filial consciousness only corroborates 
the Father’s own testimony (given in 36 ff.) ; it follows then 
that my judgment on myself is as valid as my judgment on 
others is just, for in both cases it is not really my own judgment 
but God’s.’ Hence it is no contradiction when in 8: 14 (which 
as we shall see should immediately follow the present discourse) 
Jesus says, ‘ Though I do testify to myself, my evidence is 
valid.’ In the words ‘I know the evidence He bears for me 
is valid ’ we have the Evangelist’s favourite asseveration (19: 35, 
I Jn. 5:9) put on Jesus’ own lips. By Another is meant of 
course the Father, not John the Baptist, who is introduced in 
the next verse simply by way of contrast, as if to hint, ‘if you 
thought John’s witness worth having, how much more the 
Father’s !’ 

33 ‘You sent to John, and he bore testimony to the truth’: the 

182 


CHAPTER V, VERSES 31-47 


reference is to 1: 19 ff. But, strictly speaking, John’s testi- 
mony to Jesus was given not to the deputation from the Jews 
but on the following day to his own disciples (1: 29 ff.) : 
‘ the reference is better suited for the readers of the Gospel than 
for the audience of Christ’ (Loisy). While thus calling John 
to witness Jesus makes it clear that he does so ‘ though I accept 34 
no testimony from man ’—not that he discredits it (the meaning 
in 3: II, 32), but he discounts it as unnecessary for his own 
assurance (cf. the thought of 2: 25), however valuable it might 
be for the confirmation of the faith of waverers. Indeed, Jesus 
mentions the matter not in his own interest, but in theirs: 
‘TI only speak of this testimony that you may be saved’ (1: 7). 
We have in 35 the Johannine parallel to Mt. 11: 7 ff.— 35 
Jesus’ verdict on the Baptist: ‘hewasa burning and a shining 
lamp,’ not the self-luminous light (1: 8, 8: 12), but the lamp 
which must first be kindled, and which can shine only by burn- 
ing itself out, yet, even so, invaluable as a guide to lead men 
to the true light (there is a possible allusion to Ps. 132: 17; 
for the figure ) ct. 2'Sam. 21 217,72 Petsxiir9,’ Rev. 21223)! 
Such was John, ‘and you chose to rejoice for a while in his 
light,’ ‘ like gnats playing in the sunshine’ (Hausrath), or like 
children amusing themselves while the sun shines, with a picture 
of whom Luke (7: 32) concludes his account of Jesus’ verdict 
on the Baptist. The thought is that the Jews ‘ instead of tak- 
ing advantage of the precious moments during which the torch 
burns to accomplish an indispensable task, do nothing but 
dance and play the fool in its light till it goes out’ (Godet). 
But though John might well be called to witness, ‘I (picking 36 
up 34) possess a testimony greater than that of John (i.e. 
greater than John can bear to me), for the deeds which the 
Father has granted me to accomplish, the very deeds on which 
I am engaged, are my testimony that the Father has sent me.’ 
Jesus’ ‘ works’ include not merely his miracles, but his whole 
Messianic vocation (4: 34, 5: 19-20, 17: 4). The word 
‘granted ’ contains the idea both of commission and permission, 
while in the phrase ‘ granted me to accomplish’ the Greek turn of 
expression emphasizes the divine purpose: the mission is still 
in process of fulfilment, but God’s purpose is that it shall be 
183 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


accomplished (19: 30); the miracles ‘are not given in the 
form of works done, but of works to be done’ (Godet). (For 
Jesus’ ‘ works,’ as proof of his divine origin, cf. 10: 25, 38, 
14: 11, and Mt. 9: 2-8, 11: 2-6, 20-24.) By the commission 
to fulfil the Messianic function the Father has implicitly borne 
testimony that He has sent Jesus. But Jesus can point also 
37 to a more immediate divine testimony : ‘The Father who sent 
me has also borne testimony to me Himself.’ Some see here a 
reference to the divine testimony borne to Jesus at the 
Baptism, when a voice was heard from heaven and the Spirit 
descended in the form of a dove, details which, it is claimed, 
give force to Jesus’ next words, ‘ but His voice you have never 
heard, His form you have never seen.’ If this interpretation is 
accepted, it will be necessary to put a full-stop at the end of 
37, and hold that the thought of the divine testimony of 
Scripture is not introduced till 38. Otherwise (mainly on the 
ground that the words ‘ You have never heard ’ are too vague to 
refer to so definite an occasion as the Baptism) we must under- 
stand by the ‘testimony ’ of 37 that which stands written in 
Scripture and may still be read (this would be the force of the 
Greek perfect), while by the following words Jesus would 
imply that his hearers have proved unresponsive to both of 
the means of prophetic revelation recognized in Scripture, 
that to sight (‘ form ’) and hearing (‘ voice ’), the vision and the 
word. Others again (taking 37 and 38 as one sentence) under- 
stand the meaning to be that the whole of Scripture bears 
testimony to Jesus; but the Jews, on account of their 
rejection of the Christ (38), have missed the opportunity, which 
otherwise they might have had, of hearing God’s voice and 
seeing His form, both alike expressed in the person of Jesus, 
whose voice and form they might indeed always have detected 
in the pages of Scripture, had they but ears to hear and eyes 
to see (cf. 1: 18, 6: 46, 14: 9 and Deut. 4: 33). However 
37 be interpreted, the meaning is that the Jews have missed 
God’s revelation hitherto, and in consequence they have not the 
38 fruit of that revelation stored in their hearts to-day: ‘His 
word you have not kept with you’ ; it has not become a per- 
manent possession, a “ Word which roots itself inwardly with 


184 


ro 


CHAPTER V, VERSES 31-47 


power to save your souls’ (Jam. 1: 21; and cf. 17: 6, 1 Jn. 
2:14, 3: 15), ‘because you do not believe him whom He sent.’ 
Their attitude to him who is the theme of the whole Word of 
God is proof enough that they have not made that Word their 
own ; if their life had been nourished on that Word, then they 
must have been prepared to welcome him for whose coming the 
Word was a preparation. The Word here includes not only 
Scripture but ‘the whole compass of divine revelation’ 
(Holtzmann). 

The Jews’ refusal to accept the very One to whom the 39 
Scriptures bear witness proves that all their study of the 
Scriptures is vitiated by a misunderstanding: ‘ You search the 
scriptures, imagining you possess eternal life in their pages,’ 
under the misconception that the mere study of the letter 
saves (cf. Jer. 8: 8, Rom. 2: 17-20), whereas the source of 
life is not in the Scriptures as such, but in him to whom they 
testify (2 Cor. 3 : 6)—‘ and they do testify to me (a parenthetical 
remark thrown in)—but (though you pore over the promises) 40 
you refuse to come to me (who am the fulfilment) for life.’ 
They reject Jesus’ invitation (6: 35) because they ‘ imagine’ 
that they already ‘ possess life’ in virtue of their diligent 
“searching ’ of the Scriptures; they are ‘ always curious to 
learn and never able to attain the knowledge of the truth’ 

(2 Tim. 3:7). We are reminded of Jesus’ lament over 
Jerusalem (Mt. 23: 37). 

The following verses would seem to be added by the Evangel- 41 
ist lest it should be thought that Christ in thus stressing his 
own claims is seeking honour for himself. This Jesus disclaims: 

‘I accept no credit from men’; Jesus cares as little about 
men’s good opinions as about their testimony (34) ( distinguish 
the ‘credit’ here from the ‘ honour’ of ver. 23, and cf. 7: 18, 
8:50); he feels no chagrin at their rejection of himself: 
it is their attitude to God which distresses him (cf. Lk. 12: Io) 
—‘ but I know there is no love toGod in you.’ Howcould there 42 
be any such love when ‘here am I, come in the name of my 43 
Father, and you will not accept me’? (cf. 23). On the other 
hand, ‘let someone else come in his own name, and you will 
accept him!’ They reject one who holds a commission from 
185 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


the Father (10: 25), whereas they will be willing to welcome 
one who comes not with a message from God but with some 
new-fangled Gospel made to fit their own national aspirations 
and vanity. The reference is probably neither to false pro- 
phets in general (Mk. 13: 6, 21-22), nor to any individual Jew- 
ish Messiah (Acts 5: 36-37)—Bar Cochba, who put himself 
forward in A.D. 132-5, has been suggested, but even the final 
redaction of the Gospel is probably earlier than this date ; 
in any case a false Messiah would hardly come ‘in his own 
name’ (Mk. 13: 6)—but rather to the personal Antichrist who 
was expected in the Evangelist’s day (I Jn. 2: 18, 4:3; 2 Jn. 
3-2) Thess. 2: 3 f1.). 

44. Jesus’ rejection by such is no surprise: ‘How can you believe, 
you who accept credit from one another instead of aiming at the 
credit which comes from the only God?’ (for the last phrase 
cf. 17: 3 explained by 1 Jn. 5: 20). How can the motives of 
Jesus who ‘accepts no credit from men’ be appreciated by 
those whose one aim is to enhance their own dignity in the eyes 
of their fellows (12: 43, Mt. 23: 5 ff.), forgetful that the true 
Jew is ‘a Jew who is one inwardly . . . praised by God, not 
by man’ (Rom. 2: 29) ? 

45 Since Jesus cares nothing for men’s opinions (41), his hearers 
need not fear that angered by their disrespect he will accuse 
them before God: ‘Do not imagine Iam going to accuse you 
to the Father!’ Besides, there will be no need to do so, for 
already there is one who accuses: ‘ Moses is your accuser, 
Moses who is your hope’ (39, 8: 33 ff.). The Jews regarded 
Moses as their mediator before God ; in his writings too they 
found the promise of the hoped-for prophet (Deut. 18: 15; 
cf. Lk. 24: 44, Rom. 10: 5-8, Acts 3: 22, 7: 37).. But by 
rejecting him in whom those hopes were fulfilled, they had in 
fact renounced their faith in Moses and lost the hope that was 

46 grounded in that faith: ‘For if you believed Moses you would 
believe me, since it was of me that he wrote.’ Nay more, Moses 
actually becomes their accuser; for just as in Paul’s eyes 
the knowledge of the law makes a man a conscious sinner 
(Rom. 7: 7), so the fact that the Jews with the promises before 
their eyes have spurned him who fulfils the promises lays them 

186 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 15-24 


open to the accusation of that Moses who wrote the promises. 
The thought is that the Jews have been disloyal to the spirit 
of the Mosaic faith, and so have lost their standing even as Jews. 
“Every true Jew will naturally become a Christian, every bad 
Jew will instinctively reject the Gospel’ (Godet). 

Had the Jews then been loyal to their professed faith in 47 
Moses, they would have welcomed Jesus ; ‘But if you do not 
believe what he wrote, how will you ever believe what I say ?’ 
If they refuse to believe in the writings which prophesy, how 
can they believe in the words which fulfil and realize that 
prophecy? If one misconceives the sense of the O.T. one 
naturally cannot understand the N.T. 


The Jews were amazed, saying, ‘How can this uneducated 15 
fellow manage to read?’ Jesus told them in reply, 16 
‘My teaching is not my own but His who sent me; any- 
one who chooses to do His will, shall understand whether 17 
my teaching comes from God or whether I am talking on 
my own authority. He who talks on his own authority 18 
aims at his own credit, but he who aims at the credit 
of the person who sent him, he is sincere, and there is no 
dishonesty in him. Did not Moses give you the Law p— 19 
and yet none of you honestly obeys the Law. Else, 
why do you want to kill me?’ The crowd replied, 20 
‘You are mad. Who wants to kill you?’ Jesus answered 21 
them, ‘I have only performed one deed, and yet you are 
all amazed at it. Moses gave you the rite of circumcision 22 
(not that it came from Moses, it came from your ancestors), 
and you will circumcise a man upon the sabbath. Well, 23 
if a man gets circumcised upon the sabbath, to avoid 
breaking the Law of Moses, are you enraged at me for 
curing, not cutting, the entire body of a man upon the 
sabbath ? Give over judging by appearances ; be just.’ 24 


At this point should be inserted the section 7 : 15-24, where 
the Sabbath-controversy is continued. In their usual position 
these verses are clearly out of place. They occur in the 
account of Jesus’ visit to the Feast of Tabernacles in October. 


187 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Yet, without any explanation, particular reference is made 
(7: 21) to the effect produced by ‘ one deed ’ performed at the 
Feast of Pentecost the previous May, since when Jesus has 
been absent in Galilee (7: 1). The emphasis again on one 
miracle (7 : 21) seems inconsistent with the people’s testimony 
to Jesus’ many miracles (7: 31). Finally, 7: 20 (‘ Who wants 
to kill you ? ’) seems incongruous if placed immediately before 
7: 25 (‘Is this not the man they want to kill? ’), though the 
latter verse is perfectly consistent with 7: 1 (‘the Jews were 
trying to kill him’). On the other hand, the thought of 
7: 15-24 is obviously a continuation of that of chapter 5. 
Apart from the main topic, the violation of the Sabbath, note 
how 7: 16-17 is an echo of 5: 30-32, 7: 18 of 5: 41 ff., 7: 19 
of 5: 45 ff. The usual position of the section may be due to 
a copyist, on the look-out for a suitable place to insert a frag- 
ment already displaced from its true position, having noticed 
the apparent connexion between Jesus’ ‘ teaching’ in 7: 14 
and the Jews’ ‘ marvelling’ at his ‘letters’ in 7:15. (For the 
whole question of the displacements in chapters 7 and 8 see 
an article by the present writer in the Expository Times, 
November 1921.) 

15 The Jews were amazed, saying, ‘How can this uneducated 
fellow manage to read ? ’ or perhaps, for this better suits Jesus’ 
reply, ‘Where does this uneducated fellow get his learning?’ 
(cf. Acts 26: 24). According to the first rendering the Jews 
consider Jesus an illiterate, according to the second they are 
taunting him as one who has had no training in the Rabbinical 
schools and is therefore unversed in the traditional methods of 
Scripture interpretation. The Evangelist would see some- 
thing intensely dramatic in this picture of the Jews confronted 
by the Incarnate Logos and yet treating him as an ‘ uneducated 
fellow!’ Loisy well notes that in the Synoptics, though there 
too the Jews express wonder at Jesus’ learning (Mk. 6: 2), 
there is no trace of any unwillingness to rank him asa Teacher 
because he was not a graduate of the schools. But this ob- 
jection may well have been raised in the course of the Jewish 
polemic against Christianity in the Evangelist’s own day. 
Jesus’ reply is that he has had an education they know not of, 

188 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 15-24 


he is not merely self-taught (5: 30f.): ‘My teaching is not 16 
mine but His who sent me,’ a greater Teacher than any Rabbi! 
Moreover, this teaching has a twofold attestation: and firstly 
that of every good man’s conscience—‘ anyone who chooses 17 
to do His will shall understand whether my teaching comes 
from God or whether I am talking on my own authority ’ ; that 

is, when a man puts his will into line with God’s will, he will 
feel that Jesus’ teaching finds an echo in the aspirations of his 
own conscience; he will therefore be convinced that such 
teaching is no man-made doctrine, but is inspired by God 
Himself, and has behind it the authority of God Himself. 
Knowledge of spiritual truth is possible only on certain ethical 
conditions: Jesus’ teaching can be understood only by those 
who are prepared to practise it. (See also note on 3: 21.) 
Such is the first attestation to the divine origin of Jesus’ 
teaching ; moreover, it is the mark of aman who merely speaks 
his own mind that he will tend to glorify himself; ‘he who 
talks on his own authority aims at his own credit.’ But Jesus 
does neither the one (5: 30) nor the other (5: 41); on the 
contrary the second attestation to Jesus’ teaching will be 
found just here, that his motives are entirely disinterested and 
devoted ; for it will surely be admitted that ‘he who aims 18 
at the credit of the person who sent him, he is sincere, and there 
isno dishonesty in him.’ (For this contrast between ‘sincerity’ 
(A.V. ‘ truth’) and ‘ dishonesty ’ (A.V. ‘ unrighteousness’) cf. 
Rom. 2: 8, 2 Thess. 2: 12.) To such a teacher they should 
listen as to God Himself. 

‘Not content to remain upon the defensive Jesus makes a 19 
sortie’ (Loisy). The connexion would seem to be as follows : 
‘it is not surprising that you reject my teaching seeing that 
you reject Moses’ also (cf. 5: 45-47): ‘Did not Moses give you 
the Law ?—and yet none of you honestly obeys the Law. Else, 
why do you want to kill me?’ ie., if they had put into prac- 
tice the intention of their own law, they would see that judged 
by it Jesus had done nothing to merit death (5: 18). Alter- 
natively, and perhaps more simply, we may suppose that the 
way is being prepared for the argument of 22-23: ‘ Moses 
gave you the law, but none of you strictly keep it, for in one 


0 189 


20 


21 


22 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


particular (circumcision on the Sabbath) you regularly violate 
it ; why then do you seek to kill me, who merely did once 
what you do every week?’ The crowd, who are supposed 
to be ignorant of their leaders’ designs against Jesus, scoff 
at the idea of a plot, and replied, ‘You aremad! Who wants 
to kill you?’ Literally the words mean, ‘ you have a devil!’ 
(Cf. 8: 48, 52; 10:20.) Thesame phrase is used in Mt. 11: 18, 
Lk. 7: 33 of the Baptist, and there, as here, means nothing more 
than that the victim is possessed by gloomy fancies, a very 
different thing from ‘ being a devil’ (6: 70). (See also Mk. 
3: 21-22, where the comment of Jesus’ friends that ‘ he is out 
of his mind’ is heightened by the scribes into the insinuation 
that ‘he has Beelzebul.’) It is noticeable that our Gospel 
omits all reference to Jesus’ exorcism of ‘ devils.’ 

Jesus ignores the crowd’s rejoinder, and himself takes the 
offensive: judged by their own practice how little cause they 
have for offence. ‘As for what I have done,’ he says, ‘ you 
all do it, and with much less at stake!’ ‘I have only per- 
formed one deed ’—the healing of the impotent man—‘ and 
yet you are amazed at it ’"—because they regarded as a daring 
transgression of the Sabbath-law what was in fact an object- 
lesson in its true spirit. The Greek phrase translated ‘at it,’ 
is probably to be taken thus with the verb ‘amazed.’ If 
taken with the following verse (A.V. ‘ therefore ’) the meaning 
can only be, ‘ Well then, let me tell you, Moses gave you the 
rite of circumcision (not that it came from Moses, it came 
from your ancestors), and you will circumcise a man upon 
the sabbath,’ that is, if the eighth day after barth happens 
to fall on a Sabbath. The parenthesis is probably inserted 
either by the Evangelist or the Redactor merely for the sake 
of accuracy. If part of Jesus’ argument, it is best to explain 
thus with Godet: ‘ The ordinance of circumcision formed no 
part of the Decalogue. It was derived from ancient tradition, 
and inserted in his code by Moses in an incidental manner. 
Who then could have expected that such an ordinance would 
take precedence of one of the commandments of the Deca- 
logue itself, of the law of the Sabbath?’ The principle that 
circumcision might be performed on the Sabbath is clearly 


190 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 15-24 


stated in the Mishna: ‘ Every work which can be done on 
the eve of the Sabbath does not set aside the Sabbath; 
but circumcision, which cannot be done on the eve of the 
Sabbath (i.e. if the eve be the seventh day after birth), sets 
aside the Sabbath.’ ‘Well, if a man gets circumcised upon 23 
the sabbath, to avoid breaking the Law of Moses (i.e. by the 
infringement of the regulation that a child must be circumcised 
on the eighth day), are you enraged at me for curing, not 
cutting, the entire body of a man upon the sabbath?’ Jesus 
uses an argument a fortiori based upon his own principle 
that ‘the Sabbath is made for man.’ If it is permissible on 
the Sabbath to cure a single member (for circumcision was 
apparently held to exercise a ‘curative’ virtue upon the 
member affected: ‘praeputium est vitium in corpore’), 
how much more to make sound a man’s whole body. Or 
perhaps the contrast is not so much between partial healing 
and complete healing, but rather, as our translation suggests, 
between mutilation and perfect health, between restraint 
and complete liberty (cf. Gal. 5:3). It may be noted that 
John’s choice of circumcision as an example of Sabbath- 
breaking to set over against Jesus’ cure does not provide so 
forcible an argument as the illustrations given by the Synop- 
tists (Mt. 12: 3 ff., Lk. 13: 15) ; for while circumcision, being 
a divine institution earlier even than Moses and sanctioned by 
his law, could awaken no scruples if performed on the Sabbath, 
the Synoptic examples of Sabbath-breaking, not having 
received express divine sanction, might do so. But from the 
Evangelist’s point of view circumcision is a peculiarly fitting 
illustration, for it hints at the contrast, which is the key-note 
of this section of the Gospel, between the old Law which can 
only give a man outward purity at the cost of mutilating 
him and putting him under restraint and Christ who heals a 
man completely and gives him his perfect freedom. 

Jesus now draws the moral: ‘ Give over judging by appear- 24 
ances ; be just.’ On the surface this implies that Jesus’ 
healing of the impotent man was only an apparent violation 
of the Law: in reality it was an expression of the Law’s true 
spirit. But doubtless there is a deeper meaning, intended for 

IgI 


8. 
12 


13 
14 


15 
16 


17 
18 


19 


20 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


the critics of Christianity in the Evangelist’s own day: Chris- 
tianity is not, as might appear to the casual observer, the 
subversion of the Law, but, as Christ himself taught, its per- 
fect fulfilment (Mt. 5: 17)—the only just verdict. 


Then Jesus again addressed them, saying, ‘I am the light of 
the world : he who follows me will not walk in darkness, 
he will enjoy the light of life.’ So the Pharisees said to 
him, ‘ You are testifying to yourself ; your evidence is 
not valid.’ Jesus replied to them, ‘ Though I do testify 
to myself, my evidence is valid, because I know where I 
have come from and where I am going to—whereas you do 
not know where I have come from or where I am going to. 
You judge by the outside. I judge no one; and though 
I do judge, my judgment is true, because I am not by 
myself—there is myself and the Father who sent me. 
Why, it is written in your own Law that the evidence of 
two persons is valid: I testify to myself, and the Father 
who sent me also testifies to me.’ ‘Where is your 
Father ?’ they said. Jesus replied, ‘You know neither 
me nor my Father; if you had known me you would 
have known my Father also.” These words he spoke in 
the treasury, as he was teaching in the temple, but no one 
arrested him, because his time had not come yet. 


7:24 standing by itself would form a very abrupt con- 
clusion to the discourse at Pentecost ; as already suggested 
(note at beginning of chap. 6) we propose to insert here 
8: 12-20. In favour of its usual position as part of 
Jesus’ teaching at the Feast of Tabernacles it is generally 
urged that the key thought ‘I am the light of the world’ 
was suggested by the symbolism of that feast, when four 
golden candelabra were illuminated in the Court of the 
Women as a memorial of the Pillar of Fire in the wilderness. 
But the renewal of Jesus’ address at 8 : 12 seems strange after 
the scattering of his audience at 7:53 (8: 1-11 does not 
belong to the original Gospel). Burton therefore proposes 
appropriately enough to place this proclamation by Jesus of 

192 


CHAPTER VIII, VERSES 12-20 


himself as the Light of the world immediately after the healing 
of the man born blind (he arranges thus: 9: 39-41, 10: 19-21, 
8: 12-20). But the thought of the verses is so closely akin 
to that of chapter 5 and 7: 15-24, and provides so appro- 
priate a climax to the whole section that one can hardly 
resist the conclusion that 8 : 12-20 was originally part of this 
same discourse. Nearly every verse contains an echo of 5 
and 7: 15-24; in particular the thought of ‘ witnessing ’ 
(5: 31-39; 7:18; 8: 12-14, 17-18), and of the resultant 
verdict (5 : 40-47; 7: 17,24; 8: 15, 19), runs through all three 
passages. The line of thought is as follows: Testimony is 
borne to Jesus both by his own works and by his Father 
(5: 32-374); but his opponents cannot appreciate this testi- 
mony because their powers of judgment are distorted (5 : 37 b- 
47); yet the man who brings this warped will into line with 
God's will can get insight (7: 17) ; let not the Jews therefore 
allow their judgment on things spiritual to be biased by 
external prejudices (7 : 24). ( Note now the connexion at 8: 12 ) 
let men but look to Christ and they will find him ‘ the light 
of the world,’ needing no external testimony (5: 34), but self- 
evidencing in a far truer sense than John ‘ the lamp’ (5: 35), 
and able therefore to lead them into true judgments (7: 24, 
8: 126). (Seealso F. Warburton Lewis, Disarrangements in the 
Fourth Gospel, p. 17 ff.) 

Then Jesus again addressed them, saying (words which 12 
possibly should be omitted as a link put in after the paragraph 
had been displaced) ‘I am the light of the world.’ Rather 
than being prompted by the symbolism of the Feast of 
Tabernacles the words are an echo of the Prologue (1: 4-5, 9 ff., 
where the idea of the ‘world’ is also prominent. Cf. also 
Is 82 22-20;'2, 42:6, 49: 6, Mt. 4:15 -16, 5: 14-16.) -Ac- 
cording to tradition ‘ Light ’ was one of the names of Messiah. 
_©He who follows me (as the Israelites did the Pillar of Fire ?) 
shall not walk in darkness (I: 5, 12 : 46)—-where there is many 
a pitfall (I Jn. 2: r0-11)—but shall have the light of life.’ 
The ideas of ‘light’ and of ‘life’ are associated as in 1: 4, where 
see note; that verse shows that ‘light of life’ means not ‘the 
light which gives life,’ as in the phrase ‘ bread of life’ (6: 35), 


193 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


but rather ‘ the light which results from the possession of life,’ 
‘the light which emanates from life’ (Godet). As the 
Prologue has it, ‘this life was the light for men.’ The ‘life’ 
which is the gift of Christ (6:27, etc.) expresses itself in 
‘light,’ that is, in an insight into moral truth which will save 
men from blundering into false judgments (7:24). (See 
notes on I: 4, 3: 19.) 
13 So the Pharisees said to him—turning his own words (5: 31) 
against himself—‘You are testifying to yourself; your 
14 evidence is not valid.’ Jesus replied to them, ‘Though I 
do testify to myself—and therefore on my own showing 
(5: 31) might seem to have no claim on your belief—my 
evidence is valid, because I know where I have come from 
and where I am going to (explained 13: 3, 16: 28)—-whereas 
you do not know where I have come from or where I am going 
to.’ On the surface Jesus’ defence would appear to be: ‘I 
admit the validity of my general rule (5: 31) ; but ordinary 
rules cannot apply to one of divine origin and divine destiny 
such as I know myself to be; and you, who do not share 
my self-consciousness, are not in a position to dispute my 
testimony to myself which is based upon that self-conscious- 
ness.’ But Jesus’ real defence is only reached at 16-18, 
where he repeats the argument of 5: 32 that his ‘witness’ is 
in fact not uncorroborated, for he has ‘ Another to bear 
testimony to him.’ The present verse merely prepares the 
way for that defence by emphasizing that divine self-con- 
sciousness in virtue of which Jesus perceives in his own 
mission (cf. 5: 36) the corroborative testimony of God Him- 
self. Godet well comments: ‘Christianity is entirely based 
upon Christ’s consciousness of himself, and it is the heroism 
of faith to rest upon the extraordinary testimony which this 
Being gave to himself.’ 
The Jews, on the other hand, not having this divine insight, 
15 judge by appearances (7: 24): ‘You judge by the outside ’ 
(cf. 2 Cor. 5: 16, and as an example of such ‘judgment,’ 7: 27). 
Jesus, on the other hand, even though he has all the qualifica- 
tions for penetrating judgment, prefers not to act as judge 
himself—‘ I judge no one ’—but rather to echo God’s judgment 


194 


CHAPTER VIII, VERSES 12-20 


(5: 30); and it is in virtue of this latter fact that ‘if ever 16 
(not ‘ though’) I do judge (and he cannot but do so con- 
stantly—3 : 18-19, 5: 22 notes), my judgment is true, because 

I am not by myself—there is myself and the Father who sent 
me’; that is, ‘I am conscious of a unique communion with 
the Father, in virtue of which mine is no mere individual 
judgment but one supported by the Father’s judgment on 
which indeed it is based.’ (Compare Pirke Aboth, iv, 12: 

“ Judge not alone, for none may judge alone save one.’) 

Christ’s evidence then is valid: ‘Why, it is written in your 17 
own Law that the evidence of two persons is valid’ (see note 
on 5: 31, and cf. Deut. 17: 6, 19: 15 and Mt. 18: 16, Heb. 
Io: 28, 2 Cor. 13: 1); and in this case there are two wit- 
nesses: ‘I testify to myself, and the Father who sent me also 18 
testifies to me.’ The manner of the Father’s testifying was 
given in 5: 30ff. Loisy notes that in addition to working 
out this subtle argument from the law of evidence the Evan- 
gelist also plays on the word ‘ judgment,’ the sense of which 
throughout this passage is equivocal: ‘the judgment of the 
Pharisees is a judgment of value without practical conse- 
quence: that of Christ is a sovereign decision, a divine 
decree from which there is no appeal ’ (5 : 28-29). 

Jesus’ appeal to an absentee witness does not satisfy his 19 
opponents: ‘Where is your Father?’ they said. The Jews 
know well enough who the Father is (5: 17-18), but will 
be content with nothing short of a divine theophany. It is 
interesting to compare this question and Jesus’ rejoinder with 
the similar request of Philip and Jesus’ reply in 14: 8 ff. 
In Philip’s case the ethical conditions laid down in 7: 17 are 
present, and Jesus therefore grants him a fuller revelation of 
spiritual truth ; in the present case Jesus can but reply that 
his hearers’ lack of understanding of himself renders impossible 
a revelation of God which otherwise might have been theirs: 
Jesus replied, ‘ You know neither me nor my Father ; if you 
had known me you would have known my Father also ’ (cf. 
14:9). To ‘know’ in our Gospel implies much more than 
a bare theoretical knowledge; the idea also contains moral 
and religious elements ; for John, as for prophet and psalmist, 


195 


20 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


to ‘know the Lord’ would mean also to trust him, and to 
enter into harmony with his will and purpose. Hence know- 
ledge of the Father is impossible to those who refuse to submit 
their wills to Jesus. 

The section ends with a note concerning the place where 
this discourse was delivered: These words he spoke in the 
treasury, as he was teaching in the temple. By the treasury 
is meant that part of the Women’s Court where stood the 
thirteen boxes with funnel-shaped openings, in which was 
deposited money collected for the temple and various charit- 
able purposes (Mk. 12: 41 ff.). The Sanhedrim met regularly 
close by in the chamber ‘ Gazith,’ between the Court of the 
Women and the Inner Court. Thus the point of the note 
is that Jesus was teaching within earshot of his enemies, 
but no one arrested him, for his time had not yet come. (For 
the last clause cf. 7: 30, 44; 13: 1, and note on 2: 4.) 


ACT II. THE CONFLICT OF THE NEW GOSPEL WITH 


THEY OLD 
SECTION I.—THE DIVINE ORIGIN OF THE CHRIST 


Illustration: Jesus and his Brothers (7: I-14, 25-27) 


1 After this Jesus moved about in Galilee ; he would not move 


2 
3 


4 


ON DW 


in Judaea, because the Jews were trying to kill him. 

Now the Jewish festival of booths was near, so his brothers 
said to him, ‘ Leave this and go across into Judaea, to let 
your disciples witness what you can do ; for nobody who 
aims at public recognition ever keeps his actions secret. 
Since you can do these deeds, display yourself to the world ’ 
(for even his brothers did not believe in him). Jesus said to 
them, ‘ My time has not come yet, but your time is always 
at hand; the world cannot hate you, but it hates me 
because I testify that its deeds are evil. Go up to the 
festival yourselves ; I am not going up to this festival, 
for my time has not arrived yet.’ So saying, he stayed on 
in Galilee. But after his brothers had gone up to the 
festival, he went up too, not publicly but as it were pri- 

196 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 1-14 


vately. At the festival the Jews were in quest of him, say- rz 
ing, ‘Where is he?’ And the crowd disputed about him 12 
hotly ; some said, ‘He is a good man,’ but others said, 
‘No, he is misleading the people.’ For fear of the Jews, 13 
however, nobody spoke of him in public. 

When the festival was half over, Jesus went up to the temple 14 
and began to teach. Then said some of the Jerusalemites, 25 
‘Is this not the man they want to kill? Yet here he is, 26 
opening his lips in public, and they say nothing to him! 
Can the authorities have really discovered that he is the 
Christ ? No, we know where this man comes from ; 27 
but when the Christ does come, no one will know where 
he comes from.’ 


The second main division of the Gospel is reached with Jesus’ 
entry upon his final ministry at Jerusalem, throughout which 
the dramatic emphasis centres upon the conflict of the New 
Gospel with the Old, of faith with unbelief. But first John 
records one last Galilean interlude: After this—for the 1 
sequence of events see note on p. 124 f.—Jesus moved 
about in Galilee ; he would not move in Judaea, because 
the Jews were trying to kill him—a reference to 5: 18, 
7: 19-20. The imperfect tense moved about implies a stay 
in Galilee of some length in contrast, e.g., to the brief visits of 
2: I-12, 4: 43-54. At this point, unless it be between 
Io: 21 and 22 (where see note), must be inserted the leisurely 
teaching mission undertaken by Jesus on his way from Galilee 
to Jerusalem and narrated in Lk. 9: 51-19: 28. The word 
here used (‘ move about’ ‘ walk,’) is regularly used of just such 
a going about of a teacher among his disciples. Holtzmann 
sees in this verse proof that John regards the Judaean ministry 
as the rule, anda visit to Galilee as an exception which requires 
to be justified. Rather John implies that Jesus wished to 
avoid a premature clash with the Jews (cf. 4: 1-3, 43-44). 

Now the Jewish festival of booths was near. The Feast 2 
of Booths or Tabernacles commemorated God’s providence 
towards His people while they dwelt in tents in the Wilderness, 
and lasted for eight days (from 15th Tisri) in the second half of 


197 


2 


aS 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


October, during which period the people lived in tents in the 
open places of the city. It ranked second only to the Passover 
in importance, ‘ the holiest and greatest feast,’ Josephus calls 
it, when any pious Jew might be expected to visit Jerusalem : 
so his brothers (2: 12) said to him, ‘ Leave this and go across 
into Judaea, to let your disciples witness what you can do.’ 
Contrast the brothers’ action according to Mk. 3: 21, 31; 
here so far from restraining Jesus they urge him to bring 
matters to an issue. ‘ Let these wonderful deeds of yours be 
done not only in a corner (Acts 26: 26), but in the limelight, 
where they may be seen by your disciples’—among whom 
apparently the brothers do not yet reckon themselves (5). 
‘Disciples’ include those who have professed a certain measure 
of faith in Jesus without necessarily attaching themselves to 
his person (6: 60 ff.). Many such would naturally be found 
in Judaea (4: 1), especially during festival seasons (2: 23), 
when adherents from all parts would congregate. The 
brothers’ challenge does not so much imply doubt concerning 
the reality of Jesus’ works as hint that a change of method is 
necessary if the zeal of Jesus’ followers is to be kept at high 
pitch. Jesus’ present disciples, be they Jewish residenters 
or Galilean visitors, must be shown that he has power to make 
good his claims at the headquarters of the Jewish religion. 
Wellhausen and Schwartz see in this challenge to go to Judaea 
a relic of an earlier form of the Gospel, according to which 
Jesus had not previously visited Jerusalem. But the question 
is not of recruiting new disciples from an hitherto untried 
field, but of confirming the loyalty of his present disciples 
by advancing his claims in the most impressive setting. 
‘For,’ it is urged, ‘nobody who aims at public recognition ever 
keeps his actions secret’ (cf. Lk. 8: 16-17, II: 33, 12:2, 
Mt. Io: 26) ; that is, one can’t hide one’s actions and yet hope 
to be prominent oneself. Jesus, they hint, is privately making 
claims which can be vindicated only ‘in public’ (cf. 11: 54). 
“Make yourself known, they urge, ‘as that which by your 
actions you profess to be,’ that is, as Messiah. But Messiah 
must fill the whole stage; therefore, ‘since you can do these 
deeds (granting his ability to do them, not ‘7/, as A.V., which 
198 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 1-14 


would question it), display yourself to the world ’—Jerusalem 
being for the Jew the ‘ World-metropolis.’ (For ‘ world’ 
cf. 12: 19, 18: 20 and note on 1: 10. Here it means the 
sum-total of heterogeneous humanity.) For even his brothers, 
who might be expected to be the first to believe, did not believe 
in him: they demanded world-recognition first, whereas 
‘faith would have been content to wait’ (Westcott). 

There are two reasons why Jesus cannot accept his brothers’ 
advice ; his case is entirely different from theirs: first, in this, 
that while nothing depends upon their manifestation to the 
world, everything depends upon his ; they may choose their 
own time, but he must wait a signal from God. Jesus said 
to them, ‘My time (cf. note on 2: 4, 7: 30, 8: 20, I3: 31, 
Lk. 9: 51) is not come yet, but your time is always at hand.’ 
Moreover, the ground of this distinction between Jesus and his 
brothers lies in a distinction deeper still—the relation of each 
to ‘the world,’ that is, to the sum total of forces ranged against 
Jesus and his cause (cf. 1: 10, 14: 17, 15: 18-19, 16: 20, 33, 
17: 9,14): ‘the world cannot (the word ‘ answers to the law 
of moral correspondence ’—Westcott ; cf. 20: 9) hate you— 
who share its point of view—but it hates me (15: 18-10) 
because I testify that its deeds are evil ’—because in my light its 
evil is shown up (3: 19 f.). We recall Jesus’ similar retort to 
his mother at 2: 4. ‘The world’ has a different meaning for 
Jesus and for his brothers. ‘Go up to the festival yourselves ’"— 
they would go merely as pilgrims: Jesus, when he goes up, 
must do so as Messiah; therefore ‘I am not going up to this 
festival.’ Jesus looks forward from ‘ this festival,’ the Feast 
of Booths, which as ‘ a festival of peculiar joy for work accom- 
plished ’ (Westcott) would not chime in with his present mood, 
to that final Passover when, his work accomplished, “ his time ’ 
would have arrived (12: 23, 17: 1). To go up now would be 
to be proclaimed Messiah prematurely, and that is to be 
avoided, ‘for my time has not arrived yet.’ 

Porphyry remarks on Jesus’ ‘ inconstancy’ when, after the 
statement that so saying, he stayed on in Galilee, it is added 


) 


that after his brothers had gone up to the festival, he went up 10 


too. Rather does John intend to insist once more (as in 
199 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


2: 4, 7, where see note) that Jesus would never consent to take 
hurried action on another’s initiative. The true reason for 
the delay, followed by an apparent change of plan, is that 
Jesus may be sure of his own mind and of God’s will before he 
precipitates his arrest. Jesus’ brothers symbolize the Jewish 
point of view, as does his ‘ mother’ in 2: 4, and we have here 
a Johannine parallel to the ‘Temptation’ of Mt. 4: 5-7, 
where Jesus is tempted to adopt the Jewish Messianic pro- 
gramme and secure recognition by a signal display of power. 
It is added that Jesus went up not publicly but as it were 
privately, by which we are to understand not that he refrained 
from teaching openly on arrival (cf. 18: 20), but that he 
travelled on his own account, ‘ incognito,’ and not with one of 
the pilgrim caravans. The fact is mentioned to emphasize 
that Jesus did not simply come into line with his brothers’ 
advice. 

1m At the festival the Jews (the Jewish authorities of 5: 16-18 
opposed to the ‘crowd’ of pilgrims mentioned in the next 
verse) were in quest of him, saying, ‘Where ishe?’ Again the 
meaning is not that Jesus remained ‘ incognito’ on arrival, 
but that he was not among the first of the pilgrims to arrive : 
‘the Jews’ were impatiently awaiting his appearance. And 

12 the crowd (of pilgrims and common folk) disputed about him 
hotly. The Greek word suggests that it was ‘ suppressed 
discussion in low tones, in corners and among friends’ (Dods). 
Some said, ‘He is a good man ’—his motives are pure—but 
others said, ‘No, he is misleading the people ’—he is arousing 
Messianic expectations for his own purposes (cf. Mt. 27: 63, 

13 Lk. 23:5). For fear of the Jews, however, nobody spoke of 
him in public : they were waiting for the authorities to declare 
their mind first. 

14 Possibly Jesus had already been a day or two in Jerusalem, 
but now he appears at the temple: When the festival was 
half over, Jesus went up to the temple and began to teach. 
This would be on the fourth or fifth day of the festival 
which lasted eight days. On the ground that Jesus would 
probably teach thus on a Sabbath an attempt has been made 
to fix this date as the 15th October, a.D. 29. But ready 

200 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 25-27 


listeners would be found in the temple on any day during the 
festival week. 


(Verses 15 to 24 have been inserted at the close of chapter 
5.) 

Then said some of the Jerusalemites—the residenters, as 25 
opposed to the ‘ crowd’ of pilgrims, who might be expected to 
have information about the designs of their rulers against 
Jesus—‘ Is this not the man they want to kill ? (5: 18, 7: 1, 19). 26 
Yet here he is, opening his lips in public, and they say nothing 
to him! Can the authorities really have discovered that he is 
the Christ?’ They are surprised that Jesus should be 
allowed to speak so freely, unless indeed the rulers have 
changed their minds as the result of a discovery that he is 
really the Messiah. But this idea is quickly dismissed on the 
ground of the ancient dogma that Messiah would suddenly 
appear out of concealment. (Cf. Jn. 1: 31, Mt. 24: 26, and 
the apocalyptic ideas as expressed in 4 Ezra 7: 28, 13: 32, and 
Apoc. Baruch 13: 32.) There is a Jewish saying that ‘ three 
things come wholly unexpected—Messiah, a god-send, and a 
scorpion.’ Justin Martyr alludes to a tradition that not even 
Messiah would know his own mission until he was anointed 
by Elijah. With this in mind the people conclude, ‘No, we 27 
know where this man comes from,’—an allusion to Jesus’ as- 
sumed origin in Nazaret, which did not fulfil the Messianic 
requirements noted in verse 42; but the point is that this is 
no sudden appearance, Jesus is a man whose antecedents 
are known—‘ but when the Christ does come, no one will 
know where he comes from.’ It may be noted that in thus 
assuming the point of view of the people according to which 
Jesus was born at Nazaret, the Evangelist is reflecting the 
real opinion of the time and not merely the belief of his own 
day which took for granted the nativity at Bethlehem. Is 
this trait due to ‘the Witness’? But though the Evangelist 
here uses the ordinary language of current Messianic expecta- 
tion, it must be remembered that for him the word Christ has 
outgrown its limited significance of ‘ Messiah,’ and has be- 
come almost an equivalent for ‘Son of God,’ with which 

201 


28 


29 
30 


See 


2g 
BS 
34 
35 


36 


28 


29 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


phrase indeed it is frequently co-ordinated (11: 27, 20: 31). 
This comes out in Jesus’ reply. 


Theme: Christ's Divine Commission (7: 28-52, 8: 21-59) 


So Jesus cried aloud, as he was teaching in the temple, ‘ You 
know me? you knowwhere Icome from? But I have 
not come on my own initiative ; I am sent, and sent by 
Him who is real. You do not know Him, but I know 
Him, because I have come from Him and He sent me.’ 
So they tried to arrest him ; but no one laid hands on 
him, because his time had not come yet. Indeed many 
of the people believed in him, saying, ‘When the Christ 
does come, will he perform more Signs than this man ? ’ 
The Pharisees heard the people discussing Jesus in this 
way, so the high-priests and the Pharisees despatched 
attendants to arrest him. Then said Jesus, ‘I will be 
with you a little longer, then I go to Him who sent me ; 
you will search for me but you will not find me, and 
where I go, you cannot come.’ The Jews said to them- 
selves, ‘Where is he going, that we will not find him P 
Is he off to the Dispersion among the Greeks, to teach the 
Greeks ? What does he mean by saying, ‘‘ You will 
search for me but you will not find me, and where I 
go, you cannot come ’’ ?’” 


So Jesus—as if reading their thoughts—cried aloud, as he 
was teaching in the temple. The words that follow may be 
taken either as an admission on Christ’s part of the super- 
ficial truth of the popular estimate, as if he were to say, ‘ It 
may be that you do know my earthly origin, but .. .’; or, 
more probably, his reply is an ironical question: ‘ You know me? 
you know where I come from?’ Nay—TI have a heavenly 
origin too, of which you know nothing—‘I have not come 
on my own initiative,’ commissioned by no higher authority, 
‘I am sent, and sent by Him who is real ’—by One who so fully 
exemplifies the ideal relations between Sender and Sent that 
Jesus’ mission by God may be said to be the archetype of 
every true human mission. It is this unique relation to the 

202 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 28-36 


Sender, possessed by Jesus only, which alone qualifies to give 
a judgment on Jesus’ origin ; Jesus, and not his critics, must 
be the judge of the genuineness of his commission from God : 
‘You do not know Him, but I know Him, because I have come 
from Him and He sent me.’ Jesus’ critics do not know the 
Sender, and therefore have no right to pass judgment on the 
Sent (cf. 5 : 37-38, 8:14). They have an eye only for his 
earthly parentage, but Jesus sees beyond the shadow to the 
reality. (For the thought cf. Mt. 11 : 27.) 

So they tried to arrest him, as at 5: 17 f., after asimilar claim 30 
to a unique relationship to God ; but no one laid hands on him, 
because his time had not come yet. Jesus’ words of verses 
6 and 8 had proved true in spite of his action in coming up to 
Jerusalem which seemed to contradict them. Thus does 
John emphasize again the absolute independence of Jesus 
from all outward constraint ; his fate is wholly self-determined. 
(Cf. 8: 59, 10: 39, andesp. 10: 17.) But the immediate cause 
of Jesus’ present escape was that the people were of two 
minds: Indeed many of the people believed in him, saying, 31 
“When the Christ does come, will he perform more Signs than 
this man?’ Perhaps there is a hint here of the thirst for 
miracles of the Galilean section of the crowd (cf. 4: 48). 
‘The mention of miracles accuses their faith of imperfection, 
but it also condemns the incredulity of the other Jews’ 
(Loisy). 

The Pharisees heard the people discussing Jesus in this 32 
way, so the high-priests and the Pharisees despatched attendants 
to arrest him. (See note on 1:24.) John uses the title 
high-priests not only of those who held the office of high- 
priest but of members of the hierarchical families; for him 
the ‘high-priests’ practically correspond to the Synoptic 
Sadducees. Jesus warns his enemies that by his death they 33 
will simply bring about for him his glorification with the 
Father, and for themselves the shutting of the doorway to 
salvation: Then said Jesus, ‘I will be with you a little longer, 
then I go to Him who sent me ; you will search for me ’— 
‘not in penitence nor yet in anger, but simply in distress’ (West- 34 
cott)—‘ but you will not find me.’ Having rejected the Christ 

203 


35 


36 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


the Jews will awake too late to the sense of their need, but 
the opportunity will not recur (cf. Is. 55:6, Lk. 17: 22, 
19: 43f.). Christ will have passed beyond their ken, and 
they cannot follow him: ‘and where I go you cannot come.’ 
Christ alone could have led them to his own dwelling-place 
with the Father (14: 3), whereas now they must ‘ die in their 
sins’ (8:21). There is a note of melancholy here which 
recalls Mt. 23: 37. 

The Jews, misunderstanding Jesus’ allusion to his heavenly 
destination, construe it malevolently: The Jews said to 
themselves, ‘Where is he going that we will not find him? 
Is he off to the Dispersion among the Greeks, to teach the 
Greeks?’ They jeeringly conjecture that rejected by the 
true Jews of Palestine Jesus will betake himself to the Jews 
scattered throughout the Gentile world, and make them a 
base of operations for teaching the Gentiles—as did Paul. 
From the Evangelist’s point of view the words would seem 2 
remarkable prophecy of the actual course of Christianity. 
Jesus’ friendship with the Samaritans would lend colour to 
this conjecture. But not even this notion satisfies the Jews. 
“What does he mean by saying, ‘‘ You will search for me but 
you will not find me, and where I go, you cannot come”’?’ 
‘Christ’s words cannot be shaken off. .. . A vague sense remains 
that there is in them some unfathomed meaning’ (Westcott). 
Christ unfolds this in 13: 33-14: 6. 

At this point a somewhat drastic rearrangement of the text 
suggests itself: the sections up to the end of chapter 8 should 
probably be read in the following order (omitting, as no part 
of the original Gospel, the Pericope de adultera, 7: 53-8: 11): 
8: 21-59, 7: 45-52, 7: 37-44. The section 8: 12-20 has 
already been inserted after chapter 5 plus 7: 15-24. Note 
first that the sequence from 7: 52 to 8: 21 is not satisfactory. 
Jesus can hardly have been present at the inquiry of the chief 
priests and Pharisees into the failure of the officers to arrest 
him (7: 45-52). Yet at 8: 21 he renews to this audience a 
discourse exactly similar to that broken off at 7: 36. Further, 
8: 21 admittedly resumes the argument of 7: 34, ‘ Then Jesus 
said to them again...’ With the text as it stands the 

204 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 28-36 


Jews’ question in 7: 35-36 is left in the air, contrary to the 
Evangelist’s usual manner. Elsewhere we note that such 
questions, provoked by some difficult saying of Jesus, are asked 
deliberately to prepare the way for a second declaration by him. 
(We may compare 13: 33 ff. and 16: 16ff.) Accordingly, 
after the question of 7: 36, we expect an immediate rejoinder 
from Jesus, and this we have in 8: 21. One more transposition, 
that of 7: 45-52 before 7: 37-44, makes the sequence perfect. 
As the text stands, at 7: 32 the officers are sent to arrest Jesus, 
but it is not till a new day has dawned at 7 : 37 that they report 
to their masters at 7: 45. With the suggested rearrangement, 
at 7: 32 the officers are despatched, at 8: 59 they allow Jesus 
to escape, and in the very next verse, 7: 45, they are called 
to account for their remissness; moreover, these events can 
now be assigned to a single day. We are then left with 
7: 37-44 as an impressive climax to the whole section dealing 
with Jesus’ visit to the Feast of Booths, the paragraph closing 
(vers. 43-44), as so often in the Gospel (cf. 6: 66 ff., 10: 19 ff.), 
with a note of the impression made upon the people. While 
we adopt this rearrangement it may be more convenient to 
follow in the commentary the usual order of the text. (For 
the whole question of the rearrangement of the text of chapters 
7 and 8 see the Expository Times, November 1921.) 


Now on the last day, the great day, of the festival, Jesus 37 
stood and cried aloud, ‘ If anyone is athirst, let him come to 
me and drink ; he who believes in me—out of his body, as 38 
scripture says, streams of living water will flow ’ (he meant 39 
by this the Spirit which those who believed in him were to 
receive :—as yet there was no Spirit, because Jesus had not 
been glorified yet). On hearing this some of the people 40 
said, ‘ This really is the Prophet ’ ; others said, ‘ He is the 
Christ ’ ; but others said, ‘No, surely the Christ does not 41 
come from Galilee? Does not scripture say it is from 42 
the offspring of David, from David’s village of Bethlehem, 
that the Christ is to come ?’ So the people were divided 43 
over him; some wanted to arrest him, but no one laid 44 
hands on him. 


5 205 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


37. To the original seven days of the festival (Num. 29: 12, 
Deut. 16: 13) there had been added an eighth day, kept as a 
Sabbath (Lev. 23: 36, Num. 29: 35, Neh. 8: 18), as a day of 
special rejoicing, on which the people left their booths and thus 
commemorated the permanent settlement in the Holy Land. 
The first and the eighth days were the most solemn, the 
‘great days,’ of the festival. Josephus calls the eighth day 
‘the sacred close of the year.’ It is of this day that we read: 
Now on the last day, the great day, of the festival, Jesus stood 
and cried aloud, ‘If anyone is athirst, let him come to me 
and drink © (Cf. 4: -r0,/145 6735, Is. 55%) | Thereighth 
day had taken on the characteristics of a harvest festival, and 
some think that Jesus’ reference to ‘ drinking’ is suggested 
by the Bachanalian rites commonly associated with such a 
festival. Much more probably we have a reference to the 
symbolism of the feast, on each morning of which a golden 
pitcher, filled with water from Siloam, was poured out as a 
libation in the temple court. Even if it be true that this 
ritual was discontinued on the eighth day, ‘the void caused 
by the absence of a ceremony performed on the preceding 
days would be felt’ (Lange), and Jesus seeks to fill it by 
pointing the people to himself, in whom their spiritual thirst 

38 may be satisfied: ‘He who believes in me—out of his body, as 
scripture says, streams of living water will flow,’ not an exact 
quotation from Scripture, but a free citation in which we may 
have echoes of e.g. Is. 43: 18-21, 44: 3, 48: 21, 55: 1, 58: 11. 
The meaning will then be: either, that he who first drinks 
from Christ will henceforth have within himself a perennial 
source of life—the exact thought of 4: 14—or, that he who 
first drinks from Christ will in turn himself become the source 
of life to others, just as Christ, by living on the Father, obtains 
the power to feed others (6: 57). To this we have a remarkable 
parallel from the Talmud: ‘Quando homo se convertit ad 
Dominum suum, tanquam fons aquis vivis impletur, et fluenta 
ejus egrediuntur ad omnis generis homines et ad omnes tribus.’ 
The difficulty is to see the force of ‘ out of his body,’ which some 
ingeniously explain as a metaphor from a fountain built in 
the form of a human statue. The meaning becomes much 

206 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 37-44 


clearer if we can refer the verse not to the believer but to 
Christ. This is possible if we translate, as the Greek admits, 
“If anyone is athirst, let him come to me; and let him drink 
who believes on me; as scripture says, out of his body 
(i.e. the Messiah’s, who in a quotation would naturally be 
referred to not in the first but in the third person) streams of 
living water will flow.’ There is no place in ‘ Scripture’ where 
it is said that believers themselves become fountains of water. 
But if the verse be applied to Christ, an apposite reference is 
possible to Exod. 17: 6, Ps. 105: 41, an image used by the 
prophets, Ezek. 47: 1,12, Joel3: 18. The pouring forth of the 
water of Siloam at the festival was actually in commemoration 
of the Rock in the Wilderness, while 1 Cor. 10: 4 shows that 
the image was used of Christ. The expression ‘out of his 
body ’ may now be explained as an anticipation of the scene in 
19: 34, which gives a symbolical illustration of this passage. 
Burney, however (Aramaic Origin, p. 109 ff.), suggests that the 
words are due to the confusion of the Aramaic me’yin 
(‘ bowels’) with me’yan (‘fountain’), and would translate, 
‘as the scripture hath said, Rivers shall flow forth from the 
fountain of living waters’ (Zech. 14: 8, etc.). Cyprian, 
among others, seems to have referred verse 38 to Christ, and 
in a letter from the Church of Lyons to Gallic Christians 
(A.D. 175), we read of a certain martyr ‘ besprinkled and 
strengthened by the heavenly fountain of the water of life 
that issues from the navel of Jesus.’ 

Once this interpretation is accepted the comment in the 39 
following verse becomes quite apposite, and indeed expresses 
a characteristic thought of the Gospel: he meant by this the 
Spirit which those who believed in him were to receive :—as yet 
_ there was no Spirit, because Jesus had not been glorified yet. 
Strictly the meaning is ‘as yet there was no communication of 
the Spirit,’ for this John held to be impossible (16: 17,20: 17; 
cf. Acts 2 : 32-33) except in conjunction with Jesus’ ‘ glorifica- 
tion,’ an idea which in our Gospel may almost be said to fore- 
shorten his death (11: 4, 12: 23, 13: 31), resurrection and 
exaltation (17: I, 5, etc.) into one event. The Spirit was to 
take the place of Jesus (14: 16), and therefore could not be 

207 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


communicated while he was yet present in the flesh. Christ’s 
death thus becomes the condition alike of his ‘ glory ’ and of his 
full spiritual activity. There is probably no allusion to any 
definite event such as Pentecost. Note that, just as in 
4:13f., 23f., an allusion to the living water is explained by 
reference to the Spirit, the reality of which water is but the 
symbol (I: 33). 

40 There follows a summary of the varied impressions left by 
Jesus’ teaching on the people (cf. Mk. 8: 27 ff.): On hearing 
this—not merely the immediately preceding claim, but the 
whole tenor of Jesus’ teaching at the festival—some of the 

4I people said, ‘ This really is the Prophet’; others said, ‘He 
is the Christ ’—two stages in the growth of belief (cf. 4: 19, 29; 
g: 17, 38. For the distinction between ‘the prophet’ and 
‘the Christ’ see note on I: 21, 6: 14.) But others said, ‘ No, 
surely the Christ does not come from Galilee,’ which, accord- 

42 ing to this Gospel (4: 44), was Jesus’ ‘own country.’ ‘Does 
not scripture say it is from the offspring of David, from 
David’s village of Bethlehem, that the Christ istocome?’ The 
tradition was based on such passages as Micah 5: 2, Is. 11: I, 
Jer. 23:5. David spent his boyhood at Bethlehem (1 Sam. 
16:1, 4, etc.). It may be that Jesus’ Galilean connexions 
were urged as an objection to Christianity in the Evangelist’s 
own day, possibly by the ‘ Baptist Sect.’ From the fact that 
John gives no answer to this objection it has been assumed 
that he did not accept the ‘ fictions’ of the early chapters of 
Matthew and Luke. (But see note on ver. 27.) In truth, 
to John the question was a matter of indifference; for him, 
as for Jesus himself (Mk. 12: 35 ff.), the Christ is not David’s 
son but his Lord. 

43 Once again (cf. 31) Jesus owes immunity to the lack of 
unanimity on the part of his foes: So the people were divided 

44 over him ; some wanted to arrest him, but no one laid hands 
on him. 


45 Then the attendants went back to the high-priests and Phari- 

sees, who asked them, ‘Why have you not brought him 

46 with you?’ The attendants replied, ‘No man ever 
208 


CHAPTER VII, VERSES 45-52 


spoke as he does.’ The Pharisees retorted, ‘Are you 47 
misled as well? Have any of the authorities or of the 48 
Pharisees believed in him? As for this mob, with its 49 
ignorance of the Law—it is accursed !’ Nicodemus, one 50 
of their number (the same who had come to him before), 
said to them, ‘ But surely our Law does not condemn the 51 
accused before hearing what he has to say and ascertaining 
his offence?’ They answered him, ‘And are you from 52 
Galilee, too? Search and you will see that no prophet 
ever springs from Galilee.’ 


For the true position of the following paragraph see note 
before 7: 37. It seems strange that the attendants despatched 
at 32 (at least a day previously, for a new day begins at 37) 
should only now return to report their failure: Then the 45 
attendants went back to the high-priests and Pharisees, who 
asked them, ‘Why have you not brought him with you?’ 
The high-priests and Pharisees are the Johannine equivalent 
for the Sanhedrim. The authorities cannot understand why 
their order has not been carried out. With our proposed 
rearrangement the reason is stated at 8: 59. Jesus had 
miraculously slipped through their hands. They have been 
thwarted, they know not how, by Jesus’ divine ‘ self-determina- 
tion,’ and it only remains to plead in excuse that they have been 
paralysed by Jesus’ power of speech: The attendants replied, 46 
“No man ever spoke as he does.’ There is no real faith on the 
attendants’ part, yet their blind admiration serves as a foil 
to the stubborn hostility of their masters: The Pharisees 47 
retorted, ‘ Are you misled as well ? ’—even you, whose duty 
it is as officials not to reason why, but to obey. ‘ Have any 48 
of the authorities—the only capable arbiters in matters 
religious (3: 1)—or of the Pharisees—the guardians of 
orthodoxy—believed in him?’ Those who do believe are 
negligible. ‘ As for this mob, with its ignorance of the Law— 49 
it is accursed !’ Even though ignorant of the Law they come 
under its curse through their violation of it! The Pharisees 
regularly contrasted with themselves, as students of the 
Law, the ignorant mob or am-haarets. ‘Sacerdotal anger is 

209 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


fond of putting on esoteric airs’ (Godet). The Pharisees’ 
objection to Jesus is a throw-back from that of the Jews of 
the Evangelist’s own day, who would ridicule Christianity as 
drawing all its converts from the poor and ignorant (1 Cor. 
1: 26 ff.). But though among Christians there were ‘not 
many’ educated men, John hints that there were at least 
some, though they might be timid ; for Nicodemus protests : 
50 Nicodemus, one of their number, the same who had come to 
him before (the A.V. ‘by night’ seems to be an addition 
51 after 19:39; for Nicodemus see 3:1 ff.), said to them, 
‘But surely our Law does not condemn the accused before 
hearing what he has to say and ascertaining his offence?’ 
The protest should have weight as coming from ‘ one of their 
number,’ i.e., one of the Pharisaic members of the Sanhedrim. 
Are Jesus’ accusers sure that in condemning him unheard 
they are not themselves violating the Law? (See Deut. 1: 16, 
17: 4, Exod. 23: 1.) The Pharisees’ only reply is a sarcastic 
52 pleasantry: They answered him, ‘ And are you (emphatic— 
“you, who are so obviously a Jerusalemite! ’) from Galilee 
too ? ’—and therefore disposed to side with a fellow-country- 
man (cf. Mk. 14: 70). ‘ Search (the Scriptures) and you will 
see that no prophet ever springs from Galilee.’ According to 
2 Kings 14: 25, Jonah hailed from Galilee; and what of 
Elijah, Elisha, Hosea, Nahum, Amos? But the fact that the 
tense of the word ‘springs’ is present rather than perfect, 
perhaps suggests that the reference is to the future rather 
than to the past. Galilee had few prophetic traditions, and 
was not the district from which Messiah was to be expected. ¢ Fy. Ul. 


An Interpolated Incident: Jesus and the Adulteress 
(7: 53-8: 11) 

This section interrupts the sequence of the narrative, and 
though there is no reason to doubt that we have here an 
authentic piece of evangelical tradition, both external and 
internal evidence goes to show that it is no original part of the 
Gospel. It is omitted by all the oldest Greek MSS. except 
one (D), and by a large number of the more reliable later 

210 


CHAPTER VII, VERSE 53 


MSS.; while those which do contain it frequently either 
obelize the passage as doubtful, or even insert it in a different 
context, e.g. at the end of the Gospel, after 7: 36, or even 
after Lk. 21. There are also many textual variations. Early 
Fathers such as Origen, Theodore of Mopsuestia, Chrysostom, 
Cyril of Alexandria, Tertullian, Cyprian, did not read it as 
part of the Gospel, and though Jerome retained it in his Latin 
text and Ambrose and Augustine argue for its authenticity, 
this counts little against the weight of earlier evidence. The 
internal evidence is equally strong. Neither the language 
nor the tone of the narrative is Johannine: Greek words 
occur used nowhere else in John, and indeed the whole 
style and thought is much more akin to that of the Synoptists. 
This is the ‘ only narrative in the Fourth Gospel in which the 
utterances of Jesus do not serve the purpose of his own glorifica- 
tion, but are spoken entirely for the sake of the persons with 
whom he is dealing’ (Schmiedel). It seems probable that 
we have here an authentic fragment of Synoptic tradition 
belonging to the days immediately before the Passion (one 
group of MSS. inserts it after Lk. 21, while Holtzmann 
suggests a position after Mk. 12: 17 ; see note on 8: 6) which 
failed to find a place in one of the canonical Gospels—perhaps 
because it offended the taste of the early Church and seemed 
subversive of moral discipline—but was preserved in one of 
the non-canonical Gospels (e.g. Eusebius states that the 
work of Papias contained ‘the story of a woman accused 
before the Lord of numerous sins, a story contained also in 
the Gospel of the Hebrews ’), whence presumably it found 
its way into our Gospel, and was inserted at this point perhaps 
as an illustration of 7: 24 and 8: 15. 

And every one of them went home. Who? Ifthe sentence 53 
belongs to the original narrative, then apparently the Phari- 
sees are meant, in which case ‘ the remark is an utterly idle 
one’ (Godet): if, as is more likely, it is part of the borrowed 
paragraph, then the phrase has no connexion with the previous 
scene, and we have no means of knowing to whom it refers, 
unless it be, as Holtzmann suggests, the audience of Mk. 12: 17. 
But Jesus went to the Hill of Olives—not elsewhere mentioned 1 

ZIT 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


in the Gospel, but the place to which, according to Luke 
(21: 37, 22: 39), Jesus repaired each evening during the last 
week. Note the similarity of the next verse to Lk. 21: 38, 

2 after which one group of MSS. inserts the paragraph: Early 
in the morning he returned to the temple, the people all came 
to him, and he sat down (Mk. 9: 35, Lk. 4: 20; in Jn. 7: 37 
Jesus ‘stands’) and taught them—perhaps in Solomon’s 
Portico (10: 23). The Greek words both for ‘ early’ and for 
‘people’ (John uses ‘ crowd’) are Synoptic, not Johannine, 
as is also the title ‘scribes’ in the next verse (John uses 

3 ‘high-priests,’ 7: 32): The Scribes and Pharisees brought a 
woman who had been caught in the act of committing adultery, 

4and making her stand forward they said to him, ‘ Teacher— 
addressing him with an appearance of deference—this woman 
was caught in the very act of committing adultery.’ The 
woman would in the ordinary course have been tried before 
the Jews’ own court, but by bringing her to Jesus they 

5 thought to lay a trap for him (6). ‘Now Moses has com- 
manded us in the Law to stone such creatures.’ Lev. 20: Io, 
Deut. 22:22 give death (without any particulars) as the 
penalty of adultery ; Deut. 22: 23 f. specifies stoning in the 
case of a betrothed virgin. But stoning was probably held 
to be implied in all cases (cf. Ezek. 16: 38-41) in spite of the 
Talmudic dictum that death simpliciter meant ‘ strangling.’ 

6 ‘But what do you say?’ ‘They said this to test him, in order 
to get a charge against him—hoping that with his habitual 
pity he would exonerate the woman and so lay himself open 
to the charge of contempt of the Law, while if he bade stone 
her he might be accused before Pilate of encroaching on the 
rights of the Roman authority which alone had the power of 
life and death. The test is exactly parallel to the other 
questions addressed to Jesus in the Synoptics (Mk. 12: 13-34, 
in which section Holtzmann would place this narrative) and 
might be expected to place Jesus in a similar dilemma. 

7 Jesus stooped down, and began to write with his finger on 
the ground. There is no point in asking what Jesus wrote, 
for the significance lay not in what was written but in the 
gesture itself. The action was meant not to give an answer, 

212 


GHAPTER VIII, VERSES 7-11 


but as a hint that no answer was to be given. It is the action 
of a man who is preoccupied, angered both at ‘the shame 
of the deed itself and the brazen hardness of the prosecutors ’ 
(Ecce Homo), and holding his feelings under strict control. 
Jesus’ gesture was a perfectly natural one, such as any one 
of us might find ourselves copying when sitting, perhaps with 
a stick in hand, in a preoccupied or pensive mood. Jesus, 
oriental fashion, would be sitting on the ground (2), so the 
action is not so strange as it sounds. (For a similar refusal 
on Jesus’ part to act as judge cf. Lk. 12: 13f.) But Jesus’ 
questioners will not rest content with silence: But as they 
persisted with their question, he raised himself and said to 
them, ‘ Let the innocent among you throw the first stone,’— 
‘innocent’ not of all sin, else no man could be fit to judge, 
but of a similar sin—if not actually adultery, then at least 
some sin of unchastity, if not in deed, then in thought. Let 
them judge themselves before they presume to judge another. 
‘The wonderful art displayed in Jesus’ answer consists in 
its removal of the question from the judicial sphere, in which 
his adversaries had placed it, to that moral province beyond 
which he did not for the present care to extend his authority ’ 
(Godet). The man to throw the first stone would take the place 
of ‘the Witness’ as laid down in Deut.17:7. Thenhestooped 8 
down again and wrote on the ground—as if to show that he 
had done with the matter. And on hearing what he said, 9 
they went away one by one (the A.V. gives the true reason 
for their departure, ‘ being convicted by their own conscience,’ 
but this is an addition), beginning with the older men—1i.e. 
in order of precedence, not necessarily with the idea that 
the older men had the more tender consciences or had been 
guilty of more sins. So the company melted away till Jesus 
was left alone with the woman standing before him—one of 
the intensely dramatic moments of the Gospel (cf. 4: 26). 
Looking up, Jesus said to her, ‘Woman, where are they ? Io 
Has no one condemned you?’ ‘Is no one prepared to accept 
my challenge and begin the stoning?’ She said, ‘No one, IF 
Sir.’ Jesus said, ‘Neither do I ! ’—although, as alone being 
‘innocent,’ Jesus, if any, might have condemned her (Rom. 
213 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


8: 33f.). Jesus thus illustrates the truth of 3:17, 7: 24, 
8: 15—the motive perhaps for the insertion of the incident, 
though the ‘judgment’ of these passages is a conception 
distinct from the ‘condemnation’ here. But though Jesus 
does not condemn the woman, he does condemn her sin, as 
is shown by his words of dismissal, ‘ Be off, and never sin 
again!’ There is no positive declaration of forgiveness, as 
in Lk. 7: 48-50. The woman is not ‘ justified ’ (Rom. 3: 24), 
but by Jesus’ ‘ forbearance’ her sin had been ‘ passed over ’ 
(Rom. 3: 25). 


[8: 12-20. This section has been commented on after 
7°24. See NOE, p, 102 1.) 
(For proposed rearrangement of text see note p. 204 f.) 


2I Then he said to them again—thus picking up his hearers’ 
question at 7: 36, which verse this section should immediately 
follow—‘ I go away, and you will search for me, but you will 
die in your sin;—because you cannot find me as Saviour 
and Messiah (note on 7: 33-34)—where I go, you cannot 
come’; ‘and the issue was not failure only but death, and 
death in sin, for the search under false motives, with false 
ends, was itself sin’ (Westcott). Contrast Jesus’ words to 
his own disciples (13: 33 ff.), in whose case the disability to 

22 ‘follow’ him is only temporary (13: 36, 14:3.) So the 
Jews said, ‘ Willhe kill himself ? Is that why he says, ‘‘ Where 
I go you cannot come’’?’ Death would seem to be the only 
way along which such as they could not follow Jesus, for at 
least they have no desire to die for him! Some (quoting 
Josephus) see an allusion to the hell of suicides whither pious 
Jews would refuse to follow this fanatic. It may be that 
we have here an echo of a possible objection brought against 
Christ in the Evangelist’s day: so far from dying to fulfil 
God’s purpose, he merely courted death like some Stoic 
suicide. The Jews’ misunderstanding leads up, as usual, to 
a fuller explanation by Jesus: they cannot follow him 
because in origin, affinities, and outlook they and he belong 

23 to different worlds: He said to them, ‘You are from the 
world below, I am from the world above: you belong to 


214 


CHAPTER VIII, VERSES 24-27 


this world, I do not belong to this world’ (cf. 3: 31). The 
second half of the verse explains the first ; for ‘ this world’ 
“signifies human life as constituted independently of, and 
consequently in opposition to, the will of God’ (Godet). Jesus 
draws his own out of this world (17: 6, etc.) ; the process by 
which that separation takes place is faith (1: 12); but the 
Jews have not believed: ‘So I told you, you would die in 24 
your sins ; for unless you believe that I am, you will die in 
your sins.’ It seems better here to take the words ‘I am’ 
in an absolute sense and see in them a ‘mystic formula’ 
(Loisy) complete in itself (cf. 8: 28, 58; 13: 19) and hinting 
at Christ’s participation in the deity of the Father (the 
phrase being an echo of e.g. Exod. 3: 14, Deut. 32: 39, Is. 
43: 10), rather than to translate, as does Moffatt, ‘who I am,’ 
or to supply a predicate from the context (as may be done 
in 4: 26, 9: 9, 18: 5f.), and interpret ‘that I am Messiah’ 
(Meyer), or ‘ that I am from the world above’ (Dods, Holtz- 
mann). The Jews still try to get a clear answer—They said, 25 
‘Who are you? ’—but instead of giving it Jesus replied, 
first with an exclamation of exasperation, ‘Why should I 
talk to you at all?’ (among a host of translations this is 
undoubtedly the best ; for the spirit of the exclamation cf. 
Mk. 9: 19), and then with an enigma, ‘I have a great deal to 26 
say about you and many a judgment to pass upon you ; but 
He who sent me is true, and so I tell the world what I have 
learned from Him.’ The meaning would seem to be either 
“ you incite me to pass hard verdicts upon you, but I restrain 
myself, for there is only one real judge, and it is His verdict 
and not mine (5: 30) that I must pronounce to the world’: 
or perhaps better (for Jesus does proceed to say many harsh 
things of his hearers), ‘ the verdict I have to pass is a hard 
one, but, however unpleasant the hearing, it must be pro- 
nounced, for He to pronounce whose verdict I am sent is the 
Truth, and I am here simply to declare what He reveals to 
me!’ Wellhausen supposes that the original reading may 
have been: ‘I have much to say about myself and much 
testimony to bear to myself.’ (Cf. 5: 30-32, 8: 14-16.) 
Again the Jews ‘misunderstand’: They did not understand he 27 
215 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


was speaking to them about the Father (cf. 8: 18 ff.)—a com- 
ment by the Evangelist himself, not by the Redactor, for the 
Gospel abounds with similar allusions to an almost inconceiv- 
able dulness on the part of the Jews. Therefore Jesus proceeds 
to expound the Father by means of that mystic phrase ‘I 

28 am’ which hints at his oneness with God Himself: so Jesus 
said, ‘When you have lifted up the Son of man, you will know 
then that I am (cf. Exod. 7: 5, Is. 52: 6)—that my being is 
to be interpreted by the Father’s and the Father’s by mine— 
and that (therefore) I do nothing of my own accord, but speak 
as the Father has taught me’ (5: 30f.) In ‘lifted up’ there 
is a reference to the Cross as the beginning of Christ’s ‘ glory’ 
(cf: 3:14; 12:32 f.,.and note on 7.: 39). It is in the Cross 
that Jesus’ Godhead, his ‘ equivalence to the Father’ (5: 18) 
will most clearly appear. The Cross not only reveals the 
nature of Jesus but the nature of God, not only the divinity of 
Jesus, but the Christlikeness of God. By contemplating the 
Cross the Jews will get their answer as to what Jesus means 

29 by the Father. ‘He who sent me is at my side ; He has not 
left me alone ; for I always do what pleases Him.’ (Cf. 10: 17f., 
I5: 10.) To share God’s thoughts, to ‘speak as He has 
taught,’ we must first do His will (7: 17). The last clause 
of the verse gives the evidence for the truth of the first two, 
rather than the cause (cf. Lk. 7: 47): the fact of the Father’s 
presence is proved by the obedience of the Son’s will. This 
is a much deeper truth than the converse, that consciousness 
of the presence is the reward of obedience—though both 
thoughts are equally true. 

30 =6As he said this, a number believed in ‘hint But we are 
soon shown how little such faith amounts to. As the discourse 
proceeds Jesus’ hearers quickly lapse back to the point of view 
of ‘the Jews,’ and Jesus addresses them as such. At 37 
they ‘want to kill him’; at 44 ‘ their father is the devil’; 
at 59 they try to stone Jesus; all of which emphasizes how 
superficial in John’s view (cf. 2: 23 f.) was any faith on the 
part of ‘the Jews.’ Indeed, though the conversation is 

31 introduced with the words so Jesus addressed the Jews who 
had believed in him, saying—the controversial note is so 

216 


CHAPTER VIII, VERSES 32-34 


prominent throughout that we are tempted to suspect that 
the Evangelist has forgotten that the address begins as one 
to ‘believers.’ Possibly ‘who believed in him’ may be a 
gloss, for from John’s point of view ‘ Jews who believed’ is 
almost a contradiction in terms. As if to test this profession 
of faith Jesus says, ‘ If you abide by what I say, you are really 
disciples of mine,’ that is, if they are not merely content with 
the first profession of faith but remain loyal to it ; to ‘ abide 
in’ teaching means to penetrate through from its letter to its 
spirit; as a result ‘you will understand the truth, and the 32 
truth will set you free.’ They will ‘ understand the truth’ 
because they are obedient to it (7: 17) and have the knowledge 
which only experimental testing of it can bring (see esp. 
note on 10:15). Such knowledge makes a man ‘ free’: 
“the man with astigmatism, or myopia, or whatever else it 
is, must get the glasses that will show him the real world, 
and he is safe, and free to go and come as he pleases. See the 
real in the moral sphere, and the first great peril is gone’ 
(T. R. Glover). The ‘truth’ is ‘the full revelation of the 
true nature of things’ (Godet), and such moral vision frees 
man from the power of evil. There is a striking parallel in 
Epictetus (4:7): ‘I am freed by God, I know His com- 
mandments, no one can any longer enslave me.’ The Jews 
looked for Messiah to liberate them from the Roman yoke: 
Jesus offers them a better ‘freedom.’ But the Jews pick up 
his words as if they refer not to moral, but to civil and political, 
liberty: ‘We are Abraham’s offspring,’ they retorted, ‘ we 33 
have never been slaves to anybody. What do you mean by 
saying, ‘‘ You will be free’’?’ As ‘ Abraham’s offspring’ they 
were ideally destined to rule all peoples, and each individual 
was subject to God alone. The Egyptian, Babylonian, 
Syrian and Roman conquests are ignored, though in 19: 15 
the people acknowledge their subjection. Jesus, in reply, 
shows that it is of moral liberty that he speaks. Note how 
the following verses reflect a whole series of Pauline ideas. 
Jesus replied, ‘ Truly, truly I tell you, everyone who commits 34 
sin isa slave ’ (omit ‘ of sin’ asa gloss). (Cf. Rom. 6: 16, 20; 
2 Pet. 2: 19, and the Stoic saying ‘solus sapiens est liber.’) 
217 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


By John sin is conceived not as a positive principle, but rather 
as a privation or limitation of the full life which may be had 
in Christ. Godet explains the verse as meaning that the man 
who commits sin is ‘a slave in the house of God,’ ie. ‘ fear 
and servility characterize his relation to God.’ Both ideas 
may be combined, for ‘ the slave of sin becomes by that very 
fact a slave with respect to God.’ Certainly in 35 it is God, 
35 not sin, who is regarded as the Master. ‘ Now the slave does 
not remain in the household for all time ; the son of the 
house does.’ (For the argument, cf. Gal. 4: I-7, 21-31; Heb. 
3: 5-6.) Having been mastered by sin the Jews are slaves, 
and as such have lost the right, which originally they had as 
sons of Abraham, to a permanent place in the household of 
God. For it is only ‘ the son of the house’ who has such a 
right (a slave may be sold or dismissed at any time), and for 
the new religion, sonship is a matter of spiritual and moral, 
36 not of physical, birth (3:5). ‘So, if the Son sets you free, 
you will be really free.’ If the Son par excellence—Christ who 
perfectly realizes this filial relationship in the household of 
God—gives them such freedom, and the entrance to the 
household implied by it, as he has himself, they will be really 
free, in contrast to the false claim of 33. (Cf. Rom. 8: 2, 
Gal. 5: 1.) The Son of the house is the only one besides the 
Father who has the right to free the slaves. How this freedom 
is wrought out according to Paul is shown in Gal. 4: 1-7. 
From John’s point of view the Son frees because he is himself 
the truth (8:32, 14:6). The argument that follows is 
37 exactly parallel to that of Mt. 3: 9 ff. and Rom. 9. ‘I know 
you are Abraham’s offspring ’—by physical descent, ‘ yet’ not 
by spiritual birth, as is clear from the fact that ‘ you want 
to kill me, since my word makes no headway (or ‘ holds no 
place’) among you ’—an impossible remark to ‘ believers’ 
(31 note), and in fact unlikely in any real conversation even 
with unbelieving Jews. Jesus would hardly thus deliberately 
exasperate his hearers. But the words are natural enough 
if, under the guise of a discourse, the Evangelist is picturing 
the stubborn opposition of Judaism to the spread of Chris- 
38 tianity. ‘I speak of what I have seen with my Father, and 
218 


CHAPTER VIII, VERSES 39-41 


you act as you have learned from your father.’ The Jews’ 
opposition to Jesus was morally inevitable, for their difference 
of outlook corresponds to a still more profound difference of 
origin. If Jesus speaks as he is prompted by a clear intuition 
of Ais Father’s will (ie. God's), it is to be expected that they 
will treat him as is suggested to them by ¢heir father (i.e. the 
devil, 44). (For Jesus’ claim that his teaching depends on a 
direct vision of God cf. 3: 32, 6: 46.) They answered him, 39 
‘ Abraham is our father,’—and therefore our inherited disposi- 
tion can be nothing but good! ‘If you are Abraham’s 
children,’ said Jesus, ‘then (according to the principle of 38) 
do as Abraham did.’ True sons of Abraham would share 
Abraham’s faith (Gen. 15:6, Jn. 6:29). Perhaps John 
hints that the Jewish opponents of Christ in his own day 
are to be classed among those ‘ who style themselves Jews— 
no Jews are they, but a mere synagogue of Satan!’ (Rev. 
2:9). Abraham would have welcomed Jesus (56): ‘ but 40 
now you want to kill me, to kill a man who has told you the 
truth, the truth I have learned from God.’ It is this identify- 
ing of himself and his message with God which, according to 
John, is at the root of the Jews’ hatred of Jesus (5: 18, etc.) ; 
thus their conduct is ‘murder based on hostility to God’ 
(Dods): ‘Abraham did not do that. You do the deeds of 41 
your father !’—so, whoever that father be, he is not Abraham! 
Apparently it now dawns on the Jews that it is spiritual 
descent which is in question. ‘ You admit,’ they said to him, 
“our physical descent from Abraham. Well, our spiritual 
descent, our peculiar relation to God so closely bound up 
with the Abrahamic heritage, is just as unquestionable’: 
‘We are no bastards : we have one father, even God !’ There 
has been no adulterous disloyalty to Yahweh (cf. Hosea 2: 4, 
etc., for the figure of speech) ; there is no idolatrous blood in 
their veins. Yet the sudden change of subject on the part 
of the Jews (from physical to spiritual descent) is a little odd, 
and one feels that John is deliberately arguing up to the 
climax at 44 and introduces ‘God’ here as a foil to ‘the 
devil’ there. Jesus refutes this claim as he did the other (309), 
‘by laying down a moral fact by which their claims are 
219 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


shattered’ (Godet). They shall be known by their fruits: 
42 the principle of 38 still holds good: Said Jesus, ‘If God were 
your father, you would love me (as your brother), for I came 
here from God (my origin is divine ; 13: 3, 16: 28) ; I did not 
come of my own accord (ie. without a commission from 
God), I was sent by Him’ (my mission too is divine). Thus 
the Jews’ misunderstanding has a moral root in their evil 
43 heredity: ‘Why do you not understand my speech ?— 
Jesus’ characteristic way of expressing himself—Because 
you are unable to listen to what I am saying,’ i.e. because they 
shrink from the moral content of his message. The old truth 
that our so-called intellectual difficulties more often than not 
have their root in an unregenerate will, To use a modern 
metaphor, our ‘reception’ is poor because our moral ‘ set’ 
is not ‘tuned to God’s wave-length.’ Thus is reached the 
44 climax of Jesus’ indictment: ‘ You belong to your father the 
devil, and you want to do what your father desires ;—above 
all to compass the death of Christ—he was a slayer of men 
from the very beginning,’ that is, either ‘since the devil by 
tempting to disobedience first made men liable to death’ 
(Gen. 2, 17) ; or possibly ‘ since the first murder, that of Abel, 
which was suggested by the devil’ (cf. r Jn. 3: 12, 15). 
While Paul traces death to the sin of one man (Rom. 5: 12 ff.), 
John goes behind Adam to Satan, in whom (from a point of 
view which has affinity with Persian dualism—a dualism often 
noted in this Gospel, e.g. note on 1:5, 12) he sees the 
personification of sin and death, as in Christ he sees the 
personification of truth and life. ‘And he has no place in 
truth,’ that is, the truth is not the sphere in which the devil 
moves ; his attitude to truth corresponds to his own inherent 
nature: he shuns truth ‘ because there is no truth in him ’— 
his nature is false through and through, so that ‘when he 
tells a lie, he is expressing his own nature (Mt. 12: 34), for he 
is a liar and the father of lies,’ or possibly ‘ and the father of 
liars,’ implying ‘he is your father and you are liars’ (55). 
[Some critics would translate the above verse, ‘ You belong 
to the Father of the Devil,’ ie. to the Demiurge (as distinct 
from the supreme God), with whom John, following the 
220 


CHAPTER VIII, VERSES 45-48 


Gnostics, is here supposed to identify the God of the O.T, 
and of his hearers. The last words of the verse could then 
be more simply translated: ‘he (the devil) is a liar, and his 
father (the Demiurge) is a liar also.’ But there is no hint 
of this idea in the rest of the Gospel, and the emphasis here 
is upon the devil, not on his imaginary father. The Jews 
are the children of the devil, not his brothers (1 Jn. 3: I0).] 

Being children of falsehood the Jews cannot but mistrust 45 
him who is the Truth: ‘But as for me’ (the position of the word 
is emphatic, contrasting Christ with the devil)—“‘ it is because 
I tell the truth that you do not believe me,’—a reason for in- 
credulity the reverse of the usual! ‘Which of you can convict 46 
me of sin?’ Calvin remarks here that ‘the defence should be 
restricted to the circumstances of the case,’ and not taken here 
as a Claim to entire sinlessness of life; but without doubt 
John would understand the words in the latter sense (cf. 
7:18). ‘Sin’ here means more than an ‘error’ of inexact- 
ness ; logically, no doubt, we would here expect Christ to 
disclaim not ‘sin’ in general, but falsehood. But as ‘ truth’ 
in our Gospel is much more than the reverse of falsehood, so 
many other sins besides that of falsehood would be considered 
a violation of ‘truth.’ Only a man free of all moral wrong is 
one who ‘ tells the truth.’ Just as the Jews’ misunderstanding 
has a moral cause (42), so it is Jesus’ moral perfection which 
guarantees the truth of his words. ‘If I tell the truth, why do 
you not believe me ? ’—a question already answered in 44-45: 
it is just because Jesus does tell the truth that they do not 
believe. If, on the contrary, their moral parentage were 
different, they would believe: ‘He who belongs to God listens 47 
to the words of God (6: 37, 44; 3:21); you do not listen to 
them, because you do not belong to God.’ 3 

To Jesus’ denial to them of Abrahamic and divine descent 48 
the Jews retorted that Jesus himself is no true Jew, and that it 
is he who has devilry in his blood, thus turning back both 
Jesus’ charges on his own head: ‘Are we not right in saying 
you are a Samaritan (i.e. an outcast heretic, an enemy of his 
own people), you are mad ?’ (lit. ‘have a devil’ ; note on 7: 20; 
cf. Mt. 12: 24-27, etc.). Edersheim points out that the 

Q 221 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Aramaic word here rendered into Greek by ‘Samaritan may 
have been Shomroni, which would literally mean ‘ child of 
Satan.’ If so, still more point would be added to the taunt. 
49 Jesus replied, ‘I am not mad: I honour my Father and you 
dishonour me ’ ; ‘ my actions are due not to madness, but to 
the desire to honour God ; how can you, who dishonour one 
50 who honours God, yourselves be God’s children?’ ‘However 
(I do not resent these insults, because) I do not aim at my own 
credit’ (5: 41). Yet none can lightly dishonour Jesus, for 
‘there is One who cares for my credit, and he is judge.’ And 
it is only those who listen to Jesus who will escape that 
51 Judge’s condemnation: ‘Truly, truly I tell you, if anyone holds 
to what I say, he will never see death ’—an emphatic repetition 
of 5: 24, where see notes. (For the expression ‘see death,’ 
cf. Lk. 2: 26, Heb. 11:5.) Again the Jews misunderstand 
Jesus, taking his reference to ‘death’ in a literal sense: 
52 The Jews said to him, ‘ Now we are sure you are mad. Abra- 
ham is dead, and so are all the prophets ; and you declare, 
“If anyone holds to what I say, he will never taste death! ’’’ 
For ‘taste death,’ as a bitter cup which all must drink, cf. 
Mk. 9: 1. But the Jews misquote Jesus, who said ‘ see death.’ 
Strictly even a believer may ‘taste death’ (Heb. 2: 9), though 
he has not the long, tense experience of it implied in ‘ seeing.’ 
53 ‘Are you greater than our father Abraham? He is dead, and the 
prophets are dead. Who do you claim to be?’ In claiming 
for his own words a power to conquer death which was not 
experienced, even in their own persons, by those who in the 
past were the organs of God's word, Jesus is surely setting up 
to be greater than they. Whom then does he take himself 
54 for? No more than at 25 does Jesus give a direct answer ; 
but again, as there, he emphasizes his unique relation to the 
Father. He repeats the truth of 5: 31-32, substituting the 
idea of ‘ glory ’ for that of testimony: it is only as the Father’s 
“commissioner ’ that Jesus claims divine standing. Jesus re- 
plied, ‘Were I to glorify myself, my glory would be nothing ; 
it is my Father who glorifies me.’ ‘Glorify’ seems to be used 
here with two shades of meaning, first in the ordinary sense 
of self-praise, and then in the peculiar Johannine sense, for 
222 


CHAPTER VIII, VERSES 55-57 


which see 7: 39. ‘You say, ‘‘He is our God,’’ but you do not 55 
understand him’ (5:37). Their misunderstanding of God is 
proved by the rejection of his commissioner. (Cf. also 4: 22.) 
‘I know him ’—the Greek word ‘ know’ (as opposed to ‘ under- 
stand’ which is used of knowledge acquired by observation) 
implying the direct intuition of one who in mind and will is 
one with God. ‘Were I to say, “Ido not know him,’’ I would 
be a liar like yourselves.’ In Jesus’ case the lie would consist 
not in making such claims but in veiling them behind a false 
modesty. The Jews are liars because they claim to know 
God when they do not: conversely Jesus would be a liar 
if he confessed not to know God when he did. ‘But I do 
know him and I hold to his word ’—thus fulfilling the 
two conditions necessary for the possession of ‘ eternal life’ 
(27230 551); 

Once again Jesus contrasts the Jews’ attitude with that of 56 
Abraham, whose parentage they claim: ‘Abraham exulted 
that he was to see my Day,’ i.e. the day of Christ’s earthly 
manifestation (Lk. 17: 22 ff.). [Burney (Aramaic Origin, p. III) 
thinks that the sense ‘longed to see’ is required both by 
grammar and context, and suggests an original Aramaic verb, 
which can mean both ‘ long’ and ‘ exult,’ of which he supposes 
our Greek to be a mistranslation.] Late Jewish thought de- 
picted the patriarchs as rising from Sheol to greet the Messiah 
on his appearance (so Moses and Elias hail Christ at the 
Transfiguration). Even in his earthly lifetime Abraham may 
have been said, in the contemplation of such a covenant as 
Gen. 22: 15ff., to have ‘seen the promises far away and 
hailed them’ (Heb. 11: 13) as foreshadowing ‘my day.’ But 
when Jesus adds ‘He did see it,’ the meaning is not that 
Abraham had any such vision while still on earth (e.g. figur- 
atively in the birth of Isaac; Gen. 21: 1 ff.), but that he is not 
dead, as the Jews wrongly hold (52), but still consciously follows 
the fortunes of his people (cf. Mk. 12: 26 f.) ‘and he rejoiced’ 
at Christ’s coming, even while that people scorned it. To the 
Jews this seems to imply a claim to be Abraham’s contem- 
porary: Then said the Jews to him, ‘You are not fifty years 57 
old, and Abraham has seen you?’ (or, as A.V., ‘hast thou 

223 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


seen Abraham ?’). ‘ Fifty years’ is perhaps a round number 
used without any intention of stating Jesus’ exact age. Jesus, 
they say, is not yet past the prime of life. Lightfoot thinks 
that the figure is determined by the age when Levites retired 
(Num. 4: 3, 39). Irenaeus evidently understands the passage 
literally, for he quotes our Gospel as evidence that Jesus taught 
till he was forty or fifty (Irenaeus, II. 22: 5). For the theory 
that the number is symbolical see note on 2: 20. Jesus finally 
answers his questioners with an absolute statement of his 


58 pre-existence (for which seer: 1): ‘ Truly, truly I tell you,’ said 


Jesus, ‘before Abraham was born I am ’—the present tense 
marking a timeless existence and the mystic phrase (cf. 8: 24, 
28) once again emphasizing Jesus’ oneness with God. 


59At this they picked up stones to throw at him ; but their 


H 


attempt to murder him was ‘ like the waves lifting themselves 
up to drown the stars’ (Strachan): but Jesus concealed himself 
and made his way out of the temple. The order of the words 
is significant—not ‘went out and hid himself,’ but ‘hid 
himself and went out,’ the idea evidently being that Jesus 
miraculously disappeared, as indeed is hinted by the addition 
in the A.V. ‘ going through the midst of them, and so passed 
by.’ Jesus, according to John, is inviolable (cf. 7: 30, 10: 39, 
12: 36). At this point Jesus symbolically abandons his own 
people (the temple) and goes out to humanity (the man born 
blind ; chap. 9). 


SECTION II. THE Divine NATURE OF THE CHRIST 
Illustration: The Blind Man healed (9: 1-38) 


As he passed along he saw a man who had been blind from 
his birth, The reference is presumably to Jesus ‘ passing’ 
out of the temple (so the gloss in the previous verse), in which 
case the incident would follow immediately after the controversy 
in the temple. But Jesus would not thus attract attention to 
himself immediately after his escape, and it is better to suppose 
that the vague phrase ‘as he passed along’ introduces a 
fresh scene, about the exact setting of which the Evangelist 

224 


CHAPTER IX, VERSES 2-3 


is quite careless. Possibly the incident is to be connected 
with the Feast of Dedication (10: 22). The blind man was 
presumably begging at the temple gates (Acts 3:2). The 
fact that he was ‘ blind from his birth’ both emphasizes the 
incurable nature of the trouble, and also fits in with the 
figurative interpretation whereby the man is symbolical of 
those who by birth and upbringing have been strangers to the 
Jewish revelation: the Gentiles accept Christ’s healing while 
his own people spurn him. And his disciples asked him, 2 
‘Rabbi, for whose sin—for his own or for his parents’—was 
he born blind?’ The question was based on the doctrine, 
refuted by Jesus in Lk. 13: 1-5, that every calamity must be 
due to some particular sin. The idea that the man may have 
been born blind in consequence of his own sin (unless we take it 
as a bewildered suggestion by the disciples without any thought 
of its exact implications) implies a doctrine of pre-existence 
Weroti05,8£S.0030 2620, 1 ph. my 4;and cf. Heb. 7:10) fand 
the corresponding belief that a man’s present condition is a 
reward or punishment for conduct in a previous existence 
(cf. Wis. 8: 20, ‘ being good, I came into a body undefiled’). 
This is a Greek rather than a Jewish idea. That the blindness 
is due to the parents’ sin is a characteristically Jewish idea 
(Exod. 20:5, Jer. 31: 29). Note that while in Lk. 13: 
I-5 Jesus uses the problem of undeserved suffering as an 
incentive to repentance, here it is regarded chiefly as a means 
whereby he himself may be glorified. Jesus’ reply indicates 
as usual that, according to our Evangelist, the motive behind 
his miracles is not so much pity as the desire to ‘ manifest his 
glory’ (cf. 2: 1m note): Jesus replied, ‘Neither for his own sin 3 
nor for his parents’—it was to let the work of God be illus- 
trated in him.’ Yet elsewhere Jesus does not ignore the 
inevitable relation of sin to suffering (5: 14, Mt. 9: 2). Asa 
result of the miracle the ‘ work of God’ would be ‘ illustrated ’ 
in a twofold sense: on Jesus’ part by a revelation of the 
healing power of God Himself (5: 36, 10: 37f. 14: Io); 
and on the man’s part by a signal display of his faith in Christ 
(see esp. 6: 28 f.). Symbolically the meaning is that God has 
allowed the world, before the Incarnation of the Light, to 
225 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


remain in darkness, in order that the opportunity might be 
provided for Him to reveal His glory in the Logos (cf. Acts 
3: 13, also after an act of healing), and for the world in con- 
sequence to profess its faith (g: 39). For the Christian the 
matter of moment is not his ¢heory of sin and suffering, but 
4 the way in which he deals with it: ‘While daylight lasts, we 
must be busy with the work of him that sent me (‘ we’ sums 
up in one Christ and his own): night comes (the time of rest ; 
Ps. 104: 23; with a reference to Jesus’ own death and 
passing from his earthly labours; cf. 13: 30), when no one 
can do any work.’ Note here the same emphasis on the 
necessity of work, even on the Sabbath, as in the healing 
5 of the paralytic (5:17). ‘When I am in the world, I am light 
for the world’ (8: 12, etc.): this is the spiritual truth of which 
the miracle is but a symbolical illustration ; Jesus’ work, like 
6 God's in the beginning, results in the creation of light. With 
these words—suiting his action to his words, the act being the 
direct application of the principle just enunciated—he spat 
on the ground and made clay with the saliva, which he smeared 
on the man’s eyes. Note that here, in contrast as usual to the 
Synoptic accounts, Jesus takes the initiative without being 
petitioned by the sufferer: the light cannot but shine. 
Apparently both saliva (Mk. 8: 23) and clay were considered 
efficacious for the treatment of blindness. Tacitus relates 
that a blind man begged Vespasian ‘ut . . . oculorum orbes 
dignaretur respergere oris excremento’; and a physician of 
the time of Caracalla prescribes ‘ turgentes oculos vili circum- 
line coeno.’ Jesus’ act was a symbolical one calculated to 
inspire faith by suggesting that the cure emanated from the 
person of the healer himself. It is suggested that John may 
connect the process with that of Gen. 2: 7, so that for him it 
becomes symbolical of a new creation. It is suggestive that 
Jesus first seals the eyes which he is about to open (cf. his use of 
Parable, Mk. 4: 11 ff.). ‘By adding to the real blindness, 
which he alone could cure, that artificial and symbolic blind- 
ness which the waters of Siloam were to remove, he declared 
infact: what Siloam effects typically, I accomplish in reality ’ 
(Godet). Jesus, then, completes bis prescription by saying, 
226 


CHAPTER IX, VERSES 7-16 


‘Go and wash them in the pool of Siloam’ (Siloam meaning 7 
‘sent ’). The pool was in the south-east of Jerusalem in the 
valley of the Kidron and was fed by the Virgin’s Spring (note 
on 5: 2 fin.). The meaning of the name in the form we have 
it seems to be ‘ sending’ rather than ‘sent,’ i.e. ‘ the sending 
forth of the water’ (cf. Is. 8:6). But the Evangelist inter- 
prets it as ‘sent’ for the sake of the symbolical reference to 
him who was ‘sent’ by the Father (6: 29, 17: 3, etc.). 
For the command to wash compare the story of Elisha and 
Naaman. We have a trace here of the sacramental tendency 
of the Gospel. The perfection of the new life and light comes 
only after Christian baptism in the name of him who was ‘sent’ 
and who ‘came by water, blood, and Spirit’ (x Jn. 5: 6; 
and cf. 13: 8-10). So off he went and washed them, and went 
home seeing. Whereupon the neighbours and those to whom 8 
he had been a familiar sight as a beggar, said, ‘Is this not the 
man who used to sit and beg?’ The astonishment of the 
neighbours emphasizes the reality of the miracle. Some said, 9 
‘It is’ ; others said, ‘No, but it is like him’ (or possibly ‘ it 
is one like him’); He said ‘I amthe man.’ So they asked Io 
him, ‘How were your eyes opened?’ Unlike the paralytic 
(5: 13), the blind man knows who his healer is: He replied, 11 
‘The man they call Jesus made some clay and smeared my 
eyes with it and told me, ‘‘Go and wash them in Siloam ’’; so I 
went and washed them, and I got my sight.’ The mention of 
the making of clay, which would be an infringement of the 
Sabbath, prepares the way for the charge at verse 16. ‘Where 12 
is he ? ’ they asked—that he may be arrested for breaking the 
Sabbath. He answered, ‘I do not know.’ So being unable 
to arrest the healer they arrest the man healed: They brought 13 
him before the Pharisees, this man who had once been blind. 
Now it was on the sabbath day that Jesus had made clay and 14 
opened his eyes; this was the ostensible reason for the 
Pharisees’ annoyance, the feature of the miracle which techni- 
cally gave offence. So the Pharisees asked him again how he 15 
had regained his sight, and he told them, ‘ He smeared some clay 
on my eyes, and I washed them, and now I can see.’ Then 16 
some of the Pharisees—seizing on this evidence of a technical 
227 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


violation of the Sabbath—said, ‘ This man is not from God, 
for he does not keep the sabbath’; others said, ‘How cana 
sinner perform such Signs?’ (For the hostility cf. 5: 16 and 
for the rejoinder of the minority 3:2). They were divided 
on this (7: 43), some denying Jesus’ divine mission on the 
ground of the violation of the Sabbath, others implicitly 
denying the violation of the Sabbath by their assumption that 
only a man with a divine mission could perform such a miracle. 
Accordingly they appeal again to the blind man, in the hope 
perhaps that even he may admit the guilt of his healer: 
17 So they asked the blind man once more, ‘ What have you to say 
about him, for opening your eyes?’ But they only got the 
answer of the Samaritan woman (4: 19): The man replied, ‘I 
say he is a prophet.’ The Jews next try to cast doubt on the 
reality of the miracle: no real miracle could be reconciled with 
the breaking of the Sabbath; they suspect fraudulent 
18 collusion: Now the Jews (i.e. the majority of ver. 16) would not 
believe he had been born blind and had regained his sight, 
till they summoned the parents of the man who had regained 
19 his sight and asked them, ‘ Is this your son, the son you declare 
was born blind? How is it that he can see now?’ The 
parents explode the theory of collusion, but are unwilling to 
compromise themselves by admitting that the man owes his 
20 cure to Jesus. His parents answered, ‘ This is our son, and he 
21 was born blind ; we know that. But how he can see to-day, 
we do not know, nor do we know who opened his eyes. Ask 
himself ; he is of age—and therefore his parents can no longer 
22 be held responsible for him—he can speak for himself.’ (His 
parents said this because they were afraid of the Jews ; for the 
Jews had already agreed that anyone who confessed him to be 
23 Christ should be excommunicated. That was why the man’s 
parents said, ‘ He is of age, ask himself.’) There is no evidence 
that excommunication from the Jewish synagogue for the 
profession of Jesus ever took place in our Lord’s own day; 
but it was certainly enforced at the time the Evangelist wrote. 
Moreover, in Jesus’ day in Palestine only the Sanhedrim had 
power of excommunication: in Asia Minor the synagogue 
took the power to itself, authority naturally being decentral- 
228 


CHAPTER IX, VERSES 24-31 


ized. This chapter throughout reflects the conditions of John’s 
own time and locality (cf. 3 Jn. 10, Jn. 16: 2). 

At this point ‘the physical miracle gives place to the 
spiritual miracle in the mind of the Evangelist, the miracle of 
personal experience as a testimony to the truth and power of 
Jesus’ (Strachan). The Jews, no longer able to question the 
fact, try to ‘ annihilate fact by dogma’ (Godet). While com- 
pelled to admit the miracle they ‘ suggest ’ to the man that it is 
due to God alone, not to one whom—begging the question—they 
‘know’ to be asinner: So theman born blind was summoned a 24 
second time and told, ‘ Now give God the praise (an adjuration 
to tell the whole truth and confess his error ; cf. Josh. 7: 19) ; 
this man, we know quite well, is only a sinner ’—because he has 
violated the Sabbath. To which he replied somewhat ironi- 25 
cally that for him experience has more weight than such 
theoretical ‘knowledge’: ‘I do not know whether he is a 
sinner ; one thing I do know, that once I was blind and now 
I can see.’ ‘What did he do to you?’ they repeated— 26 
trying again to convict Jesus on account of the means used on 
the Sabbath—‘ How did he open your eyes ? ’—in the hope 
perhaps that the man might involve himself in contradictory 
statements and so convict himself of fraud. The man loses 
patience, and cuts them short with an ironical pleasantry. 
He retorted, ‘I have told you that already, and you would not 27 
listen tome. Why do you want to hear it over again? Doyou 
want to be disciples of his ? ’—the most biting gibe possible— 
you his disciples! The Jews in turn lose their temper: Then 28 
they stormed at him: ‘ You are his disciple, we are disciples of 
Moses! We know (doctors of the law as we are) God spoke to 29 
Moses (on Sinai; the Greek perfect implies that God’s words 
still stand written ; cf. Heb. 1: 1), but we do not know where 
this fellow comes from,’ i.e. whether he comes from God or not 
(contrast 7: 27 where the point in question is Jesus’ earthly 
origin; cf. Mk. 11: 27 ff). The man replied to them (again 30 
ironically), ‘Well, this is astonishing! You do not know 
where he comes from, and yet he has opened my eyes. God, 31 
we know, does not listen to sinners ’ (16), ie. it is not at the 
demand of a sinner that such a miracle as this is performed ; 

229 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


‘He listens to anyone who is devout and obeys His will. It 
32 is unheard of, since the world began, that anyone should open 
a blind man’s eyes.’ Perhaps the Evangelist hints at the 
impossibility of ever opening the eyes of his own Jewish 
33 contemporaries to their folly. ‘If this man were not from 
God, he could do nothing,’ i.e. could not thus heal the blind 
34 (cf. Acts 5: 38 f.). They retorted, ‘And so you would teach 
us—you, born in utter depravity!’ His very blindness was 
proof of congenital sinfulness, and yet he presumed to instruct 
the pure and the wise! Then they expelled him, not merely 
from their presence, but implying excommunication from the 
religious community (22). 
35 Jesus heard that they had expelled him, and on meeting him 
36 he said, ‘ You believe in the Son of man?’ The ‘ meeting’ 
is regarded as providential (1: 41,5: 14): Jesus’ love, knowing 
his straits, has sought him out. The question is intended to 
prompt his faith. It is taken for granted that the man would 
understand ‘ Son of man’ to mean Messiah (in the Johannine 
sense, I: 51), which indeed he does. He admits that such a 
one exists, but desires to know who fulfils that réle. Jesus, 
whom he has already hailed as a ‘ prophet,’ should be able to 
tell him: ‘Who is that, sir ? ’ said the man, ‘ tell me, that I 
37 may believe in him.’ ‘You have seen him,’ Jesus said (an 
allusion perhaps to his restored sight), ‘ he is talking to you.’ 
38 (For the dramatic announcement cf. 4: 26.) He said, ‘I do 
believe, Lord ’—and he worshipped him, a word regularly 
used of the adoration of divine sovereignty (4: 20, 12: 20, but 
contrast Mt. 18: 26). 


Theme: Christ the Light, the Good Shepherd, the Door 
(9: 39-10: 42) 
The last three verses of the chapter sum up the spiritual 
39 significance of the miracle. Then said Jesus, ‘It is for 
judgment (the result of judging rather than the process) 
that I have come into this world, i.e. for the revealing of real- 
ities, for exhibiting in its results the true inward state of each 
human heart, to make the sightless see—that those who are 
230 


CHAPTER IX, VERSES 40-41 _ 


in darkness and conscious of it and willing to have light may 

be enlightened—to make the seeing blind,’—that those who are 

stubbornly content with the light they have may lose even 

that. At the coming of the Christ ignorant Gentiles are 
saved, while ‘enlightened’ Jews stand self-condemned; those 
predestined to salvation welcome him (6: 37, 65), while 
the reprobate become still more obdurate. (For the mean- 
ing of Christ’s ‘judgment’ see notes on 3: 17-21 and 

5:22.) On hearing this the Pharisees who were beside 40 

him (‘ there because the author has need of them’ to add point 

to the words—Loisy) asked, ‘And are we blind?’ Jesus’ 

answer is unexpectedly crushing: would to God they were 

blind! Jesus replied, ‘If you were blind—like the pagans— 41 

you would not be guilty—your ignorance would excuse you 

(15: 22, 24)—but, as itis, you claim to have sight—to be the 

only possessors of truth, while you shut your eyes obstinately 

to the light, satisfied with the light you have (cf. 1 Jn. 1: 8)— 

and so your sins remains.’ The very fact that, as God’s 

privileged people, they should have known so much better, 

is their condemnation (note on 5: 45). They are guilty of 

‘sin against the Holy Ghost’ which for ever ‘remains’ 

unforgivable (8: 21). Note that in the Synoptics (Mk. 3: 

22-30) the reference to such an unforgivable sin follows as 

here (8: 48) close upon the charge that Jesus is in some way 

in league with the devil. (See also notes on 20: 23.) 

I0. 

The Jews were again divided over these words. A number 22 
of them said, ‘He is mad. Why listento him?’ Others 21 
said, ‘These are not a madman’s words. Can a madman 
open the eyes of the blind P ’ 

‘Then came the festival of Dedication at Jerusalem ; it was 22 
winter, and Jesus used to walk inside the temple, in the 23 
portico of Solomon. So the Jews gathered round him and 24 
asked, ‘ How long are you going to keep us in suspense ? 

If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.’ Jesus replied, 25 

‘TI have told you, but you do not believe ; the deeds I do 

in the name of my Father testify to me, but you do not 26 

believe, because you do not belong to my sheep. My 27 
231 


28 


19 


20 
21 


22 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


sheep listen to my voice, and I know them and they follow 
me ; and I give them eternal life ; they will never perish, 
and no one will snatch them out of my hand, My Father 
who gave me them is stronger than all, and no one can 
snatch anything out of the Father’s hand.’ 


At this point we insert 10: 19-29. In its present context 
22-23 are clearly out of place ; some would place them as an 
introduction to 8: 12-20, while Bacon thinks that the two verses 
are an editorial addition ‘ to complete a total of five festal self- 
presentations of Jesus’ (Fourth Gospel, p. 493). But by trans- 
posing the whole section 10: 19-29 to the close of chapter 9 
a greatly improved sequence is obtained. Ig-21 round off 
the chapter, which otherwise closes abruptly ; it is no longer 
necessary to delete 22 f. in order to remove the difficulty of 
supposing that in 25 ff. Jesus renews to a different audience, 
and even at a new feast, the Sheep-discourse of 10: 1-18, 
the whole of which will now be assigned to the Feast of 
Dedication ; finally, note that 21 obviously alludes to the 
miracle of chapter 9, and that with the removal of 19-29 there 
is a perfect sequence from 18 to 30. 

The account of Jesus’ visit to the Feast of Booths concludes 
with a note of the varied impressions left: The Jews were 
again divided (as at 7: 43, 9: 16) over these words. Anumber 
of them said, ‘He is mad! (7: 20, 8: 48) Why listen to him?’ 
Others said, ‘Can a madman open the eyes of the blind?’ 
The argument is similar to that of 9:16; but there the 
question was of ‘ sin,’ here of ‘ madness.’ 

Then came the festival of Dedication at Jerusalem. The 
festival (Ezra 6: 16) began on 25th Chisleu (middle of Dec.) 
and lasted eight days in commemoration of the reconsecration 
of the temple by Judas Maccabaeus after its profanation by 
Antiochus Epiphanes in 168 B.c. Two to three months would 
have elapsed since Jesus’ teaching at the Feast of Booths 
(some suppose that this interval corresponds with the period 
covered by the special Lucan section 9: 51-19: 28). Yet, 
even if the proposed transposition be accepted, the situation 
as between Jesus and his opponents is unchanged, and so far 

232 


CHAPTER X, VERSES 19-29 


as the discourse is concerned the Evangelist would seem to be 
conscious of no interval. Itwas winter, and Jesus used to walk 23 
(7: I) inside the temple, in the portico of Solomon—in order 
to get protection from the weather. Some see in ‘ winter’ 
a hint of the chilly attitude of the Jews; surely symbolism 
gone mad! Solomon’s portico (Acts 3: II, 5:12) was a 
cloister on the east side of the temple area perhaps built on a 
remnant of Solomon’s temple. With the following verses 
cf. Lk. 22: 66 ff. So the Jews gathered round him (‘ringed 24 
him round ’—as if to prevent his escape) and asked, ‘ How 
long are you going to keep us in suspense? If you are the 
Christ, tell us plainly ’—‘in so many words,’ ‘ without 
ambiguity’ (7:13, I1: 14, 16:29). The question is out- 
wardly sincere enough, yet nothing argues the will to disbelieve 
more clearly than a demand for proof, when full proof has 
already been given. Accordingly Jesus replied, ‘I have told 25 
you, but you do not believe.’ Though in this Gospel Jesus never 
declares his Messiahship in so many words either to his enemies 
or to the general public, but only to his disciples and individuals 
such as the Samaritan woman (4: 26) and the man born 
blind (9: 37), yet by the whole of his teaching about his relation 
to the Father ‘he has told them’ that he is the Christ: 
‘The deeds I do in the name of my Father (as His representa- 
tive with His commission) testify to me (i.e. that I am Christ, 
and what sort of a Christ ; cf. 5: 36), but you do not believe.’ 
Loisy well notes that Jesus refuses a definite answer ‘ in order 
to mark the sovereign independence of his words as regards men 
and all human authority.’ The ‘ self-determination ’ of Jesus 
(7: 30 note) extends to his words as well as to his deeds: 
he refuses to be pushed to an issue before his ‘ time’ either in 
word or deed. The Jews do not believe ‘ because you do not 26 
belong to my sheep’ (some MSS. followed by A.V. add ‘as I 
said unto you ’—probably a gloss, referring to 10: 3-5, added 
after the displacement took place). With our transposition 
this is the first use of the metaphor, which is developed in 
allegory in verses 1-5 and then interpreted in 7 ff. The Jews, 
by nature and by predestination (6: 65), are incapable of 
belonging to the flock of Christ. (For the use of the term 


233 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


‘Shepherd ’ of God in the O.T. cf. Ps. 23, Is. 40: 11, Jer. 23: 
27 1-4, Zech. 11: 4 ff.) ‘My sheep listen to my voice, and I know 
28 them and they follow me ; and I give them eternal life.’ The 

thought is developed and explained in the allegory which 

follows. Shepherd and sheep have each two reciprocal char- 
acteristics: they ‘listen’ and he in turn ‘knows’ and 
acknowledges them (Mt. 10: 32); they ‘follow,’ and he in 
turn gives them the reward of moral obedience which is 

‘eternal life’ (8: 12). The final security of Christ’s own is 

emphasized when he adds, ‘ they will never perish, and no one 

will snatch them out of my hand’ (cf. 6: 39, 17: 12)—a promise 
29 illustrated in verses 12-15. ‘My Father who gave me them is 
stronger than all, and no one can snatch anything out of the 

Father’s hand.’ An alternative reading gives a neuter pronoun 

which some prefer on the ground of John’s usage in 6: 39 

(where see note for force of the word ‘ gave’), translating, 

‘that which my Father hath given me is stronger than every- 

thing’ (cf. r Jn. 5:4). But this thought is out of place 

when the figure of sheep is being used ; and the last clause of 
the verse suits better the first reading. 

Chapter 10: 1 ff. 

The allegory of the Shepherd, the Sheep, and the Door 
awakens echoes of several passages in the Synoptics, e.g. 
Mt. 7: 13-15, 9: 36, 18: 12-14, 26: 31. It provides a good 
example of what have been described as conglomerate 
passages (cf. 4: 35-38), ie. passages where several short 
sections, existing perhaps independently in an original source, 
but dealing with kindred subjects, have been worked up 
together into a single paragraph. Thus we have here: first 
(I-5) a simple allegory descriptive of the ideal shepherd ; 
second (7-10) an interpretation of this in which Christ appears 
not, as might be expected, as the Shepherd, but as the Door ; 
third (x1-18), another more natural interpretation in which 
Jesus himself is pictured as the ‘Good Shepherd.’ As a 
result it is impossible to trace throughout one sequence of 
thought or a consistent use of the similes. One might con- 
jecture that ‘the Witness’ has preserved recollections of two 
(or three ?) independent allegories, and that the Evangelist 


234 


CHAPTER X, VERSES 1-4 


has incorporated them in a single paragraph. Throughout 
the allegory in relation to the fold (the Church and her 
Teachers) Christ is the Door, in relation to the flock (individual 
Christians) he is the Shepherd. 

In 1-5 we have a simple allegory descriptive of the ideal 
Shepherd—an ideal realized no doubt in Christ (at 11 ff.), 
“but for the present this personal application lies in the 
background’ (Westcott). Notice the connexion of thought 
between 29 and I in the idea of robbery—another point in 
favour of our transposition. 

‘Truly, truly I tell you, he who does not enter the sheepfold 
by the gate but climbs up somewhere else, he is a thief and a 
robber’: his method of entry shows that he has no right to 
lead the sheep out. The ‘ fold’ is a walled enclosure without 
roof, but with a heavy door watched by a ‘ gate-keeper.’ The 
true shepherd on the other hand may be known both by his 
mode of entrance, and by the understanding existing between 
him and the sheep. ‘He who enters by the gate is the 2 
shepherd of the sheep. The gate-keeper opens the gate for 3 
him, and the sheep listen to his voice ’—because it is familiar ; 
‘he calls his sheep by name and leads them out.’ The ‘ gate- 
keeper’ is probably a purely descriptive detail, and is not to 
be interpreted as, e.g., God, the Holy Ghost, Moses, the 
Baptist, etc. Eastern shepherds give their sheep names as 
we would to horses or cows (so also, e.g., in Theocritus). 
The special name is proof of individual knowledge and love 
(Is. 43: 1, Rev. 3:5, Jn. 20: 16). The phrase ‘lead out’ 
figures the separation of Christianity from Judaism. The 
excommunication of the blind man is still in view, and the 
thought is that Christ’s flock is already being led out of the 
Jewish fold. ‘When he has brought all his sheep outside 4 
(the very Greek word used of the excommunication of the 
blind man in 9g: 34), he goes in front of them (the regular 
eastern custom, to guide them; Ps. 80: 1), and the sheep 
follow him because. they know his voice.’ Sir G. A. Smith 
(Hist. Geog. of Palestine, p. 312) gives a good illustration : 
‘Sometimes we enjoyed our noonday rest beside one of these 
Judaean wells, to which three or four shepherds come down 


235 


lal 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


with their flocks. The flocks mixed with each other, and we 
wondered how each shepherd would get his own again. But 
after the watering and the playing were over, the shepherds 
one by one went up different sides of the valley, and each 
called out his peculiar call, and the sheep of each drew out of 
the crowd to their own shepherd, and the flocks passed away 

5,as orderly as they came.’ ‘They will not follow a stranger, 
they will run from him, because they do not know the voice 
of strangers.’ Plummer tells the story of a Scottish traveller 
who changed clothes with a Jerusalem shepherd and tried 
to lead the sheep; but the sheep followed the gees s 
voice and not his clothes. 

6 Jesus told them this allegory, but they did not indeed 
what he was saying to them—the conventional phrase (Lk. 
8:10) which opens the way for the interpretation. An 
‘allegory’ is a narrative in which truth is expressed by the 
use of pictorial similes. The word is also used of a brief 
symbolic saying or ‘ figure’ (16: 25, 29; A.V. ‘ proverb’). 
Godet well distinguishes between an ‘allegory’ and the true 
‘parable’ as we have it in the Synoptics: ‘In the parable, 
the thought is clothed in a form which has meaning apart 
from its moral application; in the allegory, the application 
is directly felt in each feature of the picture—a parable is a 
picture ; an allegory a transparency.’ ( 

There follows (7-10) an interpretation in which the figure 
‘Door’ or ‘ Gate’ is used to illustrate Christ’s relation to the 
true shepherds of his flock, and through them to the flock 
itself. The true pastor approaches the flock only through 
and in the name of the Christ who, as the Gate, himself protects 
the flock from false teachers. The Gospel (21: 15) has in 
view ‘under-shepherds’ as well as the ‘ good-shepherd’ 
himself, and here John, writing from the standpoint of his own 
day, insists that only those who act in Christ’s name and 
possess his spirit have a right to assume that office. As this 
thought of the leaders of the Church being themselves ‘ shep- 
herds’ belongs to the appendix, and verses 7-10 also reflect 
this idea, it is tempting to conjecture that these verses, which 
are evidently out of harmony with the rest of the section 

236 


CHAPTER X, VERSES 7-9 


(where Christ himself is the shepherd), may also be due to 
the Redactor. 

So he said to them again, ‘Truly, truly I tell you, I am7 
the Gate of the sheep!’ Doubtless shepherd, as is read by 
Moffatt, might be expected rather than gate; but the textual 
evidence is overwhelmingly against this reading. By Christ 
alone can the sheep be protected from danger, and through 
him alone can they come out to pasture. Through Christ 
alone can the true teachers approach the flock, for by him 
alone are they commissioned. It is not the Pharisees but 
Christ who alone can admit to or expel from the true fold of 
God. ‘All who ever came before me have been thieves and 8 
robbers.’ It must be admitted that the contrast here would 
seem to be between the robbers and Christ as the ‘ shepherd ’ 
rather than as the ‘ gate’; there is evidently a certain con- 
fusion of thought as the result of the amalgamation of two 
inconsistent allegories. Probably before me should not 
be stressed in either a temporal or local force, as if Christ 
were impugning the honesty of, e.g., Moses or the prophets, 
whom elsewhere he rather calls to witness as his allies (5: 46, 
8: 56,12: 41). The phrase ‘ before me’ is part of the simile, 
as if an impostor were pictured presenting himself to the 
gate-keeper in the early hours of the morning before the true 
shepherd arrives. Writing from the standpoint of his own 
day John thus sums up all false teachers who are trying to 
seduce Christians from the true community of Christ, whether 
they be false Messiahs, Jewish reactionaries, or Gnostic 
heretics; perhaps he has in mind especially the Jewish 
doctors who from the viewpoint of the outworn creed of by- 
gone days are prejudicing people against Christ. They are 
robbers in intention rather than in fact, not because they 
have actually done much damage, but because they are un- 
authorized trespassers. (Cf. Ezek. 34: 1-19, Jer. 23: I-4.) 
‘But the sheep would not listen to them’; the true children 
of God have ‘ tested the spirits to see if they come from God’ 
(x Jn. 4: 1) and have found them false. ‘I am the Gate ; 9 
whoever enters by me will be saved, he will go in and out 
and find pasture.’ (Cf. 14: 6, and for the thought and phrase- 


: 237 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


ology, Num. 27: 15-21.) Strictly the reference must still be 
to the true leaders of the Church (not the ‘sheep,’ but the 
‘under-shepherds,’ though, as a result of the confusion of 
thought noted above, the content of the allegory as a whole 
—as contrasted with its form in this particular verse— 
demands rather a reference to the ‘sheep’; but ‘even the 
shepherds are sheep also’—Westcott) who must first find 
salvation through Christ for themselves before they can act as 
guides to the flock (1 Tim. 4: 16, 1 Cor. 3: 5). Only when 
commissioned by Christ and endued with his spirit have they 
freedom and authority to go about their sacred duty (to go 
in and out is the common expression used to denote the un- 
hindered activity of daily life: Deut. 28: 6, Ps. 121: 8, Jer. 
37:4) of finding pasture—i.e. providing spiritual susten- 
ance—for the sheep. While Christ is an open door, the 
Pharisees are a door bolted against entrance into the kingdom 
(Mt. 23:13). Finally Christ as the Gate which guards the 
sheep and admits only the true teachers is contrasted with 

Io the false teachers: ‘The thief only comes to steal, to slay and 
to destroy: I have come that they may have life and have 
it to the full.’ The impostor seeks only his own aggran- 
disement ; he exploits and ruins the community. In Christ, 
on the other hand, there is ‘life to the full’ (Ps. 23: 1, 
Jn. 4: 14). Vital contact with Christ enriches a man’s whole 
personality. 

But such a communication of life is possible only by the 
sacrifice of Christ’s own life first, and in virtue of this sacrifice 
he is now pictured as the ‘ goodshepherd.’ The simile changes 
and a new allegory begins. (For another classic description 
of the ideal shepherd, cf. Plato, Republic, p. 345.) The love 
of the early Church for this figure of Christ comes out in the 
frequency with which the emblem of the Good Shepherd 

IZ occurs on the walls of the Catacombs. ‘I am the good 
shepherd’: the Greek adjective is almost untranslatable, 
and combines the ideas of ‘ beautiful,’ ‘ fit,’ ‘ competent,’ 
‘one who excels at his work’ ; perhaps the Scots word ‘ braw’ 
comes nearest to it. ‘A good shepherd lays down his life for 
the sheep.” The Logos-Christ strips off his earthly life like a 

238 


( 


CHAPTER X, VERSES 12-15 


garment (15, 18, 13: 4); this, rather than the idea of a 
pledge or ransom, is the force of the metaphor. That this 
was originally a separate allegory appears from the fact 
that the false teachers are now symbolized not by bold robbers 
but by a timid hired man, the réle of ‘robber’ now being 
filled by the ‘ wolf’: ‘The hired man, who is not the shep- 
herd and does not own the sheep, deserts them when he sees 
the wolf coming; he runs away, leaving the wolf to tear 
and scatter them ’—pictorial details not to be stressed, but 
summing up all the harmful influences brought to bear on the 
Christian community, the seduction of heresy, the threat of 
persecution, etc.—‘ just because he is a hired man, who has 
no interest in the sheep.’ He is working for his own gain 
and not for the sheep’s protection. On the other hand, the 
mutual trust and understanding existing between the true 
shepherd and his flock make it impossible for him to desert 
them: ‘I am the good shepherd, I know my sheep (their 
marks, names, ways), and my sheep know me (as proved by 
their willingness to follow—ver. 4), just as the Father knows 
me and I know the Father, and (as a result of my insight 
alike into the need of the sheep and the will of the Father) 
I lay down my life for the sheep.’ Know means properly 
to ‘know by experience,’ and even of Christ it may be said 
that it was through life’s testing experiences that he came 
to the perfect knowledge of God’s will—though John never 
emphasizes this. The relation of mutual understanding 
between Christ and the Christian is the same as that between 
the Father and Christ (cf. 6: 57,15: 9,173 11 ; 1 Cor. 3: 23). 
This theme is developed at length in the farewell discourse. 
This passage well illustrates the place held in John’s thought 
by the concept of knowledge. In this he shows sympathy 
with the ‘Gnostic’ point of view, though by deliberately 
avoiding the special term ‘ gnosis’ he would seem to desire 
to dissociate himself from current Gnostic doctrine. More- 
over, for John ‘ knowledge’ is not a purely intellectual process, 
but includes religious and moral elements by virtue of which 
it approaches in content Paul’s idea of ‘faith.’ Just as for 
Paul ‘ the just shall live by faith’ (Rom. 1: 17), so for John 


239 


I2 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


‘eternal life’ consists in the ‘knowledge’ of God (17: 3). 
(For the relation of ‘ knowing’ to ‘ believing’ in our Gospel, 
cf. 6: 69, 10: 38, 17: 8, and note on 3: 14 f.) By use of the 
concept of ‘knowing’ John tries to interpret in terms of 
reason the facts of spiritual experience. Hence for him 
‘knowledge’ of God is primarily knowledge of His will and 
ethical character rather than initiation into some esoteric 
Gnostic discipline. Though in our Gospel, as for Plato and 
Philo, the intellectual aspect of religion is always prominent 
(4: 22, 8: 32, 13: 17, 14: 5,17: 7), yet for John, as for the 
Hebrew psalmists and prophets, to ‘ know the Lord’ is also 
to trust him, to serve him, to bend one’s being to his will 
and purpose (17: 25, 8: 19). 

It is under the moral compulsion of such a ‘ knowledge’ of 
God that the Good Shepherd ‘ lays down his life for the sheep.’ 
Now according to John one of the chief results of Christ’s 
death is to bring about a world-wide extension of his Church 
and ensure unity among believers (II: 52, 17: 21; cf. Eph. 

162: 13, 14). Accordingly Jesus proceeds: ‘I have other 
sheep, too,—i.e. Gentile believers—which do not belong to 
this fold,’ i.e. to the Jewish community so far as it has already 
recognized Christ. Jesus already ‘has’ these believers 
because, though they are not yet gathered in, they are destined 
for him by the Father (6: 37, Acts 2: 47, 18: 10). ‘I must 
bring them also (Eph. 2: 11 ff., Mt. 8: 11), and they will 
listen to my voice ; so it will be one flock, one shepherd ’— 
not ‘ one fold,’ as A.V., which Westcott truly calls a ‘ disas- 
trous’ mistranslation. The ideas of the fold and the flock 
are deliberately contrasted. The bond is not in a common 
organization, but ina common relationship to one Lord. There 
may be various folds, though but one flock and one shepherd. 

17. The Evangelist now answers what may well have been a com- 
mon objection to Christ’s claims: is it possible that a teacher 
whose mission ended in the ignominy of a gibbet can have 
held a divine commission ? So far, replies John, from Jesus’ 
death being a sign that God has disowned him, ‘this is why 
my Father loves me, because I lay down my life.’ Moreover, 
Christ’s death is not an argument against his divine power 

240 


CHAPTER X, VERSES 18, 30-32 


but a proof of it. He gives up his life voluntarily ‘to take 18 
it up again. No one takes it from me, I lay it down of my 
own accord.’ Again Jesus’ ‘ self-determination’ is empha- 
sized (note 7: 30). One cannot help contrasting the touch- 
ingly human Jesus of the Synoptic Gethsemane scene with 
this Johannine Christ who moves serenely among his enemies, 
the proud master of his fate. Our Gospel insists that Jesus’ 
death was due not to circumstances, not to the strength of 
the opposition but to his own free will, upon which no outward 
constraint can be laid (19: 11): ‘I have power to lay it down 
and also power to take it up again.’ The fact that he has 
power to take his life back again at will is proof of the freedom 
of the sacrifice. But does it not also rob the sacrifice of 
reality ? This is hardly a Christ who is ‘ made perfect by 
suffering,’ but rather one raised above suffering by the divine 
‘power’ within him. Yet in thus determining his own 
destiny Christ is not setting his own will against the Father's ; 
even in this he ‘does nothing of his own accord’ (8: 28): 
‘TI have my Father’s orders for this.’ Both Cross and Resur- 
rection are part of the Father's commission to the Son. The 
Son’s freedom consists in spontaneously obeying the Father’s 
commandment, for (note how admirable is the connexion 
resulting from the transposition of 19-29), ‘I and my Father 30 
are one—.’ (Cf. 17: 21-23.) The unity here claimed is 
ethical rather than metaphysical, a unity of will rather than 
of essence and personality, a mystical unity implying two 
separate personalities as in 38 below and 1: 1—‘ the Logos 
was with God.’ Christ never claims even in this Gospel to 
be one in essence with God (see note on 5: 18). The unity 
with the Father which he does claim is a similar unity of 
will and purpose to that which he prays may exist between 
Christian and Christian (17: 11). An indivisible unity of 
nature in Father and Son is not implied, as Jesus himself 
makes clear when in verse 36 he interprets his present claim 
as meaning not ‘I am God,’ but ‘I am God’s Son.’ 

The claim to a special relationship towards God has its 
usual sequel (5: 18): The Jews again (as in 8: 59) caught 31 
up stones to stone him. Jesus replied—with bitter irony— 32 

241 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


‘TI have let you see many a good deed of God’; Jesus’ acts 
are ‘God’s deeds’ because they are done ‘in His name’ 
(10 : 25), i.e. according to His will and purpose ; ‘ for which of 
33 them do you mean to stone me?’ The Jews retorted, ‘We 
mean to stone you, not for a good deed, but for blasphemy, 
because you, a mere man, make yourself God.’ The charge 
of blasphemy (for the law concerning which see Lev. 24: I0- 
16; Deut. 18: 20) made, according to the Synoptists, at the 
trial (Mk. 14: 64), is anticipated here. There is no fresh 
charge of blasphemy at the trial, for there Jesus merely refers 
his accusers to his previous teaching (18: 19-21), as if the 
claim to be the Son of God, which in the Synoptics appears 
to come as a new shock to his judges, had long been known to 
34 all the world—the true Johannine standpoint. Jesus answered, 
‘Isit not written in your Law (‘ your ’—as if disjoining him- 
35 self from them), “I said, you are gods’’? If the Law (here 
used of the O.T. in general; cf. 12: 34, 15: 25, Rom 3: 19, 
etc.), said they were gods, to whom the word of God came— 
36 and scripture cannot be broken—do you mean to tell me, 
whom the Father consecrated (i.e. anointed as Christ) and 
sent into the world (on a mission of salvation—3: 16-17), 
“You are blaspheming,’’ because I said, “‘I am God’s Son ’’?’ 
The quotation is from Ps. 82: 6, where God says to the judges 
of Israel, ‘I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are 
children of the most High.’ The people’s rulers were regarded 
as the representatives of God Himself; so of the King (Ps. 
45:6 and cf. Exod. 4: 16). The argument may be para- 
phrased thus: If those who were consecrated to their 
office by the saying of God which I have quoted (or perhaps 
more generally, If those who in the past have been the 
organs of the divine word) were actually called ‘ gods ’— 
and they must have been so called, for Scripture says so— 
surely the consecrated ambassador of the Father may without 
blasphemy call himself ‘God’s Son.’ The argument is a 
fortiori: if human leaders have been called ‘ gods,’ how much 
more may one greater than they make a lesser claim—to be 
not ‘God,’ but ‘God’s Son’! If the organ of the divine 
word may be called ‘ god,’ how much more the divine Logos 
242 


CHAPTER X, VERSES 37-42 


himself. The argument is admittedly ad hominem and 
indeed is little better than a play on words, for Jesus claims 
to be the ‘ Son of God’ in a very different sense from that in 
which the judges of Israel are ‘ children of the most High.’ 
But the analogy of the use made of O.T. quotation by Paul 
and in the Epistle to the Hebrews makes it quite credible that 
in John’s time such arguments may have been used against 
the Jews to defend the divinity of Christ. ‘If I am not 37 
doing the deeds of my Father, do not believe me; but if I 38 
am, then believe the deeds, though you will not believe me— 
if you will not accept my statements, then at least yield to 
the evidence of my deeds (10: 25, 5: 36, 9: 33)—that you 
may learn and understand that the Father is in me and I am 
in the Father.’ The Father is in Christ, as in the organ 
through which He expresses Himself: Christ is in the Father 
as in the element in which he lives and from which he draws 
his power. The words are a more detailed statement of the 
mystical unity claimed in 30. ‘Learn and understand’ 
implies a progressive knowledge—‘ perceive once for all, and 
then go on advancing in ever fuller perception’ (Westcott). 
Note too how the thought passes over almost unconsciously 
from the idea of ‘ believing’ to that of ‘knowing.’ (Cf. note 
oni 60, 50::-155/17 <7 f.) 

Once more they tried to arrest him (as at 7: 30, 32, 44) 39 
but he escaped their hands (cf. 8:59: ‘his time had not 
yet come’) and went across the Jordan, back to the spot 40 
where John had baptized at first, ic. at the time when Jesus 
first appeared on the earthly stage. This is better than to 
suppose that the Evangelist is distinguishing between the first 
(1: 19 ff.) and the second (3: 23 ff.) occasions on which John 
bore evidence to Christ. (For the place see note on I: 28.) 
There he stayed (till 11: 7) ; and many came to him, saying, 41 
‘John did not perform any Sign, but all he ever said about 
this man was true.’ And many believed in him there—the 42 
last word is emphatic, the faith of the Pereans, like that of the 
Samaritans, being contrasted with the unbelief of the Jews. 
The reference to John seems suggested by the locality with 
which his name was associated. The mention of him here at 


243 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


the close of Jesus’ public preaching at Jerusalem corresponds 
to that by the Synoptists in Mk. 11: 27-31. In the Synoptics 
we have hints (e.g. Mt. 14:2) that tradition must have 
attributed miracles to the Baptist. But our Evangelist as 
usual emphasizes the fore-runner’s inferiority and the fact 
that his sole mission was to testify to Jesus. Cf. with this 
verse 1: 8—‘ He was not the Light (‘ he did not perform any 
Sign’) ; it was to bear testimony to the Light that he appeared’ 
(‘all he ever said... was true’). Verses 40-42 have been 
suspected of being an addition by the Redactor. A number 
of grammatical peculiarities have been noted (see Expository 
Times, xxvii, p. 237), and it is suggested that this may be one 
of the links inserted by the Redactor for the sake of preserving 
historical sequence—in this case to translate Jesus to the 
locality beyond Jordan, where he is when Lazarus dies. The 
Synoptic record preserved in Mk. 10: 1 is thus reaffirmed. 
The verses thus present three traits characteristic of ‘R’ 
passages—Synoptic echoes, proximity to textual dislocation, 
and a desire to emphasize Christ’s superiority to the Baptist. 
(See pp. xliv, 368.) 


Section III. THe DrivinE Work OF THE CHRIST: THE GIFT 
oF LIFE AND THE AWAKING OF FAITH 


Illustration: The Raising of Lazarus (11: I-57) 


I Now there was a man ill, Lazarus of Bethany—the village 
of Mary and her sister Martha. ‘ Lazarus’ is the Greek form 
of ‘ Eleazar,’ and means ‘God is my help ’—a name appro- 
priate to the miracle of which he is the hero. Possibly John 
has borrowed the name from Lk. 16: 19 ff. Bethany, now 
called El-Azirieh (from El-Azir, the Arabic for Lazarus), lies 
on the south-east slope of Olivet, about two miles from Jerusa- 
lem (18), and must be distinguished from the place of the 
same name mentioned at 1: 28. John marks this distinction 
by calling it ‘the village of Mary and her sister Martha,’ a 
definition which also serves to connect Lazarus with figures 
well known in Synoptic tradition (cf. Lk. 10: 38-42, where, 
however, it is stated neither that they lived at Bethany nor 


244 


CHAPTER XI, VERSES 2-5 


that they had a brother). Mary is mentioned first as being 
the better known on account of the ‘anointing’ incident, 
though Luke implies that Martha was the mistress of the 
house. The Mary whose brother Lazarus was ill was the 2 
Mary who anointed the Lord with perfume and wiped his feet 
with her hair. The verse is probably a gloss: the incident is 
not recorded till 12: 1-8, but in John’s time Mary would be 
particularly remembered for this act. For the whole ques- 
tion of this ‘ identification’ see notes on 12: 1-8. (Moffatt 
at this point inserts verse 5, but see note in loc.). So the 3 
sisters sent to him, saying, ‘Lord, he whom you love is ill.’ 
The bald message veils an unexpressed prayer: ‘ sufficit ut 
noveris; non enim amas et deseris’ (Augustine). When 4 
Jesus heard it, he said, ‘ This illness is not to end in death— 
there may be death, but that will not be the final issue— 
the end of it is the glory of God, that the Son of God may 
be glorified thereby.’ (For the thought cf. 9: 3, where, as here, 
we are shown the underlying motive according to John of 
all Jesus’ miracles.) The words are perhaps intended rather 
as areflection of Jesus than as areply to the sisters’ messenger. 
There would seem to be a play on the two senses of the word 
‘ glorify,’ for as a result of the miracle Jesus was ‘ glorified’ 
in two ways: in the ordinary sense inasmuch as many 
believed in his Messiahship ; and in the peculiar Johannine 
sense, because the incident was the prelude to the Cross, the 
point d’appui for the final assault upon Jesus by his enemies. 
(Cf.7: 39 note.) The ‘ glory’ of God consists in the ‘ glorify- 
ing’ of the Son—and that through the Cross (cf. 13: 31). 
The intention of Jesus’ words is not that Lazarus will not 
die, but that death will not have the last word. (Cf. Mk. 5: 39, 
which is echoed again in verse II.) 

Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. This 5 
certainly fits in more naturally between verses 2 and 3. Yet 
when the verse is left in its present position we may perhaps 
find special point in the ‘ so’ with which the next verse opens. 
We have already noticed two occasions (2: 4, 7: 6) on which 
Jesus deliberately resisted the appeal of affection lest he 
should be ‘ rushed’ against his better judgment. The present 


245 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


6 circumstances are the same: Jesus loved Lazarus, so, when 
he heard of the illness, he stayed where he was for two days. 
The reminder of Jesus’ love also helps to remove the suspicion 
that the words just spoken (4) and the subsequent delay 
betokened coldness towards the Bethany family. Baur, e.g., 
insists that Jesus deliberately delayed in order that he 
might have the ‘ glory’ of raising a putrefying corpse. But 
though the delay certainly serves to heighten the miracle, 
this is not its primary motive; nor is it to test the faith of 
the sisters, but rather that Jesus himself may be sure of the 
Father’s will. It is possible, alternatively (indeed, the Greek 
particles favour this) to find the consequence implied in ‘so,’ 
not in verse 6 but in 7: Jesus loved...so, when he heard..., 

7 he stayed indeed where he was for two days, but then, after 
that, he said to the disciples, ‘Let us go back to Judaea.’ 
Jesus says ‘to Judaea’ not ‘to Bethany,’ because the 
Evangelist wishes to contrast believing Peraea with unbeliev- 
ing Jerusalem, and also because it was the re-entry into the 
province of Judaea which put Jesus’ life to the hazard. This 

8 at once appears: ‘ Rabbi,’ said the disciples, ‘the Jews were 
trying to stone you (10: 31) only the other day (some three 

g months before) ; are you going back there?’ Jesus replied, 
‘Are there not twelve hours in the day ?’—every man has 
but a definitely limited period within which to work (cf. the 
thought of Lk. 13: 32)—‘If one walks during the day he 

10 does not stumble, for he sees the light of this world; but if 
one walks during the night he does stumble, for the light is 
not inhim.’ (Cf. 9: 4, 12: 35.) Verses g-10 state a general 
truth, but obviously with special reference to Jesus’ own 
case. While the time definitely allotted to him by the Father 
lasted, Jesus could come to no harm, for ‘ the knowledge of 
God’s will, which is man’s moral light, guides him’ (Dods). 
When God’s time had run out for Jesus ‘it was night’ (13 : 30), 
But when a man prolongs his activity beyond the time 
appointed by God, he does stumble, having lost the light of 
God’s guidance (cf. r Jn. 2: 10-11). Verse 10 has no par- 
ticular application to Jesus’ own case, save to emphasize the 
need of haste. Two truths are asserted: first, that no harm 

246 


CHAPTER XI, VERSES 11-17 


can come to Jesus save in God’s own time ; second, that an 
important task remains to be accomplished while there is yet 
time. Hence we continue: This he said, then added (others 11 
translate ‘ and after this ’—supposing an interval of two days 
at this point; but see note on 17), ‘Our friend Lazarus has 
fallen asleep ; Iam going to waken him.’ (For death described 
as sleeping cf. Mt. 9: 24, 27: 52, Acts 7: 60, 1 Thess. 4: 13, 
r Cor. 15:6.) With Jesus’ earlier words (4) in mind, the 
disciples now understand him literally: ‘Lord,’ said the 12 
disciples, ‘if he has fallen asleep, he will get better ’—for sleep 
is the best of all cures: they hint that there is no need to take 
the risk of a visit to Judaea. The misunderstanding serves 
as usual to throw into prominence Jesus’ real meaning : 
Jesus, however, had been speaking of his death ; but as they 13 
imagined he meant natural sleep, he then told them plainly 14 
(i.e. without ambiguity or figure of speech—ro : 24), ‘ Lazarus 
is dead ; and for your sakes—though grieving for Lazarus 15 
and the sisters—I am glad that I was not there—implying 
that had he been there Lazarus would not have died (21)— 
that you may believe—the motive in a phrase of Johannine 
miracle ; in the Synoptics Jesus does miracles out of pity: 
in our Gospel even pity is crushed back that miracle may 
increase faith—Come now, let us go to him.’ Whereupon 16 
Thomas (called ‘the Twin’) said to his fellow-disciples, ‘Let us 
go too, let us die along with him.’ The disciples are not yet 
supposed to have grasped the fact that Jesus means to raise 
Lazarus, and Thomas speaks ‘in no mood of expectant faith, 
but in loyal despair’ (Strachan) (Cf. Mk. 8: 34-35, 14: 31). 
His words well express Thomas’ character, in which obstinate 
incredulity is combined with an equally obstinate loyalty 
(14:5, 20:25, 28). ‘Didymus’ (A.V.) is not a surname, 
but the Greek translation of the Hebrew for Thomas, which 
means ‘ Twin.’ The nickname is perhaps added here as that 
by which Thomas was familiarly known among the Greek 
Christians of Asia Minor. 

Now when Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had been 17 
buried for four days. The burial, as usual in the East, would 
take place immediately after death. If then Lazarus died 


247 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


about the time when Jesus received the message (3), the 
four days may be reckoned thus: the first, that on which 
Jesus received the message ; the second and third, the two 
days during which Jesus delayed (6); the fourth, that on 
which Jesus made the journey to Bethany. Loisy, who 
traces throughout the Gospel a chronology based on the 
number seven, thinks that Lazarus is supposed to have died 
at the moment when Jesus announced his death (14), that 
four days are allotted to the journey, and that the whole 
incident occupies a week (the day of the message, two days 
waiting, four days’ journey), so that Lazarus is raised sym- 
bolically on the seventh day. The Jews apparently believed 
that a soul hovered about the dead body for three days, but 
on the fourth found it so unrecognizable through decay that 
it finally forsook it (cf. 39). All life had indubitably departed 
from Lazarus. (Transpose 18-19 to follow 30; so Moffatt.) 
20 Then Martha, hearing of the arrival of Jesus, went out to meet 
him, while Mary sat at home—in the attitude of grief (Ezek. 
8:14). The contrasted actions of the sisters agree with their 
characters as painted in Lk. 10: 38 ff. Martha, in sorrow 
rather than reproach, puts into words what Jesus himself had 
21 implied in 15: Said Martha to Jesus, ‘Had you been here, 
Lord, my brother would not have died.’ But it is not yet too 
22 late: ‘But now—well, I know whatever you ask God for, 
He will grant you’ (9: 31, 11: 41-42). ‘The reticence of this 
indirect request is admirable’ (Godet). Jesus at once answers 
23 Martha’s faith with a word of promise: Jesus said to her, 
‘Your brother will rise again ’—an assurance capable of being 
interpreted either in a general sense as referring to the resur- 
rection ‘ on the last day,’ or in a particular sense as promising 
24 a special miracle. Martha takes it in a general sense: ‘I 
know,’ said Martha, ‘he will rise at the resurrection, on the 
last day.’ (For the idea of a general resurrection, based on 
such passages as Dan. 12: 2, etc., see notes on 5: 28 f.,6: 39 f., 
54.) The hope of reunion at the last day is but poor consola- 
tion for Martha, conventional comfort such as she had already 
25had from many condolers. Accordingly Jesus replies that 
“the resurrection’ and the ‘life’ which it guarantees, are 
248 


CHAPTER XI, VERSES 26-30, 18-19 


not future but present, not doctrines but facts, not events in 
time but states conditional upon a personal relationship : 
Jesus said to her, ‘I am myself resurrection and life: he who 
believes in me will live—by virtue of the ‘ eternal life’ which 
is the reward of faith—even if he dies—in the physical 


sense—and no one who lives—i.e. who has not yet tasted 26 


bodily death—and believes in me will ever die.’ The man 
who through faith identifies himself with the personal life-force 
of Christ will live in spite of death. If, like Lazarus, he has 
suffered physical death, it has only been in seeming, for he has 
carried with him into death that same vital relationship 
through which he ‘lived’ on earth. If he is still alive in the 
physical sense, then, in virtue of that same relationship, the 
physical death which one day he must face loses all reality. 
We may compare Paul’s thought of a higher life ‘ in Christ’ 
(Gal. 2: 20; Col. 3: 4) and the last words of Edward the 
Confessor (quoted by Westcott) : ‘ Weep not, I shall not die, but 
live; and as I leave the land of the dying I trust to see the 
blessings of the Lord in the land of the living.’ Jesus crowns 
his promise with a testing question: ‘ You believe that?’ 
Martha, though still puzzled, is willing to accept the saying 
for the sake of him who said it ; she welcomes ‘ truth through 
personality’: ‘Yes, Lord,’ she said, ‘I do believe (the Greek 
is an emphatic perfect—a ‘complete present’) you are the 
Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world’ 
(6:14; Mt. 11:3). And with these words she went off to 
call her sister Mary, telling her secretly—in order not to 
cause excitement and direct the attention of Jesus’ enemies 
to him, and also perhaps to give Mary the chance of a private 
talk with Jesus—‘ The Teacher (evidently the name by which 
Jesus was known in the household ; 20: 16) is here, and he 
is calling for you.’ So, on hearing this, Mary rose hurriedly 
and went to him. With the same desire for privacy Jesus 
had not entered the village yet, he was still at the spot where 
Martha had met him ; he wished to have only the sisters 
with him at the tomb, but his desire was thwarted: now as 
Bethany is not far from Jerusalem, only about two miles 
away, a number of Jews had come to condole with Martha 
249 


27 


28 


29 
3¢ 


18 
Ig 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


and Mary about their brother. The proximity of Bethany 
to Jerusalem is mentioned in order to explain the presence of 
a crowd from Jerusalem, some of them hostile to Jesus (46). 
31 For visits of condolence, cf. the Book of Job. And when 
the Jews who were condoling with her inside the house noticed 
her rise hurriedly and go out, they followed her, as they 
imagined she was going to wail at the tomb. The period of 
deep mourning lasted for a week (I Sam. 31: 13), during 
32 which a daily visit would be made to the tomb. But when 
Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she dropped at 
his feet—thus expressing the urgency of her prayer (Mk. 
5:22, Lk. 10: 39)—crying, ‘Had you been here, Lord, 
my brother would not have died.’ Her prayer is the same 
as Martha's (21), but Jesus’ response is different: the situation 
now ‘called for the act of power and not for the word of 
33 power only’ (Westcott). Now when Jesus saw her wailing 
and saw the Jews who accompanied her wailing, he chafed 
in spirit and was disquieted. The word here translated 
‘chafe’ is used with an indirect object in Mt. g: 30, Mk. 
I: 43, 14: 5, and in these passages means ‘ to charge sternly,’ 
“to upbraid.’ The note of the word is strong feeling, whether 
expressed to others, as in the Synoptic passages, or inwardly 
felt, as here. Christ’s emotion is due to his sympathy with 
Mary. It always cost him something to do a miracle (Mt. 
8:17, Lk. 8: 46, Heb. 5:7). The idea of ‘indignation’ 
(R.V. margin), whether with the hypocritical mourners or 
with death and its author the devil, is hardly present here, 
or, if implied, it is indignation that so many should be weeping 
over a dead man in the presence of One who is the Lord of 
Life (cf. 38 where the cause of Jesus’ emotion is again lack of 
faith). The phrase translated ‘was disquieted’ (for which 
cf. 12: 27, 13: 21) is in Greek active, ‘ he disquieted himself,’ 
as if John wished to hint that not even Jesus’ emotions over- 
came him involuntarily. ‘He took to himself freely those 
feelings to which others are subject ’ (Westcott). Jesus is not 
acted upon by the contagion of grief, but enters into it while 
34 still retaining perfect self-control. ‘Where have you laid 
him ? ’ he asked—the only occasion in the Gospel on which 
250 


CHAPTER XI, VERSES 35-39 


Jesus asks for information—They answered, ‘Come and see, 
sir’ (1: 46). Jesus burst into tears. This particular ex- 35 
pression of Jesus’ emotion seems to have been isolated and 
specially emphasized in order the more easily to attach to it 
the reflections of the Jews which follow. Jesus’ tears might 
have seemed more natural at an earlier point in the narrative, 
but the truth is that the Evangelist, as already noted, makes 
Jesus restrain his human grief long enough to show that he 
is superior to the mere contagion of a wailing crowd. Jesus 
first chafes at the crowd’s lack of faith, and only afterwards 
—as if spontaneously and under no compulsion of human 
weakness—he ‘bursts into tears.’ Yet, however artificial 
his picture of Jesus’ grief, John shows real spiritual insight 
when he thus teaches that ‘it is not with a heart of stone 
that the dead are raised’ (Hengstenberg). Whereupon the 36 
Jews said, ‘ See how he loved him ! ’—though some of them 
(still puzzled, if not actually ironical) asked, ‘ Could he not 37 
have prevented him from dying, when he could open a blind 
man’seyes?’ Note how the Evangelist deliberately connects 
the two great miracles of chapters g and 11: they are each 
symbolical of a great spiritual truth: there (g: 5) Christ 
is the ‘ Light,’ here he is the ‘ Life’ (11: 25). This made 38 
Jesus chafe afresh, so he went to the tomb ; it was a cave with 
a boulder to close it. The cave-tomb would be either natural 
(Gen. 23: 9) or artificial (Mt. 27: 60), with a boulder at the 
entrance to keep out wild animals. This would be placed 
against an aperture facing the spectator rather than as a lid 
on the top of a pit (cf. 20: 1, Mk. 16: 3). Jesus said, ‘ Re- 39 
move the boulder.’ Christ uses supernatural power only to 
do that which no other power can do; the rest he leaves to 
ourselves (cf. 44). ‘Lord,’ said Martha, the dead man’s 
sister—who would therefore shrink from seeing the ravages 
of death upon one so dear to her—‘ he will be stinking by this 
time ; he has been dead four days.’ Martha’s remark means 
ostensibly that it will be no consolation now to look for one 
last time on Lazarus—which she imagines to be the only 
reason for the opening of the tomb; but from the Evangel- 
ist’s point of view the remark serves to heighten the wonder 
251 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


of the miracle. (For the point of ‘ four days,’ see 17.) It is 
evident from 44 that Lazarus was partially embalmed, but 
the customary Jewish embalmment would not suffice to arrest 
decay. Jesus gently rebukes Martha’s incredulity by recalling 
his promise, which, however, was made to the disciples (4) 
40 rather than to Martha herself (23-26): ‘ Did I not tell you,’ 
said Jesus, ‘ if you will only believe, you shall see (here ‘ believ- 
ing is seeing’: contrast 20. 25) the glory of God?’ God’s 
‘glory’ or majesty will be manifested in Jesus’ miraculous 
power over death (cf. Rom. 6: 4), and also in the truth, which 
the miracle illustrates, that Christ is the source of all spiritual 
resurrection and life (cf. notes on 4). ‘The glory of God is 
the revelation of the life-giving power which is in God, and 
4I which is exercised by Christ ’ (Loisy). Then they removed 
the boulder, and Jesus, lifting his eyes to heaven (17: 1, Ps. 
I2I: I, 123: 1), said, ‘Father, I thank thee for listening to 
me,’—‘ simple words of thanksgiving, as if already Lazarus 
was restored’ (Dods), words uttered in the spirit of true 
prayer which is ‘ the conscious realization of the divine will, 
and not a petition for that which is contingent ’ (Westcott) 
(cf. Is. 65:24). Miracles are ‘just so many answered prayers’ 
(Godet). Jesus wishes to point the crowd to the true source 
of the miracle in God (5 : 19, 30) of whose power he himself 
is the instrument ; he prays for the sake of confirming, not his 
own faith in his power to raise Lazarus, but the crowd’s faith 
42in his divine commission: ‘I knew thou wouldst always 
listen to me (9: 3I, II: 22), but I spoke on account of the 
crowd, that they might believe thou hast sent me.’ The verse 
undoubtedly suggests something theatrical in Jesus’ prayer. 
Loisy goes so far as to say, ‘the Johannine Christ prays in 
order to expound the thesis of the Evangelist... he prays 
for the sake of the gallery, for he prays to the Father only to 
provoke faith in his own person.’ This is to state a partial 
truth with exaggerated emphasis. John’s purpose is to 
insist that the power Christ exercises is God’s power. By 
prayer Christ audibly invokes God as his ally; if then the 
miracle fails, let him be acknowledged to be an impostor ; if 
43 it succeeds, let him be hailed as God’s plenipotentiary. So 
252 


CHAPTER XI, VERSE 44 


saying, he exclaimed with a loud cry—expressive of divine 
authority (5:25)—‘Lazarus, come out!’ Out came the 44 
dead man, his feet and hands swathed in bandages, and his 
face tied up with a towel. Jesus said, ‘Untie him, and let 
him move.’ Jesus himself was similarly bandaged in the 
tomb (19 : 40, 20: 5, 7), but while it is made clear that Jesus 
freed himself without touch of human hand (note on 20: 7), 
Lazarus has to be freed at the word of Jesus. It is useless to 
ask how a man thus trussed up could walk out: that is part 
of the miracle. Notice how the Evangelist, having driven 
home his lesson, has no further interest in the story, and 
leaves it hanging in the air. This is consummate art: ‘ the 
absence of a conclusion invites the reader to raise himself 
heavenwards and seek among the celestial verities for that 
last word which the story seems to lack ’ (Loisy). 

The story of the raising of Lazarus presents us with one of 
the crucial problems of the Gospel. It is impossible to har- 
monize the incident with the Synoptic chronology of Jesus’ 
life; nor is the attempt to do so necessary. Just as apolo- 
getic reasons led John to transpose the incident of the Temple- 
cleansing to the beginning of the Gospel, so has a similar 
motive led to the insertion of the Lazarus story at this point. 
Indeed, once the former incident had been displaced it would 
become necessary for John to find some substitute for it as 
the event which precipitated the arrest and death of Christ. 
The story of Lazarus serves to present the Cross, to which it 
was the immediate prelude, not asa disaster, but as a victorious 
glorifying of the Son of God (11: 4). In view of the silence 
of the Synoptists it is evidently impossible to accept the 
narrative as strictly accurate history. It is inconceivable 
that the greatest of all recorded miracles, performed during 
the last critical week, and in the presence of crowds of people, 
should have been simply omitted by the first three Evangelists. 
Accordingly many have concluded that the story is pure 
allegory, symbolizing the truth that Christ is the supreme 
Life-giver—a method of interpretation which may be carried 
to the most fantastic extremes; e.g., according to Loisy, 
‘Martha who first meets Jesus symbolizes the first Christian 


s 253 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


group of converted Jews, and Mary the believing recruits 
from among the Gentiles, the two groups, united in Jesus, 
realizing through him the resurrection of humanity, of the 
man their brother, who lay dead in the tomb for four days, 
perhaps the four thousand years which preceded the coming 
of Christ.’ (!) Others suppose that the story has been built 
up from hints contained in the Synoptics—the raising of Jairus’ 
daughter and the young man of Nain, the story in Luke of 
the two sisters Martha and Mary, and above all the parable of 
the rich man and Lazarus, which ends with the suggestive 
words, ‘they will not be convinced, not even if one rose 
from the dead’ (Lk. 16:31). Possibly, in the course of 
preaching, what was originally a parable may have been 
elaborated into a supposed historical incident. But in view 
of the vividness of the narrative and, in spite of much that 
is artificial, the wealth of the circumstantial detail, it may well 
be that the story is founded upon a real incident, such as the 
raising of Jairus’ daughter (compare II: 11 with Lk. 8: 52), 
preserved perhaps by ‘the Witness,’ and elaborated for didactic 
purposes by the Evangelist, who exaggerates its effect upon 
the imagination of the crowd from Jerusalem in order to 
provide himself with a suitable substitute for the Temple- 
cleansing as the event which provoked the wrath of Jesus’ 
enemies and precipitated the dénouement of his life. For us, 
even if it be largely unhistorical, the story is none the less 
precious, for it testifies to the conviction and experience of 
the Evangelist, and the Church, in whose name he speaks, 
of the truth that Christ is himself ‘ resurrection and life.’ 
By raising Lazarus from death Jesus has signed his own 
death warrant, and from this point the narrative moves 
steadily forward to the Cross. John as usual (10 : 19-21, etc.) 
sums up the impression left by the miracle ; there is a division 
45 of opinion: Now a number of the Jews who had come to 
visit Mary (or perhaps ‘ come after Mary ’ with reference to 31 ; 
this would explain the omission of Martha’s name) and who 
46 witnessed what he had done, believed in him. But some of 
them (the presence of ill-wishers was hinted in 37) went off 
to the Pharisees (the Pharisaic members of Sanhedrim) and 


254 


CHAPTER XI, VERSES 47-49 


told them what Jesus had done. (For this tale-bearing cf. 
5:15, where, however, the motive is different.) Whereupon 47 
the high-priests and the Pharisees (7 : 32) called a meeting of 
the Sanhedrin. ‘Whatever isto be done?’ they said. ‘The 
fellow is performing a number of Signs.’ ‘ He is busy at his 
miracles while we stand by in futile inactivity!’ ‘If we let 48 
him alone, like this, everybody will believe in him, and then the 
Romans will come and suppress our holy Place (the temple, 
rather than the land; cf. 2 Macc. 5: 19) and our nation,’— 
the people over which we at present hold authority. Their 
outlook is essentially selfish: Jesus, they fear, by drawing 
the mob around him as Messiah, will provoke the vengeance 
of the Romans, as indeed happened after the Judaean war, 
with the result that ¢hey will be docked of their present pre- 
rogatives. Note that this fear of revolution fits in better 
with Jesus’ claim (as in the Synoptics) to be ‘ Messiah’ than 
with the Johannine claim that he is ‘ the light of the world,’ 
‘resurrection and life.’ But one of them, Caiaphas, who was 49 
high-priest that year, said... ‘Caiaphas’ (Cephas) is a 
surname added to the original name ‘ Joseph.’ He held 
office A.D. 18-36, when he was deposed by Vitellius. The 
remark that Caiaphas was high-priest ‘ that year’ has been 
held to imply that the Evangelist imagined the high-priestship 
to be an annual office: rather does he intend to emphasize the 
fact that in this year of years, the year of the Cross, Caiaphas 
was high-priest. The frequent changes of office (Josephus, 
Ant. 20 : Io, tells us that there were twenty-eight high-priests 
in 107 years) would alone suffice to justify the language. That 
this is the Evangelist’s meaning seems clear from 51, though 
the Greek phrase used, in the genitive case, would certainly 
be more natural were an annual office intended. Could the 
exact turn of phrase be due to the Redactor’s translation into 
Greek of the original Aramaic (Introduction, p. lxvif.)? The 
Redactor, an Ephesian, may have been misled by the analogy 
of the Asiarchs, who acted as high-priests in the worship of 
the Emperor, and held office for one year. If it be the case 
that the Evangelist held Annas to be high-priest (18 : 13), 
the clause must be an addition by the Redactor. Caiaphas 


255 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


50 then thus advises: ‘You know nothing about it—you do not 
understand it is in your own interests that one man should 
die for the People, instead of the whole nation being destroyed.’ 
‘Have you no wits—searching here and there for a solution 
which is ready to hand! Put him to death! By so doing 
you will rid yourselves of an undesirable rival, curry favour 
with the Romans by ridding Caesar of a rival, and so turn 
aside a vengeance which otherwise would fall on the whole 
people!’ Caiaphas, the Sadducee, is more emphatic than 
polite. Of Sadducean manners Josephus remarks (Bell. 
Jud. 2, 8, 14): ‘The Pharisees are friendly to each other— 
but the manners of the Sadducees are far rougher, both to 
each other and to their equals, whom they treat as strangers.’ 
John puts his own interpretation on Caiaphas’ words (cf. 

51 2:21, 12:33); he spoke more truly than he knew: He did 
not say this simply of his own accord ; he was high-priest 
that year, and his words were a prophecy that Jesus was to 

52 die for the nation, and not merely for the nation but to gather 
into one the scattered children of God. As the guardian of 
Urim and Thummim the high-priest was regarded as the 
mouthpiece of the divine oracle (Exod. 28 : 30, Num. 27: 21), 
and though, according to Josephus (Ant. 6, 6, 3), this method 
of divination had long fallen into disuse Caiaphas, in virtue 
of his priestly quality, is held to be inspired—an interesting 
touch of sacerdotalism. Caiaphas, with all his cunning 
malevolence, yet becomes the mouthpiece of a magnificent 
prophecy that Jesus should die as the Universal Saviour. 
(For a similar prophecy veiled in a taunt, cf. 7:35.) ‘In the 
irony of events Caiaphas used his high-priestly office to lead 
forward that one sacrifice which was for ever to take away sin 
and so make all further priestly office superfluous’ (Dods). 
In verse 52 we have another fine example of John’s universalism 
(cf. 10 : 16, 17: 23). ‘ Scattered children of God’ (cf. 1 : 12) 
is used proleptically of all who by predestination and inward 
predisposition are destined one day to be ‘sons of God ’— 
whoever they may be by race and country, Jew and Gentile 
alike. There is irony again in the fact that Caiaphas, as a 
Sadducee, would not believe in predestination | 

250 


CHAPTER XI, VERSES 53-57 


As a result of Caiaphas’ advice the vague plots against 53 
Jesus (5 : 16, 7 : 32, I0 : 39) now come to a head in a definite 
decree in council: So from that day their plan was to kill 
him. John anticipates the decision taken according to the 
Synoptists two days before the feast (Mk. 14:1). Accord- 54 
ingly Jesus—still unwilling needlessly to precipitate a crisis— 
no longer appeared in public among the Jews, but withdrew to 
the country adjoining the desert, to a town called Ephraim ; 
there he stayed with the disciples. ‘ The desert ’ is the Desert 
of Judaea stretching northwards of Jerusalem, the wilderness 
of Bethaven in particular. Ephraim (2 Sam. 13:23) lies 
about fifteen miles north of Jerusalem and some six miles 
east-north-east of Bethel. In ancient times it was known as 
Ophrah (2 Chron. 13:19), and is now called Et-Taiyibeh. 
This sojourn in the desert compensates for the omission from 
our Gospel of the ‘ Temptation.’ Would not Jesus be facing 
precisely the same problems ? 

Now the passover of the Jews (2 : 13, as contrasted with the 55 
Christian ‘ passover,’ I Cor. 5: 7) was near, and many people 
went up from the country to Jerusalem, to purify themselves 
before the passover, i.e. to perform the expiatory ceremonies 
and sacrifices necessary in order to put themselves in a state 
of ritual purity in preparation for the feast (Lev. 7: 21, Num. 
O10 ..82° Chron. 40: 17-18, Jn: 18: 28; * Acts 21: 24-26). 
They looked out for Jesus, and as they stood in the temple 56 
(where these rites would be performed) they said to one another, 
‘What do you think ? Do you think he will not come up to 
the festival?’ (Cf. the discussion 7:10-13.) Will Jesus be 
true to his habit of coming up tothe feast? They doubtit; for 
the high-priests and the Pharisees had given orders (in conse- 57 
quence of the decision of 53) that they were to be informed, 
if anyone found out where he was, so that they might arrest 
him. It would not have been difficult for the authorities 
to discover Jesus’ place of refuge; yet they are represented 
as powerless to do so. Even when Jesus appears at 
Jerusalem he is left unmolested till one of his own circle 
betrays him. Not a finger may be laid on him ‘till his time 
is come.’ 


257 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Theme (i): The Homage of a Disciple (12: 1-8) 


Chapter 12 serves at once as a conclusion to the story of 
Lazarus and as a prelude to the Passion. John’s version of 
the anointing at Bethany is a good example alike of his 
dependence upon the Synoptists, and of his independence in 
the treatment of detail. In the Synoptics he found two 
accounts of an anointing of Jesus : according to Mark (14 : 3-9) 
and Matthew (26 : 6-13) it occurred in Bethany immediately 
before Jesus’ death ; according to Luke (7 : 36-50) it occurred 
in Galilee a long time before his death. In both cases the 
master of the house is called Simon, and though in Mark and 
Matthew he is a leper, and in Luke a Pharisee, the fact that 
the name was in each case the same seems to have led John 
to identify the two incidents. Accordingly we find traits 
drawn from each story (see ver. 3). Moreover, though neither 
Mark nor Matthew mentions the woman’s name, John (possibly 
through a previous identification of the “woman who was a 
sinner’ and ‘ stood at his feet’ in Lk. 7: 37-38 with the 
‘Mary’ who ‘sat at Jesus’ feet’ in Lk. 10 : 39) is prepared 
to identify the woman of the anointing incident with Mary 
of Bethany, the sister of Martha and Lazarus. In point of 
fact there is no evidence for the popular identification either 
of Mary of Bethany or of Mary Magdalene with ‘ the woman 
that was a sinner.’ The close verbal agreements with Mark 
and Matthew are clear proof of John’s dependence. 

I Six days before the festival, Jesus came to Bethany, where 
Lazarus stayed (whom Jesus had raised from the dead). The 
Synoptists (Mk. 14:1) date the incident two days before 
the festival, but according to them the triumphal entry had 
already taken place. John’s date is probably intended to 
have symbolical significance. Schmiedel, reckoning in- 
clusively from Saturday 15th Nisan, the first day of the feast, 
fixes the date as Monday the roth, the day on which the 
sacrificial lamb was consecrated (Exod. 12 : 13) ; on that day the 
‘Lamb of God’ was consecrated for his sacrificial death (12 : 7, 
Mk. 14: 8). Westcott, who gives the date as 8th Nisan (the 
Saturday, the triumphal entry following on ‘ Palm Sunday’), 

258 


CHAPTER XII, VERSES 2-3 


remarks that ‘ John appears to mark the period as the new 
Hexaemeron, a solemn period of six days, the time of the new 
Creation. His Gospel begins and closes with a sacred week.’ 
Loisy, reckoning exclusively from 14th Nisan (the day of the 
Passover meal, which he assumes to be for John the beginning 
of the feast, the Thursday before this being, according to 
13: 1, the eve of the festival), also fixes on 8th Nisan, the last 
Sabbath before the Passion. Schmiedel’s date seems more 
probable as providing a symbolical motive for John’s anticipa- 
tion of the Synoptic date, though Loisy’s better suits 13: I. 
They gave a supper for him there ; Martha waited on him 2 

(Lk. 10: 40), and Lazarus was among those who reclined at 
table with him. The presence of Lazarus is mentioned in 
- order to emphasize the reality of the miracle. John evidently 
supposes the supper to have taken place in the house of Jesus’ 
three friends ; those who would harmonize John’s narrative 
with that of the Synoptists hold that the supper was given by 
Simon, and that Lazarus was merely present as a guest. Then 3 
Mary, taking a pound of expensive perfume, real nard, anointed 
the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her hair, till the house 
was filled with the scent of the perfume. The ‘ pound’ would 
be slightly over 11 0z. av. The meaning of the Greek word 
(pistikos) here translated ‘real’ is much disputed. Others 
take it to bea place-name (e.g. from Opis, a town in Babylonia) 
or a botanic term (Pistacia terebinthus), or translate it as 
‘ drinkable’ (!). The word is taken over from Mark (14: 3), 
and in any case the force is that the perfume was ‘ expensive ’ 
—also a Synoptic echo (Mt. 26: 7). Note how John somewhat 
artificially combines traits from Mark and Luke. In Mark the 
woman anoints Jesus’ head, a natural and appropriate action ; 
in Luke she weeps over Jesus’ feet, dries the tears with her 
hair, and finally anoints his feet, again a beautiful act of 
homage. Here the tears of a sinful woman do not suit the 
case of Mary, and accordingly John makes her wipe the perfume 
with her hair from Jesus’ feet, surely a very unnatural pro- 
ceeding, Symbolically, however, there is a certain fitness 
in the alteration. Mary, who figures the Church, receives 
back to herself at Jesus’ feet the perfume of the Gospel which 


259 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


fills the whole world—an idea (‘ the house was filled’) which 
takes the place of another saying about the Gospel in the 
Synoptics (Mk. 14: 9). 
4 One of his disciples, Judas Iscariot (who was to betray him) 
5 (6: 71), said, ‘Why was not this perfume sold for ten pounds 
(from Mk. 14:5; ‘a day-labourer’s wage for a year ’—Dods), 
and the money given to the poor?’ Matthew (26: 8) leaves 
all the disciples under the reproach which John here transfers 
to Judas alone; Mark (14: 4, ‘some of those present ’) is still 
more vague; John loves to particularize (18:10, etc.). 
6 Judas’ motive was not that he cared for the poor ; he said 
this because he was a thief, and because he carried the money- 
box (the word literally means the case in which musicians kept 
the mouthpieces of flutes) and pilfered what was put in. 
According to the A.V. translation Judas merely ‘ bare what was 
put in.’ But the word means not only ‘to carry,’ but to 
“ carry off.’ (Compare the Scots ‘ lift’ in the sense of ‘ steal ’"— 
‘ cattle-lifting.’) The ‘ money-box’ would contain either the 
general funds of the company, or the money set apart for 
charity, as was the custom in early Christian communities 
(cf. 13:29). This reference to Judas’ love of money takes the 
place in our Gospel of the Synoptic tradition that Judas sold 
Jesus for money, a feature which John omits, perhaps as 
inconsistent with his predominant idea that Jesus was complete 
7 master of his fate. Then said Jesus, ‘Let her alone, let her 
keep what she has for the day of my burial.’ Apparently 
only a portion of the perfume has been poured out ; the vessel 
has not been ‘ broken’ as in Mark, and Jesus bids Mary’s 
critics allow her to keep the remainder for his burial. But this 
is a strangely prosaic misunderstanding of Mark’s much more 
deep-sighted explanation that this was a prophetic anointing, 
a tribute rendered in anticipation of Jesus’ approaching death. 
Loisy, accepting the reading translated above, finds a deeper 
symbolical meaning in the idea that the Gospel truth (per- 
fume) is to be cherished until the time comes when through 
the death of Jesus it may be released into all the world (cf. 
16:7, 13); but this is far-fetched. One feels that it is un- 
likely that John, with his love of the symbolical, should have 
260 


CHAPTER XII, VERSES 8-12 


failed to seize upon Mark’s explanation, especially if, as seems 
likely, he has in view the idea of the consecration of the Paschal 
lamb. Hence perhaps the T.R. reading and the A.V. trans- 
lation may be correct: ‘Let her alone! It is in anticipation 
of my burial that she has kept this ’—instead of selling it. 
The alteration in the text may have been due to the obtuseness 
of a scribe who could not perceive how this day of anointing 
could by anticipation be called Jesus’ ‘ day of burial,’ nor how 
the perfume could have been ‘ kept’ forit. ‘Youhavealways 8 
the poor beside you, but you have not always me ’—an almost 
verbal echo of Mark (cf. Deut. 15:11). As the occasion is 
unique and the opportunity a last one, the extravagance is 
justifiable. Of this incident Strachan well writes: ‘Do 
we appraise at its true value the artistic, mystical, con- 
templative, symbolic, as a means of communion with God 
or of understanding the supreme sacrifice of Jesus? The 
thoughts that filled his heart at the supper table lay too deep 
for words or tears, and he himself took refuge in deathless 
symbols. In Mary he recognizes a kindred and understanding 
soul’ (Fourth Gospel, p. 158). 


Theme (11): The Homage of the Jews (12: 9-109) 


Now the great mass of the Jews (as distinct from the author- 9g 
ities) learned he was there (II : 56), and they came not only 
on account of Jesus but to see Lazarus whom he had raised 
from the dead—‘ an easily accessible and undoubted sensa- 
tion’ (Dods). So the high-priests planned to kill Lazarus as 10 
well, since it was owing to him that a number of Jews went 11 
away (not merely from Bethany, but from the Jewish faith to 
Christianity) and believed in Jesus. The high-priests being 
Sadducees would feel special animosity against Lazarus as a 
witness to the possibility of life through death (Mk. 12: 18). 

According to the Synoptists the triumphal entry into Jeru- 12 
salem took place several days before the anointing. Note 
that our Gospel, in the Lazarus story, furnishes a motive for 
the people’s enthusiasm, the reason for which is not sufficiently 
clear in the Synoptics. Next day (see ver. 1; the Church 

261 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


commemorates it as ‘ Palm Sunday’) the great mass of the 
people who had come up for the festival (i.e. they were pilgrims, 
not Jerusalemites) heard that Jesus was entering Jerusalem 
(i.e. that he had left Bethany and was on his way to the city), 
13 and taking palm-branches(the symbol of victory and rejoicing— 
Rev. 7: 9) they went out to meet him, shouting, ‘ Hosanna ! 
Blessed be he who comes in the Lord’s name, the king of Israel ! ’ 
In the Synoptics (Mk. 11: 9, etc.) Jesus comes from Jericho, 
and is hailed not by a crowd coming out of Jerusalem, but by 
his disciples and fellow-pilgrims from the north. ‘ Hosanna’ 
is Hebrew for ‘save now!’ The people’s cry of welcome is 
from Ps. 118: 25-26, the Dedication Psalm of the Second 
Temple, to which John, like Luke, adds the acclamation as 
‘king,’ probably with reference to Zech. 9: g (quoted Mt. 21: 5). 
In the original context the words are the welcome addressed 
by the priest to the worshippers. (For ‘he who comes’ cf. 
6:14,11:27.) Itisnot clear whether, as a matter of history, 
the people took Jesus to be Messiah himself, or merely one who 
would prepare for his coming, e.g. Elijah (1: 21, Mk. 9: 11 f.). 
John undoubtedly assumes the former alternative ; accord- 
ingly he abruptly introduces the ‘ass’ of the Synoptists in 
order to point to the fulfilment of Zechariah’s Messianic 
prophecy. Jesus, hailed as king, accepts the homage, at last 
allows the enthusiasm of the crowd to have free course, and 
adopts the recognized method of entry predicted for the 
14 Messiah: And Jesus came across a young ass and seated 
15 himself on it; as it is written, ‘Fear not, daughter of 
Sion ; here is your king coming, seated on an ass’s colt.’ 
Whatever réle the crowd understood Jesus to be adopting, 
it seems clear that Jesus himself deliberately set out to 
fulfil in detail Zechariah’s prophecy, thus unmistakably 
laying claim to the Messiahship. According to the Synoptists 
Jesus had previously obtained the ass with this end in view. 
John makes the fulfilment of the prediction seem even more 
striking by suggesting that Jesus ‘came across’ the ass by 
a providential chance (1: 43, etc.). The whole incident re- 
minds us that the question, how far O.T. prediction and the 
naive desire to represent Jesus as its fulfilment may have 
262 


CHAPTER XII, VERSES 16-19 


influenced the facts of the Gospel narratives, is one well worth 
thought. ‘ Daughter of Sion’ is the city personified. John 
changes Zechariah’s ‘ rejoice greatly ’ into ‘ fear not,’ perhaps 
echoing Is. 40:9. Nor does he quote the Hebrew poetic 
parallelism which leads Matthew to imagine a foal as well as an 
ass! The ass, in contrast to the usual war-horse of a victorious 
leader, is symbolic of lowliness and peace. Jesus comes, not 
as a military, but as a spiritual Messiah. There follows a com- 
ment, evidently the reflection of one writing long afterwards, 
added apparently by the Evangelist in order to emphasize 
the fact that the Messianic entry was not stage-managed by 
Jesus and his disciples as might appear from the Synoptic 
account: His disciples did not understand this at first ; but 
when Jesus was glorified (i.e. crucified, risen, ascended—7 : 39), 
then they remembered (14 : 26) this had been written of him and 
had happened to him—literally ‘ they had done this to him’: 
“the disciples had themselves assisted in accomplishing a 
prophecy of which at the time they were not thinking’ 
(Godet). 

John’s chief interest in the triumphal entry is to relate it on 
the one hand to the raising of Lazarus as its cause and on the 
other hand to the Crucifixion as its sequel. This he does in 
the next three verses. Now the people who were with him when 
he called Lazarus from the tomb and raised him from the dead, 
testified to it—i.e. to the fact of the miracle ; and that was why 
the crowd went out to meet him, because they heard he had 
performed this Sign. Then said the Pharisees to one another, 
‘You see, you can do nothing!’ How ineffective our half- 
measures! Follow Caiaphas’ advice (11:49)! ‘Look, the 
world has gone after him.’ For the expression cf. towt-le- 
monde: on the Pharisees’ lips it would mean ‘ the common 
mob,’ but in the thought of the Evangelist literally ‘ all the 
world ’ (11 : 52, 12: 3). 


Theme (tit): The Homage of the Gentile World (12: 20-36) 


The acclamation of Christ’s own people is now crowned by 
the tribute of the Gentile world. In the visit of the Greeks 
263 


17 
18 


19 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


some with unnecessary ingenuity see a reference to the visit 
of Abgarus of Edessa recorded by Eusebius I : 13. 

20 Now there were some Greeks among those who had come up 
to worship at the festival. These would be Greek proselytes 
or semi-proselytes (‘ god-fearers,’ ‘adherents’ of Judaism) 
perhaps from Decapolis, not Hellenist Jews, but pure Greeks 

21 who practised Jewish rites. They came to Philip of Bethsaida in 
Galilee and appealed to him. (For Bethsaidasee1: 44.) They 
would consult Philip perhaps as a Greek speaker—his name 
at least is Greek—or because they had known him in Galilee ; 
or possibly Philip is selected by the Evangelist simply because 
his was a well-known name in the district where John wrote 
(see: 44). They came saying, ‘Sir, we want to see Jesus.’ 

22 Philip, as usual (6: 7, 14: 8) is cautious: Philip went and told 
Andrew (his fellow-townsman, I: 44, and regularly paired with 
him, 6: 7-8, Mk. 3: 18); Andrew and Philip went and told 
Jesus. John hints that it is only by the mediation of Apostolic 
preaching that the Gentiles can be brought to Christ. Note 
that we are not even told whether the request for an interview 
was granted: we pass straight on to Jesus’ reflections 
prompted by the request. John has no interest in the story 
for its own sake. The Greeks are brought on the stage only 
as a cue for Jesus’ great discourse upon the necessity of his 
death and the universal salvation (32) which will result from it. 
The reply to the Greeks’ appeal is that, though Jesus in the 
flesh confined hinself chiefly to the Jews (Mt. 15 : 24), yet by 
the power of his Spirit he will draw also the Gentiles to himself. 
In Jesus’ cry of triumph John sees the promise of that Gentile 
mission in which Christianity was to achieve its permanent 
success. 

23 And Jesus answered, ‘The hour has come for the Son of 
man to be glorified ’—outwardly in this the homage of even 
the Gentile world, but also in the profounder sense that the 
Cross, itself the step to the throne of glory, is at hand (11: 4). 
At last his hour (2 : 4, 13 : 1) has come; he is to be enthroned 
as the world’s Messiah; yet there is only one way to the 

24 throne, the way of death: ‘Truly, truly I tell you, unless a grain 
of wheat falls into the earth and dies—being broken up in 

264 


CHAPTER XII, VERSES 25-26 


process of germination—it remains a single grain—because 
it is sterile—but if it dies—thus letting loose the hidden life- 
force—it bears rich fruit’ (Mk. 4:8). The allegory is sug- 
gested perhaps in part by 1 Cor. 15: 36-37. We are also 
reminded of the image of the ‘ bread of life,’ especially 6 : 51. 
The verse states a general truth, but has of course special 
reference to Jesus’ own death. His earthly life is like a seed, 
buried for a time only to reappear in greater fulness. It is 
only by Jesus’ physical death that his spiritual powers can be 
released into the world and multiplied beyond measure (cf. 
7:39, 16:7). ‘One chief element in the Johannine theory 
of the death is that it was the appointed means of freeing the 
work of Christ from its necessary limitations and making it 
available for all the world ’ (E. F. Scott) (cf. 14:12). Note 
that the analogy of the decay and rebirth of vegetation, which 
was the root idea of the Demeter mysteries, would have a 
special appeal to Greek enquirers. The principle is next 
extended from Christ, the giver of eternal life, to every seeker 
after it: ‘He who loves his life (psyche, the physical life of 25 
the senses) loses it, and he who cares not for his life in this 
world will preserve it for eternal life’ (zde, the living state). 
The saying is borrowed almost verbally from the Synoptics 
(Mk. 8:35, etc.), though ‘eternal life’ here carries its peculiar 
Johannine significance. The man who hoards up life’s powers 
and opportunities and uses them only for selfish ends stultifies 
life’s fruitfulness and ‘ dies’; he who lavishes life on others 
will find it given back to him with interest in the world of the 
spirit. Christ thus passes judgment on Hellenism : ‘ for what 
was Greek civilization but human life cultivated from the 
view-point of enjoyment, and withdrawn from the law of 
sacrifice?’ (Godet). ‘If anyone serves me, let him follow me, 26 
and where I am, there shall my servant be also.’ Jesus speaks 
as if already he were in his ‘ glory.’ The idea of ‘ following ’ 
also occurs in the parallel Synoptic passages, but there it 
precedes the promise of life gained through death. The 
word here used for ‘servant’ (diakonos) is appropriate as 
meaning one in close attendance as opposed to a doulos who 
may serve at a distance and out of sight and mind. The 
265 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


true pledge of loyalty is obedience even to death (cf. 21 : 19) : 
its reward is to share the Master’s ‘ glory’; for even as the 
Master is ‘ glorified,’ so shall the servant be ‘ honoured’: 
‘If anyone serves me, my Father will honour him’ (cf. Mt. 
10:32). It is the holder of the humble office who has the 
greater honour (Mt. 20 : 27 and the whole thought of 13 : I-17). 
In the following verses we have the Johannine counterpart 
of the agony in Gethsemane, which the Evangelist omits as 
inconsistent with his doctrine of Christ’s person. On the 
27 threshold of the Passion Jesus for a moment trembles: ‘My 
soul is now disquieted’ (Mt. 26: 38)—his soul (the psyche, 
physical life, of ver. 25), which must be lost in order to be 
preserved and yet shrinks from the ordeal of death. In 11:33 
and 13: 21 it is in ‘ spirit’ that Jesus is disquieted. ‘What 
am I to say? (Am [I to say) ‘“‘ Father, save me from this 
hour’’?’ Perish the thought! John thus tacitly corrects 
the Synoptic tradition that Jesus was ever subject enough 
to human weakness to pray ‘ My Father, if it is possible, 
let this cup pass me’ (Mt. 26:39). ‘Nay, it is something 
else that has brought me to this hour—or perhaps ‘ it is for 
this very purpose (to endure this death) that I have come 
28 to this hour ’—I will say, ‘‘ Father, glorify thy name.’’’ In 
the Synoptics Jesus prays ‘ thy will be done!’ John, who 
teaches that Jesus’ will is ever identical with the Father’s 
(8 : 28-29) changes the language while preserving the thought. 
Similarly he preserves the saying about the cup (18:11), 
but in an exactly opposite sense. ‘Glorify thy name’ means 
‘complete the revelation of thy holy love—even at the price 
of my agony.’ Then came a voice from heaven, ‘I have 
glorified it, and I will glorify it again.’ The Father’s ‘name,’ 
or true character, had already been manifested in Jesus’ works 
(5 : 36, I1: 40, etc.), and was soon again to be manifested 
in the Passion and its issue, the triumph of the Resurrection 
and the victories of the Spirit through the preaching of the 
Gospel. The idea of ‘a voice from heaven’ (the Bath Qol 
or ‘daughter-voice’) is common in Rabbinical literature. 
In the Synoptics it is heard at the Baptism (Mk. 1: 11) 
and at the Transfiguration (Mk.g:7), which in Mark, as 
266 


CHAPTER XII, VERSES 29-33 


here, follows a foreboding of the Passion. John figuratively 
conveys the thought that Jesus’ prayer is ‘heard’ and 
‘answered.’ The voice takes the place of the consoling angel 

in Luke (22: 43), and is so interpreted : When they heard the 29 
sound, the people standing by said it had thundered ; others 
said, ‘An angel spoke to him.’ A divine voice can be heard 
only by those who have the spiritual capacity for hearing ; 
those without moral and spiritual insight put a materialistic 
interpretation even upon the self-revelation of God. 


The angels keep their ancient places ; 
Turn but a stone and start a wing; 
’Tis ye, ’tis your estrangéd faces, 
That miss the many-splendoured thing, 


Compare the various accounts of Paul’s conversion (Acts 
9:7, 22:9, 26:14). Jesus answered, ‘This voice did not 30 
come for my sake—he had no need of reassurance—but for 
yours ’—in order that all the world might learn the relation 
between the Cross and the Glory. ‘Now is this world to be 31 
judged ; now the Prince of this world (i.e. Satan—Rev. 
12:7 ff., Eph. 2:2, 2 Cor. 4: 4) will be expelled (Lk. 10 : 17 ff.). 
But I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw (6: 44, 32 
Hos. 11: 4) all men to myself.’ Soon Jesus is to be tried before 
his people ; yet it is not so much he as they who are on trial : 
by their attitude to Christ the moral condition of all men is to 
be judged (3: 18, 5: 27, Lk. 2: 34). Satan too, by prompting 
the betrayal (13:27), thought to destroy Jesus ; but in truth 
he was but bringing judgment on himself (16:11), for the 
Cross would destroy the power of sin and become the mighty 
magnet whereby Christ would draw the world to himself. 
As is clear from the comment which follows—by this he 33 
indicated the kind of death he was to die (probably a gloss; cf. 
18 : 32, 21: 19)—the primary reference in ‘lifted up’ (cf. 
3:14, 8:28: the Aramaic word would mean both ‘lift’ and 
‘crucify ’) is to the elevation on the Cross. But the word 
is deliberately chosen to make possible the double-entente 
whereby the Cross is again shown to be the step to the Throne, 
and the Passion, wherein the Spirit broke through the 
267 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


limitations of Jesus’ physical life and became communicable 
to ‘all men,’ is hailed as the climax of Jesus’ exaltation to 
glory (Phil. 2: 8£., Col. 27141). 

(For the rearrangement of the text suggested at this point 
see note on p. 77f.) We propose after 12 : 32 (12: 33 being 
treated as a gloss) to insert 3: 14-15, then to read 12:34 
followed by 3: 16-21, the whole paragraph finding an ap- 
propriate climax in 12: 35-36. For commentary on verses 
from chapter 3 see notes 7 loco). 

‘Indeed the Son of man must be lifted on high, just as Moses 
lifted up the serpent in the desert, that everyone who believes 

34in him may have eternal life’ (3: 14-15). So the people 
answered, ‘We have learned from the Law that the Christ 
is to remain for ever ; what do you mean by saying that 
the Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of 
man?’ The Cross is ‘to the Jews an offence’ (1 Cor. I : 23), 
for, according to their programme, the Messiah was to be 
the perpetual vicegerent in a new theocratic state. That 
he was to ‘remain for ever’ would be deduced from such 
passages as Ps, 110: 4, Iss 9: 7,-Ezek.. 37:25, Dan- 72442 
cf. Lk. 1:32f. How is this consistent with the hint that 
‘this Son of man’ (an expression which presupposes the use 
of the title by Jesus in the previous verse ; this is obtained 
by our insertion) must die? Clearly the ‘Son of man’ 
cannot be identical with the Christ (note on 1:51). Who 
then is he? Jesus’ answer, we suggest, is contained in 
3: 16-21, which we insert at this point: Then Jesus said 
to them ‘God loved the world so dearly ...’ (See notes 
tn loco.) 

35 As the text stands Jesus, as at 8: 54, etc., refuses to give a 
direct answer, but rather meets his questioners’ difficulties by 
‘charging them to use the opportunities which they still had 
for fuller knowledge’ (Westcott). But verses 35-36 have 
very much more point when they are read as the climax of 
3: 16-21, thus: ‘ And this is the sentence of condemnation, 
that the Light has entered the world and yet men have pre- 
ferred darkness to light... . Anyone whose life is true comes 
out into the light, to make it plain that his actions have been 

268 


CHAPTER XII, VERSES 36, 44-47 


divinely prompted (3: 19-21). ‘The Light will shine among 
you for a little longer yet (7 : 33, 13: 33, 14: 19, 16:16 ff.) ; 
walk while you have the Light, that the darkness may not over- 
take you. He who walks in the dark does not know where he is 
going.’ (For the imagery cf. 8:12, 11:9f., Jer. 13:16. 
‘ Overtake ’ is the same word as ‘ master’ in 1 : 5; cf. x Thess. 
5:4.) The general truth expressed in the last sentence is now 
applied to the special case of those who find their ‘ Light’ in 
Christ : ‘While you have the Light, believe in the Light, that 36 
you may be sons of the Light.’ ‘Sons of the Light’ (Lk. 16: 8, 
I Thess. 5 : 5, Eph. 5: 8) is the common Hebraism expressive 
of close relationship. (Mt. 8:12, 9:15, Mk. 3:17, etc.) 
* Sons of Light ’ are those who find the source of their life in the 
Light (8 : 12) and live by the ideals which that Light reveals. 


Concluston : The Struggle of Faith with Unbelief (12 : 36-50) 


Verses 44-50 should be transposed to this point. In its 
usual position Jesus’ renewal of his address at 44 is awkward 
after his withdrawal at 360 and ‘ the cry does not suit the 
secrecy ’ (Moffatt). With the proposed transposition the idea 
of ‘light’ is carried on without interruption, 44-50 supplies 
the climax of Jesus’ speech, at 36 b Jesus withdraws (the verse 
according to Bacon is ‘a carefully elaborated ending of the 
public ministry ’), and finally in verses 37-43 the Evangelist 
gives us his customary summing up. Bacon (Fourth Gospel, 

p- 506) argues that this order is confirmed by Tatian. 

And Jesus cried aloud—as if uttering a momentous oracle 44 
(1: 15, 7:28, 37)—‘ He who believes in me believes not in me 
but in Him who sent me,—for it is as God’s ambassador that 
Christ comes (5 : 36 f., 7: 16, 8: 19, 42 ; 13 : 20)—and he who 45 
beholds me beholds Him who sent me (14:9). (For the con- 
nexion of ‘ believing’ and ‘seeing’ in the Gospel cf. 3: 15, 6: 40.) 

I have come as light into the world (1: 4 f., 3: 19, 9:5), that 46 
no one who believes in me may remain in the dark (8: 12, 
9: 39-41, 1 Jn.2:9ff.). If anyone hears my words and does 47 
not keep them, it is not I who judge him ; for I have not come 
to judge the world but to save the world. (See notes on 3:17, 


a 269 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


48 5:24, 8:15.) He who rejects me (1: 11, Lk. 10: 16, I Thess. 
4:8) and will not receive my words has indeed a judge : the 
word I have spoken will judge him on the last day.’ For the 
‘ sifting ’ power of Jesus’ teaching see notes on 3: 18 and 5: 28f., 
and for the significance given to Jesus’ words see 6: 63, 68. 
Christ will confine himself to applying to each life the rule of his 
word ; each man will be judged by his response to the light 
which he has received, the spiritual opportunities which he has 
enjoyed ; nor will any personal bias enter into Christ’s judg- 
ment; indeed, his words have this power to ‘ judge’ simply 
because he is but the mouthpiece of God (5:30, 8:16): 

49 ‘for I have not spoken of my own accord (7 : 16-18)—the 
Father who sent me, He it is who ordered me what to say and 
what to speak—i.e. the doctrine and the words in which it is 
clothed, the content and the form of the teaching (cf. 8 : 43). 

50 And I know His orders mean eternal life. Therefore when I 
speak, I speak as the Father has told me.’ Jesus means not 
merely ‘my commission is one to preach the message 
of eternal life,’ but ‘my commission is one which issues 
in eternal life.’ The words spoken by Jesus in obedience 
to the Father’s orders have themselves the power to bestow 
life (6: 63, 68). Note how these concluding verses set forth 
at the close of Jesus’ public teaching the leading ideas con- 
cerning faith, light, judgment, life, which have run through 
the whole Gospel, and summarize the issue both for those who 
believe and those who do not. Jesus’ public ministry is now 
over ; he withdraws from the world which has rejected him 

36 into the bosom of his own friends: With these words Jesus 
went away and hid from them. 

The Evangelist now sums up the result of the public ministry : 

37 Now for all the Signs he had performed before them, they 
did not believe in him. John assumes more miracles than the 
seven which he narrates as types (7:31, II: 47, 21:25). 
That the Jews of all people should have rejected the Christ, 
and this in spite of so many signs conspicuously performed, 
would, John feels, require explanation: the reason was 

38 that the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled : 
‘Lord, who has believed what they heard from us? And 

270 


CHAPTER XII, VERSES 39-41 


to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?’ John 
expresses himself as if it were not the coming event which 
prompted the prediction but the prediction which determined 
the event—not improbably a true explanation of some of the 
details recorded in the Gospels (note on 12:14). The quota- 
tion is from Is. 53: 1 ff., the famous passage dealing with ‘ the 
Servant of the Lord,’ in whom, though not originally a 
Messianic figure, Christian tradition, based probably on our 
Lord’s own teaching, recognized Jesus. The words translated 
“what they heard from us’ may mean either ‘ the message 
which came from us’ or ‘ the message which concerns us.’ 
In the original the reference is to ‘ the message received from 
God by the prophet ’—which none would believe. Paul 
(Rom. 10 : 16) applies it to ‘ the message which they heard from 
us,’ ie. the Apostolic testimony. John sees in it an allusion 
to Christ’s teaching, just as in ‘ the arm of the Lord’ he sees 
an allusion to the divine power manifested in his miracles. 
This was why they could not believe : the words refer both back 39 
to one prophecy and forward to another about to be quoted. 
Verse 40 indeed gives ‘a reason for the reason’ (Loisy) : 
‘ This was why they could not believe ; for Isaiah again said, 40 
“He has blinded their eyes and made their hearts insensible, to 
prevent them seeing with their eyes and understanding with 
their hearts and turning for me to cure them.’ The quotation 
is from Is.6: 9-10. In the original the words are a command 
addressed by God to the prophet. The Synoptists (Mt. 
13:14f.,Mk. 4:12, Lk. 8:10; cf. Acts 28: 25 ff.), following 
the LXX, give the imperatives a less personal form, and use the 
passage to explain the reason for Jesus’ parabolic teaching 
and the failure of his Galilean ministry. John suggests that 
God Himself is responsible for the blinding. ‘ By abuse of 
light nature produces callousness ; and what nature does, God 
does’ (Dods). ‘ For me to cure’ is here understood of Jesus, 
in whose name Isaiah is supposed to speak. John also adds 
a comment—Isaiah said this because he saw his glory and spoke 41 
of him—whereby he identifies the divine Being seen by Isaiah 
(6:1) with that Christ who is ‘ the likeness of the unseen 
God’ (Col. 1:15) ‘stamped with God’s own character’ 
275 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


(Heb. 1: 3). The Targum renders Isaiah’s words here ‘I saw 
the Lord’s glory.’ 
Yet to this general unbelief there were exceptions even in 
those quarters where least they might have been expected : 
42 Still, a number even of the authorities (7:26, 48; ie. the 
members of the Sanhedrim) believed in him, though they would 
not confess it on account of the Pharisees, in case of being 
43 excommunicated (9 : 22); they preferred the approval of men 
to the approval of God (5:44). Of these Westcott says: 
‘This complete intellectual faith (so to speak) is really the 
climax of unbelief. The conviction found no expression in 
life’ (cf. Rom. 10:10). Godet would rather call them 
‘ Erasmuses ’ who welcomed the new truth but clung to the 
old system. We have examples in Nicodemus who ‘ came 
one night to Jesus’ (3: 2), and in Joseph of Arimathea who is 
described as ‘a secret disciple—for fear of the Jews’ (19 : 38). 


ACT III. THE ENJOYMENT OF THE NEW GOSPEL: 
CHRIST’S COMMUNION WITH HIS OWN 


Illustration (1): The Washing of the Disciples’ Feet (13 : 1-38) 


Jesus having withdrawn from the world devotes himself to 
the instruction of ‘his own.’ The din of polemics is hushed, 
and in the following chapters, as the mystic Tauler puts it, ‘how 
sweetly and how gladly has Christ opened the Door into the 
Father’s heart, into the treasure-chamber of God, and there 
within he unfolds to us the hidden riches, the nearness and the 
sweetness of companionship with himself.’ 

The incident of the washing of the disciples’ feet takes in 
our Gospel the place occupied in the Synoptics by the institu- 
tion of the Lord’s Supper. Why John, with his intense love of 
the symbolical, should have chosen to omit the Institution of 
the Sacrament from his narrative of the Last Supper has been 
partly discussed in connexion with chapter 6, where see notes on 
verses II, 20, 53, 59,63. Itisheld by some that the Evangelist 
is a mystic who puts no value on Sacraments (cf. 4: 2), surely 
a strange misreading of the mind of the man who could write 

272 


GHAPTER XIII, VERSE 1 


3:5 and 6: 52-58. Rather may we explain the omission by 
John’s desire to detach his sacramental teaching from any 
historical occasion and attach it to the eternal realities of the 
Spirit. In particular John wishes to connect the Sacrament 
less with Christ’s death and more with his life-giving power. 
Hence in chapter 6 the institution is associated with the life- 
giving miracle of the feeding of the multitude, while the place 
held in the Synoptics by the institution is here filled by the 
feet-washing, which symbolizes not Christ’s death but his 
spirit of lowly service. This suggests that once again John 
wishes to counteract superstitious sacramentalism: just as 
in 6: 63 he insists that ‘ what gives life is the Spirit,’ so in 
13: 8, 15, does he insist that the Sacrament can be effective 
only when the Spirit of the Master possesses the disciples. The 
bequest which Jesus left his disciples in the Sacrament was 
not a ritual ordinance but a spirit of love and service which 
would unite them in fellowship one with another and with 
himself and would be the badge of their discipleship (13 : 34 f.). 
John here emphasizes the ethical aspect of the Lord’s Supper, 
the neglect of which renders impossible the appropriation of 
that dying love of Jesus which in the Sacrament we symbol- 
ize: ‘Unless I wash you,’ says Jesus, “ you will not share my 
lot ’ (13 : 8). 

Now before—(or ‘on the eve of’)—the passover festival 1 
Jesus knew the time had come for him to pass from this world 
to the Father ; his ‘ hour’ which had tarried at 2: 4, 7 : 6, etc., 
which he had hailed at 12: 23, is now upon him. According 
to the Johannine chronology the evening will be that of 
Thursday 13th Nisan, and the supper in question will not be 
the Passover meal, but an ordinary meal taken on the previous 
evening. For according to John Jesus was crucified before 
the Feast proper (i.e. the 15th), the execution taking place 
before six o’clock on the evening of the 14th—Christ’s death 
thus coinciding with the evening Passover meal at which the 
Paschal lamb was killed. (On the question of the date of the 
Crucifixion see Introduction, p. xiii.) 

He had loved his own (cf. 1: 11; but here the phrase seems 
restricted to the inmost circle of his peculiar friends) in this 


273 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


world—the place which he had stooped to and is about to 
abandon, leaving his friends to represent him—and he loved 
them to the end—not merely ‘ to the end of his life ’ nor ‘ to the 
utmost degree,’ but ‘ to the utmost limits of love.’ “Love... 
bears it out even to the edge of doom’ (Shak. Sonnets, 116). 
2So at supper (not ‘when supper was over,’ which is con- 
tradicted by 21 ff.), knowing that though the devil had 
3 suggested to Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, to betray him, the 
Father had put everything into his hands, ie. ‘had re- 
mitted to him the whole work of salvation and the means of 
accomplishing it’ (Loisy) (cf. 3:35). The remark about the 
devil’s suggestion to Judas might seem to anticipate 27, and 
to avoid this some MSS. read ‘ the devil having formed the idea 
in his own heart that Judas should betray him.’ But the 
suggestion here instilled may be supposed not to take posses- 
sion of Judas’ mind till 27: ‘The idea had been entertained if 
we cannot say that the purpose had been already formed ’ 
(Dods). Jesus, then, knowing that he had come from God 
and was going to God—conscious of his divine mission and his 
divine destiny (thus is the supreme condescension of his act 
4 emphasized)—rose from the table, laid aside his robe, and tied 
5, a towel round him, then poured water into a basin, and began 
to wash the feet of the disciples, wiping them with the towel 
he had tied round him. It seems strange that the feet- 
washing did not precede supper; but Jesus may well have 
postponed the act to make it more impressive. A host was 
expected to provide water to wash his guests’ feet heated with 
the dust of the road (Lk. 7: 44). When Jesus and his com- 
panions were fending for themselves the office would be 
performed by one of the disciples. But according to Lk. 
22: 21-30 (where the announcement of the betrayal im- 
mediately precedes the quarrel about precedence in the 
kingdom and Jesus’ rejoinder about the nobility of service), 
the disciples were at the moment standing on their dignity, 
and none would be willing to stoop to the menial office. So 
Jesus does it himself; he will ‘set them an example’ ; 
the washing of one another’s feet, like the breaking of bread 
in the Synoptics, the place of which it here takes, is to be the 


274 


CHAPTER XIII, VERSES 6-8 


memorial tribute of the disciples to one who gave himself in 
service to them (14; Mk. 10: 45). The ‘ laying aside’ of his 
robe is symbolic of the ‘laying down’ of his life (10 : 17-18; 
the Greek word is the same). Common folk wore a tunic 
and over it a cloak, and the latter, sometimes even the former, 
would be removed for work. Jesus thus waited upon his 
disciples in the garb of a slave. What a contrast to the 
Emperor Caligula who, Suetonius tells us, required his senators 
to attend him at table ‘ succinctos linteo,’ like waiters! Note 
that by making the idea of ‘ washing,’ which cannot but be 
symbolical of Baptism, the central feature of the incident which 
for John takes the place of the institution of the Lord’s Supper, 
the Evangelist emphasizes, as in Ig: 34, the intimate con- 
nexion between the two sacraments. 

He came to Simon Peter—apparently having washed the feet 6 
of others without protest—‘ Lord,’ said he, ‘ you to wash my 
feet ! ’ Jesus answered him, ‘ You do not understand just now 7 
what I am doing, but you will understand it later on.’ Peter 
would take this as a promise that Jesus will explain in a 
moment the import of his action, as indeed he does in part in 
12 ff. ; but Jesus’ deeper meaning is that his act has a symbolic 
and mystical significance which will appear only in the light 
of his approaching death and resurrection. The coming of the 
Spirit will bring a more perfect understanding (16 : 13, 15, 25). 
Said Peter, ‘You will never wash my feet, never!’ No8 
promised explanation can justify this! The service Jesus is 
offering under these symbols is his death for the sanctification 
of ‘his own’; hence Peter’s protest is parallel to that of 
Mt. 16:22. Peter is humble enough to see the incongruity 
of Christ’s action, yet proud enough to dictate to his Master. 
‘Unless I wash you,’ Jesus replied, ‘ you will not share my lot.’ 
Again the words might be superficially understood in the sense 
that only if washed could Peter sit at table with Jesus ; 
but the deeper meaning is that only through the possession of 
Jesus’ spirit is vital union with him possible, only through 
the baptism of the Spirit, ministered symbolically in the 
sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist, can the believer 
have communion with Christ and share in the benefits of his 


275 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


death (cf. 7: 37-39). (For a similar insistence upon the 
necessity of the spiritual experience which is merely typified 
gin the sacraments, cf. 3:5, 6:53, 63.) ‘Lord,’ said Simon 
Peter, ‘then wash not only my feet but my hands and head,’ 
‘A moment ago he told his master he was doing too much: 
to now he tells him he is doing too little’ (Dods). Jesus said, 
‘He who has bathed only needs to have his feet washed ; 
he is clean all over.’ On the surface the meaning is: the 
guest who comes to table having first bathed in his own home 
needs only to have the dust of the road removed from his feet. 
But again the words have a deeper sense: for those who are 
true and loyal disciples the experience of regeneration typified 
in their initial baptism (here symbolized by the washing of the 
whole body) has no need to be repeated ; what does need to be 
repeated is the ‘ washing of the feet,’ the removal of life’s 
travel-stains by fellowship with Jesus, the doing for the sake 
of others what Christ has first done for us (I4-15). Baptismal 
regeneration remains effective only if the Spirit of Jesus is 
perpetuated. Some MSS. read simply, ‘ he who has bathed 
does not need to be washed,’ omitting all reference to a washing 
of the feet ; this would limit the sense to a statement of the 
finality of an initial baptismal regeneration. Note that, so 
far as there is any allusion here to the sacraments, Baptism is 
typified rather in the washing of the whole body than in the 
feet-washing, which, taking the place of the institution of the 
Eucharist, symbolizes all that is implied in the second great 
sacrament—the giving of the Lord himself in service to human- 
ity. In the practice of the Church Baptism is not repeated, 
but the Eucharist, the washing of the feet, is. For a similar 
expression of the benefits of Christ’s death (usually sym- 
bolized in the Eucharist) under the symbolism of ‘ washing,’ 
which belongs more fittingly to Baptism, cf. r Jn. 1: 7, Rom. 
6:3. Both sacraments are, according to John, but empty 
ritual unless accompanied by the Spirit which renders life 
holy and ‘clean.’ Thus Jesus adds, ‘And you are clean— 
but not all of you ’—they became regenerate when they pro 
fessed Christ’s discipleship, and to that discipleship they are 
11 loyal—all save the traitor—(he knew the traitor (6 : 64, 70 f.) ; 
276 


CHAPTER XIII, VERSES 12-17 


that was why he said, ‘ You are not all clean.’) Judas’ treachery 
did not take Jesus unawares: his death was wholly self- 
determined. Judas’ feet had been washed as clean as Peter’s ; 
but he did not bring to the supper that regenerate spirit apart 
from which it is but an empty form. We all come to the 
Sacrament, all partake of the same elements, but how many 
go forth ‘ clean’ ? 

Then, after washing their feet and putting on his robe, he 
lay down again. ‘Do you know,’ he said to them, ‘ what I 
have been doing to you?’ Itis when Jesus‘ puts on his robe,’ 
takes up his life again (10: 17 f.) in the power of the Spirit, 
that he will make all things plain (7). The question implies 
that what has gone before is symbolical and has a deeper 
meaning than might appear. ‘You call me Teacher and Lord— 
Rabbi, master of teaching, and Mar, master of life—and you 
are right: that is what I am (Mt. 23:8). Well, if I have 
washed your feet, I who am your Lord and Teacher, you are 
bound to wash one another’s feet.’ (Cf. Mk. 10: 44f.) Jesus 
with an argument a fortiori sums up the inward significance 
of the whole incident. When he bids the disciples ‘ wash one 
another’s feet ’ he is enjoining them to perpetuate ‘ not the 
act itself but its moral essence ’ (Meyer), though the act itself 
came to be regarded as typical of all charity (1 Tim. 5: 10), 
and is still literally practised by the Pope on Maundy 
Thursday. The service of our fellows in the Spirit of Christ 
is the truest of all sacraments, ‘for I have been setting you an 
example, that you should do what I have done to you ’—words 
which recall the form of institution in 1 Cor. 11 : 24, ‘ do this 
in memory of me.’ (Cf. Phil. 2:3 ff.) The Christian disciple 
may well condescend to do for others what his Master has 
first done for him, for ‘ Truly, truly I tell you, a servant is not 
greater than his master, nor is a messenger (literally ‘ apostle ’) 
greater than he who sent him’ (Mt. 10 : 24, Lk. 6: 40, 22 : 27). 
This is the only place in the Gospel or First Epistle in which the 
word ‘apostle’ occurs: it is never used specifically of the 
Twelve. The disciple is ‘sent’ by Jesus, as was Jesus by the 
Father, and is to represent Jesus in spirit and character, as 
Jesus represents God (17:18, 20: 21). ‘If you know all this, 


277. 


13 


14 


T5 


16 


7 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


blessed are you if you really do it’—not merely repeat the 
symbolic act, but practise the whole Christian life—the loving 
of others as Christ has loved us—which it typifies. There isa 
Jewish saying: ‘If a man knows the Law but does not do 
thereafter, it had been better for him that he had not come 
into the world.’ 

Verses 18-19 may possibly be an addition by the Redactor, 
as they break the thread of thought which is picked up again 

18 at 20. ‘When I say ‘‘you,’’ I do not mean youall (10-11). I 
know the men of my choice,’ that is, the worth of the eleven 
and the treachery of the twelfth. The reference here is to the 
call of the disciples (6: 70) ; there is no thought of ‘ election to 
salvation.’ (For the insight implied in ‘I know’ cf. 1: 48, 2: 
24f.) ‘I made my choice that this scripture might be fulfilled, 
‘Che who eats my bread has lifted up his heel against me.’’’ 
John again insists that Jesus was not deceived in his choice ; 
he selected Judas with his eyes open ; even the betrayal was 
self-determined ; Jesus anticipated it ‘from the very first’ 
(6: 64, 70 f.) ; indeed, it was foreordained by prophecy (note 
on 12:38); and at the end he gives himself up voluntarily 
(18: 4f.). Thecitation is from Ps. 41 : 9, in which the speaker 
is, according to the title, David (perhaps speaking of Ahitho- 
phel), according to some critics, Jeremiah. To ‘eat one’s 
bread ’ is a pledge of friendship ; to ‘ lift one’s heel’ ( origin- 
ally of a horse—to kick) is to show violence or contempt. 

19 ‘I am telling you this now, before it occurs (14 : 29, 16: 4), so 
that when it has occurred you may believe who Iam’ (8 : 24, 28) 
—by noting how my case fits the Messianic prophecy. The 
betrayal should confirm rather than upset their faith. 

20 The following verse has no clear reference to nor logical 
connexion with the preceding allusion to the betrayal, unless 
it be that Jesus intends to confirm the disciples’ confidence 
in their apostolate, which might have been shaken by this 
hint of disloyalty. On the other hand, the verse connects 
perfectly with 16-17, the idea of ‘Sender’ and ‘ Sent’ being 
carried on, while here as above the disciple is the repre- 
sentative of Christ, as Christ is of God. The verse is modelled 
on Mt. 10:40, Lk. 10: 16, where, however, the context is 

278 


CHAPTER XIII, VERSES 21-25 


different. We must either bracket 18-19 as an interpolation 
by the Redactor, added to exclude Judas from the promise 
of blessedness, or more probably transpose 20 to follow 16. 
‘Truly, truly I tell you, he who receives anyone I send receives 
me, and he who receives me receives Him who sent me.’ He 
who acts towards his fellows in the spirit of the feet-washing 
is really doing the kindness to Christ (Mt. 25 : 45) and through 
him to God Himself, and is therefore indeed ‘ blessed’ 
(Mt. 25 : 34) according to the promise of 17. It is worthy of 
note that the word used for ‘ receiving’ is not dechesthat, 
as in Matthew, but lambanein—the word used of receiving 
the Eucharistic elements (Mk. 14:22, Jn. 6: 7)—in tone 
with the sacramental colouring of the whole section. 

Before delivering his intimate farewell discourse Jesus 
unmasks the traitor and secures his withdrawal. On saying 21 
this (presumably 18-19, 20 being transposed), Jesus was dis- 
quieted in spirit (II: 33, 12:27): he testified and said, 
‘Truly, truly I tell you, one of you will betray me.’ ‘ Testi- 
fied’ is always used of a momentous declaration (4: 39, 44, 
etc.), and hete perhaps hints that Jesus is about to reveal a 
secret supposed to be known only to the devil and Judas. 
The hint of Io and 18 is now made explicit in the exact 
words of the Synoptists (Mk. 14:18). The disciples looked 22 
at each other, at a lossto know which of them he meant—but 
they do not, as in the Synoptic account, search their own 
consciences. For the sake of vividness John as usual (cf. 
12: 4) puts into the mouth of one disciple the general question 
which in the Synoptics is asked by all in turn. As one of his 23 
disciples was reclining on his breast—he was the favourite of 
Jesus (the ‘disciple whom Jesus loved ’)—Peter nodded to 24 
him, saying, ‘Tell us who he means,’ implying that Peter 
thought Jesus had already whispered the traitor’s name to 
the Beloved Disciple. The latter is here introduced as such 
for the first time (see Introduction, p. xlvi). It has been 
suggested that his presence at the supper in a place of honour 
may have been the occasion of the disciples’ quarrel about pre- 
cedence (Lk. 22 : 24-30). The disciple just leant back on the 25 
breast of Jesus and said, ‘Lord, who is it?’ The guests lay 


279 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


on a divan propped on their left elbows, so that the Beloved 
Disciple’s head as he lay next to Jesus would reach to the 
height of his Master’s girdle; in order to address him he 

26 would lean back on his breast and look up. Jesus answered, 
‘The man I am going to give this piece of bread to, when I 
dip it inthedish.’ Then he took the piece of bread, dipped it, 
and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. In contrast 
to the Synoptic story the details show that Christ wished to 
avoid a public denunciation. The question is whispered and 
the answer is conveyed symbolically in a way which would 
reveal the truth to Jesus’ confidential friend, but screen it 
from the rest. Indeed, suspicion would be turned from Judas, 
for the offer of a ‘tit-bit’ by the host would be a sign of 
special favour; possibly Jesus hoped thus to make a last 
appeal to Judas’ better feeling. Some suppose that by the 
‘ piece of bread ’ is meant the slice of unleavened bread dipped 
in bitter sauce which was handed round by the head of the 
house at the Passover meal, and that John therefore conceives 
this to be the actual Paschal supper. But it may be that he 
has merely borrowed the detail from the Synoptists, who 
suppose themselves to be dealing with that meal. The 
‘Beloved Disciple,’ whoever he be historically, is certainly 
used as a type of the true disciple who ‘ leans on Jesus’ breast,’ 
the fountain whence springs all spiritual blessing (7: 38, 
Ig : 34) ; he is on Christ’s breast as Christ is on God’s (1 : 18). 
Note too that Peter and the Beloved Disciple are constantly 
mentioned together (20: 4, 8, and perhaps 18:16), as if to 
hint that the Petrine and Johannine traditions are comple- 
mentary. Here it is the two undoubtedly loyal disciples who 
seek to unmask the traitor. 

27 The devilish suggestion already instilled into Judas’ mind 
(2) now becomes crystallized into a devilish decision: and 
when Judas took the bread, at that moment Satan entered into 
him (Lk. 22:3). (For the thought that in the very act of 
receiving the bread Judas surrendered his soul to the devil, 
cf. 1 Cor. 11:29.) The sacramental meal became for Judas 
the means of communion not with Christ but with the devil. 
John pictures Judas as not merely dipping his hand in the 

280 


CHAPTER XIII, VERSES 28-30 


dish along with Jesus (Mk. 14 : 20), but as receiving the morsel 
direct from Jesus, as if to suggest that the Master himself 
gave him his choice of allegiance, and when he proved obdurate 
handed him over to the devil (r Cor. 5:5, 1 Tim. 1: 20). 
Then Jesus told him, ‘Be quick with what you have to do ’— 
an enigmatic order, again intended to screen Judas. Jesus 
himself determines the hour of his betrayal. None of those 28 
at table (not even Peter and the Beloved Disciple ?) understood 
why he said this to him ; some of them thought that as Judas 29 
kept the money-box (12 : 6), Jesus told him to buy what they 
needed for the festival (a hint that the feast was still in the 
future) or to give something to the poor. So Judas went out 30 
immediately after taking the bread. And it was night. It is 
useless at this point to discuss the psychology of Judas: 
according to John, the devil formed the resolution in Judas’ 
heart, Jesus himself gave it free play because his hour had 
come, and therefore Judas ‘went out.’ ‘This theological 
mechanism has nothing in common with psychology’ (Loisy). 
The statement that ‘ it was night’ (9: 4, II : 10) is symbolical 
(Gia 22 3953, Le Lhess. 5 = 5c Kev, -21:3.233°222.5)).andiis 
intensely dramatic: ‘ We see the door open, and in contrast 
to the light within, the outside is darkness ’ (Strachan). 

It will be convenient at this point to note suggestions for 
the rearrangement of the order of the text. The climax of 
the farewell discourse is reached at 14: 31, ‘ Rise, let us be 
going,’ and it seems strange that just after the address is thus 
broken off there should follow chapters 15 and 16, in which 
the same topics are renewed, especially in view of 14: 30, ‘I 
will no longer talk much with you.’ If the canonical arrange- 
ment be accepted, we must suppose either that 15 and 16 
were spoken en route for Gethsemane, which seems unlikely in 
the case of words so solemn and intimate, or that the party 
lingered in the doorway throughout the discourse of 15 and 16 
and the prayer of 17, an explanation which may be accepted 
as regards 17 but hardly as regards 15 and 16. Accordingly 
it is generally agreed that 15 and 16 have been displaced from 
an original position before 14. But exactly at what point 
should they be inserted? There are three main suggestions : 

281 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


(a) After 13 : 31a immediately following the words ‘ when he 
had gone out Jesus said’ (Spitta, Moffatt). But this destroys 
the characteristic Johannine idea that Christ’s glory is directly 
contingent upon the betrayal and the Cross in which it issues 
(note on 13: 32), and also the postponement of 310 ff. toa 
position at the end of chapter 16 interrupts the very apt 
transition from 16:33 (‘courage! I have conquered the 
world ’) to 14: 1 (‘let not your hearts be disquieted’). (0) After 
32 (Warburton Lewis), an arrangement which obviates the 
first objection to Moffatt’s order but not the second ; moreover, 
13:34 (where the commandment to love is called ‘ new’) 
should surely come before 15:12,17. (c) After 13 : 35 (Wendt, 
F. J. Paul), an arrangement which we adopt. Immediately 
after the announcement of the ‘new commandment’ there 
follows the parable of the Vine and the discourse of chapter 
15, in which that commandment is illustrated and enforced. 
Moreover, as 13 : 30-38 is almost certainly a later addition by 
the Redactor (see notes 1m loco), the transition from 16: 33 to 
14: Zisnot nowinterrupted. Again 13 : 33, withits reference 
back to 7 : 34, 8: 21, is retained in the more natural position 
before 16:16. Nevertheless, any rearrangement still leaves 
its difficulties. For example, Thomas’ question in 14:5 seems 
unnatural after Jesus’ words in 16:5 ff., and the disciples’ 
assurance in 16 : 30 ; also of the two allusions to the ‘ Helper ’ 
in 14: 16f. and 15: 26 the former quite clearly seems to be 
the first and indeed is presupposed in the second (see notes 
tn loco). These difficulties, together with the fact that in 
14 there are so many almost needless repetitions of 15 and 16, 
suggest that the two sections may possibly be independent 
redactions of the same original material which have been set 
side by side but could not be arranged in a perfectly self- 
consistent manner. It may be noted that certain subtle 
differences in doctrinal point of view may be traced in 15 and 
16 as compared with 14. In the latter the Spirit appears 
to mediate Christ’s spiritual presence: in the former he 
more definitely takes Christ’s place (compare 14 : 15-26 with 
15: 26, 16: 7 ff.) ; consequently the personal return of Christ 
himself as distinct from the indwelling of his Spirit is more 
282 


CHAPTER XIII, VERSES 31-34 


clearly indicated in the one section than in the other (compare 
14: 2~7 with 16 : 16-33). 

When he had gone out Jesus said, ‘ Now at last the Son of 31 
man is glorified, and in him God is glorified.’ The ‘ glorifying’ 
of Jesus through his death (7:39, II: 4, etc.) is at hand, 
nay has already taken place, for the traitor has ‘ as it were 
already completed his deed’ (Winer). Remember that John 
writes and his readers read from the point of view of those 
for whom communion with the glorified Christ is an accom- 
plished fact. Note the characteristic use of the title ‘Son 
of man’: it was by the very humiliation of the betrayal 
that Jesus obtained his glory (note on 1:51). Moreover, 
‘in him God is glorified,’ because by his giving of himself 
to death Christ reveals God’s true nature (12:28, 17: 4), 
just as in turn the Spirit ‘ glorifies’ Christ by disclosing 
Christ’s true nature (16:14). Indeed, so truly is the ‘glory’ 
of the Son and the Father one ‘ glory’ that Jesus can add: 
‘if God is glorified in him (a clause probably to be omitted with 32 
the best authorities) God will glorify him in Himself and 
glorify him at once’ ; in glorifying God Christ himself becomes 
partaker of the divine glory (17:4f., Acts 7:55). ‘These 
two verses sound like a shout of triumph from the heart of 
Jesus at seeing the traitor depart in the darkness’ (Godet). 
It is with the hope of this immediate ‘ glory’ (‘at once’; 
cf. 12:23, 17:1), that Jesus continues: ‘My dear children, 33 
I am only to be with you a little longer—the entrance to 
glory must be by way of separation—then you will look for 
me, and, as I told the Jews I tell you now, where I go you 
cannot come’ (7: 33 ff., 8:21). The argument is a little 
unnatural, for in the case of the Jews the application is quite 
different, and in 14 : 2-3 Jesus seems to contradict, his words 
here; note, however, that Jesus does not say, as he did to 
the Jews, ‘ you will not find me.’ Here then is the Master’s 
farewell injunction: ‘I give you a new command, to love one 34 
another—as I have loved you, you are to love one another.’ 
The command is old in the letter (Lev. 19:18); how then is 
it ‘new’? Because here it is a question not of loving one’s 
‘neighbour,’ but of a special love of Christian to Christian, 

283 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


of philadelphia in distinction to universal agape (Holtz- 
mann). ‘Because the love of Christ’s friends for Christ’s 
sake was a new thing in the world’ (Dods). There is to be 
a new love-circle, the Christian Church, dependent upon a 
new love-centre, Christ. ‘As I have loved’ indicates the 
kind of love rather than the degree, which was defined in 
13 vie» (Cher Juv 2: 810,34 23572) Ju, 4.) brobablya tue 
giving of the ‘new commandment’ takes for John the 
place of the actual institution of the Eucharist. Just as 
in 13:14-I5, so here he emphasizes the moral side of the 
sacrament—the spirit of love without which the mere opus 
operatum is valueless. The ‘new commandment ’ is parallel 
to the ‘ new covenant ratified by my blood’ (x Cor. Ir : 25) 
and the ‘ new covenant-blood ’ (Mt. 26:28). It is not merely 
a common ritual, but the spirit of mutual love which gives 

35 the right to the title of a Christian disciple: ‘ By this everyone 
will recognize that you are my disciples, if you have love one 
for another.’ ‘The heathen are wont to exclaim with wonder, 
See how these Christians love one another!’ (Tertullian) 
(citr Jn: 32 207 Acts 43192). 

36 Apparently picking up Jesus’ words in 33, ‘Lord,’ said 
Simon Peter, ‘where are you going?’ The Vulgate here has 
‘Domine, quo vadis ? ’—the words which Peter in the legend 
addresses to Jesus, when in his flight from Rome he met the 
Master entering the city. Rather than speak plainly of his 
death Jesus replies with a riddle, for the solution of which see 
21:19: ‘I am going where you cannot follow me at present ; 
later on you will follow.’ Peter, imagining that Jesus is about 
to undertake some perilous adventure, feels this to be a slight 

37 upon his love and courage: ‘Lord,’ said Peter, ‘why cannot 
I follow you just now? I will lay down my life for you ! ’— 
the boast of all the disciples in the Synoptics (Mk. 14 : 31, etc.). 
‘In the zeal of love he mistakes the measure of his moral 

38 strength ’ (Meyer). Jesus replied, ‘ Lay down your life for me ? 
Truly, truly I tell you, before the cock crows, you will have 
disowned me thrice over.’ The ‘ cock-crowing’ was a recog- 
nized interval of the night, say between 2 and 4 a.m. (Mk. 
13:35). By his repetition of Peter’s words Jesus seems 

284 


CHAPTER XIII, VERSE 38 


to admit that one day the boast will be made good—but after 
how many failures ! 

Chapter 20, which it is agreed is the conclusion of the 
Gospel in its original form, contains no hint of any shame 
on Peter’s part in consequence of his denial, which suggests 
that there was no reference to the denial in the body of the 
Gospel. Verses 36-38 interrupt the connexion between the 
“new commandment’ (35) and the allegory in which it is 
enforced (15: 1 ff.) and make the opening of the latter very 
abrupt. On the other hand, the relation of this incident to 
the reinstatement passage in the Appendix (cf. the use of 
‘follow’ in each passage; 21:19) suggests that both may 
be due to the Redactor. Possibly the verses were originally 
inserted by the Redactor to follow 16: 33 (a position to 
which they are restored by many critics ; see note following 
13 : 30); 16: 31-32 (‘ you will be scattered to your homes 
every one of you’) is the Johannine counterpart of Jesus’ 
Synoptic prediction, ‘I will strike at the shepherd and the 
sheep will be scattered’ (Mk. 14:27). Indeed, Jn. 16: 
31-32 plus 13 : 36-38 is an exact parallel to Mk. 14: 27-31. 
Moreover, the Redactor could hardly have introduced Peter’s 
question (36) before Jesus’ complaint in 16:5. But placed 
at the end of chapter 16 the section would interrupt the very 
clear transition from 16: 33to14:1. It may be that a later 
copyist had sense enough to recognize this, and as he searched 
for an alternative context the present position may have been 
suggested to him by the apparent connexion of 13 : 36 with 
Jesus’ words in 13:33. (For examples of similar ‘engineered’ 
connexions cf. that between 8:14 and 8: 21, between 7: 14 
and 7:15, and between 3 : 30 and 3: 31, though in each case 
the connected verses belong in fact to quite distinct sections.) 
We may even find an explanation here of the notorious dis- 
placement of chapter 14, which originally followed 15 and 16, 
to a position before them. In the process of copying, 13 : 36- 
38 (originally inserted by the Redactor immediately before 
chapter 14) may have been transposed to its present position 
before chapter 15 and may have carried chapter 14 with it. 
We have here an excellent example of the intimate connexion 


285 


H 


2 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


between the interpolation of Synoptic material and the dis- 
location of the text: wherever these two phenomena are 
seen in conjunction it is probable that the Redactor is 
responsible (see Introduction, p. lxvi). 


Illustration (11): The Allegory of the Vine (15: 1-17) 


The ‘new commandment’ (13: 34), obedience to which 
gives the right to the title of a Christian disciple, is illustrated 
in the allegory of the Vine. Such a spirit of mutual Christian 
love can have its source only in life-union and love-union 
with Christ himself. The allegory is probably suggested 
(if indeed any suggestion need be sought for so natural an 
illustration) by the wine at the table, rather than by, e.g., a 
vine trailing over the window of the Upper Room or by the 
view of the vines on the slopes of Olivet. The whole section, 
with its thought of the agape or ‘ love-feast ’ between Christ 
and the disciple and between one disciple and another, has 
close affinities with the eucharistic ideas of chapter 13 and 
frequently echoes its thought. (Cf. 15 : 2-3 with 13: I0-II, 
15 : 16 with 13: 18,15 : 20 with 13: 16.) 

‘Iam the real Vine ’—the genuine fulfilment of those qualities 
which a vine illustrates (cf. 6 : 32): ‘ real,’ perhaps in contrast 
to Israel which was regularly spoken of by the prophets as 
God’s vine (Is. 5: I, Jer. 2: 21, Ezek. 15 : 6, 19 : 10-14, Ps. 80: 
8 ff.). In the Didaché Christ is called the ‘ Vine of David.’ 
He is the divine prototype of all that was implied in the 
prophet’s typology. ‘And my Father is the vine-dresser,’ who 
planted the Vine here on earth in the person of Christ and tends 
the Christ-life expressed now in his Church. The Evangelist 
throughout writes from the point of view of his own time: 
‘ Jesus, before he closes his life-work, throws his mind into the 
future, and shadows out the history of his Church’ (E. F. 
Scott). Just as Judas has already been eliminated from the 
Christian Society, so ‘He cuts away any branch on me which 
is not bearing fruit—as the chapter proceeds we see that this 
fruit is love—and cleans every branch which does bear fruit, 
to make it bear richer fruit,’—prunes away the useless shoots 

286 


CHAPTER XV, VERSES 3-5 


which would rob the vine of its strength. John thus explains 
the problem of apostasy, which must have perplexed his 
contemporaries: it is God pruning the Vine, purging the 
Body of Christ. The word ‘cleans’ is used in view of the 
next verse, which itself points directly back tor3: 10: ‘You3 
are already clean, by the word I have spoken to you’ ; Judas 
being gone there is now no exception. But ‘ clean,’ which in 
I3: 10 meant ‘cleansed of sin,’ is now given a more active 
sense and virtually means ‘capable of bearing fruit.’ The 
cleansing instrument has been Christ’s word—his whole 
message and revelation—which has shown up their faults and 
pruned them of those failings which make them unfruitful. 
(For the power of Jesus’ words cf. notes on 6: 63, 12: 48.) 
And yet it is not enough simply to hear the word : its effect 
must be maintained (5 : 38, 8 : 31) by constant union with him 
who spoke it, by the co-operation of the hearers’ wills with his : 
‘Remain in me, as I remain in you: just asa branch cannot 4 
bear fruit by itself without remaining on the vine, neither can 
you, unless you remain in me.’ This is one of the passages 
in which the gift of ‘life’ seems to have for the Evangelist 
an almost semi-physical character, an energy transmitted 
directly from its main source (see Introduction, p. xxxix). 
But, though the Evangelist may employ the thought-forms 
of the semi-physical mysticism of his day, union with Christ 
is for him ‘more a matter of will and moral effort than of 
feeling. ... To be “in Christ” (in this Gospel) is just to 
accustom oneself to breathe the atmosphere of the moral stand- 
ard Jesus has set—to develop within us a set of Christian 
instincts ’ (Strachan). ‘I am the vine, you are the branches— 5 
the main stem and the branches making together one tree with 
one common life (cf. Paul’s comparison of the body and its 
members, I Cor. 12:12, Rom. 12: 4f., Eph. 4: 4)—he who 
remains in me, as I in him—for the effort to maintain fellow- 
ship is not ours alone (cf. 16 and Phil. 2: 12 f.)—bears rich 
fruit—and conversely when separated from Christ bears no 
fruit at all—because apart from me you can do nothing’: not 
that 3 non-Christian life can never have any moral worth, 
but apart from union with Christ there can, in the Johannine 
287 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


6 sense, be no ‘harvest for eternal life’ (4:36). ‘If anyone 
does not remain in me, he is thrown aside like a branch and he 
withers up’—he is deprived of eternal life, as the severed 
branch is of the sap, and in consequence loses his natural 
capacity for fruit-bearing. The unworthy Christian is ‘ thrown 
aside,’ excommunicated (the word is the same as in 9: 34), 
and that ‘ not as a future consequence but as an inevitable 
accompaniment of the separation’ from Christ (Westcott). 
He has proved himself to be in no true sense one of Jesus’ 
‘own’ (cf. 1 Jn. 2:19), and therefore is excluded from the 
guarantee that none of Jesus’ own shall be lost (6: 39, 
Io: 28 f.): ‘then the branches are gathered and thrown into 

7 the fire to be burned (Mt. 13 : 30, 40, etc.). If you remain in 
me and my words remain in you, then ask whatever you like 
and you shall have it.’ Note that just as in verse 4 the thought 
of Christ himself is substituted for that of his word (ver. 3), 
so here we revert from Christ to his ‘words’: ‘It was in 
his words that these men experienced the power of his person- 
ality. So with us, who have not seen him’ (Strachan). When 
Christ’s ‘words’ ‘remain in’ a disciple the latter’s prayers 
become but echoes of those words and must needs be answered 
(14: 13,15: 16; cf. Mt.18:19f.). The prayers are prompted 
by the indwelling Spirit of Christ, and ‘ a prayer thus inspired 
is a child of heaven: it is God’s promise transformed into 
petition’ (Godet). Such prayer is indeed ‘ fruit-bearing,’ 
part of the natural function of the Christian (cf. 16); hence 

8 Jesus continues: ‘As you bear rich fruit and prove yourselves 
my disciples, my Father is glorified ’ (13 : 31), just as the fruitful- 
ness of the vine redounds to the credit of the husbandman. 
‘The Father is glorified in everything which demonstrates 
that through Christ his grace reaches and governs men’ 
(Dods). And what an incentive to true discipleship should 
they find in the assurance that Christ’s love for them is no less 
than the Father’s love for the Son! (3:35, 5:20, 10:17, 

9 17:24). ‘As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you ; 
remain within my love ’—for to retain that precious possession 
you must conform to the spirit of it. Love, so to say, is the 
atmosphere in which they are to continue to dwell. More- 

288 


CHAPTER XV, VERSES 10-13 


over, as Christ’s love for his disciples is paralleled only by the 
Father’s love for Christ, so is the condition of ‘ remaining in it ’ 
the same—obedience, in this case conformity to the ‘new 
commandment’ to love one another (12 and I Jn. passim) : 
‘If you keep my commands you will remain within my 
love, just as I have kept my Father’s commands and remain 
within His love.’ The Farewell Discourses abound in passages 
where the relationship between Jesus and the Christian is 
compared with that between the Father and himself (cf. 14: 10, 
N2y208" 17 217, -18,°21-23 5 20. 21). 

‘Thave told you this—invited you to remain in my love and 
assured you that through obedience you can do so—that my 
joy may be within you and your joy complete’ (16: 24, 17:13, 
I Jn. 1:4, 2 Jn. 12)—in the knowledge that Christ loves them 
as the Father loves Christ and that they stand to Christ in the 
same relation as he does to God. ‘ My joy ’—the joy possessed 
by Jesus himself through his communion with God—is a joy 
which may be the disciples’ through a like communion with 
Christ on the same condition of obedience ; and ‘this is my 
command : you are to love one another as I have loved you’ 
(13: 34): Jesus’ love is to be at once the source and the 
measure of theirs ; and that is the greatest possible measure, 
for ‘ self-sacrifice is the high-water mark of love’ (Dods) : 
‘to lay life down (10: 11) for his friends, man has no greater 
love than that’ (i Jn. 3:16). Paul finds a proof of love 
greater still in giving life for one’s enemies (Rom. 5: 8-10). 
Christians are here called Christ’s ‘ friends’ possibly with a 
reference to the official Roman title ‘ friend of the Emperor,’ 
a position roughly corresponding to Privy Councillor. Abra- 
ham is called ‘God’s friend’ (Jas. 2: 23), as also are the 
prophets (Wis. 7:27). The use of the word ‘friend’ 
instead of the Synoptic ‘neighbour’ (Mk. 12:31) does not 
necessarily narrow the love-circle for whom Christ is thought 
to die: rather does it emphasize the intimacy of the love. 
Yet it must be remembered that Christ’s command is ‘ new’ 
just because it enjoins not only universal love of man to man, 
but the duty of special love of Christian to Christian. (See note 
on 13:34.) So here the Evangelist stresses the peculiar love 

289 


H 


2 


14 


15 


16 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


of Jesus to ‘ his own,’ but not at all to the exclusion of ‘the 
world’ from his love. Indeed, ‘ his love to the world has 
assumed a new meaning for all time, because John was able 
to realize so intimately his love for his own’ (E. F. Scott). 
‘You are my friends—if you do what I command you ’—for 
such is the condition of the love of which we are speaking (9-10). 
Yet this is no servile obedience (8 : 35, 12: 26, Ps. 119: 45): 
‘I call you servants no longer—as e.g. at 13 : 16—because a 
servant does not know what his master is doing’ ; he rendersa 
mere unintelligent obedience and has no sympathy with or 
interest in his master’s purpose; ‘his not to reason why ’: 
‘I call you friends (Lk. 12: 4), because I have imparted to you 
all that I have learned from my Father’ (5:19, 8:28). The 
last words so far as they are addressed merely to the Eleven 
contradict 16:12, but they are true when referred to the 
believers of all ages as progressively enlightened by the 
holy Spirit (14: 26). Such will obey Christ, not mechanically 
like a slave, but as being united to him by an inward harmony 
of will and a perfect understanding of his motives and purposes. 
In the life of divine communion the initiative is always 
taken by God: (238, a Jn:=4 729" Bons 2767)Galet ae 
‘You have not chosen me, it is I who have chosen you.’ The 
reference in ‘chosen’ is primarily, as in 6:70 and 13: 18, 
to the call to the Apostolate, but may be extended to include 
not only the Eleven but all Christian disciples. The link of 
love was forged not by them but by Christ; he will keep 
it strong ; it is not for them to seek to break it, but rather to 
go forth on love’s service. For, says John, putting on Christ’s 
lips a message to the missionary Church of his own day, Christ 
chose you ‘appointing you to go and bear fruit—fruit that lasts, 
so that the Father may grant you whatever you ask in my 
name.’ In the word‘ appointing’ (for which cf. Acts 20: 28, 
1 Cor. 12: 28) the primary reference is again to the Eleven and 
their Apostolic mission (Mt. 28 : 19, etc.), but includes also the 
duty of every Christian to engage in fruitful activity which 
may have permanent results ; and again, as in verse 7, inter- 
cession which wins its end is regarded as a typical example of 
such fruitful activity. The word for ‘ go’ is the same as that 
290 


CHAPTER XV, VERSES 17-19 


used in Jesus’ words (14: 28) ‘I am going away and coming 
back to you,’ and implies the launching forth from the inner 
circle of love to the needy world without; as Godet says, 
it brings out ‘the kind of independence to which Jesus had 
gradually raised them.’ To ask ‘ in Christ’s name’ means to 
pray in such a way that the petition is in complete harmony 
with the whole nature of Christ ; the phrase is a summary of 
the truth expressed in verse 7. The allegory of the Vine now 
closes with a final repetition of the ‘new commandment’ 
(13 : 34, 15 : 12) which it has served so suggestively to illus- 
trate: ‘This is what I command you, to love one another.’ 17 


Theme (t): The Time of Separation (15 : 18-16 : 33) 

In the following verses the Evangelist is evidently trying to 
allay the surprise which must have been felt by the early 
Christian Church at the world’s animosity against the Gospel of 
Jesus. The world being what it is, such an antipathy is inevit- 
able (7:7, 1 Jn. 3:13, 1 Pet. 4:12 ff.). A certain dualism, 
characteristic of the Evangelist, appears in the fact that, while 
the universality of the Gospel is more fully recognized than in 
any other N.T. book (e.g. 3: 16, 10: 16), yet a distinction is 
everywhere presupposed between ‘Christ’s own’ and that 
‘world’ in which they dwell and which represents the sum- 
total of the forces opposed to Christ (note on1:10f.). ‘The 
farewell discourses are based throughout on the conception of 
a chosen community which has broken with the life around it 
and is complete within itself ’ (E. F. Scott). 

‘If the world hates you, remember it hated me first’— 18 
before you, in point of time and also of degree. The words 
are obviously spoken from the point of view of the Evangelist’s 
own day, the indicative in the conditional clause expressing 
not a future contingency, but a present fact. ‘If you belonged 19 
to the world—if you were morally identified with it—the world 
~ would love what it owned (I Jn. 4, 5); it is because you do not 
belong to the world, because I have chosen you from the world, 
that the world hates you ’—the word ‘ chosen ’ here conveying 
the idea of ‘ election’ to faith rather than of the ‘ call’ to the 
Apostleship (16). The verse is the exact converse of 7: 7. 

291 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


The Jews the world cannot hate: the Christians it cannot but 
hate. Such hatred should be regarded not as a calamity, but 
rather as a guarantee that they are of the number of Christ's 
‘own’ and will share his glory (Rom. 8:17, cf. Lk. 6: 26). 
Meantime the sincerity of their communion with their Master 
may be measured by the extent to which they are called upon to 
20 share his lot : ‘ Remember what I told you (13: 16), ‘‘ Aservant 
is not greater than hismaster.’’’ The principle is illustrated in 
2 Tim. 2: 11 ff., 1 Pet. 4:13 ff. ‘If they persecuted me—as 
indeed they did—they will persecute you. Ifthey hold tomy 
word (8: 51)—as they do mot—they will hold to yours.’ The man 
who is identified with Christ will find his experience identical 
2ialso. ‘They will do all this on account of my name, because 
they know not Him who sent me’: ‘all this’ persecution, to 
which John’s contemporaries are subject, is the result of 
antipathy to Christ—to ‘ his name,’ to all for which he stands— 
and of ignorance of God ; or rather not so much ignorance of 
God (8: 54f.) as failure to understand that ‘ He who sent’ 
Jesus 1s God (5: 38, 7: 28). On the other hand, true know- 
ledge of God would have carried with it a better appreciation 
of Christ (8: 42,1 Jn. 5: 1). (For what Dods calls ‘ the efficacy 

of this consolation’ cf. Acts 5: 41, Phil. 1: 29 f.) 
The sin of the world in rejecting Christ and persecuting ‘ his 
own’ is the more deadly in that it is committed in the presence 
22 of light ; it is the ‘sin against the Holy Ghost’: ‘they would 
not be guilty (a Johannine phrase for which see 19: 11, 1 Jn. 
1: 8) if I had not come and spoken to them ; but, as it is, they 
have no excuse for their sin.” (For the thought see note ong: 
41.) Moreover, just as knowledge of God Himself is involved in 
the knowledge of His representative (8: 19), so does hatred of 
23 the representative involve hatred of God: ‘ he who hates me 
hates my Father also’ (5: 42). Sin for John appears sometimes 
to be not so much a positive principle as a deprivation of moral 
‘light.’ Its moral culpability is minimized and, where a sin- 
cere plea of ignorance is advanced, disappears. Yet according 
to Jesus even the sin of ignorance requires some measure of 
forgiveness (Lk. 23: 34, 12: 48), and Paul, though he pleads 
ignorance, yet admits that he stood in need of mercy (xz Tim. 

292 


CHAPTER XV, VERSES 24-26 


I: 13). How much more heinous the guilt when there can be 
no plea of ignorance: ‘They would not be guilty, if I had not 24 
done deeds among them such as no one has ever done (3: 2, 
7: 31, 9: 32); but, as it is, they have seen—and they have 
hated—both me and my Father.’ In Christ’s acts (5: 17, 
Ig, 20) no less than in his Person (1: 18, 14: 9) the Father 
had been clearly revealed ; yet they had rejected him, and 
in him the Father also. Note that the sin consists not in 
rejecting Jesus as a dogmatic proposition, but as one who has 
been manifested as an active force for good in the world. 
“Have we any moral right to be ignorant of Jesus, when all 
history rings and echoes with his deeds?’ (Strachan). Yet 
such obdurate blindness was predestined by prophecy (cf. 
12: 37f.): ‘It is that the word written in their Law may be 25 
fulfilled ; ‘‘they hated me for no cause.’’ There is no exact 
parallel in the O.T., the nearest being Ps. 35: 19, 69: 4. 

The logical continuation would seem to be at 16: 1, and 
verses 26-27 are a parenthesis anticipating the section on the 
Helper which begins at 16:7. The theme of persecution 
suggests this idea of the Spirit which will uphold Christians 
and with them bear witness to Christ. But 26-27 here seem 
out of place and should probably be transposed after 16: 3, 
where the connexion is perfectly apt (‘they have not known ’— 
but—‘ the Spirit . . . will bear witness’). 

‘When the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from 26 
the Father, even the Spirit of truth which issues from the 
Father, he will bear witness to me.’ The idea of ‘ the Helper ’ 
is introduced as if already familiar, and when we compare this 
verse with 14: 16 the latter certainly leaves the impression of 
being the first allusion (see note on rearrangement after 
13: 30). The word translated ‘ Helper’ (Greek, Paraklétos) 
is properly a passive form meaning ‘one called in to help,’ 
as either plaintiff or defendant might call in a friend to aid 
him in a lawsuit. Properly it is a legal term (Latin, advoca- 
tus; so translated in 1 Jn.2: 1). The Spirit is one who will 
champion the Church in her suit against the world and appear 
as a decisive ‘ witness’ for the defence (cf. Mk. 13: I1, etc.). 
He is one who pleads a cause, whether it be the Church's 


293 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


cause with the world as here, or Christ’s cause with the believer 
asin14: 26. It has been thought that John borrows the term 
directly from Philo, who writes (Vita Mos., iti. 14): ‘ For 
it was necessary that t- an consecrated to the Father of the 
world should employ2 vocate His son, most perfect in virtue, 
to ensure forgiveness, sins and a supply of richest blessings.’ 
But the ‘ son’ in this passage evidently refers not to the Logos, 
but to the whole universe as the perfect Creation or ‘son’ of 
God, so that the ‘ Helper’ of the Gospel shares with that of 
Philo only the name and the idea of pleading implied in it. 
The Helper is ‘ the Spirit of truth ’ (cf. 14: 16), ie. the Spirit 
which is truth and which reveals it—‘ truth’ being ‘God 
revealed in His essential nature’ (Godet ; cf. 14:6). Jesus 
is himself ‘the truth’ ; the Helper who takes his place and 
continues his work is ‘ the Spirit of truth,’ who ‘ makes divine 
truth enter the soul, gives it entire reality within us, and makes 
it the truth to us’ (Godet). Note that in 14: 16 the Father 
gives the Helper, while here Christ sends him ‘from the 
Father,’ a thought which is further emphasized by the clause 
“which issues from the Father.’ Loisy well notes that John 
has in view here not the eternal relation of Father, Son, and 
Spirit—the much-debated question of the ‘ procession’ of 
the Spirit from Father, or Son, or both—but their respective 
contributions to the work of salvation. The words ‘ issues 
from the Father ’ refer not so much to the nature of the Spirit 
as to his mission. Hence the emphasis laid on his function of 
‘witnessing,’ which as in the Synoptics (Mt. 10: 20) is closely 
related to the persecution of the Church. The witness of the 
Spirit is given by the interpretation of the inward meaning of 
Jesus’ words and life through the personal experience of his 
followers. It also appears in the victorious power in which 
they surmount persecution. The witness of the Spirit must 
always be expressed through the witness of disciples ; hence 
27 it is added, ‘and you too are witnesses, for you have been with 
me from the very beginning’ (Mk. 3: 14, Acts 1: 21 f.), from 
the commencement of the Messiah’s public work, and there- 
fore are able to bear evidence to the historical facts (Acts 
13: 31), even as the Spirit bears witness to their true meaning. 
204 


CHAPTER XVI, VERSES 1-4 


The Spirit is similarly related to the Apostolic witness in Acts 
1: 8, 5: 32. Here John seems to distinguish those to whom 
Christ is actually speaking, whose evidence is that of eye- 
witnesses, from those through whom the Spirit witnessed in 
his own day. The Evangelist’s own ‘Spiritual Gospel’ 
is itself the best of all commentaries on the profound truths 
of verses 26-27. (See Introduction, p. xxvi.) 


Chapter XVI 


‘Thave told you all this—i.e. the certainty both of persecution 
and of support in it—to keep you from being repelled ’— 
literally, ‘scandalized,’ ‘tripped up,’ ‘staggered’ (6: 61), 
and therefore tempted to turn from Christ under the pressure 
of opposition and disappointment (Mt. 11:6). The words 
seem to connect with 15:25. ‘ Forewarned is forearmed.’ 
‘They will excommunicate you’ (9: 22, 12: 42)—again a type 2 
of persecution to which John’s contemporaries in Asia rather 
than Jesus’ personal followers in Palestine would be exposed. 
‘Indeed the time is coming when anyone who kills you will 
imagine he is performing a service to God ’—just as did Saul of 
Tarsus himself (Acts 26:9). The word used for ‘ service’ 
(latreia) means usually ‘sacrificial worship’ (Rom. 9: 4); 
in Exod. 12: 25 it is used of the Passover ; later it meant more 
generally ‘a work well pleasing to God’ (Theophylact ; cf. 
Rom. 12:1). Meyer quotes a Jewish maxim: ‘Omnis 
effundens sanguinem improborum aequalis est illi qui 

.sacrificium facit.’ It is needless to trace an allusion to any 
particular massacre of Christians, e.g. at the time of Bar 
Cochba’s rising. ‘This they will do to you, because they have 3 
not known the Father nor me’ : a repetition of the thought of 
Theil 

At this point we have suggested the insertion of 15: 26-27: 
‘They have not known the Father nor me. When the Helper 
comes ... he will bear witness to me... . Jesus then 
continues: ‘I have told you all this, so that when the time for 4 
it arrives, you may remember what I said to you,’ that being 
forewarned you may be forearmed, and that your faith may 
be strengthened rather than undermined—practically a 


295 


MH 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


repetition of verse I (cf. 13: 19, 14: 29), to which is added a 
reason for Christ’s silence hitherto concerning the inevitability 
of persecution. Though Mt. 10: 17-23 records just such a 
warning spoken by Christ at an earlier date, the statement 
holds good of this Gospel, where there has been no previous 
reference to persecution: ‘I did not tell you this at the beginning, 
because I was with you then ’—and they were not likely in his 
companionship to fall victims to foreboding nor to feel the 
need of such a ‘ Helper’ as has just been promised (cf. Mt. 
59:15). ‘But nowlam going to Him who sent me,’ returning 
with my commission fulfilled; and bearing the brunt of 
hostility alone you will need such comfort as I now give you. 
‘ And yet not one of you asks, ‘“‘ Where are you going ? ’’’ (13: 36 
and note after 13: 38). The disciples are so distressed about 
Christ’s departure that they forget the compensating factor 
of where he is going and the blessings which his departure will 
bring in the gifts of the Spirit. ‘ The exclusive interest, which 
we often find to-day in the historical Jesus, as distinct from 
the risen Jesus of personal experience, is an example of the 
refusal to ask the question, ‘‘ Whither goest thou?’’’ 
6 (Strachan). ‘No, your heart is full of sorrow at what I have told 
you—about my departure and your coming troubles—a sorrow 
7 due to wounded affection and baffled hopes—yet—I am telling 
you the truth (however strange it seems to you !)—my going is 
for your good. If I do not depart, the Helper will not come 
to you ; whereas if I go, I will send him to you’: Jesus will 
be able to do so, for he himself will now be living in the Spirit 
in the presence of that Father who is the source of the Spirit’s 
mission (15:26). The withdrawal of Jesus from bodily 
fellowship with his intimate circle is the necessary condition 
of his spiritual fellowship with the Church universal. The 
Helper is to take in the future experience of the Church the 
place held by Jesus himself in the lives of those who were his 
friends in the days of his flesh. His departure is a great gain. 
The limitations imposed by a life in the flesh will be broken 
down, and Christ will be able as spirit with spirit to hold with 
his people everywhere a communion as close as once he did 
with his immediate disciples (cf. 14: 16). 
296 


CHAPTER XVI, VERSES 8-11 


(For the style and language of the following verses, cf. 
I Jn. 5: 6-8.) ‘And when he (the Helper) comes, he will 
convict the world, convincing men of sin, of righteousness, 
and of judgment: of sin, because they do not believe in 
me; of righteousness, because I go to the Father and 
you see me no morse; of judgment, because the Prince 
of this world has been judged.’ The Spirit expressing him- 
self in men’s hearts and lives and through the verdict of 
history and experience will reverse the world’s present judg- 
ments and triumphantly vindicate Christ’s claims (cf. Paul’s 
thought in 1 Cor. 14: 24-25). As that Spirit enlightens 
men’s minds the world which now condemns the Christian, 
and takes credit to itself for so doing (16: 2), will itself be on 
trial with the Spirit as accuser; the result will be ‘ con- 
viction ’—that is, the demonstration of the truth in so clear a 
light that it must be acknowledged as the truth, and the 
consequent condemnation of those who in spite of light 
reject that truth. Thus ‘conviction’ is used in a double sense : 
the world reaches the ‘ conviction’ that Christ is the truth, 
and it is ‘convicted’ of the crime of rejecting the truth. In 
that verdict there will be three counts: (a) On the question of 
“sin’ the verdict will be that the guilt was not on the part of 
Christ, but on the part of those who in spite of light refused 
to believe (15: 22, 24; 3:18, 19, 36). (b) On the question 
of ‘righteousness ’—in the widest sense of the word—the 
verdict will be that this is on Christ’s side, as proved by his 
triumphant exaltation to the Father—a return which is itself 
demonstrated by the fact that an invisible ministry of the 
Spirit has taken the place of Christ’s earthly ministry (‘ you 
see me no more’: ‘the invisibility was the evidence of his 
-victory ’—Dods). (c) On the question of ‘judgment ’—in 
the sense of 7: 24—the summing up of the issue as between 
Christ and the world, the verdict here too will be in favour 
of Christ, for, as a result of the Cross and its influence upon 
men’s thought as interpreted by the holy Spirit, ‘ the Prince 
of this world has been judged’ ; that is, the anti-Christian 
point of view, the principles which govern the actions of 
worldly men, have been once and for all discredited and 


297 


8 


I 


iS) 


Oo 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


condemned (12: 31 f., r Cor. 2: 8, Col. 2: 15). The work of 
the Spirit manifested in the history of Christianity verifies 
the judgment that by Christ’s death evil has been condemned 
utterly : the Devil is fighting a losing battle. 

The true function of the Spirit appears only when it is 
understood that the revelation of truth and the understanding 
of it are alike progressive and can be bestowed through the 
Spirit only in proportion to the receptivity of the learner : 
‘T have still much to say to you (note on 15: 15), but you cannot 
bear it just now’ (Lk. 11: 46, Acts 15: 10). There are problems 
for the understanding of which their minds must be prepared 
by the defining power of Christian living. Epictetus is 
recorded to have thus cautioned a would-be philosopher: 
‘Sir, consider if you can bear it!’ ‘’Tis the taught already 
that profit by teaching.’ (Compare the thought of 1 Cor. 3:1, 
Heb. 5: 11-14.) ‘However, when the Spirit of truth comes, he 
will lead you into all the truth ’—a form of words implying not so 
much a revelation of entirely new truth as a deeper under- 
standing of the truths already revealed by Jesus, and of Jesus 
himself who zs the Truth (14: 6). To bestow such an under- 
standing is essentially the work of the Spirit in the Church 
to-day (14: 26). There is an interesting parallel in Philo: 
‘ The mind (of Moses) would not have gone thus straight to the 
mark unless there had been a divine Spirit which guided 
it to the truth’ ( Vit. Mos., iii. 36). Our Gospel registers an 
eternal protest against all fixity of dogma: ‘ The Spirit, as 
John conceives it, is a principle of inner development by which 
the traditional forms of belief may from time to time be 
broken up, in order to reveal more perfectly their essential 
content’ (E. F. Scott). 

As the representative of Jesus the Spirit will follow the 
rule laid down by Jesus himself (5: 30, 7: 16, 14: 10): ‘for he 
will not speak of his own accord, he will say whatever he is 
told—by the Father from whom he comes and by the Son who 
sends him (15: 26)—and he will disclose to you what is to 
come ’—explain the significance of the seeming tragedy which 
confronts Jesus and proclaim a message of hope and victory 
for the future destiny of the Church. The phrase ‘ what is to 

298 


CHAPTER XVI, VERSES 14-16 


come’ (erchomena) means, properly, ‘things that are on the 
way. It is a question not of foretelling the future, but of 
interpreting tendencies: ‘Through all history the prophets 
who have tried to detail future history have failed; but the 
great ones among them, who have seen into the heart of things 
and declared in what direction they were moving, have suc- 
ceeded. The truth of prophecy is not truth to fact, but truth to 
idea ’ (Percy Gardner, Ephesian Gospel, p. 263). The function 
of the Spirit is not to disclose what lies ahead, but to light up 
the difficulties of the road as we progressively meet them and 
to give the assurance that the road along which we follow 
Christ leads at last to victory. Thus, says Jesus, ‘He will 
glorify me’: the Spirit will make Christ known in his full 
majesty, and this he will do by revealing in the experience of 
the Christian Church Jesus as he now is in his risen spiritual 
power ; for the ‘glory’ of Jesus is all that is implied in his 
death, resurrection and ascension, and to reveal him as he now 
is, having passed through these, is to ‘glorify’ him. And 
this the Spirit does, ‘for he will draw upon what is mine—from 
Christ’s own treasure of truth—and disclose it to you.’ Though 
the Spirit is the perennial source of new truth, yet this truth 
is nothing more than the interpretation, under new forms and 
in larger measure, of the truth taught by Jesus himself (cf. 
14: 26). And indeed there is no richer store upon which the 
Spirit could possibly draw, for ‘ all that the Father has is mine 
(13: 3,17: 10; cf. x Cor. 15: 24-28, Heb. 2: 8) ; that is why 
I say, “‘he will draw upon what is mine and disclose it to you.”’’ 
It is noticeable that John allows to the Spirit little independent 
action or influence. His function is to represent Christ and 
to ensure that Ais influence shall continue, even as Christ’s 
function is to represent God. Like every N.T. writer, John 
presents us not with any formulated doctrine of the Trinity, 
but only with those facts of Christian experience upon which 
such a doctrine must be based. 

‘In a little while—after Jesus’ death on the following day— 
you shall behold me no longer ; then, after a little—when the 
experience typified in Pentecost begins—you shall see me.’ 
Up to this point Jesus has been speaking of the coming of the 


299 


16 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Spirit as a substitute for himself: he now promises his own 
return ‘after a little.’ Is this a contradiction? Rather is 
it John’s method of meeting the disappointments and doubts 
of his own day by thus identifying Christ’s expected ‘ Parousia,’ 
or ‘second coming,’ not with an apocalyptic manifestation, 
but with the same coming of the holy Spirit which the Church 
had already experienced at Pentecost and was daily experi- 
encing. We have already noted (6:62) that for the 
Evangelist the Resurrection, Ascension and Parousia are 
almost telescoped into one experience. In the words, ‘ after 
a little you shall see me,’ while the immediate reference, as 
addressed to the Eleven, may be to the post-resurrection 
appearances, the analogy of 14: 19 suggests that the larger 
reference is rather to the realization of the spiritual presence of 
Christ in his Church as exemplified in Pentecost. Christ has 
indeed returned, hints the Evangelist, and if the Church still 
feels disappointment and perplexity, it is only because she has 
mistaken the nature of his coming. The following verse 
vividly reflects such questioning on the part of contemporary 
17 Christians: So some of his disciples said to one another, 
‘What does he mean by telling us, “‘In a little while, you shall 
behold me no longer ; then, after a little, you shall see me’’ ? 
and, “‘I gotothe Father’’?’ The last phrase is an allusion back 
to 16: 10, the meaning of which they have not yet grasped. 
18 They said, ‘What is the meaning of ‘‘Inalittle’’? Wedonot 
understand what he is saying.’ Note the tentative nature of 
the question: they do not presume to ask Jesus directly ; 
they are still muttering among themselves. As usual (cf. 
14: 5 ff.) the perplexed question prepares the way for a fuller 
1g explanation by Jesus: Jesus knew they wanted to ask him— 
by supernatural intuition (2: 25, 6: 61, etc.) as well as from 
their obvious embarrassment ; so he said to them, ‘Is this 
what you are discussing together, why I said, ‘‘In a little while, 
you will not see me: then, after a little, you shall see me’’?’ 
Jesus shows that he knows what is puzzling his disciples ; 
without giving a definite answer to their question he reveals 
20 how sorrow is to be changed to joy: ‘Truly, truly I tell you, 
you will be wailing and lamenting—as those who mourn their 
300 


CHAPTER XVI, VERSES 21-24 


dead—while the world is rejoicing—in its triumph over its 
enemy ; we see the prediction fulfilled in Mk. 16: ro—you 
will be sorrowful, but then your sorrow will be changed into 
joy ’—as indeed happens at 20: 20. Jesus then adds a typical 
illustration of joy born out of dread: ‘When a woman is in 21 
labour she is sorry, for her time has come ; but when the child 
is born she remembers her anguish no longer, for joy that a 
human being has been born into the world.’ (For the figure, 
cf. Ps. 48: 6, Jer. 4: 31, 6: 24, Is. 26:17, etc.) The mother’s 
‘time’ which ‘has come’ recalls Jesus’ ‘time’ which has 
also ‘ come’ (12: 23), while her ‘ anguish’ hints at the coming 
‘persecution’ of the Church (Gk. thlipsts; cf. Rev. 7: 14). 
Though the chief point of the illustration is simply the changing 
of sorrow into joy, the analogy of Is. 66: 7-9, Hos. 13: 13 f., 
Mic. 4: 9-10, 5: 2, suggests that John intends us to understand 
that the N.T. Church is actually born at the Resurrection out 
of the travail of the Cross. (See also the imagery of Rev. 12.) 
Here then is the point of the illustration: ‘So with you. Just 22 
now you are in sorrow, but I shall see you again and your heart 
will rejoice—with a joy no one can take from you.’ Again 
(cf. ver. 16) the promise is literally fulfilled in Jesus’ appear- 
ance after his resurrection (20: 19 ff.), but more perfectly 
still in the mystic communion of the Church through all the 
ages with the Spiritual Christ ; for it is in this sense that joy 
will be permanent. 

‘And on that day you will not ask me any questions’ (Gk. 23 
erétan), for ‘you will understand on that day’ (14: 20), 
and all mysteries will have been solved (25). But there is 
another kind of ‘asking,’ the asking of prayer: and, adds 
Jesus, ‘truly, truly I tell you, whatever you ask (Gk. aztein) 
the Father, He will give you in my name’ (15: 16). Up to this 
point they have indeed asked questions enough, but ‘hitherto 24 
you have asked nothing in my name’; that is, they have not 
turned to account the truth that those who in their petitions 
enter fully into the mind and purpose of Jesus cannot fail of 
an answer (note on 15: 7). It is also hinted that only after 
Jesus’ exaltation as Paraclete and Intercessor is prayer ‘ in his 
name’ possible (but see 26): ‘ Prayer must have been rather 


oI 
w 3 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


hindered by the visible presence of a sufficient helper ’ (Dods). 
Let them then make good their lost opportunities: ‘Ask and 
you will receive (Mt. 7: 7 f.), that your joy may be full’ (15: I1, 
17:13). The joy will consist not merely in the fact that 
prayer is answered, but in the results that follow answered 
prayer—success in their mission and the glorifying of God in 
Christ (14: 12-14). 

25 ‘I have told you this—not merely the immediately foregoing 
utterance, but with reference to the reserve which has marked 
much of the discourse (12, 16 ff., etc.)—in figures, but the 
time is coming when I shall speak to you in figures no longer ; 
I shall let you know plainly about the Father ’—the chief 
theme of Jesus’ teaching in this Gospel. ‘ Figure’ (parotmia) 
is the word used both for a ‘ parable’ or ‘ allegory’ (10: 6), 
such as the ‘Good Shepherd’ or the ‘ Real Vine,’ and also 
for a ‘ dark saying’ or riddle such as verse 16. Such utter- 
ances are contrasted with those spoken ‘ plainly,’ ‘ without 
reserve, and therefore intelligibly (cf. r Cor. 13: 12). The 
verse perhaps hints the reason why John has omitted from his 
Gospel all the Synoptic ‘ parables.’ He evidently supposed 
that they were intended to obscure Jesus’ true teaching, 
whereas his own Gospel purposed to disclose the ‘ truth.’ The 
promised ‘plain’ revelation ‘about the Father’ will be 
through the agency of the Spirit: Christian experience will 
define what now seems dark in Jesus’ words (16: 12-15). 
‘ All teaching in words is but a parable until the Spirit explains 
it’ (Godet). It is this thought which is the justification of the 
Fourth Gospel. The Evangelist who, it may be, never saw 
Christ in the flesh can yet rightly claim to interpret the 
“inwardness ’ of his teaching more truly than those who were 
his personal friends. 

26 ‘On that day—after Christ’s spiritual communion with his 
Church is established—you will ask in my name (24), and I 
do not say to you I will ask the Father on your behalf.’ Whereas 
the writer to the Hebrews represents Christ as ‘ interceding ’ 
(7: 25), and Paul speaks not only of Christ (Rom. 8: 34) but 
also of the Spirit (Rom. 8: 26; for Paul the Spirit is Christ, 
2 Cor. 3:17) ‘pleading for us,’ John so closely identifies 

302 


CHAPTER XVI, VERSES 27-31 


Christ with the Father, and the believer with Christ, that he 
regards no such separate intercession on the part of the Risen 
Christ as necessary. Prayer ‘in Christ’s name’ is equivalent 
to Christ’s own prayer as Intercessor. When men ‘ remain in’ 
Christ (15: 7), their wills are in fact wholly one with the 
Father’s will: when they pray ‘in Christ’s name,’ they are 
in direct touch with God ; those whose fellowship with Christ 
is real will cease to think of him merely as an intermediary, 
for ‘ having seen him they have seen the Father’ ; therefore, 
apart from any special intercession by Christ, prayer will be 


answered: ‘for the Father—without any such pleading on my 27 


part—loves you Himself.’ Yet Jesus does not deny the fact of 
his Intercession, which indeed seems implied in 14: 13 ff., 
I Jn. 2: 1, and in the very term ‘ Paraclete’: he only denies 
its necessity. The certainty of answer to prayer depends not 
solely on such intercession, but primarily on the Father’s love, 
and this love is bestowed in return for our love for Christ— 
which has first been prompted by his love to us (I Jn. 4: 19) 
—and our faith in his divine mission: ‘ because you have loved 


me and believed that I came forth from God. From the Father 28 


I came—owing to Him my divine origin—and I entered the 
world ;—charged with a divine commission—again—my 
mission fulfilled—I leave the world and I go to the Father.’ 
The disciples, forgetting that only the progressive revelation 
of the Spirit can ‘lead them into all truth’ (16: 13), think 
that the hour promised in verse 25 has already come and 


express themselves satisfied: ‘Now—in contrast to the past 29 


when Jesus spoke in riddles—you are talking plainly at last, 


not speaking in figures. Now we are sure you know every- 30 


thing, and need no one to put questions to you. This makes us 
believe you have come forth from God.’ In verses 17-18 the 
disciples had hinted that Jesus was perhaps veiling his own 
bewilderment behind a cloud of obscurity: they are now 
satisfied that he sees his way clear, that he has perfect know- 
ledge, and is willing and able to communicate it without being 
questioned ; consequently their faith is confirmed that he is 


God’s ambassador (3: 2). Jesus replied, ‘You believe it at 31 


last ?—it may be truly enough for the time (17:8); but 
393 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


32 how evanescent will their faith be—Behold, the time is com- 
ing, it has come already—so imminent is it in Jesus’ thought 
—when you will be scattered (10: 12) to your homes, every 
one of you, leaving me alone.’ The words are an echo of 
Mk. 14: 27, Mt. 26: 31 (quoted from Zech. 13: 7), all the 
more remarkable here because according to John’s narrative 
the disciples did not immediately scatter, but remained at 
Jerusalem, where they were all found together on the Resur- 
rection day. Jesus then adds, as if the Evangelist intended to 
correct the impression of Mk. 15: 34: ‘But I am not alone, for 
the Father iswithme.’ ‘ When ye have shut the door and made 
darkness within,’ says Epictetus (Diss. i. 13, 14), “ remember 
never to say that ye are alone; for ye are not, but God is 

33 within and is your spirit.’ ‘I have said all this to you that in 
me you may have peace ; in the world you have trouble, but 
courage! I have conquered the world’ (cf. 14:27). At one 
and the same time the Christian lives in two contrasted en- 
vironments—‘ in me,’ ‘ in the world’ (cf. Col. 1: 2: ‘in Christ 
...atColosse’). Those who maintain communion with Christ 
may have peace even in the midst of the storm (cf. 17: 15). 
Note that for Jesus ‘ peace’ means not a negative thing— 
freedom from anxiety and striving, mere stagnation of soul— 
but the possession of a soul in harmony with the victorious 
Christ in the midst of conflict. As Jesus has conquered the » 
world and its prince (12: 31), so may his disciples (1 Jn. 5: 4, 
Rom. 8: 37). 


Theme (11): The Promised Communion (14: I-31) 


1 The triumphant note of 16: 33 is continued: ‘Let not your 
hearts be disquieted (13: 21, 12: 27) ; you believe—believe in 
God and also in me’; or perhaps better, taking both the 
verbs as imperatives, ‘ Believe in God, and (if that is too hard, 
then) believe in me’ (whom you have seen; cf. ver. 9). 

2 ‘In my Father’s house there are many abodes’ : according to 
later Jewish thought each individual had a heavenly ‘ abode’ 
assigned to him according to his worth; there is room for 
each and all with Christ in the Father’s dwelling-place. The 
Vulgate translation mansiones (from which comes the A.V. 


304 


CHAPTER XIV, VERSES 3-5 


“mansions ’) is used especially of resting-places on a road; 
perhaps the thought here too is of a resting-place on life’s 
eternal pilgrimage: ‘The contrasted notions of repose and 
progress are combined in this vision of the future ’ (Westcott). 
‘Father’s house,’ used in 2: 16 of the Temple, here means 
God’s immediate presence, to which Jesus, as Son, has right 
of access (8: 35). The translation of the following words is 
much disputed ; at first sight Moffatt’s rendering seems best : 
‘were it not so, would I have told you I was going to prepare 
a place for you?’ But it seems a fatal objection that nowhere 
in the Gospel has Jesus said that he is ‘ going to prepare a 
place.’ Hence the usual translation should perhaps be retained : 
‘Were it not so, | would have told you; for (I have been 
speaking of my departure to the Father, and the purpose of 
that departure is that) I am going to prepare a place for you 
(and I could not have thus misled you into thinking that a 
place awaits you, were it not the case).’ ‘And when I go 3 
and prepare a place for you, I will come back and take you 
to be with me’—one of those peculiar ‘ concessions’ (cf. 
21: 22, 1 Jn. 2: 28) to the more materialistic Synoptic and 
Pauline view of an eschatological ‘ Parousia’ of Christ in 
person, which however is at once offset by a return to the 
more mystical Johannine thought—‘ so that you may be where 
Iam’ (cf. 2 Cor. 5: 8, Phil. 1: 23,1 Thess. 4:17). The ‘abode’ 
is really Christ himself (15: 4): ‘It is not in heaven that we 
are to find God, but in God that we are to find heaven ’ (Godet). 
‘What is heaven toareasonable soul? Naught else but Jesus’ 
(Luther). ‘And you know the way to where I am going.’ 4 
This would be better taken as a question: ‘ And do you know 
the way to the place where Iam going?’ Jesus’ destination 
(the Father) has been clearly indicated in 16: 28; they are 
now to learn the route by which they are to reach that destina- 
tion. ‘Lord,’ said Thomas (the materialistic, matter-of-fact 5 
man, rather lacking in vision, as appears from 11: 16, 20: 24f.), 
‘ we do not know where you are going, and how are we to know 
the way?’ If Thomas’ professed ignorance of Jesus’ destina- 
tion seems strange after 16: 28, we must remember that his 
question is in fact a leading one, the usual artifice of the 
3°95 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Evangelist to prepare the way for the momentous declaration 
which follows (cf. the dialogue with Martha, 11: 21-27), 
in which Jesus claims not only to point out the way, but 
6 to be it: Jesus said to him, ‘I am the real and living way.’ 
(For the thought of Christ as ‘ the way ’ into God’s presence, cf. 
Heb. 9: 8, 10: 20, Eph. 2: 18, Acts 9: 2.) The literal trans- 
lation is, ‘I am the way, and the truth, and the life ’—the 
last two substantives serving to define the first. Jesus is the 
‘real’ (15: 1) way and the ‘living’ (6: 35, etc.) way, that is, 
the way which leads to all real knowledge of God and con- 
sequently alone leads to ‘life’ (cf. 17: 3). For if ‘ truth’ is 
‘God revealed in his essential nature,’ then ‘life’ is ‘ God 
communicated to the soul’ (Godet). Hence Jesus can add: 
‘no man comes to the Father except by means of me ’—not by 
accepting my teaching, or believing in my claims, but only by 
way of mystical communion with myself. The mention of the 
Father answers Thomas’ doubt about Jesus’ destination. 
Possibly the Evangelist here glances at the Gnostics: he who 
has fellowship with Jesus has no need of any other ‘ gnosis.’ 
Jesus’ next words give us the key-thought of the whole 
7 Gospel: ‘If you knew me, you would know my Father too’ 
(8: 19, 1: 18). In the knowledge of Jesus the disciples have 
been unconsciously acquiring knowledge of the Father; as 
a result of Jesus’ present ‘ plain’ speaking (16: 29) that know- 
ledge is now to become conscious: ‘You know Him now and 
you have seen Him.’ But Philip, no mystic but the practical 
man (6:7), for whom, like Thomas (20: 25), ‘ seeing is be- 
lieving,’ wishes a sensible proof of the reality of ‘the Father’: 
8 ‘ Lord,’ said Philip, ‘ let us see the Father ; that is all we want.’ 
(For the request cf. Exod. 33: 18.) At this Jesus expresses 
pained surprise : the disciples’ long companionship with himself 
g should have given to them a deeper insight. Jesus said to 
him, ‘Philip, have I been with you all this time, and yet youdo 
not understand me? He who has seen me has seen the Father. 
What do you mean by saying, ‘‘Let us see the Father’’?? 
—for one who, like Philip, has seen the Son has no reason to 
make such a request. In this verse we reach the culminating 
point of the Gospel’s teaching. For John Christ’s revelation 
306 


CHAPTER XIV, VERSES ti0-12 


of God consists not, as for the Synoptists, in his teaching about 
God’s fatherly love, nor, as for Paul, in his supreme act of 
self-sacrifice on the Cross, but rather in the vision of his own 
Person which Christ manifests to the world, in which mankind 
may ‘see the Father.’ In the contemporary pagan Mystery 
Religions the climax of the initiation ceremony was the vision 
of the god, through which the worshipper was ‘ reborn into 
eternity.’ Christianity is the perfect Mystery, and in the 
vision of the Father in Christ is the sure guarantee of eternal 
life. Note that there is a play here on the word ‘see’: 
Thomas wishes to ‘see’ the Father in a material sense; but 
to ‘see’ Christ in that sense, as even his enemies had seen him, 
would not be to ‘see’ the Father ; for in Jesus’ meaning ‘ see’ 
here signifies to grasp with spiritual vision. In fact, to ‘see’ 
includes a moral factor and practically means to ‘ believe’ 
(see note on 3: 14f.), a fact which clearly distinguishes John’s 
point of view from that of the Mysteries. Hence it is added: 
‘Do you not believe Iam in the Father—reading His will and 
mind—and the Father is in me’—communicating to me His 
knowledge and power? The result of this intimate union 
of Father and Son appears both in Jesus’ teaching (7: 16) 
and in his deeds (5: 19): ‘The words I speak to you all I do not 
speak of my own accord ; it is the Father who remains ever in 
me, who is performing His own deeds.’ Whatever Jesus says 
and does is indeed the Father’s saying and doing. What Paul 
can say of Christ (Gal. 2: 20, ‘ It is no longer I who live, Christ 
lives in me’), Christ himself can say of the Father: ‘Believe 
me, I am in the Father and the Father is inme’—let them take 
Christ’s word for that truth! or, if they are still incredulous, 
surely his deeds are proof enough! (cf. 10: 38)—or else, 
believe because of the deeds themselves.’ It is worth noting that 
in this Gospel as contrasted with the Synoptics (Mt. 13: 58) 
faith is the result not the necessary condition of miracle. Yet 
just as in Mk. 11: 22 ff. the summons to faith is at once 
followed by a promise of the miraculous power of faith, so 
here there follows the assurance that Christ’s great deeds may 
through faith be perpetuated in the disciples’ own persons: 
‘Truly, truly I tell you, he who believes in me will do the very 


397 


Io 


I2 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


deeds 1 do’—just as Christ by ‘remaining in the Father ’ 
does deeds which are in truth God’s deeds. The work of the 
Church is but ‘a continuation, under larger conditions, of the 
work of Christ himself’ (E. F. Scott). So G. L. Brace gives 
to his account of the beneficial results of Christianity upon 
civilization the title Gesta Christi—the Deeds of Christ. 
In this sense 21: 25 is no hyperbole. ‘And,’ adds Jesus, 
they will perform ‘still greater deeds than these,’ than Christ’s 
own—because with Christ’s departure the full power of the 
holy Spirit will be liberated into the world (note on 16: 7). 
These ‘greater deeds’ (cf. 1:50, 5:20) include all the 
missionary triumphs of the Church which will be achieved 
in the power of the Spirit of the departed Christ (cf. Lk. 24: 49, 
Acts 1: 8, Eph. 4: 8 ff., Phil. 4: 13). This comes out in the 
next clause: ‘For Iam going to the Father’; and, as in 
16:23 f., the power of prayer is made contingent upon 
the diffusion of the Spirit following upon that return to 
13 the Father: ‘and I will do whatever you ask in my name, 
that the Father may be glorified in the Son’ (13: 31)—that 
through the deeds of Christ’s disciples, achieved in answer to 
prayer, God’s purpose in sending the Son into the world may 
be accomplished and Himself ‘ glorified.’ The promise is con- 
14 firmed and emphasized by being repeated: ‘I will do whatever 
you ask (me) in my name.’ Probably ‘me’ should be omitted 
with many ancient authorities ; it seems redundant with ‘ in 
my name,’ and moreover, the only prayer of which this Gospel 
speaks is prayer to the Father in the name and spirit of Christ, 
not prayer to Christ direct. 
Yet another promise is about to be given; but it is con- 
ditional upon moral obedience, which is the practical expression 
15 of love to the Master: ‘If you love me you will keep my com- 
mands ’—especially the injunction to mutual love (13: 34). 
Cf. 15: 10, I Jn. 5: 3; we have the converse proposition in 
14: 21 and the reverse in 14:24. Let such obedience be 
16 present, ‘and I will ask (notwithstanding 16: 26 where see note) 
the Father to give you another Helper,’ one who will replace Jesus 
himself in that réle, and whose mission it will be, unlike the 
Incarnate Christ who had but a temporary commission, 
308 


CHAPTER XIV, VERSE 17 


‘to be with you for ever.’ (For the ‘ Helper’ see note on 15: 26.) 
In relation to Christ the Spirit is ‘another Helper,’ in all 
respects Christ’s own alter ego. Just as Christ is one with 
the Father and yet distinct from Him, so is the Spirit one with 
Christ and yet distinct (cf. 2 Cor. 3:17). Hence for John 
the coming of the Spirit and the future Parousia of Christ are 
in fact interchangeable ideas (16: 16 note), though sometimes, 
apparently with the desire to conserve traditional belief, he 
appears to discriminate between them (cf. 14: 3 note). Christ 
himself being ‘ the Truth ’ (14: 6), the ‘ Helper ’ who is to take 
his place and continue his work is here called ‘ even the Spirit 
of truth’ (15: 26 note). But, as sympathy is the necessary 
condition for understanding, ‘the world cannot receive him’ : 
the spiritual can be apprehended not by worldly men, but only 
by those whose souls are attuned to the spiritual realm. It 
has been noted that a distinction is indicated here between the 
Spirit, which is held to manifest itself only within the Church 
of Christ, and the Logos, which is universally present as the 
“light which enlightens every man’ (I: 9). Moreover, in this 
Gospel the action of the Spirit is frequently connected with the 
sacraments (3: 5-8, 6: 63, r Jn. 5: 6-8), in which the outside 
world can have no part. To the Spirit then the world is 
unresponsive ‘because it neither sees nor knows him’—it neither 
has the spiritual vision nor the mystical experience which alone 
can make the action of the Spirit intelligible. There is an 
exact parallel in 1 Cor.2: 14f. How different the case of the 
disciples: ‘but you know him’—they have that first-hand 
experimental knowledge through their knowledge of Christ ; 
for the Spirit was present in Christ for his contemporaries just 
as for us Christ is present in his Spirit ; thus they may ‘ know’ 
that Spirit ‘because he remains with you—in the person of 
Jesus meanwhile—and will be within you ’—when the promised 
Helper takes Jesus’ place. As addressed to the Eleven the 
words must be understood thus ; but they become natural only 
when we realize that John has in view not Jesus’ hearers but his 
own readers, whose only experience of Christ is such a spiritual 
experience as is herein question. The point of view, as usual, 
is that of the later Church. 
399 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Bequeathing to his disciples the permanent fellowship of 
18 his own alter ego, Jesus is able truly to say, ‘I will not leave 
you forlorn,’ as children bereft of a father (13: 33), for Christ 
himself will be present in the Spirit even as the Father is present 
in Christ ; thus his apparent departure is really a more intimate 
19 approach, and he can add, ‘Iam coming to you. A little while 
longer—till the close of his earthly life and his return as a 
spiritual presence—and the world will see me no more— 
‘ because it neither sees nor knows him’ (17)—but you will see 
me, because I am living and you will be living too.’ The last 
words can be rightly understood only as addressed to the 
Church of all ages; Jesus, as an abiding spiritual presence, 
and his disciples, as perpetuated in the Church, will so to 
speak always be contemporaries who can ‘see’ and ‘ know’ 
each other. Nay more, the best proof of Christ’s continual 
spiritual presence will be found just in the sustained ‘life’ 
of his disciples. As in 16: 16 the primary reference in ‘ you 
will see me’ may be to the Resurrection appearances, but the 
deeper intention is to point to that spiritual communion with 
Christ as an abiding presence which is the normal experience 
of the Christian and one more to be coveted than the enjoy- 
ment of special appearances granted, it may be, to confirm 
20 an unstable faith (20: 29). ‘ You will understand, on that day— 
the allusion again being firstly to the day of Resurrection or of 
Pentecost, but also in a more profound sense to the new era, 
inaugurated by those days, during which the Spiritual Christ 
shall rule and by his sustained communion with Christians will 
convince them, as Jesus puts it—that I am in my Father— 
drawing life from its supreme source (14: 10)—and you are 
in me—in your turn receiving that divine life (15: 4)— 
and I am in you ’—continually renewing the supplies of that life 
and expressing my will and purpose in and through you. 

This mystic communion of Father, Son, and Believer is now 
stated in terms of love: the condition of it is that moral obedi- 
ence which is the best expression and proof of love (14: 15). 

21 ‘He who possesses my commands (literally ‘has’ them, ‘ holds 
them in mind’) and obeys them is he who loves me, and he who 
loves me wil! be loved by my Father, and I will love him and 

310 


CHAPTER XIV, VERSES 22-24 


appear to him ’—‘ manifest myself to him,’ the very word used 
by Moses in Exod. 33: 18 ; in the spiritual presence of Christ 
is the clearest possible revelation of God. To this Judas— 
probably to be identified with Thaddaeus or Lebbaeus, the 
brother of James (Mt. 10: 3, Lk. 6: 16)—replies by hinting 
that an outward manifestation, by which the disciples’ faith 
might be vindicated in the eyes of an unbelieving world, 
would be more effective (cf. 1 Jn. 5: 4f.): ‘Lord,’ said Judas 22 
(not Judas Iscariot), ‘ why is it that you are to appear to us, and 
not to the world ? ’—or better, ‘What has happened that you 
are to appear to us and not to the world ? ’—as if something 
had occurred to change the expected programme. (For the 
question cf. Acts 1:6.) It is likely that critics of the Church 
would lay stress upon the small number of those who could 
witness to the Resurrection, as indeed Celsus actually does. 
John meets this sort of objection, as well as the complaints of 
impatient Christians at the delay of the Parousia, by arguing 
that the power of apprehending such a revelation depends upon 
obedience resting on love, and that the best evidence of the 
continued spiritual life of Christ is the divine life of every 
individual Christian: Jesus answered, ‘If anyone loves me 23 
he will obey my word, and my Father will love him, and we will 
come to him and take up our abode with him ’—Father and 
Son alike: ‘ The whole power of the Godhead is manifested 
in the individual believer’ (Strachan). The word ‘abode’ 
recalls the O.T. idea of God dwelling among His people 
(Exod.-25: 8, 29: 45 ; cf. Mt. 18: 20, 28:20). The verse is 
a repetition of 21, save that ‘take up our abode’ replaces 
‘appear,’ implying that better than any dramatic manifesta- 
tion is the abiding inward presence. Jesus now states the 
reverse truth: ‘He who does not love me does not obey my 24 
word ; and—this is disobedience to God Himself, for what 
you hear me say is not my word but the word of the Father 
who sent me’ (14: 10, 7: 16, 12: 49). As in verse 21 Jesus 
associates the Father with himself in the closest possible union: 
through disobedience to Jesus, which is in fact disobedience 
to God, will be forfeited that love of the Father which is 
promised with Jesus’ own love and also the capacity for 
311 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


apprehending his ‘ appearing.’ For the phrase ‘ he who does 
not love’ defines what in verse 22 Thomas calls ‘ the world’ 
and explains why no spiritual manifestation is possible to it. 

25 ‘Ihave told you all this,’ continues Jesus, ‘ while I am still 
with you’ (contrast 16: 4b)—implying that his personal 
ministry in the flesh is about to end; but it will be continued 

26 by his alter ego: ‘but the Helper, the holy Spirit (this full 
title occurs only here in the Gospel) whom the Father will send 
in my name—to take my place, represent my interests, fulfil 
my purpose—will teach you everything ’—which may still 
have been left unsaid (16: 12) ; yet he will be but cultivating 
the seeds of truth already sown by Jesus; he will illuminate 
‘and recall to you everything I have said.’ The Spirit’s 
teaching is but the development and complement of Jesus’ 
(cf. 16: 13-15 notes). Echoes will be reawakened and a fuller 
meaning given to oldtruths. The verse is another (cf. 16: 25) 
admirable commentary on the character of the Fourth Gospel, 
which is the result of an indissoluble mingling of Jesus’ own 
teaching, daring reinterpretations of that teaching under the 
guidance of the Spirit, and the recollections of the Evangelist 
and his associates also enriched by long years of spiritual 
experience. 

As if making his last will before death, Jesus now leaves 
to his disciples his most precious possession—Peace. It is 
the ordinary word of farewell, but Christ so speaks it that what 
upon other men’s lips is a mere conventional wish, on his 

27 becomes a divine bequest (cf. 20: 19): ‘Peace I leave to you— 
yet this is no ordinary peace: it is my peace I give to you ’— 
the peace to which Jesus himself had attained, peace in the 
midst of storm, ‘the inward serenity based upon reconcilia- 
tion with God’ (Godet). (Cf. 16: 33, Phil. 4: 7, Col. r: 20, 
3:15, Rom. 5:1; contrast Mt. 10: 34.) ‘I give it not as the 
world gives its ‘‘Peace!’’ ’—not by way of a mere polite 
greeting, but such peace as is peace in very truth, a real defence 
against disquiet ; thus Jesus adds, echoing verse 1, ‘Let not 
your hearts be disquieted or timid ’—not without a hint of 
reproach, as if with such protection it were cowardly to be 
afraid (cf. Rev. 21: 8). Besides, this farewell is but ax 

312 


CHAPTER XIV, VERSES 28-31 


revoty; ‘You heard me tell you I was going away (16: 28, 28 
14: 2) and coming back to you (14: 3); if you loved me— 
a half-playful reproach, ‘ if you thought of me and the fulfil- 
ment of my purposes as well as of yourselves ’—you would 
rejoice (16: 20-22), both for my sake, that I am going to 
the Father, and for your own sakes—for the Father is greater 
than I am ’—and therefore the apparent end of Jesus’ life was 
in truth its absorption into a great Divine Life whereby he 
would have the greater power to fulfil his purposes and to 
protect his own (10: 29). Though the Father and the Son 
are ‘one’ (10: 30), yet the Father is ‘greater’ than Jesus 
(cf. 13: 16) ; and yet, ‘God alone can compare Himself with 
God’ (Godet). 

‘T tell you this now, before it occurs, so that, when it does 29 
occur, you may believe’ (cf. 13: 19, 16: 4), that being fore- 
warned, and matching the event with the promise, you may 
find your faith actually confirmed when the storm breaks upon 
you. ‘Iwill no longer talk much with you ’—a saying which 30 
could hardly occur here if the whole of chapters 15 and 16 were 
still to follow ; ‘ Time presses,’ says Jesus, ‘I must be done! ’— 
‘for the Prince of this world is coming ’—to meet me in the 
conflict of which the Cross is the symbol and in which he is 
to be overthrown (12: 31f.). Possibly the idea is that at 
this very moment Satan, in the person of Judas whom he has 
possessed (13: 27), is preparing for the betrayal. But ‘he has 
no hold on me’: literally the translation is ‘ he has nothing in 
me’ ; the meaning apparently is, firstly, that Satan has a hold 
on no element in Christ’s nature which will yield to him—a 
reference to our Lord’s moral supremacy; secondly, that 
Satan has no authority in virtue of which he can retain his 
hold on Christ—a reference once again to the purely spontan- 
eous quality of Jesus’ self-sacrifice. Even as against Satan 
it is true that ‘no one takes his life from Christ’ (10: 18), 
but that ‘he lays down his life of his own accord’ because 
“he has his Father’s orders for this ’—a saying on which the 
next verse is a commentary: ‘His (Satan’s) coming (as 31 
symbolized in the crime of the Betrayal) will only serve to let 
the world see (not that Satan has power over me, but) that 

313 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


I love the Father and (following my own rule, 14: 15) that lam 
acting as the Father ordered ’—the Father’s order being that 
he should die (10: 18). ‘ Rise, let us be going ’ (Mk. 14: 42 
Mt. 26: 46). Christ goes forth to face the conflict. 


Theme (tit): The Prayer of Consecration (17: 1-26) 


Before leaving the Upper Chamber, or possibly in the court- 
yard below before setting out for Gethsemane, Jesus prays 
for ‘his own’ whom he is about to leave ‘in the world’ ; 
his ‘teaching is crowned by prayer’ (Westcott). This 
sacramental prayer, offered by the Master before he sacrificed 
himself for mankind, the eternal intercession of the Great 
High-priest (Heb. 7: 25, Rom. 8: 26, 27, 34), gave form to the 
Eucharistic liturgies of the early Church: cf. e.g. the prayers 
in the Didaché (IX-X). The prayer falls naturally into three 
divisions: (a) Jesus’ prayer for himself (1-5) ; (6) his prayer 
for his immediate disciples (6-19) ; (c) his prayer for the 
Church Universal in all ages (20-26). Most of the ideas 
spring directly from the teaching of chapters 14-16 and will 
therefore require the less exposition. 

I So Jesus spoke ; then, lifting his eyes to heaven, he said 
(the language (cf. Ps. 121: 1, 123: 1) suggests that Jesus 
is standing in the open air; but this is not necessary, for, 
as Meyer puts it, “ the eye of one who prays is on all occasions 
raised towards heaven’): ‘Father (Rom. 8:15, Gal. 4: 6), 
the time has now come’: the ‘hour,’ which had ‘not yet 
come’ in 2: 4, 7: 6, 8, 30; 8:20, which was imminent in 
12: 23, 27, has now struck—the hour in which Christ is to be 
‘ glorified ’ in his death and the victory which followed it (see 
note on 12: 23) ; therefore Jesus prays, ‘ glorify thy Son that 
thy Son may glorify thee.” The Father’s ‘ glory,’ which con- 
sists in the revelation of Himself for the salvation of the world, 
is involved in the ‘ glory’ of the Son (see 13: 31 f. note), ice. 
in that victorious death which is the condition whereby alone 
Christ’s spiritual power can transcend all limitations and 
perfect that revelation which is God’s ‘ glory.’ ‘ Grant me the 
Ascension,’ Jesus prays, ‘that I may execute the work of 


314 


CHAPTER XVII, VERSES 2-5 


Pentecost’ (Godet). This mutual ‘ glorification’ of Father 
and Son is essential to the fulfilment of the divine purpose: 
‘since thou (the Father) hast granted him (the Son) power 2 
(13: 3) over all flesh to give eternal life to all whom thou hast 
given to him,’ and only by means of this ‘ glorification’ can 
this gift be bestowed (7: 39, etc.). The phrase ‘all flesh’ 
(Gen. 6: 12, Is. 40: 6, etc.) signifies the human race as pos- 
sessed of physical life apart from the gift of ‘ eternal life’ which 
is now thus defined: ‘ And this is eternal life, that they know 3 
thee, the only real God, and him whom thou hast sent, even 
Jesus Christ’ (cf. r Jn. 5:20). ‘Eternal life’ (3: 15 note) 
results from the ‘knowledge’ of the ‘ only’ (Is. 37: 20) ‘true’ 
(Exod. 34: 6, Jer. ro: ro, r Cor. 8: 5f.) or ‘ real’ God; for 
such knowledge is the only possible basis of the life-giving 
love-fellowship on which Jesus has been dwelling. But to 
such knowledge of God must be added knowledge of God’s 
ambassador: the Christian idea of God and that Christian 
communion with God, wherein eternal life consists, can be 
obtained only through the knowledge of and communion with 
Jesus Christ himself (cf. 1: 18, 14:6). The verse, with its 
reference to Christ in the third person, though the words are 
ostensibly spoken by Jesus himself, reads like a fragment of a 
liturgical hymn of praise (cf. such verses as I Jn. 4: 2, I Tim. 
3: 16,6: 13, 2 Tim. 2: 8). (For the emphasis on the necessity 
of ‘ knowledge’ see note on Io: 15.) 

‘I have glorified thee on earth by accomplishing the work 4 
thou gavest me to do ’ (13: 31) ; it was by making the Father 
‘known ’ through the teaching and miracles which marked his 
earthly ministry that Jesus ‘ glorified’ God. Note that, while 
for Paul Jesus’ earthly life had meaning onlyas a necessary stage 
towards the Cross, John can speak of Jesus’ work as ‘ accom- 
plished ’ even before the Crucifixion. The revelation of God 
is in Christ’s life (cf. 14: 9 note), and his death but puts the 
final seal upon that revelation. Christ can therefore pray— 
not as if seeking reward, but rather, his earthly mission being 
complete, in order that he may pass on to the next stage, 
first to the Cross and then to the heavenly exaltation: 
‘Now, Father, glorify me (through the Cross and the resulting 5 


315 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


glory) in thy presence with the glory which I enjoyed in thy 
presence before the world began ’—an eternal glory, laid aside 
for a season, and now to be restored. We have here (cf. 
1: 1-5, 6: 62, 8: 52 ff.) a clear assertion of Jesus’ divine pre- 
existence. ‘There is consequently . . . a continuity of the 
consciousness of the historical Christ with the Logos’ (Tho- 
luck). John, like Paul (Phil. 2: 5-11), represents Christ as 
recovering, through the accomplishment of his mission, a 
glory which he had enjoyed from eternity, but had for a time 
voluntarily relinquished in order to undertake that mission ; 
6his earthly life is an interlude between two eternities. ‘I 
have made thy Name (i.e. God Himself in His divine nature and 
purpose) known to the men whom thou hast given to me from 
the world ’ : according to our Evangelist the sphere of Christ’s 
mission is limited ; the manifestation of God has been made 
only to the elect, a minority which has been separated ‘ from 
the world’ by the bestowal upon them of a spirit responsive 
to Christ’s call (see 6: 37-44 notes). ‘ Thine they were, and thou 
gavest them to me’: they were godly men even before they 
attached themselves to Jesus (e.g. Nathanael 1: 47) ; God 
first ‘ elected’ them to salvation, and then accomplished that 
salvation by ‘ giving them to Christ’; ‘and they have held 
to thy word’: in contrast to the Jews of 5: 38 they have 
remained loyal to God’s earlier revelation by recognizing its 
completion in the revelation of Jesus; they have accepted 
Jesus’ word as being but a faithful reproduction of God's: 
7 ‘they know now (as a result of obedience, 7: 17) that what- 
ever thou hast given me comes from thee’—that my words 
8 and works alike are those of God Himself (14: 10)—‘ for I 
have given them the words thou gavest me, and they have 
received them ’—and, again as the result of this moral obedi- 
ence (7: 17)—‘ they are now sure that I came from thee and 
believe that thou didst send me’: they are persuaded that 
Christ’s origin and mission are alike divine (16: 30). Note 
once again how for John the immediate condition of belief is 
knowledge, ‘ being sure’ (cf. notes on 6: 69, 10: 15, 10: 38). 
‘Knowledge’ completes itself and becomes effectual in 
‘belief.’ ‘Faith as described in the Synoptic teaching is 
316 


CHAPTER XVII, VERSES 9-10 


simply the opening of the heart to God, and the humble and 
child-like are the most capable of it. The Johannine “ belief ” 
is the result of “ knowledge.”’ It presupposes a mind fully 
enlightened, and equal to high speculations on the Person and 
nature of Christ’ (E. F. Scott, The Fourth Gospel, p. 275). 
“I pray for them—not for the world but for those whom thou 9 

hast given me (6) do I pray ; for they are thine ’—and there- 
fore prayer for them must have peculiar power of appeal— 
“all mine is thine (because from God he received it ; ver. 7) 10 
and thine is mine (by the gift of the Father; 3: 35, 13: 3); 
and I am glorified in them ’—i.e. in the ‘ life’ communicated 
to the disciples through faith in Christ. ‘The Church itself 
is the best proof that Jesus is alive or “ glorified”’ (R. H. 
Strachan) (cf. 14: 12-13). The pronouns ‘mine’ and 
‘thine’ are neuters, as if to hint that ‘the community of 
property and therefore of interest is unlimited, absolute’ 
(Dods). ‘Any man may say, “ What is mine is Thine,” 
but only the Son can say, ‘‘ What is Thine is mine ’”’’ (Luther). 
The line of separation between the Christian community and 
the ‘ world’ (i.e. the section of society deliberately hostile to 
the Church) could not be more strongly stressed than by put- 
ting on our Lord’s own lips the words, ‘I pray not for the 
world.’ One cannot but contrast the answer which in the 
Synoptics Jesus gives to the question, ‘ Who is my neighbour ?’ 
(Lk. 10: 29 ff.). We have already noted how the Evangelist, 
who at one moment voices a splendid universalism (e.g. 3 : 16), 
at another limits the scope of the Gospel to a narrow circle so 
that the ‘ Saviour of the world’ (4: 42) becomes in effect the 
Saviour of the Church. (Yet see note on 15: 13.) Let it 
be remembered that for the Evangelist and his contemporaries 
the barrier between the Church and the world was in fact a 
very solid one. And indeed in all ages ‘a real brotherhood 
must in some way be separate ; its principles have a definite 
meaning ; and they are or are not accepted. Life is full of 
occasions when a man must be for something or against it, and 
perhaps his worst choice, in God’s eyes, is that which on a 
famous occasion adopted the formula of “ neutrality even in 
thought ”’ (Lord Charnwood, According to St. John, p. 116). 


“ 317 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Ir ‘Iam to be in the world no longer—so immfnent is the 
Cross that Jesus speaks as if it were already past—but they 
are to be in the world ; I come to thee—leaving them in the 
world ; and therefore I pray—Holy Father, keep them by the 
power of (literally ‘ in,’ as if in a fortress) thy name which thou 
hast given me—for it was ‘in God’s name’ that Christ 
came (5: 43)—that they may be one—for in the unity of 
love alone (15: 2) will the strength of their discipleship con- 
sist (15: 8)—as we are one’ (15: 9-10). Some MSS. have 
‘keep those, whom thou hast given me, in thy name,’ which 
seems an obvious correction, unless indeed, as may well be 
the case, the original reading was the neuter pronoun as in 
verse 2 and also in verse 24 (where the same variant occurs), 
which would give the same translation. ‘By the power of 
thy name’ means by the power of God’s own nature and 
personality, here almost ‘ by the power of thy holiness,’ for 
in that quality the whole divine nature is expressed (e.g. to 
“swear by God’s holiness’ in Amos 4:2 is equivalent to 
“swearing by Himself’ in Amos 6: 8). Thus Jesus invokes 
God as ‘ Holy Father.’ The original idea in ‘holiness’ is 
that of ‘separateness’ or ‘distance.’ Thus the attribute is 
particularly fitting when used here of the Father, who is to 
‘keep’ those who are ‘separated’ from the world—isolated 
in it—as His own. The ‘ Holy Father’ will ‘keep’ His own 
‘holy’ in the midst of the world’s sin. 

12 Christ prays the Father to grant a protection which he 
himself once afforded, but can do so no longer: ‘When I was 
with them, I kept them by the power of thy Name which 
thou hast given me—the tense once again reflecting the 
time-point not of Jesus but of the Evangelist, as if the depar- 
ture had already taken place—I guarded them, and not one 
of them perished (6: 39, 10: 28f., and see the allusion to 
this verse in 18: 9)—only the son of perdition, that the 
scripture might be fulfilled ’ (Ps. 41: 9, cf. 13: 18). Notice 
the play on the words ‘perished,’ ‘ perdition.” ‘Son of 
perdition ’ is a Hebraism and means ‘ one closely identified with 
perdition’ (cf. Is. 57: 4, Mt. 23:15 and 12: 36, ‘sons of 
the Light’). The reference is of course to Judas. 

318 


CGHAPTER XVII, VERSES 13-17 


‘But now I come to thee’—again Jesus sees beyond the 13 
Cross ; ‘ I speak thus in the world—before leaving it, my task 
triumphantly complete—that they may have my joy complete 
within them ’—this joy of victory born in the sense of a com- 
pleted task. (See notes on 15: II, 16: 24.) Jesus implies 
that this prayer would be granted by the Father even without 
the Son’s asking (16: 26), but the utterance of it (‘I speak 
thus ’) will confirm the faith and complete the joy of those 
who hear it (cf. 11: 42). The guardianship of the Father 
is the more necessary because ‘I have given them thy 14 
word—the revelation which the Father has commissioned the 
Son to declare—and—in consequence—the world has hated 
them’ (15: 18-20) ; the acceptance of Jesus’ teaching has 
set them in opposition to the world which hates them, 

‘ because—as ‘ children of God’ (1: 18)—they do not belong 
to the world (15: 19 note) any more than I belong to the 
world. I pray not that thou wilt take them out of the world ’ 15 
—which might appear the surest and quickest deliverance ; 
but they have still a part to play in the world; an ascetic 
or puritan renunciation of the world is often easier than 
Christianity, which is a way of life 1 the world; therefore 
Jesus prays not for an easy escape, ‘but that thou wilt 
keep them from the evil one ’—Satan (xr Jn. 2: 13 f., 3: 12, 
5: 18f.), who is the ‘ Prince of this world’ (12: 31, 14: 30) 
in which the disciples must remain and the author of their 
persecution and temptation. (For the petition cf. Mt. 6: 13.) 
‘They do not belong to the world any more than I belong to 16 
the world ’—a repetition of 14: as citizens of another kingdom 
it is not to be imagined that Satan should have any more 
hold on the disciples than upon the Master himself (14: 30). 
.That they may in very truth be thus exempted from Satan’s 
authority Jesus prays: ‘ Consecrate them by thy truth ’—or 17 
perhaps ‘ by the power of thy truth’ (cf. ver. 11). ‘ Conse- 
crate’ is the verb corresponding to ‘holy’ (Heb. 9: 13): 
Jesus is praying the Father to make the disciples His own 
separate possession, cut off from the world and its power. 
This God will perform ‘by the power of His truth’ (for 
‘truth’ see 14: 17, 16: 13)-—words which recall the thought 


319 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


of verse 3 that the Father is ‘the only veal God,’ and that 
consequently His ‘ word,’ as spoken by Jesus and revealed 
in the Word (Logos), is also ‘reality’: ‘Thy word is truth.’ 
The purpose of this ‘ consecration’ is that the disciples may 
be fitted to carry on Christ’s work, even as Christ himself had 
first been ‘ consecrated ’ to fulfil God’s work (10: 36) ; accord- 
18 ingly the prayer continues: ‘As thou hast sent me into the 
world, so have I sent them into the world’ (cf. 20: 21) ; 
thus is explained Christ’s purpose in refraining from with- 
drawing his own from the world (15) ; they are to continue 
there as Christ’s representatives, even as Christ had come 
there as the representative of God: ‘ John accepts in a yet 
fuller and more literal sense the idea of Ephesians, that 
the Church is the body of Christ—the vesture of flesh which 
the eternal Word is always renewing in order to abide with 
men for ever. . . . The community of the disciples, as the 
germinal Church, is to replace Christ after he is gone, and 
to manifest him as still present’ (E. F. Scott). The following 
words again stress this intimate connexion between the 
1g consecration to service of Christ and of his disciples: ‘and 
for their sake I consecrate myself that they may be conse- 
crated by the truth ’—or rather ‘1 reality’: the omission of 
the definite article distinguishes the phrase from that used 
in verse 17; the meaning is not merely that the disciples 
are to be ‘truly’ consecrated, but that what was formerly, 
by O.T. ritual, etc., done in symbol is now to be done ‘ in 
reality’ (cf. 4: 23, note). Christ is the ‘truth,’ the reality, 
of the old symbolical sacrifices, and his death therefore ensures 
a true ‘consecration’ for those ‘for whose sake’ he died. 
For Christ’s ‘ consecration,’ though covering the whole of his 
life, was supremely illustrated in the Cross (so Calvin). Christ 
himself was ‘ consecrated’ both as the priest whose life is 
devoted to a ‘holy’ service (Exod. 28: 41), and also as the 
victim devoted in sacrifice to God (Exod. 13: 2), the offering 
of which (cf. Heb. 9: 14) in turn ‘ consecrates’ or renders 
“holy ’ (Heb. 9: 13) those on whose behalf it is offered. By 
thus consecrating himself in death to God Christ achieves 
‘in reality ’ for his followers that consecration to holy service 
320 


CHAPTER XVII, VERSES 20-22 


which the old ritual merely symbolized (Heb. 10: 10). The 
approximation of John’s thought here to that of Hebrews 
is most noticeable. The passage also undoubtedly has a 
sacramental interest, and should be compared with 13: 14, 
where the Christian’s obligation to service under constraint 
of the Master’s example is similarly emphasized. 

The thought of the consecration to service of the inner circle 
suggests the larger circle of believers which will be the fruit 
of that missionary service ; for them too Christ prays: ‘Nor 20 
do I pray for them (the inner circle) alone, but for all who 
believe in me by their spoken word’ ; and, as the extension 
of the Church may well endanger its unity, he prays specially : 
‘May they all be one !’ (Acts 4: 32, Eph. 4: 3). This unity 21 
of believers is to find alike its principle and its ideal in the 
unity of the Father and the Son: it is to be not a co-ordina- 
tion of organizations, but a personal relationship of mutual 
love (15: 9 f.) ; Christians are to be “ one’ because they draw 
their life from the Father and the Son who are themselves 
‘one’: ‘As thou, Father, art in me—the source of my life— 
and I in thee—drawing life from thee—so may they be 
in us—drawing a common life from both—that the world 
(here regarded not as hostile but as the object of God’s purpose 
of salvation; 3: 16) may believe thou hast sent me’ (7 f.) 
—the simplest possible ‘creed’ and ‘basis of union.’ Just 
as the Church’s lack of unity is the greatest of stumbling- 
blocks to non-Christians, so will her unity be the chief argu- 
ment for the divine character of Christ’s mission (cf. 23). 
Moreover, that the unity of believers may fulfil the ideal set 
forth in the unity of Father and Son, it is necessary that they 
shall share even the ‘ glory’ of Christ—a glory defined in 5 
and again in 24. Sharers of his mission (18) and of his suffer- 
ings (15: 18), they shall finally share his‘ glory’ (Rom. 8: 17): 
‘Yea, I have given them the glory thou gavest me, that they 22 
may be one as we are one.’ Notice the perfect tense, as if 
the promise were already fulfilled. The glory to be thus 
bestowed upon believers ‘is the filial dignity, the state of 
‘adoption,’ whereby they have become (1: 18) what the 
Son eternally is (17: 5), children of God, and objects of His 

321 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


perfect love’ (Godet). Thus will this triple union of believers, 

23 Christ, and God—‘I in them and thou in me ’—grow until 
it becomes ‘ perfect,’ a word with a mystic colouring: they 
will at length be fully ‘ initiated ’"—‘ that they may be made 
perfectly one,’ and may thereby witness progressively to the 
divine origin of Christ’s mission and to the love of the 
Father towards the Church—‘ so that the world may recognize 
‘that thou hast sent me and hast loved them as thou hast 
loved me.’ ‘The Fourth Gospel may be said to culminate 
in this magnificent conception of God Himself eternally 
present in the believer, through Christ who unites us with 
himself as he is united with God’ (E. F. Scott). 

There follows an explanation of what is implied by ‘ sharing 
Christ’s glory’: it is ‘to be beside him ’—‘ the consumma- 
tion of Christian blessedness’ (Dods). Notice that for John 
the supreme hope is not the ‘ second coming’ of Christ, but 
the believer’s union with Christ in God, a union which may 

24already be enjoyed: ‘Father, it is my will—sufficient 
prayer for one whose will is one with God’s ; Jesus speaks as 
if making his last will and testament—that these, thy gift 
to me (this translation well brings out the force of the Greek 
neuter pronoun) may be beside me where I am—from first 
(Mk. 3: 14) to last Jesus can desire nothing better for his dis- 
ciples—to behold (and, it is implied, to share ; 22, Rom. 8: 17, 
2 Tim. 2:12, Rev. 3: 21) my glory which thou hast given 
me, because thou lovedst me before the foundation of the 
world.’ Christ’s ‘glory’ is again defined as being from all 
eternity (cf. 5). The verse also suggests ‘ the road by which 
we must seek the solution of the Trinitarian relations ; love 
is the key of this mystery ’ (Godet). 

The prayer ends with an appeal to God’s justice not to 
suffer believers to share in the retribution rightly meted out 
to an unbelieving world. Though the world may deserve 
rejection through its misunderstanding of God, the Church 
by accepting Christ’s revelation of God has shown itself 

25 worthy of His love: ‘O just Father, though the world has 
not known thee (15: 21. 16: 3; 1 Cor. 1: 21), I have known 
thee, and they have known that thou hast sent me ’—the one 

322 


GHAPTER XVII, VERSE 26 


necessary credal test (21). Christ ‘knows’ God directly, 
believers through accepting Christ as God’s commissioned 
revealer. ‘ So have I declared, so will I declare, thy Name to 
them’: the end and crown of all Christ’s revelation of God’s 
nature and purpose is to make men worthy to be loved even 
as the Father loved the Son—‘ that the love with which 
thou hast loved me may be in them (cf. 1 Jn. 3: 1)—and 
worthy to be Christ’s own habitation—and I inthem.’ ‘ The 
love of God in lighting on believers will not attach itself to 
aught that is defiled. For it will in truth light only on Jesus 
himself, on Jesus living in them, and upon them as identified 
with him and reflecting his holy image’ (Godet). 


FINALE 
I. THE ARREST AND TRIAL (18: I-19: 16) 
Chapter XVIII 


It is noteworthy that at this point the Evangelist omits 
all mention of the Agony in Gethsemane and passes at once 
to an account of the arrest. Such an omission would be 
strange indeed were John the Apostle, who is expressly stated 
by the Synoptists to have been present at the Agony, the 
author of the Gospel; but it is more understandable on the 
hypothesis that ‘the Witness’ was other than the son of 
Zebedee. The omission is perhaps due to the fear of unduly 
emphasizing what might appear to be a moment of weakness 
on the part of Jesus. Yet there is an echo of Mark’s account 
in 18: II, as previously in 12: 27. 

Having said this, Jesus went out with his disciples across 
the Kidron ravine—like David (2 Sam. 15: 23), who also passed 
out of his city over Kidron to return again a victor. The 
Kidron ‘ ravine’ (literally ‘ winter-torrent’ dry for the greater 
part of the year) separates the Mount of Olives from the Temple 
Mount. According to some authorities the Greek reads 
“ravine of the Cedars.’ But there are no cedars in the district, 
and moreover this reading ‘ would not correctly represent the 
‘Hebrew name (‘‘ Kedron,” meaning ‘“dark’’). But it may 
have been adopted even’ by Jews as more euphonious in 


323 


=) 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Greek, when they were ‘writing for Greeks’ (Stanton). 
Crossing Kidron Jesus came to an orchard, which he entered in 
the company of his disciples. The ‘orchard’ is the Geth- 
semane of the Synoptists (Mk. 14: 32), and may well have 
belonged to a friend, open or secret, of Jesus. There is no 
proof of its exact position, though the traditional site, which 
dates from the time of Constantine, when ‘ the faithful were 
eager to offer their prayers there ’ (Eusebius), may be the true 
2one. Judas the traitor also knew the spot, for Jesus and his 
disciples often met there (cf. Lk. 21: 37). The Evangelist 
suggests that Jesus made no attempt to hide, thus answering 
such taunts as that of Celsus that Jesus ‘was taken while 
trying to hide himself and to escape in the most disgraceful 
way’; on the contrary, Jesus’ surrender is entirely voluntary. 
3 So after procuring troops (Roman soldiers) and some attendants 
(the temple-police, 7: 32) belonging to the high-priests and 
the Pharisees (John’s description of the Sanhedrim, 7: 32), 
Judas went there with lanterns and torches and weapons. The 
‘lanterns’ were part of the regular equipment of the Roman 
army and also of the temple-police. Even with the light 
of the Passover full-moon they might be necessary for search- 
ing the dark corners of the olive-grove. The word ‘troops ’ 
means strictly the cohort of six hundred men, under a 
chiliarchos or ‘ military tribune’ (12), which garrisoned the 
Tower Antonia; but possibly only a detachment of these 
is thought of as being present. The Synoptists make no 
mention of Roman soldiers on this occasion. It has been held 
that this Gospel proves that there had been negotiations 
about Jesus’ arrest between the Jewish authorities and Pilate. 
That Pilate was informed beforehand of the Sanhedrim’s 
intentions is possible enough. But if Roman soldiers had 
effected the arrest Jesus would almost certainly have been led 
direct to Pilate. John probably adds the feature of the 
Roman soldiers for dramatic and symbolical reasons. The 
presence of a strong body of Roman troops among those who 
“fell back and dropped to the ground’ (6) before Jesus 
emphasizes his power and sovereign liberty and the voluntari- 
ness of his surrender, while his arrest at the hands of Romans 


324 


CHAPTER XVIII, VERSES 4-8 


becomes typical of the persecution of the Church in after-years 
and a comfort to later martyrs who are but suffering as did 
their Lord before them (15: 20). 

Then Jesus, who knew everything that was to happen to him, 4 
came forward—out of the shadows where he was lingering with 
his disciples. Again the voluntariness of Jesus’ surrender is 
strongly emphasized (10: 18, etc.). He ‘knew’ what lay 
ahead ; he went to meet his fate with his eyes open, not as the 
victim of force majeure; he was not dragged out of some 
hiding-place, but freely came forward and asked them, ‘ Who 
are you looking for?’ ‘Jesus the Nazarene,’ they replied— 5 
that is, ‘the man of Nazareth’ (1: 46, Acts 24: 5). Jesus said, 
‘I am he.’ And Judas the traitor was standing beside them. 
According to John, it is not necessary for Jesus to be pointed 
out by Judas, who merely stands by as a spectator while Jesus 
spontaneously gives himself up. Judas, like the Roman 
soldiers with whom he is grouped, is powerless to force the 
issue ; Satan, in the person of Judas (13: 27), ‘has no hold 
on’ the Christ (14: 30). The temple-police are supposed not 
to know Jesus by sight in spite of previous encounters with 
him (e.g. 7: 32). Jesus is pictured as in complete command 
of the situation, and now the powerlessness of the whole band 
of his assailants before his divine majesty is still further brought 
out: When he said, ‘I am he,’ they fell back and dropped to 6 
the ground. This would be regarded as a fulfilment of Ps. 
27:2. Jesus admits that he is the wanted man; but for 
John the words ‘I am he’ signify much more than a mere 
statement of identity (see notes on 8: 24, 28; 13: 19). 

So he asked them once more, ‘Who are you looking for?’ 7 
And when they replied, ‘Jesus the Nazarene,’ he answered, 8 
‘I told you that I am he ; if it is me you are looking for, let 
these men get away.’ Jesus repeats his question, and on the 
same reply being given reminds the soldiers that on their own 
showing their sole duty is to arrest himself ; for the apprehen- 
sion of his companions they have no warrant. By his free 
surrender of himself Jesus ‘ lays down his life for his friends’ 
(15:13; and again note the analogy with David, 2 Sam. 
24:17). ‘ The power of the army is held in check until the 


325 


THE: GOSPEL OF JOHN 


last moment, until Jesus has guaranteed the safety of his 
own’ (Loisy). So voluntary is his surrender that he makes 
it only on his own conditions—the release of his comrades. 
In the view of the Evangelist (or possibly of the Redactor, for 
the comment shows an obvious lack of spiritual discernment 
as to the true intention of Jesus’ promise; see Introduction, 
p. xliv) Jesus thereby makes good his guarantee given in 

917: 12: This was to fulfil his own word: ‘I did not lose a 
single one of those whom thou didst give me ’—a saying of 
Jesus intended certainly in a spiritual sense which here finds 
its symbol in the bodily escape of the disciples. The allegorical 
teaching of 10: 11-15 also receives practical illustration. The 
idea that Christian disciples were subject to arrest merely 
on the charge of being disciples agrees with the conditions 
of a later age. Note too that the statement of the Synoptists 
that the disciples ‘all forsook him and fled’ (Mk. 14: 50), 
from which might be argued their Master’s powerlessness to 
hold them, gives place to an assertion of the Master’s power to 
secure their unimpeded escape. 

10 Then Simon Peter, who had a sword (Lk. 22: 36; to carry 
a weapon on the feast-day was forbidden), drew it and struck 
the high-priest’s servant, cutting off his right ear—in an 
attempt, no doubt, to cleave his head—(the servant’s name 
was Malchus). The incident is borrowed from the Synoptics, 
perhaps by the Redactor (like other ‘ Peter’ incidents; cf. 
notes on pp. 165, 285), for it is out of harmony with the spirit 
of the rest of the narrative, which is one of triumphant non- 
resistance. Peter does not wish safety at his Master’s ex- 
pense, and gives a practical exhibition of the spirit expressed 
in 13:37. The fondness of the Gospel for detail appears in the 
statement that ‘ Peter’ was the aggressor, that the ‘right’ 
ear was wounded, and that the name of the servant (a personal 
slave to be distinguished from the ‘ attendants ’) was ‘ Malchus’ 
—apparently a common enough name (Neh. 10: 4). From this 
appearance of inside information it might be argued that the 
verses rest on the authority of ‘ the Witness’ himself, who may 
have been acquainted with the High-priest’s household 
(x8: 16). Jesus reproves the misplaced zeal of his impetuous 

326 


GHAPTER XVIII, VERSE 11 


disciple and asserts the necessity of a voluntary submission 
to the death which is the Father’s purpose for him (10: 18). 
Whereupon Jesus said to Peter, ‘Sheathe your sword. Am I 
not to drink the cup which the Father has handed me?’ 
The words are an echo of the Agony (Mk. 14: 36). (For the 
figure of the ‘cup’ cf. Ps. 75: 8, Ezek. 23: 31-34, Is. 51: 17, 
22; Mt: 20: 22.) 

Our Gospel’s version of Jesus’ trial shows marked divergence 
from that of the Synoptists. According to Mark (14: 53), Jesus 
was first led ‘to the High-priest,’ and during the night, at a 
preliminary trial or anakrisis held for the purpose of 
preparing evidence and examining witnesses, he was tried and 
condemned by a quorum of the Sanhedrim, which early the 
next morning (Mk. 15: 1) met in the temple-chamber Gazith 
(Mt. 27:5) for a second trial, possibly, as Luke implies 
(22: 66 ff.), to register their sentence more formally, and in 
any case to convey Jesus to Pilate ina body. John omits all 
reference to this second early-morning gathering (unless ver. 
24 contains a hint of it), while he alone alludes to an appear- 
ance before Annas. The section 18: 12-27 is in its present 
order full of difficulties. These seem to be due to the Redactor’s 
desire to bring the account into line with the Synoptics and to 
his insertion of the denial story as a sequel to 13: 36-38, 
verses which we have already suspected to be the work of 
the same hand. The difficulties are as follows: Jesus is 
first led to Annas (13). In the same verse and again in 24 
Caiaphas is distinctly named as the High-priest, a statement of 
course historically correct. Yet in 15, 19, 22, the official at 
whose house and before whom Jesus is being tried—pre- 
sumably Annas, for it is not till 24 that Jesus is sent to 
Caiaphas—is also called ‘ High-priest.’ This difficulty can 
only be overcome either by omitting 24 (or transposing it to a 
position before 15) and assuming that from the first it is Caia- 
phas before whom the trial is being conducted, and that it 
is he all through who is named ‘ High-priest ’’ ; or else we may 
make the same assumption possible by arbitrarily translating 
the pure aorist ‘sent’ in 24 as a pluperfect ‘had sent,’ which 
the A.V. translators, perceiving the difficulty, have actually 


327 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


done. The second difficulty is that at 24 the scene of the trial 
is changed (unless indeed we are prepared to accept the some- 
what naive suggestion that ‘Annas and Caiaphas occupied 
different portions of a range of buildings round a common 
court-yard’ ; Stanton), and yet 25 represents Peter standing 
and warming himself in exactly the same position as in verse 
18 before the change of scene takes place. In the original 
Gospel the scene of the trial probably remained unchanged 
until at 28 Jesus is led to the Praetorium. But the Redactor 
by prematurely changing the scene has reduced Peter's 
position to absurdity. As Prof. Bacon has shown (op. cit., 
p. 485), the confusion is explained once we realize that the 
Redactor has, as usual, interpolated Synoptic material and 
thereby dislocated the text. Note the close parallel with 
Mk. 14:53 ff. Jn. 18: 15-18 is equivalent to Mk. 14: 54. 
In Mark the story of the denial is at this point interrupted by 
verses 55-65 ; then in verse 67 occurs the second reference to 
Peter standing and warming himself. The Redactor, closely 
following the source from which he is interpolating, at 254 
also inserts a second reference to the “ warming ’ in spite of the 
change of scene at 24. The Evangelist’s own conception of 
what happened was probably either (a) that Jesus was tried 
before Annas whom John mistakenly imagined to be High- 
priest (cf. Acts 4: 6). The confusion is then caused by the 
Redactor, who, as usual following the Synoptists, has intro- 
duced the allusions to Caiaphas before whom he assumed that 
Jesus must afterwards have been tried. (Cf. 11: 49, where the 
emphasis on ‘that year’ may simply be due to a similar 
anxiety on the part of the Redactor to correct the Evangelist’s 
idea that the High-priest of the day was Annas.) Alternatively 
(b) the Evangelist may have meant that Jesus was taken to the 
house of Annas (possibly the ‘ bazaars,’ for which see note on 
13), but tried there by Caiaphas the High-priest ; there he was 
detained till 28; but the Redactor, assuming that in 19-23 
the Evangelist is recording a trial by Annas and wishing to 
harmonize the story with that of the Synoptists, according to 
whom the trial was before Caiaphas, has interpolated the 
references to Caiaphas and caused the consequent confusion. 
328 


GHAPTER XVIII, VERSES 12-13 


A tolerably satisfactory sequence may of course be reached 
by rearranging the order of the text: (a) as Moffatt, 12-14, 
19-24, 15-18, 25 ff. ; (0) as Spitta, 12-13, 19-23, 24, 14, 15-18, 
25 ff.; (c) as the order is actually found in the Sinaitic Syriac 
MS., 12-13, 24, 14-15, 19-23, 16-18, 25. The last rearrange- 
ment, possessing as it does MS. authority, is particularly 
attractive, though the evidence of Sin. Syr. probably proves 
no more than that the confusion of the present text was early 
recognized and that there were skilled textual critics before 
Spitta! The true solution would probably be to render all 
such ingenious transpositions superfluous by regarding 136-18, 
24-27 as interpolations by the Redactor. Yet the order of 
Sin. Syr. deals best with the text as it stands and may be 
adopted for purposes of exposition. According to this 
rearrangement, Jesus is first taken to Annas (possibly at the 
‘bazaars,’ which would be near the place of arrest), who at 
once sends him on for trial to the legal High-priest Caiaphas. 


So the troops and their commander and the Jewish attendants 12 


(x8 : 3) seized Jesus, bound him—shackled his hands behind his 
back, a detail not mentioned at this point by the Synoptists— 
and led him first of all to Annas. ‘ First’ has reference to the 
subsequent proceedings at 24, 28, and reads like a correction of 
the Synoptists. Annas (or Hanan, Ananias) was High-priest 
himself from A.D. 6 till 15, when he was deposed by Valerius 
Gratus, and after him his five sons held the office at intervals. 
He would thus on account of his rank and family connexions 
still be a person of commanding influence: for Annas was the 
father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high-priest that year 
(11: 49). The verse explains both how it was that the 
prisoner was led to Annas—he was a close relative of the 


ruling High-priest—and also how it happened that Caiaphas, 


who held office till 37, was High-priest in the midst of a suc- 
cession of the sons of Annas. Possibly the meaning is that 
Jesus was taken to the famous ‘ bazaars of the sons of Hanan,’ 
to which the Sanhedrim is said to have been in the habit of 
retiring when it left the chamber ‘Gazith.’ There is some 
evidence that these ‘ bazaars’ were on the Mount of Olives, 
close to the place of arrest, and they may well have been a 


329 


13 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


rendezvous where members of the Sanhedrim favourable 
to the hierarchical oligarchy might meet at night. But here 

24 Jesus was not long detained: then Annas had him bound and 
sent him to Caiaphas the high-priest. The fact that there is no 
account in the Gospel as it stands of the interrogation before 
Caiaphas, which according to the Synoptists was the chief 
Jewish trial, suggests the possibility that verse 24 should be 
transposed to this position, so that 19-23 are made to refer to 
Caiaphas’ examination. Note that while John records the 
passing of no formal verdict of conviction against Jesus by 
the Jews, whose part is little more than to denounce him to the 
Roman power, and therein reflects the procedure followed in the 
prosecution of Christians in his own day rather than gives a 
strictly accurate account of Jesus’ own trial, yet he emphasizes 
throughout the bitter hostility of the Jews, and insists that 
upon them lies the guilty responsibility for the death of the 
Christ, rather than upon the weak Roman whom they use 

14 as the instrument of their crime (19: 11). Now Caiaphas was 
the man who had advised the Jews that it was for their interests 
that one man should die for the people : we are reminded of the 
incident of Ir: 50, and get a hint as to what Caiaphas’ treat- 
ment of Jesus is likely to be. 

I5 Simon Peter followed Jesus along with another disciple; 
and as this disciple was an acquaintance of the high-priest, he 
passed into the courtyard of the high-priest with Jesus, while 
Peter stood outside at the door. Having transposed 24 we 
may now assume that the High-priest in question is Caiaphas. 
The ‘courtyard’ would be not the interior where the interro- 
gation was conducted, but the quadrangle round which the 
house was built, where Peter later conversed with the servants, 
and which in Mk. 14: 66 is ‘ downstairs’ and in Mt. 26: 69 
is ‘outside’ in relation to the judgment-hall. The ‘ other 
disciple’ is generally supposed to be the Beloved Disciple, 
which is rather improbable if the latter is indeed John the son 
of Zebedee, for it is hardly likely that a Galilean fisherman 
would have access to the High-priest’s house. But if the 
Beloved Disciple and Witness of our Gospel is, as we suppose, 
a Jerusalemite disciple, he may well have moved in priestly 


330 


CHAPTER XVIII, VERSES 19-22 


circles. This conjecture is strengthened if we may suppose 
that it is to him that Eusebius refers when he quotes the testi- 
mony of Polycrates that ‘ John too who leaned on the Lord’s 
breast, who had been a priest and worn the high-priest’s mitre, 
both witness and teacher—he sleeps in Ephesus.’ (See Introduc- 
tion, pp. xlviii and lxiv, for the still more attractive suggestion 
that the ‘ other disciple’ here in question is not the ‘ Beloved 
Disciple-Witness,’ but the ‘ Evangelist’ himself.) 

Note that according to John there is no formal trial, no cita- 
tion of witnesses as in the Synoptics, but rather an attempt to 
gather damning evidence to lay before Pilate. Then the high- 
priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his 
teaching, in order to discover whether he made converts as a 
simple Rabbi or as one who claimed to be Messiah. But there 
is nothing to be learned beyond what Jesus has already 


publicly proclaimed: Jesus answered, ‘I have spoken openly 20 


to the world ; I have always taught in the synagogues (6: 59) 
and in the temple, where all Jews gather ; I have said nothing 


in secret. Why ask me? Ask my hearers what I have said 21 


to them ; they know what I said.’ (For ‘ openly,’ ‘ in secret,’ 
cf. 7: 4.) Weare reminded of Socrates’ protest to his judges 
(Plato, Afol., 33): ‘ If any one says that he has ever learned 
or heard anything from me in private which the world has not 
heard, be assured he says what is not true.’ Perhaps the 
Evangelist is rebutting the objection frequently brought 
against Christianity (cf. Origen, Celsus, ii. 70), that its founder 
had preached only in an obscure corner of Galilee and made 
disciples but of a few country folk. Rather was Jesus a 
conspicuous public figure at the headquarters of his national 
religion! ‘All Jews,’ not merely a clique, have sat at his 
feet. 


As he said this, one of the attendants who stood by gave 22 


him a blow (literally a ‘ blow with a rod,’ but used in later 

Greek of the open hand), saying, ‘Is that how you answer the 

high-priest ? ’—is this the correct demeanour of an accused 

man before his judge? Of all the mocking, spitting, and 

buffeting recorded by the Synoptists, John mentions only 

this single blow, thus perhaps seeking to preserve the majesty 
331 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


23 of the Christ. (For a similar incident cf. Acts 23:2.) ‘If I 
have said anything wrong,’ replied Jesus, ‘ prove it; if I said 
what was true, why strike me?’ In Jesus’ answer, so re- 
strained and reasonable, the blow recoils upon the head of the 
striker. 

The ‘ other disciple’ now returns to report to Peter the 
progress of the examination and gets permission for him to 

16 enter: Then this other disciple, who was an acquaintance of the 
high-priest, came out and spoke to the woman at the door, and 
brought Peter inside. The porter is said to be a woman 
apparently because in the Synoptics it is a maidservant who 
first provokes the denial. Each of the four evangelists records 
three denials by Peter, but with interesting divergence in 
details: all agree, however, that the first to accost Peter was a 

I7 woman: The maidservant at the door then said to Peter, ‘Are 
you not one of this fellow’s disciples ?’ This she would deduce 
from the fact that Peter had been introduced by one who 

r8 entered in Jesus’ company. At once Peter denies: He said, 
‘No!’ Nowthe servants and the attendants—who had assisted 
at Jesus’ arrest—were standing and warming themselves at 
a charcoal fire which they had lit (for it was cold), and Peter 
also stood beside them and warmed himself. In the text as 
usually arranged the last sentence is repeated at the beginning 
of 25 in order to pick up the thread of the denial story broken 
at 18. The fire is not mentioned by Matthew ; in Mark the 
first only of the denials takes place beside it, in Luke all three. 
It was not yet dawn and Jerusalem at 2,500 feet is cold at that 

25 hour in spring. They asked him, ‘ Are you not one of his 

26 disciples?’ He denied it, saying, ‘No!’ Said one of the 
high-priest’s servants, a kinsman of the man whose ear had been 
cut off by Peter—who therefore would particularly note the 
assailant and eagerly denounce him—‘ Did I not see you with 

27 him in the orchard?’ Again Peter denied it. The dawn was 
now at hand, and at that very moment the cock crowed, the 
prophecy of 13 : 38 thus being fulfilled—one of John’s intensely 
dramatic sentences, even more so than if, as in the Synoptics, 
the warning had been recalled and the effect of remembrance 
on Peter noted. John neither emphasizes the vehemence of 

332 


CHAPTER XVIII, VERSES 28-29 


the third denial (Mk. 14: 71) nor the agony of repentance that 
followed ; for him it is enough that Jesus’ prediction has been 
fulfilled. 

Our Evangelist gives a fuller account than the Synoptists of 
the scene before Pilate and enlarges upon Jesus’ personal con- 
versation with the Roman governor ; but he makes no allusion 
to Luke’s story of a reference to Herod. Then from the house 28 
of Caiaphas they (apparently the Jewish authorities) took Jesus 
to the praetorium. Probably the Evangelist means that Jesus 
was led to Pilate direct from the place where the enquiry just 
recorded had taken place. The Synoptists make it clear that 
a second and more formal meeting of the Sanhedrim was held 
at dawn to ratify the verdict of condemnation already passed. 
This in any case would be held at Caiaphas’ official residence. 
But it is doubtful whether even this second meeting was 
legally in order, for no regular meeting of the Sanhedrim might 
be held sooner than 6 a.m. and John adds that still it was 
early morning, a Greek term apparently used technically of 
‘the fourth watch’ (Mk. 13: 35), ie. 3 till 6 am. Jesus 
was never legally tried before the Jewish authorities, the whole 
proceedings being carried through with indecent haste in order 
that the execution might be over and the body removed 
(19: 31) before the beginning of the Passover day at 6 p.m. 
The ‘ praetorium’ was the residence of the Roman governor, 
according to the traditional view Pilate’s quarters in Antonia, 
but more probably the former palace of Herod the Great in 
the western part of the upper city. Herod’s son Archelaus 
had been expelled in A.D. 6 and a Roman procurator installed 
in his place. 

Jesus is taken inside the palace to be interrogated, while 
Pilate in concession to their scruples converses with his 
accusers in the portico outside, for they would not enter the 
praetorium themselves, in case of being ceremonially defiled— 
by entrance into a pagan house—for they wanted to eat the 
passover. John is at pains to emphasize the fact that this, 
the day of Jesus’ death, is also the day of the Paschal feast, 
which, according to this Gospel, takes place the same evening, 
not, as in the Synoptics, the evening before. So Pilate came 29 


y 333 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


outside to them and asked, ‘ What charge do you bring against 
this man?’ Pilate is mentioned without introduction as if 
well known. He was appointed by Tiberius in A.D. 26 pro- 
curator of Judaea, which comprised the former kingdom of 
Archelaus. His severity in quelling a rising in Samaria led to 
his recall in A.D. 36. Though a weak man, John pictures him 
as endeavouring to uphold Roman ideals of justice. He 
desires from the Jews a definite charge against Jesus. What 
this was is hinted in 33. The Sanhedrim had condemned 
Jesus as a false Messiah who had threatened to destroy the 
Temple (Mk. 14: 58, Jn. 2: 19), a charge which would carry 
no weight with Pilate. Accordingly when asked to state their 
case Jesus’ accusers reply evasively that they are here ‘ not to 
have their judgment revised, but to have their decision con- 
30 firmed and the punishment executed’ (Dods): They retorted, 
‘If he had not been a criminal, we would not have handed him 
31 over to you.’ Then said Pilate, ‘Take him yourselves, and 
sentence him according to your own Law ’—an apt retort 
with which cf. Gallio’s in Acts 18: 14 f. ‘ If you have already 
come to a verdict,’ says Pilate, ‘ then pass sentence yourselves 
according to your own law and within the limits of your own 
competency ’—an attempt to save Jesus’ life, for the power still 
left to the Jewish court did not extend to the death penalty, 
which would require to be ratified by the Roman procurator. 
Accordingly, and hereby showing their real intentions towards 
Jesus, the Jews said, ‘We have no right to put anyone to 
32 death.’ Their reply, John adds, took this form that the word 
of Jesus might be fulfilled, by which he had indicated the kind 
of death he was to die. The prophecy noted in 12: 32f. 
(cf. 3: 14, 8: 28) was to be fulfilled, for if put to death by 
Romans Jesus would be crucified, a form of execution never 
employed by the Jews even when they had the power. Ac- 
cording to John, Jesus must die upon a cross because he had 
so foretold; the very manner of his death was self-deter- 
mined ; hence again and again he had escaped stoning. Such 
a conception of cause and effect seems of course strange to us ; 
yet ‘the reality of the principal fact which gave point to 
John’s words, namely the contrivance of the Jews that the 
334 


GHAPTER XVIII, VERSES 33-35 


Romans should put Jesus to death, cannot be challenged’ 
(Stanton). It was not enough that Pilate should merely 
ratify the Jewish sentence and hand over Jesus to a Jewish 
execution ; Jesus must be sentenced by Roman authority, and 
so put to death upon a cross. Hence the subtle conversion 
of the charge into one of ‘ high treason,’ on which Pilate now 
questions Jesus in private. 

So Pilate went back inside the praetorium and called Jesus, 
saying, ‘Then you are king of the Jews ? ’—with emphasis on 
the pronoun. In Pilate’s question pity is mingled with 
contempt. With ‘ king of the Jews’ contrast ‘ king of Israel ’ 
(x: 49 note). It is assumed that Pilate knows the charge 
brought against Jesus (Lk. 23: 2). According to the Synop- 
tists (Mk. 15:5), Jesus having admitted his kingship refuses 
further to answer Pilate. John, by staging this scene in 
private, avoids too glaring a discrepancy with the Synoptists, 
and makes it possible to put in Jesus’ mouth the great declara- 
tion of 36f., which in view of the emphasis of the Synoptists 
on Jesus’ silence John could hardly claim to have been made 
in public. It must be confessed that the evidence of the 
Synoptists and Roman usage, which required that a prisoner 
should be examined in the presence both of his accuser and 
witnesses, make it doubtful whether this private interrogation 
can actually have taken place. But none will deny that 
John’s drama sets forth in a clearer light even than does the 
exact history of the Synoptists the spiritual significance of 
the hour when Christ confronted Rome. Jesus replied, ‘ Are 
you saying this of your own accord, or did other people tell you 
about me?’ The responsibility for Jesus’ condemnation is 
cast on the Jews—a characteristic of this Gospel; Pilate is a 
mere tool. But the words perhaps have a deeper meaning ; 
as Godet well puts it, ‘ In the political sense which a Roman 
naturally gave to the term ‘‘ king of the Jews’ Jesus could 
repudiate the title ; but in the religious sense given to it by 
every believing Jew Jesus must acceptit.... Everything thus 
depended on the question whether the charge proceeded from 
Jewish or Gentile lips.’ But such a distinction would be 


34 


unintelligible to Pilate, who replies, ‘Am I a Jew ?—what 35 


Sf) 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


interest have I in your theocratic subtleties ?—Your own 
nation and the high-priests—who might have been expected 
to support their ‘King ’—have handed you over to me. 
What have you done?’ Pilate is impatient to get to the 
practical point ; he is convinced that this is a mere matter 
of religious quibbling, and that there is nothing in the treason- 
charge. Jesus’ reply confirms this conclusion, and also 
36 explains the reason for his own people’s antagonism: Jesus 
replied, ‘My realm does not belong to this world’ (8: 23, 
15:19, 17:14, 16). The answer ignores Pilate’s outburst 
in 35 and picks up the question of 33. According to the 
Synoptists, Jesus simply allowed Pilate to understand the 
term ‘ king of the Jews’ as a Roman naturally would, and 
as the accusers intended that he should—as a rival to Caesar: 
according to John, Jesus enlightens him. His kingdom is 
neither of a worldly nature, nor is it defended by worldly 
power: ‘If my realm did belong to this world, my men 
—the retinue which had he been a king he would presumably 
have had at his disposal (the word is the same as that trans- 
lated ‘attendants’ in vers. 3, 18)—would have fought to 
prevent me being handed over to the Jews. But as it is— 
as may be deduced from the fact that Jesus did not rely on 
armed resistance—my realm lies elsewhere ’—in the region 
of the spirit, though this is not explicitly stated. The words 
read like an appeal to the political authorities of the Evangel- 
ist’s own day to recognize the Church for what it is, not a 
37 treasonable society but a spiritual community. ‘So you are 
a king ?’ said Pilate, ‘you!’ The Greek particle is used in 
questions ‘mostly in irony’ (L. and S.). Pilate means: ‘ So, 
notwithstanding your reservations, you still claim to be a 
king?’ ‘Certainly,’ said Jesus, ‘Iam a king ’—literally, ‘ thou 
sayest that... ,’ the emphatic Jewish formula of affirmation 
as in Mk. 15:2, etc. Dods would translate, ‘ Certainly, for 
a king Iam!’ Moreover, Jesus is king not merely of one 
small nation, but of the most universal of all realms—truth : 
‘This is why I was born (1: 14), this is why I came into the 
world (1:9, 16:28), to bear testimony to the truth (1:17, 
3:11, 32f.). Everyone who belongs to the truth—by moral 
336 


CHAPTER XVIII, VERSES 38-40 


affinity (cf. ‘belongs to God,’ 8: 47)—listens to my voice’ 
—and obeys it, as the Greek word implies. The meaning is 
that those who are morally sincere instinctively yield to 
Christ’s will and become subjects of his kingdom. ‘ Truth, 
absolute reality, is the realm of Christ ; and every one who has 
a vital connexion with the Truth recognizes his sway’ 
(Westcott). 

‘Truth!’ said Pilate, ‘what is truth !’—not a sincere 38 
request for light, but a contemptuous and sceptical ejacula- 
tion. Is this then all that the case amounts to ?—a mere 
philosopher’s argument about the meaning of‘ truth’! This 
is no king threatening insurrection, but one who is nothing 
more than ‘un grand mystagogue!’ (Loisy). Accordingly 
Pilate goes out with the intention of releasing Jesus forthwith 
as a harmless visionary. Note that at this point the remitting 
of Jesus to Herod (Lk. 23:6 ff.) is omitted. With these 
words he went outside to the Jews again and told them, ‘I 
cannot find anything wrong about him.’ By ‘the Jews’ is 
meant the mob that had gathered rather than Jesus’ actual 
accusers ; Pilate perhaps hoped to enlist the support of the 
former against the latter. But he also saw the chance of 
conciliating the mob by making an act of bare justice appear 
to be an act of grace; he therefore adds: ‘ But it is your 39 
custom that I should release a prisoner for you at the passover. 
Is it your will that I release you the king of the Jews?’ The 
‘custom’ would provide an excuse for setting aside the 
sentence of the Sanhedrim, while at the same time enhancing 
Pilate’s own reputation for clemency. We have no evidence 
elsewhere that this was a regular custom, though Josephus 
(Ant., xx., 9, 3,) says that at one Passover Albinus released 
some robbers. If Pilate really wished to conciliate the mob 
and save Jesus, it is hardly likely that he would risk still 
further exacerbating them by the use of the title “ king of the 
Jews.’ But from the Evangelist’s point of view the title 
throws into stronger relief the Jews’ blindness in preferring 
a robber to their king. Note too that in this Gospel it is 
not Pilate who mentions Barabbas as an alternative; the 
Jews themselves deliberately choose him: Again they yelled, 40 


337 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


‘No, nothim! Bar-Abbas!’ The Evangelist emphasizes the 
tragedy of their choice in the dramatic words, Now Bar-Abbas 
was a robber. According to Mk. 15:7 he was a murderer 
and a rebel, and as such, by a strange irony, guilty of the 
very crime for which Jesus was innocently condemned 
(Lk. 23:5). John makes him a mere insignificant ‘ robber,’ 
the better to use him as a foil to the rejected king. Origen 
sees a mystery in the fact that the name of both prisoners is 
‘ the Son of the Father,’ that being the meaning of Bar-Abbas. 
John writes ‘ again they yelled,’ though this is the first outcry 
mentioned in this Gospel ; but there had been several in the 
Synoptic account (Mk. 15:8, 13, 14) which the Evangelist 
evidently has in mind. Indeed, on the ground that the 
indignities heaped on Jesus prior to the crucifixion are else- 
where in this Gospel omitted, and that 19 : 5 f. appears to be 
an anticipation of 19 : 13 ff., it has been held that the whole 
section 18 : 39-19: 6 is a redactional insertion added chiefly 
for the sake of the Barabbas incident in order to bring the 
account into line with the Synoptic tradition. According to 
the Synoptics (Mk. 15:16 ff.) the mockery by the soldiers 
took place only after Jesus had been handed over for execu- 
tion, which in view of Pilate’s favourable attitude to Jesus 
is much more likely than John’s version. 


Chapter XIX 


I Then Pilate took Jesus and had him scourged. According 
to Mark and Matthew the scourging took place only after 
the crucifixion had been decreed. Here Pilate first has 
Jesus scourged, evidently in the hope that the Jews will be 
satisfied with something short of the death penalty (Lk. 
23:22). But such punishment before sentence would be 
contrary to Roman judicial procedure, and perhaps we should 
assume that at this point Pilate pronounced sentence of death, 
and that the scourging was the usual legal preliminary to 
crucifixion. The victim was bound in a stooping attitude to 
a low column and lashed with thongs weighted with lead or 
bone. Then, according to John, followed the mockery which 
Luke (23:11) ascribes to the soldiers not of Pilate but of 


338 


CHAPTER XIX, VERSES 2-4 


Herod. John here follows Mark and Matthew very closely. 
And the soldiers twisted some thorns into a crown and put it 2 
on his head—thus ridiculing his kingship—and arrayed him 
in a purple robe—probably a red military cloak as worn by 
Roman officers—marching up to him and shouting, ‘ Hail, 3 
king of the Jews !| ’—a parody of the customary salute, ‘ Ave, 
Caesar ! ’"—and striking him. According to Matthew (27 : 31) 
this mockery took place after Jesus had been handed over for 
crucifixion. If Pilate really permitted it at an earlier stage 
in the proceedings, his motive was probably to save Jesus’ 
life by having the charge laughed out of court: again Pilate 4 
went out and said to them, ‘ Look, I am bringing him out to 
you. Understand, I cannot find anything wrong about him.’ 
But in the Evangelist’s own perspective it is not the mockery 
that is conspicuous, but those symbols of royalty wherein 
Jesus’ enemies seem unconsciously to prophesy his true 
kingship: So out came Jesus, wearing the crown of thorns 5 
and the purple robe (Is. 63: 1 ff., Rev. 19 : 13)—bearing even 
in his humiliation the insignia of empire—and Pilate said, 
‘Here the man is!’ The substantive is one of contempt— 
almost ‘ the creature!’ How can such a pitiable object be 
accused of treason! But the definite article lends it dignity 
and suggests that Pilate’s words are an unconscious prophecy 
(cf. 11: 50 f.) of Jesus’ uniqueness: ‘ Here is the Man ’—the 
Son of Man, the Man par excellence foretold by the prophets. 
At this point John again emphasizes how it was the priests 
who stampeded the mob into demanding Jesus’ death: 
Now when the high-priests and their attendants saw him, 6 
they yelled, ‘ Crucify him, crucify him!’ Pilate said, ‘ Take 
him and crucify him yourselves !_ I find nothing wrong about 
him.’ Pilate does not yet wash his hands of the matter ; 
he does not do so till verse 16. Rather in a fit of exasperation 
does he dare the Jews to exceed their powers and take the 
crucifixion into their own hands. He says in fact, ‘ Crucify 
him if you dare! If die he must, then yours must be the 
responsibility !’ That the Jews will ot dare, and that they 
know it themselves, is implied in their reply: The Jews 7 
retorted (‘we have no right to put to death’), ‘But we 
339 


at 


I 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


have a Law, and by [our] Law he is bound to die, because he 
has made himself out to be God’s Son’ ; though innocent of 
treason in Roman eyes he is guilty of blasphemy in Jewish 
eyes and therefore must die (Lev. 24:16). Off their guard 
with excitement, Jesus’ accusers reveal the true nature of the 
charge. As Pilate had suspected, it is not political but 
religious. Jesus, as is recorded in Mark’s account (14: 61 f.) 
of the trial before the Sanhedrim, had professed to be the 
‘Son of God,’ i.e. Messiah. The charge against Jesus as a 
pretender to the Messiahship on its political side (‘ king of 
the Jews’) having failed to move Pilate, the religious side of 
the claim (‘Son of God’) is now stressed as a capital offence 
against Jewish law, which Pilate is bound to respect. But 
the title ‘Son of God’ carries even here its full Johannine 
significance (I: 34, 5:18) as implying something far more 
than a national‘ Messiah.’ Pilate himself is supposed to read 
a deeper meaning into the title; hence the hint that he is 
now seized with that superstitious fear which so often haunts 


8 the sceptic: Now when Pilate heard that, he was still more 


9 


O 


H 


afraid. Pilate begins to feel awe in the presence of his 
captive. Perhaps too he once again scents treason and fears 
lest his clemency may be misconstrued in high quarters ; 
for was not the Emperor himself a divi filius, son of God ? 
Accordingly he went inside the praetorium again and asked 
Jesus, ‘Where do you come from ? ’—what is the meaning 
of this claim to a divine origin (cf. 8: 14, etc.) ? Jesus made 
no reply (Is. 53:7). Pilate has virtually admitted his 
innocence ; why then argue more? ‘ Jesus always assumed 
and did not assert his claims’ (Strachan). Then Pilate said, 
‘You will not speak to me?’ The last word is emphatic. 
Pilate feels slighted by Jesus’ silence, and therefore asserts 
his authority. Silence before the Jews might be intelligible, 
but hardly before the man who has power of life and death : 
‘Do you not know it is in my power to release you or to 
crucify you?’ That Pilate speaks not of justice but of power 
implies that he considers Jesus innocent. Jesus answered, 
“You would have no power over me, unless it had been 
granted you from above.’ Once again Jesus insists that his 


340 


CHAPTER XIX, VERSES 11-12 


death is brought about by no outside compulsion, but by the 
will of God which he himself does (10: 17f.). His death is 
self-determined. Pilate is but the tool of the Jews to whose 
guilty machinations Jesus willingly surrendered himself. 
‘So you are less guilty,’ says Jesus, ‘than he who betrayed 
me to you.’ As Calvin well puts it, ‘He who delivered me 
unto thee is the more guilty of the two, because he criminally 
makes use of thy lawful powers ’—powers that have been 
“granted you from above.’ Alternatively we may paraphrase: 
“ Because your power is not your own but God’s, therefore my 
betrayer is more guilty than he would otherwise have been, 
for in persuading you to put me to death he is turning against 
me a power which is in fact delegated from God.’ The holier 
the power the more blameworthy the misuse of it. But the 
comparison is evidently between Pilate’s guilt and the Jews’, 
rather than between the Jews’ present guilt and their hypo- 
thetical guilt under other circumstances. Our translation is 
truer to the thought of the Gospel: it was decreed that Jesus 
should die, and upon a Cross; Pilate is but the instrument 
of the Jew’s animosity and ultimately of the divine will, and 
therefore his guilt is the less. As already noted, John habitu- 
ally enlarges upon the Jewish as over against the Roman guilt 
for Jesus’ death. By ‘he who betrayed me’ is evidently 
meant Caiaphas, though the phrase is regularly used of 
Judas (but in 18 : 30, 35 the verb is used of the Jews). Per- 
haps we should rather translate ‘he who handed me over to 
you.’ Loisy supposes that the reference is to Judas, or rather 
to Satan working through Judas (13:2, 27). (For the idea 
that the Roman power is divinely sanctioned, though this 
is not directly in view here, cf. Paul’s words in Rom. 13: 1 ff). 
This made Pilate anxious to release him (Acts 3:13). Why ? 12 
Probably because Jesus’ reference to things spiritual 
(‘ granted you from above ’) confirms Pilate’s conviction that 
the prisoner is not a revolutionary but a visionary. But— 
as if to counteract this impression—the Jews yelled, ‘If you 
release him, you are no friend of Caesar's! Anyone who 
makes himself a king is against Caesar.’ To compromise 
with a pretender like Jesus is to conspire against the Emperor. 


341 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Dropping the religious charge Jesus’ accusers once again 
press the political one, with an appeal to Pilate’s own interests 
and fears. The charge of high treason, they hint, may recoil 
on Pilate’s own head—the more so that Tiberius was the 
most suspicious of despots, while Pilate’s conduct had on a 
previous occasion been brought under review (Lk. 13: 1). 
13 On hearing this, Pilate brought Jesus out and seated him on 
the tribunal—the raised platform from which justice was 
administered—at a spot called the ‘mosaic pavement ’—the 
14 Hebrew name is Gabbatha (it was the day of Preparation for 
the passover, about noon). ‘There is your king!’ he said 
to the Jews. Undoubtedly the meaning is that Pilate set 
Jesus upon the tribunal, rather than that he took his own 
seat in order to pronounce final judgment in presence of the 
crowd. The passage is so understood by Justin Martyr 
(Apol. I, 35), and in the Gospel according to Peter. This 
interpretation makes the scene much more dramatic and alone 
suits the words ‘ There is your king!’ In the details of 
John’s account historical probability should be considered 
less than symbolical fitness. Dramatically the Jews are 
shown rejecting their king. Pilate makes one final attempt 
to have the case laughed out of court; but John thinks not 
of the ridicule but of the unconscious prophecy : it is really 
Jesus who is King and Judge. Such an incident no doubt 
seems historically improbable, but the very fact that the 
Evangelist so carefully marks place and hour shows that he 
attached great importance to the event, which in his view 
must have been something extraordinary. By the ‘ mosaic 
pavement ’ is apparently meant a paved space in front of the 
praetorium ; there is no other reference to it, no attempted 
identification of the spot is satisfactory, and it may be that 
the Evangelist simply assumed its existence from custom. 
Suetonius says (Vit. Div. Jul., 46) that Julius Caesar carried 
about with him when with his army a tesselated pavement 
which was laid down to mark the spot where his judicial 
decisions were given. But the Hebrew name ‘ Gabbatha’ 
suggests that a definite spot is in view. The word is not a 
translation of the Greek for ‘ pavement,’ but a name given 


342 


CHAPTER XIX, VERSES 14-15 


to the place from its being ‘ raised,’ and would seem to apply 
to the tribunal rather than to the pavement. The derivation 
is perhaps Gab-baitha, meaning ‘ridge of the house.’ The 
allusion may be to a paved portico outside the palace upon 
which stood the tribunal under some kind of cupola. ‘ Day 
of Preparation ’ is the usual name for Friday, the day before 
the weekly Sabbath. But in this case, though the day was 
in fact a Friday, its relation not to the Sabbath but to the 
Passover feast is emphasized. In Mk. 15: 42 the Passion day 
is similarly called the ‘ day of Preparation,’ but there merely 
with reference to the Sabbath—on account of the difference 
in chronology (Introduction, p. xiii). There is some difficulty 
about the hour, which John states to have been ‘ about the 
sixth,’ ie. about noon; Mark, on the other hand, puts the 
crucifixion at ‘ the third hour,’ i.e. 9g a.m. The apparent dis- 
crepancy may be partly explained by the fact that the day 
was divided into four parts of three hours each. The second 
quarter would begin at ‘ the third hour’ (9 a.m.), and end at 
“the sixth hour’ (noon). As mention is scarcely ever made 
in the N.T. of any hours except the third, sixth and ninth 
(cf. Mt. 20: 1-5), most statements of time being qualified 
with the word ‘ about,’ an event taking place say midway 
between g a.m. and noon might well be referred by one 
narrator to the former hour and by another to the latter. 
But this is only a partial solution, for allowance must be made 
for the elapse of time between Pilate’s sentence and the 
actual execution. Mark’s apportionment of the Passion day 
seems to be the more probable, and possibly some symbolical 
motive may underlie John’s preference for ‘ the sixth hour’ 
(clea) 

Then they yelled, ‘Off with him! Off with him ! (possibly 
meaning, ‘take him off the tribunal!’) Crucify him!’ 
‘ Crucify your King ?’ said Pilate—a flash of irritable sarcasm 
which so stings the Jews that in hatred of Jesus they actually 
renounce the theocracy and make abdication of the Messianic 
hope: The high-priests retorted, ‘We have no king but 
Caesar ! ’—a declaration which is ‘ the crowning apostasy of 
Judaism’ and ‘the utterance of a nation turned traitor 


343 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


to its noblest traditions’ (Strachan). Compare the cry in 

16 Mt. 27:25. Then Pilate handed him over to them to be 
crucified. Again the Evangelist insists that Pilate took no 
active part in Jesus’ death, but merely gave the necessary 
authorization. Accordingly, while Mark makes it plain that 
Roman soldiers carried through the execution, John implies 
that it was the Jews who hurried Jesus off, and were respon- 
sible for the crucifixion (17-18), though at verse 23 the 
Roman soldiers reappear. 


II. THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST (IQ : 17-42) 


The details in the crucifixion story peculiar to this Gospel 
are: the Jews’ objection to the inscription (20-22) ; Jesus’ 
last bequest (25-27); the two sayings, ‘I am thirsty’ and 
‘It is finished ’ (28-30) ; the wounding of Jesus’ side (31-37) ; 

17 the last ministry of Nicodemus (39 f.). So they (i.e. the Jews) 
took Jesus, and he went away—outside the city where it was 
customary to execute criminals (cf. Heb. 13 : 12 f.)—carrying 
the cross by himself : this, too, was customary (cf. Mt. 16: 24). 
The words read like a correction of Mk. 15 : 21, according to 
which Simon the Cyrenian was forced to carry the cross, 
but they may merely imply that Jesus set out with the 
cross on his shoulders though he was afterwards relieved of it. 
The fact that Jesus carried his own cross again suggests in 
symbol the voluntary nature of his sacrifice, while the parallel 
is also noted with Isaac (Gen. 22 : 6), who in Jewish-Christian 
thought was used as a type of Christ (Tertullian, Adv. Jud., 
Io). Certain Gnostics (e.g. Basilides) taught that Simon was 
crucified instead of Jesus; but the evidence seems too late 
to permit the supposition that John is here combating this 
heresy (see Irenaeus, Haer., i. 24, 4). Thus then they came 
to the spot called ‘ the place of the skull ’—the Hebrew name 
is Golgotha. The exact site cannot be located with certainty 
because of doubt about the line of the northern wall of the 
city at this time. ‘ Golgotha’ lay probably just beyond this 
wall and close to the road (Mk. 15: 29) leading out through 
a gate near to the praetorium. The traditional site, where 


344 


CHAPTER XIX, VERSES 18-24 


the Church of the Holy Sepulchre now stands, seems too far 
within the walls of the city. The name ‘ place of the skull’ 
would be due to the hillock’s bare top and skull-like contour 
rather than to its grim associations. There they crucified 18 
him, along with two others, one on each side and Jesus in the 
middle : thus ‘he was classed among criminals’ (Lk. 22 : 37). 
Matthew and Mark call his fellow-sufferers ‘ robbers.’ 

Pilate had written an inscription to be put on the cross— 19 
probably a white board nailed to the gibbet and inscribed 
with the name and offence of the victim. What he wrote was, 
JESUS THE NAZARENE, THE KING OF THE JEWS—an insult 
directed by Pilate in his chagrin against the Jews rather than 
against Jesus, as appears from 22. Now many of the Jews 20 
read this inscription, for the place where Jesus had been 
crucified was close to the city ; besides, the inscription was in 
Hebrew, Latin, and Greek, and so would be intelligible to all. 
That the inscription was in three languages is recorded by 
John alone, for the clause in Lk. 23 : 38 is an interpolation ; 
again we have an unwitting prophecy of Christ’s universal 
kingship. So the Jewish high-priests—piqued by the inscrip- 21 
tion, as they were meant to be, as though Jesus’ claim had 
been officially admitted—said to Pilate, ‘Do not write, THE 
KING OF THE JEWS; write, HE SAID I AM THE KING OF THE 
JEws. Pilate replied, ‘What I have written, I have written.’ 22 
This, hints the Evangelist, is a true prophecy. The Greek 
perfects imply that what is written stands, and that the 
matter is closed. The incident well reveals the temperament 
of Pilate, who, according to Philo (ii. 589), was ‘by nature 
obstinate and stubborn.’ 

Now when the soldiers crucified Jesus they took his clothes 23 
—the usual perquisite of the executioner—and divided them 
into four parts, one for each soldier. Four soldiers was the 
customary detachment for such purposes (a ‘ quaternion’ ; 
Acts 12:4). The ‘four parts’ would perhaps consist of 
head-dress, shoes, outer-garment and girdle; there would 
remain the undergarment or tunic: But as the tunic was 
seamless, woven right down in a single piece, they said to 24 
themselves, ‘Don’t let us tear it. Let us draw lots to see who 


345 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


gets it.’ John alone records that the tunic was ‘ seamless,’ 
for he sees in the fact a symbolical meaning. The full-dress 
of the High-priest (Exod. 28:31 ff.), so Josephus tells us 
(Ant., xi, 7, 4), was similarly seamless. Christ on the Cross 
is the world’s High-priest (Heb. 3:1 and passim). Philo 
uses the High-priest’s seamless robe as a symbol of the Logos, 
the eternal Principle of the Universe, and Cyprian uses it as 
a symbol of the undivided Church. The incident, John sug- 
gests, took place that the scripture might be fulfilled, ‘ they 
distributed my clothes among them, and drew lots for my 
raiment.’ The reference to the prophecy in Mt. 27: 35 is 
interpolated from our Gospel. Ps. 22: 18 is exactly quoted 
from the LXX. John would seem to apply the first member 
of the verse to the ‘ clothes’ and the second to the ‘ tunic,’ 
whereas in the original the repetition is simply the Hebrew 
poetic parallelism, and is so understood by the Synoptists, 
who do not distinguish the tunic. (For a similar misconcep- 
tion cf. Mt. 21: 2, 5, of the ass of Zech. 9:9.) This was what 
the Roman soldiers did: thus even the rudest and blindest 
agents became an instrument for the fulfilment of prophecy. 
25 Now beside the cross of Jesus (contrast Mk. 15:40, Mt. 
27:55) stood his mother and his mother’s sister, Mary the 
wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala. It is not clear whether 
three or four women are mentioned, for ‘ Mary the wife of 
Clopas’’ may be in apposition to ‘his mother’s sister’ and 
refer to the same person. But probably the two are distinct, 
for it is unlikely that both the Virgin and her sister would 
be called ‘Mary.’ (To obviate this difficulty some have 
supposed that Clopasis a brother of Joseph, mention of whom 
by Hegesippus is recorded by Eusebius, in which case the 
two women would be sisters-in-law.) According to Mt. 27:56 
and Mk. 15: 40 the group included Mary of Magdala, Mary 
the mother of James and Joses, and Salome the mother of 
the sons of Zebedee, whence it has been assumed that ‘ his 
mother’s sister ’ is Salome (in which case Jesus and John the 
Apostle would be cousins, an attractive hypothesis, for those 
who identify the Beloved Disciple with the Apostle, in view 
of 20f.), while “Mary the wife of Clopas’ would be Mary 


346 


CHAPTER XIX, VERSES 26-27 


the mother of James and Joses, in which case ‘ Clopas ’ might 
be identified with ‘ Alphaeus’ (Mt. 10:3). But there is no 
evidence for the first identification (indeed Lk. 24: 10 men- 
tions ‘ Joanna ’ as the third woman), while the argument that 
‘ Clopas ’ and * Alphaeus ’ are derived from a common Aramaic 
original has not been satisfactorily established. The alterna- 
tive identification of Clopas with the ‘ Cleopas’ of Lk. 24 : 18 
is purely conjectural and is denied by Deissmann (Bible 
Studies, p. 315) on the ground that the former name is Semitic 
and the latter Greek. No certain conclusion can be reached 
as to these identifications. ‘Mary of Magdala’ is first men- 
tioned in Lk. 8: 2 as one of a company of women who accom- 
panied Jesus on his second mission through Galilee. Magdala 
(now Mejdel, a decayed village) was a place of some importance, 
three miles from Capharnahum, on the Lake of Galilee. 
According to the Talmud, it had an evil reputation for harlotry, 
from which, together with Luke’s remark (8:2: ‘out of 
whom seven devils had been driven’), it has been generally 
assumed, on slender enough evidence, that Mary was a re- 
formed courtesan. 

So when Jesus saw his mother and his favourite disciple 26 
standing near, he said to his mother, ‘Woman, there is your 
son ! ’—one who will take my place as your protector. Inthe 
word ‘Woman’ there is no such harshness as the English 
suggests ; rather have we ‘a very tender application of the 
wider thought of 17: 11’ (Strachan). (Cf. 2:4 with which 
the present incident closely connects itself.) Jesus’ ‘time’ 
is now indeed come. Then he said to the disciple, ‘ Son, there 27 
is your mother!’ Jesus’ true brother is the ideal Christian 
(Mk. 3: 31-35). In Lucian’s Toxaris Eudamidas makes a 
similar bequest : ‘I leave to Aretaeus the care of nourishing 
and providing for my mother in her old age.’ The trust is 
at once assumed: and from that hour the disciple took her 
to his home—which most naturally, but not necessarily, 
implies that the Beloved Disciple had a home at Jerusalem ; 
if so, it supports the idea that he was a Jerusalemite rather 
than John the son of Zebedee. Symbolically the incident is 
interpreted as meaning that Jesus commends his mother, the 


347 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Jewish Church (2 : 3 note)—the spiritual heritage of the race 
from which Jesus sprang, the ancient faith which had given 
birth to Christianity—into the keeping of the perfect Christian 
believer. Such a believer is to be regarded as the legitimate 
‘son’ of the O.T. faith. But the mother goes to the son’s 
house, not the son to the mother’s ; the old faith must accom- 
modate itself to the new, not the new to the old. ‘ What 
was valuable and permanent in Judaism has now passed 
over to Christianity: the ‘‘ mother of Jesus’ dwells in the 
house of his disciple’ (E. F. Scott). All this may possibly 
be legitimate interpretation ; but again we must remind our- 
selves that the fact that an incident is capable of being 
allegorized is no proof that it is not historically true (2:1 
note). 

28 After that, as Jesus knew that everything was now finished 
and fulfilled (ie. brought to its purposed end: Christ’s 
mission is now complete), he said (to fulfil the scripture), ‘ ‘<I 
am thirsty.’?’ The Evangelist writes as if Jesus deliberately 
set himself to fulfil prophecy; his request prompted the 
fulfilment of Ps. 69:21 (cf. also Ps. 22:16) in the offer of 
the vinegar. (See notes on 12: 14, 38.) The Greek word used 
here for ‘ might be fulfilled ’ is unusual, and suggests that ‘ the 
subject in question is the finishing of the fulfilment of the Scrip- 
tures as a whole, and not the fulfilment of this particular 
prophecy’ (Godet) (cf. Acts 13:29). John alone records 
the word from the Cross ‘I thirst ’"—possibly with an apolo- 
getic purpose directed against Docetic doctrine. The Jesus 
on the Cross was as truly real and human as he who thirsted 

29 at Jacob’s well (4:7). A jug full of vinegar was lying there ; 
so they put a sponge full of vinegar on a spear and held it to 
his lips. The word translated ‘spear’ is literally ‘ hyssop,’ 
from a branch of which the ‘ spear’ may have been made; 
an improbable alternative is that by ‘ hyssop’ is meant some 
substance that was mingled with the vinegar. Matthew and 
Mark state that the sponge was put on the end of a ‘ reed’ 
or ‘stick.’ Probably some symbolical intention underlies 
John’s alteration, for ‘ hyssop’ was used for ceremonial pur- 
poses in connexion with the Paschal lamb (Exod. 12: 22). 

348 


CHAPTER XIX, VERSES 30-32 


Another allusion to the Paschal ritual follows in 36. The 
vinegar or sour wine was the ordinary drink of the soldiers, 
and would be offered out of compassion. It is probably to 
be distinguished from the drugged wine, which was regularly 
given to criminals before execution and which Jesus had 
already refused (Mt. 27 : 34, 48), though possibly the mention 
of two separate offers of wine is again due to the poetic paral- 
lelism in the prophecy fulfilled (Ps. 69:21). And when 30 
Jesus took the vinegar, he said, ‘It is finished,’ bowed his 
head, and gave up his spirit. Jesus’ last words are a declara- 
tion that his commission is fulfilled (17: 4, 19 : 28) and that 
his ‘time’ having now fully come he may voluntarily lay 
down his life (Io : 17-18). Every clause in this verse stresses 
the voluntariness of his sacrifice, while we also find emphasized 
John’s characteristic idea that at Jesus’ death his spirit was 
set free from the limitations of the body that it might be 
bestowed upon the Church (7:39, 20:22). Matthew and 
Mark simply say that Jesus ‘ expired.’ 

Now, as it was the day of Preparation, in order to prevent 31 
the bodies remaining on the cross during the sabbath (for that 
sabbath-day was a great day), the Jews asked Pilate to have 
the legs broken and the bodies removed. The ‘ day of Pre- 
paration ’ means ‘ the eve of the Sabbath’ (14)—a Sabbath 
which in this case was a ‘ great day’ or ‘ high day ’ because, 
according to John’s reckoning, it would be not only the weekly 
Sabbath but also Nisan 15th, the first day of the feast of un- 
leavened bread, which was celebrated by a ‘ holy convocation ’ 
(Lev. 23: 7) ; it was therefore a double-sabbath. The Roman 
custom was to abandon corpses of criminals to dogs and 
vultures, but Jewish law forbade the leaving of a body on the 
gibbet overnight. In this case the law would be the more 
stringently enforced as the next day, beginning at 6 p.m. the 
same evening, was a ‘great day.’ The Evangelist again 
stresses the fact that Jesus died at the very time when in 
every Jewish home the Paschal lamb would be slain. The 
breaking of the legs or crurifragium was a customary means 
of hastening death. Jesus’ companions in misery are thus 
despatched: So the soldiers went and broke the legs of the 32 


“1 349 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


first man and of the other man who had been crucified with 
him ;—but it is emphasized that Jesus had already died 
33 spontaneously—but when they came to Jesus and saw he was 
34 dead already, they did not break his legs ; only, one of the 
soldiers pricked his side with a lance—perhaps to test whether 
he was really dead—and out came blood and water in a moment. 
It is said that the soldier ‘ pricked’ rather than ‘ pierced’ 
Jesus’ side : the word is not so strong as that used in verse 37, 
though 20 : 25 suggests that the wound was large, as would 
be made by a full thrust by the Roman hasta, which had a 
broad head. Endless controversy has raged around the 
words ‘ blood and water.’ It has been argued, though the 
medical evidence is extremely doubtful, that if the immediate 
cause of death had been rupture of the heart, a spear thrust 
in the pericardium may have been followed by a flow of blood 
and watery lymph. It is just possible that ‘ the Witness’ may 
have actually noticed some such physical phenomenon and 
that the Evangelist, with an apologetic purpose directed 
against Docetic doctrine, emphasizes it as a proof that Christ 
really died upon the Cross. But it is necessary for us, as 
Sanday well remarks (Criticism of the Fourth Gospel, p. 181), 
‘to distinguish between the fact itself... and the train of 
speculation to which it gave rise.’ It is the latter, the 
symbolical meaning of what may or may not be a natural 
phenomenon, which has importance for the Evangelist. The 
shedding of ‘ blood’ and of ‘ water’ almost certainly typifies 
the bestowal of the benefits of Jesus’ death and of the gift 
of the Spirit in the two Christian sacraments of the Eucharist 
and Baptism. The thought of Christ’s death being im- 
mediately before us, the ‘ blood’ is mentioned first, for the 
Eucharist is the sacrament of Christ’s death. In 1 Jn.5:6 
Baptism, according to the logical order of the sacraments, is 
alluded to first. (See also note on 7: 38.) 
The historicity of the incident just recorded is now vouched 
35 for in the most emphatic manner possible: He who saw it 
has borne witness (his witness is true ; God knows [literally, 
“he knows ’] he is telling the truth), that you may believe— 
the aim of the whole Gospel (20: 31). Taking into account 


350 


CHAPTER XIX, VERSE 35 


the peculiar Johannine force of the words translated ‘ true’ 
(Gk. aléthiné, ‘conformé a la réalité mystique de son 
objet,’ Loisy) and ‘truth’ (Gk. aléhé, the ‘real’ as 
opposed to the symbolical), the words may mean not only 
that the incident is historically ‘true,’ but also that the 
account just given adequately represents the spiritual reality 
of the outward facts. But who is the witness to whom the 
verse appeals? If we owe it to the Evangelist himself, is he 
“by these words objectifying, and as it were looking back 
upon himself, or is he pointing to some third person unnamed 
in the background?’ (Sanday). Is he himself claiming to be a 
witness, or is he appealing to another whose evidence he 
guarantees? Pace the defenders of the traditional theory 
of authorship, the former alternative is surely impossible. 
Quite apart from the difficulty of the use of the Greek pronoun 
ekeinos by the writer as referring to himself, ‘ whoever 
heard of a writer employing such ambiguities to make the 
simple statement, ‘‘I myself saw this” ?’ (Bacon, Fourth 
Gospel, etc., p. 192). It is more probable that the Evangelist 
is appealing to the authority of ‘the Witness ’ whose memoirs 
he has before him (this would be the force of the present tense 
“he is telling’). In this case the word ekeinos, unless, as 
is natural enough, it merely picks up the subject of the pre- 
vious clause, may conceivably refer to Christ, as several times 
in the First Epistle (r Jn. 3:3,5). The phrase would then 
be ‘ just a formula of strong asseveration like “‘ God knows!”’’ 
(Sanday), and this translation we have adopted above. That 
the appeal is to the testimony of a third party is suggested 
by 5: 31, 8:13. But on the whole the most likely solution is 
that the verse is a comment interjected by the Redactor. It 
rudely interrupts the connexion between 33 f. and 36, and 
seems to be one of the verses in which the point of view of 
the Appendix is thrown back into the body of the Gospel in 
order to suggest that the Witness-Evangelist (according to 
the Redactor they are one person) is to be identified with the 
Beloved Disciple (see Introduction, p. xlix f.). The verse should 
be considered in close connexion with 21: 24. ‘ The man who 
saw this,’ says the Redactor, ‘ has set down his evidence, and 


351 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


here in his Gospel we have, God knows! a true account.’ 
A further tentative suggestion may be made. Is it possible 
that the Redactor is here making a subtle distinction between 
‘the Witness’ and the Evangelist? The former has seen and 
borne witness, while the latter (ekeinos), that ‘ Elder’ 
known to all, by his writings corroborates its truth: e.g. in 
I Jn. 5:7 he testifies to this very same phenomenon of 
blood and water in the words, ‘ The Spirit is the witness to 
this, for the Spirit is truth.’ 

The following two verses connect with 34, verse 35 being 
a parenthesis. Again the Evangelist notes the fulfilment of 

36 prophecy: For this took place that the scripture might be 
fulfilled, ‘Not a bone of him will be broken.’ The words are 
an echo of Exod. 12: 46, Num. 9: 12, passages referring to 
the Paschal lamb, with which Jesus is identified (cf. Ps. 

37 34:20). And another scripture also says, ‘They shall look 
on him whom they have impaled ’—a quotation from Zech. 
12:10 describing the martyrdom of an unknown hero, who 
may be regarded as a ‘ good’ shepherd, in contrast to the 
‘ foolish shepherd ’ of Zech. 11 : 15, and so as a type of Christ. 
Our Gospel gives a more accurate translation of the original 
Hebrew than that of the LXX. See also Rev. 1:7, where 
the passage is alluded to in the sense that one day the crucified 
will triumph over his executioners—an idea which is doubtless 
present in the Evangelist’s mind also. The whole incident 
of the spear-thrust is peculiar to John, who at 20: 20 again 
alludes to ‘his side,’ while Luke has ‘ his hands and feet’ 
(24 : 40). 

Had the Jews’ request to ‘have the body removed’ (31) 
been granted, the body would have been dealt with as in e.g. 
Josh. 8:29. But at the very moment of Jesus’ deepest 
humiliation two members of the Jewish aristocracy who had 
hitherto shrunk from making open profession of faith have the 
courage to save the Master from this last dishonour: Christ 
on the Cross has a power greater even than Jesus the Rabbi 

38 to ‘draw men to himself’ (12:32). After this, Joseph of 
Arimathaea, a disciple of Jesus but a secret disciple—for fear 
of the Jews—asked Pilate for permission to remove the body 


352 


CHAPTER XIX, VERSES 39-41 


of Jesus—though from 31 we would gather that Pilate had 
already ordered the bodies to be removed. And Pilate allowed 
him—in accordance with Roman custom except in extreme 
cases (cf. also Mt. 14: 12, Acts 8: 2). Joseph was evidently 
a rich man (Mt. 27:57) and a member of the Sanhedrim 
(Mk. 15: 43). Arimathaea is not certainly identified, but is 
probably the same place as Ramathaim (1 Sam. 1:1; x Mace. 
II: 34), now Beit-Rima, thirteen miles east-north-east of 
Lydda. Like Nicodemus, with whom he is now associated, 
Joseph had not yet ‘ shown his colours’; hence Mark’s state- 
ment that he ‘ventured to go to Pilate.’ So he went and 39 
removed the body, accompanied by Nicodemus (he who had first 
come to Jesus by night)—his nervousness then setting off his 
boldness now—who brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, 
about a hundred pounds of it. The spices were a compound 
made of the gum of the myrrh tree and powdered aloe wood 
(Ps. 45 : 8) and according to our scale would amount to about 
70 lb.—a vast amount and the expression of a rich man’s 
homage. Theembalmment was on a kingly scale (cf. 2 Chron. 
16:14). ‘Judas had been scandalized at the use of one 
pound of perfume for the living Jesus (12: 3-5), and here 
are one hundred pounds brought to his corpse!’ (Loisy). 
They took and wrapped up the body of Jesus in the spices and 40 
in bandages (11 : 44), according to the Jewish custom of burial 
—evidently an explanation intended for Hellenistic readers 
and contrasting, not Jewish methods of embalmment with 
e.g. Egyptian, but the custom of embalming with that of e.g. 
burning. The elaborate embalmment at this point seems 
out of keeping with the need for a quick disposal of the body 
in view of the approaching Sabbath and with the hint of Mark 
(16:1) and Luke (23:56, 24:1) that the women prepared 
spices over the Sabbath and brought them to the tomb on 
the Sunday morning. 

Now at the spot where he had been crucified there was an 41 
orchard, and in the orchard a new tomb where no one had yet 
been laid. The orchard, according to Mt. 27: 60, contained 
Joseph’s own new tomb and was presumably his property. 
That the tomb was new is a fact ‘ which belongs to the glory 


alee! 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


of Jesus. When a king is received, the objects devoted to his 
service are such as have never yet been used ’ (Godet) (cf. Lk. 

4219: 30). So they put Jesus there, since it was the Jewish day 
of Preparation (14 note), seeing that the tomb was close by— 
to the place of crucifixion. The position of the ‘ orchard ’ as 
of Golgotha is uncertain. The near-by tomb was utilized 
because the near approach of the Sabbath, which began the 
same evening at 6 p.m., left no time to remove the body else- 
where. 


3. THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST (20 : I-31) 


It is impossible completely to harmonize the various Gospel 
accounts of Christ’s resurrection appearances. The chief 
variation of Mark and Matthew from John (though in this 
feature Luke agrees with our Gospel) lies in the statement that 
the women, after finding the tomb empty, were commissioned 
by an angel to bid the disciples go to Galilee, where they would 
see the Risen Lord. The fulfilment of this promise is recorded 
by Matthew (28 : 16 ff.), and must also have been mentioned 
in the original conclusion of Mark which has been lost and 
replaced by 16:9-20. In Luke and John (excluding the 
Appendix) all the appearances of the Risen Lord take place in 
or near Jerusalem. Even advanced critics have found much 
in this chapter to suggest that it is based on the memories 
of an eye-witness. ‘The story is told so simply, and so cir- 
cumstantially, that it is hard to accept any view in regard 
to its origin except that it came to the Evangelist on the 
authority of one of the Apostles. ... It is no doubt very 
difficult ever to judge from the naturalness and vividness of a 
story that it is really historic. But it is very hard for any 
reader not to think that we have here a simple piece of testi- 
mony, an uncoloured narrative of fact’ (Percy Gardner, 
Ephestan Gospel, p. 288). Verses 2-10 have been widely held to 
be an interpolation by the Redactor on the grounds (a) that 
they interrupt the story of Mary’s meeting with her Master 
which is broken off at the end of verse 1 and resumed, as if 
there had been no interruption, at verse 11, where Mary is still 
standing where the narrative of verse 1 had left her ; (6) that 


354 


CHAPTER XX, VERSES 1-4 


the passage emphasizes, as the Evangelist himself does not, 
the fact of the empty tomb and the absence of the material 
body, the supposition being that the Redactor is strongly 
anti-docetic and is here counteracting a tendency to give 
a docetic interpretation to the original Gospel. But (a) the 
first argument is ‘ an example of that pedantic kind of criticism 
which demands that every detail, however easily the reader 
can imagine it, shall be stated in so many words’ (Stanton, 
op. cit., p. 56) ; and (b) the point of the evidence described 
(esp. 6 f.) seems to be that Christ’s body had ‘ evanesced ’ 
from a physical to a non-physical and spiritual entity, while 
on the other hand the Evangelist is just as anxious as the 
Redactor to safeguard the human reality of the crucified Jesus 
(cf. 19 : 28, 34). 

On the first day of the week Mary of Magdala went early to the 1 
tomb, when it was still dark—so that she could not see what 
the disciples afterwards saw. The hour would be the dark 
before the dawn, some time between 3 and 6 a.m. (cf. 18 : 28). 
Mk. 16: 2 says it was ‘ after sunrise ’ that Mary, accompanied 
by two other women, visited the tomb. John, with his love 
of individualizing, mentions but one woman, but, as is hinted 
in the next verse (‘ we’), there may have been others with her. 
But as she saw the boulder (11 : 38) had been removed from 
the tomb—and would fear that the tomb had been violated— 
she ran off to Simon Peter and to the other disciple, the favourite 2 
of Jesus, telling them, ‘They (i.e. the authorities, for some 
purpose of their own) have taken the master out of the 
tomb, and we do not know where they have put him!’ In 
the following verses it is hard to doubt that we have the evi- 
dence of ‘the Witness’: So Peter and the other disciple set out 3 
for the tomb ; they both started to run, but the other disciple 4 
ran ahead, faster than Peter, and got to the tomb first. The 
Beloved Disciple was the younger and more active man, while 
Peter perhaps would hang back ‘ ob conscientiam culpae ’ 
(Lampe). The race between the two disciples has often 
been interpreted allegorically—surely a fantastic example 
of the misuse of a method of interpretation for which the 
Gospel gives ample scope. ‘A common reader sees in this 


355 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


the charming reminiscence of an old man recalling his emotion 
of that morning, and therewith (as such things live in memory 
endeared) the little fact that once he could run fast, and the 
thrill with which he did so then. No, says a certain critic, 
this would have been “ vanity unbecoming to an Apostle.’ 
With this monumental commencement he proceeds to his own 
more becoming exposition. This little touch in the Gospel 
exhibits, he tells us, the jealousy between the Johannine and 
the Petrine school ! ’ (Lord Charnwood). 

5 The Disciple, then, reached the tomb first ; he glanced in— 
this rather than the idea of ‘ stooping’ (A.V.) seems to be the 
sense—and saw the bandages lying on the ground, but he did 
not go inside—through reverence and delicacy of feeling and 
possibly also through fear of ceremonial pollution. But Peter, 

6as usual, is more impetuous and has fewer scruples: Then 
Simon Peter came after him, and went inside the tomb ; he 
noticed—the word implying a more careful scrutiny than 
John’s ‘ glance ’—not only that the bandages were lying on the 

7 ground, but that the napkin which had been round his head was 
folded up by itself, instead of lying beside the other bandages. 
Had the tomb been rifled everything would have been in dis- 
array; had the disciples removed the body—a Jewish libel 
current in John’s own day—the wrappings would have been 
taken with it. John insists that all the evidence pointed to a 
deliberate act of resurrection. The word used of the napkin, 
‘folded up,’ means properly ‘ twirled’ turban-like, just as it 
had been wound around the head. The napkin too, John 
notes, is ‘ by itself,’ a little apart from the body-wrappings. 
The whole language seems to have been carefully chosen to 
suggest that Jesus’ physical body had passed into a spiritual 
and ‘ glorified’ Risen Body without disturbing the grave- 
clothes, which had simply settled down on the ledge within the 

8 tomb in their original positions. Upon this the other disciple, 
who had reached the tomb first, went inside too, and when he 
saw for himself he was convinced—that Jesus had indeed risen 
from the dead. In the words ‘saw’ and ‘ convinced’ ‘ we 
have in short fact and the discerning interpretation of fact, 
both of which were held to be of such immense importance 


356 


CHAPTER XX, VERSES 9-13 


by the writer of the Gospel’ (Stanton). But conviction had 
been reached only as the result of the evidence of the disciples’ 
own eyes, for as yet they did not understand the Scripture 9 
that he must rise from the dead—a moral necessity for which 
cf. 7:7 and Lk. 24: 26, Acts 2:24. The implication is that, 
if the disciples had already possessed true insight into Scrip- 
ture, no such proof as that just afforded would have been neces- 
sary (cf. 20:29). But such insight, because in this Gospel 
Jesus’ predictions of his resurrection have been ‘ in riddles’ 
(2: 19, 10: 18, 12: 24), the disciples did not possess ‘as yet’; 
later, in John’s phraseology, they would ‘ remember ’ (2: 17, 
27el2c0)omes ne ocripture.: is Ps. 16 310 5_ch,Acts 13 335, 
Lk. 24: 21, 25 ff., 44 ff. Generally speaking, the Evangelist 
lays more stress upon the evidence of prophecy and of ex- 
perience than upon that afforded to the senses by the fact of 
the empty tomb. But he may also imply here that the 
Beloved Disciple’s faith was due not to presuppositions based 
on scripture, but to the strength of the visible evidence. 

Then the disciples returned home—convinced that a further ro 
search for the body was useless ; but Mary (who had presum- 11 
ably followed the disciples back to the tomb) stood sobbing 
outside the tomb. Sometimes the tears of sorrow quicken 
spiritual vision: As she sobbed, she glanced inside the tomb— 
as if refusing to believe that Jesus was indeed gone—and 12 
noticed two angels in white, sitting where the body of Jesus had 
lain, one at the head and one at the feet. The mention of the 
“angels ’ appears to be an echo of Lk. 24: 4 ff. and a relic of 
the Synoptic tradition according to which the women are 
commissioned by an angel to bid the disciples go to Galilee 
to meet the Risen Lord. Dods, quoting Liicke, well says that 
‘ neither the believing nor the critical enquirer can lift the veil 
that hangs over the appearance of angels.’ Perhaps for the 
Evangelist they are symbolic of the cherubim on the mercy- 
seat (Exod. 25:22). ‘Woman,’ they said to her, ‘ why are you 13 
sobbing ?’ (For the mode of address, the same as that used 
by Jesus to his mother, cf. 2: 4, 19:26.) It is interesting to 
note that, according to Ephrem, the words of 17 are addressed 
not to Mary of Magdala but to the Mother of Jesus, and that 


307 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


in Tatian’s Diatessaron the whole incident seems to be 
narrated of the Virgin. Mary said, ‘ Because they have taken 
away my master, and I do not know where they have put him ! ’ 

14 With these words she turned round and noticed Jesus standing— 
though she did not know it was Jesus. Why Mary failed to 
recognize Jesus it is out of place to speculate ; certainly not 
because of any abnormal change in Jesus’ glorified body 
(though cf. Mk. 16: 12 ‘in another form’; Lk. 24: 16), for 
in that case Mary would hardly have mistaken him for a 
gardener; the Evangelist probably supposes it still to be 

15 dark. ‘Woman,’ said Jesus, ‘why are you sobbing ? Who 
are you looking for?’ Supposing he was the gardener— 
the first person that would occur to her as likely to be abroad at 
so early an hour and to question her thus—she said, ‘ Oh, sir, 
if you carried him away, tell me where you put him, and I will 
remove him.’ Mary does not mention her master by name ; 
One alone fills her thoughts and she assumes that the ‘gardener’ 
will know whom she means by ‘him.’ The word translated 
‘ carried away ’ implies the bearing of a heavy weight (19 : 17) 
and makes all the more touching the weak woman’s offer to 
“remove him’ and give him seemly burial. There follows the 
greatest recognition scene in all literature—and one told in 

16 two words! ‘Mary!’ saidJesus. She started round and said, 
‘Rabboni !’ (a Hebrew word meaning ‘ teacher’). Mary has 
been talking listlessly turned half towards the ‘ gardener’ 
and half towards the tomb. The speaking of her own name 
and the very tone of its utterance by Jesus calls up memories 
and awakens recognition ; in a flash she turns and faces her 
Master. ‘She is beginning to experience the risen Lord; 
only then does she recognize him’ (Strachan). Rabbont 
(Mk. 10:51), which is Aramaic rather than ‘ Hebrew,’ is a 
more respectful title than Rabbi; it means literally ‘ my 
teacher,’ but the pronominal suffix had lost its force as in 
monsteur. Even in the hour of his glory Mary addresses 
Jesus as the ‘teacher’ of the old familiar days. In this 
wonderful recognition scene John dramatically illustrates the 
truth of 10 : 4—‘ the sheep follow him, because they know his 
voice,’ 


358 


CHAPTER XX, VERSE 17 


In the first flush of her joy Mary starts forward to embrace 
her Master: Jesus said, ‘Cease clinging to me (the word 17 
means not merely to ‘ touch’ but to hold on to an object with 
the desire to retain possession of it). I have not ascended yet 
to the Father ; but go to my brothers—not his blood-relatives 
of 7 : 3, but his disciples, brothers of the Spirit (Mt. 12 : 50)— 
and tell them, I am ascending to my Father and yours, to my 
God and yours.’ Is this a Johannine counterpart of the com- 
mission to tell the disciples to meet the risen Christ in Galilee 
(Mt. 28:10)? Note that John always distinguishes the sense 
in which Christ and men are ‘sons’ of God—even using 
different words (1:12 note); hence he speaks of ‘my’ 
Father and ‘ yours’ rather than of ‘our’ Father. It is by 
Christ’s ascension to the common Father that an abiding tie 
will be knit up between himself and the ‘ brothers’ he leaves 
behind. It is in this thought that we are to find the reason 
for Jesus’ refusal meantime to allow Mary to ‘ cling to him.’ 
Quite apart from the fact that, according to our Evangelist, 
Christ’s risen body is a purely spiritual one which passes out 
of grave-clothes and through closed doors and therefore cannot 
be ‘ clung to,’ it is one of his central doctrines that the abiding 
possession of Christ, for which Mary yearns, may be enjoyed 
only after his ‘ ascension to the Father.’ It is only ‘ after 
a little while ’—when men’s spiritual experience of the 
“ascended ’ Christ begins—that they shall truly ‘see’ him. 
(See note on 16:16 and cf. 14: 18f.) For Mary this ‘little 
while’ is not yet passed and the time for lasting fellowship 
with the Risen Lord is not yet. Our Evangelist teaches that 
the true proof of the Resurrection and the true possession of 
the Risen Christ (a desire for both of which is expressed in 
Mary’s gesture) is not to be looked for in any ‘ resurrection 
appearance ’ nor verified by any physical contact, but is to be 
realized in the normal spiritual experience of the believer. 
And such an experience can be enjoyed only after the ‘ ascen- 
sion,’ which John regards as the final moment in one process 
of ‘ glorification’ (7:39, 12:16). This ‘ascension’ is ap- 
parently assumed to take place between the events of verses 
11-18 and 1g ff., and accordingly the appearances which follow 

359 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


are subtly distinguished from that to Mary: e.g. at verse 27 
Thomas is encouraged to test the reality of Christ’s presence— 
this ‘ post-ascension’ appearance being symbolical of the 
abiding spiritual presence, for proof of which, it is nevertheless 
added (29), no sensuous evidence should be necessary. It is 
difficult to estimate the place of an ‘ascension’ in John’s 
thought. As has been several times noted, Christ’s Death, 
Resurrection, Ascension, and Parousia appear often as but 
four moments in one process of ‘ glorification,’ the three last 
being practically merged in one another. The ‘ Resurrection ’ 
is realized in a ‘ return to the Father’ which marks the com- 
mencement of that larger spiritual activity in which Christ 
manifests himself again to his disciples. Yet there are 
occasional hints, such as we have in the present passage, of the 
survival of the point of view of the Synoptists, who regard 
Resurrection, Ascension, Parousia, as three events distinct in 
space and time. John clothes in more spiritual form the more 
realistic conceptions of primitive thought ; yet consciously or 
unconsciously he makes ‘concessions’ to the older point of view. 
‘ The Parousia is separated from the Resurrection by a scarcely 
perceptible interval, and even this is bridged over by the 
meeting in which he is seen and heard by Mary, although 
he withdraws himself from her touch. We can scarcely be 
wrong in perceiving here one of John’s concessions to the 
primitive tradition, which he sought to conserve in form, 
even while in substance he broke with it’ (E. F. Scott, op. cit., 
p. 308). 
The scene ends with Mary hurrying off to fulfil her com- 
mission to the disciples as in Mk. 16: 10, Mt. 28: 8, Lk. 24: 10: 
18 Away went Mary of Magdala to the disciples with the news, 
‘TI have seen the Lord ! ’—telling them what he had said to her. 
There follows an account of the first appearance to the 
1g assembled disciples: On the evening of that same day, the 
first day of the week—the date is emphasized as being the first 
Christian Sunday—though the disciples had gathered within 
closed doors for fear of the Jews, Jesus entered and stood among 
them, saying, ‘Peace be with you!’ Thus is the promise of 
14: 18f,, 16: 16 fulfilled, for the ‘little while’ is now past. 
360 


CHAPTER XX, VERSES 19-20 


The fact that the doors were shut is mentioned as significant 
of the nature of Christ’s risen body, which could pass where 
it would; for it is evidently implied that Christ passed 
through the doors rather than that he miraculously unlocked 
them (cf. also note on 6:19). Many a band of Christians 
skulking behind locked doors in days of persecution must have 
plucked up courage as they recalled this incident and realized 
the same experience of the Risen Christ in the midst (Mt. 
18:20). Jesus’ salutation is the conventional greeting of 
every day. But ‘a great soul can redeem his words from 
triviality. He takes the most conventional expressions, the 
small change of ordinary courtesy, which on the lips of other 
men mean nothing, and in his mouth they have such heart 
and substance that you go on, cheered and bettered by 
his greeting’ (W. M. Macgregor, Jesus Christ the Son of 
God, p. 165). ‘Peace’ had been almost Jesus’ last word 
before he led his companions to Gethsemane (14: 27) ; 
and now the Risen Lord picks up the broken thread. Then, 
as if to remind his disciples of the victory won in the 
interval, as if to prove the identity of this divine figure with 
the human Jesus who had suffered for them, so saying he 20 
showed them his hands and his side (Lk. 24: 39f.). John, 
who alone narrates the incident of the spear-thrust, is also the 
only evangelist who represents Jesus as calling attention to 
the wound in his side. While John emphasizes throughout the 
spiritual nature of Jesus’ resurrection body, he is so concerned 
to combat Docetism and to stress the identity of the Risen 
Christ with that Jesus who was the Logos made flesh that the 
spiritual body is represented, as in the Synoptists, as actually 
bearing the marks of the wounds, which are unaffected by the 
change wrought by ‘resurrection’ and ‘ascension.’ And 
when the disciples saw the Lord they rejoiced—according to the 
promise of 14: 28, 16: 22. 

An attractive suggestion is made by Strachan (The Fourth 
Evangelist, p. 312) that verses 21-23 should be transferred 
to follow 29. The doubt of Thomas is then immediately con- 
trasted with the joyful faith of his comrades, while the original 
Gospel fittingly concludes with the gift of the holy Spirit, 

361 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


from which Thomas is no longer excluded, as appears to be the 
case if the present order of the text be retained. The repetition 
of the greeting ‘Peace be with you’ also becomes more 
natural: Jesus takes final farewell of his disciples in the same 
words with which he saluted them when first he appeared 
as Victor over death. We pass therefore to 24. 

24 Now Thomas, one of the twelve, who was called ‘ the Twin ’ 
(rz: 16), was not with them when Jesus came—why, it is useless 

25 to speculate—and when the rest of the disciples told him, 
“We have seen the Lord,’ he said, ‘ Unless I see his hands with 
the mark of the nails, and put my finger where the nails were 
(reading topon, ‘ place,’ instead of tupon, ‘mark,’ at the 
second occurrence of the word, and apparently implying that 
the wounds were healed), and put my hand into his side, I 
refuse to believe it.’ Thomas appears here as the type of those 
who base their faith upon ocular miracles. He is a ‘ realist ’ 
and represents the materialist attitude towards the resur- 
rection body of Christ which appears e.g. in Luke (esp. 24: 39- 
43), and to which our Evangelist is opposed. Yet Thomas is 
not so much an intellectual sceptic as one who, being by 
disposition a pessimist (11: 16, 14:5), finds it difficult to 
replace his own mood of despair, born of the spectacle of the 
Crucifixion which is still printed indelibly in all its details 
upon his imagination, by his companions’ mood of newly- 
awakened joy and faith. First he must have a vision of 
triumph as vivid as the former vision of defeat ; he must be 
sure that this risen figure, which his fellows claim to have seen, 
is the same crucified Jesus bearing upon his body the very 
marks of his execution. 

According to Luke, all the appearances of the Risen Christ, 
and indeed the Ascension, took place on the first Easter Day. 
John here probably intends us to understand that on the 
following Sunday Jesus again appeared: as the Church 
meets on the Lord’s day week by week for praise and sacra- 

20 ment the Risen Master is ever present. Eight days after- 
wards his disciples were together again, and Thomas with 
them. Though the doors were closed, Jesus entered and stood 

27 among them, saying, ‘Peace be with you!’ Then he said 

362 


CHAPTER XX, VERSES 27-28 


to Thomas, ‘ Look at my hands, put your finger here ; and put 
your hand here into my side ; cease your unbelief and believe.’ 
Christ repeats Thomas’ own words; he knows the very 
words in which we express our doubts. John hints that even 
while Thomas was voicing his incredulity Jesus was present 
though unseen. Verse 27 has commonly been assigned to 
the Redactor on the ground that it emphasizes, as the Evange- 
list himself does not, the corporeality of the resurrection body. 
If the verse be omitted we are left to understand that in 
Thomas’ case also, as previously in the case of the other 
disciples, the experience of Christ’s ‘ peace’ (19) and the 
spiritual contemplation of his wounds (20) were sufficient 
evidence of the Resurrection ; verse 27, on the contrary, repre- 
sents Jesus as yielding to Thomas’ demand for sensuous 
evidence. The suspicion that 27 is an addition is strengthened 
by the fact that Thomas does not accept the invitation, but 
immediately makes his adoring confession. On the other 
hand, if the verse be genuine, we may suppose that the 
Evangelist again intends to show the sufficiency of spiritual 
proof by hinting that the test offered by Jesus was one 
which was at once seen to be incongruous and therefore 
refused. ‘Put your hand into my side,’ says Jesus, ‘+f you 
still think such a test needful !’ Whereupon Thomas answered 28 
him, ‘My Lord—the familiar title given to the Master in 
the days of his flesh—and my God!’ Thomas means, ‘ It 
ts Jesus himself and now I recognize him as Divine’ (Burkitt). 
Pliny in his letter to Trajan (A.D. 112) states that the Chris- 
tians ‘sing hymns to Christ as God.’ In Thomas’ confession 
—and it is specially significant as coming from one who had 
at first wavered—the gradual victory of faith over unbelief, 
which is one of the leading motives in the Gospel-drama, 
reaches its climax. The equality of Christ with God, which 
has hitherto been claimed only by implication in such words 
as 14:9 and is seemingly disavowed by Jesus himself in 
5: 18 f., 14: 28 (cf. Phil. 2: 6) is now explicitly asserted. The 
keynote with which the Gospel opened (1: 1) is struck again 
at its close: to the Christian believer Christ is none other 
than God Himself. 
363 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Thomas’ failure to avail himself of the test offered by 
Jesus has thus thrown into prominence the incongruity of 
demanding sensuous evidence of spiritual truth ; this funda- 

29 mental principle of the Gospel is now driven home: Jesus 
said to him, ‘You believe because you have seen me ?—a 
question with an affirmative implication—Blessed be those 
who believe though they have never seen me.’ True faith 
in the Resurrection and in the abiding power and presence of 
Christ is based not on the evidence of the senses or on miracles, 
but on an individual experience of the power of the risen 
life—an experience corroborated by the living testimony of 
the Church of all ages. The Evangelist has in view those 
of his own generation and of all following generations to 
whom no ocular vision of the Risen Christ could be vouch- 
safed. Let them not, like Thomas, reject the testimony of 
those who have had an experience denied to themselves ; 
but relying on that testimony let them make the experiment 
of faith, which in turn will become an experience. Men 
‘can only become Christians when they lay hold of the inner 
life of Jesus in that report which has come down to us in the 
Christian brotherhood.’ But ‘the man who feels the strength 
of Jesus’ love, and sees that confidence of victory which welled 
from his peace of soul, and who is startled and humbled by 
these—that man will no longer see a historical problem in 
Jesus, but a Reality before whom he bows’ (Hermann, Com- 
munion with God, p. 154). 

2I Jesus then repeated, ‘Peace be with you!’ But it is not 
such peace as the world conceives of (14: 27), but the active 
peace of service; for, adds Jesus, ‘as the Father sent me 
forth, I am sending you forth’ (cf. 17: 18)—words that recall 
the great commission of Mt. 28: 19f. Two distinct words are 
used here to express the idea of sending (apostello, pempo): 
Jesus is God’s ‘apostle’ or ambassador, the disciples are 
Jesus’ envoys. Having given a commission, Jesus now 

22 confers the power to fulfil it (Lk. 24: 49, Acts 1: 8): And 
with these words he breathed on them, and added, ‘ Receive 
the holy Spirit!’ The phrase ‘holy Spirit’ is without the 
article, but the omission (face Westcott) has no significance, 

364 


CHAPTER XX, VERSES 22-23 


as if the meaning were that the disciples are now to receive 
“a gift of the holy Spirit in preparation for Pentecost’ when 
the holy Spirit would be given. Similarly Godet: ‘ What 
Jesus gives . . . is not the fulness of the Spirit; it is an 
earnest .. . This communication is to the Resurrection 
what Pentecost will be to the Ascension.’ But this scene 
is for John almost certainly the counterpart of Pentecost ; for, 
as we have seen (ver. 17 above), he ‘ telescopes’ Resurrection, 
Ascension, and Pentecost into one event of ‘ glorification.’ 
With the breathing of the Spirit is consummated in its fulness 
the promise of 14: 16, 16: 7. Note, firstly, that for John, as 
for Paul, the Spirit is not a fitful and ‘ miraculous’ gift, 
an ecstatic and non-ethical experience, but rather an abiding 
endowment—the principle of spiritual living. Just as in 
Gen. 2:7 ‘God breathed into man’s nostrils the breath 
of life’ and thus communicated the divine life of man as 
opposed to the life-principle of other animals, so does Christ 
here impart his own divine life-spirit, wherein lies the secret 
of ‘eternal life.’ Jesus (the Logos) is the author of a new 
spiritual creation (1: 3 f.). Note, secondly, that by the words 
‘ veceive the holy Spirit’ it is implied that the recipient is not 
merely passive but must become a partaker of life by an act 
of faith. The whole scene symbolizes the truth that the 
Spirit is the gift of the same Jesus who, as a man in history, 
lived and suffered for his own, and is not to be ‘ sublimated into 
a merely ecstatic experience ’ (Strachan). 

Having thus bestowed the holy Spirit Jesus adds: ‘If you 
remit the sins of any, they are remitted: if you retain them, 
they are retained ’—one of the cruces of the Gospel. The 
most satisfactory interpretation seems to be as follows: By 
the inbreathing of the Spirit Christ himself becomes incarnate 
in the community of the disciples, i.e. the Church. Accord- 
ingly there is a sense in which the world (separate from that 
Church, 17: 6, 14) will be judged by its attitude towards the 
Christian community and its message. Just as to accept 
Jesus as Son of God means forgiveness of sin and to reject 
him means the ‘retaining’ of sin (8: 24, 9: 41), and in this 
sense Christ is said to ‘judge’ men (3: 17f.), so may the 

res 365 


THE GOSPEL” OFT IORN 


Church be said to ‘judge’ men—to forgive or retain their 
sin—when, as a result of either accepting or spurning the 
Church’s message, men deliberately choose either life or death 
(2 Cor. 2: 16, Is. 6: 9f.). The verse means that to “every 
member of the Christian community who abides in closest 
communion with his Lord, is given the last and final word 
on the sins of frail humanity ; the last and decisive word in 
removing the wrongs of our tangled world; the last and 
decisive power of judgment on the distinction between right 
and wrong’ (Strachan). Westcott well remarks that in the 
verse ‘the pronouns in this case are unemphatic’; i.e. the 
Apostles are not singled out (indeed others may have been 
present with the Eleven; Lk. 24: 33), in virtue of special 
ordination, to be the possessors of an inherent power to absolve 
from sin. Rather is the Church, as a society organized for 
teaching, fellowship, and discipline, confirmed in an authority 
derived directly from its Founder Jesus to declare the promise 
and the conditions of forgiveness. (Cf. Mt. 16: 19, 18: 18.) 
Just as in Matthew the life and authority of the Church are to 
be founded on faith exemplified in Peter, so here are they 
derived from the gift of the Spirit bestowed on the gathered 
disciples. There is an echo also of the commission as given 
by Luke (24: 47) ‘that repentance and the remission of sins 
must be preached in his name to all nations.’ One cannot but 
remark the frequent echoes of Lk. 24 in this chapter. Can the 
generally held view be justified that our Evangelist was not 
acquainted with Luke’s Gospel ? (Cf. 4: 47, 6:3, chap. 21 
passim, and Introduction, p. x f.) 
Verses 30f., which are obviously intended to be the con- 
clusion of the original Gospel, define its method and sum up 
30 its purpose: Many another Sign did Jesus perform in presence 
of his disciples, which is not recorded in this book : thus does 
John guard his work against comparison with the Synoptics. 
The additional ‘Signs’ alluded to are not only resurrection 
appearances but miracles in general, and are stated to have 
been performed ‘ in presence of his disciples ’ because miracles 
are regarded as an incentive to faith and the disciples are the 
predestined witnesses to future generations. The Evangelist 
366 


GHAPTERS XX VERSE 31 


has selected particular miracles on account of their value for 
his didactic purpose. Apart from the Resurrection there are 
seven, all of which are ‘transparencies through which was 
manifested the ‘‘ glory’’ of Jesus’ (Strachan). Accordingly 
John concludes: But these Signs are recorded so that you— 31 
in the first case the circle of Christian disciples in Ephesus, but 
the words extend to all of us—may believe Jesus is the Christ, 
the Son of God, and believing may have life through his Name 
(I: 12). Thus is defined the guiding purpose of the whole 
Gospel which is to confirm faith in a dogma and to transmit 
to future generations a divine gift. The phrase ‘ Christ, the 
Son of God’ is full of significance (cf. 1: 14, 34, 49). ‘The 
Messianic title of Jesus is here co-ordinated with a higher 
title, or rather is superseded by it ; and this use of the double 
title may be regarded as an index to the nature of the Gospel 
as a whole. It is a work of transition, in which primitive 
Christianity is carried over into a different world of thought ’ 
(E. F. Scott). To ‘ have life in his name’ is to accept Christ 
for what he claims to be and really is, and thereby to come into 
that living relationship with him which John calls ‘ remaining 
in’ him (15: 4), wherein consists ‘ eternal life.’ 


EPILOGUE. THE APPENDIX (21: 1-25) 


It is now generally agreed that the Gospel as originally 
planned by the Evangelist must have ended with 20: 31. 
The linguistic evidence alone is strongly against the authen- 
ticity of chapter 21 (for a good summary see Stanton, op. cit., 
p. 28 ff.). There is no question at least that 21: 24-25 are 
an addition. But these verses seem closely connected with 
the rest of the chapter, and if we amputate 24 f. not only do 
we leave the chapter without any suitable ending, but we 
deprive it of its whole ratson d’ére. For, as Bacon well 
remarks (op. cit., p. 193), marturia, ‘testimony,’ ‘ confession,’ 
or ‘ white and red martyrdom ’—to use a phrase felicitously 
chosen to express the double sense of the Greek (cf. ver. 22)— 
is the theme of the whole paragraph 15-24, and is illustrated in 
the respective fates of Peter and the Beloved Disciple. Even 


367 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Zahn, who is hailed as ‘ the Prince of Conservative Scholars,’ 
agrees that not only 24 f. but the whole of chapter 21 is due 
to a hand other than the author of the Gospel: ‘ the inference 
from this that the entire Appendix was attached by the 
friends of John who come distinctly to the front in verse 24 
must be admitted.’ Even those who contend that chapter 21 
is by the same hand as the Gospel admit that ‘ the 21st chapter 
is an afterthought’ (Lightfoot). But it is difficult to under- 
stand why it should have occurred to the Evangelist to narrate 
these incidents only after he had brought his work to the 
impressive and carefully planned conclusion of 20: 30-31. 
With the possible exception of the allusion to the future 
of the ‘ Beloved Disciple’ there is nothing in chapter 21 which, 
on the supposition that it is the work of the Evangelist, would 
not more naturally have been included in the body of the 
Gospel, had the Evangelist desired to record it at all. We 
can only conclude that the author of chapter 21 had a motive 
for recording these incidents which the Evangelist had not. 
We may therefore assign the Appendix to the Redactor, whose 
motive we suggest was twofold: (a) To emphasize the identity 
of the Evangelist with the anonymous disciple and by implica- 
tion with John the son of Zebedee, and thus secure Apostolic 
authority for the Gospel (20-24). (0) To bring the Gospel 
more into line with the dominant Synoptic tradition, and in 
particular to restore to Peter the position of supremacy 
among the Twelve which he occupies in the Synoptics. In 
verses I-14 the Redactor reverts to the Galilean form of the 
tradition, whereby the Risen Jesus appears to the disciples not 
only at Jerusalem, as in our Gospel and Luke (cf. note at be- 
ginning of chap. 20), but also in Galilee (Mk. 14: 28). This 
readjustment would be felt to be specially needful on account 
of the Evangelist’s concentration of interest upon Jerusalem. 
Moreover, the Redactor reintroduces this tradition in a way 
which also reasserts the leadership of Peter. The story of 
the draught of fishes, which in Lk. 5: 4-11 is narrated in 
connexion with Peter’s first call, is here transferred to post- 
resurrection days in order to add colour to the new commission 
now given to Peter. (It may be noted that a similar fishing 
368 


GHAPTER XXI, VERSES 1-2 


scene occurs in the concluding verses of the fragment of the 
“Gospel of Peter,’ and is thought by some to be derived from 
the lost ending of Mark.) It is important to note the close 
affinities of the Redactor’s addition to the Synoptic material 
from which he borrows. The resemblance both in thought 
and language to Lk. 5: 4-11 can hardly be accidental. (Com- 
pare Lk. 5:5 and:ver. 3; Lk. 5:6 and ver. 11; Lk. 5:8 
and ver. 7; Lk. 5: 10 and the commission in vers. 15-17.) 
Chapter 21, though an addition, must be very early, for no 
trace exists in any MS. of a version of the Gospel without it. 
This would well agree with the suggestion that it was appended 
when the Gospel was first translated and published by the 
Redactor (see Introduction, p. lxvi f.). 
After that, Jesus disclosed (the same word as that used in I 

. 7:4, 17: 6) himself once more to the disciples at the sea of 
Tiberias (6: 1 note). It was in this way. Simon Peter, 2 
Thomas (who was called ‘the Twin’), Nathanael from Cana 
in Galilee, the two sons of Zebedee, and two other disciples of 
his, were all together. For Nathanael see 1: 45. His con- 
nexion with Cana is mentioned perhaps to emphasize that, 
though his home was not by the Lake, he was still with the 
other disciples ‘all together.’ ‘The two sons of Zebedee,’ 
James and John, are here mentioned for the first time ; the 
Redactor’s motive for thus mentioning them, in face of the 
silence of the rest of the Gospel, seems clear. As the chapter 
proceeds it becomes almost inevitable for the reader, by a 
process of elimination, to identify the ‘ favourite disciple’ of 
47 and 20, and ‘ the disciple who bears testimony to these facts 
and who wrote them down’ of 24 with the survivor of the sons 
of Zebedee. The Redactor thus secures the identification 
of the Beloved Disciple-Witness-Evangelist with John the 
Apostle. True, the mention of ‘two other disciples’ saves 
the identification from being quite inevitable. If we choose to 
harmonize with the Gospel of Peter these two might be 
Andrew and Levi. But possibly the Redactor has added the 
two anonymous disciples to the other five, partly because 
of his interest in the symbolic number seven, and partly also 
on account of a certain timidity in suggesting an identification 


369 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


concerning which he himself may be of two minds: a‘ penum- 
bra of indefiniteness,’ to use Bacon’s phrase, is secured by the 
mention of ‘ two other disciples.’ The ‘ Beloved Disciple’ is 
thus ‘ identified with the Apostle John, not explicitly, but by 
a process of elimination subtly suggested to the reader, who 
thus assumes the responsibility the Redactor seems loath him- 
self to undertake ’ (Bacon, op. cit., p. 194). So also Dr. A. E. 
Garvie (The Beloved Disciple, p. 32): ‘The writer of the 
Appendix evidently intends to identify “ the disciple whom 
Jesus loved’ with one of the brothers ; and yet there seems 
to be some doubt in his mind, and he leaves himself a door 
of escape from mistake by adding “‘ two other of his disciples ” 
without mentioning their names.’ 

The exquisite story which follows is no doubt intended to 
symbolize the work of the Apostolic Church ; Jesus’ promise 
in Lk. 5: 10 receives an allegorical illustration. Note that 
the disciples are presumed to have gone back to their original 
calling as fishermen—naturally enough if this was the first 
appearance of the Risen Christ, but rather inconsistently 
with the commission given in 20: 21 ff. The circumstances 
suit better the setting of Luke, who places the incident before 

3 the call. Simon Peter said to them, ‘I am going to fish.’ 
They said, ‘ We are coming with you too.’ Off they went and 
embarked in the boat (Peter’s; Lk. 5: 3), but that night they 
caught nothing. They have failed during the best hours for 
fishing ; now comes sunrise when the time for fishing is past. 

4 Now at break of day—symbolical perhaps of the dawn of new 
hope when it is least expected—Jesus was standing on the 
beach, though the disciples did not know it was Jesus—because 
of the darkness and distance and their preoccupation with 

5 work. ‘Lads,’ said Jesus, ‘have you got anything ?’ ‘Lads’ 
(paidia) is the ordinary term of address used to men at 
work, and is to be distinguished from the characteristic 
Johannine use of the word (x Jn. 2: 14, 18). The question 
does not necessarily mean ‘have you anything to eat?’ (so 
A.V.). The word (frosphagion) is used of anything which 
might be served in addition to a plain meal of bread and, 
according to Plutarch, commonly meant ‘fish.’ Jesus 


370 


CHAPTER XXI, VERSES 6-10 


simply asks ‘ Have you caught anything ? ’—a correct technical 
use of the Greek word. The disciples confess failure: ‘No,’ 
they answered. So he told them, ‘ Throw your net on the right 
side of the boat, and you will have a take.’ Perhaps Jesus had 
seen a shoal of fish on that side of the boat, but the right side 
often has symbolical significance as the side of good omen 
(Ezek. 47: 1f., Mt. 25: 33, Lk. 1: 11). At this they threw 
the net, and now they could not haul it in for the mass of fish. 
So the disciple who was Jesus’ favourite said to Peter, ‘ It is 
the Lord !’ We are intended to recognize in the ‘ favourite’ 
the second of Zebedee’s sons, John. As usual the ‘ Beloved 
Disciple’ has the quickest intuition and recognizes the worker 
of the miracle. ‘John had a keener insight; Peter the 
greater ardour’ (Euthymius). The latter’s usual impetuosity 
now shows itself: Hearing it was the Lord, Simon Peter 
threw on his blouse (he was stripped for work) and jumped into 
the water, while the rest of the disciples came ashore in the 
punt (they were not far from the land, only about a hundred 
yards), dragging their netful of fish. With instinctive rever- 
ence for Christ’s presence Peter slips on his ‘ blouse ’—not 
the outer robe or #allith, but a fisherman’s jacket which 
would be thrown on over the loin-cloth in which alone Peter 
was working. The‘ punt’ may be either a more exact descrip- 
tion of the ‘boat’ (ver. 3), or may mean a smaller craft 
attached to it. Curiously nothing more is said about Peter 
at this point. Has the Evangelist in mind the incident of 
Peter walking on the water (Mt. 14: 28 ff.), or may we supple- 
ment the story from Lk. 5:8? In Luke the commission to 
Peter to ‘catch men’ more naturally follows immediately 
upon his act of worship; here that to ‘feed my lambs’ is 
delayed till after the meal. 

When they got to land, they saw a charcoal fire burning, 
with fish cooking on it, and some bread. Jesus said to them, 
‘Bring some of the fish you have just caught.” As Stanton 
remarks (op. cit., p. 20), one cannot but feel ‘a lack of self- 
consistency and life-likeness and “‘ convincingness’”’’ in this 
part of the narrative. The Redactor seems to waver between 
two traditions—that Jesus himself miraculously had the meal 


371 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


already prepared and that the disciples supplied it from their 
catch. Perhaps the suggestion is that both Lord and disciples 
are to make their contribution to the common resources (cf. 
t1 Paul’s thought in Phil. 2: 12f.). So Peter went aboard— 
presumably to unfasten the net from the boat—and hauled 
the net ashore full of large fish, a hundred and fifty three of 
them. The number is undoubtedly symbolical. According to 
Jerome, ancient naturalists distinguished 153 varieties of fish. 
The Gospel net is to embrace every conceivable variety of man 
(Lk. 5: 10, Mt. 13: 47). (For a large number of alternative 
explanations see Westcott im loco.) The next sentence also 
has a symbolical intention: but for all their number the net 
was not torn. (Cf. the seamless robe 19: 23, and contrast 
Lk. 5:6.) ‘The Church’s resources with the risen Christ 
in its midst are never overstrained’ (Strachan). 
The invitation that follows fits in best with the idea that 
12 Jesus already had a meal prepared: Jesus said, ‘Come and 
breakfast.’ The meal is the counterpart of that described in 
Lk. 24: 36-43 ; but here it is not actually stated that Jesus him- 
self ate, though probably this is implied in order to emphasize 
the real corporeality of Jesus’ body. Possibly the thought is 
of a second eucharistic meal at which the Risen Christ presides. 
Overcome by awe and reverence, the disciples refrain from all 
inquisitive questioning : Not one of the disciples dared to ask 
him who he was ; they knew it was the Lord. As Luke puts 
it, they recognized him ‘in the breaking of the bread’: 
13 Jesus went and took the bread and gave it to them, and the fish 
too. The very language recalls the first eucharistic meal 
(cf. 6: 11), whichis hererenewed. Though the preceding para- 
graph appears to be an amalgam of several Synoptic incidents, 
from the point of view of this Gospel it may be said that 
14 this was the third time now that Jesus appeared to the disciples 
after rising from the dead—two previous appearances having 
been recorded at 20: 19 and 20: 26. (For this concluding 
note cf. that on the miracles 2: II, 4: 54.) 
15 Then after breakfast Jesus said to Simon Peter, ‘ Simon, 
son of John...’ The use of the full name marks the solem- 
nity of the occasion (cf. Mt. 16: 17). As one of the motives 


372 


CHAPTER XXI, VERSE 15 


of the Appendix appears to be to safeguard the Synoptic 
tradition by reinstating Peter in his primacy over the other 
disciples, not excepting the Beloved Disciple, Jesus’ question 
to Peter should probably be understood: ‘Do you love me more 
than the others do ? ’—recalling 13: 37 and with a recollection 
of Mk. 14: 29, Lk. 22: 33, where Peter had claimed to be 
supremely devoted. Some commentators, on the ground that 
_ such a question in the presence of the other disciples would 
show lack of tact and delicacy on Jesus’ part, would trans- 
late: ‘Do you love me more than you love these things ? ’— 
all the accompaniments of your ordinary life (your boat, 
fishing-gear, etc.), which you are willing to abandon for my 
sake. A distinction has been thought to be intended between 
Jesus’ question, ‘Do you love?’ (Gk. agapdn, ‘like’), and 
Peter's answer, ‘You know I love... (Gk. philein), 
as if the former word implied the esteem existing between 
benefactor and recipient, and the latter word the personal 
affection existing between members of the same family. Peter 
is thought deliberately to change the colder word into the 
warmer: ‘To love Jesus as a benefactor and to love him for 
himself are lower and higher stages of love’ (Strachan). 
But in this Gospel the two words are evidently interchangeable 
(cf. 13: 23 with 20: 2 and see also II: 3, 5, 36) and such 
subtlety is hardly justifiable ; indeed, Westcott and Godet, 
while also drawing a distinction, consider agapan to be the 
nobler word. The words are interchanged simply for euphony, 
just as ‘feed’ is changed to ‘shepherd’ below (16) and 
‘lambs’ to ‘sheep.’ It is not concern about the quality of his 
love that is apparent in Peter’s answer, but surprise that the 
question should be asked at all: ‘Why, Lord,’ he said, ‘ you 
know I love you.’ With the memory of his failure Peter cannot 
appeal to his own record, but he can to his Master’s under- 
standing. ‘Then feed my lambs,’ said Jesus—implying that 
he answers Peter’s love with trust, while Peter must prove 
his love to Christ by love and service towards his fellows 
(x Jn. 4: 20 f.). Peter is constituted chief Shepherd of the 
Christian flock and bidden to put into practice Jesus’ teaching 
of 10: 1-16. Cf. Mt. 18: 12-14 and Peter’s own words (are 


373 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


they a recollection of Jesus’ words to himself?) in 1 Pet. 
5:1-4. Let Peter make good his boast recorded in Mk. 
14: 27-29. Note that not only is Peter rehabilitated after 
his denial but, in accordance with the Synoptic tradition 
(Mt. 16: 18 f., Lk. 22: 32), his leadership among the disciples 
is emphasized. 
Jesus repeats his question, but this time without comparing 
Peter’s love with that of the others, the emphasis thus falling 
16 upon the sincerity and reality of the love: Again he asked him, 
for the second time, ‘ Simon, son of John, do you love me ? ’— 
‘ Are you sure that love and nothing but love is the bond be- 
tween you and me?’ Peter replies as before and again the 
trust is committed to him: ‘Why, Lord,’ he said, ‘ you know 
I love you.’ ‘Then be a shepherd to my sheep,’ said Jesus. 
‘ The lambs require to be fed ; the sheep require to be guided ’ 
(Westcott). Having three times denied his Master, Peter 
is asked three times to make profession of his love and 
17 three times he is commissioned. For the third time he asked 
him, ‘ Simon, son of John, do you love me?’ Now Peter was 
vexed at being asked a third time ‘Do you love me?’ Peter 
is annoyed that Jesus should seem to doubt him, perhaps all 
the more because he feels that he has given cause for doubt ; 
he therefore asseverates the more earnestly: So he replied, 
‘Lord, you know everything (16: 30)—and taking every- 
thing into account, even my failure—you can see I love you! ’ 
Experience (‘ you see’ contrasted with ‘you know’ above, 
which implies intuitive knowledge) has surely proved Peter’s 
love to Jesus. Jesus said, ‘Then feed my sheep.’ 
Jesus now warns Peter that the impetuous devotion of his 
18 prime will be sorely tested in later days: ‘Truly, truly I tell 
you, you put on your own girdle and went wherever you wanted, 
when you were young.’ The meaning is that now Peter has 
the power to choose his own line of service and vigorously to 
equip himself for it; but the use of past tenses shows that 
the words are framed from the point of view of a later age. 
In the words ‘ put on your girdle ’ there is doubtless a reference 
to the impulsive act of verse 7. ‘But when you grow old, 
you will stretch out your hands for someone to gird you, and 


374 


CHAPTER XXI, VERSES 19-20 


you will be taken where you have no wish to go.’ The language 
suggests the feebleness of an old man who must be tended by 
another and have the whole of life ordered for him irrespective 
of his own desires. But in the words ‘ stretch out your hands’ 
there is a deeper reference to the stretching out of the victim’s 
arms as the executioner straps him to the cross. If Peter’s 
love is real, then he will indeed have to make good his boast 
(13 : 37) and be faithful unto death. In this sense the Re- 
dactor himself interprets Jesus’ words: He said this to 19 
indicate the kind of death by which Peter would glorify God 
(12 : 23,28). ‘The phrase “‘ to glorify God,”’ to signify martyr- 
dom, became a technical term in later ecclesiastical writings. 
Here we find it still in its original freshness ’ (Godet). Peter’s 
martyrdom is generally placed in A.D. 64, at Rome, and is 
attested by Tertullian (Scorp., 15), while Origen states that 
at his own request he was crucified with his head downwards. 

Jesus had thus hinted at Peter’s future martyrdom; 
then he added, ‘ Follow me!’ Superficially the words imply 
that Jesus led Peter aside from the rest; but undoubtedly 
there is a latent reference to 13: 36f. Soon Jesus’ promise 
that ‘later on you will follow me’ will be fulfilled, and Peter 
will have the chance to make good his boast by ‘ following ’ 
Jesus to the death of the Cross (cf. I : 43 note). 

The following verses prove that at the time the Appendix 
was written the Beloved Disciple (whom the Redactor, be it 
remembered, identified with John the Apostle) was dead, 
though there existed a tradition (perhaps due to the mis- 
interpretation of such sayings as Mk. 9: 1, 13 : 30, Lk. 9: 27) 
that Jesus had promised that he would be alive at his coming. 
The Redactor endeavours subtly to reconcile this contradic- 
tion by stressing the conditional nature of Jesus’ promise. 
Peter turned round and saw that the favourite disciple of Jesus 20 
was following, the disciple who had leant on his breast at 
supper and put the question, ‘ Lord, who is to betray you ? ’ 
Again the surface meaning is that the favourite disciple went 
after Jesus and Peter as they retired apart from the rest, but 
with the deeper implication that John too had ‘ followed ’ 
Jesus to death. The elaborate description of the Beloved 


375 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Disciple is meant to explain that it was by right of peculiar 
intimacy that he presumed to follow, and also to prepare the 
way for his subsequent identification, in verse 24, with the 

2I Witness-Evangelist. So, on catching sight of him, Peter said 
to Jesus, ‘And what about him, Lord?’ Peter’s question 
exactly expresses the perplexity of the Redactor’s contem- 
poraries about the death of John. Witness the fanciful 
tradition, actually mentioned by Augustine ‘ on the authority 
of grave men,’ that John was still sleeping in his grave at 
Ephesus, where the moving earth testified to his breathing ! 

22 Jesus replied, ‘If I choose that he should survive till I come 
back, what does that matter to you? Follow me yourself.’ 
‘The ambiguity of the answer which Jesus returns is deliber- 
ately designed to cover both forms of the tradition’ (Bacon, 
op. cit., p. 134), i.e. (a) that John was, like Peter, executed—a 
‘red martyrdom’; (0) that he lived to a great old age to 
‘witness ’ (the same Greek word as ‘ martyr’ ; cf. 24) to Christ— 
a ‘white martyrdom.’ (See note at beginning of chapter.) 
There were two kinds of ‘ witness’ which John might have 
borne, ‘ the testimony of blood by martyrdom, and that of 
speech by a Johannine and priestly activity’ (Godet). The 
stress laid upon the Parousia or ‘ coming back’ of Christ as a 
definite personal event distinguishes the Redactor from the 
Evangelist (cf. 16: 16, etc.). Dods well compares with these 
words of Jesus the thoughts of Thomas 4 Kempis on the man 
who ‘neglects his duty, musing on all that other men are 
bound to do’ (Im. Christi, ii. 3). ‘ Follow me yourself,’ 
says Jesus. ‘Don’t let your doubts and perplexities about 
others hinder your own service.’ But there is also a hint 
that Peter at least is to die before the Parousia, to ‘ follow’ 
Jesus to the Cross. 

Having recorded this ambiguous answer of Jesus the Re- 
dactor now endeavours to reconcile the contradiction involved 
by the death of the Beloved Disciple. While allowing that 

23 this (answer of Jesus) started the report among the brotherhood 
(a name for the Christian community common in Acts but here 
only in the Gospels) that the said disciple was not to die, 
he insists that Jesus however did not say he was not to die ; 


376 


CHAPTER XXI, VERSE 24 


what he said was, ‘ If I choose that he should survive till I come 
back, what does that matter to you?’ In other words the 
traditional promise of Jesus, which has apparently been falsi- 
fied, that John should not die till after the Parousia, is con- 
tingent first upon Christ’s own will, which it is not for us to 
scrutinize, and secondly upon the interpretation which is to 
be put upon his ‘coming back.’ To explain the latter has 
been the purpose of the last half of the Gospel. In the Johan- 
nine sense at least Christ had come back (in the Spirit) before 
the Beloved Disciple’s death. 

The Gospel closes with a certificate of authenticity parallel 
co that of 19: 35. The Beloved Disciple, who has already by 
implication been identified with the Apostle John, is now 
guaranteed to be not only an eye-witness of the events re- 
corded but also the actual writer of the Gospel: This was the 24 
disciple who bears testimony (the ‘ Witness ’) to these facts— 
not merely the preceding incidents but the contents of the 
Gospel as a whole—and who wrote them down (the ‘ Evangel- 
ist’) ; his testimony we know (i.e. the Redactor and his school 
speaking for the Church of his day) is true. The Beloved 
Disciple is one who still ‘ bears testimony ’ ; whether or no his 
“martyrdom ’ was ‘red,’ certain it is that it is ‘ white.’ Yet 
the use of the present tense does not necessarily imply that the 
Beloved Disciple is regarded as still alive. His ‘ witness’ may 
continue after death just as does that of Moses and the 
prophets (5:39). The Redactor thus identifies not only the 
‘Witness’ but also the ‘Evangelist’ with the Beloved Dis- 
ciple. Yet it is upon the testimony rather than upon the 
writing that he lays emphasis. ‘ The words “ and wrote these 
things’ seem to be added to “ beareth witness concerning 
these things”’ as a kind of afterthought. Most prominence 
at all events is given to his having borne witness. From the 
position and form of this reference to writing, it is not unfair to 
infer that there may have been some uncertainty in the mind 
of the framer of the statement as to the extent to which it was 
to be attributed to the same disciple’ (Stanton, op. cit., p. 134). 
The Redactor is sure that the Beloved Disciple is ‘ the Witness’ ; 
he is not quite so sure that he is the actual author of the Gospel. 


377 


THE GOSPEL OF JOHN 


Finally, the Redactor picks up the thought of the true 
conclusion of the Gospel in 20: 30 f., and adds a hyperbolical 
25 description of the scope of Jesus’ activities: Now there is much 
else that Jesus did—so much, that if it were written down in 
detail, I do not suppose the world itself could hold the written 
records. There is no reason to suppose that the verse is by 
a hand other than that which wrote the whole of the Appendix. 
The hyperbole amply explains its excision from the Sinaitic 
MS. And yet can we justly call it hyperbole when we consider 
the mighty ‘ Gesta Christi’ through nineteen hundred years ? 
(Cipr4or2:) 


378 


A 
3 


ore 
pears ate 
eaeee 


ae 


