Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016 


https://archive.org/details/revivalsofeighte00macf_0 


CAMBUSLANG— SCENE  OF  THE  OUT-DOOR  RELIGIOUS  SERVICES. 

Vide  Preface , 


9 


THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY, 


PARTICULARLY  AT 


CAMBUSLANG. 

WITH  THREE  SERMONS 

BY  THE  REV.  GEORGE  WHITEFIELD, 

TAKEN  IN  SHORT  HAND. 


COMPILED  FROM  ORIGINAL  MANUSCRIPTS  AND  CONTEMPORARY  PUBLICATIONS. 


By  D.  MACFARLAN,  D.D., 

RENFREW. 


JOHNSTONE  AND  HUNTER, 

15  PBIN CES  STREET,  EDINBURGH;  AND 


26  TATERNOSTER  R 0 W,  LONDON. 


EDINBURGH  : 

PRINTED  BY  JOHNSTONE  AND  HUNTER, 
104  HIGH  STREET. 


3 4 V 

"8  K 


PREFACE. 


The  manuscripts  from  which  this  volume  was  prepared 
were  chiefly  left  by  the  Rev.  William  M4Culloch  of  Cam- 
buslang,  and  are  now  the  property  of  the  Free  Church 
Library,  of  Mrs.  Coutts,  Mr.  MtCulloch,s  grand- daughter,  and 
another  lady.  The  contemporary  publications  made  available 
are  partly  the  property  of  the  Free  Church  library,  partly  of 
James  Hog,  Esq.  of  Newliston,  and  partly  of  the  under- 
signed. 

The  preparation  of  the  work  was  undertaken  at  the 
request  of  the  Assembly's  Publication  Committee,  but 
something  of  the  kind  had  long  been  contemplated  by  th  e 
writer,  as  a means  of  awakening  a thoughtless  and  sleeping 
generation. 

It  must  be  known  to  all  conversant  with  the  history  of 
the  period  referred  to,  that  a painful  controversy  took  place 
between  some  of  the  early  Seceders  and  friends  of  the 
revivals  connected  with  the  Establishment.  It  was  thought 
injudicious  to  mix  up  matters  of  a controversial  nature 
with  the  historical  details  of  a wrork  believed  to  be  of  God, 
but  it  was  not  meant  to  conceal  or  suppress  these.  A 
Review  of  the  whole  was  prepared  and  sent  to  the  printer, 
which  could  not  be  admitted  without  greatly  exceeding  the 


VI 


PREFACE. 


fixed  limits  of  the  volume;  and  the  same  reason  prevented  the 
insertion  of  a greater  number  of  Mr.  Whitefield’s  sermons. 
In  absence  of  the  review  above  referred  to,  it  may  be  stated, 
that  there  were  circumstances  on  both  sides  leading  to 
temptation;  that  these  were  allowed,  especially  on  the  one 
side,  a very  undue  influence;  that  much  may  be  learned 
from  what  then  took  place  to  guard  parties  similarly  cir- 
cumstanced against  falling  into  similar  errors;  but  that 
there  is  nothing  going  either  to  weaken  the  evidence  of  the 
work  being  of  God,  or  to  discourage  in  seeking  anew  times 
of  refreshing. 

The  Frontispiece  was  taken  on  the  spot;  but  from  the 
extent  of  the  scene  and  the  narrow  limits  of  the  sketch, 
farther  description  may  be  useful  to  enable  the  reader  to 
understand  the  references  which  occur  in  the  volume.  It 
was  taken  from  the  top  of  the  bank  on  the  south  side  of  the 
church-yard,  and  therefore  the  church,  which  has  been  re- 
built, does  not  appear.  Immediately  in  front,  but  at  the 
extremity  of  the  low  ground  nearly  southward,  will  be  seen 
the  meeting  of  two  small  streams,  which  flow  together  past 
the  church  under  the  name  of  the  Kirk-burn.  From  the 
meeting  of  these  streams,  northward  along  the  east  side, 
there  is  a comparatively  level  green,  having  near  its  centre 
two  aged  hawthorn  trees,  growing  so  much  together  as 
scarcely  to  fail  in  attracting  notice.  On  this  green,  and 
probably  on  the  south  side  of  these  trees,  stood  the  com- 
munion tables  at  the  great  meetings  in  July  and  August, 
1742,  and  the  principal  tent  on  these  occasions  is  said  to 
have  stood  on  the  stripe  of  ground  separating  the  two 
streams.  Preaching  from  this,  the  minister  would  be  look- 
ing to  the  north-east,  having  the  brae  from  the  south-east 
all  the  v, ay  round  to  tin*  north  before  him,  as  well  as  the 


PREFACE. 


Vl  l 


level  tract  of  ground  immediately  in  front  of  the  tent — a 
space  altogether  capable  of  containing  many  thousands,  and 
remarkably  well  adapted  for  sitting  and  hearing.  West  of 
the  bum  and  nearly  opposite  the  church,  the  hill  slopes  so 
away  as  to  admit  of  a separate  meeting  very  much  out  of 
hearing  from  the  tent  already  described,  and  here  a second 
tent  was  pitched  on  these  sacramental  occasions,  and  a 
second  congregation  formed.  The  church-yard  rests  on  a 
sandstone  cliff,  with  the  burn  passing  deep  below  on  the 
west ; and  there  was  a third  tent  with  a separate  congrega- 
tion. The  old  manse  stood  a little  way  to  the  south-east  of 
the  church-yard,  and  not  far  from  the  top  of  the  brae  on  the 
east.  And  all  round,  but  especially  southwards  in  the 
direction  of  the  farm  seen  in  the  distance,  are  the  braes  so 
often  referred  to  as  places  of  retirement  for  devotional  pur- 
poses. The  hollow  space  given  in  the  sketch  and  the  brae 
round  the  east  side,  were  occupied  not  merely  on  com- 
munion occasions,  but  generally,  when  weather  permitted, 
throughout  the  Revival  period,  the  church  being  both  small 
and  out  of  repair. 

It  is  necessary  only  to  add,  that  the  state  of  religion  pre- 
paratory to  the  Revivals  of  the  last  century,  and  the  longing 
desires  of  many  who,  in  discouraging  circumstances,  feared 
God,  were  not  unlike  what  may  be  observed  at  present. 
May  God  grant  us  the  farther  likeness  of  experiencing,  as 
they  did,  the  power  of  the  Highest! 


Free  Church  Manse, 
Renfrew. 


D.  MACFARLAN. 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 

Chapter 


Pagh 

I. — Introductory  sketch  of  the  times,  and  of  the  Re- 
vivals generally  ....  9 

II. — The  same  continued  . . . 19 

III.  — Some  account  of  Mr.  M‘Culloch  of  Cambuslang, 

chiefly  as  furnished  by  his  son,  the  Rev.  Dr. 
Robert  McCulloch,  minister  of  Dairsie,  and 
published  with  a volume  of  sermons  in  1793  34 

IV.  — Means  and  circumstances  apparently  employed 

in  bringing  about  the  Revival  at  Cambuslang  38 

V. — The  first  three  months  of  the  Revival  at  Cam- 


buslang .....  45 

VI. — The  First  Communion  ...  61 

VII. — The  Second  Communion  ...  70 

VIII. — The  condition  of  Cambuslang  after  the  Revival 

of  1742  had  subsided  ...  88 

IX. — Some  account  of  two  manuscript  volumes  left 
by  Mr.  M‘Culloch,  and  of  the  Cases  which 
they  contain  . . . . 105 

X. — A selection  of  Cases  prepared  from  the  first 
volume,  and  approved  of  by  the  original 
examinators  . . . . 113 

William  Baillie  . . . ib. 

Janet  Jackson  ....  117 

Elizabeth  Jackson  . . . 123 

Catherine  Jackson  . . . 127 

George  Tassie  . . . . 135 

Alexander  Roger  . . . 140 

Elizabeth  Dykes  . . . 142 

James  Kirkland  . . . 148 

R.  Shearer  . . . . 151 

R.  Barclay  . . . . 157 

Archibald  Bell  . . . 162 

James  Tenant  . . . . 167 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Chapter  XI. — A selection  of  Cases  prepared  from  the  second 

manuscript  volume  . . . 173 

Bailie  Weir  . . ib. 

Mrs.  Weir  . . . . 175 

John  Parker  . . . . 177 

Daniel  M‘Larty  . . . 186 

Bessie  Lyon  . . . . 188 

Sarah  Gilchrist  . . . 191 

Catherine  Anderson  . . . 198 

Jean  Walker  ....  202 

Andrew  Faulds  . . . 203 

Margaret  Borland  . . . 205 

Archibald  Smith  . . . 207 

Chapter  XII. — The  extension  of  the  work  to  other  parts  of  Scot- 
land .....  213 

The  Presbytery  of  Hamilton  . . 218 

The  Presbytery  of  Irvine  . * 219 

The  Presbytery  of  Paisley  . . 221 

Glasgow  ....  ib. 

The  Barony  Parish  . . . 224 

The  City  of  Glasgow  . . . 226 

The  Parish  of  Calder  . . 230 

The  Parish  of  Baldernock  . . 231 

The  Parish  of  Kirkintilloch  . . 233 

The  Parish  of  Campsie  . . 234 

The  Parish  of  Kilsyth  . . 237 

Parishes  lying  East  and  North  of  Kilsyth  239 
The  Parish  of  Gargunnock  . . 240 

The  Presbytery  of  Auchterarder — Parish  of 
Muthill  ....  242 

Other  Parishes  in  Presbytery  of  Auchter- 
arder— Parish  of  Monivaird  . 247 

Crief 248 

The  Town  of  Dundee  . . ib. 

The  Synod  of  Ross  . . . 250 

The  Parish  of  Rosskeen  . . ib. 

The  Parish  of  Nigg  . . 251 

The  Parish  of  Rosemarkie  . . 253 

Other  Parishes  in  the  same  District  254 

The  Parish  of  Golspie,  in  Sutherland  ib. 

Other  Parishes  in  the  District  . 256 

The  City  of  Edinburgh  . . ib. 


SERMONS  BY  THE  REV.  GEORGE  WH1TEFIELD. 

Sermon  I. — The  duty  of  a gospel  minister  . . 3 

Sermon  II.  -The  method  of  grace  . . . . 18 

Sermon  III. — The  kingdom  of  God  ....  34 


THE  EEVIYAL  OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY 


ESPECIALLY  AT  CAMBUSLANG. 


CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH  OF  THE  TIMES  IN  WHICH  THE 
REVIVAL  OCCURRED. 

An  interesting  subject,  connected  with  the  history  of  practical 
godliness,  is  the  recurrence  of  reviving  power  after  long 
seasons  of  deadness.  Occasions  of  this  kind  are  most  notice- 
able when  confined  to  particular  churches  or  countries ; but 
they  are  more  wonderful  when  they  occur  in  churches  and 
countries  widely  apart.  It  seems,  on  such  occasions,  as  if 
the  voice  of  the  Bridegroom  were  heard,  saying  to  the  churcli 
at  large,  u Rise  up,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away ; 
for,  lo,  the  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone : the 
flowers  appear  on  the  earth ; the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds 
is  come,  and  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land;  the 
fig  tree  putteth  forth  her  green  figs,  and  the  vines  with  the 
tender  grape  give  a good  smell.  Arise,  my  love,  my  fair 
one,  and  come  away.”  (Cant.  ii.  10-13.) 

About  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  and  beginning  of  the 
eighteenth  century  most  of  the  churches,  whether  in  the 
United  Kingdom  or  the  American  colonies,  were  in  a com- 
paratively low  state.  Arianism  and  Deism  prevailed  in 
England.  In  Scotland,  the  old  style  of  preaching  vras  being 
fast  laid  aside,  and  cold  formal  addresses,  verging  tovrarc!s  a 
kind  of  Socinianism,  were  becoming  fashionable.  Old  M r. 

B 


10 


LOW  STATE  OF  RELIGION 


Hutchison,  minister  of  Kilellan,  in  Renfrewshire,  who  saw 
hut  the  beginning  of  this  progress,  used  to  say  to  Wodrow 
the  historian : “ When  I compare  the  times  before  the  resto- 
ration with  those  since  the  revolution,  I must  own  that  the 
young  ministers  preach  accurately  and  methodically;  but 
there  was  far  more  of  the  power  and  efficacy  of  the  Spirit 
and  of  the  grace  of  God  went  along  with  sermons  in  those 
days  than  now.  For  my  own  part  (all  the  glory  be  to  God), 
I seldom  set  my  foot  in  a pulpit  in  those  days,  but  I had 
notice  of  some  blessed  effects  of  the  word.”  The  Arianism 
of  England  was  carried  to  the  north  of  Ireland,  and  finding 
a state  of  feeling  suited  to  its  reception,  it  took  root  and 
grew  up,  so  as  to  characterize  a distinct  section  of  the  pres- 
byterian  church,  and  now  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the 
Remonstrant  Synod.  The  south  and  west  of  Ireland  were 
subjected  to  a blight  not  less  withering,  though  of  a different 
kind,  and  which  continued  much  longer — continued,  to  a 
great  extent,  throughout  the  whole  of  the  last  century. 

The  following  extract  is  from  a letter  now  before  us, 
written  in  1838  by  a highly  honoured  servant  of  God  in  the 
Irish  establishment,  and  who,  perhaps  more  than  any  one 
else,  is  able  to  speak  of  what  God  has  since  done  in  these 
parts : “ The  state  of  the  south  and  west  of  Ireland  is  very 
peculiar.  The  counties  have  twice  changed  their  land- 
holders. In  the  time  of  Cromwell  and  of  king  William 
there  were  forfeitures,  and  these  continued  till  the  reign 
of  George  I.  The  principal  lands  were  given  to  military 
officers  and  soldiers  connected  with  the  two  armies;  but 
some  of  the  estates  were  purchased  by  English  adventurers 
— all,  however,  protestants.  In  some  places  the  original 
land  tenants  were  driven  out,  in  others  they  were  allowed 
to  remain,  but  nearly  all  the  original  proprietors  went  to 
the  continent,  most  of  them  to  France.  The  gentry  were 
now  all  soldiers,  and  utterly  regardless  about  religion,  edu  - 
cation,  morality,  or  anything  tending  to  the  instruction  or 
improvement  of  the  people.  They  gave  themselves  to  sport- 
ing and  carousing,  leading  a kind  of  half-savage  life.  Many 


AT  TIIE  END  OF  THE  SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY. 


11 


noblemen  and  gentlemen  rose  above  this;  but,  as  their  man- 
ners got  more  refined,  they  generally  went  to  England,  leav- 
ing the  country  at  the  disposal  of  mere  fox-hunters — few  of 
them  remaining  longer  than  during  the  sittings  of  the  Irish 
parliament.  As  agriculture  extended,  benefices  became 
more  valuable,  unions  were  multiplied,  and  large  districts 
of  country  were  in  consequence  severally  placed  under  one 
clergyman.  The  clergy  were  usually  all  sons  of  the  gentry, 
and  accustomed  to  their  sporting,  drinking,  and  riotous 
habits.  They  had  no  preparation  for  ministerial  duties  but 
a college  degree;  and  no  education,  either  literary  or  moral, 
which  had  not  been  obtained  among  wild  young  men  at 
college.  According  to  the  interest  which  they  happened 
to  have,  they  passed  at  once  from  college  to  ministerial 
charges,  and  again  mixed  in  all  the  dissipation  of  the  dis- 
tricts where  these  lay.  Ignorant  of  the  truth,  they  and  their 
congregations  were  satisfied  with  some  short  moral  discourse. 
The  people  were  very  generally  as  ignorant  of  the  Scriptures 
and  Scripture  truth  as  the  inhabitants  of'Hindostan.  The 
priests  were  meanwhile  at  work  among  the  people,  and 
they  had  many  helping  them.  The  sick  and  dying  were 
watched;  their  fears  were  wrought  upon.  They  were  told 
of  the  power  which  the  priests  had — of  the  influence  pos- 
sessed by  the  Virgin,  and  much  about  the  old  church; 
and  as  soon  as  any  seemed  to  give  way,  on  whatever 
point,  the  priest  was  sent  for — he  plied  them  anew,  and 
seldom  failed  in  succeeding  with  the  poor  ignorant  people. 
They  were  now  ready  to  receive  absolution*;  but  he  had 
farther  conditions  to  propose.  The  whole  family  must  sub- 
mit to  be  rebaptized,  or  at  least  promise  to  attend  mass ; 
and  this,  also,  was  not  infrequently  gained — the  protestant 
clergyman  being  all  the  while  at  a distance,  neither  know- 
ing nor  caring  much  about  what  was  going  on.  In  this 
way  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  lower  and  middle  classes  of 
protestants  went  over  to  the  church  of  Rome.  Throughout 
whole  districts  our  churches  were  almost  emptied,  and  many 
in  country  places  were  allowed  to  fall  into  ruins.” 


12 


LOW  STATE  OF  RELIGION. 


In  New  England,  the  visitation  of  barrenness  was  much 
more  of  the  kind  common  to  most  of  the  other  countries, 
and  its  continuation  was,  like  theirs,  temporary.  Dr.  In- 
crease Mather,  writing  towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  says  : “ Prayer  is  necessary  on  this  account,  that 
conversions  have  become  rare  in  this  age  of  the  world. 
They  that  have  their  thoughts  exercised  in  discerning  things 
of  this  nature,  have  sad  apprehensions  that  the  work  of 
conversion  has  come  to  a stand.  During  the  last  age 
scarcely  a sermon  was  p reached  icithout  some  being  ap- 
parently concerted , and  sometimes  hundreds  were  concerted 
by  one  sermon . Who  of  us  now  can  say  that  we  have  seen 
anything  such  as  this?  Clear,  sound  conversions  are  not 
frequent  in  our  congregations ; the  great  bulk  of  the  pre- 
sent generation  are  apparently  poor,  perishing,  and,  if  the 
Lord  prevent  not,  undone ; many  are  profane,  drunkards, 
lascivious,  scoffers  at  the  power  of  godliness,  and  disobe- 
dient ; others  are  civil  outwardly,  conformed  to  good  order, 
because  so  educated,  but  without  knowing  aught  of  a real 
change  of  heart.”  The  same  esteemed  writer  says,  in  1721 : 
44  I am  now  in  my  eighty-third  year,  and  having  had  an 
opportunity  of  conversing  with  the  first  planters  of  this 
country,  and  having  been  for  sixty -fice  years  a preacher 
of  the  gospel,  I feel  as  did  the  ancient  men,  who  had 
seen  the  former  temple,  and  who  wept  aloud  as  they  saw 
the  latter.  The  children  of  New  England  are,  or  once  were, 
for  the  most  part,  the  children  of  godly  parents.  What  did 
our  forefathers  come  into  this  wilderness  for?  Not  to  gain 
estates  as  men  do  now,  hut  for  religion,  and  that  they  might 
have  their  children  in  a hopeful  way  of  being  truly  reli- 
gious. There  was  a famous  man  who  preached  before  one 

of  the  Greatest  assemblies  that  ever  was  addressed — it  was 
© 

about  seventy  years  ago — and  he  said  to  them,  4 1 lived  in 
a country  seven  years,  and  all  that  time  I never  heard  a pro- 
fane oath  or  saw’  a man  drunk/  And  where  wras  that 
country?  It  was  New  England!  Ah,  degenerate  New 
England!  what  art  thou  come  to  at  this  day?  How  are 


COMMENCEMENT  OF  THE  REVIVAL 


13 


those  sins  become  common  that  were  once  not  even  heard 
of!” 

It  was  amidst  circumstances  such  as  these  that  the  re- 
vivals of  the  eighteenth  century  took  Their  rise.  There  is 
perhaps  no  time  during  which  the  natural  tide  is  not  either 
ebbing  or  flowing,  and  yet  there  is  a period  during  which  it 
would  be  difficult  to  say,  from  observation , whether  the 
one  has  ceased  or  the  other  begun.  Tn  this  case,  our 
difficulty  is  dependent  on  our  judging  from  appearances, 
instead  of  observing  the  relation  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 
The  same  thing  occurs  in  those  changes  which  affect  the 
state  of  religion.  Judging  from  appearances,  it  is  often 
difficult  to  say  whether  a progress  for  the  better  has  be- 
gun, or  whether  matters  are  not  still  growing  worse ; but 
Ave  know  that  in  the  purposes  of  God  there  is  nothing 
doubtful ; and  even  the  observer  may  sometimes  detect,  in 
the  under-current,  a change  in  the  flow  of  the  stream,  al- 
though not  }^et  perceptible  to  all.  Early  in  the  eighteenth 
century  there  were,  in  many  places  all  over  the  countries 
referred  to,  a feeling  of  the  evil,  inquiries  as  to  the  reme- 
dial means  which  should  be  employed,  and  an  enlarged 
measure  of  the  spirit  and  exercise  of  prayer ; not  a few  of 
the  pious  were  stirred  up  to  unusual  wrestlings  with  God. 
Societies  were  formed  in  various  places,  but  especially  in 
London,  for  discouraging  vice  and  instructing  the  ignorant ; 
missionary  societies  were  formed,  and  missions  sent  forth 
to  the  heathen — the  Danish  missionaries  set  sail  for  the 
East  Indies  in  1705  ; and  as  regarded  societies,  something 
like  what  occurred  towards  the  £nd  of  the  last  century, 
though  far  less  in  amount,  made  its  appearance;  in  1701, 
the  society  for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  in  foreign 
parts  was  established,  under  the  auspices  of  king  William, 
and  towards  the  end  of  the  same  year,  a society  was  formed 
for  promoting  Christian  knowledge  at  home ; in  Scotland, 
also,  a society  for  propagating  Christian  knowledge  in  the 
highlands  and  islands,  and  in  foreign  parts,  began  to  be 
formed  in  1704,  and  in  1709  received,  according  to  the 


14 


REVIVAL  IN  AMERICA. 


fashion  of  the  times,  a charter  from  the  crown.  In  the 
course  of  a few  years,  these  and  many  similar  undertakings 
began  to  lay  hold  of  the  religious  mind ; and  this  was,  no 
doubt,  indicative  of  divine  power,  though  as  yet  apparent 
only,  or  chiefly,  in  ichat  concerned  others.  But  it  was  not 
long  after  this,  when  the  power  of  the  Spirit  became  mani- 
fest, and  it  appeared,  not  merely  in  the  doings  of  men,  but 
on  men  themselves , even  the  disobedient. 

To  begin  where  wre  stopped — in  reviewing  the  preced- 
ing period,  and  passing  over  less  remarkable  manifestations 
of  divine  power,  so  early  as  1734,  a very  wonderful  re- 
vival took  place  in  Northampton,  New-  England,  under 
the  ministry  of  the  celebrated  Jonathan  Edwards,  a man  of 
deep  thought  and  guarded  language,  and  not  at  all  likely  to 
be  either  himself  carried  away  with  strong  feelings,  or  to 
be  the  instrument  of  mere  excitement  among  others.  His 
own  narrative  of  what  took  place  is  so  generally  known  as 
to  render  any  notice  of  it  here  unnecessary.  But  we  ought 
not  to  take  leave  of  the  labours  of  Edwards  Avithout  remind- 
ing the  reader  of  that  blessed  Avork,  some  ten  years  later, 
among  the  poor  Indians,  under  the  ministrations  of  the 
holy  and  self-denied  Brainerd — a Avork  brought  before  the 
public  through  EdAvards,  and  connected  also  Avith  the  society 
in  Scotland.  But  on  casting  our  eye  across  the  white  har- 
A^est  fields,  A\diich  Avere  from  1734  downwnrds  heard  rustling 
and  falling  beneath  the  gospel  sickle,  all  over  NeAv  England, 
and  other  parts  of  the  colonies,  south  and  north,  we  are  at 
a loss  where  to  begin  or  how  to  shape  our  Avay.  The  A~ast 
number  of  publications  issued  about  the  middle  of  the  last 
century  on  American  revivals,  greatly  injure  the  effect  which 
fewer  Avould  have  produced.*  On  the  history  of  revivals, 
Avhether  here  or  in  other  parts  of  the  wnrld,  we  knoAv  of  no 
single  work,  on  the  whole,  better  than  Dr.  Gillies’  Historical 

* We  have  examined  upwards  of  a score  of  these,  including  some  full 
of  the  most  virulent  abuse.  One,  entitled  “ A faithful  Narrative  of  the 
Remarkable  Revival  of  Religion  in  East  Hampton,  Long  Island,  by  the 
Rev.  Samuel  Buell,”  is,  among  others,  truly  interesting  and  satisfactory. 


REVIVAL  IN  AMERICA. 


15 


Collections.  But  the  letters  and  journals  of  Whitefield 
shed  a strong,  though  rapidly  passing  light,  over  the  whole 
of  that  interesting  scene.  And  as  some  very  naturally  call 
in  question  strong  statements  made  under  strong  feelings, 
they  will  find  a calm  and  judicious  review  of  the  whole  in 
the  Constitutional  History  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  by 
Professor  Hodge  of  Princeton  college — a living  author, 
equally  distinguished  for  talents  and  orthodoxy.  As  this 
work  is,  we  fear,  hut  little  known  in  this  country,  we  shall 
extract  from  it  the  more  largely.  After  describing  the 
general  deadness  which  prevailed  on  both  sides  of  the  At- 
lantic at  an  earlier  period,  he  adds : 44  The  earliest  manifes- 
tation of  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  our  portion  of 
the  church  (meaning  the  preshy terian),  was  at  Freehold, 
New  Jersey,  under  the  ministry  of  the  Rev.  John  Tennent, 
who  was  called  to  that  congregation  in  1730,  and  died  in 
1732.,,  44  The  settling  of  that  place,”  says  his  brother,  the 

Rev.  William  Tennent,  44  with  a gospel  ministry,  was  owing, 
under  God,  to  the  agency  of  some  Scotch  people  that  came 
to  it ; among  whom  there  was  none  so  painstaking  in  this 
blessed  work  as  one  Walton  (Walter?)  Ker,  who,  in  1685, 
for  his  faithful  and  conscientious  adherence  to  God  and 
his  truth,  as  professed  by  the  church  of  Scotland,  was  there 
apprehended  and  sent  to  this  country,  under  a sentence  of 
perpetual  banishment.  By  which  it  appears  that  the  devil 
and  his  instruments  lost  their  aim,  in  sending  him  from 
home,  where  it  is  unlikely  he  could  ever  have  been  so  ser- 
viceable to  Christ’s  kingdom  as  he  has  been  here.  He  is 
yet  alive  (in  1744),  and,  blessed  be  God,  flourishing  in  his 
old  age,  being  in  his  eighty-eighth  year.” 

This  incident  is  full  of  interest.  In  1685  there  was 
much  blood  shed  in  Scotland,  many  wanton  cruelties  were 
practised,  and  many  hundreds  were  banished  to  the  colonies  ; 
and  among  these  New  Jersey  is  particularly  mentioned. 
The  name  of  44  Walter  Ker”  also  occurs  as  44  banished  to 
the  plantations,  September  3,  1685.”  (Wodrow.)  What 
wisdom  but  that  of  God  could  so  overrule,  that  the  puritans 


16 


REVIVAL  IX  AMERICA. 


driven  from  England,  and  the  presbyterians  from  Scotland, 
should  be  as  the  sowing  of  that  glorious  harvest  which  was 
to  be  so  largely  reaped  towards  the  middle  of  the  following 
century;  and  that  this  should  be  a chief  means  of  reviving 
the  cause  of  God,  both  in  England  and  Scotland?  Yet  so 
it  was,  as  might  he  shown  from  other  and  detailed  evidence. 
44  O the  depth  of  the  riches,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge of  God ! how  unsearchable  are  his  judgments,  and  his 
ways  past  finding  out!”  (Rom.  xi.  33.) 

After  detailing,  to  some  extent,  this  work  of  God,  not 
only  among  the  presbyterians,  hut  also  the  congregation- 
alists  and  others,  the  author  goes  on  to  remark  respecting 
its  character,  as  genuine  or  otherwise : 44  W e can  compare 
the  doctrines  then  taught,  the  exercises  experienced,  and 
the  effects  produced,  with  the  word  of  God,  and  thus  leam 
how  far  the  work  was  in  accordance  with  that  infallible 
standard.  The  first  of  these  points  is  a matter  of  primary 
importance.  How  wall  the  revival  under  consideration 
abide  this  test?  Is  there  any  doubt  as  to  the  doctrines 
taught  by  Whitefield,  the  Tennents,  Blair,  Dickinson,  and 
the  other  prominent  preachers  of  that  day?  They  were 
the  doctrines  of  the  reformation,  and  of  the  standards  of 
the  preshyterian  church.  The  doctrines  preached,”  says 
Turnbull,  44  by  those  famous  men,  who  were  owned  as  the 
principal  instruments  of  this  remarkable  revival  of  God’s 
work,  were  the  doctrines  of  original  sin,  of  regeneration  by 
the  supernatural  influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  of  its 
absolute  necessity;  of  effectual  calling,  of  justification  by 
faith,  wholly  on  account  of  the  imputed  righteousness  of 
Christ;  of  repentance  towards  God,  and  faith  towards  our 
Lord  J esus  Christ ; of  the  perseverance  of  the  saints,  of  the 
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  them,  and  of  its  divine 
consolation  and  joy.”  The  second  criterion  is  the  nature 
of  the  experience  professed  by  its  subjects.  When  we 
come  to  ask,  What  was  the  experience  of  the  subjects  of 
this  revival?  we  find,  amidst  much  that  is  doubtful  or 
objectionable,  the  essential  characteristics  of  genuine  con- 


REVIVAL  IN  AMERICA. 


17 


version.  In  a great  multitude  of  cases,  the  same  feelings 
were  professed  which  we  find  in  the  saints  whose  spiritual 
life  is  detailed  in  the  Bible,  and  which  the  children  of  God, 
in  all  ages,  have  avowed;  the  same  sense  of  sin,  the  same 
apprehension  of  the  mercy  of  God,  the  same  faith  in  Christ, 
the  same  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  the  same  desire  for 
communion  with  God,  and  the  same  endeavours  after  new 
obedience.  Such,  however,  is  the  ambiguity  of  human 
language,  such  the  deceitfulness  of  the  human  heart,  and 
such  the  devices  of  Satan,  that  no  mere  detail  of  feeling, 
and  especially  no  description  which  one  man  may  give  of 
the  feelings  of  others,  can  afford  conclusive  evidence  of 
the  nature  of  those  feelings  in  the  sight  of  God.  We 
must,  therefore,  look  farther  than  mere  professions  or  detail 
of  experiences  for  evidences  of  the  real  character  of  this 
work.  We  must  look  to  its  effects.  What,  then,  were  the 
fruits  of  this  revival?  Mr.  William  Tennent  says,  that  the 
subjects  of  this  work,  who  had  come  under  his  observation, 
were  brought  to  approve  of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  to 
delight  in  the  law  of  God,  to  endeavour  to  do  his  will,  to 
love  those  wrho  have  the  divine  image : that  the  formal  had 
become  spiritual;  the  proud,  humble;  the  wanton  and  vile, 
sober  and  temperate;  the  worldly,  heavenly-minded;  the 
extortioner,  just;  and  the  self-seeker,  desirous  to  promote 
the  glory  of  God.  The  convention  of  ministers,  that  met 
at  Boston  in  1743,  state,  that  those  who  were  regarded  as 
converts  confirmed  the  genuineness  of  the  change  which 
they  professed  to  have  experienced,  by  the  external  fruits 
of  holiness  in  their  lives,  so  that  they  appeared  to  those 
who  had  the  nearest  access  to  them,  as  so  many  epistles 
of  Jesus  Christ,  written  not  with  ink,  but  by  the  Spirit 
of  the  living  God. 

And  after  rehearsing  the  opinion  of  president  Edwards, 
which  we  need  not  copy,  he  adds:  “ Turnbull,  a later  wit- 
ness, says,  ‘ The  effects  on  great  numbers  were  abiding  and 
most  happy.  They  were  the  most  uniformly  exemplary 
Christians  with  whom  I was  ever  acquainted.  I was  born, 


18 


REVIVAL  IN  AMERICA. 


and  had  my  education  in  that  part  of  the  town  of  Albany, 
in  which  the  work  was  most  prevalent  and  powerful. 
Many,  who  at  that  time  imagined  that  they  were  born  of 
God,  made  a profession  of  their  faith  in  Christ,  and  were 
admitted  to  full  communion,  and  appeared  to  walk  with 
God.  They  were  constant  and  serious  in  their  attendance 
on  public  worship,  prayerful,  righteous,  and  charitable, 
strict  in  the  government  of  their  families;  and  not  one 
of  them,  so  far  as  he  knew,  was  ever  guilty  of  scandal. 
Eight  or  ten  years  after  the  religious  excitement,  there  was 
not  a drunkard  in  the  whole  parish.  It  was,'  he  adds, 
‘ the  most  glorious  and  extensive  revival  of  religion  and 
reformation  of  manners  which  this  country  has  ever  known. 
It  is  estimated,  that  in  two  or  three  years , thirty  or  forty 
thousand  souls  were  born  into  the  family  of  heaven  in  New 
England , besides  great  numbers  in  New  York,  New  Jersey, 
and  the  more  southern  provinces/  ” 


CHAPTER  II. 


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCH  OF  THE  TIMES  CONTINUED. 

On  now  turning  to  England,  we  are  at  once  met  witli  the 
full  blush  of  a returning  summer.  On  looking  back,  we 
see,  so  early  as  1729,  a few  students  in  the  university  of 
Oxford  meeting  for  prayer,  giving  themselves  wholly  to 
God,  and  going  forth  among  the  poor  and  the  ignorant  to 
instruct  and  comfort  them.  And  in  the  course  of  ten 
years,  those  who  had  thus  been  a small  and  despised  meet- 
ing of  students,  went  forth  as  apostles,  over  England  and 
Wales,  and  into  the  American  colonies,  and  were  accom- 
panied, especially  at  home,  with  men  of  extraordinary  gifts 
and  devotedness.  There  was  now  active  and  open  war  be- 
tween the  men  so  raised  up  and  their  followers  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  world  on  the  other.  The  history  of  this  period, 
and  especially  of  the  methodists,  whether  of  the  school  of 
the  Wesleys,  or  of  Whitefield,  is  large  and  diversified,  and 
is  to  a greater  or  less  extent  within  the  reach  of  most.  It 
would  lead  us  altogether  beyond  our  limits  were  we  to  enter 
upon  it.  But  as  the  labours  of  Whitefield  are  to  some  extent 
interwoven  with  the  Scottish  revivals,  it  is  necessary  to  say 
something  of  his  proceedings  before  his  coming  to  Scotland. 

He  was  one  of  the  little  society  in  Oxford,  and  began  to 
attract  attention  as  soon  as  he  received  orders,  though  he 
was  still  a very  young  man — little  more  than  twenty-one 
years  of  age.  In  1737,  the  year  after  he  obtained  ordina- 
tion, he  went  to  Georgia,  where  he  projected  an  orphan 
institution.  Towards  the  end  of  1738,  he  returned  to  make 


20 


REVIVAL  IN  ENGLAND. 


collections.  This  gave  him  occasion  to  go  forth  over  Eng- 
land, very  much  as  an  evangelist.  Early  in  1739  he  was  at 
Bristol,  and  preparing  to  return  to  America,  when  it  was 
said  to  him,  “ MTh y go  abroad?  have  we  not  Indians  enough 
at  home?  If  you  have  a mind  to  convert  Indians,  there 
are  colliers  enough  in  Kingswood.”  He  had  before  this 
thought  of  the  duty  of  going  forth  to  the  highways  and  the 
hedges,  that  he  might  compel  sinners  to  come  in,  but  had 
not  vet  ventured  on  what  was  then  altogether  unusual.  But 
it  seemed  to  him  now  that  he  had  a call  in  providence. 
The  colliers,  he  was  told,  were  exceedingly  rude,  so  much 
so  that  few  cared  about  visiting  them,  and  they  had  no 
place  of  worship.  After  much  prayer  and  many  inward 
struggles,  he  went  one  day  to  Hannam  Mount,  and  standing 
on  a hill,  he  began  to  preach  to  about  a hundred  colliers. 
This  soon  took  air,  and  meeting  after  meeting  his  audience 
increased,  till  he  found  himself  addressing  nearly  twenty 
thousand  persons.  His  own  account  of  the  effects  pro- 
duced is  very  striking.  u The  first  discovery,'*  says  he,  “ of 
their  being  affected,  was  in  the  white  gutters  made  by  their 
tears,  which  plentifully  fell  down  their  black  cheeks,  as  they 
came  out  of  their  coal-pits.  Hundreds  and  hundreds  of 
them  were  soon  brought  under  deep  convictions,  which 
happily  ended  in  sound  and  thorough  conversion.  As  the 
scene  was  quite  new,  and  I had  just  begun  to  be  an  extem- 
pore preacher,  I had  often  many  inward  conflicts.  Some- 
times, when  twenty  thousand  people  were  before  me,  I had 
not,  as  I thought,  a word  to  say;  but  I was  never  deserted, 
and  I was  often  so  assisted  as  to  understand  what  that 
meaneth,  4 Out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water.* 
The  open  firmament  above;  the  prospect  of  the  adjacent 
fields;  the  sight  of  thousands  and  thousands,  some  in  coaches, 
some  on  horseback,  and  some  in  the  trees,  and  some  of  all 
affected,  so  as  to  be  drenched  with  tears,  amidst  the  solemn 
stillness  of  the  approaching  night,  were  almost  too  much 
for  me ; I was  occasionally  all  but  overcome.*’ 

From  this  time  forward,  his  course  was  as  that  of  an 


REVIVAL  IN  WALES. 


21 


apostle.  But  as  it  is  not  necessary  for  the  present  to  follow 
him  much  farther,  we  shall  here  allow  him  to  introduce 
us  to  a separate  corner  of  the  Lord's  vineyard  less  known 
than  England,  and  which,  from  its  smallness,  can  he  more 
easily  judged  of.  Wales  was  at  that  time  more  than  now 
separated  from  England  in  language,  and  generally  in  what- 
ever characterizes  a people.  The  history  of  God’s  work  in 
that  country  is  intensely  interesting,  and  may  he,  to  some 
extent,  learned  from  a well  written  life  of  the  great  How- 
land, and  another  of  Charles  of  Bala,  both  of  which  are  in 
general  circulation.  But,  having  access  to  contemporary 
information,  we  shall  furnish  a few  extracts  of  what  is 
perhaps  less  generally  read. 

An  awakening  had  by  this  time  existed  in  Wales  for 
several  years.  It  is  said  to  have  commenced  through  the 
labours  of  Griffith  Jones,  a truly  eminent  man,  particularly 
in  doing  good  and  devising  means  of  usefulness ; and  it  was 
being  carried  forward,  especially  by  Howell  Harris,  a very 
extraordinary  character,  to  whom  Whitefield  will  by-and-by 
introduce  us.  Whitefield  had  himself  taken  leave  of  his 
friends  in  Bristol,  and  the  following  entry  was  made  in 
his  journal  on  his  landing  in  Wales: — 

“ Cardiff, \ March  8,  1739. — Arose  before  twelve  at  night, 
sung  psalms,  and  prayed ; and  the  wind  being  fair,  we  had 
a speedy  passage  over  to  the  Welsh  shore.  Our  business 
being  in  haste,  God  having  of  his  own  providence  sent 
one  to  guide  us,  we  rode  all  night,  stopped  at  Newport  to 
refresh  ourselves,  where  we  met  with  two  friends,  and  reached 
Cardiff  about  eleven  in  the  morning. 

The  town,  I soon  found,  was  apprehensive  of  my  com- 
ing ; and  therefore,  whilst  I was  giving  a word  of  exhorta^- 
tion  to  some  poor  people  at  the  inn,  who  hung  upon  me  to 
hear  the  word,  Mr.  Seward  went  to  ask  for  the  pulpit.  But 
being  denied,  we  pitched  on  the  town-hall,  which  Mr.  Se- 
ward procured;  and  at  four  in  the  afternoon,  I preached 
from  the  judge’s  seat  to  about  four  hundred  hearers.  Most 
of  them  were  very  attentive,  but  some  mocked.  However,  I 


22 


REVIVAL  IN  WALES. 


offered  Jesus  Christ  freely  to  them,  and  would  have  rejoiced 
if  they  had  accepted  him;  hut  their  foolish  hearts  were 
hardened.  Lord,  make  them  monuments  of  thy  free  grace ! 

“ After  I came  down  from  my  seat,  I was  much  refreshed 
with  the  sight  of  my  dear  brother,  Howell  Harris,  whom  I 
knew  not  in  person,  but  long  loved  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  on  whose  behalf  I have  often  felt  my  soul  drawn 
out  in  prayer. 

“ He  is  now  about  twenty-five  years  of  age.  Twice  has 
lie  applied  for  holy  orders,  being  every  way  qualified,  and  yet 
refused,  under  the  pretence  of  his  not  being  of  age,  although 
he  was  then  twenty- two  years  and  six  months.  About  a 
month  ago  he  offered  himself  again,  and  was  put  off.  On 
this  he  was,  and  is  still,  resolved  to  go  on,  and  he  has  already 
shown  indefatigable  zeal  in  his  Master  s work.  During  these 
three  years,  he  has  discoursed,  as  he  told  me,  almost  twice 
every  day,  for  three  or  four  hours  together;  not  authorita- 
tively as  a minister,  but  as  a private  person,  exhorting  his 
Christian  brethren.  He  has  been,  I believe,  in  seven  coun- 
ties, and  has  made  it  his  business  to  go  to  wakes,  and  to 
turn  people  from  their  lying  vanities.  Many  ale-house 
people,  fiddlers,  harpers,  &c.,  cry  out  against  him  for  spoiling 
their  trade.  He  has  been  the  subject  of  many  rumours, 
has  been  threatened  with  public  prosecution,  and  has  had 
constables  sent  to  apprehend  him;  yet  God  has  blessed  him 
with  inflexible  courage,  and  he  still  goes  on  conquering  and 
to  conquer.  He  is  of  a most  catholic  spirit,  loves  all  who 
love  Christ,  and  is  therefore  styled  by  bigots  a dissenter. 
He  is  despised  by  all  who  are  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than 
lovers  of  God;  but  God  has  greatly  blessed  his  endeavours. 
Many  call,  and  even  venerate  him  as  their  spiritual  father, 
and  would,  I believe,  lay  down  their  lives  for  his  sake.  He 
discourses  generally  in  a field,  but  at  other  times  in  some 
house,  from  a wall,  or  a table,  or  anything  else.  He  has 
established  nearly  thirty  societies  in  South  Wales,  and  still 
the  field  of  his  labours  is  becoming  wider.  He  is  full  of 
faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 


REVIVAL  IN  WALES. 


28 


“ When  I first  saw  him,  my  heart  was  knit  closely  to 
him.  I wanted  to  catch  some  of  his  fire,  and  I gave  him 
the  right  hand  of  fellowship  with  all  my  heart.  After  I 
had  saluted  him,  and  given  a warm  exhortation  to  a great 
number  of  people,  who  followed  me  to  the  inn,  we  spent 
the  remainder  of  the  evening  in  taking  sweet  counsel  to- 
gether, and  telling  one  another  what  God  had  done  for 
our  souls.  My  heart  was  still  drawn  out  towards  him  more 
and  more.  There  seemed  to  be  a strong  and  divine  sym- 
pathy between  us,  and  I resolved  to  promote  his  interest 
with  all  my  might.  Accordingly,  we  took  an  account  of  the 
several  societies,  and  agreed  on  such  measures  as  seemed 
most  conducive  to  promote  the  common  interests  of  our  Lord. 
Blessed  be  God,  there  seems  to  be  a noble  spirit  going  out 
into  Wales,  and  I expect  that  ere  long  the  fruits  will  be 
more  visible.  After  much  comfortable  and  encouraging 
conversation,  we  knelt  down  and  prayed  with  great  enlarge- 
ment of  heart.  This  done,  we  had  a little  supper,  sung  a 
hymn,  and  went  to  bed,  praising  God  for  having  brought 
us  face  to  face.  Satan,  I doubt  not,  envied  our  happiness ; 
and  we  hope,  by  the  help  of  God,  that  we  shall  make  his 
kingdom  shake.  God  loves  to  do  great  things  by  such 
instruments,  that  the  power  may  be  seen  to  be  of  God,  and 
not  of  man.” 

Being  thus  introduced  to  Howell  Harris,  we  shall  next 
furnish  an  extract  from  a letter  written  by  Howland  to  Harris, 
and  which  is  descriptive  of  both,  and  of  the  work  of  God 
in  their  common  and  much  loved  country,  Wales: — 

“ October  20,  1742.  My  dear  Brother, — I bless  you  for 
your  letters;  they  were  like  showers  of  rain  to  a dry  land. 
Indeed,  the  Lord  gave  you  the  tongue  of  the  learned.  But 

0 Avhat  am  I ? A painted  hypocrite,  a miserable  sinner  ! 

1 know  all  the  to’s  and  fro’s,  ups  and  downs  that  are  in 
religion;  but  the  blessed  liberty  that  remains  for  the  children 
of  God  is  still  hidden  from  me.  God  grant  that  you  may 
prevail.  I wish  I could  skip  and  leap  over  all  the  moun- 
tains of  pleasure  and  laziness,  hard-heartedness,  unbelief, 


24 


REVIVAL  IN  WALES. 


and  rest  on  tlie  breast  of  the  beloved  and  never-enouoh 

O 

praised  Jesus.  0 blessed  time,  when  all  prisoners  of  hope 
shall  be  released,  and  enter  into  the  rest  of  their  dear  Im- 
manuel ! I doubt  not  that  your  soul  joins  me  in  saying, 
Amen,  amen. 

“ I have  been  of  late  in  Montgomeryshire,  and  had  great 
power  to  convince  and  build  up.  Persecution  increases. 
Some  of  the  brethren  have  been  excommunicated.  I hope 
you  will  consult  with  the  brethren  in  London,  and  send 
us  word  what  we  ought  to  do.  At  Brecknock,  I preached 
in  several  churches  and  houses  with  uncommon  power.  I 
have  heard  since,  that  I am  brought  into  court  for  preaching 
in  an  ale-house  while  there.  Your  sentiments  about  this, 
too,  would  be  very  serviceable.  Last  week  I was  in  Car- 
marthenshire and  Glamorgan,  and  brave  opportunities  in- 
deed they  were.  Whole  congregations  were  under  concern 
and  crying  out,  so  that  my  voice  could  not  be  heard.  Some 
persons  of  quality  entertained  me  with  more  than  ordinary 
respect.  0 Avhat  am  I,  that  my  ears  and  eyes  should  hear 
and  see  such  things?  Help  me  to  bless  the  God  of  heaven. 
I hope  his  kingdom  begins  to  come.  Be  packing,  Satan; 
flee,  flee  with  trembling,  lest  the  God  of  Israel  overtake  thee. 
Lord,  chastise  him.  Lord,  down  with  him.  Let  his  king- 
dom be  shattered,  and  let  him  be  himself  trampled  under 
the  feet  of  thy  children ! LIow  long  shall  he  domineer  over 
thy  little  ones?  My  dear  brother,  up,  up  with  your  arms; 
yield  not  an  inch.  That  God  whom  we  serve  can,  yea  and 
will,  deliver  us.  Through  his  might,  we  shall  win  the  field. 
Don’t  you  hear  all  the  brethren  in  Wales  crying  out  loudly, 
Help,  help,  help,  help,  brother  Harris — the  bold  champion, 
where  art  thou?  What!  in  London!  though  it  is  now  the 
day  of  battle!  What!  has  not  London  champions  enough 

to  fight  her  battles  ? Where  are  the  great  W , C , 

&c.*  Must  poor  Wales  send  help  to  England?  0 poor 
W ales ! thine  own  ingratitude  has  caused  all  this.  Good 
Lord,  pity  poor  Wales ! Send  our  dear  brother  back  among 
* Probably  Whitelield  and  Cennick. 


REVIVAL  IN  WALES. 


2 5 


us  with  thy  power,  and  in  the  fulness  of  thy  blessing;  and 
let  the  devil  tremble  before  him.  Amen,  amen. 

“ My  poor  flock  increases  daily.  They  would  be  heartily 

glad  to  see  and  hear  you.  Brother  W s*  was  here  last 

Sunday,  and  a sweet  day  it  was.  I love  him  more  and 
more,  because  of  his  simple,  honest,  plain  way  of  dealing 
with  the  people.  His  parishioners  are  highly  incensed 
against  him.  1 trust  we  shall  hare  him  out  before  long.  + 
Methinks  I hear  you  inquiring  after  Carnarvonshire. 

B n T s J is  there.  They  come  by  thousands  to 

hear.  Brother  H 11  D s (Howell  Davies)  pro- 

mised to  go  there;  what  detains  him  I know  not.  I 
cannot  possibly  go  this  winter,  for  want  of  one  to  supply 
my  room  at  my  churches. § The  next  week  I promised 
to  be  at  Pembroke  and  the  lower  part  of  Carmarthen,  shortly 
after  at  Colvill,  &c.  Dear  brother,  never  fail  to  intercede 
for  me,  who  am  your  loving  friend,  well-wisher,  and  un- 
worthy brother,  Daniel  Rowland.’* 

This  letter  from  Rowland  was  written  in  October,  1742. 
The  following  extract  is  from  a letter  wTitten  by  the  Rev. 
Edmond  Jones,  a dissenting  minister  in  Wales,  and  is 
dated  the  8th  of  December,  J 7 43,  fully  a year  later:  u As 

for  the  three  ordained  church  of  England  ministers  men- 
tioned by  Mr.  Howell  Harris,  namely,  Mr.  William  Wil- 
liams, Mr.  Howell  Davies,  and  Mr.  Daniel  Rowland,  I 
know  them  very  well,  although  they  live  at  a great  distance 
from  this  place.  They  are  all  three  men  of  unblemished 
character,  very  zealous,  laborious,  and  popular.  Mr.  Wil- 
liams labours  chiefly  in  Brecknockshire  and  Carmarthen- 
shire; Mr.  Howell  Davies  lives  in  Pembrokeshire,  and 
labours  there  and  in  Carmarthenshire  and  Cardiganshire, 

* Probably  William  Williams. 

X Rowland,  as  well  as  Williams,  bad  been  a parish  minister,  but  was 
outed  because  of  his  zeal  in  his  Master’s  work,  episcopally  called  his  irre- 
gularities, and  so  he  and  others  united  in  setting  up  the  Calvinistic  me- 
thodist  communion. 

X Mr.  John  Thomas  was  at  this  time  minister  there. 

§ He  had  four  to  supply. 

C 


26 


REVIVAL  IN  WALES. 


and  likewise  in  some  parts  of  Glamorganshire,  with  great 
zeal  and  effect;  and  Mr.  Rowland  in  Cardiganshire,  chiefly 
where  his  churches  are — hut  he  preaches  in  many  other 
parts  of  both  North  and  South  Wales.  His  people  are  the 
most  zealous  in  the  kingdom,  or  perhaps  in  the  world.  They 
sing  psalms  and  hymns  night  and  day,  when  going  and  re- 
turning from  their  places  of  worship,  and  also  when  at  their 
work.  It  is  with  them  as  it  was  in  St.  J erome’s  time  in  the 
primitive  church.  Some  time  ago,  at  Landewe  Brevi- 
Church,  he  had  above  two  thousand  communicants;  and  Mr. 
Philip  Pugh,  a dissenting  minister  not  far  distant,  had  about 
five  hundred.  And  besides,  there  are  other  meetings  and 
congregations  in  the  same  country;  so  that  the  lower  part  of 
Cardiganshire  is  almost  all  over  religious.  I have  been 
informed,  that  in  one  of  Mr.  Rowland’s  parishes  there  are 
hut  two  men  who  are  not  well  affected  to  religion;  and  even 
these  come  to  hear,  and  are  not  grossly  immoral.  I desire 
both  you  and  Mr.  M4Culloch  (he  is  writing  to  Mr.  Rohe) 
to  be  pleased  to  print  some  of  your  best  notes  of  sermons, 
especially  if  you  have  anything  remarkable  on  subjects  rarely 
handled.  We,  who  in  this  kingdom  are  for  the  doctrines 
of  free  grace,  do  greatly  affect  the  sermons  and  writings  of 
Scots  ministers,  and  desire  to  have  more  of  them.  I do 
assure  you  that  the  wrorks  of  those  famous  gospel  preachers, 
the  Erskines,  are  greatly  valued,  and  have  been  of  much 
use.  The  sermons  entitled  Law  Death  and  Gospel  Life, 
are  in  course  of  being  translated  into  Welsh,  in  order  to 
be  printed.  Also  Mr.  Willison's  Balm  of  Gilead  is  come 
into  some  hands  in  this  country,  and  is  greatly  and  de- 
servedly valued.  It  would  he  long  before  we  wrould  be 
wearied  of  such  books,  especially  as  they  strengthen  our 
hands  against  the  adversaries  of  the  doctrines  of  free  grace/' 
The  following  extract,  or  rather  abstract,  is  from  a letter 
dated  14th  February  1745:  46  Last  night  I came  home, 
after  a month's  journey,  which  our  dear  Lord  carried  me 
through  in  the  most  tender  manner.  More  of  the  divine 
presence  and  power  I never  knew;  and  such  congregations 


REVIVAL  IN  WALES. 


o~ 


I never  before  saw.  The  meetings  are  generally  out  of 
doors,  no  house  being  sufficient  to  contain  them.  The  work 
is  even  greater  than  it  was  some  years  ago.  The  word  is 
quicker  and  more  powerful — the  mystical  glory  of  Christ 
more  set  forth.  The  hearts  of  many  are  as  if  on  fire,  and 
they  seem  to  set  on  fire  others  also.  They  live  as  if  in  the 
suburbs  of  heaven,  and  use  much  of  its  language.  Others 
have  still  to  struggle  with  the  bondage  of  a legal  spirit,  though 
hopefully.  Some  are  brought  under  conviction  gradually, 
and  others  all  at  once.  Some  of  the  wealthier  classes  are 
growing  less  prejudiced — are  coming  even  to  hear;  and  of 
them,  too,  some  have  been  awakened.  In  several  parts  of 
Carmarthen,  Pembroke,  and  Cardigan  shires,  it  is  difficult 
to  say  where  the  gospel  runs  most,  and  where  divine  power 
is  most  seen.  Mr.  Rowland  is  one  of  the  most  surprising 
men  that  ever  I heard.  Such  wisdom  to  divide  the  word 
rightly,  such  light  in  reaching  the  spirituality  of  the  word, 
and  such  power  in  applying  it,  I never  witnessed.  He  has 
four  congregations;  but  the  people  come  from  six,  seven, 
or  eight  comities  round.  It  is  impossible  to  express  what 
life  and  power,  what  warmth  and  holy  fire,  what  praises 
from  some,  what  mournings  and  groanings  from  others,  what 
tears  of  love  and  joy,  and  what  looks  of  happiness,  are  mani- 
fested. These  indications  can  be  properly  understood  only 
by  such  as  have  experienced  what  they  express.  Mr.  Row- 
land  is  assisted  by  Mr.  Williams  of  Carmarthenshire,  who 
is  younger  in  years  and  in  grace,  but  is  much  honoured  by 
his  Lord.  He  is  a flaming  instrument,  and  is  day  and  night 
on  the  stretch  in  his  Master  s service.  In  Pembroke,  Cardi- 
gan, and  part  of  Carmarthenshire,  the  laborious  Mr.  Davies 
sounds  the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel  with  great  success. 
He  is  also  young,  but  greatly  owrned,  especially  to  the  Eng- 
lish-speaking population  of  Pembrokeshire,  v7ho  wrere,  till  he 
w~ent  among  them,  utter  strangers  to  the  very  forms  of  godli- 
ness. Under  his  ministry,  the  Lord  does  very  manifestly 
display  his  great  power  in  wounding  and  healing.  These 
men  preach  day  and  night,  in  houses,  in  bams,  and  in  the 


28 


REVIVAL  IN  THE  ARMY. 


fields;  the  whole  country  being  open  to  them/' — It  will 
perhaps  occur  to  some,  that  these  extraordinary  effects  were 
the  result  of  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  men  described. 
And  so  in  some  sense  they  were.  But  these  very  gifts  were 
of  God.  Rowland’s  mind  was  once  unawrakened,  and  his 
ministrations  wrere  barren.  The  awakening  was  of  God,  and 
so  were  the  gifts.  And  it  is  very  observable  that  such  men 
grew  in  wisdom  as  well  as  eloquence. 

On  taking  leave  of  Wales,  it  may  be  right  to  notice  the 
extension  of  this  work  to  the  army  even  in  foreign  parts. 
Some  will  recollect  a very  interesting  account  in  the  Life  of 
Walker  of  Truro,  concerning  a wrork  of  God  not  many  years 
after  this,  among  soldiers  who  were  for  some  time  at  Truro, 
before  going  abroad.  But  it  is  more  remarkable  when  found 
in  the  army  while  abroad,  and  wanting  in  the  opportunities 
which  they  had  at  home.  There  was  a British  army  at  this 
time  in  Flanders;  and  letters  were  wvitten  by  some  of  the 
soldiers  and  others  on  the  spot,  and  published  in  the  journals 
of  the  day.  Most  of  those  we  have  seen  are  by  English- 
men, but  the  following  extracts  are  from  letters  written  by 
Scotchmen — the  one  “ by  a private  Christian,”  probably  an 
officer  at  Bruges,  dated  20th  March  1745;  and  the  other 
dated  25th  May  1745,  from  a common  soldier;  and  both 
are  addressed  to  ministers  in  this  country : “ Indeed,  there 
is  a great  awakening  in  our  army.  There  is  one  John 
Haime,  a dragoon  in  major-general  Cope’s  regiment;  like- 
wise one  Clemens  in  the  First  Regiment  of  Guards;  and  one 
Evans  in  the  Train  of  Artillery,  who  met  together  for 
searching  the  Scripture,  for  prayer  and  other  duties,  as  also 
for  rebuking  others  in  following  sinful  ways,  and  for  setting 
before  them  their  dreadful  state,  from  Scripture  and  reason. 
In  our  last  campaign,  there  was  open  field  preaching,  and 
there  is  now,  in  most  of  all  our  regiments , a remarkable 
awakening . In  this  company  there  are  three,  wrho  were 

notoriously  wicked,  and  now  desire  only  to  know  Christ, 
and  him  crucified.  There  is  also  a society  of  praying  people 
in  this  and  several  other  regiments.  This  society  was 


REVIVAL  IN  THE  ARMY. 


20 


erected  before  the  awakening.  There  are  two  of  colonel 
Johnston's  regiment  who  preach.  The  dragoon  belonging 
to  Copes  regiment  and  these  two  preach  here  every  night, 
in  a house  they  have  taken.  The  general  gave  them  liberty 
to  go  to  the  church,  and  preach  every  day.  Major-general 
Ponsonby,  who  commands  here,  seems  to  be  more  religious ; 
for  he  both  encourages  these  men,  and  causes  the  ministers 
to  go  to  church  every  morning  and  read  prayers  to  the  men 
that  mount  guard.  In  Ghent  there  is  another  assembly  of 
the  awakened  soldiers." — The  following  extract  is  from 
the  soldier’s  letter  : “ Rev.  Sir, — I received  the  book 

which  ye  sent  me.  I am  obliged  to  you  for  your  love  and 
kindness  to  me,  and  to  all  my  fathers  family,  and  especially 
as  I am  but  a prodigal,  and  that  I refused  all  your  good 
advices,  and  those  of  my  friends.  I desire  to  be  very 
thankful  to  God  that  he  hath,  by  your  hand,  sent  me  such 
a book.  I hope  it  will  be  useful  to  me,  and  also  to  some 
others  of  this  army,  who  are  ten  thousand  times  more  de- 
serving, and  who  on  all  occasions  seek  to  do  me  good. 
There  are  a few  who,  in  this  wilderness,  where  we  are  de- 
prived of  those  refreshing  ordinances  which  you  have  among 
you,  that  assemble  together;  which  we  believe  to  be  our  duty. 
There  are  nearly  forty  of  us,  who  meet  as  often  as  we  can. 
But  we  have  not  in  this  campaign  the  same  opportunities 
we  had  in  the  last;  and  in  winter  quarters,  we  commonly 
meet  on  Sabbath  and  Wednesday,  and  oftener  when  we  can. 
We  begin  with  prayer,  we  then  sing,  then  read  a chapter, 
we  have  then  prayer  again,  and  questions  on  practical  heads 
of  divinity,  such  as  are  in  the  writings  of  Mr.  Isaac  Am- 
brose. There  is  one  young  lad  in  the  company  who  sent 
to  London  for  his  whole  works.  He  got  it  over  in  winter; 
but  we  could  not  get  it  to  camp  with  us.  After  the  ques- 
tion has  gone  round,  duty  is  gone  about,  and  we  conclude 
with  praise.  There  are  amongst  us  men  of  different  regi- 
ments, who  take  upon  them  to  exhort  and  preach  publicly 
in  the  camp.  There  is  a great  work  of  conviction  among 
the  men,  and  I hope  that  there  are  also  some  conversions. 


30 


TOKENS  OF  A COMING  REVIVAL. 


Thev  go  after  tlie  strain  of  the  Messrs.  Wesley  in  England. 
If  it  were  not  too  much  trouble,  I would  be  very  glad  to 
have  your  advice  concerning  our  society,  and  the  means 
whereby  we  may  obtain  and  preserve  the  presence  of  God 
among  us ; and  concerning  myself.  I greatly  desire  to  hear 
of  the  healing  of  divisions,  and  of  a reformation- work,  both 
in  heart  and  life,  among  high  and  low.  0 that  that 
promise  were  made  good ! 4 When  thy  judgments  are  in 
the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  vail  learn  righteous- 
ness/  (Isa.  xxvi.  9.)  Surely  his  judgments  are  in  the 
earth  now,  and  in  some  measure  executed  on  our  army. 
His  hand  seems  to  be  lifted  up  against  both  nations  and 
armies/'  * 

When  one  goes  forth  in  spring,  and  finds  on  the  exposed 
hill-side  the  flowers  and  other  indications  of  the  advancing 
year,  he  naturally  concludes  that  long  ere  now  these  must 
have  appeared  in  the  sheltered  valley;  and  so  might  we  also 
conclude,  from  what  we  have  seen  of  the  work  of  God  even 
in  the  British  camp.  Scotland,  with  all  its  ecclesiastical 
wrongs  and  moral  degeneracy,  was  comparatively  a privi- 
leged land : the  very  sufferings  which  had  been  endured  on 
the  side  of  truth  during  the  preceding  century,  had  left 
behind  them  witnesses  for  truth,  which,  though  like  the 
works  of  God  described  by  the  psalmist,  having  no  speech 
nor  language  so  as  to  make  their  voice  heard,  had  their  line, 
nevertheless,  going  forth  over  the  land,  and  with  a meaning 
as  intelligible  as  words.  In  very  many  cases,  the  men  of 
this  generation  were  the  sons  of  persecuted  fathers,  whose 
prayerful  instructions  and  high  testimony  for  truth  were 
not  soon  to  be  forgotten.  The  very  oppression  of  an  eccle- 
siastical majority,  and  domineering  power  of  an  irreligious 
age,  increased  the  amount  and  intensity  of  their  prayerful 
communings,  who  wept  over  the  degeneracy  of  their  times. 
A certain  class  of  ministers,  and  a greatly  larger  class  of  the 

* There  are  several  other  letters  to  the  same  effect,  one  addressed  to 
the  congregation  at  Marten,  and  published  in  the  Monthly  History,  and 
another  communicated  by  Mr.  Halley  of  Muthil,  in  Perthshire. 


TOKENS  OF  A COMING  REVIVAL. 


31 


people,  were  like  the  Simeons  and  the  Annas  of  other  days 
— the  life  of  the  church,  and  the  hope  of  their  generation. 
In  such  writings  as  the  Memoirs  of  Boston,  the  Lives  of  the 
Erskines,  and  others  of  that  age,  we  have  laid  open  to  us 
many  of  the  hidden  springs  of  a coming  change;  and  in  this 
there  is  much  interest.  There  were  general  causes,  otherwise 
so  general  a change  would  be  unaccountable;  but  there 
were  also  special  causes,  and  these  lay  hid  in  the  circum- 
stances of  the  different  countries.  From  almost  the  very 
commencement  of  the  century,  there  were  in  Scotland 
indications  of  returning  power.  The  habitations  of  horrid 
cruelty  abroad,  and  the  abominations  of  immorality  at  home, 
being  both  glaring,  began  to  engage  the  public  mind.  The 
country  was  not  so  far  gone  as  not  to  feel,  at  least  in  many 
places,  a want  of  gospel  light  and  gospel  warmth  in  the 
pulpit,  and  the  tyranny  of  ecclesiastical  moderatism  in  the 
church  courts ; and  for  a time  the  few  strove  against  the 
many,  in  seeking  to  arrest  the  downward  progress  in  both : 
the  secession  broke  the  strength  of  this  reclaiming  party 
within  the  church,  and  their  attention  was  perhaps  all  the 
more  directed  to  other  and  brighter  scenes.  Far  in  the  west, 
beyond  the  W estern  Ocean,  the  Sun  of  righteousness  seemed 
anew  to  arise — it  was  as  if  the  apocalyptic  angel  had  been 
seen  to  “ fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  having  the  everlasting 
gospel  to  preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth, 
and  to  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people, 
saying  with  a loud  voice,  Fear  God,  and  give  glory  to  him, 
for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come;  and  worship  him  that 
made  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  fountains  of 
waters.”  (Rev.  xiv.  6,  7.)  So  astonishing  were  the  things 
seen  and  done,  that  many  of  the  calmest  and  most  philoso- 
phical friends  of  truth  were  of  opinion,  that  what  they  then 
witnessed  was  to  usher  in  the  full  revelation  of  the  mil- 
lennium. The  minds  of  many  in  this  country,  wearied,  as  if 
labouring  in  the  fire  and  for  very  vanity,  were  naturally 
drawn  out  to  behold,  and  if  possible  to  realize,  some  share 
in  this  coming  glory. 


32 


TOKENS  OF  A COMING  REVIVAL. 


But  even  in  separate  localities  there  were  special  prepara- 
tions. Among  other  cases,  Mr.  Rohe  of  Kilsyth  speaks  ot 
providential  events  affecting  that  parish,  and  preparing  the 
way  for  what  followed,  so  early  as  1733;  and  the  direct 
means  afterwards  blessed,  began  to  be  used  two  years  be- 
fore the  commencement  of  the  revival.  “ In  1740,”  says  he, 
u I began  to  preach  on  the  doctrine  of  regeneration.  The 
method  I followed  was,  first  to  press  the  importance  and 
necessity  of  it,  from  John  iii.  3 : ‘ Except  a man  be  bom 
again  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God/  Next,  to  show 
the  mysteriousness  of  the  way  and  manner  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  in  effecting  it,  from  John  iii.  8 : ‘ The  wind  bloweth 
where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst 
not  tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it  goeth ; so  is  every 
one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit/  Thirdly,  to  explain  and  apply 
the  various  Scripture  views  and  expressions  of  it;  as  first, 
being  born  again,  from  John  iii.  8;  secondly,  as  a resur- 
rection, from  Rev.  xx.  6,  ‘ Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath 
part  in  the  first  resurrection ;’  thirdly,  as  a new  creature, 
from  Eph.  ii.  10,  ‘For  we  are  his  workmanship,  created  in 
Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works;’  fourthly,  as  Christ’s  con- 
quest of  the  sinner  to  himself,  from  Ps.  cx.  3,  ‘ Thy  people 
shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  thy  power;’  fifthly,  as  the 
circumcision  of  the  heart,  from  Ezek.  xliv.  9,  6 Thus  saith 
the  Lord  God,  No  stranger,  uncircumcised  in  heart,  nor  un- 
circumcised in  flesh,  shall  enter  into  my  sanctuary,  of  any 
stranger,  among  the  children  of  Israel;’  sixthly,  as  the  tak- 
ing away  of  the  stony  heart,  and  the  giving  a heart  of  flesh, 
from  Ezek.  xi.  19  ; seventhly,  as  the  putting  of  God’s  law 
in  the  mind,  and  writing  it  in  the  heart,  from  Heb.  viii. 
10.  I sometimes  could  observe,”  he  adds,  “ that  the 
doctrine  of  these  sermons  was  acceptable  to  the  Lord’s  peo- 
ple, and  that  there  was  more  than  ordinary  seriousness  in 
hearing  them;  yet  I could  see  no  farther  fruit.  But  now 
(1742)  I find  that  the  Lord,  who  is  infinitely  wise , and 
knoweth  the  end  from  the  beginning , was  preparing 
some  for  this  uncommon  dispensation  of  the  Spirit , which 


TOKENS  OF  A COMING  REVIVAL. 


33 


i ice  looked  not  for;  and  that  others  were  brought  under 
convictions,  issuing,  by  the  power  of  the  Highest,  in  their 
real  conversion,  and  in  a silent  way.”  (See  Mr.  Robe’s 
Narrative.) 

Similar  preparations  were  going  on  at  Cambuslang  for 
some  time  before  the  awakening  broke  out.  But  these 
will  fall  to  he  considered  under  a separate  head. 


CHAPTER  III. 


SOME  ACCOUNT  OF  MR.  McCULLOCH  OF  CAMBUSLANG,  CHIEFLY  AS 

FURNISHED  BY  HIS  SON,  THE  REY.  DR.  ROBERT  McCULLOCH, 

MINISTER  OF  DARSIE,  AND  PUBLISHED  WITH  A VOLUME  OF 

SERMONS  IN  1793. 

The  late  Rev.  William  McCulloch,  minister  of  the  gospel 
at  Cambuslang,  was  horn  towards  the  end  of  last  century  (the 
seventeenth),  at  Whithorn,  in  Galloway,  where  his  father 
was  the  teacher  of  the  public  school.  He  received  the 
rudiments  of  his  education  from  his  father,  who,  perceiving 
his  studious  disposition,  sent  him  to  the  universities  of 
Edinburgh  and  Glasgow.  There  he  laid  a good  founda- 
tion; and  in  time  acquired  the  character,  which  he  always 
maintained  among  those  that  knew  him,  of  extensive  read- 
ing, good  acquaintance  with  the  Greek  and  Roman  classics, 
and  uncommon  skill  in  Hebrew.  His  genius  led  him 
also  to  the  mathematical  sciences,  particularly  astronomy 
and  geography,  which  he  afterwards  taught  in  Glasgow  to 
numerous  classes  of  young  men,  with  great  applause;  and 
in  subserviency  to  such  studies,  he  constructed  small  globes 
vdth  great  accuracy.  But  his  favourite  study  was  theology, 
as  contained  in  the  Holy  Scriptures ; and  being  early  called 
of  God,  by  his  grace,  he  determined  to  consecrate  all  his 
talents  to  the  work  of  the  ministry;  and  from  that  time 
forward  no  prospect,  however  alluring,  could  divert  him  from 
his  steady  purpose  of  preaching  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ. 

After  attending  the  divinity  colleges  of  Edinburgh  and 


REV.  WM.  MCCULLOCH  OF  CAMBUSLANG. 


35 


Glasgow,  he  was  licensed  to  preach  the  gospel  by  the  pres- 
bytery of  Wigton,  in  the  year  1722.  He  resided  mostly  at 
Glasgow,  where,  in  1725,  he  was  nominated  to  preach  the 
annual  sermon  for  the  reformation  of  manners,  which  he 
published  at  the  desire  of  the  magistrates.  This  was  the 
only  sermon  he  ever  published.  Though  at  different  periods 
of  his  ministry  he  was  solicited  to  favour  the  public  with 
some  of  his  discourses,  his  modesty  still  prevented  him. 
When  he  was  a preacher,  and  had  not  yet  received  ordina- 
tion, he  lived  some  time  in  the  family  of  Mr.  Hamilton  of 
Aikenhead,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Glasgow,  where  he 
acquired  the  esteem  and  friendship  of  that  respectable 
gentleman  and  his  family;  for  whom  he  always  expressed  a 
particular  regard. 

On  the  29  th  April  1731,  he  was  ordained  by  the  presby- 
tery of  Hamilton  minister  of  Cambuslang.  This  parish 
lies  on  the  south  side  of  the  river  Clyde,  and  about  five 
miles  east  of  Glasgow.  It  runs  about  three  and  a half 
miles  south  of  that  river,  and  nearly  the  same  length  east 
and  west.  At  present  the  population  is  not  much  short  of 
three  thousand,  but  in  1742  it  was  only  about  nine  hundred. 

All  the  accounts  we  have  seen  of  Mr.  McCulloch,  unite 
in  describing  him  as  able,  judicious,  and  faithful,  yet  no 
way  distinguished  as  a popular  preacher.  “ He  was  not,” 
says  his  son,  “ a very  ready  speaker.  Though  eminent  for 
learning  and  piety,  he  was  not  eloquent.  Thoughtful  and 
studious,  he  delivered  the  truths  of  God  faithfully ; but  his 
manner  was  slow  and  cautious — very  different  from  that  of 
popular  orators.” 

The  sermons  published  by  his  son  correspond  with  this 
description.  They  are  in  all  thirteen,  and  are  throughout 
clear,  simple,  and  manly  exhibitions  of  divine  truth,  but 
no  way  distinguished  either  for  eloquence  or  unction. 

In  speaking  of  his  habits,  his  son  says : “ He  com- 
monly rose  about  five  in  the  morning,  and  excepting  about 
two  or  three  hours,  which  he  allowed  for  relaxation,  he 
was  closely  employed  in  study  till  about  eight  o’clock  in 


36 


KEY.  WM.  MCCULLOCH  OF  CAMBUSLANG. 


the  evening.  His  ordinary  practice  was  to  write  out  and 
commit  to  memory  two  sermons  every  week.  He  spent 
much  time  in  secret  prayer,  waiting  with  humble  patience 
for  a favourable  return.  He  greatly  encouraged  private 
Christians  to  meet  for  social  prayer,  and  particularly  that 
God  would  revive  his  work  everywhere,  He  was  often 
employed  in  reading  and  meditating  on  the  Scriptures ; and 
when  his  memory  began  to  fail,  he  transcribed  large  por- 
tions of  them,  that  he  might  impress  them  the  more  upon 
his  mind.  4 1 never  knew  a man,’  said  one  who  had  access 
narrowly  to  observe  his  conduct,  4 that  seemed  to  be  more 
conscientious  in  remembering  the  Sabbath-day  to  keep  it 
holy/  ” 

44  In  works  of  charity  he  was  also  singular.  He  was 
timorous  in  the  extreme  lest  what  he  did  in  this  way 
should  be  known.  To  mention  a few  instances  : in  1752, 
he  caused  print,  with  the  greatest  privacy,  three  thousand 
copies  of  an  exact  and  easy  way  of  teaching  children  to 
read;  to  which  he  subjoined  the  Shorter  Catechism,  and 
the  Proverbs  of  Solomon.  These  he  dispersed  throughout 
Scotland  and  America,  for  the  benefit  of  young  people  of 
the  poorer  sort.  This  cost  him  about  £12.  In  1768,  he 
purchased  three  hundred  Bibles,  which  cost  nearly  <£25,  and 
secretly  ordered  them  to  be  dispersed  for  the  same  benevolent 
purpose.  About  the  same  time,  he  employed  one  of  his 
elders,  in  whom  he  could  confide,  to  go  to  Edinburgh  with 
£200  to  the  society  for  propagating  Christian  knowledge, 
with  a strict  charge  that  he  should  not  tell  any  person  by 
whom  it  was  sent. 

44  Amidst  the  increasing  frailties  of  age,”  his  son  goes  on 
to  say,  44  he  continued  his  incessant  labours  in  the  gospel, 
and  preached  to  his  congregation  till  within  a Sabbath  or 
two  of  his  death — even  when,  through  weakness,  he  was 
obliged  to  be  supported  to  the  church  by  a person  on  each 
hand. 

44  About  the  10th  of  December  1771,  wdien  he  vras  be- 
ginning family  worship  in  the  evening,  he  was  suddenly 


REV.  WM.  McCULLOCII  OF  CAMBUSLANG. 


37 


seized  with  the  disorder  that  terminated  his  valuable  life. 
During  his  affliction  he  was  almost  continually  insensible. 
Recollecting  himself  one  night,  he  said : 4 The  whole  is 
shortly  summed  up  in  the  words  of  Jesus  Christ,  c He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved ; but  he  that 
belie veth  not  shall  be  damned/  On  the  18th  of  December 
1771,  and  in  the  forty -first  year  of  his  ministry,  after  some 
days  of  severe  distress,  he  departed  in  peace  from  this  life, 
to  enter  into  the  joy  of  his  Lord.  On  the  Saturday  fol- 
lowing his  body  was  interred  in  the  churchyard  of  Cambus- 
lang,  amidst  the  tears  and  lamentations  of  an  affectionate 
people,  who  highly  respected  and  loved  him  as  their  mini- 
ster. On  his  grave-stone  is  this  inscription  : c He  was  holy 
in  his  life,  esteemed  in  his  congregation,  and  honoured  of 
God  to  be  remarkably  useful  in  preaching  the  gospel/” 

These  biographical  notices,  though  applicable  perhaps 
chiefly  to  an  after-period  of  life,  are  sufficient  to  bring  before 
us  the  man , with  his  ordinary  habits  and  constitutional 
tendencies.  And  it  will  now  be  seen,  that  there  was  no- 
thing in  these  to  account  for  the  awakening  which  took  place. 
There  was,  indeed,  apparently  the  absence  of  what  might 
otherwise  have  been  regarded  as  a hindrance,  especially 
pride  of  intellect,  and  a fondness  for  display;  but  there 
was  really  nothing  on  account  of  which  the  most  observant 
could  have  said — God  will  yet  employ  that  man  in  doing 
great  things.* 

* His  son,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Robert  M‘Culloch,  was  recognised  and  re- 
spected by  his  cotemporaries,  as  a man  of  excellent  talent,  sound  judg- 
ment, and  evangelical  views ; and  he  is  still  favourably  known  as  the 
author  of  Lectures  on  Isaiah,  and  two  volumes  of  sermons.  He  was  born 
in  1740,  and  died  September,  1824.  He  is  now  represented  by  Mrs. 
Coutts,  his  daughter,  and  widow  of  the  late  Robert  Coutts,  Esq.,  Brechin. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


MEANS  AND  CIRCUMSTANCES  APPARENTLY  EMPLOYED  IN 
BRINGING  ABOUT  THE  REVIVAL  AT  CAMBUSLANG. 

It  may  be  well  again  to  recur,  in  a few  sentences,  to  the 
proceedings  of  Whitefield,  as  apparently  connected  with 
what  we  have  immediately  to  add.  We  last  parted  from 
him  in  Wales,  which  was  in  March  1739.  In  the  August 
following  he  embarked  for  America,  landed  at  Philadel- 
phia, went  from  that  to  New  York,  and  from  this  largely 
over  the  colonies ; and  he  was  thus  thrown  among  the  men 
who  had  been  engaged  in  America  as  he  had  been  in  Eng- 
land. The  field-preaching,  begun  among  the  colliers  at 
King’s-wood,  was  now  practised  in  the  colonies.  He  learned 
from  the  colonial  brethren  in  some  things,  and  they  from 
him  in  others ; and  the  work  went  on  between  them  to  the 
astonishment  of  all.  Large  districts  of  country  were  now 
ripened  for  the  spiritual  harvest.  There  was  little  spoken 
of  but  religion,  and  all  who  knew  the  truth  were  ever 
saying  to  their  neighbours,  “ Know  ye  the  Lord.”  Minis- 
ters, instead  of  preaching  as  if  engaged  in  some  professional 
task,  dealt  with  men’s  souls  in  what  they  said ; and  hearers 
had  their  consciences  so  awakened,  that  they  could  not 
listen  and  remain  indifferent.  The  power  of  God  was 
everywhere  felt,  and  the  reports  of  what  in  this  way  oc- 
curred were  spread  everywhere,  and  especially  in  the 
mother  country. 

Now  this  was  in  1740,  and  early  in  1741  Mr.  M‘Culloch 
appears  to  have  been  in  the  habit  of  bringing  the  intelli- 


PREPARATIVES  OF  TIIE  REVIVAL  AT  CAMBUSLANG.  39 


gence  of  tliese  interesting  events  before  liis  people.  The 
following  is  the  statement  given  of  this  proceeding  in  the  last 
statistical  account  of  the  parish,  and  which,  as  regards  this 
matter,  was  drawn  up  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Clason,  now  of  Edin- 
burgh : “ The  kirk  of  Cambuslang  being  too  small,  and 
out  of  repair,  the  minister,  in  favourable  weather,  frequently 
conducted  the  public  devotional  services  of  the  parish  in 
the  open  fields.  The  place  chosen  was  peculiarly  well 
adapted  for  the  purpose.  It  is  a green  brae  on  the  east 
side  of  a deep  ravine  near  the  church,  scooped  out  by  na- 
ture in  the  form  of  an  amphitheatre.  At  present  it  is 
sprinkled  over  with  broom,  furze,  and  sloe  bushes,  and 
two  aged  thorns  in  twin-embrace  are  seen  growing  side  by 
side  near  the  borders  of  the  meandering  rivulet  which 
murmurs  below.  In  this  retired  and  romantic  spot  Mr. 
McCulloch,  for  about  a year  before  ‘the  work’  began, 
preached  to  crowded  congregations,  and  on  the  Sabbath 
evenings,  after  sermon,  detailed  to  the  listening  multitudes 
the  astonishing  effects  produced  by  the  ministrations  of  Mr. 
Whitefield  in  England  and  America;  and  urged,  with 
great  energy,  the  doctrine  of  regeneration  and  newness  of 
life.”  In  a narrative  drawn  up  in  1742,  and  approved  by 
Mr.  McCulloch,  it  is  said,  u The  minister  in  his  ordinary 
course  of  sermon,  for  nearly  a twelvemonth  before  this 
work  began,  had  been  preaching  on  those  subjects  which 
tend  most  directly  to  explain  the  nature,  and  prove  the 
necessity,  of  regeneration,  according  to  the  different  lights 
in  which  that  important  matter  is  represented  in  Holy 
Scripture.” 

This  was  the  state  of  matters  at  Cambuslang  during  the 
spring  and  summer  of  1741.  But  we  must  now  again 
return  to  Whitefield,  who,  at  this  very  juncture,  appeared, 
and  for  the  first  time,  in  Scotland.  In  the  month  of  March 
he  had  arrived  in  England,  and  soon  after  he  was  invited 
by  many  in  this  country  to  visit  Scotland.  Among  these, 
Messrs.  Ebenezer  and  Ralph  Erskine,  now  separated 
from  the  establishment,  and  forming  with  their  brethren 


40  PREPARATIVES  OF  THE  REVIVAL  AT  CAMBUSLANG. 

of  the  secession  the  associate  presbytery,  were  among  the 
earliest  and  most  urgent.  Their  wish  was,  that  in  coming 
to  Scotland  Whitefield  should  preach  only  in  connection 
with  their  body,  and  so  help  forward  the  exclusive  work 
in  which  they  were  engaged.  To  this  he  objected,  regard- 
ing himself  as  an  evangelist  at  large;  and  out  of  this  diffe- 
rence many  things  that  were  to  be  regretted  seem  to  have 
taken  rise.  But  with  these  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  at 
present  further  to  interfere.  On  the  30th  of  July  he  arrived 
in  Edinburgh.  He  was  urged  to  preach,  but  declined  till  he 
had  seen  the  Messrs.  Erskine ; and  he  accordingly  proceed- 
ed to  Dunfermline.  Writing  on  the  1st  of  August,  he  says: 
“ I went  yesterday  to  Dunfermline,  where  dear  Mr.  Ralph 
Erskine  hath  got  a large  and  separate,  or,  as  it  is  commonly 
termed,  seceding  meeting-house.  He  received  me  very 
lovingly.  I preached  to  his  and  the  town's  people — a very 
thronged  assembly.  After  I had  done  prayer,  and  named 
my  text,  the  rustling  made  by  opening  the  Bibles  all  at  once 
quite  surprised  me;  a scene  I never  was  witness  to  before." 
The  day  following  he  returned  to  Edinburgh,  accompanied 
with  Mr.  Ralph  Erskine,  and  preached  in  the  Orphan  House 
park  to  a large  and  impressed  audience.  His  text  was, 
“ The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righ- 
teousness, and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  (Rom. 
xiv.  17.)  After  sermon,  a large  company,  including  some  of 
the  nobility,  came  to  bid  him  God-speed,  and  among  others, 
a portly  Quaker,  a nephew  of  the  Messrs.  Erskine,  who, 
taking  him  by  the  hand,  said,  “ Friend  George,  I am  as 
thou  art ; I am  for  bringing  all  to  the  life  and  power  of  the 
ever -living  God;  and  therefore  if  thou  wait  not  quarrel  with 
me  about  my  hat,  I will  not  quarrel  vTith  thee  about  thy 
gowm.”  On  Sabbath  evening  he  preached  in  the  same 
place  to  upwards  of  fifteen  thousand;  and  on  the  evenings 
of  Monday,  Friday,  and  Saturday,  to  nearly  as  many  ; on 
Tuesday  in  the  Canongate  Church ; on  W ednesday  and 
Thursday  at  Dunfermline;  and  on  Friday  morning  at 
Queensferry.  “ Everywhere,"  says  he,  “ the  auditories  wrere 


PREPARATIVES  OF  THE  REVIVAL  AT  CAMBUSLANG.  41 


large  and  very  attentive.  Great  power  accompanied  the  word. 
Many  have  been  brought  under  convictions,  and  I have 
already  received  invitations  to  different  places;  which,  God 
willing,  I intend  to  comply  with.”  Writing  on  the  1 5th  of 
August  (that  is,  a week  later),  he  says:  “ It  would  make 
your  heart  leap  for  joy  to  he  now  in  Edinburgh.  I question 
if  there  he  not  upwards  of  three  hundred  in  this  city  seeking 
after  Jesus.  Every  morning  I have  a constant  levee  of 
wounded  souls,  many  of  whom  are  quite  slain  by  the  law. 
God's  power  attends  the  word  continually,  just  as  when  I left 
London.  At  seven  in  the  morning  we  have  a lecture  in  the 
fields,  attended  not  only  by  the  common  people,  but  also 
by  persons  of  rank.  I have  reason  to  think  that  several  of 
the  latter  sort  are  coming  to  Jesus.  Little  children,  also, 
are  much  wrought  upon.  God  much  blesses  my  letters 
from  the  little  orphans.  [Girls  in  the  hospital.]  He 
loves  to  work  by  contemptible  means.  O my  dear  bro- 
ther, I am  quite  amazed  when  I think  what  God  has  done 
here  in  a fortnight.  My  printed  journals  and  sermons  have 
been  blessed  in  an  uncommon  manner.  I am  only  afraid 
lest  people  should  idolize  the  instrument,  and  not  look 
enough  to  the  glorious  Jesus,  in  whom  alone  I desire  to 
glory.  Congregations  consist  of  many  thousands.  Never 
did  I see  so  many  Bibles,  nor  people  looking  into  them, 
when  I am  expounding,  with  so  much  attention.  Plenty 
of  tears  flow  from  the  hearers’  eyes.  Their  emotion  appears 
in  various  ways.  I preach  twice  daily,  and  expound  at 
private  houses  at  night,  and  am  employed  in  speaking  to 
souls  under  distress  great  part  of  the  day.  I have  just 
snatched  a few  moments  to  write  to  my  dear  brother. 
O that  God  may  enlarge  your  heart  to  pray  for  me  ! This 
afternoon  I preach  out  of  town,  and  also  to-morrow.  Next 
post,  God  willing,  you  shall  have  another  letter.  I walk 
continually  in  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  love 
of  Christ  quite  strikes  me  dumb.  0 grace!  grace!  Let 
that  be  my  song.  Adieu.” 

In  this  way  lie  continued  preaching  very  extensively  over 

D 


42 


WHITEFIELD  AT  GLASGOW. 


the  country;  and  early  in  September  he  arrived  in  Glas- 
gow. On  the  11th  he  began  in  the  High  Church-yard, 
and  for  five  days  in  succession  he  preached  there  twice 
a- day — at  an  early  hour  in  the  morning,  and  again  in  the 
evening.  The  expectations  were  great,  not  only  in  Glasgow, 
hut  all  around,  and  crowds  flocked  to  hear  him.  Morning 
after  morning,  and  evening  after  evening,  that  vast  church- 
yard, almost  paved  as  it  is  with  tombstones,  was  crowded 
with  living  worshippers,  trembling  under  the  word.  But 
not  satisfied  with  hearing,  the  pen  of  the  ready  writer  was 
from  day  to  day  at  work,  and  each  sermon  was  printed  by 
itself,  and  put  immediately  into  circulation.  Eight  of  the 
ten  are  now  before  us  in  their  original  form.  On  compar- 
ing these  with  the  sermons  contained  in  the  uniform  edition 
of  his  w'orks,  only  three  out  of  the  eight  appear  in  that 
collection.  Some  of  the  remaining  five  will  be  found  in 
the  appendix,  as  true  specimens  of  the  kind  of  preaching 
which  was  so  eminently  blessed.  In  these  there  are  speci- 
mens of  preaching  eloquence  fitted  to  impress  and  to  awaken ; 
yet  is  there  in  them  but  little  of  the  mere  eloquence  of  intellect 
or  of  imagination.  They  are  throughout  characterized  by 
great  simplicity,  as  if  the  language  of  the  preacher  merely  ex- 
pressed what  he  felt;  and  yet  is  there  so  much  earnestness 
and  so  much  closeness  of  application,  as  in  some  measure 
to  account  for  the  effect  produced — we  mean  in  so  far  as 
that  w as  human.  All  that  we  know  of  that  wonderful  man 
from  his  writings,  confirms  us  in  the  impression  that  this 
was  very  much  the  character  of  all  his  ministrations ; that 
with  the  advantage  of  a thrilling  voice  and  an  impressive 
manner,  he  was  in  the  pulpit  very  much  what  Baxter  was 
in  the  press.  He  spoke  as  a man  realizing  all  that  he  said, 
and  laying  open  the  feelings  of  his  own  heart  in  addressing 
the  hearts  of  others.  And  in  this  there  is  doubtless  much 
of  the  power  by  which  the  sympathies  of  others  may  be 
awakened. 

The  impression  produced  by  these  sermons  was  very 
great,  and  they  were  blessed  to  not  a few'.  Mr.  Whitefield 


WIIITEFIELD  AT  GLASGOW. 


43 


himself  returned  to  England  in  the  end  of  October,  hut 
many  letters  followed  him,  detailing  the  fruits  of  his  labours 
in  Scotland;  and  one  of  these  was  written  by  Mr.  McCul- 
loch. This  is  important,  not  only  as  showing  the  interest 
which  he  took  in  Mr.  Whitefield’s  first  visit  to  Scotland,  but 
also  in  making  us  acquainted  with  the  views  which  he  en- 
tertained concerning  the  effects  produced.  The  following 
is  an  extract: — 

“As  it  is  matter  of  joy  and  thankfulness  to  God,  who 
sent  you  hither,  and  gave  you  so  much  countenance,  and  so 
remarkably  crowned  your  labours  w ith  success  here  at  Glas- 
gow, so  I doubt  not  but  the  following  account  of  the  many 
seals  to  your  ministry,  in  and  about  that  city,  will  be  very 
rejoicing  to  your  heart,  especially  as  the  kingdom  of  our 
glorious  Redeemer  is  so  much  advanced  thereby,  and  as  the 
everlasting  happiness  of  souls  is  promoted.  I am  wrell 
informed  by  some  ministers,  and  other  judicious  and  expe- 
rienced Christians,  that  there  are  to  the  amount  of  fifty 
persons  already  known,  in  and  about  Glasgow,  who  appear 
to  be  savingly  converted,  through  the  blessing  and  power  of 
God  on  your  ten  sermons.  And  there  are,  besides  these, 
several  others  apparently  under  conviction,  but  not  reck- 
oned, as  being  still  doubtful.  Several  Christians,  also,  or 
considerable  standing,  were  much  strengthened,  revived, 
and  comforted,  by  w7hat  they  heard.  They  were  made  to  re- 
joice in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God,  having  attained  to  the  full 
assurance  of  faith.  Among  those  lately  converted,  there  are 
several  young  people,  who  were  before  openly  wTicked  and 
flagitious,  or  at  best  but  very  negligent  as  to  spiritual  things ; 
and  yet  they  are  now  in  the  wTay  of  salvation.  Some  young 
converts  are  yet  under  doubts  and  fears,  but  a considerable 
number  of  them  have  attained  to  peace  and  joy  in  believing. 
Several  of  those  who  wTere  lately  wrought  upon  in  a gracious 
way,  seem  to  outstrip  Christians  of  considerable  standing,  in 
spiritual-mindedness,  and  in  many  other  good  qualifica- 
tions; particularly  in  their  zeal  for  the  conversion  of  others, 
in  their  love  to  ordinances,  and  in  their  freedom  from 


44 


WIIITEFIELD  AT  GLASGOW. 


bigotry  and  party  zeal.  Those  converted  by  your  ministry 
have  not  been  discovered  at  once,  but  only  from  time  to 
time.  A good  many  of  them  have  been  discovered  only  of 
late.  Their  convictions  were  at  first  less  pungent,  and 
through  the  discouragements  they  met  with,  in  the  families 
where  they  resided,  as  well  as  from  their  own  feelings,  they 
endeavoured  for  a time  to  conceal  their  state.  These  cir- 
cumstances afford  grounds  for  hoping,  that  there  are  yet 
others  who  may  afterwards  become  known.  Besides  such 
as  have  been  awakened  through  the  power  of  God  accom- 
panying your  sermons,  there  are  others  who  have  been  since 
awakened,  and  who  have  been  discovered  in  consequence 
of  the  change  observable  in  their  conduct.  Young  con- 
verts are  very  active  in  seeking  to  promote  the  conversion 
of  others,  especially  their  relations  and  connections.  Some- 
times this  is  done  by  conversations,  exhorting  them  to  flee 
to  Christ,  and  sometimes  by  correspondence ; and  there  are 
instances  of  such  means  being  blessed.  Such  converts  have 
all  a great  love  for  one  another,  and  for  all  in  Christ;  and 
they  have  great  sympathy  with  any  who  are  in  a state  of 
doubt  and  fear.  Such  as  have  not  yet  attained  to  com- 
fort, nevertheless  of  their  deep  concern  and  careful  attend- 
ance on  the  means  of  grace,  are  sometimes  useful  to  Chris- 
tians of  older  standing,  by  the  anxiety  which  they  discover. 
These,  dear  brother,  are  a few  hints  concerning  some  of  the 
most  remarkable  things,  as  to  the  blessing  which  accom- 
panied your  labours  at  Glasgow.  May  a rich  and  power- 
ful blessing  give  a plentiful  increase  to  them  everywhere.* 
— With  great  respect  and  esteem,  I am,  reverend  and  dear 
sir,  your  affectionate  brother  in  the  work  of  the  gospel. 

“ William  McCulloch.” 

It  may  be  added  here,  that  many  of  those  who  were 
afterwards  brought  under  the  power  of  the  truth  at  Cam- 
buslang,  spoke  of  these  sermons  as  among  the  first  means 
of  awakening  them  to  concern.  Instances  of  this  will  be 
brought  out  in  the  cases  to  be  afterwards  detailed. 


CHAPTER  V. 


THE  FIRST  THREE  MONTHS  OF  THE  REVIVAL  AT 
CAMBUSLANG. 

W E before  saw  the  condition  of  this  parish,  as  regarded  the 
means  of  grace,  some  of  which  wTere  special,  and  had  a 
direct  bearing  on  the  existing  state  of  religion.  We  have 
now  seen  that  preaching  of  a very  unusual  kind  had  been 
brought  to  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  and  that  Mr. 
McCulloch  had  taken  a deep  interest  in  the  work  which 
ensued.  It  would  have  been  strange  indeed,  if,  neverthe- 
less, the  people  of  Cambuslang  had  remained  wholly  un- 
moved. On  the  contrary,  we  are  informed,  that  towards 
the  end  of  the  year  1741,  there  was  an  observable  change 
in  the  attention  and  apparent  feelings  of  the  congregation, 
under  the  ministrations  of  the  word.  Still  there  was  no- 
thing so  remarkable  as  yet  to  warrant  the  term  revival,  in 
its  ordinary  acceptation:  and  as  a narrative  of  the  revival 
itself  was  drawn  up  and  attested  in  May  1742,  it  will  be 
best  for  us  simply  to  copy  the  account  given,  and  Mr. 
McCulloch’s  attestation  to  its  accuracy. 

“ A narrative  of  the  extraordinary  work  at  Cambuslang , 
in  a letter  to  a friend. 

“ Sir, — As  the  report  of  the  good  work  at  Cambus- 
lang, which  has  for  several  weeks  engaged  the  attention  of 
numbers  in  this  city  and  country  in  the  neighbourhood,  is 
now  spread  over  a great  part  of  the  nation,  it  is  no  wonder 
that  one  who  lives  at  the  distance  you  do  should  be  curi- 
ous to  have  a true  relation  of  it.  And  as  I would  be  glad 


4G  FIRST  THREE  MONTHS  AT  CAMBUSLANG. 

of  any  opportunity  to  serve  you,  it  is  very  agreeable  to  me 
to  think  that  I can  gratify  you  in  this  matter,  especially 
in  what  concerns  the  people  in  that  parish,  and  some  other 
parishes  near  it ; having  had  opportunity  to  converse  fully 
with  the  minister  of  Cambuslang,  and  with  many  of  the 
people  there  who  are  under  this  special  exercise,  and  also 
with  some  other  ministers  who  have  several  in  their  parishes 
that  appear  to  be  under  the  same  happy  impressions. 

“ There  is  one  thing,  in  the  entry,  I must  apprize  you  of, 
namely,  that  I am  to  confine  myself  to  a simple  narration 
of  facts,  as  the  evidences  on  which  the  opinion  of  many 
concerning  the  present  happy  change  that  is  wrought  on 
that  people  is  founded ; and  this,  without  entering  on  any 
reasoning,  but  leaving  it  to  yourself  to  draw  proper  conclu- 
sions from  the  facts,  after  comparing  them  with  Scripture 
rules  and  instances. 

“I  must  also  acquaint  you,  as  it  was  natural  to  expect, 
when,  on  a singular  occasion  of  this  sort,  great  numbers 
of  people  from  adjacent  towns  and  country  came  flocking 
to  a place  which  became  so  remarkable,  that,  in  such  a 
promiscuous  multitude,  some  counterfeits  would  readily  ap- 
pear. It  was  the  early  care  of  ministers,  who  interested 
themselves  most  in  that  matter,  to  enter  into  a strict  exa- 
mination of  those  who  appeared  to  be  under  a more  than 
ordinary  concern;  so  as  to  obtain  satisfaction  to  themselves 
whether  the  work  was  solid,  being  justly  apprehensive  that 
the  powers  of  darkness  would  not  fail  to  employ  their  de- 
vices to  bring  contempt  on  what  might  tend  so  much  to  the 
honour  of  the  gospel. 

“In  those  watchful  endeavours,  it  must  be  owned  that 
some  impostors  were  found  to  have  mixed  with  the  sincere; 
but  there  is  reason  to  bless  God  that,  so  far  as  yet  appears, 
they  have  been  very  few;  and,  as  these  have  been  severely 
rebuked,  so  the  most  awful  warnings  have  been  given  against 
all  such  insincere  pretensions;  which  warnings,  there  is 
ground  to  believe,  have  had  very  good  effect. 

“Now,  sir,  to  give  you  the  short  history  of  this  matter: 


FIRST  TTIREE  MONTHS  AT  CAMBUSLANG. 


47 


The  minister  of  the  parish,  in  his  ordinary  course  of  sermons, 
for  near  a twelvemonth  before  this  icork  began , had  been 
preaching  on  those  subjects  which  tend  most  directly  to  ex- 
plain the  nature  and  prove  the  necessity  of  regeneration, 
according  to  the  different  lights  in  which  that  important 
matter  is  represented  in  Holy  Scripture.  And  for  some 
months  before  the  late  remarkable  events , a more  than  ordi- 
nary concern  about  religion  appeared  among  that  people. 
One  evidence  of  this  was,  that  about  the  end  of  January 
last,  a petition  was  given  in  to  the  minister,  subscribed  by 
about  ninety  heads  of  families,  desiring  that  a weekly  lecture 
should  be  set  up ; which  was  readily  granted,  and  the  day 
fixed  was  Thursday,  as  the  most  convenient  for  the  temporal 
interests  of  the  parish.* 

“On  Monday,  the  15th  of  February,  there  was  a general 
meeting,  at  the  ministers  house,  of  the  particular  societies 
for  prayer,  which  had  subsisted  in  the  parish  for  several 
years  before.  On  Tuesday,  there  was  another  meeting  for 
prayer  in  the  same  place;  the  occasion  of  which  was  a con- 
cert with  several  serious  Christians  elsewhere  about  solemn 
prayer  relating  to  the  public  interests  of  the  gospel.  In 
this  concert,  only  a small  number  of  people  in  Cambuslang 
were  engaged  at  first;  but  others  getting  notice  of  it  desired 
to  join,  and  were  admitted.  The  people  who  met  for  prayer 
these  two  days  apprehended  that  they  had  been  so  well 
employed,  and  found  so  much  leisure  for  it,  that  they  had 
a third  meeting  on  Wednesday.  But,  on  all  these  three 
days,  they  returned  timeously  in  the  evening  to  their  own 
houses;  so  far  is  it  from  being  true  that  they  rushed  from 
some  of  these  meetings  to  the  church,  and  continued  for  days 
and  nights,  as  was  reported. 

“Previous  to  Thursday,  the  18th  February,  they  had  week- 
day sermons  only  on  Thursdays,  according  to  the  above- 
mentioned  desire  of  the  parish.  And  up  to  this  time,  though 

* That  the  class  with  whom  this  movement  originated  may  he  known, 
it  may  be  added,  that  the  two  men  who  went  round  for  signatures,  were 
Ingram  More,  a shoemaker;  and  Robert  Bowman,  a weaver. 


48 


FIRST  THREE  MONTHS  AT  CAMBUSLANG. 


several  persons  came  to  the  minister  under  deep  concern 
about  their  salvation,  yet  there  came  no  great  number  together. 
But  on  that  day  (Thursday  the  18th  of  February),  after 
sermon,  a considerable  number  of  people,  reckoned  by  some 
present  to  be  about  fifty , came  together  to  the  ministers 
house,  under  convictions  and  alarming  apprehensions  about 
the  state  of  their  souls,  and  desiring  to  speak  with  him. 

“From  this  unexpected  number  coming  in  one  evening  in 
so  great  distress,  and  the  necessity  of  the  minister's  exhort- 
ing them  in  general  and  conversing  with  them  separately, 
you  will  easily  perceive  that  he  behoved  to  spend  that  night 
with  them,  as  he  had  done  most  part  of  two  or  three  more 
since  this  work  began,  ivhich  is  about  twelve  weeks . 

“ After  this,  numbers  daily  resorted  to  that  place — some  to 
hear  the  word,  some  to  converse  with  people  who  were 
under  this  remarkable  concern,  and  others  with  different 
views.  And  the  desires  and  exigencies  of  these  were  such 
that  the  minister  found  himself  obliged,  without  any  previous 
intimation,  to  provide  them  with  daily  sermon , a few  days 
excepted,  and  after  sermon  usually  to  spend  some  time  with 
them  in  exhortation,  prayer,  and  singing  of  psalms;  he 
being  especially  encouraged  thereto  by  the  extraordinary 
success  with  which  God  was  pleased,  from  time  to  time, 
to  bless  his  own  ordinances,  insomuch  that,  by  the  best  infor- 
mation that  could  be  had,  the  number  of  persons  awakened 
to  a deep  concern  about  salvation,  and  against  whom  there 
are  no  known  exceptions  as  yet,  has  amounted  to  above  three 
hundred . And,  through  divine  mercy,  the  work  seems  to 
be  still  making  considerable  progress  every  week,  and  more 
for  some  weeks  of  late  than  formerly. 

“ Of  the  number  just  now  mentioned,  the  far  greater 
part  have  already  given,  both  to  ministers  and  other  serious 
Christians,  a good  account  of  what  they  have  felt  in  their 
convictions  and  humiliation  for  sin,  of  the  way  of  their  re- 
lief by  faith  in  the  mercy  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  and 
of  the  change  they  feel  in  the  prevalent  inclinations  and 
dispositions  of  their  hearts. 


FIRST  THREE  MONTHS  AT  CAMBUSLANG. 


49 


u As  to  their  devotion,  with  other  parts  of  their  practice, 
which  is  what  chiefly  attracts  the  attention  and  regard  of 
this  country,  there  are  comfortable  accounts  given  of  it, 
by  those  who  have  the  best  and  most  frequent  opportuni- 
ties of  knowing  their  daily  behaviour. 

u The  parish  of  Cambuslang  being  of  so  small  extent 
that  most  of  the  people  live  within  a mile  of  the  church, 
and  some  who  have  the  best  intelligence  being  almost 
every  day  with  the  minister,  he  and  they  have  abundant 
opportunities  of  knowing  the  practices  of  such  of  the 
people  as  live  within  their  bounds.  And  the  account 
which  they  give  is,  that  they  appear  to  be  in  a very  hope- 
ful way;  and  the  like  good  accounts  are  given  by  several 
ministers  and  others,  of  such  as  belong  to  other  neighbour- 
ing parishes. 

“ Ami>ng  the  gdod  fruits  already  appearing,  both  in  Cam- 
buslang and  elsewhere,  the  following  instances  seem  very 
encouraging : There  is  a visible  reformation  of  the  lives  of 
some  whoy  were  formerly  notorious  sinners,  particularly  in 
the  laying  aside  cursing  and  swearing,  and  drinking  to 
excess,  among  persons  addicted  to  these  practices; — re- 
morse for  acts  of  injustice  and  the  violation  of  relative 
duties,  confessed  to  the  persons  wronged,  joined  to  new 
endeavours  after  a conscientious  discharge  of  the  duties 
previously  neglected; — restitution,  which  has  more  than 
once  been  distinctly  and  particularly  inculcated  in  public, 
since  this  work  began ; — forgiving  injuries ; — desirable 
evidence  of  fervent  love  to  one  another,  to  all  men,  and  even 
to  those  who  speak  evil  of  them ; — and  among  those  people, 
both  in  Cambuslang  and  other  parishes,  more  affectionate 
expressions  of  regard  than  ever  to  their  own  ministers,  and 
to  the  ordinances  dispensed  by  them ; — the  keeping  up  of 
divine  worship  in  families,  wrhere  it  was  often  neglected  by 
some,  and  entirely  by  others ; — the  setting  up  of  new  meet- 
ings for  prayer,  both  of  old  and  young,  partly  within  the 
parish,  where  twelve  such  societies  are  now  begun,  and 
partly  elsewhere,  among  the  awakened ; — and  together  with 


50 


first  three  months  at  cambuslang. 


all  of  these,  ardent  love  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,  vehement 
thirsting  after  the  public  ordinances,  earnest  desires  to  he 
instructed  in  private  by  ministers  and  others,  with  com- 
mendable docility  and  tractableness  in  receiving  such  in- 
struction. 

“ This  thirst  after  knowledge  is  remarkable  among  those 
who  were  formerly  more  ignorant  than  others.  Some  who 
cannot  read,  though  old,  are  thus  desirous  that  they  may 
become  better  acquainted  with  God’s  word;  and  so  they 
have  resolved  to  learn  to  read ; some  of  the  younger  having 
gone  to  school. 

“ These  good  impressions  have  been  made  on  persons  of 
very  different  characters  and  ages ; on  some  of  the  most 
abandoned,  as  well  as  the  more  sober ; on  the  young  as 
well  as  the  aged;  on  the  illiterate  as  well  as  those  better 
instructed;  on  persons  of  a slow  as  well  as  quick  and 
more  sprightly  genius ; and  what  seems  to  deserve  special 
attention,  on  persons  who  were  addicted  to  scoffing  at 
sacred  things,  and  at  this  work  particularly,  when  it  first 
began. 

“ The  sum  of  all  these  facts  is,  that  this  work  has  been 
begun  and  carried  on  under  the  influence  of  the  great  and 
substantial  doctrines  of  Christianity,  pressing  jointly  the 
necessity  of  repentance  towards  God , of  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ , and  of  holiness  in  all  manner  of  conversation; 
that  it  came  after  such  preparations  as  an  extensive  con- 
cern about  religion,  gradually  increasing,  together  with 
extraordinary  and  fervent  prayers  in  large  meetings,  and 
particularly  in  relation  to  the  success  of  the  gospel ; that 
great  and  successful  pains  have  been  taken  to  discover  and 
discountenance  hypocritical  pretences,  and  to  warn  people 
against  what  might  have  the  least  appearance  of  enthusiasm 
or  delusion  ; that  the  account  given  by  a very  large 
number  of  people  concerning  their  inward  exercises  and 
attainments,  seems  to  agree  with  the  Scripture  standard  ; 
and  that  they  are  bringing  forth  in  practice  fruits  meet  for 
repentance,  comprehending  the  several  branches  of  piety. 


FIRST  THREE  MONTHS  AT  CAMBUSLANG. 


51 


and  of  the  most  substantial  morality,  tliat  can  entitle  men 
to  the  regard  of  the  friends  of  religion  and  virtue. 

“ And  now,  sir,  I have  given  you  a plain  and  simple  ac- 
count of  the  most  material  facts  relating  to  this  extraordi- 
nary work  at  Cambuslang,  and  of  such  as  were  awakened 
there  belonging  to  other  parishes,  together  with  the  proper 
evidence  by  which  these  facts  are  supported ; in  all  which 
I have  avoided  disputing,  and  studied  brevity.  I leave  it 
with  you  to  judge  how  far  such  facts  make  it  evident  that 
this  work  is  from  God ; seeing  that,  to  use  the  words  of  a 
pious  divine,  treating  a subject  of  the  same  nature,  c He 
that  was  formerly  a drunkard,  lives  a sober  life ; he  that 
was  vain,  light,  and  wanton,  becomes  grave  and  sedate;  the 
blasphemer  praises  God;  joy  is  turned  into  heaviness,  and 
that  on  account  of  the  condition  of  the  soul;  the  ignorant 
are  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  divine  things;  and  the 
tongue  that  was  dumb  in  the  things  of  God,  speaks 
the  language  of  Canaan ;' — seeing  that  secure  sinners 
c have  been  roused  with  a witness  to  care  for  the  state  of 
their  souls,  that  those  who  were  ignorant  speak  skilfully 
concerning  religious  matters,  and  that  even  the  graceless 
increase  in  knowledge ; that  swearers  stop  their  oaths  and 
speak  reverently  of  God ; that  vain  persons,  who  minded  no 
religion,  but  frequented  taverns  and  frolics,  passing  their 
time  in  filthiness,  foolish  talking  and  jesting,  or  singing 
paltry  songs,  do  now  frequent  Christian  societies  for 
prayer,  seek  Christian  conversation,  talk  of  what  concerns 
the  soul,  and  express  their  mirth  in  psalms  and  hymns 
and  spiritual  songs;  that  they  who  were  too  sprightly  to 
be  devout,  and  who  esteemed  it  an  unmanly  thing  to  shed 
tears  for  the  state  of  their  souls,  have  mourned  as  for  an 
only  son ; and  that  persons  who  came  to  mock  at  the 
lamentations  of  others,  have  been  convinced,  and  by  free 
grace  brought  over  to  such  ways  as  they  formerly  despised/ 

“ I am,  sir,  yours/’  &c. 

“ May  8,  1742.” 

This  letter  was  published  without  the  name  of  the  author, 


ATTESTATIONS. 


‘ h the  following  attestation  by  Mr.  McCulloch  him- 


“ I have  perused  the  folloicing  short  narrative,*  and  can 
attest  the  facts  contained  in  it;  partly  from  personal  know- 
ledge, and  partly  from  the  most  credible  information ; hut 
I think  it  a loss  that  it  is  not  fuller.  I have  seen  a large 
paper  compiled  by  different  hands;  which,  besides  the  facts 
related  in  this,  contains  several  useful  reasonings,  tending  to 
prove  that  the  favourable  judgment  formed  by  many,  and 
even  by  some  who,  through  want  of  information,  hesitated  at 
first  about  this  work,  is  supported  by  all  that  kind  of  evi- 
dence that  things  of  this  nature  are  capable  of,  in  such  a space 
of  time ; and  consequently,  that  there  is  good  ground  to  hope 
that,  by  the  divine  blessing,  the  confirmation  arising  from 
perseverance  will  be  daily  increasing,  as  hitherto  it  has  been. 
The  said  large  paper  contained  also  a vindication  of  this 
work  from  various  objections,  and  false  and  injurious 
aspersions  thrown  on  it  in  print  by  some  who  have  noffyet 
appeared  to  own  their  accusations;  which  in  justice  they 
ought  to  do,  or  retract  them.  But  though  it  has  not  been 
thought  expedient  to  publish  that  large  account  at  present, 
I understand  the  compilers  of  it  can  easily  prepare  it 
for  the  press,  if  it  shall  be  thought  needful  afterwards. 
For  my  own  part,  I desire  to  join  in  hearty  prayers  with 
the  people  of  God,  that  he  may  revive  his  work  in  the 
midst  of  the  years,  in  this  and  all  the  churches,  and  make 
it  to  triumph  over  all  opposition  ; and  I conclude  with  the 
words  of  the  prophet  Zechariah  (iv.  6,  7)  : ‘ Not  by  might, 
nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord.  Who  art 
thou,  0 great  mountain  ? Before  Zerubbabel  thou  shalt 
become  a plain  : and  he  shall  bring  forth  the  headstone 
thereof  with  shoutings,  crying,  Grace,  grace,  unto  it/ 


We  have  not  observed  whether  the  large  paper  here 
referred  to  was  published  or  not.  But  there  is  a collection 
* This  attestation  vas  originally  prefixed  to  the  narrative. 


a 


May  8,  1742. 


“ William  M‘Culloch.” 


ATTESTATIONS. 


53 


of  not  fewer  than  nine  attestations,  nearly  all  by  ministers 
whose  nearness  enabled  them  to  judge,  or  who  had  them- 
selves shared  in  the  work.  It  is  now  unnecessary,  and 
would  be  tiresome,  were  these  to  be  all  copied.  But  in 
several  cases  there  is  so  much  of  what  was  actually  observed 
by  the  writers,  that  extracts  at  least  from  their  attestations 
can  scarcely  fail  to  be  interesting.  And  they  are  all,  it  will 
be  seen,  attesting  what  had  occurred  during  the  same  period, 
namely,  the  first  three  months  of  the  revival. 

The  first  which  we  shall  copy  is  the  attestation  of  Mr. 
Willison  of  Dundee,  a name  familiar  among  the  pious  as  a 
household  word.  His  letter  is  as  follows : — 

“Glasgow,  April  15,  1742. 

“ Reverend  and  Dear  Brother, — Seeing  some  are  de- 
sirous to  have  my  thoughts  of  the  work  at  Cambuslang, 
I am  willing  to  own  that  I travelled  a good  way  to  inquire 
and  get  satisfaction  about  it.  And  having  resided  several 
days  in  Mr.  M‘Culloch's  house,  I had  occasion  to  converse 
with  many  who  had  been  and  were  under  convictions  there. 
I found  several  in  darkness  and  great  distress  about  the 
condition  of  their  souls,  and  with  many  tears  bewailing 
their  sins  and  original  corruptions ; and  especially  the  sin 
of  unbelief  and  slighting  of  precious  Christ ; some  of  whom 
had  been  in  this  state  for  several  weeks  past.  Yet  I saw 
nothing  in  any  tending  to  despair;  but,  on  the  contrary,  their 
exercise  pointed  still  at  the  great  remedy : for  oft  they  would 
be  breaking  out  in  hopeful  expressions,  such  as,  ‘Though  He 
slay  me,  I will  trust  in  him/  Others  I found  in  a most  desir- 
able frame — overcome  with  a sense  of  the  wonderful  love  and 
loveliness  of  Jesus  Christ;  they  were  even  sick  of  love,  and 
inviting  all  about  them  to  praise  him.  I spoke  also  with 
many  who  had  got  relief  from  their  soul-trouble,  and  in 
whom  the  gracious  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  appeared, 
according  to  my  apprehension,  in  its  fruits  and  effects. 
Such  were  ingenuous  confessors  of  their  former  evil  ways, 
professed  hatred  of  sin,  low  and  abasing  thoughts  of  them- 
selves, the  renouncing  the  vanities  of  the  world  and  all 


54 


ATTESTATIONS. 


their  own  doings,  and  relying  wholly  upon  Christ  for  righ- 
teousness and  strength;  expressing  great  love  to  Christ,  to 
the  Bible,  to  seeret  prayer,  to  the  people  of  God,  and  to  his 
image  in  whomsoever  it  might  appear;  and  also  love  to 
their  enemies,  so  that  when  they  heard  of  some  calling  the 
work  at  Cambuslang  a delusion,  they  showed  no  resentment, 
but  wished  their  eyes  might  be  opened;  and  they  earnestly 
wished  they  could  bring  all  their  enemies  and  all  the  world 
to  their  dear  Redeemer.  I conversed  with  some  who  had 
been  very  wicked  and  scandalous,  but  who  were  now  won- 
derfully changed.  Some  of  them,  who  had  before  been  rude 
and  boisterous,  had  now  the  meekness  of  the  lamb.  When 
they  spoke  of  their  former  ways,  they  blushed  and  wept, 
saying  that  none  in  all  the  country  round  had  been  so 
wicked  as  they;  and  they  earnestly  desired  to  exalt  free 
grace.  When  I was  cautioning  them  against  new  tempta- 
tions, they  showed  a proper  sense  of  their  own  weakness, 
and  seemed  on  this  account  afraid  of  going  near  their  old 
companions,  though  they  would  fain  have  had  them  brought 
to  Christ.  They  would  rather,  they  said,  die  than  return 
to  their  old  sins;  and  that  if  ever  they  should  be  so  left  to 
themselves  as  to  fall  into  any  of  them,  they  would  rather 
leave  the  country  than  bring  dishonour  on  the  cause  of  God. 
Though  I conversed  with  a great  many,  both  men  and 
women,  young  and  old,  I could  observe  nothing  visionary 
or  enthusiastic  about  them.  Their  conversation  was  solid, 
their  experience  scriptural,  and  the  comfort  or  relief  they 
had  got  still  came  to  them  through  some  promise  or  word 
of  Scripture  cast  into  their  minds.  And  it  was  pleasant  to 
hear  them  mention  so  great  a variety  of  these,  up  and  down 
the  Bible.  Some  who  could  not  read  repeated  their  words 
of  consolation  without  knowing  well  whether  they  were 
words  of  Scripture  or  not ; and  on  finding  that  they  were, 
they  greatly  rejoiced.  I had  heard  much  of  this  surprising 
work  by  letters,  and  from  eye-witnesses,  before  I came;  but 
all  that  made  slight  impressions  on  me  when  compared 
with  what  I saw  and  heard  for  myself.  On  the  whole, 


ATTESTATIONS. 


I look  upon  the  work  at  Camhuslang  as  a singular  and 
marvellous  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  I pray  that 
it  may  be  a happy  forerunner  of  a general  revival  of  the 
Lord’s  work  in  this  poor  decayed  church,  and  a blessed 
means  of  union  among  all  the  lovers  of  our  dear  Lord. 

“John  Willison.” 

A somewhat  similar  account  is  given  by  Mr.  Matthew 
Connel,  minister  of  East  Kilbride,  a neighbouring  parish  ; 
but  as  it  does  not  contain  much  additional  information  it 
may  be  omitted.  The  third  is  by  Dr.  John  Hamilton, 
minister  of  the  Barony  parish  of  Glasgow,  and  who  was 
himself  also  honoured  of  God.  He  speaks  in  his  attesta- 
tion of  some  who  belonged  to  his  own  parish,  and  who  had 
been  benefited  at  Cambuslang.  We  shall,  therefore,  com- 
municate an  abstract  of  his  statements.  Writing  on  the 
20th  of  April,  he  says:  “ I understand  it  to  be  expected 
that  I should  declare  my  sentiments  concerning  the  extra- 
ordinary work  at  Cambuslang,  especially  as  a good  many 
of  my  parishioners  have  lately  been  awakened  there  to  a 
great  concern  about  their  souls.  As  soon  as  I was  inform- 
ed of  their  condition,  I made  it  my  business  to  wait  on 
them.  And  I found  a good  many  persons  under  the  deep- 
est exercise  of  soul,  crying  out  most  bitterly  of  their  lost 
and  miserable  state,  by  reason  of  sin;  of  their  unbelief,  in 
despising  Christ  and  the  offers  of  the  gospel;  of  the  hard- 
ness of  their  heart;  and  of  their  gross  carelessness  and  in- 
difference about  religion.  And  though  some  of  them  said 
that  they  had  regularly  attended  the  preaching  of  the  gos- 
pel, yet  they  acknowdedged  with  much  regret  their  misim- 
provement  of  it ; that  they  had  heard  many  sw7eet  sermons 
without  benefit,  and  had  come  to  church  only  to  see  and 
be  seen.  I have  heard  them  express  great  sorrow  for  these 
things,  and  seemingly  in  the  most  serious  and  sincere  man- 
ner, and  this  not  so  much,  as  some  of  them  told  me,  from 
fear  of  punishment  as  from  a sense  of  the  dishonour  done 
to  God  and  the  blessed  Redeemer.  Though  I have  seen 
some  of  them  in  great  distress,  I could  never  observe  any 


5G 


ATTESTATIONS. 


disordered  in  mind,  and  tlieir  complaints  were  always  suited 
to  their  circumstances.  Neither  did  I observe  any  of  them 
in  a state  of  despair,  hut  all  of  them  seeking  relief  accord- 
ing to  the  gospel  method  of  salvation — through  an  interest 
in  Christ.  When  speaking  of  prayer,  they  have  told  me 
how  much  they  had  formerly  neglected  that  duty,  and  how 
coldly  and  lifelessly  it  had  been  performed.  But  now  they 
had  much  sweetness  in  it.  Their  love  for  the  Scriptures 
was  great.  They  spoke  of  them  as  very  precious,  and  as  an 
invaluable  treasure.  They  seemed  surprised  how  they 
could  have  so  slighted  them  before,  and  they  wondered  at 
the  discoveries  which  they  were  daily  making  in  them. 
They  had  great  love  for  the  public  ordinances,  and  felt  un- 
willing, they  said,  to  retire  even  when . they  were  over. 
They  are  also  very  desirous  of  being  instructed  in  private. 
Some  of  them  came  to  my  house;  and  I never  saw  persons 
more  docile.  Some  were  at  first  hut  little  acquainted  with 
doctrinal  knowledge;  but  their  progress  was  rapid.  I have 
been  surprised  to  observe  how  readily  and  even  judiciously 
some,  who  had  hut  lately  been  ignorant  and  unconverted, 
spoke  concerning  the  most  important  points  of  practical  re- 
ligion, and  with  how  much  facility  they  adduced  passages 
of  Scripture  suited  to  the  subject  in  hand.  I have  often 
heard  them  express  very  strong  desires  for  the  conversion  of 
others ; and  they  discover  great  love  to  as  many  as  are  in 
Christ.  The  persons  I conversed  with  had  been  different 
from  one  another  in  their  previous  character  and  conduct. 
Some  had  all  along  been  sober  and  regular,  and  in  the 
habit  of  attending  public  ordinances;  whereas  others  had 
been  careless,  and  addicted  to  many  sins.  But  even  the 
more  blameless  declared,  that  till  now,  their  hearts  had 
never  been  touched  with  the  word ; that  they  had  never 
till  now  felt  the  influence  of  religion,  but  were  altogether 
unconcerned.” 

Other  attestations  are  afforded  by  the  Rev.  William 
Hamilton,  at  Bothwell ; the  Rev.  William  Hamilton, 
at  Douglas ; the  Rev.  John  McLaurin  of  Glasgow,  whose 


ATTESTATIONS. 


name  is  in  all  the  churches,  and  others  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood ; but  passing  over  these,  we  shall  further  quote 
only  from  a letter  by  the  Rev.  William  M 4 Knight,  minister 
of  Irvine,  and  father  of  Dr.  M ‘Knight,  well  known  as  a cri- 
tical commentator.  And  we  furnish  an  abstract  of  his  let- 
ter all  the  rather  that,  like  Mr.  Willison’s,  it  describes  the 
impressions  produced  on  his  own  mind  when  at  Cambus- 
lang.  Writing  on  the  6th  of  May,  1742,  he  says  : — 

“ As  I had,  by  information  from  letters,  conceived  a good 
opinion  of  the  extraordinary  and  surprising  work  at  Cambus- 
lang  before  I went  thither,  so  my  opinion  has  been  much  con- 
firmed by  what  I saw  and  heard.  While  I joined  with  your 
congregation  in  public  worship,  I observed  among  the  vast 
number  assembled  to  hear,  not  only  serious  looks,  grave 
deportment,  and  close  attention,  but  also  weeping  eyes, 
and  other  indications  of  deep  distress.  In  conversing  with 
some  after  the  public  services  were  over,  I found  that  their 
convictions  were  deep  touching  the  evil  and  demerit  of 
sin,  both  original  and  actual,  particularly  that  of  unbelief. 
On  directing  them  to  the  words  of  Paul,  as  addressed  to  the 
Philippian  jailer,  4 Believe  on  the  'Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved,  and  thy  house’  (Acts  xvi.  31),  their 
answer  was,  4 Lord,  help  me  to  believe ; gladly  would  I 
believe,  but  I cannot/  Yet  I observed  that,  even  in  these 
circumstances,  they  expressed  ardent  desires  after  Christ. 
I conversed  with  others,  who  had  been  under  deep  and 
piercing  convictions  of  sin,  but  who  had  also  found  in  the 
blood  of  Christ  a sufficient  remedy;  and  these  were  ever 
exalting  free  grace,  saying,  with  the  apostle  Paul,  4 It  is 
by  grace  that  we  are  what  we  are;  and  blessed  be  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  blessed  us 
with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ/ 
When  I conversed  with  them,  they  declared  distinctly  how 
their  convictions  began,  and  wrought,  and  how  they  got 
relief.  They  discovered,  also,  how  gracious  that  work 
was,  in  their  confession  of  sin  vrith  shame,  sorrow,  and 
blushing  : in  their  professing  so  to  hate  it  as  to  loathe 

E 


58 


McCULLOCHS  ACCOUNT. 


themselves  on  account  of  it ; crying  out,  c Behold  we  are 
vile;  we  abhor  ourselves,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes:' 
also  in  their  love  to  God  and  his  ordinances,  in  renouncing 
their  own  righteousness,  and  relying  wholly  on  Christ  for 
righteousness  and  strength ; in  their  high  esteem  and  ardent 
love  for  their  dear  Redeemer;  in  their  charity  and  love  for 
one  another,  and  for  all  who  are  Christ's;  in  their  affec- 
tionate concern  for  such  as  fall  under  distress  and  anguish 
of  spirit  on  account  of  sin ; and  in  their  endeavours  to  re- 
lieve them,  whether  by  suitable  exhortations,  or  by  com- 
forting with  the  consolations  wherewith  they  had  them- 
selves been  comforted.  These  are  a few  of  the  good  fruits 
which  I observed  among  some  of  those  with  whom  I con- 
versed at  Cambuslang.  u Wm.  M‘Knight. 

“ Irvine,  May  6,  1742.” 

These  attestations  are,  we  doubt  not,  sufficient,  and  there- 
fore we  shall  now  only  add  the  account  which  Mr.  M‘Cul- 
loch  himself  gives  of  what  had  taken  place.  Writing  to 
Mr.  Wliitefield,  on  the  28th  of  April  1742,  he  says: — 

“ Rev.  and  very  Dear  Sir, — I have  been  so  much  em- 
ployed daily  for  so  long  time  in  the  Lord’s  work  in  this 
place,  that  I have  not  had  leisure  to  write  to  you  half  so  often 
as  I inclined;  but  I cannot  forget  you  one  day,  and  would 
gladly  hear  more  frequently  from  you,  if  your  more  im- 
portant work  will  permit  you  now  and  then  to  employ  a 
few  minutes  that  way.  It  is  matter  of  great  joy  to  hear 
that  our  Immanuel  is  making  such  quick  and  amazing 
conquest  in  New  England,  and  that  his  work  still  goes  on 
and  prospers  w ith  you.  May  he  continue  more  and  more 
to  strengthen  and  furnish  you  for  that  great  and  extraor- 
dinary work  to  which  he  hath  called  you;  and  may  he 
abundantly  bless  and  promote  your  labours  for  the  good  of 
multitudes  of  souls,  who  may  be  as  so  many  jewrels  in  that 
crowm  of  glory  that  our  Lord  will  give  you  at  his  appear- 
ing ! F or  my  part,  I cannot  but  often  cry  out,  with  won- 
der and  astonishment,  Whence  is  this  to  me,  that  the  great 
God  our  Saviour  should  put  so  great  and  extraordinary  a 


m'culloch’s  account. 


50 


work  into  my  hands — a work  relating  to  the  interests  of 
his  kingdom,  and  the  bringing  of  souls  to  him — and  that  he 
should  give  any  countenance  at  all,  especially  to  the  worth- 
less endeavours  of  such  a poor  sinful  creature  in  this  work? 
How  well  does  it  become  me  often  to  say  and  to  sing, 

‘ Not  unto  me,  0 Lord,  not  unto  me,  hut  unto  thy  name, 

0 Lord,  be  all  the  glory,  for  thy  mercy’s  sake,  and  for 
thy  truth’s  sake!’ 

“ Help  us,  dear  brother,  to  praise  him  for  his  goodness, 
and  for  his  works  of  mercy  to  perishing  sinners,  that  are 
everywhere  made  to  taste  of  his  distinguishing  goodness, 
and  particularly  in  this  place  of  late.  To  the  praise  of  his 
own  mercy  and  grace  be  it  spoken,  I believe  that,  in  less 
than  three  months  past,  about  three  hundred  souls  have 
been  awakened  and  convinced  of  their  perishing  condition 
without  a Saviour,  more  than  two  hundred  of  whom  are , 

1 believe , hopefully  converted  and  brought  home  to  God , and 
have  been  at  times  filled  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing; 
and  the  rest  are  earnestly  seeking  for  Jesus,  and  following 
on  to  know  the  Lord. 

“ We  have  had  several  glorious  days  of  the  Son  of  man 
since  this  work  began.  Last  Lord’s-day  was  a remarkable 
day  of  divine  power  amongst  us.  The  .Lord  was  with  us 
of  a truth.  The  arrows  of  conviction  flew  thick  among 
my  people,  and  though  there  were  but  a dozen  persons  that 
had  been  awakened  that  day,  who  came  to  my  closet  to  talk 
with  me  at  night  after  sermon,  yet  I am  informed  that  a 
considerable  number  besides  these  were  wounded  in  spirit, 
and  either  could  not  get  into  the  house  for  the  crowd,  or 
went  away  wishing  to  conceal  their  distress  as  long  as  they 
could.  Some  have  computed  the  number  present  hearing, 
the  last  two  Lord’s-days,  at  nine  or  ten  thousand.  Mr. 
Willison  came  from  Dundee  about  three  weeks  ago,  to  see 
the  Lord’s  work  here,  and  he  returned  much  pleased.  I 
believe  his  sermons,  while  here,  were  blessed  to  many. 

Our  dear  brother,  Mr.  L n,  has  been  very  assisting 

and  encouraging  to  this  work.  We  continue  still  to  have 


60 


McCULLOCH  S SERMONS. 


a sermon  here  every  day.  I long  much  to  see  you  here. 
Let  me  know  by  the  first  opportunity  when  you  think  to 
he  with  us.  Cease  not,  dear  brother,  to  pray  for  the  con- 
tinuance and  spreading  of  this  blessed  work,  and  for 
your  poor  and  unworthy,  but  affectionate  brother  in  the 
Lord,  Wm.  McCulloch.” 

After  hearing  so  much  of  the  power  experienced  at 
Cambuslang,  one  naturally  feels  desirous  of  having  some 
specimen  of  the  preaching,  and  especially  of  Mr.  McCul- 
loch’s. Eleven  of  his  discourses  were  published  by  his  son. 
But  they  had  generally  been  revised,  remodelled,  or,  it  may 
be,  in  some  cases  written  out  for  the  first  time,  after  they 
had  been  delivered.  During  the  pressing  season  of  special 
duty,  his  discourses  were,  it  may  be,  generally  rather  the 
fruit  of  meditation  than  of  written  compositions,  and  not 
therefore  to  be  had.  Two  only  of  the  eleven  published  ser- 
mons, however,  are  said  to  have  been  delivered  during  the 
revival,  and  one  of  them  during  the  period  just  reviewed. 
But  even  these,  though  faithful  manifestations  of  divine 
truth,  were  not  the  actual  sermons,  as  delivered  on  the 
occasions  referred  to.  Of  the  one,  his  son  says : “ The 
sermon  which  he  preached,  he  afterwards  altered,  particu- 
larly in  the  improvement,  when,  about  twenty  years  after , 
he  again  wrote  and  preached  on  the  same  text.”  It  would, 
therefore,  lead  only  to  mistake,  were  these  to  be  given  as 
actual  specimens  of  the  preaching  so  eminently  blessed. 
Many  of  the  passages  remembered  by  the  awakened,  as 
having  been  the  most  effective,  are  not  likely  ever  to  have 
been  written,  but  spoken,  in  addressing  the  persons  whose 
hearts  had  thus  been  touched  and  awakened. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


THE  FIRST  COMMUNION. 

We  have  already  been  carried  forward  to  the  month  of 
May,  and  as  the  usual  period  for  observing  the  communion 
appears  to  have  been  in  July,  it  was  to  be  expected  that 
some  further  progress  would  be  contemplated.  It  is  through 
the  gospel  that  God  especially  calls  sinners.  But  there 
must  be  more  than  calling — there  must  be  answering. 
“ When  thou  saidst,  Seek  ye  my  face,  my  heart  said  unto 
thee,  Thy  face,  Lord,  will  I seek.  O Lord,  truly  I am  thy 
servant  ; I am  thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  thine  handmaid ; 
thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds.”  (Ps.  xxvii.  8,  cxvi.  16‘.) 
These  are  sayings  of  the  heart,  and  may  be  addressed  to 
God  in  private : but  it  is  at  the  Lords  table  that  they  are 
fully  and  solemnly  said.  There,  such  as  can  use  this  lan- 
guage have  a seat  among  the  children;  there  they  have  to 
accept  of  the  bread  and  the  cup  personally;  there  they  pro- 
fess to  accept  of  Christ  as  set  forth  in  these — of  Christ  as 
having  made  an  atonement  for  them — of  Christ  as  their 
loving  and  beloved  Lord,  reigning  in  them,  reigning  over 
them,  and  reigning  for  them.  The  hundreds  already  con- 
verted at  Cambuslang  must,  therefore,  have  desired  greatly 
such  an  opportunity  as  this.  And,  accordingly,  we  are 
told  that  when  it  wras  said  to  them,  “Let  us  go  into  the 
house  of  the  Lord,”  they  were  glad.  Their  prayers  and 
conversation  all  looked  forward  to  this  holy  meeting. 
Many  spoke  of  seeing  “ the  King  in  his  beauty,”  and  many 


02 


WHITEFIELD  S ACCOUNT  OF 


hoped  to  have  their  bands  loosed — each  of  these  trusting 
that  he  might  he  released  at  this  New  Testament  feast. 

On  the  3d  of  June,  Mr.  Whitefield  again  arrived  at 
Leith;  and  the  impression  produced  everywhere  by  this, 
his  second  visit  to  Scotland,  was  greater  than  during  the 
first.  lie  began  in  Edinburgh,  hut  had  pressing  invitations 
to  visit  the  west,  which  was  by  this  time  very  generally  in 
an  excited  state,  whether  from  one  cause  or  another.  He 
complied ; and  on  returning  to  Edinburgh,  wrote  as  follows 
concerning  what  he  had  witnessed  : “ I arrived  here  last 

Saturday  evening  from  the  west,  wdiere  I preached  all  last 
week.  On  Monday,  I preached  at  Paisley ; on  Tuesday 
and  W ednesday,  thrice  each  day  at  Irvine ; on  Thursday, 
twice  at  Mearns ; on  Friday,  thrice  at  Cumbernauld  ; and 
on  Saturday,  twice  at  Falkirk,  on  my  way  back.  In  every 
place,  there  was  the  greatest  commotion  among  the  people 
that  was  ever  known.  Their  mourning,  in  most  of  the 
places,  was  as  for  a first-born.  The  auditories  were  very 
large,  and  the  w^ork  of  God  seems  to  be  spreading  more  and 
more.  Indeed,  I have  seen  and  felt  such  things  as  I never 
saw  and  felt  before.  I never  before  was  enabled  to  preach 
so  powerfully  as  I have  been  whilst  in  the  west.  I pur- 
pose going  to  Cambuslang  to-morrow,  in  order  to  assist  at 
the  communion/’ 

Besides  Mr.  Whitefield  and  some  of  the  ministers  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Cambuslang,  Mr.  Alexander  Webster  of 
Edinburgh  was  present  on  this  occasion,  and  took  part  in 
the  interesting  services  of  the  w^eek. 

It  was  in  these  circumstances  that  the  first  communion 
after  the  commencement  of  the  revival  was  observed  at 
Cambuslang;  and  some  accounts  of  it  cannot  perhaps  be 
better  introduced  than  in  the  unstudied  notice  which 
Whitefield  gives  of  what  he  himself  observed  on  that  occa- 
sion. The  communion  was  fixed  for  Sabbath,  the  11th  of 
July;  and  he  is,  in  the  extract  to  be  made,  speaking  of  the 
preceding  Tuesday  : “ Yesterday  morning,  I preached  at 

Glasgow  to  a very  large  congregation.  At  noon,  I came 


THE  FIRST  COMMUNION.  03 

to  Cambuslang,  the  place  which  God  hath  so  much 
honoured.  I preached  at  two,  to  a vast  body  of  people; 
again  at  six  in  the  evening;  and  afterwards  at  nine.  Such 
a commotion  was  surely  never  heard  of,  especially  about 
eleven  o'clock  at  night.  It  far  outdid  all  that  ever  I saw 
in  America.  For  about  an  hour  and  a half  there  was  such 
weeping,  so  many  falling  into  deep  distress,  and  manifesting 
it  in  various  wrays,  that  description  is  impossible.  The 
people  seemed  to  be  smitten  by  scores.  They  were  carried 
off  and  brought  into  the  house  like  wounded  soldiers  taken 
from  a field  of  battle.  Their  agonies  and  cries  were  deeply 
affecting.  Mr.  McCulloch  preached  after  I had  done,  till  past 
one  o’clock  in  the  morning,  and  even  then  the  people  could 
scarcely  be  got  to  retire.  Throughout  the  whole  of  the 
night  might  the  voice  of  prayer  and  praise  be  still  heard 
in  the  fields." 

On  Friday  night,  Mr.  Whitefield  returned  again  to  Cam- 
buslang,  and  remained  till  Monda}^.  And  waiting  on  the 
Thursday  following,  he  says  : “ On  Friday  night  I came 

to  Cambuslang,  to  assist  at  the  blessed  sacrament.  On 
Saturday,  I preached  to  above  twenty  thousand  people. 
Two  tents  were  set  up  (for  the  Sabbath),  and  the  sacra- 
ment was  administered  in  the  fields.  When  I began  to 
serve  a table,  the  power  of  God  was  felt  by  numbers;  but 
the  people  so  crowded  upon  me  that  I was  obliged  to  leave 
the  tables  to  be  served  by  some  of  the  other  ministers,  and  to 
go  myself  to  preach  at  one  of  the  tents.  God  was  also  with 
them  and  with  his  people.  There  was  sermon  all  day  bv 
one  or  another ; and  when  the  table  services  were  over,  I 
preached  to  the  whole  congregation,  this  being  at  the 
request  of  the  brethren.  I preached  about  an  hour  and  a 
half.  Surely  it  was  a time  much  to  be  remembered.  On 
Monday  morning,  I preached  to  nearly  as  many,  but  so 
general  a stir  I never  saw  before.  The  motion  passed 
swift  as  lightning  from  one  end  of  the  audience  to  the  other. 
You  might  have  seen  thousands  bathed  in  tears,  some 
wringing  their  hands,  some  almost  swooning,  and  others 


61 


m^culloch’s  account. 


crying  out  and  mourning  over  a pierced  Saviour.  In  the 
afternoon  the  concern  was  also  very  great.  Much  prayer 
had  been  previously  offered  up,  and  during  the  whole 
night,  you  might  have  heard  the  different  companies  pray- 
ing and  giving  praise  to_  God.” 

This  account  is  very  striking,  but  it  is  mainly  confined 
to  what  concerned  Mr.  Whitefield’s  own  labours.  It  will, 
therefore,  be  gratifying  to  see  what  Mr.  McCulloch  himself 
says.  His  letter,  detailing  what  took  place,  was  written 
on  the  Wednesday  following  this  communion,  and  there- 
fore, at  a time  when  every  thing  must  have  been  fresh  upon 
his  mind.  It  is  as  follows  : “ Our  glorious  Immanuel  is 

still  going  on  to  make  numerous  conquests  in  this  place.  It 
is  not  quite  five  months  since  the  work  began,  and  during 
that  time,  I have  reason  to  believe  that  upwards  of  jive 
hundred  souls  have  been  awakened , brought  under  deep  con - 
victions  of  sin , and  a feeling  sense  of  their  lost  condition . 
Most  of  these  have  also , I trust , been  savingly  brought  home 
to  God.  I do  not  include  in  this  number  such  as  have 
been  found  to  be  mere  pretenders,  nor  such  as  have  had 
nothing  in  their  exercise  beyond  a dread  of  hell,  which,  as 
you  know,  may  never  issue  in  any  saving  change.  There 
have  been  some  of  both  classes,  but,  blessed  be  God,  the 
number  has  not  been  great,  so  far  as  I have  been  able  to 
ascertain.  I do  not  include  in  this  number,  either,  such  as 
have  been  awakened  by  Mr.  Whitefield’s  sermons;  because 
I cannot  pretend  to  compute  them.  He  has  been  much 
here.  He  has  preached  not  fewer  than  seventeen  times 
during  this,  his  last  visit  to  Scotland.  He  and  Mr.  W ebster 
of  Edinburgh,  as  well  as  others  from  the  neighbourhood, 
assisted  at  the  dispensation  of  the  Lord’s  supper  here  last 
Lord’s-day,  and  they  were  also  with  me  on  the  Saturday 
and  the  Monday.  Both  were  much  assisted  and  counte- 
nanced in  their  Master’s  work.  There  was  also  a more  than 
ordinary  concern  among  the  people  throughout  all  the 
services,  but  especially  under  Mr.  Whitefield’s  sermon, 
which  was  preached  on  the  Monday.  Under  it  there  was 


TEXTS  PREACHED  FROM. 


65 


great  weeping  and  mourning.  The  meetings  also  were  very 
great.  On  Sabbath,  it  was  reckoned  that  there  could  not 
be  fewer  than  thirty  thousand  present ; but  Mr.  Whitefield, 
who  has  been  accustomed  to  large  meetings,  estimated 
them  at  twenty  thousand.  The  tables  were  placed  below 
the  brae.  The  whole  work  was  conducted  in  the  open  air. 
There  were  two  tents,  and  two  ministers  employed  in  these 
all  day,  except  in  the  evening,  when  Mr.  Whitefield 
preached  to  the  vast  multitude  who  remained.  The  num- 
ber of  services  was  seventeen,  and  each  table,  except 
the  last,  contained  about  a hundred,  or  rather  more ; and 
the  issue  of  tokens  shows  that  upwards  of  seventeen  hun-r 
dred  must  have  communicated.  It  was,  I am  persuaded, 
a blessed  time  to  many ; and  yet  I am  hopeful  that  we 
shall  see  and  hear  of  far  greater  things  than  these.  May 
the  Lord  send  a plentiful  rain  to  Glasgow,  his  ancient  heri- 
tage, whereby  multitudes  in  it  may  be  made  to  look  to  Him 
whom  they  have  pierced,  and  mourn ! 

“ William  M‘Culloch." 

It  will  be  observed,  that  in  none  of  these  accounts  is 
there  any  notice  of  the  texts  from  which  so  many  impres- 
sive discourses  wrere  delivered.  We  have  not  the  means  of 
supplying  any  regular  list  of  these.  But  we  have  observed, 
from  references  in  some  of  the  manuscript  cases,  that  the 
action  sermon,  preached  by  Mr.  McCulloch,  was  from  the 
Song  of  Solomon  v.  1 6 : “ His  mouth  is  most  sweet;  yea,  he 
is  altogether  lovely.  This  is  my  beloved,  and  this  is  my 
friend,  0 daughters  of  Jerusalem/'  And  that  the  sermon 
preached  by  Mr.  Whitefield  on  Sabbath  evening,  wTas  from 
Isa.  liv.  5 : u Thy  Maker  is  thy  husband ; the  Lord  of 
hosts  is  his  name.”  The  sermon  preached  from  this  text  has 
more  references  to  it,  as  having  been  blessed  to  individuals, 
than  any  other  of  all  that  great  man's  addresses.  It 
is  printed  in  the  first  edition  of  his  works,  and  in  the 
more  recent  collections  of  his  sermons.  But  no  one  can 
obtain  from  these  publications  a correct  impression  of 
the  sermon  as  delivered.  We  have  been  able  to  trace  the 


GG 


REMARKS  ON  ALLEGED  OBJECTIONS. 


same  discourse  as  delivered  in  four  or  five  places  of  the 
west,  not  very  distant  from  one  another,  during  the  same 
season,  and  have  seen  reason  to  believe,  that  his  ordi- 
nary practice  was  to  adhere  to  a common  outline  which 
had  been  prepared,  hut  to  fill  it  up  variously  in  different 
places,  as  his  own  feelings  and  a sense  of  duty  prompted. 
It  was  in  this  way  that  he  secured  regularity  in  his  general 
method  and  trains  of  reasoning,  and  yet  gave  all  the  fresh- 
ness of  originality,  and  all  the  directness  of  an  immediate 
appeal  to  his  addresses.  Different  men  have  different  me- 
thods, as  they  ought,  and  different  circumstances  lead  to 
changes  even  in  these,  which  would  not  otherwise  he  advis- 
able; but  it  is  instructive  to  observe  how  a man  of  so 
much  labour,  so  much  eloquence,  and  who  was  so  much 
blessed,  conducted  his  discourses. 

Some  of  the  details  occurring  in  this  and  other  parts  of 
the  narrative,  may  require  explanation.  These  outcries  and 
faintings,  it  is  said,  do  not  look  well.  Revivals,  accom- 
panied with  exhibitions  such  as  these,  are  not  desirable. 
They  ought  not  to  be  encouraged.  W ell,  even  if  it  should 
turn  out  so,  let  us  first  see  how  the  matter  stands.  It  is 
not  alleged,  then,  be  it  observed,  that  there  is  any  virtue  in 
such  bodily  manifestations.  It  is  not  washed  that  anything 
should  be  done  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  these.  It  is 
admitted  that  the  demand  put  forth  in  the  gospel  is  not, 
My  son,  give  me  thy  tears,  or  thy  groaning,  or  thy  fainting, 
or  thy  bodily  suffering  of  whatever  kind ; but,  “ My  son,  give 
me  thy  heart.”  These  are  regarded  merely  as  effects;  and 
it  is  alleged  that,  as  such,  there  is  not  in  them  anything 
contrary  either  to  reason  or  Scripture.  The  mother  w^eeps, 
and,  it  may  be,  faints  over  the  loss  of  a beloved  child ; the 
mercantile  adventurer  is  distracted  on  hearing  of  some  heavy 
and  overwhelming  loss;  and  the  condemned  criminal  is  re- 
moved from  the  bar  agitated  and  convulsed;  and  is  there 
anything  unnatural  in  the  tears,  or  even  in  strong  bodily 
agitation  on  his  part,  wrho  has  just  been  brought  to  see 
that  his  soul,  as  well  as  his  body,  is  in  a lost,  and,  as  ap- 


REMARKS  ON  ALLEGED  OBJECTIONS. 


G7 


pears  to  him,  a hopeless  condition  ? Then,  every  one  con- 
versant with  the  common  sympathies  of  our  nature  must  he 
aware  how  much  our  feelings,  whether  of  joy  or  of  sorrow, 
are  heightened  by  the  sight  and  the  hearing  of  others  in  like 
circumstances;  and  it  will  from  this  be  seen  how  much  of 
the  things  observed  at  Cambuslang  must  have  been  owing  to 
the  vast  concourse  of  people  assembled,  and  to  the  intensity 
of  the  impressions  produced.  And  if  we  now  turn  to  Scrip- 
ture, there  must  surely  be  something  of  this  kind  conveyed 
in  such  a passage  as  the  following:  “ They  shall  look  upon 
me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him  as 
one  mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for 
him  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  first-born.”  (Zech. 
xii.  10.)  And  it  is  difficult  to  . conceive  of  the  multitude 
who  heard  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  otherwise  than  as 
resembling  the  meeting  at  Cambuslang.  Peters  audience, 
as  well  as  Whitefield’s,  must  ha  ve  consisted  of  many  thou- 
sands. This  vast  assembly  were  pricked  in  their  hearts, 
and  cried  out,  as  men  who  saw  themselves  lost,  “ Men  and 
brethren,  w7hat  shall  we  do?”  and  not  fewer  than  three 
thousand  found  peace  under  that  sermon,  and  were  saved. 
It  is  true  we  are  not  told  of  bodily  agitations;  but  this  was 
not  to  be  expected  in  so  brief  a history,  nor  was  it  neces- 
sary, as  these  are  merely  the  natural  effects  of  such  feelings 
as  are  here  expressed. 

But  why,  say  some,  have  so  many  sermons  and  so  many 
preachers,  as  if  to  awaken  and  keep  up  such  excited  feel- 
ings? Simply  because  they  were  found  necessary.  Men’s 
minds  are  usually  so  thoroughly  engaged  with  the  things  of 
this  world,  as  to  require  all  that  can  be  done  to  bring  them 
into  a state  even  of  proper  concern  about  their  eternal  well- 
being. The  common  feeling  is,  that  men  require  only  to 
be  informed  on  the  subjects  brought  before  them.  But 
why,  then,  was  it  that,  “ in  the  last  day,  that  great  day  of 
the  feast,  Jesus  stood  and  cried , saying,  If  any  man  thirst, 
let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink?”  (John  vii.  37.)  Was 
it  not  just  because  of  the  little  interest  which  they  had 


68 


REMARKS  ON  ALLEGED  OBJECTIONS 


been  taking  in  his  previous  teaching,  and  because  of  the 
sense  which  he  had  of  their  condition  ? And  the  same 
thing  is  true  in  such  circumstances  as  these  under  consi- 
deration. The  saying  of  our  Lord  has  need  to  be  often  re- 
peated and  considered : M Martha,  Martha,  thou  art  careful 
and  troubled  about  many  things,  but  one  thing  is  needful .” 

But  it  is  the  opinion,  we  know,  of  some  who  sympathize 
with  all  this,  that  such  gatherings  on  sacramental  occasions 
are  not  advisable.  Without  offering  anything  controver- 
sially on  this  subject,  it  is  well  that  we  do  not  shut  our 
eyes  on  purposes  actually  served  by  such  meetings.  It  is 
of  itself  an  important  tact,  that  most  of  the  remarkable  re- 
vivals which  have  occurred  in  Scotland  have  been  more  or  less 
in  connection  with  these — have  been  eminently  forwarded 
by  them.  They  have  also  served  the  important  purpose  of 
extended  fellowship  among  God’s  people  connected  with 
different  congregations,  and  even  different  parts  of  the 
country.  In  consequence  of  this  intercourse,  these  were 
often  the  means  of  opening  communications  between  diffe- 
rent places,  and  of  promoting  the  work  of  God  in  these. 
Refreshed  by  what  they  heard,  and  saw,  and  felt,  each 
little  company  returned  to  their  own  locality ; and,  in  very 
many  cases,  their  knowledge  of  each  other,  their  inter- 
course when  brought  together  in  such  solemn  circumstances, 
and  their  opportunities  of  meeting  afterwards,  led  to  the 
employment  of  means  which  w'ould  not  otherwise  have 
been  thought  of,  and,  through  these,  to  the  revival  of  God’s 
work  in  their  own  neighbourhood. 

It  is  also  to  be  observed,  as  regards  the  number  of 
ministers  brought  together  on  such  occasions,  that  the 
various  gifts  thus  employed,  no  doubt,  contributed  to  the 
effects  produced.  Different  men,  all  excellent  in  their  own 
way,  are  nevertheless  very  differently  endowed.  Some  are 
fitted  to  awaken,  some  to  melt,  some  to  comfort,  some  to 
lay  open  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  some  to  solve  diffi- 
cult questions,  and  some  to  unfold  the  mysteries  of  the 
gospel.  These  and  other  gifts  are  really  wanted,  and  hence 


REMARKS  ON  ALLEGED  OBJECTIONS. 


GO 


another  reason  why  greater  effects  have  been  experienced 
on  such  occasions  than  under  the  ordinary  ministrations  of 
some  one  instructor.  And  perhaps  we  should  add,  that 
there  is  really  a blessing  in  Christian  fellowship,  which 
comes  to  be  greatly  more  felt  when  its  feelings  traverse  their 
usual  limits,  and  bring  together,  as  of  one  family,  many 
otherwise  strangers,  or  known  only  by  report.* 

* We  have  been  very  much  struck  with  the  fact  observable  in  Scot- 
tish revivals,  that  the  services  of  the  Monday  after  the  communion 
were  usually,  more  than  those  of  other  days,  eminently  blessed. 
Livingston,  when  on  his  death-bed,  said  that  the  only  sermons  he  had 
ever  preached,  and  which  he  wished  to  see  written,  were  preached  on 
the  Mondays  after  communion  Sabbath,  one  at  the  Kirk  of  Shotts,  and 
another  at  Holy  wood,  near  Belfast.  And  the  readers  of  this  volume 
will  find  many  notices  of  special  blessings  attending  Monday  sermons. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


THE  SECOND  COMMUNION. 

0> 

The  excitement  produced  by  the  first  communion  was  very 
great.  Frequent  mention  of  this  is  made  in  the  manuscript 
cases.  Some  had  been  disappointed  at  not  being  able 
to  attend  the  former ; some  who  were  present  had  been  so 
distracted  with  a sense  of  their  condition,  that  they  dared  not 
to  venture ; and  such  as  had  been  forward,  and  found  Him 
whom  they  so  much  loved,  eagerly  panted  for  a renewed 
opportunity  of  the  same  enjoyment.  But  besides  these 
personal  feelings,  there  were  extraordinary  reports  carried 
into  all  parts  of  the  country.  The  meetings  had  been  large, 
and  many  of  those  present  were  from  a distance,  and  had 
never  seen  any  thing  of  the  kind  before.  They  went,  there- 
fore, to  their  own  places,  proclaiming  to  all  the  things 
which  they  had  seen  and  heard;  and  the  effect  was  an  ex- 
traordinary desire  that  a renewed  opportunity  of  witnessing 
something  similar  should  be  afforded ; many  who  had  not 
been  present  on  the  former  occasion,  resolving  that  in 
these  circumstances  they  also  would  attend. 

But  long  before  these  desires  could  be  learned,  a pro- 
posal to  this  effect  had  been  suggested,  and  was  at  this  very 
time  under  consideration.  But  this  cannot  be  better  ex- 
plained than  in  a letter  written  by  Mr.  McCuiloch  himself. 
This  letter  contains  an  account  of  the  communion,  and 
although  it  wants  the  date,  it  must  have  been  written  very 
soon  after  that  solemnity,  for  it  was  published  in  the  39th 
number  of  the  “ Glasgow  Weekly  History/'  which  would 


m^culloch’s  account  of  tiie  second  communion.  71 

fall  due  about  the  end  of  September.  It  is  addressed  to  a 
brother  minister,  but  his  name  is  not  given,  and  is  as  fol- 
lows : — 

u Rev.  and  Dear  Brother, — You  know  that  we  had  the 
sacrament  of  the  Lord’s  supper  dispensed  here  on  the  11th  of 
July  last.  It  was  such  a sweet  and  agreeable  time  to  many, 
that  a motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Webster,  and  seconded  by 
Mr.  Whitefield,  that  we  should  have  another  such  occasion 
again  in  this  place  very  soon.  The  motion  was  very  agree- 
able to  me,  but  I thought  it  needful  to  deliberate  before 
coming  to  a resolution.  The  thing  proposed  was  indeed 
extraordinary,  but  so  had  the  work  in  this  place  been  for 
several  months  past.  Care  was,  therefore,  taken  to  acquaint 
the  several  meetings  for  prayer  with  the  motion.  They 
relished  it  well,  and  prayed  for  direction  to  those  concern- 
ed in  determining  this  matter.  The  session  met  next  Lord’s- 
day,  and  taking  into  consideration  the  divine  command  to 
celebrate  the  ordinance  often,  joined  with  the  extraordinary 
work  that  had  been  here  for  some  time  past ; and  under- 
standing that  many  who  had  met  with  much  benefit  to 
their  souls  at  the  last  solemnity,  had  expressed  their  earnest 
desires  of  seeing  another  in  this  place  shortly;  and  hearing 
that  there  were  many  who  intended  to  have  joined  at  the 
last  occasion,  but  were  kept  back  through  inward  discou- 
ragements, or  outward  obstructions,  and  were  wishing  soon 
to  see  another  opportunity  of  that  kind  here,  to  which  they 
might  have  access ; it  was  therefore  resolved,  God  willing, 
that  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper  should  be  again  dis- 
pensed in  this  parish  on  the  third  Sabbath  of  August  then 
next  to  come,  being  the  15th  day  of  that  month.  And  there 
was  first  one  day  and  then  another,  at  some  distance  of  time 
from  that,  appointed  for  a general  meeting  of  the  several  so- 
cieties for  prayer  in  the  parish,  at  the  manse.  They  accord- 
ingly met  on  the  days  appointed,  with  some  other  Christians 
from  places  in  the  neighbourhood.  And  when  the  manse 
could  not  conveniently  hold  them,  they  went  to  the  church ; 
and  at  one  of  these  meetings,  when  light  failed  them  in  the 


72  McCULLOCHS  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SECOND  COMMUNION. 

church,  a good  number,  of  their  own  free  motion,  came 
again  to  the  manse,  and  continued  at  prayers  and  praises 
together  till  about  one  o’clock  next  morning. 

“ The  design  of  these  meetings,  and  the  business  which 
they  were  accordingly  employed  in — besides  singing  of 
psalms  and  blessing  the  name  of  God  together — was  to  ask 
mercy  of  the  God  of  heaven  to  ourselves  ; to  pray'  for  such 
as  unhappily  opposed  this  work  of  God  here  and  in  other 
parts,  that  God  would  forgive  their  guilt  in  this  matter, 
open  their  eyes,  remove  their  prejudices,  and  convince 
them  that  it  is  indeed  his  work,  and  give  them  repentance 
to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  truth;  that  the  Lord  would 
continue  and  increase  the  blessed  work  of  conviction  and 
conversion  here  and  in  other  places,  where  it  has  begun  in 
a remarkable  measure,  and  that  he  would  extend  it  to  all 
the  corners  of  the  land;  and  that  he  would  eminently  coun- 
tenance the  dispensing  of  the  sacrament  of  the  holy  supper 
a second  time  in  this  place,  so  as  to  make  the  glory  of  this 
latter  solemnity  to  exceed  that  of  the  former.  Much  of 
the  Lord’s  gracious  presence  was  enjoyed  at  these  meetings 
for  prayer.  Returns  of  mercy  were  vouchsafed  in  part,  and 
are  still  further  expected  and  hoped  for. 

“ The  second  sacramental  occasion  did  indeed  much  exceed 
the  former,  not  only  in  the  number  of  ministers,  people,  and 
communicants,  but,  which  is  the  main  thing,  in  a much 
greater  measure  of  the  power  and  special  presence  of  God, 
in  the  observation  and  sensible  experience  of  multitudes 
that  were  attending. 

“ The  ministers  that  assisted  at  this  solemnity  were,  Mr. 
Whitefield;  Mr.  Webster,  from  Edinburgh;  Mr.  M4Laurin 
and  Mr.  Gillies,  from  Glasgow;  Mr.  Robe,  from  Kilsyth;  Mr. 
Currie,  from  Kinglassie;  Mr.  M ‘Knight,  from  Irvine;  Mr. 
Bonar,  from  Torphichen;  Mr.  Hamilton,  from  Douglas;  and 
three  of  the  neighbouring  ministers,  namely,  Mr.  Hender- 
son, from  Blantyre;  Mr.  Maxwell,  from  Rutherglen;  and 
Mr.  Adam  from  Cathcart; — all  of  them  appeared  to  be  very 
much  assisted  in  their  work.  Four  of  them  preached  on 


McCULLOCIl’s  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SECOND  COMMUNION.  73 

the  fast-day,  four  on  Saturday,  on  Sabbath  I cannot  well 
tell  how  many,  and  five  on  Monday;  on  which  last  day  it 
was  computed  that  above  twenty-four  ministers  and 
preachers  were  present.  Old  Mr.  Bonar,  though  so  frail 
that  he  took  three  days  to  ride  eighteen  miles,  the  distance 
between  Torphichen  and  Cambuslang,  yet  his  heart  was  so 
set  upon  coming,  that  he  w^ould  by  no  means  stay  awray; 
and  when  he  was  helped  up  to  the  tent,  he  preached  three 
times  with  great  life,  and  returned  with  much  satisfaction 
and  joy.  Mr.  Whitefield’s  sermons  on  Saturday,  Sabbath, 
and  Monday,  were  attended  with  much  pow  er,  particularly 
that  on  Sabbath  night  about  ten  o’clock,  and  that  on  Mon- 
day; several  were  crying  out,  and  a very  great  but  decent 
wreeping  and  mourning  was  observable  through  the  auditory. 
On  Sabbath  evening,  while  he  wTas  serving  some  tables,  he 
appeared  to  be  so  filled  with  the  love  of  God,  as  to  be  in  a 
kind  of  extasy,  and  he  communicated  with  much  of  that 
blessed  frame.  Time  would  fail  me  to  speak  of  the  evi- 
dence of  the  powrer  of  God  coming  along  with  the  means, 
and  I am  in  part  prevented  by  w hat  is  noticed  by  Mr.  Robe 
in  his  Narrative. 

u The  number  of  people  present  on  Saturday  and  Monday 
was  very  considerable.  But  the  number  present  at  the 
three  tents  on  the  Lord’s-day  w as  so  great,  that,  so  far  as  I 
can  hear,  none  ever  saw  the  like  in  Scotland,  from  the 
revolution  down,  or  even  anywhere  else,  on  a sacramental 
occasion.  Some  have  called  it  fifty  thousand,  some  forty, 
and  the  lowest  estimate  I hear  of,  w7ith  which  Mr.  White- 
field  agrees,  who  has  been  used  to  great  multitudes,  and 
accustomed  to  form  a judgment  of  their  number,  makes 
them  to  have  been  upwards  of  thirty  thousand. 

u The  number  of  communicants  appears  to  have  been  about 
three  thousand.  The  tables  wTere  double,  and  the  double 
table  wras  reckoned  to  contain  from  a hundred  and  fourteen 
to  a hundred  and  twenty  communicants.  The  number  of 
tables  I reckoned  at  twrenty-four,  but  I have  been  since 
informed,  that  a man  who  sat  near  the  tables  and  kept  a 

F 


74  McCULLOCHS  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SECOND  COMMUNION. 


pen  in  his  hand,  carefully  marking  each  service,  declares 
that  there  were  twenty-five  double  tables  or  services,  the 
last  wanting  only  five  or  six  persons  to  fill  it  up.  And  this 
account  seems  the  most  probable,  as  it  nearly  agrees  with 
the  number  of  tokens  distributed,  which  was  three  thou- 
sand. And  some  worthy  of  credit,  and  who  had  proper 
opportunities  to  know,  gave  it  as  their  opinion,  that  there 
was  such  a blessed  frame  fell  upon  the  people,  that  if  there 
iiad  been  access  to  get  tokens,  there  would  have  been  a 
thousand  more  communicants. 

“ This  vast  concourse  of  people,  you  may  easily  imagine, 
came  not  only  from  the  city  of  Glasgow,  and  other  places 
near,  but  from  many  places  at  a considerable  distance.  It 
was  reckoned,  that  there  were  two  hundred  communicants 
from  Edinburgh,  two  hundred  from  Kilmarnock,  a hundred 
from  Irvine,  a hundred  from  Stewarton,  and  some  even  from 
England  and  Ireland.  A considerable  number  of  quakers 
were  hearing,  and  many  formerly  of  the  secession,  some  of 
whom  communicated.  A voun£  man  looking  forward  to 
the  ministry,  and  who  had  been  for  some  time  under  great 
temptation,  as  if  the  presence  of  God  was  to  he  no  more 
enjoyed,  either  in  the  church  or  the  secession,  communi- 
cated here,  and  went  home  with  great  joy,  and  full  of  the 
love  of  God. 

“ There  was  a meat  deal  of  out  ward  decencv  and  remilaritv 

& J O 

observable  at  the  tables.  Public  Avorship  began  on  the 
Lord’s-day  at  half-past  eight  in  the  morning.  My  action 
sermon  Avas,  I think,  reasonably  short.  The  third  or  fourth 
table  was  a-serAum:  at  twelve  o’clock,  and  the  last  was 
servinof  about  sunset.  When  that  was  done,  the  work  was 
closed  Avith  a few  words  of  exhortation,  prayer,  and  praise, 
the  precentor  hairing  so  much  day-light  as  to  let  him  see  to 
read  four  lines  of  a psalm.  The  passages  to  and  from  the 
tables  were  kept  clear  for  the  communicants  to  come  and  go. 
The  tables  were  filled  so  quickly,  that  oftentimes  only  four 
lines  of  a psalm  could  be  sung  between.  The  tables  were 
all  served  in  the  open  air,  beside  the  tent  and  below  the 


m‘culloch*s  account  of  the  second  communion.  75 

brae.*  The  day  was  temperate;  no  wind  or  rain  sufficient 
to  disturb.  Several  persons  of  rank  and  distinction,  who 
were  elders,  most  cheerfully  assisted  in  serving  the  tables : 
such  as  the  honourable  Charles  Erskine,  advocate;  Bruce 
ofKennet;  Gillon  of  Wallhouse;  Warner  of  Ardeer;  and 
Mr.  Wardrop,  surgeon  in  Edinburgh. 

44  But  the  thing  most  remarkable,  was  the  spiritual  glor}rof 
this  solemnity — I mean  the  gracious  and  sensible  presence  of 
God.  Not  a few  were  awakened  to  a sense  of  sin,  and  of 
their  lost  and  perishing  condition  without  a Saviour. 
Others  had  their  bands  loosed,  and  were  brought  into  the 
marvellous  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  Many  of  God’s  dear 
children  have  declared  that  it  was  a precious  time  to  their 
souls — that  they  had  been  abundantly  satisfied  with  the 
goodness  of  God  in  his  ordinances,  and  filled  with  all  joy 
and  peace  in  believing.  I have  seen  a letter  from  Edin- 
burgh, in  which  the  writer  says,  4 That  having  talked  with 
many  Christians  in  that  city,  who  had  been  here  at  this 
sacrament,  they  all  owned  that  God  had  dealt  bountifully 
with  their  souls  on  that  occasion.’  Some  who  attended 
here  have  declared,  that  they  would  not  for  all  the  world 
have  been  absent.  Others  cried  out,  4 Now  let  thy  servants 
depart  in  peace,  since  our  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation 
here !’  f And  there  were  who  wished,  had  it  been  the  will  of 
God,  to  be  removed  wdiile  waiting  on  God  in  these  ordi- 
nances, without  returning  again  to  the  world  or  their 
friends,  and  so  to  be  with  Christ  in  heaven,  which  is  far 
better. 

44  I thought  it  my  duty  to  offer  these  few  hints  concern- 
ing this  solemnity,  and  so  to  record  the  memory  of  God’s 
great  goodness  to  many  souls  on  that  occasion.  And,  now, 

* One  tent  was  placed  at  the  lower  extremity  of  the  amphitheatre, 
and  near  the  joining  of  the  two  rivulets,  and  here  the  sacrament  was 
administered;  a second  tent  was  erected  in  the  church-yard;  and  a 
third  in  a green  field  a little  to  the  west  of  the  first  tent.  {Statistical 
Account.) 

+ This  we  believe  was  the  saying  of  Mr.  Bonar,  when  taking  leave  to 
return  home. 


78 


whitefield’s  account. 


I suppose  }rou  Avill  by  this  time  find  yourself  disposed  to 
sing  the  98th  psalm  at  the  beginning,  or  the  close  of  the 
72d,  or  some  other  psalm  of  praise.  May  our  exalted 
Redeemer  still  go  on  from  conquering  to  conquer,  till  the 
whole  earth  be  filled  with  his  glory.  Amen,  so  let  it 
be.  In  him,  I am  yours,  &c. 

u William  McCulloch.” 

W riting  from  Cambuslang  on  the  27th  August,  Mr. 
Whitefield  says:  “ This  day  fortnight  I came  to  this  place 
to  assist  at  the  sacrament,  with  several  worthy  ministers  of 
the  church  of  Scotland.  Such  a passover  has  not  been 
heard  of.  The  voice  of  prayer  and  praise  was  heard  all 
night.  It  was  supposed  that  between  thirty  and  forty 
thousand  people  were  assembled,  and  three  thousand  com- 
municated. The  ministers  were  enlarged,  and  great  grace 
w as  among  the  people.  I preached  once  on  Saturday,  once 
on  the  Lord’s-day  in  the  morning,  I served  five  tables,  and 
preached  about  ten  at  night  to  a great  number  in  the 
churcli-yard,  though  it  rained  much.  There  wras  a great 
awakening.  On  Monday  at  seven  in  the  morning,  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Webster  preached,  and  there  was  a very  great 
commotion;  and  also  in  the  third  sermon,  when  I preached. 
A very  great  and  serious  concern  was  visible  throughout 
the  whole  solemnity.  The  Lord’s  people  went  home  much 
refreshed.” 

We  cannot  better  follow7  up  this  account  of  the  second 
communion,  than  by  extracting  a few  of  Mr.  Webster’s 
remarks  on  the  w ork  at  large,  but  w ritten  immediately  on 
his  return  from  Cambuslang,  and  pictures,  no  doubt,  of  wrhat 
he  had  just  witnessed.  His  letter  is  dated  at  Edinburgh, 
on  the  30th  of  August  1742:  “ During  the  time  of  di- 
vine worship,  solemn,  profound  reverence  overspread  every 
countenance.  They  hear  as  for  eternity,  and  not  know- 
ing but  the  next  moment  they  must  account  to  their  great 
Judge.  Thousands  are  melted  into  tears.  Many  cry  out  in 
the  bitterness  of  their  soul.  Some  of  both  sexes,  and  all 
ages,  from  the  stoutest  man  to  the  tenderest  child,  shake 


WEBSTER  S ACCOUNT. 


77 


and  tremble,  and  a few  fall  down  as  dead.  Nor  does  this 
happen  only  when  men  of  warm  address  alarm  them  with 
the  terrors  of  the  law,  but  when  the  most  deliberate  preacher 
speaks  of  redeeming  love.  Bring  them  to  Mount  Sinai, 
where  the  thunder  roars  and  lightnings  flash,  and  this  may 
occasion  greater  outcry;  but  lead  them  to  the  consolations 
that  are  in  J esus,  and  then  vastly  greater  numbers  fall  un- 
der the  most  kindly  impressions.  Talk  of  a precious 
Saviour,  and  all  seem  to  breathe  after  him.  Describe  his 
glory,  and  how  ravished  do  many  appear!  how  captivated 
with  his  loveliness!  Open  the  wonders  of  his  grace,  and 
the  silent  tears  drop  from  almost  every  eye.  Such  eternal, 
such  glorious  themes,  seem  the  delight  of  their  souls,  and 
reign  triumphant  over  each  power  and  faculty. 

u These,  dear  sir,  are  the  visible  effects  of  this  extraordi- 
nary work  during  the  time  of  divine  worship.  Upon  con- 
versing with  the  subjects  of  this  work,  after  public  service 
was  over,  they  gave  a distinct  and  scriptural  account  of  the 
temper  of  their  minds,  and  of  the  various  springs  whence 
their  tears  of  sorrow  or  of  joy  flowed.  Those  struck  in  the 
most  awful  manner,  when  recovered  from  the  violence  of 
the  shock,  mentioned  the  quick  and  affecting  sense  which 
they  had  of  divine  wrath,  before  they  were  so  affected. 
They  condescended  on  the  particular  part  of  the  sermon  or 
Scripture  which  occasioned  such  views  of  their  guilt  and 
misery.  They  described  the  gradual  opening  of  their 
minds,  till,  led  back  to  the  rock  whence  they  were  hewn, 
they  saw  that  they  had  been  conceived  in  sin,  and  brought 
forth  in  iniquity,  and  humbly  acknowledged  that  they  had 
been  transgressors  from  the  womb.  They  spoke  under  a 
painful  sense  of  sin,  not  only  as  the  ruin  of  the  creature, 
but  as  dishonouring  to  a kind  and  loving  Saviour.  Unbe- 
lief in  a particular  manner  cuts  them  to  the  very  heart. 
They  cannot  bear  the  thought  of  having  so  long  rejected 
the  Son  of  God,  and  despised  his  endearing  calls,  as  set 
forth  in  the  gospel.  Being  persuaded  that  he  is  the  only 
Redeemer  of  a lost  world,  they  breathe  after  him  under  every 


78 


THE  PREACHERS  AND  THEIR  TEXTS. 


character  and  in  every  relation ; as  a king  upon  his  throne, 
clothed  with  authority  to  reign,  as  well  as  a priest  on  the 
cross,  endowed  with  ability  to  save.  Willingly  would  they 
part  with  all  for  an  interest  in  Jesus,  and  they  desire  no- 
thing more  than  to  he  taught  of  him  as  their  great  prophet. 
Sensible  of  their  utter  inability  to  believe,  how  earnestly  do 
they  pray,  4 Open  the  everlasting  doors  of  our  heart : Come 
in,  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord:  Be  our  God  and  portion!* 

44  Those  who  have  attained  comfort  readily  give  a reason 
of  the  hope  and  joy  which  are  in  them  with  meekness  and 
fear,  declaring,  to  the  praise  of  divine  grace,  how  the  Holy 
Ghost,  formerly  a convincer,  proved  also  their  comforter,  by 
discovering  to  them  their  warrant  to  lay  hold  on  Jesus  the 
Saviour,  and  happily  determining  them  to  embrace  a whole 
Christ  as  freely  offered  in  the  gospel:  4 Whom,  hav- 

ing not  seen,*  say  they,  4 we  love ; in  whom  though  now  we 
see  him  not,  yet  believing,  we  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory.*  Sensible  of  the  blessed  change  which  has 
passed  upon  their  minds,  they  rejoice  that  old  things  are 
done  away,  and  all  things  become  new. 

44  It  is  not  pretended,  nor  can  it  indeed  be  supposed,  that 
all  should,  on  being  first  awakened,  give  such  distinct  ac- 
counts of  the  working  of  their  minds ; or  that  all  who  have 
fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  them,  have  attained  to 
so  joyful  a faith;  but  I have  honestly  described  the  condition 
of  the  generality  as  I had  it  from  themselves .** 

But  before  concluding  our  account  of  this  second  com- 
munion, there  are  certain  interesting  memorials  to  be  no- 
ticed. Mr.  M;Culloch  furnishes  a list  of  the  ministers  who 
preached  on  the  occasion,  and  of  their  texts,  except  those 
who  preached  at  the  tents  during  the  table  services.  And 
it  cannot  fail  to  be  interesting  to  have  some  memorial  of 
these,  and  of  the  men  who  were  so  much  honoured  of  God. 

On  Tuesday , the  fast-day , — 

1.  Mr.  Adams  preached  from  Ps.  cxix.  59  : “ I thought 
on  my  ways,  and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy  testimonies.’* — (1 .) 

2.  Mr.  Robe  from  Isa.  liii.  10:  44  He  hath  put  him 


THE  PREACHERS  AND  THEIR  TEXTS. 


79 


to  grief;  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin, 
he  shall  see  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  days,  and  the 
pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hands.” — (2.) 

3.  Mr.  Henderson  from  Rom.  yiii.  33,  34 : “ Who 
shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God’s  elect?  It  is  God 
that  justifieth : who  is  he  that  condemneth?  It  is  Christ 
that  died,  yea,  rather  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us.” — (3.) 

4.  Mr.  Currie  from  John  iii.  29 : “ lie  that  hath  the 
bride  is  the  bridegroom;  but  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom, 
which  standeth  and  heareth  him,  rejoiceth  greatly  because 
of  the  bridegroom’s  voice.  This  my  joy,  therefore,  is  ful- 
filled.”—(4.) 

On  Friday  evening , — 

Mr.  McCulloch  from  Isa.  liii.  11 : u He  shall  see  of  the 
travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied.” — (5.) 

On  Saturday , — 

1.  Mr.  Whitefield  from  John  xiii.  8.  “ If  I wash  thee 
not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me.” — (6.) 

2.  Mr.  Webster  from  1 Pet.  ii.  7:  “ Unto  }*ou,  there- 
fore, which  believe,  he  is  precious.” — (7.) 

3.  Mr.  Robe  from  his  former  text,  Isa.  liii.  10.— (2.) 

4.  Mr.  Bonar  from  the  Song  iii.  3:  “ Saw  ye  him  whom 
my  soul  loveth?” — (8.) 

On  the  Lord' s-day , — 

1.  Mr.  McCulloch  preached  the  action  sermon  from 
1 John  iv.  10  : u Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God, 
but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  propitia- 
tion for  our  sins.” — (5.) 

2.  The  sermons  at  the  tents  during  the  table  services  are 
not  given. 

3.  Mr.  Whitefield  exhorted  in  the  evening  after  the 
other  services  were  over,  but  without  a text. — (6.) 

On  Monday , — 

1.  Mr.  Webster  at  seven  o’clock  a.m.,  from  Luke  xii.  32 : 
“ Fear  not,  little  flock;  for  it  is  your  Father’s  good  pleasure 
to  give  you  the  kingdom.” — (7.) 


80 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICES. 


2.  Mr.  Hamilton  from  1 Thess.  y.  17:  “ Pray  without 
ceasing.” — (9.) 

3.  Mr.  MTiitefield  from  the  parable  of  the  marriage 
supper,  Matt.  xxii.  2-14. — (6.) 

4.  Mr.  M*Knight  from  Matt.  xt.  28  : “ O woman, 
great  is  thy  faith : be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt.” — (10.) 

5.  Dr.  Gillies  from  Job  xxii.  21:  “Acquaint  now 
thyself  with  him,  and  be  at  peace ; thereby  good  shall  comi» 
unto  thee.” — (11.) 

Notices  concei'ning  the  above  ministers. 

1 . Mr.  George  Adams  was  at  this  time  minister  of  Cath- 
cart,  and  was  esteemed  of  all  as  a man  of  piety,  and  faith- 
ful in  the  discharge  of  ministerial  duties:  he  afterwards 
fell  into  the  sin  of  fornication,  and  was  deposed  from 
the  office  of  the  ministry.  The  signs  of  his  repentance, 
however,  were  so  evident  to  all,  that  application  was 
made  by  the  session,  by  the  whole  of  the  heritors,  and  by 
many  of  the  parishioners,  for  his  restoration.  The  presby- 
tery, after  a course  of  discipline,  before  the  congregation  and 
otherwise,  were  proceeding  to  replace  him,  when  the  com- 
mission, in  November  1747,  ordered  them  to  desist,  till  the 
advice  of  the  assembly  had  been  obtained.  The  presbytery 
accordingly  referred  the  case  to  the  assembly,  in  May  1748 ; 
and,  under  the  circumstances,  the  assembly  allowed  the 
presbytery  to  proceed,  and  he  was  re-instated  in  his  former 
parish,  on  the  17th  of  August  following.  It  is  said  by 
local  tradition,  that  as  often  as  he  had  discipline  to  admi- 
nister on  others  for  a like  offence,  his  reference  to  his  own 
case  was  so  touching  as  greatly  to  affect  all  present. 

2.  Mr.  James  Robe  was  minister  of  Kilsyth,  and  a 
son  of  Mr.  Michael  Robe,  minister  of  Cumbernauld  before 
the  revolution,  probably  as  an  indulged  minister  under  the 
act  of  1687.  and  after  it  as  parish  minister.  His  son,  Mr. 
James,  was  inducted  at  Kilsyth  in  1713,  and  died  in  1755. 
His  Narrative  of  the  Revival  shows  much  of  his  character 
and  labours.  His  “ Monthly  History”  contains  much  that  is 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICES. 


81 


not  to  be  found  in  any  other  original  work.  His  controver- 
sial pamphlets  discover  talent  as  well  as  zeal.  II is  ser- 
mons, of  which  there  are  several  volumes,  are  simple,  full 
of  gospel  truth,  and  worthy  of  a place  among  other  works 
of  practical  divinity.  And  there  are  still  traditional  anec- 
dotes strongly  illustrative  of  his  character,  as  a holy  and 
conscientious  servant  of  Christ. 

3.  Mr.  Henderson  was  minister  of  Blantyre,  a parish  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Cambuslang ; hut  we  have 
not  met  with  anything  concerning  him  worthy  of  notice. 

4.  Mr.  John  Currie  was  minister  of  Kinglassie,  in  Fife. 
He  was  settled  in  that  parish  in  1705,  and  died  in  1755. 
He  was  distinguished  as  an  able,  faithful,  and  laborious 
gospel  minister.  As  he  and  Mr.  Ebenezer  Erskine  were 
friends  in  early  life,  and  their  parishes  adjoining,  they  lived 
as  brothers,  sharing  each  others  counsels,  and  striving 
together  in  the  cause  of  their  common  Master.  But  when 
the  secession  took  place,  they  parted.  Mr.  Currie  became 
one  of  the  leading  defenders  of  the  establishment,  or  rather 
of  his  own  conduct  and  that  of  others  in  not  seceding. 
Mr.  Wilson  of  Perth  was  his  principal  opponent,  as  an 
author.  And  when  the  revivals  broke  out,  Mr.  Currie 
wrote  in  their  defence,  and  was  engaged  in  controversy 
with  others  of  his  former  associates. 

5.  It  is  not  necessary  to  add  anything  to  the  biographical 
notice  already  given  concerning  Mr.  McCulloch.  His  son, 
as  already  noticed,  was  minister  of  Dairsie,  in  Fife.  He 
was  highly  respected  in  his  day  as  an  able  and  evangelical 
minister ; and  a daughter  of  his,  Mrs.  Coutts,  is  now  resi- 
dent in  Edinburgh,  a living  example  of  the  piety  and  be- 
nevolence of  her  ancestors,  and  warmly  attached  to  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  Free  Church. 

6.  It  may  not  be  known  to  the  reader,  that  Mr. 
Whitefield  wrote  his  own  life,  up  to  the  time  of  his  ob- 
taining ordination.  In  it,  he  freely  exposes  his  own  early 
sins,  as  well  as  acknowdedges  the  grace  which  he  had  re- 
ceived. Dr.  Gillies  of  Glasgow  wrote  the  life  which  ac- 


82 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICES. 


companies  his  works;  and  it  is  drawn  up  with  great  judg- 
ment. There  is  a curious  fact  connected  with  this,  which 
may,  like  many  similar  facts,  touch  some  of  the  hidden 
springs  in  providence,  now  at  work.  A Mr.  William  Burns 
of  Falkirk  or  the  neighbourhood,  became  so  attached  to  Mr. 
Whitefield,  as  to  follow  him  across  the  Atlantic,  and  after 
returning,  to  devote  himself  to  the  ministry.  He  never 
received  any  appointment,  but  continued  to  preach  as  op- 
portunity occurred,  so  long  as  he  was  able.  And  as  a 
memorial  of  his  regard  for  Whitefield,  he  published  an 
edition  of  his  life  by  Dr.  Gillies,  with  a preface  written  by 
himself.  This  Mr.  William  Bums  was  the  uncle  of  the 
late  Mr.  Janies  Burns  of  Brechin,  of  Mr.  William  Bums 
of  Kilsyth,  Dr.  Robert  Burns,  formerly  of  Paisley,  now  of 
Toronto,  and  of  Dr.  George  Burns  of  Corstorphine,  with 
their  numerous  clerical  descendants  and  connections,  in- 
cluding Mr.  William  Burns,  junior,  who,  like  Whitefield, 
is  properly  an  evangelist — all,  so  far  as  we  recollect,  of  the 
Free  Church. 

7.  Dr.  Alexander  Webster  was  one  of  the  most  distin- 
guished men  of  his  day.  His  father  was  Mr.  James  W eb- 
ster  of  the  Tolbooth  Church,  Edinburgh.  The  father  had 
lived  and  suffered  in  troublous  times.  He  was  repeatedly 
imprisoned  on  account  of  his  adherence  to  right  principle, 
and  his  health  was  in  consequence  impaired.  He  received 
license  from  the  persecuted  church,  and  seems  to  have 
been  for  some  time  at  Craigmillar,  near  Edinburgh,  as  an 
indulged  minister.  After  the  revolution,  he  was  settled 
first  at  Whitekirk,  and  about  1693,  in  the  Tolbooth  Church, 
where  he  laboured  till  his  death,  which  was  in  1720.  He 
was  beloved  by  his  people,  and  was  one  of  the  fewT  who 
stood  boldly  up  to  stem,  if  it  were  possible,  the  rising  tide 
of  corruption  in  the  church.  In  this  capacity,  he  incurred 
much  odium  with  many,  but  was  honoured  by  the  godly  in 
presenting  himself  as  the  libeller  of  professor  Simpson  at 
Glasgow,  on  account  of  heresy.  His  son,  Alexander,  was 
but  a boy  when  his  father  died.  He  was  first  ordained 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICES. 


83 

at  Culross,  but  in  1737,  be  was  inducted  to  the  Tol- 
booth  Church,  where  his  father  had  been  minister.  lie 
was  received  with  the  love  due  to  the  son  of  a beloved 
pastor,  and  with  high  expectations  as  to  his  own  merits. 
These  expectations  were  not  disappointed.  He  proved  one 
of  the  most  popular  and  influential  ministers  of  the  age, 
and  his  talents  and  influence  were  always  on  the  side  of 
gospel  truth.  Among  the  many  important  undertakings 
which  engaged  his  attention,  one  was  the  establishment  of 
the  Ministers'  Widows'  Fund — an  acknowledged  monument 
not  only  of  benevolence,  but  also  of  talents  and  influence. 
Mr.  Whitefield  saw  him  and  other  friends  on  first  arriving 
in  Edinburgh  in  1741.  Notwithstanding  Mr.  Webster's 
connection  with  the  Erskines — for  one  of  his  sisters  was 
the  wife  of  Mr.  Ebenezer  Erskine — he  remained  the  firm 
friend  of  the  work  of  God  in  the  establishment,  after 
they  had  set  themselves  against  it.  One  of  the  ablest 
defences  of  that  work  was  written  by  him,  and  is  en- 
titled “ Divine  Influence,  the  True  Spring  of  the  Extra- 
ordinary Work  at  Cambuslang,  and  other  places  in  the 
W est  of  Scotland/’ 

8.  The  Eev.  Jchn  Bonar  was  educated  at  St.  Andrews 
previous  to  the  revolution  settlement.  Here  he  had  trials  to 
endure  even  as  a student,  on  account  of  his  adherence  to  pres- 
byterian  principles.  In  1692  he  was  licensed;  and  in  1693 
he  appears  to  have  been  settled  at  Torphichen.  In  1721 
he  was  one  of  the  twelve  good  men  who  joined  in  a represen- 
tation to  the  assembly  because  of  the  injury  done  to  truth 
in  the  censure  pronounced  on  the  “ Marrow  of  Modern 
Divinity."  He  afterwards  took  part  with  those  who,  in 
defence  of  truth,  prosecuted  professor  Simpson  for  heresy. 
Being  thus  allied  with  the  little  band  of  witness-bearers 
for  the  honour  of  Christ,  he  was  deeply  grieved  at  the 
harsh  treatment  which  some  of  them  received;  and  although 
he  did  not  see  it  to  be  his  duty  to  secede,  he  retained  for 
such  as  did  great  esteem  and  affection,  which  they  also 
cherished  for  him.  In  his  own  parish  he  manifested  all 


84 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICES. 


that  personal  piety  and  zeal  for  evangelical  truth,  which 
his  public  conduct  would  lead  us  to  expect.  Many  serious 
persons  from  other  parishes  into  which  hirelings  had  been 
intruded  attended  his  ministry,  and  especially  on  commu- 
nion occasions,  when  he  usually  had  assisting  him  men  of 
a like  spirit.  When  the  reyival  at  Cambuslang  first  broke 
out,  he  was  greatly  delighted,  and  anxious  to  hear  all  about 
it.  Two  of  his  letters,  addressed  to  Mr.  McCulloch  in 
the  months  of  March  and  April,  1742,  are  still  extant. 
But  not  satisfied  with  correspondence,  he  resolved,  though 
now  so  frail  as  to  take  three  days  in  riding  eighteen  miles, 
to  witness  with  his  own  eyes  what  was  doing.  And  so,  as 
we  have  seen,  he  attended  the  second  communion.  There 
is  another  letter  of  his,  addressed  to  Mr.  McCulloch  the  year 
following,  which  is  so  tender  and  touching  that  we  give  it 
entire  : “ Rev.  and  very  Dear  Brother, — I had  your  very  de- 
sirable letter  of  the  25  th  August,  by  two  of  your  elders, 
Archibald  Fvfe  and  Ingram  More,  to  whom  I gave  what 
tokens  you  called  for  to  your  Cambuslang  people.  It  was  on 
account  of  my  bodily  frailty  and  weakness  that  I was  afraid 
to  think  of  a communion,  but  was  truly  importuned  both  by 
strangers  and  our  own  people,  making  use  of  this  weighty 
argument,  that  they  apprehended  it  would  be  the  last  they 
should  have  with  me.  But  even  amidst  all  their  pressing 
desires,  they  evidenced  their  fear  that  I should  not  be  able 
to  go  through  with  it.  At  last.  I yielded  to  them,  not 
knowing  what  might  be  in  the  womb  of  Providence;  but  so 
much  I think  we  can  now  say,  that  it  was  begun,  carried 
on,  and  completed  by  prayer.  Sure  I am  that  God  did  mani- 
fest himself  as  a prayer-hearing  God.  He  sent  to  us  very 
agreeable  assistants  with  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the 
gospel,  and  perfected  strength  in  my  weakness;  so  that  I was 
carried  through  all  the  parts  of  my  work  to  the  admiration 
of  many.  The  Lord  was  here  in  a remarkable  manner , so 
that  his  people  were  both  fed  and  feasted,  and  several  who  kneic 
nothing  of  religion  were  weakened,  both  of  our  own  people  and 
strangers.  0 that  I could  with  my  soul  and  all  that  is 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICES. 


85 


within  me  magnify  his  holy  name  for  what  he  hath  done 
for  us  ! And  I hope,  my  dear  brother,  as  I believe  you 
joined  in  wrestling  for  a blessing  to  us,  so  will  you  join  me 
in  ascribing  the  glory  and  praise  that  is  due  to  our  exalted 
Redeemer,  for  his  wonderful  love  and  grace,  manifested  to 
unworthy  me  and  my  flock. 

u It  was  refreshing  to  hear  that  the  Lord  continues  to 
build  up  his  own  among  you  in  holiness  and  comfort,  and 
of  your  two  desirable  sacramental  occasions  this  year.  May 
the  Lord  prosper  his  work  in  your  hands,  and  spare  you  long 
as  an  instrument  of  doing  him  much  service ! Our  dear 
Lord  has  been  riding  prosperously  this  year  in  the  chariot 
of  his  salvation;  may  he  continue  so  to  do,  in  this  our  land, 
and  in  those  liappy  places  which  he  hath  so  remarkably 
countenanced  abroad  \ May  the  glorious  work  spread  from 
nation  to  nation,  till  it  fill  the  length  and  breadth  of  thy 
land,  O Immanuel ! As  for  me,  my  work  seems  to  be 
near  an  end;  and  now  my  desire  is,  that  before  I go  off  the 
stage,  God  would  give  me  some  new  seals  of  my  ministry, 
and  make  me  see  glorious  days  of  his  power  and  grace  in 
this  place,  where  I have  laboured  these  fifty  years.  I must 
now  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth ; may  God  be  with  you  and 
my  other  brethren,  whose  years  promise  a longer  time  in 
the  vineyard  ! Be  valiant  to  fight  the  Lord’s  battles : let 
no  opposition,  though  even  from  the  pretended  friends  of 
Jesus,  discourage  your  heart  or  weaken  your  hands.  The 
Lord  sits  king  upon  the  floods;  yea,  our  God  shall  reign 
for  ever  and  ever.  He  will  make  even  the  w7rath  of  man 
to  praise  him,  and  the  remainder  thereof  shall  he,  in  his 
own  time,  restrain. 

“ Remember  me  in  my  distress  at  a throne  of  grace.  I 
join  my  wife  and  grandson  in  affectionate  service  to 
yourself  and  Mrs.  McCulloch. — I am,  Rev.  and  Dear 
Brother,  your  most  affectionate  brother  and  servant  in  the 
Lord,  J.  Bonar. 

“ Torphichen,  September  20,  1743.'” 

Four  years  after  the  writing  of  this  letter,  he  appears  to 


86 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICES. 


have  entered  into  his  rest,  namely,  in  1747;  leaving  behind 
him  an  impression  of  guileless  zeal  and  devotional  earnest- 
ness, which  died  only  with  the  last  of  the  generation  to 
which  he  belonged.  And  now,  that  several  generations 
have  succeeded,  his  memory  is  still  preserved  in  a long  line 
of  honoured  descendants.  He  had  a son,  minister  of 
Fetlar,  in  Shetland.  John,  his  grandson,  was  first  minister 
of  Cockpen,  and  then  of  Perth;  Archibald,  his  great  grand- 
son, first  of  Glasgow,  and  then  of  Cramond;  John  his 
great  great  grandson,  first  of  Larbert,  and  now  of  Aber- 
deen; and  with  him,  there  are  three  other  grandsons  of  the 
minister  of  Perth — Iloratius,  minister  of  Kelso;  John,  of 
Greenock;  and  Andrew,  of  Collace — all  the  four  being  of  a 
like  spirit  with  their  common  ancestor,  and  faithful  to  the 
same  principles.  They  are  all  ministers  of  the  Free  Church. 

9.  Mr.  William  Hamilton  was  minister  of  Douglas,  in 
the  upper  ward  of  Lanarkshire,  and  one  of  those  who  at- 
tested the  Narrative;  but  we  have  not  otherwise  observed 
any  thing  remarkable  concerning  him. 

10.  Mr.  William  M ‘Knight  was  minister  of  Irvine.  He 
was  a native  of  Ireland,  and  is  said  to  have  been  in  Irvine 
merely  as  a stranger — probably  on  his  way  to  or  from  Ire- 
land— when,  after  the  demission  of  Mr.  Warner,  he  was 
asked  to  preach,  and  gave  so  much  satisfaction,  as  soon 
after  to  be  settled  in  that  town.  This  was  in  1702,  and 
he  died  in  the  same  place  in  1750.  He  wTas  a popular 
preacher,  and  esteemed  for  his  piety  and  uprightness.  Dr. 
James  M ‘Knight,  the  well-known  commentator,  was  a son 
of  his. 

11.  Dr.  John  Gillies  was  a son  of  the  minister  of  Care* 
ston,  in  Forfarshire.  He  was  born  in  1702,  and  inducted 
to  the  College  Church,  Glasgow,  on  the  29th  July  1742. 
His  preaching  at  Cambuslang,  must,  therefore,  have  been 
only  a few  weeks  after  his  induction,  and  is  itself  a strong 
proof  of  the  estimation  in  which  he  was  held,  seeing  that 
so  many  highly  esteemed  ministers  were  there  as  hearers. 
His  labours  in  Glasgow  were  numerous,  and  few  men  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICES. 


87 


that  age  did  so  much  to  advance  the  cause  of  practical  god- 
liness. Deeply  serious,  and  of  a very  catholic  spirit,  he 
seems  to  have  been  continually  seeking  opportunities  of 
doing  good,  and  in  every  possible  way.  His  writings, 
which  are  numerous  and  varied,  are  all  characterized  by  an 
earnest,  evangelical  spirit.  They  all  have  reference  to  the 
realities  of  religion,  rather  than  anything  speculative  or 
merely  popular.  As  regarded  correspondence  with  foreign 
churches  and  eminent  servants  of  God,  he  and  Dr. 
Erskine  of  Edinburgh  were  generally  known  on  both 
sides  of  the  Atlantic  as  the  Scottish  representatives.  His 
first  wife  was  a daughter  of  the  celebrated  JVDLaurin,  also 
of  Glasgow,  whose  society  he  greatly  enjoyed;  and  co-oper- 
ating with  his  more  aged  relative,  as  Timothy  with  Paul, 
they,  together,  may  be  said  to  have  given,  for  many  years, 
the  proper  tone  and  character  to  the  religious  movements  of 
that  great  city.  When  he  had  reached  his  eighty-fourth 
year,  he  was  asked  by  a friend,  how  he  felt  ? “ You  ask 

me,”  said  he,  in  reply,  “ how  old  age  sits  upon  me?  I am 
now  in  my  eighty-fourth  year,  and,  thank  God,  enjoy  toler- 
able health  and  spirits ; though  it  has  pleased  our  heavenly 
Father  to  lay  me  almost  wholly  aside  from  my  work  for 
many  months  past.  I comfort  myself  with  my  favourite 
Miltons  words — 4 They  also  serve,  who  only  stand  and 
wait/  I am  waiting,  I hope  with  patience,  God's  time, 
which  is  the  best,  for  my  dismission  hence.  Christ’s  lying 
in  the  grave,  has  sweetened  the  thoughts  of  it  to  all  be- 
lievers; and  through  his  merits,  we  can  have  hope  in 
death.”  This  was  written  in  autumn  1785,  and  on  the 
29th  of  March  1786,  he  fell  asleep  in  Christ. 

He  left  a son,  Mr.  Colin  Gillies,  who,  after  officiating 
for  some  time  in  the  West  parish  of  Greenock,  was  induct- 
ed to  the  Low  parish  of  Paisley  in  1781,  where  he  died  in 
1810.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a very  tender  and  affec- 
tionate preacher,  much  esteemed  by  the  more  serious;  and 
cases  have  been  brought  to  the  writer’s  knowledge  of  his 
having  been  also  blessed  in  his  labours. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


THE  CONDITION  OF  CAMBUSLANG  AFTER  THE  REVIVAL 
OF  1742  HAD  SUBSIDED. 

There  was  but  one  day  of  Pentecost  at  Jerusalem.  There 
is  no  mention  of  so  many  as  three  thousand  being  convert- 
ed under  one  sermon  in  the  times  which  followed.  But 
the  work  of  God  did  not  on  that  account  cease.  The  num- 
ber of  such  as  believed  was  soon  after  reckoned  at  five 
thousand,  instead  of  three.  Moreover,  many  of  the  effects 
remained.  Those  who  were  thus  born  as  in  a day  became 
the  seed  of  a more  numerous  generation  in  the  age  which 
followed.  It  also  gave  a high  tone  to  the  religious 
character  and  devotedness  of  professors,  to  which  they 
might  not  have  otherwise  attained.  Who  can  tell  whether, 
if  there  had  been  no  Pentecost,  there  would  have  been, 
among  other  indications  of  high  principle  on  the  part  of 
the  converts,  the  devoting  of  their  entire  substance  to  the 
cause  and  service  of  God?  (Acts  ii.  44,  45)  the  only  other 
occasion  on  which  it  is  specially  mentioned,  being  after  a 
similar  visitation.  (Acts  iv.  34-  °?.)  The  revivals  of  the 
last  century  did  not  cease  all  at  once.  There  were  some 
precious  years  after  1742;  and  many  precious  seasons,  hold- 
ing a connection  with  these,  wTere  enjoyed  in  different  parts 
of  the  country  for  many  years  after.  We  do  not  think 
it  impossible  even  to  trace  a connection  between  these  and 
the  missionary  spirit  which  broke  out  at  the  end  of  the 
century,  namely  in  1795,  1796,  &c.  Some  of  the  generation 
who  took  part  in  these  movements  spoke  of  a state  of  re- 


EFFECTS  OF  TIIE  REVIVAL. 


89 


ligion  then  fast  waning,  which  was,  however,  even  then, 
more  intense,  more  devotional,  and  more  closely  associated 
with  the  habits  of  the  revival  period,  than  any  other.  Speak- 
ing of  the  west  of  Scotland,  there  were  not  a few,  as  we 
have  been  assured  by  some  of  themselves  when  old  men, 
who  travelled  in  the  summer  season  upwards  of  twenty 
miles,  that  they  might  enjoy  the  privileges  of  a gospel  minis- 
try; passing,  as  they  pursued  their  journey,  several  churches 
into  which  they  felt  as  if  they  could  not  profitably  enter. 
There  were  common  mechanics,  and  others  of  similar  stand- 
ing in  society,  who  were  in  the  habit  of  travelling  ten  or 
twelve  miles,  once  a week  or  once  a fortnight,  to  attend 
fellowship -meetings.  And  on  sacramental  occasions,  it  was 
quite  common  for  the  pious  of  one  place  to  lodge  with  those 
of  another  for  several  days,  so  that  there  would  be  in  the 
same  house  some  belonging  to  places  twenty  or  thirty  miles 
asunder ; and  while  together,  they  were  either  hearing  the 
gospel,  or  conversing  on  matters  of  religion,  or  engaged  in 
devotional  exercises.  In  country  places,  the  barns  were  for 
this  purpose  fitted  up  as  barrack-rooms,  and  those  who  had 
such  accommodation  waited  after  divine  service,  especially 
on  the  Saturday,  to  invite  their  guests.  In  some  places, 
public  intimation  was  usually  made  from  the  pulpit,  in- 
structing strangers  how  to  find  the  necessary  accommoda- 
tion. Some  of  these  practices  existed  probably  thirty  years 
ago;  and  there  are  persons  still  living  who  are  able  to 
recollect,  not  the  forms  merely,  but  the  spirit  by  which 
these  had  been  animated  at  an  earlier  period.  Nor  can 
any  of  us  tell  how  much  we  are  even  now  indebted  to  what 
God  did  in  this  country  upwards  of  a hundred  years  ago. 
It  is  in  early  life,  and  under  the  influence  of  parental  example 
and  parental  instruction,  that  we  commonly  acquire  those 
habits  and  form  those  tendencies  whicfl  afterwards  appear 
in  public  conduct.  And  among  those  who  are  now  active, 
and  others  wTho  may  have  been  active  at  a somewhat  earlier 
period,  there  doubtless  are  some  whose  boyish  musings 
were  first  nursed  under  the  lingering  influence  of  an  earlier 


90 


ATTESTATION  BY  MCCULLOCH. 


state  of  religion.  Due  attention,  moreover,  is  not  usually 
given  to  the  importance  of  merely  awakening  to  inquiry  a 
comparatively  dead  and  worldly  generation.  Apart  alto- 
gether from  the  immediate  work  of  conversion,  there  is 
much  in  disturbing  the  slumbers  of  a Laodicean  church ; 
and  this  end  is,  in  some  measure,  served  by  the  very 
peculiarities  of  a revival.  There  is  a voice  in  spring  as 
well  as  a hidden  power;  and  so  is  there  in  a revival  of 
religion. 

But  as  regards  Cambuslang,  we  have  much  more  direct 
and  satisfactory  information.  In  1743  and  1744  special 
days  of  thanksgiving  were  appointed  by  the  session,  and 
observed.  In  1751 — that  is,  nine  years  after  the  special 
season  of  revival — Mr.  Robe  of  Kilsyth  was  about  to  puK 
lish  certain  attestations,  and  Mr.  McCulloch  prepared  a re- 
view of  the  fruits  of  the  revival  at  Cambuslanor.  The 

o 

account  is  somewhat  long,  containing  a practical  exposition 
and  application  of  the  parable  of  the  sower;  it  being  the 
object  of  the  writer  to  show  cause  for  the  falling  away  of 
some  who  had  at  first  given  promise  of  better  things.  But 
as  regards  a mere  statement  of  facts,  the  expositions  intro- 
duced rather  mar  than  promote  the  communicating  of  a 
distinct  impression.  The  piece  will  be  found  entire  in 
Robe’s  Narrative,  which  was  lately  republished,  but  we  shall 
merely  embody  the  facts,  with  so  much  only  of  the  exposi- 
tion as  seems  necessary. 

“ Cambuslang  Manse,  April  30,  1751. 

“ Rev.  and  Dear  Brother, — Hearing  that  you  are  very  soon 
to  publish  some  attestations  to  the  fruits  of  the  revival  of 
religion  in  this  country  in  the  year  1742,  at  the  desire  of 
some  ministers,  I drew  up,  and  herewith  send  you,  my  attes- 
tation, relating  to  the  effects  of  the  extraordinary  work  here 
in  1742,  which  you  may  publish  along  with  your  own  at- 
testation and  that  of  others.  When  the  God  of  all  grace  is 
pleased,  in  infinite  mercy,  to  send  a revival  of  religion  to  a 
church,  or  any  particular  corner  in  it,  among  other  artifices 
whereby  Satan  and  his  instruments  endeavour  to  obstruct 


ATTESTATION  BY  M‘CULLOCH. 


91 


its  progress,  a very  usual  and  successful  one  is,  to  raise  pre- 
judices against  it  in  people’s  minds,  by  suggesting  and  alleg- 
ing that,  though  the  like  awakenings  and  promising  ap- 
pearances formerly  obtained  in  as  high,  or  even  a higher 
degree  elsewhere,  yet  there  was  no  good  that  followed,  but 
a great  deal  of  evil. 

u In  order,  therefore,  to  set  this  matter  in  a clear  light,  and 
that  I might  be  able  to  give  a brief  but  just  account  of  a 
work  that  happened  in  a parish  whereof  I have  the  pas- 
toral inspection  and  charge,  and  which  I cannot  but  look 
upon  to  have  been  a glorious  work  of  God’s  grace,  I thought 
it  my  duty  to  make  a particular  inquiry  concerning  the  be- 
haviour of  the  known  subjects  of  the  work  at  Cambuslang 
in  1742;  that  is,  of  those  persons  not  only  living  in  the 
parish  of  Cambuslang,  but  who  came  from  many  other 
places,  near  or  more  remote,  and  who,  upon  resorting  to 
Cambuslang  in  1742,  are  known  to  have  there  fallen  under 
awakenings,  convictions,  and  a deep  concern  about  their 
eternal  salvation,  for  the  first  time,  or,  at  least,  the  first 
time  that  their  convictions  and  concern  seemed  to  prove 
effectual,  and  to  come  to  a gracious  issue. 

“ I do  not  propose  to  speak,  except  in  a few  words,  of  those 
who  resorted  hither  in  1742,  and  who  wrere  true  Christians 
before  that.  Of  these  there  were  many  hundreds,  I may 
say  thousands,  from  places  near  and  far  off,  who  then  flocked 
hither  and  joined  in  hearing;  and  great  numbers  of  them, 
upon  producing  sufficient  testimonials , were  admitted  to 
partake  of  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord’s  supper ; and  thereby 
the  number  of  communicants,  which  here  used  to  be  about 
four  or  five  hundred,  previous  to  1742,  came  to  be  greatly 
increased  in  that  and  the  following  years.  At  the  first 
sacrament  in  1742,  the  number  was  upwards  of  seventeen 
hundred;  at  the  second  sacrament,  in  1742,  the  number 
was  reckoned  at  three  thousand;  in  1743,  it  w^as  about 
twro  thousand;  in  1744,  it  wTas  about  fifteen  hundred;  in 
1745,  it  wras  about  thirteen  hundred;  in  1746,  it  was  about 
twelve  hundred;  and  down  to  this  year  (1751),  it  has 


92 


ATTESTATION  BY  M;CULLOCH. 


continued  to  be  greatly  more  than  it  was  previous  to 
1742.* 

“ The  unweariedness  of  the  Lord’s  people  in  religious  exer- 
cises at  these  times,  especially  at  the  sacramental  occasions 
in  1742,  1743,  and  1744,  was  wonderful.  What  eager 
attention  in  hearing  the  word — all  upon  the  stretch,  and  as 
for  eternity ! What  a serious,  solemn  air  in  the  manner  of 
their  worship ! What  vehement  workings  of  joy  and  sor- 
row and  other  feelings  in  their  looks ! What  attendance  on 
God  in  his  ordinances!  hearing  three  sermons  on  each  of 
the  three  days,  Thursday,  Saturday,  and  Monday — double 
the  number  on  the  communion  Sabbath;  besides  partaking 
of  the  sacrament,  joining  in  public  prayers  and  praises,  spend- 
ing almost  the  whole  of  Saturday  and  Sabbath  nights  in 
praises  and  prayers  with  others,  or  apart  by  themselves. 

“ And  their  attainments  were  answerable  to  their  exer- 
cises. This  was  the  case,  at  least  with  many  of  them,  ac- 
cording to  the  account  which  they  gave  to  me  or  to  others 
from  whom  I had  it,  and  whom  I could  entirely  credit. 
Many  attained  to  the  full  assurance  of  faith,  had  a sense  of 
God’s  love  to  them,  and  an  exercise  of  ardent  love  to  him ; 
and  who,  after  believing  in  Christ,  were  sealed  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  promise.  Some  eminently  pious  ministers, 
who  assisted  here,  testified  that  they  had  never  seen  so  much 
of  heaven  on  earth.  A very  aged  and  worthy  minister,  at 
going  away  from  this,  cried  out,  at  the  stair-head  in  the 
manse,  c Now,  Lord,  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in 
peace;  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation.’ t Others, 
after  reaching  home,  wrote  that  they  would  not  on  any  ac- 
count have  been  absent,  or  missed  what  of  God  they  had 
enjoyed  at  Cambuslang. 

* In  1836,  instead  of  900,  there  was  a gross]  population  of  2,705,  of 
whom  2,016  were  professedly  connected  with  the  establishment,  and 
yet  the  number  of  communicants  was  only  245;  and  the  average  atten- 
dance at  church  400  in  summer,  and  300  in  winter. 

+ This,  we  have  little  doubt,  was  Mr.  Bonar,  who  had  by  this  time  been 
nearly  fifty  years  a minister,  and  who  was  so  frail  as  to  require  help  in 
ascending  the  place  where  he  had  occasion  to  preach. 


ATTESTATION  BY  MCCULLOCH. 


93 


“ It  must  be  owned,  that  there  is  a considerable  number 
of  those  who  were  hearers  here  in  1742,  who  have  since 
appeared  to  be  but  as  the  way-side  hearers,  the  stony-ground 
hearers,  or  the  thorny-ground  hearers,  described  in  the  par- 
able of  the  sower.  (Matt.  xiii.  1-9.)  There  are  of  these 
who  are  still  going  on  in  their  defection  and  apostasy,  en- 
larging the  breach  between  them  and  God;  but,  blessed  be 
his  name,  there  are  some  even  of  these  who  seem  to  be 
greatly  humbled,  and  whose  souls  are  responding  to  the 
Lord’s  call,  as  addressed  to  backsliders.  They  are  virtually 
saying,  4 Behold  we  come  unto  thee,  for  thou  art  the  Lord 
our  God.’ 

44  Speaking  of  these  different  classes,  there  is  no  doubt  that 
a considerable  number  of  thoughtless  persons  came  here  for 
fashion’s  sake,  without  either  preparing  their  hearts  so  as  to 
profit,  or  seriously  attending  to  what  they  heard.  Some 
also  were  gross  counterfeits,  who  crowded  in  among  the 
really  distressed,  and  observing  and  imitating  their  manner, 
pretended  to  be  in  a like  condition.  But  these  were  soon 
detected,  and  their  number  was  never  large.  There  were 
also  many  idle  boys  from  Glasgow,  some  of  them  appren- 
tices, who,  pretending  or  seeming  to  be  under  concern  about 
their  souls,  came  often  to  Cambuslang  to  hear  and  to  join 
together  in  prayer,  in  the  fields,  as  they  pretended.  But 
these  appearances  generally  came  to  nothing,  and  they 
brought  much  reproach  on  the  work,  by  their  neglecting  so 
often  their  masters’  work,  and  strolling  about  in  the  fields. 
Some  also  came  here  in  1742  for  diversion,  or  to  cavil  at 
what  they  saw,  and  to  mock  such  as  were  in  spiritual  dis- 
tress. The  bands  of  such  mockers  were,  no  doubt,  generally 
made  stronger,  by  their  coming  here  and  behaving  as  they 
did ; yet  some  of  them  were  made  monuments  of  victorious 
grace  and  sovereign  mercy.  In  a letter  which  I had  from 
an  aged  and  experienced  Christian,  worthy  of  all  credit,  the 
following  testimony  is  offered:  4 I have  to  say,  for  my 
own  part,  that  I am  able  to  go  to  death  with  it,  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  was  so  powerfully  at  work  in  Cambuslang, 


94 


AT  TEST  ATION  BY  McCULLOCII. 


that  not  only  sinners,  who  knew  nothing  of  God  before, 
were  reached  both  by  conviction  and  conversion,  but  even 
saints  themselves  were  enabled  to  attain  what  they  never 
before  could  reach  in  matters  of  religion.  I am  able,  if 
time  would  allow,  to  give  a most  satisfying  account  of  not 
a few,  both  men  and  women,  who  will,  I hope,  bless  God 
to  all  eternity  for  that  happy  time.  There  were,  among 
others,  two  young  men  living  not  far  from  me,  who  went 
over  to  you  in  1742,  purposely  to  mock  the  work;  and  as 
they  had  been  formerly  horrid  cursers  and  swearers,  the  one 
swore  to  the  other  that  he  would  go  to  see  the  falling  at 
Cambuslang,  asking  his  comrade  if  he  would  go  with  him. 
The  other  swore  that  he  would,  and  that  they  should  not 
make  him  fall,  for  that  he  would  run  for  it.  But  after 
going,  they  were  both  caught  the  same  day,  and  for  a quar- 
ter of  a year  after  they  continued  under  deep  convictions. 
They  have  ever  since  attended  fellowship- meetings  weekly; 
and  I have  been  sometimes  with  them,  and  have  heard  them 
both  pray  and  converse  on  matters  of  Christian  experience 
to  my  great  satisfaction/ — These  young  men,  instead  of 
being  able  to  run  away,  fell  both  under  awakenings  nearly 
at  the  same  time,  as  is  well  known  here.  They  were  glad 
to  get  into  a stable  which  was  at  hand,  and  there,  on  their 
knees,  among  the  horses,  to  betake  themselves  to  prayer. 
The  greater  part  of  those  who  afterwards  fell  away,  might  be 
said  to  resemble  the  stony-ground  and  thorny-ground  hearers. 

“ There  were  many,  in  1742,  who,  in  time  of  sermon, 
fell  under  various  bodily  agitations  and  commotions,  such 
as  crying  aloud,  fainting,  falling  down  as  dead,  &c.  Con- 
cerning such  bodily  effects,  we  cannot  certainly  conclude 
that  the  persons  so  affected  are  under  the  influence  of  the 
Spirit,  whether  convincing,  comforting,  or  sanctifying;  be- 
cause, for  aught  we  know,  they  may  proceed  from  the  mere 
power  of  the  imagination,  or  from  some  bodily  disorder. 
Neither  should  any  one  suspect  himself,  merely  because  he 
has  not  experienced  such  effects.  Some  are  brought  truly 
under  a sense  of  their  lost  condition  with  fewer  terrors  than 


ATTESTATION  BY  MCCULLOCH.  95 

in  other  cases,  and  are  brought  home  to  Christ  in  a more 
gradual  and  gentle  manner;  they  are  allured  by  the  love 
and  loveliness  of  Christ,  and  are  sweetly  drawn  to  him, 
and  bound  to  him  with  cords  of  love,  and  bands  of  a man. 
But  neither  are  we  to  infer,  from  the  presence  of  such 
effects,  that  the  cause  is  not  divine.  So  close  is  the  union 
between  the  soul  and  the  body,  that  when  anything  greatly 
affects  the  one  it  reaches  also  the  other.  This  is  often 
seen  in  the  ordinary  occurrences  of  life.  Suppose  tidings 
to  reach  some  family  of  the  death  of  a beloved  son,  who 
had  been  abroad,  would  not  all  be  deeply  affected,  and 
would  not  this  appear  in  outward  signs?  Or,  suppose  that, 
after  he  had  been  thought  dead,  news  were  to  come  of  his 
being  alive,  would  not  opposite  emotions,  scarcely  less 
strong,  discover  themselves?  These  also  would  differ  ac- 
cording to  the  constitutional  differences  of  individuals. 
And  why,  upon  the  same  grounds,  should  it  be  thought 
strange  that  a sense  of  being  lost,  and  afterwards  of  having 
obtained  mercy,  should  have  similar  effects  ? and  that  these 
should  appear  differently  in  the  case  of  different  individuals? 

“ Yet,  from  all  that  I can  hear  or  observe,  there  are  more 
of  those  who,  in  1742,  were  brought  under  concern  with- 
out these  bodily  agitations  than  of  such  as  were  so  affected, 
that  seem  to  persevere  in  gospel  holiness.  There  are,  in- 
deed, some  of  both  sorts,  whose  convictions  have  led  to  a 
gracious  issue ; yet  are  there  many  more  of  the  former  than 
of  the  latter.  Some  were  led,  under  a sense  of  the  dis- 
honour done  to  God,  as  an  infinitely  holy  and  gracious 
being ; while  others  were  so  brought  under  the  terrors  of 
the  law,  seeing  themselves  ruined  for  ever,  that  they  cried 
aloud,  trembled,  and  fell  down.  But  when  there  was  no- 
thing more,  these  fears  wore  away — they  returned  to  a 
state  of  security  and  to  their  wonted  habits  of  sin.  Their 
state  was  now  worse  than  at  the  first.  There  were  also 
some  who,  after  a short  time,  were  all  at  once  filled  with 
transporting  joys,  even  to  their  crying  out  in  the  congre- 
gation, and  who,  upon  examination,  seem  really  to  have 


96 


ATTESTATION  BY  McCULLOCH. 


had  manifestations  of  the  love  of  God  made  to  their  souls, 
even  such  as  are  described  in  the  gospel ; and  these,  so  far 
as  I know,  persevere,  bringing  forth  fruits  of  holiness.  But 
there  were  others  who,  like  them,  had  sudden  transports  of 
joy,  who  have  since  fallen  away.  These  last,  often  on 
hearing  some  one  saying  or  reading  a portion  of  Scripture, 
did  all  at  once  assume  its  application  to  themselves.  They 
had,  therefore,  for  the  time  the  joy  of  something  real : 
whereas  the  grounds  of  that  joy  were  altogether  imaginary. 
When  the  heart  has  not  been  humbled,  the  soul  united  to 
the  Saviour,  and  made  one  with  him  in  all  things,  outlets 
from  distressing  terrors,  and  sudden  joy,  though  apparently 
conveyed  by  Scripture  promises,  are  always  to  be  suspected, 
and  often  not  to  be  regarded  otherwise  than  as  the  joy  of 
the  stony-ground  hearers.  And  of  this  class,  we  had 
several  instances  in  1742;  some  of  them  still  maintaining 
a blooming  profession  in  1743.  They  fancied  that  now 
the  bitterness  of  death  was  over ; whereas  unsubdued  pride, 
a worldly  spirit,  and  other  corruptions,  obtained  such  mas- 
tery over  them,  that  they  took  offence  at  the  requirements 
of  a holy,  self-denied  life,  and  so  fell  away  and  relapsed 

into  sensual  indulgences. 

© 

“ As  to  crying  out  in  the  time  of  divine  worship,  it  is  best 
to  avoid  extremes.  On  the  one  hand,  hearers  should  not 
give  way  to  these,  if  they  can,  as  they  disturb  the  attention 
of  others,  and  interrupt  the  service  of  God.  And  ministers 
should  beware  of  doing  anything  purposely  to  promote  such 
expressions  of  feeling ; but  they  ought  to  set  forth  the  terrors 
of  the  law  and  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  fully  and 
unrestrainedly,  leaving  it  to  God  to  take  his  own  way  in  what- 
ever might  follow ; and  He  is  able,  as  happened  in  some 
cases  here,  to  employ  the  outcries  of  some  to  contribute  to 
the  awakening  of  others.  It  is  due,  also,  to  remark,  that 
hearers  ought  not  to  be  censorious,  as  if  all  who  cried  out 
were  to  be  blamed;  and  neither  ought  ministers  too  severely 
to  rebuke  such.  Although  there  may  be  pretensions  in 
some  cases,  in  others  there  is  necessity.  Some  who  in  1742, 


ATTESTATION  BY  MCCULLOCH. 


97 


endeavoured  to  restrain  themselves,  fell  a-bleeding  at  the 
mouth  and  nose,  and  continued  so  for  a considerable  time, 
to  the  injury  of  their  health  and  the  alarm  of  all  near;  real 
violence  having  been  done  to  nature. 

“ Meantime,  we  see  in  some  things  the  malice  of  the 
wicked  one.  When  he  saw  a number  under  deep  convic- 
tions, that  were  likely  to  issue  well,  as  these  appeared  to- 
wards the  end  of  1741  and  the  beginning  of  1742,  he 
taught  certain  of  his  wretched  bondsmen  to  mimic  them, 
crying  out,  falling  down  as  dead,  and  afterwards  report- 
ing dreams  and  visions,  making  a high  profession — some 
for  weeks,  some  for  months,  and  some  for  years ; and  when 
this  was  ended,  they  were  driven  on  in  evil  courses — some 
falling  into  habits  of  uncleanness,  some  of  drunkenness, 
some  of  lying,  some  of  cheating,  and  some  of  other  abomi- 
nations— utterly  casting  away  from  them  all  respect  for 
religion. 

“ But  this  leads  us  to  speak  of  such  as  resembled  the  good- 
ground  hearers,  and  who  are  as  epistles  of  Christ,  known 
and  read  of  all  men.  Glory  to  God,  setting  aside  all  who 
have  remarkably  backslidden,  whether  persisting  in  it  still, 
or  whether  they  have  returned  from  it,  there  is  a consider- 
able number  of  such  as  were  awakened  in  1 7 42,  who  ap- 
pear to  bring  forth  fruits  of  righteousness.  I do  not  speak 
at  random  or  loosely,  but  from  a writing  which  I have  now 
before  me,  dated  27th  April,  1751 ; and  which  contains  a 
list  of  about  four  hundred  persons,  who  were  awakened  here 
in  1742,  and  who,  from  that  time  to  the  time  of  their  death, 
or  till  now,  have  been  enabled  to  behave  in  a good  measure 
as  becometh  the  gospel.  This  I state  on  what  I have  my 
self  observed,  and  on  the  best  information  I could  obtain, 
whether  by  conversation  or  by  writing,  from  persons  of 
established  character,  and  who  knew  those  concerning 
whom  they  report.  But  under  this  head  I must  be  more 
particular. 

“ And  first,  there  are  certain  things  which  I do  not  say, 
and  which,  without  explanation,  I might  be  understood  as 


98 


ATTESTATION  BY  MCCULLOCH. 


saying.  I do  not  say,  then,  that  those  of  whom  I am  to 
speak  have  been  in  all  things  blameless ; hut  that,  with  the 
ordinary  allowance  made  for  the  infirmities  common  to  man. 
they  have,  so  far  as  I have  been  able  to  learn,  been  enabled 
in  a good  measure  to  walk  worthy  of  their  profession. 
Neither  do  I wish  to  be  understood  as  speaking  of  these 
as  if  they  alone  had  persevered.  Some  of  these  have  been 
reported  to  me  only  of  late;  and  many  more,  it  is  to  be 
hoped,  remain  quite  unknown.  It  will  be  recollected,  that 
many  of  the  subjects  of  that  work  have  since  deceased,  only 
some  of  whom  are  reported ; but  these  having  finished  their 
course  consistently,  and  some  of  them  triumphing  in  the 
full  assurance  of  faith,  their  testimony  is  of  all  others  the 
most  valuable.  Need  I guard  against  having  it  supposed, 
that  in  speaking  of  what  happened  here  in  1742,  I am  for- 
getting that  it  was  all  of  God — of  free,  sovereign  grae  ? The 
speakers  were  but  as  the  rams’  horns  • in  overthrowing  the 
walls  of  Jericho.  The  power  was  not  in  their  words — it 
flowed  through  them.  It  is  His  to  bear  the  glory  whose 
temple  the  soul  is,  when  prepared  by  his  grace  and  Spirit. 
And  last  of  all,  I do  not  presume  to  say  that  all  of  whom 
I speak  have  been  truly  converted.  A true  believer  may, 
without  any  extraordinary  revelation,  be  infallibly  assured 
that  he  is  in  a state  of  grace,  though  this  is  not  the  attain- 
ment of  all,  or  perhaps  even  of  the  greater  part ; but  this 
is  not  usually  to  be  expected  concerning  others.  The  white 
stone  and  new’  name  are  fully  knowrn  only  by  such  as  pos- 
sess them. 

“ But  so  guarded,  I now  remark,  that  the  evidence  pro- 
ceeded upon  concerning  these,  would  warrant  a like  judg- 
ment in  as  many  other  cases  wholly  unconnected  with  any 
special  revival.  Now,  there  are  in  other  cases  chiefly  tw^o 
grounds  usually  proceeded  upon — a Christian  profession, 
and  a suitable  walk  and  conversation.  Confining  ourselves, 
then,  to  these  twro  things,  we  remark : — 

“ First,  that  all  the  persevering  subjects  of  the  work  here 
in  1742,  agree  in  professing  faith  in  Christ  as  the  mediator, 


ATTESTATION  BY  MCCULLOCH. 


99 


through  whose  mediation  alone  we  can  come  to  God  the 
Father  as  our  God  and  Father  in  him,  through  the  power 
and  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  all  profess  to  hope  for 
salvation  through  the  gospel  plan,  namely,  through  the 
imputed  righteousness  of  Christ  entitling  to  eternal  life, 
and  all  other  covenant  blessings ; also  through  the  sancti- 
fying influences  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  fitting  for  eternal 
life,  and  for  all  holy  services  and  enjoyments,  whether  here 
or  hereafter. 

“ And  secondly,  there  is  evidence  as  to  their  walk  and 
conversation.  I am  not,  at  present,  free  to  publish  any  of 
their  names,  or  those  of  the  attesters;  but  all  the  above 
number  are  severally  attested  either  by  ministers,  elders,  or 
private  Christians  of  established  reputation,  who  have 
known  those  whose  characters  they  attest,  and  their  manner 
of  life,  from  1742  down.  And  these  attestations  bear,  not 
only  that  the  persons  they  mention  were  awakened  at  Cam- 
buslang  in  1742,  or  were  under  convictions  and  remarkable 
concern  there  at  that  time,  but  that  they  have  from  that 
time  till  now,  or  till  the  time  of  their  death,  behaved  as 
became  their  Christian  profession,  with  such  exceptions  as 
must  always  be  made  in  judging  of  imperfect  creatures. 
But  besides  this  general  statement,  the  following  particu- 
lars are  submitted,  either  on  my  own  personal  knowledge 
or  good  and  credible  information. 

“ In  practising  justice  and  charity,  relative  duties,  public- 
spiritedness9  humility,  meekness,  patience,  close  and  dili- 
gent attendance  on  gospel  ordinances,  heavenly-minded- 
ness,  watchfulness  against  sin,  especially  such  sins  as  for- 
merly more  easily  beset  them,  they  adorn  the  doctrine  of 
God  their  Saviour,  glorify  their  heavenly  Father,  and  excite 
others  to  do  so  on  their  account.  Such  as  were  given  to 
cursing  and  swearing  have  laid  aside  the  practice,  learning 
to  speak  the  language  of  heaven,  and  having  upon  them  a 
holy  awe  of  God  and  of  things  divine.  Such  as  were  ac- 
customed to  frequent  taverns,  to  drink  and  play  at  cards, 
&c.,  till  late,  or  it  may  be  morning  hours,  have,  for  these 


100 


ATTESTATION  BY  M^ULLOCH. 


nine  years  past,  avoided  all  occasions  of  the  kind,  and  kept 
at  home,  spending  their  evenings  in  Christian  conference, 
in  matters  profitable  to  their  families,  and  in  secret  and 
family  devotion.  He  who  was  formerly  drunken,  accus- 
tomed to  lie  in  bed  till  eight  or  nine  o’clock  in  the  morn- 
ing, sleeping  off  his  night’s  intoxication,  has,  for  these  nine 
years,  been  in  the  habit  of  getting  up  at  three  or  four  in 
the  morning,  of  reading  his  Bible  and  other  good  books,  of 
being  engaged  in  prayer  and  meditation,  &c.,  till  seven  or 
eight,  when  he  calls  together  his  household  for  family  devo- 
tion; which  is  again  repeated  in  the  evening. 

“ Some  wives,  who,  before  1742,  lived  at  variance  with 
their  husbands,  have,  since  that  time,  learned  to  put  on  the 
ornament  of  a meek  and  a quiet  spirit ; so  that  they  now 
live  with  them  in  great  peace  and  affection.  Others,  when 
their  husbands’  passions  break  out  against  them  in  bois- 
terous language,  run  into  another  room  and  engage  in 
prayer,  asking  of  God  for  their  husbands  forgiveness,  with 
a better  temper;  and  for  themselves,  patience,  and  meek- 
ness; and  after  a while,  they  return  with  the  law  of 
kindness  on  their  lips. 

“ Those  who  were  formerly  covetous  and  selfish,  have  ac- 
quired much  of  a public  spirit,  and  of  concern  for  the  king- 
dom and  glory  of  Christ,  especially  in  the  salvation  of 
sinners.  And  with  this  view,  they  are  not  only  exemplary 
in  their  conduct,  but  useful  to  all  within  their  reach.  They 
contribute  cheerfully,  and  some  of  them  beyond  their 
ability,  at  collections  for  the  interests  of  religion,  or  the 
relief  of  the  distressed.  They  carefully  observe  seasons 
fixed  for  the  concert  for  prayer,  and  join  in  earnest  suppli- 
cation for  the  farther  spread  of  the  gospel,  and  the  outpour- 
ing of  the  Spirit  on  the  churches. 

“ ‘ As  new  born  babes,  they  desire  the  sincere  milk 
of  the  word,  that  they  may  grow  thereby,’  flocking  with 
eagerness  to  hear  in  their  different  localities.  The  weekly 
lecture  on  Thursday,  which  was  established  in  this  place  in 
1742,  has  been  continued  ever  since,  summer  and  winter. 


ATTESTATION  BY  McCULLOCn. 


101 


even  in  harvest;  only  it  is  then  held  in  the  evening,  and  it 
is  well  attended.  In  harvest,  the  reapers  come  running 
from  the  fields,  where  they  have  been  toiling  all  day.  And 
as  regards  the  rest  of  the  year,  some  servants  are  known,  of 
their  own  free  choice,  to  sit  up  all  the  previous  night 
working,  that  they  may  get  time  to  attend  the  lecture  next 
day. 

“ They  are  careful  in  their  preparations  for  the  Lord's  sup- 
per, and  frequent  in  the  observance.  Country  parishes 
have  the  sacrament  usually  dispensed  only  once  a-year,  but 
ever  since  1742  we  have  it  here  twice.  And  these  have 
been  indeed  remarkable  times  for  communion  with  God. 
Then  especially,  his  people  have  seen  the  goings  of  their 
God  and  King  in  the  sanctuary.  They  have  been  made  to 
sit  under  Christ’s  shadow  with  great  delight,  and  his  fruit 
has  been  sweet  to  their  taste.  They  have  been  feasted  in 
the  banqueting  house,  his  banner  over  them  being  love; 
and  meeting  with  like  entertainment  at  other  places,  they 
resort  to  many  such  solemnities,  especially  during  the 
months  of  June,  July,  and  August,  when  these  commonly 
occur. 

“ To  conclude,  they  abound  much  in  prayer,  both  secret 
and  domestic,  and  also  in  the  observance  of  fellowship- 
meetings.  These  are  usually  held  weekly ; and  the  exercises 
are,  prayers,  praises,  and  Christian  conference.  In  1731, 
when  I came  to  this  parish,  there  were  only  three  of  these ; 
in  1742,  they  increased  to  a dozen  or  more.  They  have 
since  been  reduced  to  six.  In  every  town  or  village  almost 
in  this  country  side,  where  there  is  any  competent  number 
of  serious  and  lively  Christians,  and  where  religion  is  in  a 
thriving  state,  meetings  of  this  kind  exist;  and  the  per- 
severing subjects  of  the  work  in  1742  are,  if  at  all  near,  sure 
to  form  part  of  them.  Common  tradesmen,  who  are  mem- 
bers, and  who  work  for  so  much  a-day,  allow  their  employ- 
ers to  deduct  so  much  for  the  time  they  are  absent.  Some 
of  these  meetings,  besides,  have  also  special  seasons  for 
fasting  and  prayer,  on  extraordinary  occasions;  such,  for 


102 


ATTESTATION  BY  MCCULLOCH. 


example,  as  on  receiving  news  of  heavy  losses,  or  dangers 
occurring  to  any  of  themselves,  or  of  what  threatens  the 
interests  of  religion ; and  on  some  of  these  occasions,  they 
enjoy  much  of  the  divine  presence,  and  much  enlargement 
in  prayer,  though  less,  alas!  than  in  former  times. 

u And  now,  in  concluding,  if  this  paper  shall  fall  into  the 
hands  of  any  one  concerned  in  the  work  of  which  it  treats, 
and  if  he  shall  pervert  anything  here  said,  so  as  to  encourage 
himself  in  pride  or  carnal  security,  counting  himself  among 
the  persevering  subjects  of  this  work — to  such  I say,  Per- 
haps it  is  not  as  you  imagine ; hut  suppose  it  be,  what  of 
that?  was  Judas  the  better  for  being  in  the  list  of  the 
apostles?  Men  may  approve,  and  yet  God  condemn.  If 
thou  valuest  thyself  merely  on  the  approbation  of  others, 
thou  art  deluded,  and  the  delusion  will  ruin  thee.  Be  not 
high-minded,  hut  fear.  Those  who  have  hitherto  been 
enabled  to  persevere,  and  who  may  still  hope  to  be  enabled 
to  go  on  in  the  ways  of  God,  are  the  humble  and  lowly,  the 
modest  and  self-denied;  while  the  haughty,  the  presump- 
tuous, and  self-confident,  have  been  suffered  to  fall,  or 
have  reason  to  fear  that  a fall  is  not  far  distant. 

“ Now  to  Him  that  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling,  and  to 
present  us  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory  with 
exceeding  joy,  to  the  only  wise  God  our  Saviour,  he  glory  and 
majesty,  dominion  and  power,  both  nowr  and  ever.  Amen. 

“ Upon  the  whole,  I think  1 may  say,  c The  Lord  hath 
done  great  things  for  us,  whereof  we  are  glad/  To  Him 
alone  he  all  the  glory  and  praise,  of  whatever  good  was  got 
or  done  in  that  remarkable  work  of  his  grace.  Amen. — I 
am  your  affectionate  brother,  William  MUulloch.” 

An  attestation  so  full  and  minute  as  the  above,  can 
scarcely  he  strengthened  by  additional  testimony;  hut  there 
is  also  an  attestation  signed  by  the  elders,  after  the  above 
had  been  read  over  to  them,  and  considered  paragraph  by 
paragraph ; and  as  it  is  short,  and  contains  certain  addi- 
tional information,  it  would  be  wrong  not  to  give  at  least 
the  substance  of  it. 


ATTESTATION  BY  THE  ELDERS. 


103 


“ Manse,  Cambuslang,  April  30,  1751. 

“ We,  the  undersigned  elders,  members  of  the  kirk-ses- 
sion of  Cambuslang,  having  heard  the  foregoing  attestation 
read  to  us  by  our  pastor,  and  having  maturely  considered 
the  same,  paragraph  by  paragraph,  do  heartily  join  with 
him  in  said  attestation ; and  hereby  make  it  our  own,  being 
persuaded  that  it  contains  a just  and  true  account  of  the 
extraordinary  work  here  in  1742,  and  of  the  comfortable 
and  abiding  effects  of  it  on  many,  'probably  on  more  than 
the  four  hundred  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  attestation , and 
particularly  as  regards  seventy  of  these,  who  lived  in  this 
parish  in  1742,  and  from  that  time  down,  or  till  their  death, 
and  who  lived,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  as  becomes 
their  profession.  And  to  what  is  above  said,  we  add  the 
following  general  observations: — 

“ 1.  The  awakening  in  1742,  instead  of  leading  to  sepa- 
ration, as  has  been  alleged,  caused  many  who  were  at  the 
point  of  leaving  the  church  to  remain,  acknowledging  that 
God  was  in  the  midst  of  her ; and  it  greatly  increased  their 
regard  for  all  true  ministers. 

“ 2.  Though  most  of  such  as  had  in  their  exercises  a 
large  mixture  of  fancy  and  imagination  have  fallen  away, 
yet  are  there  of  these  who  persevere  in  their  Christian  pro- 
fession, and  who  maintain  a character  for  unblemished 
conduct. 

44  3.  The  decrease  in  the  number  of  meetings,  from  a 
dozen  or  more  in  1742,  to  six  as  at  present,  has  not  been 
owing  merely  to  backsliding.  It  has  also  been  occasioned 
by  the  death  of  some,  and  the  removal  or  altered  circum- 
stances of  others.  And  where  meetings  were  broken  up, 
the  remaining  members  joined  other  meetings. 

44  4.  The  reason  why  we  think  that  there  are  more  than 
four  hundred  of  such  as  were  awakened  here  in  1742,  who 
persevere,  is  because  we  have  had  no  returns  from  the  wrest 
country  (Ayrshire  and  Renfrewshire),  where  wre  know 
very  many  of  the  subjects  of  the  late  awrakening  live,  and  of 
whom  doubtless  many  are  walking  in  the  fear  of  God. 


104 


ATTESTATION  BY  THE  ELDERS. 


“ 5.  And  now,  upon  the  whole,  we,  the  undersigned, 
with  the  greatest  freedom,  after  the  most  impartial  inquiry 
for  information,  being  all  the  elders  of  this  parish,  save  one 
occasionally  absent  from  this  meeting,  day  and  date  afore- 
said. do  hereto  subscribe  our  names. 

“ Alexander  Duncan,  Elder . 

Archibald  Fife,  Elder . 

Ingram  More,  Elder . 

Claud  Somers,  Elder . 

Bartholomew  Somers,  Elder? 
Dr.  Robert  M4Culloch,  writing  in  1?93,  says:  “ Though 
I cannot  possibly  have  the  least  remembrance  of  anything 
that  occurred  at  that  period,  yet,  having  spent  about  twenty 
years  of  my  life  in  that  parish,  I had  the  best  opportunity 
of  strictly  inquiring  into  facts,  and  of  impartially  examin- 
ing the  evidences  of  their  truth  and  reality.  After  a care- 
ful investigation  of  the  subject,  and  the  circumstances  and 
effects.  I adopt,  without  the  least  hesitation,  as  clearly  ex- 
pressing my  sentiments,  the  words  of  the  late  celebrated 
Dr.  Alexander  Webster/’  And  after  quoting  a long  pas- 
sage from  Dr.  Webster,  he  adds:  “ All  these  happy  fruits 
of  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  and  of  the  Spirit  being  poured 
out  from  on  high,  I have  seen  with  pleasure,  in  many  in- 
stances, in  the  place  of  my  nativity.” 

There  is  only  one  additional  testimony,  which  we  shall 
very  briefly  subjoin.  The  late  Dr.  Robertson  was  inducted 
minister  of  Cambuslang  towards  the  close  of  the  last  century, 
at  which  time  some  of  the  converts  of  1742.  or  some  of  the 
following  years,  were  still  alive ; and  his  testimony  of  them 
and  theirs  concerning  the  awakening  went  to  confirm  the 
foregoing  attestations. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

SOME  ACCOUNT  OF  TWO  MANUSCRIPT  VOLUMES  LEFT  BY  MR. 

MCCULLOCH,  AND  OF  THE  CASES  WHICH  THEY  CONTAIN. 

In  preparing  the  preceding  statement  from  Mr.  McCulloch’s 
attestation,  we  purposely  omitted  an  entire  paragraph,  be- 
cause it  stood  isolated,  and  was  originally  meant  chiefly  as 
a notice  of  what  is  now  to  be  introduced.  It  is  as  follows: 
u But  besides  what  concerns  a credible  profession,  and  a 
suitable  walk  and  conversation,  some  require  that  persons, 
who  would  have  a place  in  their  good  opinion,  should  be 
able  to  give  some  account  of  their  experience  of  the  grace 
of  God.  And  this  also  has  been  done  by  not  a few.  Up- 
wards of  a fourth  perhaps,  of  the  persevering  subjects  of  the 
revival  in  1742,  gave  me  very  particular  accounts  of  God’s 
dealings  with  their  souls,  as  regards  their  first  awakening, 
their  outgates,  their  distresses,  their  deliverances,  and  their 
comforts  in  1742,  1743,  and  1744;  and  some  of  them  con- 
tinued their  accounts  down  to  1748.  I took  down  many  of 
these  from  their  own  mouths,  always  in  their  true  sense,  and 
very  much  also  in  4heir  own  words.  Many  of  the  state- 
ments so  prepared  hare  appeared , to  competent  judges,  to 
whom  they  were  submitted , and  who  perused  them  with  care , 
to  be  very  rational  and  scriptural,  and  worthy  of  seeing  the 
light ; which  perhaps  may  be  done  hereafter.” 

It  is  nearly  a hundred  years  since  this  peradventure  was 
put  on  record,  and  it  is  only  now  that  it  is  to  be  realized, 
n 


106 


COLLECTION  OF  CASES. 


Had  the  good  man  who  so  expressed  himself,  been  able  to 
foresee  the  condition  of  the  church,  when  this  saying  was 
to  be  fulfilled,  he  would  have  been  as  much  astonished  in 
looking  forward,  as  we  are  in  looking  hack.  And  yet,  in 
tracing  the  ordinary  connection  of  moral  cause  and  effect, 
it  is  not  very  difficult  to  see  in  the  one  a real,  though  re- 
mote issue  of  the  other.* 

T wo  quarto  volumes,  containing  a hundred  and  five  cases, 
are  now  before  us.  These  were  preserved  by  Mr.  McCul- 
loch’s family,  and  were,  in  1844,  presented  by  Mrs.  Coutts 
of  Edinburgh,  a grand-daughter  of  Mr.  M‘Culloch,  to  the 
Free  Church  Library. 

A considerable  part  of  the  whole  are  in  Mr.  McCulloch’s 
handwriting,  particularly  of  those  in  the  first  volume;  hut 
some  are  in  other  hands,  and  a few  seem  to  have  been  writ- 
ten by  persons  of  only  common  education.  They  generally 
proceed  so  much  on  the  same  plan,  as  to  suggest  the  idea  of 
certain  queries  being  put  or  submitted  to  all,  and  that  the 
information  was  drawn  up  under  these  heads.  These  heads 
touch  the  original  condition,  education,  and  religious  or  irre- 
ligious habits  of  the  individual ; the  means  employed,  under 
God,  for  his  conversion ; the  changes  which  ensued,  the  pro- 
gress made,  and  the  grounds  on  which,  at  the  time  of  writ- 
ing, he  concluded  himself  to  he  in  a state  of  grace. 

Generally  speaking,  the  persons  introduced  appear  to 
have  been  of  the  working  classes.  Many  of  both  sexes 
were  farm-servants.  Married  men  were  generally  labourers 
or  common  mechanics,  and  married  women  were  of  the  same 
rank.  A few,  both  men  and  women,  were  of  a higher 
rank,  and  had  obtained  more  or  less  of  a liberal  education. 

• 

* Mr.  McCulloch  seems  to  have  contemplated  a work  in  two  volumes, 
consisting  of  a narrative  and  the  cases;  the  whole  forming  a kind  of 
continuation  to  Fleming’s  Fulfilling  of  the  Scriptures.  We  have  now  be- 
fore us  a letter,  containing  the  printer’s  terms,  and  also  several  letters 
from  lord  Grange;  from  which  it  appears  that  he  had  counted  on  the 
patronage  of  the  noble  family  of  Hamilton,  hoping  thereby  to  get  the 
subject  introduced  to  persons  of  rank.  But  in  this  he  failed,  and  was  ad- 
vised greatly  to  alter  his  plan,  and  to  publish  only  a selection  of  the  cases. 


COLLECTION  OF  CASKS; 


107 


Among  those,  there  were  magistrates,  landed  proprietors,  and 
gentlewomen  connected  with  families  of  a similar  condition 
in  life. 

It  is  ncoe^saty  to  keep  these  circumstances  in  mind,  in 
judging  of  the  cases.  The  person  si  chiefly  described  were 
but  imperfectly  educated;  liiany  of  them  had  previously  been 
grossly  ignorant*  and  some  of  them  immoral.  They  had 
been  hut  -recently  brought  to  a knowledge  of  the  -truth,  and 
were  therefore  wanting  in  expedience,  - and  in  those  habits 
of  thought*  and  of  conduct  which  rather  grow  out  of  such 
a condition  hs  -theirs*  than  form  any  - large  and  ordinary 
portion  of  iti  Theirs  was  like  new  wine,-  rather  than  wine 
resting  on  its  lees ; - or,  like  the  •machine  recently  put  in 
motion,  and  still  tremulous  and  jolting  from  the  unevenness 
of  its  moving  surfaces,  their  experience  Was  less  equable 
and  noiseless,  than  no « doubt  \ it  * afterwards  became.  They 
had  very  generally  an  undue  dependence  on  their. feelings*— 
something  like  a superstitious  regard  for  •the  suggestions  of 
Scripture  passages,  which  was  indeed  characteristic  of  their 
times  i and  in  some  cases,  especially  among  the  more  igno- 
rant and  doubtful,  there  was  a prOn-eness  to;  indulge  in  sug- 
gested thoughts,  dreams,  and  visionary  impressions. 

W e must  fake  these ; considerations-  along  with  us,  to 
avoid  the  dissemination  bf  what  was  merely  human,  and 
associated^  with  the  error?  and  imperfections  of  humanity, 
under  the  character  of  its  being  of  thb  teaching  and  influ- 
ence of  the  Holy  Spirit.-  The  work  was-  of  God ; . but  the 
subjects ; of  that  Work  were  fallen,  sinful,  erring  creatures, 
and  for  the  most  part,  in  circumstances  ; unfaiourahle  to 
proper  discrimination.  But . the  eases  ate  not  on  that  ae-* 
count  the  less  valuable.  There  are  two  errors  of  judgment 
very  common  in  the  religious  literature  of  the  day;  The 
one  is*  that  religious  biography  should  » mainly  consist  of  -the 
lives  of  the-  more  educated  and  exhlted  m rank ; and  the 
Other,  that  religious  experience*  should  he: as--  much  as  pos- 
sible freed,  of  doubts,  misgiving^  !and-  fitful  changes,  ithowgh 
feally  incident  dijL  Common  life,  because  -Unsuitable^  - as  file- 


108 


COLLECTION  OF  CASES. 


ments  of  an  example,  to  be  held  up  to  others.  The  former 
of  these  errors  consists  in  overlooking  the  dependence 
of  our  sympathy  on  the  similarity  of  our  circumstances; 
and  with  this,  the  fact  that  our  common  people  are  as  a 
hundred  to  one  of  the  literary  and  reflective.  Our  fathers 
Knew  better  than  we  do  where  the  religious  heart  of  Scot- 
land lav,  and  hence  their  many  touching  rehearsals  of  what 
occurred  in  the  cottage,  and  was  experienced  in  the  breasts 
of  men  covered  with  u hodden  grey.”  And  the  latter  of 
the  two  errors  consists  in  also  forgetting  that  such  as  par- 
ticularly require  instruction,  are  not  those  who  have  reached 
“ the  land  of  Beulah,  where  the  sun  shineth  night  and 
day but  those  who  are  looking  despairingly  on  the  slough 
of  despond,  or  standing  in  fear  and  trembling  at  the  wicket 
gate,  or  it  may  be,  entangled  in  some  of  the  snares  which 
lie  thick  in  the  way  even  of  the  believer.  It  is  a great 
comfort  for  the  sorely  tried,  just  to  knowr  that  others  have 
been  in  like  circumstances;  and  it  is  not  only  instructive, 
but  the  instruction  most  wanted,  to  be  told  how  they  ob- 
tained relief,  what  they  found  to  be  errors  and  mistakes, 
and  what  also  they  found  to  be  useful.  And  in  both  re- 
spects, many  will,  we  trust,  be  interested  and  profited  by  the 
details  which  are  now  to  be  brought  before  them. 

It  is  necessary,  however,  to  add,  that  in  consequence  of 
the  number,  the  sameness,  and  repetition  of  details  in  these 
cases,  and  because  of  passages  containing  unguarded  state- 
ments, it  will  be  advisable  to  publish  only  a selection,  and 
sometimes  to  abridge  even  these,  being  chiefly  careful,  with 
the  original  compiler,  to  give  always  the  true  sense,  and  as 
much  as  may  he  the  language,  but  still  to  study  wTith  these 
brevity  and  variety. 

It  may  be  interesting  farther  to  add,  concerning  both 
volumes,  that  the  names  of  ministers  and  others  referred  to  in 
these  cases,  are  indicated  by  numerals,  which  stand  connected 
with  the  true  names  in  a separate  list.  We  have  been  able, 
in  most  instances,  to  identify  the  persons  meant,  and  they 
will  thus  be  embodied  in  the  references.  By  a comparison  of 


WILLISON  OF  DUNDEE. 


109 

various  lists,  the  names,  and  sometimes  the  condition  of  the 
persons  described,  maybe  also  ascertained,  and  wall  be  inserted. 

And  it  is  yet  farther  necessary  to  explain,  that  it  will  be 
advisable,  unless  otherwise  stated,  to  give  the  cases  of  each 
volume  separately — those  of  the  first  in  the  following  chap- 
ter, and  those  of  the  second  in  the  chapter  succeeding  if. 
Leaving,  therefore,  some  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  second 
volume  to  chapter  xi.,  wre  shall  here  subjoin  those  of  the  first. 

The  first  volume  contains  forty-seven  cases,  nearly  all  in 
the  handwriting  of  Mr.  McCulloch,  and  bearing  evidence 
of  having  been  carefully  examined  by  four  “ competent 
judges.”  These  were  Dr.  Alexander  Webster  of  Edinburgh; 
Mr.  John  Willison  of  Dundee;  Mr.  Thomas  Gillespie  of 
Carnock;  and  Mr.  James  Ogilvie  of  Aberdeen.  Mr.  Ogilvie 
examined  the  whole,  wrote  his  criticisms,  and  returned  the 
volume  in  August  1744.  Dr.  Webster  had  it  next,  and  then 
Mr.  Willison,  who,  writing  in  January  1745,  says:  “ I read 
over  the  manuscript  Avith  much  delight  and  edification.  It 
gave  me  great  pleasure  to  read  the  Scripture  texts  which  the 
Lord  blessed,  and  the  notes  of  sermons,  set  dowTn  as  accom- 
panied with  success.”  Mr.  Gillespie  examined  it  last.  And 
the  margins  afford  proof  of  the  care  w hich  they  all  four  be- 
stowed on  the  volume.  Some  account,  however,  of  these 
great  and  good  men  will  now  be  added. 

Dr.  Alexander  Webster  of  Edinburgh,  has  already  been 
noticed  in  chapter  vii.,  and  no  person  would  more  readily 
occur  as  wrell  qualified  to  advise  in  this  matter.  His  dis- 
tance from  the  locality,  his  general  acquaintance  with  the 
religious  world,  and  his  sound  judgment,  would  all  of  them 
suggest  him  as  one  of  the  very  first. 

Mr.  John  Willison  of  Dundee  wTas  probably  born  in 
1680,  wras  inducted  minister  of  Brechin  apparently  in  1703, 
but  being  soon  after  translated,  he  is  commonly  known  only 
as  one  of  the  ministers  of  Dundee.  He  took  an  active  part 
in  church  matters,  wras  sent  as  one  of  a deputation  to  Lon- 
don in  1734,  to  obtain,  if  possible,  a repeal  of  the  law  of 
patronage,  and  in  1744  he  published  his  Imoartial  Testimony, 


110 


GfLLESPIE  OF  CATINOCK. 


as  a kind  of  ecclesiastical  protest*  representing  the  senti- 
ments and  feelings  of  a large  and  honoured  minority.'  Bnt 
it  Was  ds  d,  ininister  of  the  gospel,  and  as 5 a plain  practical 
writer,  studying  the  instruction  of  the  many ’rather  than 
the  taste  of  the  feiv,  that  lie  stood  out  aihong  the  men  of 
his  own  and  following  ages.  His  u Mothers  Catechism*” 
his  “ Exercises  of  a Communion  Sabbath,7  and  his  “ Afflict- 
ed Mail's  Companion, ” have  embalmed  his  memory  amidst 
the  domestic  duties  of  a Sabbath  evening,  the  anxious  pre- 
paration of  young  professors, 5 and  the  solemn  stillness  of 
sick  and  dying  chambers.  His  “ Treatise  on  Sabbath  Sanc- 
tification” should  be  better  known;  and  there  is  a proof  of 
the  early  interest  which  he  took  in  the  revivals  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  in  the  preface  to  his  u Balm  of  Gilead,” 
which  was  written  in  January  1742.  He  there  speaks  of 
thehf  as  already  commenced,  and  urges,  especially  ministers, 
to  take  part  in  awakening  the  slumbering  churches.  At 
this  time,  he  must  have  been  upwards  of  forty  years  a mini- 
ster; and  froln  his  circuhistances  and  qualifications  altor 
gether,  he  was  just  such  a pCrsoii  as  would  be  desired  for 
giving  an  “opinion  concerning  these  cases.  It  was  probably 
one  of  the  latest  of  his  special  labours,  for  he  died  in  175b. 

‘ Mr.  Thomas  Gillespie,  after  finishing  his  studies  in  Edin- 
burgh, went  to  England,  where  lie  was  ordained  among  the 
Independents*  Dr.  Doddridge  presiding  at  the  ordination. 
This  was  on  the  2 2d  of  January  1741;  and,  recomihended 
by  Dr.  Doddridge  and  fourteen  other  ministers,  lie  came  to 
Scotland  during  the  March  following*  and  was  soon  after 
called 'and  admitted  minister  of  the  parish  of  Camock.  Dr. 
Erskine  says  of  him : 64  The  fidelity  and  diligence  of  Mr. 
Gillespie  in  the  discharge  of  the  various  duties  of  his  pas- 
toral offlee,  and  the  remarkable  success  with  which  God  was 
pleased  to  bless  his  labours  for  awakening  and  converting 
sinners,  and  for  cbmforting  and  establishing  Christians,  is 
knoivn  to  many,  not  only  in  the -congregation  under  his 
charge,  but  in  Edinburgh,  the  west  of  Skotlarid,  Muthil,”  Set 
He  visited  the  west,  and  particularly  Kilsyth,  during  the 


OGILVIE  OF  ABERDEEN. 


Ill 


summer  of  1742,  and  was  one  of  those  whose  attestations 
were  published  by  Mr.  Robe.  His  labours,  and  the  bless- 
ing which  attended  them,  with  his  situation,  might  there- 
fore point  him  out  as  an  cxaminator. 

But  we  can  scarcely  leave  Mr.  Gillespie,  without  noticing 
what  soon  after  befell  him.  He  had  not  taken  any  leading 
part  in  ecclesiastical  matters,  having  given  himself  wholly 
to  pastoral  and  evangelistic  duties;  but  he  was  not  on  that 
account  the  less  decided  and  conscientious  in  his  convic- 
tions on  the  side  of  popular  rights,  and  a free  and  unfettered 
preaching  of  Christ.  And  now,  he  was  also  to  be  driven 
forth  of  the  church.  In  1752  the  general  assembly, 
without  a libel  or  any  formal  process,  deposed  him,  on  the 
grounds  of  his  refusing  to  take  part  in  a violent  settlement 
at  Inverkeithing.  He  meekly  submitted  to  this  most  irre- 
gular and  unjust  sentence,  retiring  to  the  fields,  where  he 
preached  for  a year,  without  organizing  either  a session  or 
congregation.  In  1753,  an  attempt  was  made  to  have  him 
restored,  but  the  motion  was  lost ; and  he  then  formed  a 
congregation  in  Dunfermline.  And  being  joined  by  two 
other  ministers,  they  formed  themselves  into  a presbytery, 
taking  as  their  distinctive  title,  “ The  Presbytery  of  Relief." 
And  hence  the  origin  of  another  separation  from  the  esta- 
blishment. Mr.  Gillespie  died  in  1774,  deeply  regretted 
by  many;  his  memory  being  held  in  esteem  by  all  who 
knew  him,  and  who  loved  the  truth  and  the  cause  of  evan- 
gelism in  Scotland. 

Mr.  James  Ogilvie  was  one  of  the  ministers  of  Aberdeen. 
This  city  was  not,  during  that  day,  or  even  that  century, 
very  well  affected  to  a fully  preached  gospel.  At  this  time, 
however,  both  Mr.  Ogilvie  and  his  colleague,  Mr.  Bisset, 
who,  as  sir  Henry  Moncrieff  says,  was  the  highest  of  the 
high,  were  both  evangelical,  though  otherwise  very  oppo- 
site men.  “ Though  colleagues  of  the  same  congregation," 
says  Whitefield,  “they  are  very  different  in  their  natural 
tempers.  The  one  is,  what  they  call  in  Scotland,  a sweet 
blooded  man,  the  other  of  a choleric  disposition . Mr.  Bisset 


112 


OGILVIE  OP  ABERDEEN. 


is  neither  a seceder  nor  quite  a true  kirkman,  having  great 
fault  to  find  with  both.  Soon  after  iny  arrival,  dear  Mr. 
Ogilvie  took  me  to  pay  my  respects  to  him.  He  was  pre- 
pared for  it,  and  pulled  out  a paper,  containing  a great 
number  of  insignificant  queries,  which  I had  neither  time 
nor  inclination  to  answer.”  Seeing  Mr.  Ogilvie  was  so 
situated,  his  zeal  for  advancing  the  cause  of  Christ  must 
have  been  early  and  great,  for,  several  years  before  this , he 
had  been  corresponding  with  Mr.  Whitefield  to  get  him  to 
visit  Aberdeen,  hoping  that  some  good  might  be  done; 
and  now  he  had  succeeded  even  in  1741.  Mr.  Whitefield, 
in  the  letter  already  quoted,  gives  some  curious  proofs  of 
Mr.  Ogilvie’s  prudence  as  well  as  zeal.  He  was  himself 
to  preach  on  Sabbath  forenoon  in  presence  of  the  magis- 
trates. He  gave  Mr.  Whitefield  his  place.  The  congre- 
gation was  large,  and  apparently  much  interested.  Mr. 
Bisset,  in  the  afternoon,  preached  against  Mr.  Whitefield 
by  name.  Mr.  Ogilvie,  without  either  consulting  his  friend 
or  noticing  the  conduct  of  his  colleague,  stood  up  after 
sermon,  and  intimated  to  the  congregation  that  Mr.  White- 
field  would  again  preach  in  about  half  an  hour.  The  ma- 
gistrates remained  in  the  session-house,  and  the  people 
hastened  back,  expecting  to  hear  a reply.  Mr.  Whitefield, 
waiving  as  much  as  possible  all  controversial  matter,  preach- 
ed Christ.  The  audience  was  silent,  solemn,  and  deeply 
impressed.  Next  day,  the  magistrates  apologized  for  their 
minister ; and,  as  a mark  of  their  own  respect,  presented  to 
Mr.  Whitefield  the  freedom  of  the  city.  The  moral  and 
religious  effect  of  this  visit  to  Aberdeen  was  great  and  bene- 
ficial, as  Mr.  Ogilvie  explains  in  several  letters,  published 
in  the  “ Weekly  History,”  which  seems  to  have  been  chiefly 
under  Mr.  McCulloch’s  management.  In  these  circumstances, 
grounds  will  be  seen  for  selecting  such  a man  to  examine 
the  cases,  especially  as  he  had  himself  been  at  Cambuslang. 

By  such  men  as  these,  then,  wrere  the  cases  wrhich  are  con- 
tained in  the  first  volume  examined,  and,  so  far  as  we  shall 
have  occasion  to  transfer  them  to  our  pages,  also  approved. 


CHAPTER  X. 


A SELECTION  OF  CASES  PREPARED  FROM  THE  FIRST  VOLUME, 
AND  APPROVED  OF  BY  THE  ORIGINAL  EXAMINATORS. 

1.  William  Baillie,  a married  man,  about  thirty  years  of 
age:— 

“ I was  taught  to  read  and  write,  and  I got  some  part 
of  the  c Shorter  Catechism  * by  heart,  when  young;  and 
to  this  day  I retain  much  of  it  upon  my  memory,  and  also 
of  the  Scripture  proofs.  I also  read  the  Holy  Scriptures  by 
themselves.  By  these  and  other  means  I attained  to  a 
competent  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  religion.  My 
parents  also  set  me  to  pray  when  I was  young;  but  I often 
neglected  this  duty.  Sometimes  I thought  myself  serious, 
but  usually  I was  not.  On  growing  up,  I was  often  made 
deeply  sensible  that  it  was  both  my  duty  and  my  interest  to 
pray ; yet  was  it  uninviting,  for  I had  no  abiding  impression 
of  God,  or  of  the  concerns  of  my  soul.  I usually  went  to 
church  and  heard  sermon,  and  sometimes  I prayed,  before 
going,  that  the  Lord  would  prepare  my  heart  for  the  due 
reception  of  his  word ; and  now  and  then,  after  sermon,  I 
have  meditated  on  what  I had  been  hearing,  and  have  gone 
again  to  prayer  for  a blessing. 

u About  twelve  or  fourteen  years  ago  I heard  Mr.  H. 
Cross  preaching  in  our  parish  church;  and  as  he  spoke 
about  the  redeeming  love  of  Christ,  I became  much  affect- 
ed. I was  somewhat  convinced  of  my  own  want  of  love 
to  Christ,  and  for  some  time  after  I was  more  concerned 


114 


WILLIAM  BAILLIE. 


about  my  salvation  and  more  attentive  to  duty.  But  that 
impression  wore  off,  and  I became  again  cold  and  careless.  I 
was  not  given  to  any  open  vice,  and  as  I had  a compe- 
tent measure  of  knowledge,  I was  admitted  to  the  Lord’s 
table.  About  nine  or  ten  years  ago,  when  attending  on  a 
sacramental  occasion,  I thought  it  my  duty  to  go  forward. 
I Avas  Avarned  by  my  father  to  bevrare  of  unworthy  com- 
municating ; but  after  some  preparation,  I obtained  a token 
and  Avent  forward.  I did  not  find  Christ  there : still  for  a 
time  I Avalked  more  circumspectly  than  I had  been  doing; 
but  this  also  fell  into  decay.  Every  year  after  this  I com- 
municated ; and  on  such  occasions  I AA'as  accustomed  to  re- 
vieAV  my  past  life,  seeing  and  confessing  my  shortcomings, 
and  essaying  to  renew;  my  baptismal  covenant ; but  I cannot 
say  that  my  repentance  Avas  of  a right  kind. 

“About  five  years  ago  I married.  In  this  I sought  dAine 
direction ; and  on  becoming  the  head  of  a family  I kept  up 
a form  of  family  worship  once  a- day,  but  I was  less  regular 
in  secret  prayer,  allowing  the  other  sometimes  to  stand  in- 
stead. In  thife  way  I continued  to  go  the  round  of  exter- 
nal duties  in  religion,  and  I had  a perfect  abhorrence  of  in- 
justice and  oppression  against  whomsoever  these  Avere  direct- 
ed. I have  also  reproved  others  for  cursing  and  SAA'earing, 
and  have  felt  something  like  remorse  on  account  of  heart 
sins.  I therefore  thought  favourably  of  myself,  and  I con- 
tinued to  entertain  this  opinion  till  the  AAanter  of  1741. 

“ I had  bought  and  read  Mr.  Andrew  Gray’s  sermons  on 
the  4 Great  Sab'ation’  and  other  subjects  ; and  from  them, 
but  especially  those  regarding  the  4 great  salvation,’  I began 
to  see  that  I had  all  along  been  despising  that  salvation. 
This  led  me  to  plead  for  pardon,  and  especially  on  account 
of  my  having  rejected  Christ  so  long.  But  even  that  con- 
viction Avore  off*  AAdthout  any  saAung  effect. 

After  the  aAvakening  began  at  Cambuslang  I heard  vari- 
ous accounts  about  it;  some  calling  it  a Avork  of  God,  and 
others  a delusion^  of  the  devil.  I went  to  prayer,  pleading 
that  if  it  was  a delusion  I might  not  fall  under  it,  but  that 


WILLIAM  f BAIL  LIE. 


1 1 6 


if  it  was  of  God,  I might  be  m<lde  a subject  of  its  power, 
i went  thither  about  the*  beginning  of  May,  and  heard 
Ml  ■ M‘(Gulloch.  From  what  I heard  and  saw,  I thought 
it  was  a work  of  God.  I went  home  and , prayed  that  I 
and  my  family  might  obtain  a saving  benefit  and  I con- 
tinued to  use  this'  prayer  for  some  time  ; and  the  Lord  heard 
me — I and  all  my  family  come  to,  the  years;  of  discretion, 
except  a hired  boy,  were  enabled  to  profit.  ! 

“With  regard  to  the  means  of  my  own  effectual  aw  aken- 
ing ; I was  hearing  Mr.  OYFCulloch^  and  he  was  showing 
how  far  a sinner  might  go  in  the  observance  of  external 
duties,  and  yet  be  a stranger  to  the  life  and  power  of  godli- 
ness. From  what  he  said,  I became  convinced  that  this 
was  my  state,  and  that  I had  yet  to  become  a new  creature, 
ere  all  old  things  would  become  new.  This  awakened  new 
troubles,  especially  as  regarded  sin.  I besought  God  to 
give  me  a full  discovery  of  my  state,  and  grace  to  enable 
me  to  mortify  sin.  The  Lord  heard  nle.  My  sins  rose  up 
before  me  when  so  engaged,  and  particularly  that  of  un- 
worthy communicatings  and  my  many  breaches  of  solemn 
vo^Vs  made  on  such  occasions.  I saw,  also,  my  original 
sin  so’  heinous  as  tb  be  enough  to  condemn  me.  I read 
much  in  my  Bible,  so  as  to  obtain  a more  humbling  sense 
oT  the  evil  of  particular  sinsJ;  and  against  these  X resolved 
in  the  Lord's  strength  continually  to  watch.  I was  also 
enabled,  in ^ dependence5  oh  the  righteousness  and  strength 
which  are  in  Christ,  to  devote  myself  wholly  to  his  honour 
and  service.  About  this  time,  that  saying  of  the  prophet, 
4 Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  eten,  for  in  the  Lord' Jehovah 
is  everlasting  strength'  (Isa.  xxvi.  4),  came  powerfully 
home  to  me,  as  it  has  often  done  since.  I was^  through  it, 
enabled  to  look  to  God  for  strength  Ho  perform  duty  and 
overcome  temptation.  And  I think  it  was  about  this  time 
that  a change  was  wrought  upon  my  heart ; for  ever  since 
I have  had  an  abhorrence  of  all  manner  of  sin,  and  when 
tempted  I can  go  to  God  in  prayer,  and  often  in  this  way 
I obtain  relief.  One  thing  which  greatly  confirmed  me  in 


116 


WILLIAM  BA1LLIE. 


this,  was  a mark  given  by  Mr.  McCulloch  to  this  effect, 
that  as  many  as  were  truly  changed  would  curb  sin  in  its 
first  motions  in  the  heart.  This  was  now  my  experience, 
and  it  gave  me  comfort. 

u When  the  first  communion  was  intimated  at  Cambus- 
lang,  I resolved  to  prepare  for  partaking  of  that  ordinance. 
I was  enabled  in  some  measure  to  review  my  past  sins,  and 
truly  to  humble  myself  before  God  ; and  at  the  table  of  the 
Lord  I was  also  enabled,  in  some  measure,  to  receive  Christ 
anew  into  my  soul  by  faith,  and  I was  thereby  strengthened 
for  resolving  on  new  obedience.  In  the  evening  I heard 
Mr.Whitefield  preach  from  Isa.  liv.  5 : c Thy  Maker  is  thine 
husband:  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name/  From  this  text 
he  set  forth  the  articles  of  agreement  between  Christ  and  as 
many  as  are  his.  To  all  of  these  I freely  consented,  and 
was  comforted  by  what  I heard. 

“ During  night  a number  of  us  were  in  a barn.  Some 
were  strangers  and  some  were  acquaintances,  but  we  all 
united  in  spending  the  night  singing  psalms  and  praying. 
After  several  had  been  engaged  leading  these  exercises,  it  was 
put  upon  me  to  do  so  next.  I felt  sadly  abashed,  and  for  a 
time  refused,  but  recollecting  what  our  Lord  says  about  deny- 
ing him  or  not  owning  him  before  men,  I became  ashamed 
of  myself.  And  although  I had  great  fear,  yet  the  Lord  so 
opened  my  heart  as  to  give  me  great  liberty  in  the  duty; 
and  the  sweet  frame  which  I then  got  in  believing  on 
( Christ  remained  for  some  time  with  me. 

“ On  Monday  morning,  after  the  second  communion,  I 
heard  Mr.  Webster  preach  from  these  words:  c Fear  not, 
little  flock;  for  it  is  your  Fathers  good  pleasure  to  give  you 
the  kingdom/  (Luke  xii.  32.)  He  gave  several  marks  of 
such  as  belonged  to  Christ's  little  flock;  all  of  which  I was 
enabled  to  apply  to  myself  with  much  clearness. 

u About  Candlemas,  I had  a child  to  offer  to  God  in  bap- 
tism. In  looking  forward  to  this  duty,  I went  often  to  God, 
pleading  the  promises,  and  particularly  that  he  would  be  my 
God  and  the  God  of  my  seed ; and  I teas  enabled  to  plead  in 


JANET  JACKSON. 


117 


faith , so  that  while  my  child  was  receiving  the  baptism  of 
water , I teas  looking  to  God  for  the  inward  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Ghost , and  teas  enabled  to  believe  that  it  ivoald  be  so. 

u And  now,  as  to  the  ordinary  bent  of  my  desires,  since 
my  first  effectual  awakening,  I find,  that  whereas  my  heart 
before  was  ever  running  out,  mainly  after  the  world  and  its 
vanities,  I now  find  it  to  be  set  upon  those  things  which 
are  above.  Though  I had  no  prospect  of  any  reward  be- 
yond the  present  state,  and  no  fear  of  coming  wrath,  I 
would  far  rather  go  on  in  the  ways  of  holiness,  than  re- 
turn to  my  former  sins  and  follies.  The  pleasures  of  sin 
which  I formerly  enjoyed,  were  not  to  be  compared  with 
what  I now  enjoy  in  serving  God.  I have  also  been  fore- 
casting trials  and  sufferings  for  truth’s  sake,  and  although  I 
can  have  no  confidence  in  myself,  yet  I trust  that,  if  the 
Lord  call  me  to  suffer,  I shall  be  enabled  to  choose  suffer- 
ings rather  than  sin,  and  that  he  will  not  permit  me  to  fall 
away.  My  heart’s  desire  and  prayer  to  God  also  is,  that 
all  Israel,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  may  be  saved,  and  that 
the  Lord  may  visit  every  corner  of  the  land  with  a reviving 
power.  Sometimes  I am  led  in  prayer  to  desire  even  that 
I may  be  dissolved,  to  be  with  Christ,  to  be  joined  to  the 
glorious  company  above,  singing  hallelujahs  to  Him  that 
sit*h  upon  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb." 

There  is,  in  this  case,  an  example  of  how  far  a mere  pro- 
fessor may  go  apparently  in  the  ways  of  God,  before  enter- 
ing in  at  the  strait  gate.  And  should  any  feel  as  if  the 
evidence  here  required  were  greatly  more  complex  than  that 
which  was  admitted  by  the  apostles,  let  them  not  forget 
that  unconverted  professors  are  all  the  while  deceiving 
themselves,  and  that  therefore  the  change  wrought  on  such 
has  a greatly  more  complex  aspect.  There  is,  in  such  cases, 
much  to  unlearn,  and  much  to  discover  and  overcome  of 
the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart. 

2.  Janet  Jackson,  an  unmarried  woman,  aged  twenty- 
four  : — 

“In  early  life,  I was  very  indifferent  about  religious  duties. 


118 


JANET  JACKSON. 


As  I gr^vfr  np\  I became  morC  observant  of  thesey  but  it 
was  only  b^cau^e  * I saw  others  do  so.  J went  to  the  kirk, 
but  I paid  little*  attention  to  what  was  saidhv  I did  not  un- 
derstand it,  and  I>  did  not  care  whether  L heard  it  or  not. 
1 was  not  grossly  vicious.  When  I heard  swearings,  I was 
even  afraid^  and  sometimes  I reproved  those  who  were  guilty. 
But  though  outwardly  j sober,  I had  no  love  td  God.  I 
did  nothing  to  please  him— I wasi laUvays  provoking  him  ; 
diuf.  yet  I knew  it  not?  my  conscience  being , altogether 
asleep. 

■ x 4 Some  years  belore  the  att*a!kbmngy  I was  a servant  in  Mr. 
M 4G  id  loch’s  family.*  He  took  a great  deal  of  pains  with 
me  to  have  me  instructed^  arid;  I attained,  to  some  measure 
df  knowledge,  had  some  concern  about  niy  soiil,  and  was 
more;  attentive  to  duty.  Stilly  I had  no  true  sense  of  my 
condition  before  God.  About  fiVe  years  agoy  during  a 
Communion  season*  I observed  soiiie 'young  people  coming 
to  * any  master-  about  the  concerns  of  their  souls,  and  they 
Seemed  to  he  very  deeply  impressed.  I wondered  what  it 
was  that  -affected  them,  Seeing  I had  no  such  feeling;*  hut 
tins  reflection  wore  off  wheh  the-  Sacrament  was  over. 
Next  year  (173fl),  when  the  communion  came  round, y I be- 
gaii  to  think  more  df  my  state,  saw  more  of  my  heprt 
plagues,  and  I prayed  tb  God  with  some  earnestness.  After 
much  thinking  and  anxiety,'  I went  to  the  Lord’s  table]  but 
I cannot  sky  that  I was  enabled  to  discern  the  Lord’s  body  ] 
only  I resolved  henceforward  to  serve  God,  and  did  reform 
nvy  Conduct  in  various  respects.  But  my  j gaodneiss  on  this 
Occasion  also  was  hut  as  the  morning  ! cloud  and  the  early 
(Jew.  The  year  following,  I urns  much  impressed  with  the 
saving- of  a minister,  w hom  I heard  at  Carmunnock  serving 
a table.'  • 4 Only  such/  he  sai,dy  4 as  had  clean  hands  and  a 
pure  heart  ought  to  sit  dowrn  at  that  table;’  I* saw  that  I 
had  no  right  there — I shed  abundance  of  teats  ; yet  hvere 
my  convictions  hut  shnllbwr,  only  a concern  abotit  m}r  Condi- 
tion remained  with  me  all  summer. 

41  In  September}  74L  I heard  Mn  WhitefieMy  at  Glasgow', 


J A'NUT  JACKSON . 


urn 

preach  two  sermons  in  the  churchyard — the  one  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  the  other  in  the  evening.  In  one  of  these,  he 
spoke  frequently  of  those  to  whom  God  spoke  not  of  peace, 
I felt  concerned  to  kiiow  who  these  pebple  were,  and  how 
they  might  he  known.  Afterwards,! hearing  of  several  who* 
had  been  awakened  healing  Mr.  Whitefield,  I fell  into 
deeper  concern  about  mv  Own  state.  And  seeing  Elizabeth 
Jackson,  a near  friend  of  my  own;  who  had  been  hearing 
him,  I observed  a great  change  in  her.  She  now  spent 
much  of  her  time  in  •prayer,  and, in  reading  her  Bible  and 
Mr.  Whitefield’s  sermons,  i This  showed  me  that  she  and 

1 were  not  in  the  same  state.  I frequently  also  heard  Jane 
Galbreath,  one  of  my  neighbours,  speak  sof  some  who  had 
been  awakened  at  Glasgow,  as  greatly  changed  in  their  life 
and  conversation.  I now  prayed  more  freqdently,  read 
more  in  my  Bible  and  in  Mr.  Whitefield’s  sermons^  and 
also  the  ‘ Weekly  History, ’ after  it  began  to  be  published ; 
and  I began  also  to  think  that  my  own  minister  - (Mr. 
McCulloch)  must  rtoic  be  Reaching  better  them  He  used  to  do.: 
In  the  beginning  of  S December  1 741 , he  preached  ' from* 

2 Cor  vi.  1,  2:  * We  then,  as  workers  together  with 
him,  beseech  you,  that  ye  receive  not  tire  grace  of  < God  in 
vain/  He  spoke  of  people  who  heard’  the  gospel  as  if  they 
heard  it  not,  and  felt  hut  slightly.  I felt  this  as  addressed 
to  me.  I saw  myself  to  be  as  those!  described,  and  I was* 
so  affected  with  the  thought  as  scarcely  to  be  able  to  re- 
strain myself  from  crying  out.  And  npw  my  unworthy 
communicating,  my  heart  wanderingin  time  of  pray ef,  and 
my  slighting  of  ordinances,  stared  upon  me  as  enemies,  H 
went  home  deeply  affected,  Never  before  had  I suck  a 
sense  of  the  evil  of  sin;  and  yet;  I do  not  remehiber  that  I 
had  Avith  this  any  feat  of  hell.  What  I felt  was  the  pro- 
vocation I had  given  to  God.  . I was  now  more  deeply  en- 
gaged in  prayer,  hut  I did  hot  discover  myself  to  any1  one. 
For  several  Sabbaths  after  this  I felt  as  if  the  minister 
was  preaching  to  me,  and  me 'Only;  and  I vfris  getting  fresh 
discoveries  of  the  evil  of  my ; ways;  froth  day  to  day*  so  . that 


120 


JANET  JACKSON. 


I now  saw  sin  to  be  something  wholly  different  from  what 
I had  ever  taken  it  to  be.  I found  in  the  very  corruption 
of  my  nature,  and  the  unbelief  of  my  heart,  the  causes  of 
my  other  evils ; and  knowing  that  till  these  were  removed 
I could  not  be  saved,  I began  to  fear  that  God  would  let 
me  alone.  My  friend,  Elizabeth  Jackson,  left  the  place  for 
some  time,  and  this  added  to  my  despondency,  for  it  seemed 
as  if  she  had  been  removed  from  me  because  of  my  sins. 
My  convictions  were  every  day  deepening,  and  becoming 
more  and  more  cutting;  yet  I kept  all  my  feelings  to 
myself,  working  my  work,  and  even  forcing  myself  to 
eat  my  meals,  that  my  state  might  not  be  discovered. 
But  often  my  sleep  went  from  me.  Sometimes  my  night 
thoughts  were  sweet,  so  that  I blessed  God  for  the  com- 
fort which  I found  in  the  passages  which  passed  through 
my  mind. 

44  About  the  12th  of  February  1742,  I heard  Jane  Gal- 
breath  tell  my  father  (James  Jackson)  that  several  in  the 
parish  had  been  awakened,  and  I felt  keenly,  even  as  if 
God  was  to  show  mercy  to  others  and  leave  me  in  my  sins. 
The  same  night  my  father  read  from  4 Guthrie’s  Trial  of  a 
Saving  Interest  in  Christ/  which  so  increased  my  convictions 
as  very  nearly  to  force  hie  to  cry  out  before  all  present.  I wen  t 
to  the  door  to  conceal  my  state,  when  that  saying — 4 A 
broken  and  a contrite  heart,  Lord,  thou  wilt  not  despise/ 
burst  in  on  my  soul  and  relieved  me.  After  this  relief,  I 
went  to  see  an  acquaintance  and  to  converse  with  her  a lit- 
tle. Our  conversation  turned  on  the  case  of  a relation  of 
hers,  who  had  obtained  an  outgate.  This  touched  my  ten- 
der part.  I fell  a-weeping,  though  I concealed  the  cause. 
Next  day,  I went  to  Jane  Galbreath,  who  had  experienced 
what  I now  felt.  She  saw  what  was  the  matter,  and  charged 
me  not  to  conceal  from  her  the  cause  of  my  distress.  I 
could  not  reply,  but  hastened  home  and  sat  down  to  my 
wheel,  in  my  father’s  house,  reading,  with  the  Bible  on  my 
knee,  and  shedding  many  tears.  These  lvords  were,  how- 
ever, supporting:  4 The  prayer  of  the  destitute  he  surely 


JANET  JACKSON. 


121 


will  regard/  I spent  a portion  of  the  day  with  a comrade, 
and  Catherine  Jackson,  a relation  of  mine.  But  we  were 
all  three  in  such  a state  of  trouble  as  to  be  of  little  service 
to  one  another.  Next  day  being  Sabbath,  I went  to  the 
kirk,  which  was  so  full  that  I could  not  get  a seat,  and 
stood  with  great  difficulty.  It  seemed  as  if  everything  said 
were  levelled  at  me.  ‘ Some  of  you/  said  the  minister,  c are 
perhaps  grieved  that  God  should  gather  others  to  himself 
and  not  you,  and  ye  may  on  this  account  be  murmuring 
against  him/  This,  I said,  is  exactly  my  case.  I was  made 
to  see  the  evil  of  this,  and  to  be  satisfied  that  God  might 
in  justice  pass  me  by,  and  suffer  me  to  perish  in  my  sins, 
and  that  it  was  an  act  of  pure,  sovereign  mercy  on  God’s 
part  that  he  should  save  any;  and  my  heart  became  thus 
humbled,  because  of  my  rebellion  against  God.  I think  it 
was  on  this  occasion,  also,  that  the  minister  explained  to  us 
the  difference  between  mere  concern  and  real  convictions  of 
sin.  This  I had  not  before  understood.  Now  I saw  it, 
and  was  glad  to  find  that  my  trouble  was  more  than  con- 
cern; yet  did  all  this  deepen  my  sense  of  sin  and  sorrow 
on  account  of  it. 

“ Catherine  Jackson  w*as  this  Sabbath  so  overcome  with 
the  power  of  her  convictions,  that  Ingram  More,  one  of  the 
elders,  had  her  removed  to  the  minister’s  room.  He  knew 
not  my  state,  and  left  me  behind ; yet  was  I sorely  affected 
with  this.  It  seemed  as  if  I were  despised  of  all.  I never- 
theless went  with  them.  During  Catherine’s  great  agony, 
I remained  in  a kind  of  stupor ; but  when  she  obtained  an 
outgate,and  was  commending  the  grace  of  God  to  others,  and 
came  and  addressed  herself  to  me,  I felt  as  if  there  remained 
for  me  no  mercy.  Yet  the  Lord  saved  me  from  despair, 
sending  home  to  my  heart  these  words,  4 I will  draw  thee 
with  the  cords  of  love  and  the  bands  of  a man/  The  mo- 
ment these  words  entered  my  heart,  I found  myself  drawn 
out  in  love  towards  God.  And  other  passages  followed  with 
similar  effect,  especially  Matt.  xi.  28,  and  Isa.  xl.  4.  The 
next  day,  James  Miller  a young  man  of  my  acquaintance, 
i 


122 


JANET  JACKSON. 


asked  me  what  ailed  me,  and  whether  I was  in  fear  of  ke£i ; 
for,  said  he,  4 I have  a brother  in  great  fear  of  hell/  1 told 
him  that  such  was  not  the  case  with  me.  4 What,  then/  said 
he,  4 makes  you  so  concerned  ? ' "Because/  said  I,  4 of  the  dis- 
honour I have  done  to  God  by  my  sins/  He  advised  me 
to  take  courage,  and  to  hope  in  God.  That  evening,  I went 
to  Jane  Galbreath’s,  and  found  there  eight  or  nine  young 
people  who  had  fallen  under  trouble  of  mind,  and  with 
them  was  Mr.  Duncan,  a preacher,  an  elder,  called  John  Bar, 
and  a man  who  had  been  awakened  by  hearing  Mr.  White- 
held  the  harvest  before.  Mr.  Duncan  exhorted  us  not  to 
read  any  hook  so  much  as  our  Bible,  as  it  was  fittest  for 
persons  in  our  condition ; and  from  this  I saw  that  I had 
been  wrong  in  reading  more  of  other  religious  hooks  than 
of  my  Bible.  Next  morning  these  words  came  with  power 
upon  my  soul,  4 Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved/  (Acts  xvi.  31.)  This  led  me  to  see  in 
faith  the  way  to  peace.  Still  I wanted  that  joy  and  love 
experienced  by  my  friend  Catherine  Jackson.  And  that  very 
evening,  Elizabeth  Jackson  had  her  heart  kindled,  and  her 
tongue  loosened  to  proclaim  the  love  of  God,  and  to  praise 
him.  She  wished  all  the  people  in  the  place  to  he  brought 
to  her,  that  she  might  tell  them  how  good  and  gracious 
God  is.  This  again  cast  me  down,  and  led  me  to  suspect 
my  state. 

“ On  the  18th  of  February,  I heard  that  sermon  under 
which  so  many  were  awakened.  It  was  from  Jer.  xxiii. 
5:  4 And  this  is  the  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called. 
The  Lord  our  Righteousness/  I thought  that  sermon  to  be 
as  a kind  of  new  gospel  to  me.  I had  great  satisfaction  in 
hearing  it,  although  I do  not  recollect  that  I could  freely 
say,  4 The  Lord  is  my  righteousness/  I went  into  the 
minister’s  room,  was  glad  to  see  so  many  in  an  awakened 
state,  and  so  many  obtaining  relief  and  commending  Christ 
to  others,  and  I was  even  myself  enabled  to  offer  a word  to 
one  in  distress.  Still  my  state,  when  compared  with  that 
of  others  who  were  so  full  of  joy,  caused  me  to  fear,  espe- 


ELIZABETH  JACKSON. 


123 


cially  when,  the  day  following,  I heard  a young  man,  James 
Miller,  speak  of  his  experience  in  a way  greatly  beyond  my 
reach.  I thought  I would  do  anything  to  enjoy  as  they 
did.  About  the  11th  of  April,  the  minister  preached  from 
these  words:  4 To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not 
your  hearts/  (Ps.  xcv.  7,  8.)  And  that  sermon  proved 
the  voice  of  Christ  to  my  soul.  1 was  enabled,  from  what  I 
heard,  to  believe  upon  God  with  all  my  heart,  and  for  a long 
time  my  faith  and  love  were  kept  in  lively  exercise.  Since 
then,  however,  I have  been  cast  down  as  well  as  lifted  up.” 

A considerable  amount  of  detail  follows  this,  but  with- 
out indicating  any  remarkable  change,  and,  therefore,  we 
shall  subjoin  only  the  conclusion. 

“ To  conclude,  I think  the  Lord  has  given  my  heart  such 
a touch  and  turn,  that  I can  through  grace  say,  that  there 
is  none  either  in  heaven  or  on  earth  whom  I desire  besides 
him,  or  in  comparison  with  him ; that  I count  all  things  but 
dross,  when  compared  with  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ,  and  of  being  found  in  him,  not  having  my  own 
righteousness,  but  his;  and  I have  often  found  so  much 
sweetness  in  communion  with  God,  through  his  ordinances, 
that  I esteemed  a day  in  his  courts  better  than  a thousand 
elsewhere,  and  preferred  his  favour  to  every  thing  else.” 

W e see,  from  such  details  as  these,  much  of  what  was 
going  on  in  private  during  the  interesting  season  referred  to, 
much  also  of  how  the  leaven  operates  under  such  visita- 
tions; and  we  repeat  the  remark  before  offered,  as  explana- 
tory also  of  this  case.  Persons  who  have  long  enjoyed  or- 
dinances formally  and  hypocritically,  are  likely  to  have 
many  difficulties  special  to  themselves.  It  was  said  by  our 
Lord,  44  Children,  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in 
riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God!”  (Mark  x.  24.) 
And  it  may,  on  similar  grounds,  be  said,  How  hard 
is  it  for  formalists  and  hypocrites  to  see  with  their  eyes 
open,  so  as  to  receive  the  truth  freely  and  in  the  love 
of  it! 

3.  Elizabeth  Jackson,  daughter  of  James  Jackson, 


1 *24 


ELIZABETH  JACKSON. 


elder,  a young  woman  aged  nineteen,  and  occasionally  re- 
ferred to  under  the  last  case: — 

44  When  I was  a child,  my  parents  often  set  me  to  pray, 
and  I usually  kept  up  something  like  a form  of  prayer  daily. 
When  very  young,  I also  learned  psalms.  Sometimes, 
when  thinking  of  the  great  day,  I would  say  to  myself, 
4 What  will  become  of  me?'  and  for  a time  I was  concerned 
about  myself.  I was  accustomed  to  attend  church — some- 
times hoping  to  get  good,  and  at  other  times  going  only 
because  others  went.  Sometimes  I was  for  a little  impress- 
ed with  what  I heard;  but  all  these  favourable  appear- 
ances soon  wore  off.  At  the  sacrament  in  Cambuslang,  in 
1739,  I fell  under  more  than  ordinary  concern.  Mr. 
Hamilton  of  Both  well  was  preaching  from  Rev.  xxii.  17: 
4 The  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say,  Come/  &c. ; and  on  the  Sab- 
bath following,  Mr.  M4Culloch  preached  from  Isa.  xl.  11: 
4 He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a shepherd/  &c.  And  this  con- 
cern continued  with  me  about  three  weeks.  But  this  also 
wore  off*,  and  I became  more  dead  than  I had  been  before. 
Like  Nicodemus,  I had  no  idea  of  being  born  again.  In 
September  1741,  I went  to  hear  Mr.  Whitefield  in  Glasgow. 
Some  of  his  first  sermons  renewed  my  concern  for  a time  ; 
but  those  which  he  delivered  on  the  Tuesday,  just  before 
leaving,  melted  my  heart.  Some  weeks  after  that,  I heard 
Mr.  M'Culloch  read  some  papers  concerning  the  spread  of 
the  gospel  in  foreign  parts,  which  moved  me  greatly,  espe- 
cially on  observing  how  much  good  others  were  getting, 
while  I was  let  alone.  On  hearing  him  afterwards  preach 
from  Ps.  xxv.  11:  4 For  thy  name’s  sake,  O Lord,  par- 
don mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great/  he  observed  that  many 
asked  and  received  not,  because  they  asked  not  as  the 
psalmist,  earnestly;  but  as  if  they  did  not  care  whether 
they  received  it  or  not.  This  came  home  to  me  as  if  I were 
the  very  person  meant.  After  that  sin  had  become  bitter 
to  me,  and  also  my  undervaluing  gospel  mercies,  I was  led 
to  see  other  evils  both  in  my  heart  and  life,  and  I now  saw 
myself  to  be  a hell-deserving  sinner.  This  impression  was 


ELIZABETH  JACKSON. 


1 25 


confirmed  by  what  the  minister  said  at  an  examination, 
namely,  that  even  the  wicked  would  be  forced  to  acknow  - 
ledge  the  equity  of  God  at  the  great  day.  In  December 
1741,  the  minister  was  preaching  from  these  words,  4 Be- 
hold, now  is  the  accepted  time;  behold,  now  is  the  day  of 
salvation:*  and  he  remarked,  that  the  city  of  Nineveh  got 
forty  days  to  repent,  but  that  the  sinner  has  only  one,  and 
that,  should  it  be  neglected,  there  is  no  promise  of  any 
other.  His  soul  may  that  very  night  be  required  of  him. 
This  caused  me  to  feel  the  urgency  of  the  gospel ; and  yet 
I felt  myself  unable  to  move  towards  God.  I was  now 
for  a while  in  great  distress.  My  sleep  went  from  me;  and 
as  I awoke,  I could  not  better  describe  my  feelings  than 
in  the  words  of  the  psalmist,  4 As  the  hart  panteth  after 
the  water-brooks,  so  panteth  my  soul  after  thee,  O God.’ 
On  a Sabbath  soon  after,  the  minister  was  preaching  from 
John  iii.  3:  4 Except  a man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see 
the  kingdom  of  God:’  and  he  remarked,  that  the  heart 
might,  like  a stone,  be  broken  in  pieces,  and  vet  not  be 
melted.  This  seemed  to  be  my  case.  I was  deeply  af- 
fected, and  my  legs  trembled  even  on  the  way  home.  I 
now  looked  more  to  God  for  help,  feeling  my  own  inability. 
Various  passages  of  the  Word  of  God  came  into  my  mind, 
bringing  relief  for  a time ; but  it  abode  not.  In  this  way  I 
continued  till  the  10th  of  February,  when,  at  home,  I w7as 
enabled  to  lay  hold  on  a promise,  which  had  before  been 
brought  home  to  me,  namely,  Isa.  xli.  10:  4 Fear  thou 
not,  for  I am  with  thee;  be  not  dismayed,  for  I am  thy 
God:  I will  strengthen  thee;  yea,  I will  help  thee;  yea,  I 
will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness. 
My  heart  was  now  drawn  out  after  Christ,  so  that  I was 
enabled  to  close  with  him  in  all  his  offices. 

44  After  this,  when  I heard  the  gospel  preached,  it  seemed 
to  me  as  if  it  were  another  gospel,  and  that  all  it  contained 
was  new  to  me.  I now  heard  with  joy,  and  I read  my 
Bible  with  like  feelings.  When  I walked  in  the  fields, 
everything  looked  as  if  it  also  had  changed,  affording  me 


126 


ELIZABETH  JACKSON. 


occasion  for  pleasant  and  spiritual  meditations.  Still  my 
feelings  were  not  so  full  of  joy  as  many  afterwards  experi- 
enced. On  Tuesday  the  16th  of  February,  I heard  my 
sister  [^Catherine]  so  commend  the  love  of  Christ,  as  to  fill 
me  with  grief,  because  I did  not  feel  as  she  did.  I went 
away  to  call  at  a relations  house,  and  as  soon  as  I reach- 
ed it,  I could  not  restrain  from  weeping;  and  in  the  pre- 
sence of  all,  I began  to  commend  the  free  grace  and  love 
of  Christ,  in  a way  1 had  never  done  before,  and  for  a con- 
siderable time.  I was  even  unable  to  restrain  myself.  This 
frame  of  mind  continued  for  weeks;  yet  it  was  not  always 
so  with  me.  I had  afterwards  my  times  of  depression  as 
well  as  of  joy;  but  the  Lord  often  gave  me  deliverance. 
On  hearing  a sermon  from  Rom.  iii.  19,  c Now  we  know 
that  what  things  soever  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them  who 
are  under  the  law,  that  every  mouth  may  he  stopped,  and 
all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  God / I was  melted 
on  account  of  sin,  and  made  to  wonder  at  the  free  grace  of 
God.  On  other  occasions,  when  hearing  sermon,  as  well  as  in 
prayer  and  at  our  fellowship-meetings,  I had  similar  feelings. 
One  day,  in  particular,  I was  hearing  the  minister  preach 
from  -Jer.  xvii.  9 : 6 The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things, 
and  desperately  wicked;  who  can  know  it?’  and  I got  a 
very  affecting  sense  of  the  evil  of  my  heart,  and  was  greatly 
humbled  before  God. 

u When  the  communion  arrived,  I was  in  doubt  as  to  what 
I ought  to  do,  and  although  I at  last  ventured,  I experi- 
enced great  deadness.  On  seeking  to  ascertain  the  cause, 
I was  led  to  see  that  I had  sinned  through  unbelief  and 
murmuring  before  God.  On  hearing  Mr.  Currie  of  King- 
lassie,  on  the  fast-day  before  the  second  sacrament,  I was 
greatly  refreshed.  His  text  was  John  iii.  29:  ‘ He  that 

hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom/  &c.  Yet,  on  Saturday, 
I felt  my  heart  hard  as  a stone;  and  on  Sabbath  I was 
in  much  the  same  state,  so  that  I was  greatly  perplexed 
whether  I ought  to  communicate.  At  length  I did,  and 
obtained  some  relief.  And  throughout  the  whole  of  the 


CATHERINE  JACKSON. 


127 


following  harvest  I was  filled  with  wonder  and  admiration 
at  the  condescension  and  grace  of  God  to  so  vile  a sinner; 
yet  during  the  winter  it  was  otherwise  with  me. 

“ When  I now  reflect  on  the  workings  of  my  heart  for  the 
last  twelvemonth  and  more,  I find  that  its  ordinary  and 
chief  bent  is  after  Christ  and  the  things  of  another  world. 

I cannot  pretend  to  a fixed  assurance  of  my  state,  but  I 
would  not  for  a thousand  worlds  he  in  the  state  I was  in 
not  long  ago;  and  I cherish  a humble  hope  that  the  Lord 
will  have  mercy  upon  me  to  eternal  life.” 

The  experience  of  this  young  woman  differs  from  that  of 
the  former  in  different  respects.  If  all  the  circumstances 
were  known,  perhaps  some  of  these  points  might  he  ex- 
plained. But  beyond  all  that  man  can  reach,  there  is  the 
sovereignty  of  God,  and  purposes  under  that  sovereignty, 
which  will  not  appear  till  the  end  of  all  things.  It  may  he 
also  well  to  remind  the  reader,  that  although  feelings  are  the 
expressions  of  what  we  experience,  they  are  not  always  to  he 
regarded  as  affording  proper  evidence  of  our  state,  and  they 
ought  not  therefore  to  be  proceeded  upon  as  grounds  either 
of  confidence  or  distrust.  It  is  not  because  we  love  our 
friend  that  we  trust  him,  hut  because  of  the  evidence  which 
we  have  that  he  loves  us ; and  neither  is  it  because  of  the 
coldness  of  our  own  affections  that  we  distrust  him,  but  only 
because  of  our  learning  that  his  affections  are  cooled  towards 
us.  And,  in  like  manner,  it  is  not  because  of  our  love  to 
God,  but  rather  of  his  love  to  us,  that  we  ought  to  have  con- 
fidence before  him:  and  unless  we  see  cause  for  believing 
that  his  love  towards  us  is  less,  we  ought  not  to  distrust  him. 

4.  Catherine  Jackson,  sister  of  the  former,  and  introduced 
from  the  second  volume  on  account  of  this  connection: — 

“ It  pleased  God  to  preserve  me  in  a great  measure  out- 
wardly blameless,  whether  living  at  home  with  my  father 
or  at  service.  From  infancy,  I was  taught  to  observe  a 
form  of  prayer,  and  now  and  then  I read  my  Bible,  and  I 
attended  divine  ordinances.  But  in  none  of  these  did  I 
go  beyond  mere  form.  When  about  seventeen  years  of 


128 


CATHERINE  JACKSON. 


age,  I fell  under  deep  concern  about  my  state,  especially  in 
connection  with  preparation  which  I was  making  before 
going  forward  to  the  Lord’s  table;  but  when  that  occasion 
was  over,  I fell  back  into  my  usual  listless  state.  In  De- 
cember 1741,  I heard  Mr.  McCulloch  preach  from  2 Cor. 
vi.  1,  2:  4 We,  then,  as  workers  together  with  him,  be- 

seech you,’  &c.  This  sermon  awakened  me  to  a deep  sense 
of  my  original  as  well  as  actual  sin,  and  from  that  time 
my  convictions  went  on  from  day  to  day.  About  the  be- 
ginning of  February,  a weekly  lecture  was  begun  on  the 
Thursdays;  and  so  great  was  my  desire  for  instruction  in 
the  Word,  that  I sat  up  a good  part  of  the  night  at  my 
wheel,  that  I might  go  to  the  meeting  next  day,  without 
giving  cause  of  offence  to  my  master  and  mistress.  On 
Sabbath,  the  14th  of  February,  the  minister  preached  on 
John  iii.  3.  My  convictions  were  greatly  increased  by 
what  I heard.  After  sermon,  I went  with  my  two  sisters 
to  a friend’s  house  near  the  kirk ; and  w hile  I sat  there  weep- 
ing, and  seeing  nothing  before  me  but  the  blackness  of 
darkness,  a preacher  (^probably  Mr.  Duncan],  and  another 
person,  Ingram  More,  now  an  elder,  came  vrhere  I 
wras,  and  spake  several  things  suitable  to  my  case.  But 
for  what  followed  that  night,  I refer  to  the  following  ac- 
count written  out  by  the  minister  next  morning,  from  his 
own  recollection,  and  that  of  the  persons  now  referred  to. 
and  which  is  also  according  to  what  I am  able  to  recall  to 
mind : — 

u The  preacher  asked  her  what  particular  sins  lay  heaviest 
on  her  conscience.  She  bewailed  her  despising  gospel  ordi- 
nances, her  unbelief,  that  she  had  received  gospel  grace  in 
vain,  had  lost  much  precious  time,  that  she  had  been  a 
lover  of  pleasure  more  than  of  God,  and  that  she  had  mur- 
mured at  the  conduct  of  Providence  in  calling,  as  she  be- 
lieved, her  sister,  and  leaving  her.  After  a little,  she  was 
brought  by  her  sisters  and  the  two  men  to  the  minister’s 
room,  weeping  all  the  way.  After  she  had  been  seated  a 
little,  he  asked  wrhat  ailed  her?  She  could  only  reply,  as 


CATHERINE  JACKSON. 


120 


she  did  over  and  over,  4 Oh,  what  shall  I do?*  ‘Believe.’ 
said  he,  4 on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.’ 
Weeping  very  bitterly,  she  cried  out,  4 But  my  sins  are  so 
great  that  lie  will  not  receive  me.’  4 Come  now,’  he  re- 
peated, 4 and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord.  Though 
vour  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow; 
though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool.’ 
4 Oh  no,*  said  she,  in  great  bitterness  of  spirit,  4 he  will  not 
accept  of  me — he  will  not  accept  of  me.’  4 But  he  will,’ 
said  the  minister.  4 If  you  be  willing  to  come  to  him,  and 
to  accept  of  him,  I assure  you,  in  his  name,  that  he  will 
accept  of  you,  whatever  you  have  done  or  been.  Where 
there  is  a w illingness  on  both  sides,  what  should  hinder  the 
concluding  of  a match  between  you?  Come,  then,  to  him, 
and  be  assured  that  he  wall  in  no  wise  cast  you  out.’  On 
this  she  ceased  weeping,  and  seemed  calmed  for  a little.  She 
was  now’,  as  she  afterwards  explained,  essaying  to  believe 
on  Christ.  But  in  a little  she  burst  out  anew,  wreeping  and 
crying,  4 Oh,  my  sins,  my  sins;  he  will  not  receive  me — he 
will  not  receive  me  : I am  the  chief  of  sinners.’  4 Are  you 
a greater  sinner,’  said  the  minister,  4 than  the  apostle  Paul  ? 
He  was,  as  he  says,  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  yet  he  ob- 
tained mercy;  and  he  is  set  forth  as  an  example  of  the 
grace  of  God,  that  others  may  be  encouraged.  Come  to 
him,  then,  and  ye  also  shall  obtain  mercy,  as  the  apostle 
did.’  She  again  repeated  the  same  complaint,  when  she 
was  told  that  no  evidence  of  Christ’s  willingness  to  save 
her  could  be  greater  than  his  having  shed  his  very  heart’s 
blood,  out  of  love  to  such  as  her;  that  this  blood  wTas  cap- 
able of  cleansing  her  from  all  her  sins — of  w ashing  out  the 
deepest  stain.  After  several  passages  to  this  effect  had  been 
repeated,  she  again  ceased  crying,  and  said,  mournfully, 
c Oh,  but  I cannot  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  I 
maybe  saved/  4 Will  you  not,  then,’  said  he,  4 cry  out,  with 
that  poor  man  in  the  gospel,  4 Lord,  I believe,’  or  Lord,  I 
mould  believe ; 4 help  thou  mine  unbelief?  ’ ’ She  now  repeated 
these  words,  endeavouring  to  exercise  faith,  and  was  in 


130 


CATHERINE  JACKSON. 


some  measure  helped  to  it,  as  she  afterwards  said.  But 
although,  during  this,  she  refrained  from  crying,  it  was  but 
for  a little.  She  again  fell  a- weeping,  and  said,  4 He  will 
not  accept  of  me.’  4 But  he  will/  said  the  minister ; 4 he  as- 
sures you  that  he  will.  Hear  his  own  words : 4 Whosoever 
w ill,  let  him  take  of  the  wrater  of  life  freely/  * Still  she  con- 
tinued to  wreep  in  great  bitterness  of  spirit.  4 Come/  said  the 
minister,  4 shall  we  pray  for  the  help  of  God  to  draw  you  to 
Christ  ? * 4 Oh  yes,  yes/  said  she,  and  she  hastened  to  rise. 
We  stood,  and  one  present  supported  her  in  that  attitude. 
The  prayer  consisted  first  of  adoring  gratitude,  because  of 
the  love  of  God  in  giving  his  Son,  and  of  the  love  of 
Christ  in  giving  himself;  after  which  it  turned  on  the  con- 
dition of  the  young  woman.  It  w7as  but  a little,  when  she 
whispered  to  the  person  supporting  her,  that  she  felt  as  if 
Christ  w7ere  saying  to  her,  4 I will  never  leave  thee  nor  for- 
sake thee  / and  again,  that  he  had  cast  all  her  sins  behind 
his  back.  After  prayer  she  repeated  the  promises  which 
had  thus  been  brought  home  to  her,  and  broke  out  in  a 
strain  of  exultation,  because  of  the  excellences  of  Christ's 
person,  and  the  wonders  of  his  love  and  free  sovereign 
grace,  and  lamenting  her  late  unbelief.  Then  she  exclaimed, 
4 Oh,  I would  not  believe  till  I felt  his  pow  er  ; but  now  his 
love  hath  conquered  my  heart.  He  has  pardoned  even  mv 
unbelief;  he  has  drawn  me  with  the  cords  of  love  and  the 
bands  of  a man.  I thought  that  my  sins  wTere  so  great  and 
many  that  he  wrould  not  pardon  them;  but  now  he  hath 
cast  them  all  behind  his  back.  His  thoughts  are  not  as 
w ere  my  thoughts,  neither  are  his  wrays  as  my  ways/ 

44  A number  of  people  had  by  this  time  gathered  into  the 
room,  particularly  some  young  women  of  her  acquaintance : 
and  all  present  being  deeply  affected,  several  weeping  all 
the  while,  the  minister  said  to  the  young  woman,  4 You  see 
that  there  are  several  daughters  of  Jerusalem  writh  us,  who 
may  be  asking  in  their  hearts,  4 What  is  thy  beloved  more 
than  another  beloved?'  have  you  anything  to  say  to  them 
in  commendation  of  Christ?'  She  immediately  turned  to 


CATHERINE  JACKSON. 


131 


them  and  said,  in  the  most  feeling  manner,  44  My  Beloved 
is  white  and  ruddy,  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand;  yea, 
lie  is  altogether  lovely/  O come  to  Christ.  Come  and 
trust  him.  If  ye  cannot  cry  to  him,  long  after  him.  Oh, 
will  ye  at  least  sigh  and  sob  for  him?  I can  now  say, 
4 My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I am  his.’  ’ 

u This  address  produced  great  commotion  of  feeling. 
Some  were  so  transported  with  joy  as  scarcely  to  be  able  to 
restrain  themselves,  and  there  was  heard  among  others  such 
a sound  of  weeping,  as  to  be  audible  at  a considerable  dis  - 
tance. The  minister  bade  them  compose  themselves  and 
join  in  praising  God;  and  turning  to  the  young  woman,  he 
said,  4 Shall  we  sing  part  of  the  103d  psalm?’  She  readily 
approved,  and  they  sang  the  first  eight  verses,  in  which  she 
very  cheerfully  took  part.  When  this  exercise  was  over, 
the  minister  said  to  her,  4 1 suppose  you  have  been  singing 
with  pleasure?’  She  answered,  that  she  had  never  up  to 
that  time  sung  as  she  had  just  done,  nor  had  she  previous 
to  this  occasion  known  Christ. 

44  She  then  rose  up,  with  great  vigour  of  body  and  liveli- 
ness of  spirit,  and  turning  first  to  her  sister,  who  had  been 
brought  under  the  power  of  the  truth,  as  was  believed, 
some  weeks  before,  she  embraced  her  with  the  greatest 
tenderness,  thanking  her  for  what  she  had  done  in  coun- 
selling her  and  praying  for  her.  She  then  shook  hands  with 
all  present,  commending  to  them  Christ,  and  the  sweetness 
of  his  love,  as  well  as  the  riches  of  his  grace.  As  many  as 
she  feared  were  still  strangers  to  Christ,  she  invited  with 
great  earnestness  to  come  to  him  without  delay;  and 
such  as  she  believed  to  be  in  Christ,  she  asked  to  join  with 
her  in  praising  him  for  the  wonderful  love  and  favour  he 
had  vouchsafed  her. 

44  After  this  the  minister  and  several  others  joined  in 
prayer,  and  so  the  meeting  broke  up,  after  being  together 
for  about  three  hours.  Mr.  M4Culloch  adds,  that  during 
the  whole  of  this  time,  much  of  the  sensible  presence  and 
power  of  God  were  felt  by  as  many  as  had  previously 


132 


CATHERINE  JACKSON. 


known  the  truth,  and  at  least  deep  concern  laid  fast  hold 
of  others.” 

In  proceeding  with  her  own  narrative,  she  speaks  of 
many  varying  exercises  of  mind  through  which  she  was 
brought,  but  they  are  very  much  like  those  we  have  already 
seen.  Passing,  therefore,  over  some  of  these,  we  find  her 
thus  describing  her  condition  the  summer  following : — 

“ For  some  time  before  the  first  sacrament,  which  was 
in  July  1742,  I was  under  great  discouragement,  having  but 
little  of  that  liveliness  and  spirituality  which  I had  formerly 
enjoyed.  I went  with  others  to  the  minister  for  instruction ; 
and  when  all  was  over,  he  offered  me  a token,  but  I did 
not  feel  at  liberty  to  accept  of  it,  being  under  the  im- 
pression that  I had  not  God’s  welcome.  But  on  returning 
home,  I was  so  impressed  with  that  saying,  4 My  grace 
is  sufficient  for  thee,’  that  I resolved  on  going  forward 
still.  During  the  action-sermon,  which  was  on  these 
words,  c He  is  altogether  lovely,’  &c.  (Song  v.  16),  the 
Lord  was  pleased  to  give  me  great  heart-brokenness  on 
account  of  sin,  and  to  draw  out  my  desires  in  love  towards 
Christ.  He  also  allowed  me  much  of  his  presence  at  the 
communion-table.  On  Monday,  I heard  Mr.  Whitefield 
preach  from  Phil.  ii.  5,  and  saw  much  of  God  in  that 
sermon.  I was  made  greatly  to  desire  that  the  same 
mind  should  be  in  me  which  was  in  Christ;  and  I was 
much  humbled  in  thinking  how  little  there  was  of  it  in 
my  soul.  At  the  second  communion,  which  was  in  August, 
I heard  Mr.  Currie  preach  from  these  words,  4 He  that 
hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom,’  &c.  (John  iii.  29);  and 
was  greatly  refreshed.  I was  enabled  to  see  that  Christ 
was  the  bridegroom  of  my  soul.  My  heart  was  also  drawn 
out  after  him  above  all  things,  and  I had  a deep  and  af- 
fecting sense  of  the  dishonour  I had  done  him.  At  the 
table,  I had  a sweet  savour  of  Christ  upon  my  soul.  On 
the  Monday,  I heard  Mr.  Hamilton,  on  these  words,  ‘Pray 
without  ceasing’  (1  Thess.  v.  17);  and  my  heart  was 
melted  under  a sense  of  the  love  of  God,  and  was  drawn 


CATHERINE  JACKSON. 


I f>j> 

out  with  earnest  desires  that  I might  be  enabled  to  comply 
with  the  exhortations  offered. 

“ In  the  course  of  the  harvest,  I fell  into  a state  of  great 
darkness  and  deadness  of  spirit.  One  day  after  coming 
from  secret  prayer,  and  feeling  as  if  I needed  not  to  at- 
tempt it  any  more,  seeing  the  Lord  would  not  hear  me  be- 
cause of  my  sins,  that  word  came  to  me  with  commanding 
power,  c In  a little  wrath  I hid  my  face  from  thee  for  a 
moment ; but  with  everlasting  kindness  will  I have  mercy 
on  thee,  saith  the  Lord  thy  Redeemer/  (Isa.  liv.  8.) 
From  this  I was  made  to  see  that  the  Lord  had  justly  hid 
his  face  from  me  on  account  of  my  sins;  that  although  it 
was,  as  my  unbelieving  spirit  suggested,  long,  yet  was  it 
but  for  a little  moment ; whereas  his  kindness  was  everlast- 
ing, and  altogether  his  own. 

“ In  the  course  of  the  winter  a stor}’  was  got  up  against 
me,  which,  though  altogether  untrue  and  unjust,  I felt 
most  because  of  the  dishonour  which  might,  in  this  way, 
be  done  to  God  and  his  cause.  One  night,  while  weeping 
and  lamenting  this  as  I lay  in  bed,  I was  so  distressed  as 
deeply  to  deplore  my  having  revealed  my  spiritual  condi- 
tion to  any  one,  as  otherwise,  say  what  they  might  of  me, 
it  could  not  have  injured  religion.  But  while  in  this  state 
these  words  came  to  me  as  if  sent  by  God,  ‘ Be  still,  and 
know  that  I am  God/  (Ps.  xlvi.  10.)  This  calmed  my 
fretted  feelings  and  reproved  my  impatience.  I resigned 
myself  and  all  my  ways  to  God,  that  he  might  over-rule 
my  lot  as  he  should  see  to  be  best ; and  I was  afterwards 
confirmed  in  this  temper  of  mind,  by  observing  that  we 
are  required  to  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

“ In  January,  the  same  winter  (1743)  I heard  much  of  the 
Lord’s  gracious  dealings  in  some  of  the  prayer-meetings 
which  were  held  in  the  parish;  and  yet  in  the  meeting  with 
which  I was  connected  there  was,  as  I thought,  much 
deadness.  This  distressed  me  greatly,  believing,  as  I did, 
that  we  must,  in  some  way,  have  done  dishonour  to  God. 


134 


CATHERINE  JACKSON. 


1 was  much  engaged  in  prayer  on  this  account,  and  was 
led  earnestly  to  plead  that  God  would  visit  us  also  at  our 
ensuing  meeting,  and  this  although  I should  not  share  in 
the  blessing.  It  seemed  as  if  the  Hearer  of  prayer  were 
intimating  his  answer  by  sending  home  to  me  that  saying, 
4 Said  I not  unto  thee,  that  if  thou  wouldest  believe,  thou 
shouldest  see  the  glory  of  God?*  (John  xi.  40.)  Accord- 
ingly at  night,  when  we  met  for  prayer,  there  were  several 
present  so  filled  and  overcome  with  the  love  of  God,  espe- 
cially during  the  devotional  exercises,  that  they  could  not 
converse  for  some  time  after,  but  were  wholly  taken  up  in 
admiring  wonder  at  the  love  of  God  in  Christ.  I desired 
much  to  share  with  them  in  this  love,  but  the  Lord  did 
not  grant  me  this  desire ; yet  the  declarations  of  his  W ord 
were  sweet  to  my  soul,  and  I felt  satisfied  in  waiting  his 
holy  will  in  all  that  concerned  me,  sincerely  rejoicing  in  the 
blessings  bestowed  upon  others.  While  one  of  the  meeting 
was  engaged  in  prayer,  that  word  came  home  to  me  as  ap- 
propriate : 4 1 charge  you,  O ye  daughters  of  J erusalem,  by 
the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field,  that  ye  stir  not  up, 
nor  wake  my  love,  till  he  please/  (Song  iii.  5.)  And 
when  it  came  to  my  turn  to  pray,  I got  great  liberty  in 
blessing  and  praising  the  Lord  for  his  goodness  to  others. 

44  Some  time  after  this  I went  to  attend  on  a sacramental 
occasion  in  Paisley.  There  several  of  us  were  going  together ; 
and  I felt  as  if  I ought  not  to  be  wfith  them,  so  much  was  I 
borne  down  with  a sense  of  my  sinfulness ; yet  God  dealt 
very  tenderly  with  me.  On  Saturday  I was  broken-hearted, 
because  of  sin.  During  the  action-sermon  on  Sabbath,  my 
heart  was  filled  with  a sense  of  God’s  love.  In  the  even- 
ing I was  also  filled  with  holy  joy,  listening  to  a sermon 
from  these  words,  4 And  truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the 
Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ/  (1  John  i.  3.) 
And  on  Tuesday  morning  I was  greatly  confirmed  in  my 
faith,  and  resolved  to  serve  God. 

44  To  come  to  a close,  I bless  the  Lord  that,  down  to  the 
present  time,  the  thoughts  and  desires  of  my  heart  are 


GEORGE  TASSIE. 


135 


mainly  and  ordinarily  carried  Out  after  spiritual  and  eter- 
nal things.  Though  my  heart  is  sometimes  much  more  dead 
in  reading  and  hearing  from  the  Word  than  it  is  at  other 
times,  yet  I often  long  for  opportunities  of  attending  gospel 
ordinances,  both  on  Sabbath  and  week-days,  before  the 
time;  and  I prize  them  more  than  my  daily  food.  I also 
bless  God  that  he  has  often  made  them  the  means  of  re- 
viving, strengthening,  and  comforting  my  soul.  The  world, 
and  the  things  of  the  world,  bulk  but  little  in  my  eyes ; 
yet  I am  often  humbled  because  of  wandering  thoughts 
when  engaged  in  holy  duties.  I now  find  vastly  more 
pleasure  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  light  of  God’s  countenance, 
even  for  a very  short  time,  than  I ever  found  in  all  my 
life  before.  What  I chiefly  want  and  desire  is,  more  com- 
munion with  Christ,  and  greater  conformity  to  him  in  the 
present  state,  and  to  be  ever  with  him  in  the  life  which  is 
to  come.  To  him  be  glory  for  ever.  Amen.” 

The  pious  reader  can  scarcely  fail  to  have  been  particu- 
larly interested  with  what  is  said  of  this  young  woman ; 
and  his  interest  will  not  be  lessened  by  our  adding,  that 
she  was  merely  a servant  girl  in  a farm-house.  So  much 
does  grace  elevate  and  enlarge  the  mind,  that  even  the 
simple  and  unlearned  think  and  speak  to  some  extent  as 
if  their  circumstances  had  been  different.  At  the  same 
time,  there  are  peculiarities  in  such  cases.  In  this  and 
similar  examples,  there  is  a tendency  to  count  too  much  on 
feelings,  and  also  to  attach  an  undue  importance  to  impres- 
sions. A more  enlarged  acquaintance  with  divine  truth, 
and  greater  strength  of  mind,  would,  with  the  same  measure 
of  spirituality,  greatly  lessen  these.  But  the  prevailing 
tendency  of  our  age  lies  in  an  opposite  direction,  and  may 
even  require  such  examples  as  this  to  show  what  it  is  to 
have  the  heart  fully  engaged  in  the  things  of  God. 

5.  George  Tassie,  a married  man,  aged  forty-one  years  : — 
“ I was  taught  to  read  and  write  at  school,  and  also  to 
repeat  the  Shorter  Catechism.  I was  instructed  by  my 
parents  to  engage  in  prayer  when  but  a child ; but  as  I grew 


1 36 


GEORGE  TASSIE. 


up  I became  less  regular.  I usually  attended  divine  ordi- 
nances— sometimes  heard  gladly;  and  kept  up,  on  ordinary 
occasions,  the  worship  of  God  in  my  family  morning  and 
evening.  I used  also  to  read  the  Bible  by  myself,  although 
I understood  nothing  of  its  spirituality.  I had  likewise 
pleasure  in  reading  sermon  books,  but  I could  never  apply 
what  I read  to  myself ; and  I cannot  say  that  anything, 
either  read  or  heard,  ever  came  home  to  my  heart  with 
power,  till  the  end  of  June  1742.  I had  still,  however,  a 
suspicion  that  there  was  something  in  religion  more  than  I 
had  found,  and  yet  I could  not  think  myself  worse  than 
many  of  my  neighbours. 

“I  continued  in  this  state  till  the  12th  of  May  1742, 
when  I heard  Mr.  Robe  of  Kilsyth  preaching  at  Cambus- 
lang  on  these  words  : c He  heareth  the  cry  of  the  poor  and 
needy/  He  said  it  was  better  to  cry  now  than  to  cry  in  hell  ; 
but  adding,  that  the  cry  which  God  heareth  is  the  cry  of  faith. 
I fell  under  great  concern,  and  was  made  to  tremble  and 
shake,  although  I made  no  noise.  I felt  as  in  the  imme- 
diate presence  of  God,  and  was  therefore  filled  with  fear. 
I put  up  many  petitions  for  deliverance.  The  trembling 
abated,  as  did  also  my  fear,  and  I became  very  much  what 
1 was.  Reflecting  on  the  probable  cause  of  what  had  oc- 
curred, I thought  of  that  saying,  c The  devils  believe,  and 
tremble/  This  showed  me  that  there  was  nothing  saving 
in  my  fear. 

“ One  day,  when  at  home  working  by  myself,  I thought 
much  of  what  was  then  going  on  at  Cambuslang,  and  con- 
cluded that  there  must  be  something  very  special  about  it. 
When  thus  engaged,  these  words  came  into  my  mind  with 
great  power : c What  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was 
weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the 
likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  condemned  sin  in  the 
flesh/  (Rom.  viii.  3.)  This  led  me  to  meditate  on  the 
law,  and  I saw  it  to  be  just,  and  good,  and  so  holy  that 
the  best  man  on  earth  could  not  keep  it,  so  as  to  be  justi- 
fied by  it  before  God  ;*and  this  led  me  to  wonder  at  the 


GEORGE  TASSIE. 


137 


love  of  God  in  sending  his  Son  to  purchase  salvation  for 
law  breakers.  So  much  did  I wonder  at  this,  that  I could 
not  restrain  myself  from  crying  out,  wO  wonderful,  amazing 
love  !*  My  heart  was  thus  drawn  out  to  accept  of  Christ  in 
all  his  offices — as  my  prophet,  my  priest,  and  my  king.  In 
doing  this,  I found  the  words  of  Thomas  to  be  as  my  own : 
‘ My  Lord,  and  my  God/  And  after  this,  my  desires  went 
out  after  God,  that  he  would  keep  and  preserve  that  which 
concerned  me.  I had  now  much  sensible  love  in  my  heart 
towards  Christ.  He  was  to  me,  indeed,  the  chiefest  among 
ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely.  My  heart  was  en- 
larged to  bless  aud  praise  God,  on  account  of  his  many 
mercies.  I had  also  a deep  and  humbling  sense  of  my  own 
sinfulness,  and  especially  in  having  rejected  the  Saviour  so 
long.  When  I had  settled  a little,  I began  to  inquire 
whether  this  was  to  be  regarded  as  really  a work  of  regene- 
ration or  otherwise.  My  own  conscience  said  that  it  was, 
but  doubts  were  raised  in  my  mind  as  to  whether  such  a 
work  could  take  place  in  so  short  a time.  I turned  up  my 
Bible,  and  found  in  it  such  cases  as  those  of  the  Philippian 
jailer  and  Zac^heus,  which  showed  me  that  some  were 
converted  in  a short  time.  I also  observed  that  several  of 
those  described  in  the  New  Testament  as  applying  to 
Christ,  addressed  him  as  Lord,  and  placed  themselves  under 
his  authority,  and  that  this  also  I was  enabled  to  do  ; and 
thus,  instead  of  stumbling  at  the  Lord's  way,  I was 
taught  to  admire  his  great  goodness  in  dealing  with  me 
as  he  had  done,  in  carrying  me  through  so  mildly  and 
speedily.  Their  crying  and  distress,  who  had  been  other- 
wise dealt  with,  I saw  to  be  because  of  their  being  kept  so 
long  under  a sense  of  sin,  without  finding  rest  in  Christ, 
and  I became  convinced  that,  if  it  had  been  so  with  me,  I 
also  would  have  been  forced  to  cry  out. 

“ I continued  in  this  state  for  some  considerable  time. 
All  week  I was  occupied  in  admiring  the  love  of  Christ  in 
obeying  and  suffering,  in  yielding  satisfaction  through  the 
excellency  of  his  divine  nature  and  his  sufferings  as  a man. 

K 


138 


GEORGE  TASSIE. 


I was  taught  to  imitate  Christ  in  all  his  imitable  perfections, 
to  take  part  with  God  speaking  in  the  law  against  the  corrup- 
tions of  my  own  heart,  to  watch  against  every  known  sin, 
and  to  strive  after  every  commanded  duty ; and  I was  at 
the  same  time  made  to  see  in  all  I did  much  that  was  evil : 
and,  renouncing  all  my  deeply- stained  performances,  to  rely 
wholly  on  Christ  for  acceptance  and  sanctifying  grace. 

44  The  Bible  was  now  to  me  my  frequent  companion. 
Many  passages  appeared  in  a new  light,  so  as  to  be  quite 
different  from  what  they  had  been  before.  I remember, 
in  particular,  how  that  passage  in  the  118th  psalm,  4 The 
stone  which  the  builders  refused,  is  become  the  head 
stone  of  the  corner/  flashed  upon  me,  as  condemning 
many  because  of  unbelief.  In  conversing  with  some  of 
my  neighbours,  whom  I had  been  accustomed  to  regard  as 
religious.  I now  found  them  to  be  nothing  more  than  I 
had  myself  formerly  been — mere  formalists. 

44  Next  LordVday,  I went  to  Cambuslang  and  heard  Mr. 
Duncan,  on  that  text : 4 If  any  man  he  in  Christ,  he  is  a 
new  creature/  (2  Cor.  v.  17.)  The  marks  given  I was 
enabled  to  find  in  myself,  particularly  love  towards  God 
and  my  neighbour.  So  much  did  I experience  the  latter, 
'that  I earnestly  wished  to  be  reconciled  to  any  with  whom 
I had  been  at  variance.  Hearing  Mr.  McCulloch  preach 
from  these  words  : 4 O Jerusalem,  wash  thine  heart/  & c. 
(Jer.  iv.  14),  I did  not  very  well  understand  what  it  was 
to  have  my  heart  washed ; but  afterwards  I came  to  under- 
stand and  experience  it  in  my  own  case. 

44  On  the  Sabbath  preceding  the  first  sacrament  at  Cam- 
buslang, Mr.  M;Culloch  preached  from  these  words : 
4 But  let  a man  examine  himself/  &e.  (1  Cor.  xi.  28), 

and  took  occasion  to  say,  that  many  might  get  a token 
from  a minister  or  elder  without  receiving  any  token  from 
Christ ; adding,  that  an  unconverted  soul  could  not  derive 
any  benefit  from  the  Lord’s  supper.  Some  of  the  marks 
given  I had  no  difficulty  in  finding,  which  gave  me  much 
peace  and  joy,  believing,  as  I did,  that  the  Lord  made  me 


GEORGE  TASS  IE. 


139 


welcome.  Before  going  to  the  table  I was  in  a very  dead 
frame  of  mind ; but  when  there,  I could  scarcely  get 
another  word  said  than  4 My  Lord,  and  my  God.*  My 
heart  clave  to  God  as  its  portion  for  time  and  eternity, 
and  I was  at  the  same  time  much  humbled  because  of  my 
own  unworthiness.  Mr.  Whitefield,  on  preaching  from  the 
text,  4 Thy  Maker  is  thy  husband'  (Isa.  liv.  5),  said, 
that  he  was  come  to  woo  a bride  for  his  Master,  the 
church's  bridegroom ; but  that  before  any  soul  could  be 
admitted  into  the  marriage  covenant  with  Christ,  it  be- 
hoved to  become  dead  to  the  law  and  its  own  righteous- 
ness. I had  great  satisfaction  in  finding  that  I had 
become  dead  to  both,  and  had  betaken  myself  to  Christ 
for  righteousness  and  strength. 

44  For  several  weeks,  I was  much  perplexed  how  to 
manage  some  of  my  worldly  affairs.  My  thoughts  about 
these  became  a snare.  They  haunted  me  even  on  the  Lord's- 
day,  and  I have  had  to  sit  till  well  on  in  the  night  reading 
and  praying,  lest,  on  going  to  bed,  they  should  haunt  me 
there.  One  Sabbath  evening,  while  so  perplexed,  these 
words  stole  in  upon  me  with  a soothing  and  healing  effect : — 

‘ Set  thou  thy  trust  upon  the  Lord, 

And  be  thou  doing  good ; 

And  so  thou  in  the  land  shalt  dwell, 

And  verily  have  food.’ 

I was  thus  led  to  ascertain  present  duty,  and  to  cast  myself 
on  the  care  of  Providence  for  the  future. 

44  And  now,  reflecting  on  the  time  that  has  passed  since 
June  1742,  I find  that  by  grace  I have  been  enabled  to  go 
on  from  day  to  day  in  the  way  of  duty,  endeavouring  to 
live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly.  I find  now  that  my 
chief  end  is  to  live  and  act  for  the  glory  of  God,  studying 
in  all  things  conformity  to  his  will.  Though  obliged  to 
attend  to  my  worldly  calling,  so  as  to  provide,  under  God,  for 
myself  and  family,  my  thoughts  run  out  more  after  Christ, 
and  in  meditations  on  his  word,  than  in  any  other  way." 

In  this  case,  there  is  much  less  feeling,  and  fewer 


140 


ALEXANDER  ROGER. 


changes,  than  in  some  of  the  preceding,  and  yet  is  there 
apparently  much  evidence  of  a real  change  of  heart ; thus 
showing  us,  it  may  he,  how  much  there  is  of  constitutional 
dissimilarities,  and  also  of  the  sovereignty  of  God  in  dealing 
differently  with  different  individuals. 

6.  Alexander  Roger,  a youth  about  fifteen  years  of  age : — 

44  I obtained  the  usual  education  when  a hoy,  and  some- 
times, hut  not  regularly,  I said  my  prayers,  and  I usually 
went  to  church  on  Sabbath ; hut  I had  no  proper  under- 
standing of  what  I addressed  to  God  in  prayer,  or  of  what 
I read  in  my  Bible,  or  heard  from  the  minister.  It  was 
my  great  loss  that,  after  leaving  school,  I was  for  some  time 
in  a family  where  I saw  nothing  of  the  fear  of  God.  All 
this  while  I restrained  prayer  before  God ; I never,  while 
here,  so  much  as  bowed  my  knee  in  prayer.  I forgot  my 
questions  [^catechism],  and  seldom  turned  over  a leaf  of  my 
Bible.  I even  lost  my  reading,  and  cared  for  nothing  hut 
madness  and  folly;  never  reflecting  that  there  was  a God,  a 
heaven,  and  a hell,  or  that  I had  a soul  to  he  saved.  Having 
none  to  reprove  me,  I went  into  habits  of  profane  swearing, 
of  Sabbath-breaking,  and  of  lying.  On  leaving  that  family, 
I returned  home ; and  being  under  restraint,  these  gross 
habits  were  discontinued.  I began  to  recover  my  reading 
and  questions,  and  I made  a fashion  of  praying.  Soon 
after  this  I was  sent  to  learn  a trade,  hut  I minded  no- 
thing hut  vanity.  I was  given  to  card-playing  and  other 
games  ; and  I continued  in  this  hardened  state  till  it  pleased 
the  Lord  to  show  me  my  sin  and  danger. 

44  Some  time  in  the  month  of  June  1742,  I went  to  Cam- 
buslang,  to  hear  Mr.  Whitefield  preach.  It  was  on  a 
Thursday,  and  his  text  was,  4 The  harvest  is  past,  the 
summer  is  ended,  and  we  are  not  saved,'  &c.  (Jer.  lxxx. 
20-22.)  Among  other  things,  he  said,  4 Many  come  out 
of  curiosity  to  hear  a poor  child  preach;  and  the  same 
curiosity  would  induce  them  to  go  to  the  devil.’  I thought 
myself  described.  I had  come  from  no  better  motive ; and 
I felt  that  without  repentance  I could  not  be  saved.  Again, 


ALEXANDER  ROGER. 


141 


addressing  God,  he  said,  4 0 Lord,  how  many  trample 
thy  blood  under  their  feet,  and  despise  thee  and  thy 
gospel  !*  This  led  me  to  such  a view  of  my  sins,  that 
I saw  nothing  but  the  wrath  of  God  awaiting  me,  and  hell 
ready  to  receive  me.  I was  also  deeply  pierced  with  a 
sense  of  the  evil  of  those  sins  which  I could  remember,  as 
well  as  of  the  corruption  and  depravity  of  my  nature  and  of 
my  unbelief  in  not  receiving  but  rejecting  Christ,  when 
ottered  to  me  in  the  gospel.  My  sense  of  guilt  was  such, 
that  I would  have  thought  it  no  injustice,  on  God's  part, 
had  he  cast  me  immediately  into  hell.  I even  felt  as  if  I 
were  sinking  into  the  bottomless  pit,  and  that  all  around 
were  ready  to  drag  me  down  to  it.  My  feelings  of  repen- 
tance were  deep  and  sincere,  and  above  all,  on  account  of 
the  dishonour  which  I had  done  to  God. 

u Under  these  awful  feelings,  I at  last  fainted  away;  and 
on  recovering,  I was  enabled  to  return  with  a comrade  to 
my  father’s  house,  which  was  about  five  miles  distant. 
After  reaching  home,  I attempted  to  pray,  but  I could 
not;  my  heart  was  hard  as  a stone.  I had  no  peace  at 
home,  and  therefore  I returned  to  Cambuslang,  and  was  in 
time  to  hear  Mr.  McCulloch’s  first  sermon  that  day.  His 
text  was,  ‘He  hath  filled  the  hungry  with  good  things;  and 
the  rich  he  hath  sent  empty  away/  (Luke  i.  53.)  When 
these  words  were  first  read,  they  came  home  to  my  mind 
with  powrer.  I thought  much  upon  them ; so  much  as  to 
lose  a considerable  part  of  the  sermon.  My  convictions  of 
sin  wrere  so  strong,  that  I was  at  last  forced  to  cry,  neverthe- 
less that  I did  all  I could  to  restrain  myself.  I continued 
in  this  state  during  all  the  time  of  that  sermon,  during  the 
interval,  and  also  during  the  second  sermon. 

44  When  it  was  over,  I wTent  alone  to  pray,  pleading  with 
God  for  grace  to  close  with  him  on  his  own  terms;  andwdiile 
so  engaged,  that  saying  of  Scripture  was  powerfully  borne  in 
upon  my  mind,  4 Fear  thou  not;  for  I am  with  thee:  be  not 
dismayed;  for  I am  thy  God:  I will  strengthen  thee ; yea, 
I will  help  thee;  yea,  I will  uphold  thee  with  the  right 


142 


ELIZABETH  DYKES. 


hand  of  my  righteousness/  (Isa.  xli.  10.)  I was  now 
filled  with  joy  and  wonder  at  what  God  had  done;  and 
thus  I was  enabled,  with  all  my  heart,  to  believe  on  Christ — 
to  receive  and  embrace  him  as  offered  in  the  gospel.  And 
ever  since,  the  power  of  sin  and  of  unbelief  has  been  broken. 
1 have  not  been  without  doubts  of  my  interest  in  Christ, 
and  I have  in  consequence  been  shy  to  speak  of  myself,  lest 
matters  should  turn  out  otherwise  than  I hope;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  I have  great  pleasure,  and  even  delight,  in 
religious  duties,  and  make  conscience  of  what  I owe  to- 
wards both  God  and  man.  I am  accustomed  to  keep  a 
strict  watch  over  my  heart,  and  over  my  words  and  actions. 
One  of  the  greatest  crosses  I have  to  do  with,  is  to  be  found 
in  the  vanity  and  sinfulness  of  my  heart  and  life.  My 
chief  desires  are  after  God  and  Christ,  heaven  and  holi- 
ness ; and  I am  often  looking  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.” 

The  subject  of  this  notice  was  but  young,  and  the  pe- 
riod reviewed  was  perhaps  too  short  to  warrant  any  very 
settled  opinion  concerning  him.  Still  the  account  which 
is  here  given  is  simple  and  scriptural,  and  may  be  useful, 
especially  to  the  young.  They  ought  to  feel  and  know  that 
their  season  of  life  is,  more  than  any  other,  an  acceptable 
time  and  day  of  salvation. 

7.  Elizabeth  Dykes,  a young  woman,  about  sixteen 
years  of  age: — 

“ By  the  time  I was  six  years  of  age  I could  read  the 
Bible,  having  been  taught  by  my  father.  I got  the  catechism 
by  heart,  and  am  still  able  to  repeat  it.  My  parents  set  be- 
fore me  a good  example,  and  exhorted  me  to  pray  to  God. 
Sometimes  I did  so,  and  sometimes  not ; but  I had  no  de- 
light in  the  duty,  and  I knew  not  the  God  to  whom  I prayed. 
The  Lord  kept  me  from  gross  sins,  such  as  appear  before 
men ; only  I sometimes  fell  into  saying  what  was  untrue, 
and  the  profanation  of  the  Lord’s-day.  I usually  attended 
the  house  of  God;  but  it  was  only  to  see  and  be  seen.  I 
read  my  Bible  when  bidden  by  my  parents ; but  I had  far 
rather  read  story-books  and  ballads.  On  hearing  sermons, 


ELIZABETH  DYKES. 


143 


I sometimes  thought  that  the  gospel  condemned  me,  and 
that  if  I died  in  that  state,  I must  perish ; still  these  things 
were  not  laid  to  heart. 

44  The  first  time  that  I felt  the  word  coming  home  to  me 
with  power,  was  when  hearing  Mr.  McCulloch,  on  the  last 
Sabbath  of  February  1742.  His  text  was,  4 lie  that  be- 
lieveth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not  be- 
lieved in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God/ 
(John  iii.  18.)  I heard  wdtli  much  attention,  and  was 
made  very  uneasy.  I went  to  go  into  the  manse  with 
others,  but  could  not  get  in,  there  being  many  about  the 
door.  A man  whom  I knew  not  said  to  those  standing 
about,  4 Why  stand  ye  idle?  ye  have  need  to  be  looking  into 
the  state  of  your  hearts/  I felt  this  to  be  true,  and  parti- 
cularly applicable  to  myself.  And  such  was  my  state  of 
feeling,  that  I wras  unable  to  stand;  I was  carried  into  the 
manse,  and  remained  with  others  in  the  hall,  in  great  dis- 
tress, all  night.  My  sins  so  pressed  upon  me,  that  I could 
not  believe  it  possible  that  God  w7ould  ever  pardon  my  sins, 
they  seemed  to  me  to  be  so  great.  I saw  nothing  before 
me  but  hell -fire;  and  yet  my  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin  wras 
even  greater  than  my  apprehensions  of  coming  wrath.  My 
lying,  my  Sabbath-breaking,  and  other  sins,  were  brought 
fresh  to  my  remembrance,  and  they  lay  upon  my  con- 
science with  a.  weight  which  I could  not  remove.  But  I 
had  not  yet  got  such  a sight  of  my  heart  sins,  and  of  the 
corruption  of  my  nature,  as  I afterwards  got.  Towards 
morning,  that  word  came  home  to  me  with  powder,  4 I will 
heal  their  backsliding,  I will  love  them  freely ; for  mine 
anger  is  turned  awTayfrom  him/  (Hos.  xiv.  4.)  It  seemed 
as  if  the  Lord  had  spoken  to  me  in  these  words;  my 
trouble  ceased,  and  for  a time  I had  peace.  But  during 
Monday  night,  I awroke  in  great  horror,  crying  out  that 
I was  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bond  of  iniquity. 
My  former  comforts  seemed  now  a delusion.  I bethought 
me  that  many  precious  sayings  of  the  word  might  cast 
up  and  be  snatched  at  by  those  to  whom  they  did  not 


144 


ELIZABETH  DYKES. 


belong,  and  I concluded  that  it  had  been  so  with  me. 
This  brought  me  into  great  distress,  which  continued  for 
about  eight  days.  Next  Sabbath  I had  to  remain  at  home, 
so  as  to  allow  another  member  of  the  family  to  get  to  the 
kirk.  When  engaged  in  secret  prayer,  that  word  came 
into  my  heart,  ‘ O thou  afflicted,  tossed  with  tempest,  and 
not  comforted,  behold,  I will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair 
colours,  and  lay  thy  foundations  with  sapphires/  &c.  (Isa. 
liv.  11-13.)  I was  made  to  say,  ‘Will  the  Lord,  indeed, 
cleanse  so  vile  and  filthy  a heart  as  mine,  and  make  it  con- 
formable to  his  will?'  I also  found  in  my  heart  love  to 
God,  and  I was  made  to  rejoice  in  him,  and  to  praise  him 
with  my  whole  heart.  My  great  wish  was,  if  I could  get 
all  the  world  to  praise  him. 

“ But  this  frame  did  not  continue  very  long.  I fell 
into  a state  of  doubting,  and  I was  unable  to  take  that 
promise  to  myself.  Many  of  the  threatenings  of  God’s 
Word  came  now  to  my  mind,  such  as  that,  c It  is  a fearful 
thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God/  and  that, 
c Our  God  is  a consuming  fire/  I was  accordingly 
brought  into  great  distress.  It  seemed  as  if  all  the  threat- 
enings of  God’s  Word  were  against  me.  I saw  that  there 
was  no  relief  for  me,  but  in  Christ;  and  yet  I seemed  to  be 
so  great  a sinner,  as  that  I could  scarcely  venture  to  plead 
for  his  mercy.  While  in  this  distress,  and  not  knowing 
what  to  do,  that  word  came  home  to  me  with  powder, 
6 Great  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee/ 
(Isa.  xii.  6.)  This  made  me  praise  God  for  his  love  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  so  for  a time  I rested  in  the  promise.  But 
I had  not,  as  yet,  seen  my  need  of  Christ  in  all  his  offices; 
I was,  however,  led  so  to  see  the  corruption  of  my  nature, 
as  to  know  that  there  was  nothing  in  me  but  sin  that 
I could  call  my  own,  and  that  I was  otherwise  so  im- 
perfect, as  to  be  unlike  God.  I experienced  within  me 
as  the  conflict  of  two  armies — the  flesh  lusting  against 
the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh.  Even  when 
my  lusts  had  been  subdued,  so  as  to  seem  trampled  under 


ELIZABETH  DYKES. 


145 


foot,  I found  them  stealing  upon  me  anew,  and  drawing  away 
my  heart  from  God  and  from  matters  of  duty.  I saw  in 
this  how  unwilling  1 was  to  come  to  Christ,  how  backward 
I was  in  duty,  and  how  much  inclined  to  sin;  yea,  how 
obstinate  I was  in  sin.  I saw  my  great  need  of  Christ  as 
my  prophet,  my  priest,  and  my  king,  and  I felt  willing  to 
accept  of  him  in  all  of  these  offices.  But  on  searching 
more  deeply,  I found  a secret  unwillingness  in  my  heart 
to  submit  to  him  in  all  things  as  my  king . I discovered 
in  me  a lusting  after  things  sinful,  which  I had  not  power 
to  overcome.  I saw  in  this  my  own  insufficiency,  and  be- 
came persuaded  that  unless  the  Lord  would  undertake  for 
me,  and  work  all  my  works  in  me  and  for  me,  I would 
not  succeed  in  doing  anything  to  purpose.  My  heart 
seemed  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked, 
averse  to  all  good,  and  bent  upon  all  evil.  I was,  how- 
ever, enabled  to  look  to  the  Lord  in  faith,  for  grace 
to  conquer  these  strong  lusts  and  corruptions;  and  as  I 
thus  looked  to  him,  I became  stronger,  and  they  became 
weaker. 

“ As  the  Barony  communion  was  approaching,  I resolved 
to  attend,  to  see  whether  the  Lord  would  be  pleased  to 
strengthen  my  weak  faith,  and  to  give  me  more  love  to 
himself.  I was  sensible  of  much  want  of  preparation,  hut 
I went  forward  relying  on  Christ.  When  at  the  table,  that 
word  came  with  power:  4 And  Mary  hath  chosen  that  good 
part  which  shall  not  he  taken  away  from  her.*  (Luke  xi. 
42.)  I did  not  then  know  that  there  was  such  a passage 
in  the  Bible;  and  it  came  into  my  mind  as  if  it  had  been 
said,  4 Thou  .hast  that  good  part  which  shall  not  be  taken 
away  from  thee;'  and  this  was  accompanied  with  so  much 
sweetness  and  power,  that  I could  not  enough  praise  God. 
After  this,  I took  great  pleasure  in  prayer  and  other  duties, 
finding  all  His  ways  to  be  pleasantness  and  peace.  On  the 
observance  of  the  first  sacrament  at  Cambuslang,  I had  a 
great  desire  to  communicate,  but  I was  overtaken  with 
damps  and  doubtings,  and  was  left  under  great  deadness. 


146 


ELIZABETH  DYKES. 


When  the  second  sacrament  came  round,  I could  not  find 
any  one  to  whom  I could  apply  for  a token,  and  so  I sat 
on  the  brae  and  heard  the  tables  served.  My  longings 
were  great  to  be  there,  and  my  love  to  Christ  was  so  strong 
that  I would  have  given  all  I had  for  a token.  I even 
desired  to  be  dissolved,  that  I might  be  with  Christ  in 
heaven.  I went  home  with  much  of  this  frame  upon  me, 
and  had  for  a time  great  sweetness  in  reading  the  Word  of 
God,  and  in  secret  prayer. 

44  Some  time  after,  I again  fell  into  great  doubts  and  fears, 
concluding  that  all  my  experiences  were  only  of  the  common 
operations  of  the  Spirit,  and  that  the  promises  which  1 had 
got,  as  I believed,  from  God,  had  been  suggested  by  the 
wicked  one.  Many  evil  thoughts  now  came  into  my  mind, 
and  I was  made  to  fear  that  I had  committed  the  unpar- 
donable sin,  and  was  in  a state  altogether  desperate. 
These  thoughts  came  into  my  mind  so  thickly  and  quickly, 
as  to  seem  so  many  fiery  darts;  and  so  it  continued  for 
about  a month.  Intending  to  communicate  in  Glasgow7, 
in  October  1742,  I was  by  myself  on  the  morning  of  the 
communion  Sabbath,  and  these  words  of  the  prophet  came 
into  my  mind  as  of  God:  4 1 will  pour  w7ater  upon  him 
that  is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground/  (Isa.  xliv. 
3.)  I had  been  thirsting  greatly  for  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  and  this  word  encouraged  me.  I wrent  to  the  table 
under  a deep  sense  of  my  need  of  Christ,  and  I got  such  a 
view  of  his  fulness  as  enabled  me  to  go  forward  resting  on 
his  righteousness  and  strength ; and  such  was  my  love  to- 
wards him,  that  I could  have  laid  dowm  my  life  for  his 
sake.  Y et  after  a few  days,  when  my  feelings  of  love  were 
somewhat  abated,  I examined  myself,  and  found  that 
I could  not  then  willingly  lay  dowTn  my  life  for  him.  This 
grieved  me,  and  I earnestly  sought  after  greater  perfect- 
ness, reckoning  myself  a wretched  creature  to  be  so  fickle 
and  so  easily  led  away  from  the  love  of  Christ.  I examined 
myself  as  to  that  faith  which  worketh  by  love,  and  some- 
times I was  satisfied  as  to  my  having  such  a faith.  I 


ELIZABETH  DYKES. 


14? 


found  that  I could  pray  from  the  heart  for  my  friends,  my 
relations,  and  even  my  enemies ; and  I would  have  been 
glad  of  an  opportunity  to  serve  them.  At  other  times  I 
was  much  bowed  down,  not  finding  such  liberty  in  prayer. 
When  I had  any  difference  with  my  neighbours  or  fellow- 
servants,  I found  a rising  of  corruption  in  my  heart  against 
them;  yet,  on  looking  to  Christ  as  meek  and  lowly,  the 
force  of  my  corruption  has  been  broken,  and  I have  prayed 
most  heartily  for  them. 

“ Preparatory  to  the  next  communion  occasion  in  Glas- 
gow, I began  to  read  concerning  the  sufferings  of  Christ, 
and  was  made  to  see  in  our  sins  the  procuring  cause,  and 
in.  his  sufferings  love  to  poor  perishing  sinners.  I was 
made  greatly  to  wonder  at  the  love  of  Christ  in  that  he 
suffered  for  his  very  enemies.  When  I went  to  the  table, 
I could  not  get  even  a sense  of  a broken  heart,  nor  one 
blink  of  Christ’s  countenance;  but  hearing  Mr,  Bain  of 
Killearn  preaching  from  these  words,  c Whatsoever  is  bom 
of  God  overcometh  the  world ; and  this  is  the  victory  that 
overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith’  (1  John  v.  4),  I 
began  to  revive,  hoping  through  Christ  to  overcome  the 
world. 

“ And  now  to  this  day  I cannot  say  that  I have  an 
assurance  of  heaven,  but  I desire  to  lay  the  stress  of  my 
salvation  on  Christ  and  his  righteousness.  I find  great  de- 
light in  reading  and  hearing  the  Word,  and  in  prayer;  and 
with  these,  in  every  other  known  duty,  I am  well  pleased 
with  the  commands  of  God,  and  with  his  disposal  of  all 
my  ways  in  providence.  But  I dare  not  say  much,  for  fear 
of  presumption,  and  lest  my  heart  should  deceive  me.  I 
endeavour,  from  time  to  time,  to  pray  for  the  public  inte- 
rests of  real  religion.  I dare  not  say  that  I pray  for  these 
on  all  occasions  with  that  earnestness  wherewith  I ought; 
but  I wish  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  that  Christ’s  king- 
dom of  grace  may  be  advanced,  and  that  multitudes  of  souls 
may  be  brought  to  him  in  a day  of  his  power.” 

The  feeling,  probably,  produced  on  the  mind  of  the 


148 


JAMES  KIRKLAND. 


reader  on  finishing  with  this  case,  will  he,  44 1 had  rather 
that  her  progress  had  been  more  steady.”  True,  and  this 
will  often  be  felt  in  reading:  other  cases,  and  even  the  diaries 
of  persons  more  highly  privileged:  and  what  we  should 
learn  from  this  is,  to  be  humble,  to  study  practically  to  live 
near  God — to  get  at  God  himself  as  the  soul’s  portion,  and 
not  to  live  by  his  gifts.  It  is  natural  for  us,  so  long  as  we  are 
but  imperfectly  sanctified,  to  live  by  sense,  even  in  spiritual 
things,  rather  than  by  faith.  But  in  proportion  as  we  are 
enabled  to  hear  and  to  feel  that  we  have  our  portion  in 
God,  our  peace  will  be  as  a river,  full  and  overflowing. 

8.  James  Kirkland,  a young  man,  aged  twenty-four: — 

44  In  youth,  I got  into  a way  of  praying  evening  and 
morning,  and  I attended  church  every  Lord’s-day.  But 
many  a time  I wofully  neglected  to  read  my  Bible  in 
secret.  Sometimes  I had  of  myself  a desire  to  pray,  and 
aiso  to  go  to  church ; but  usually  I went  the  accustomed 
round  of  duty  without  any  sense  of  the  authority  of  God. 
When  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  I was  admitted  to  the 
Lord’s  table;  at  which  time  I thought  that  I got  some 
views  of  the  folly  of  my  former  ways,  and  that  I had  some- 
what of  a concern  upon  my  spirit  in  the  observance  both  of 
public  and  private  duties.  I had  also  some  resolutions  to 
amend  my  life.  These  resolutions  I had  both  before  and 
after  the  sacrament.  When  at  sermon,  I sometimes  gave 
attention  to  what  I heard,  but  more  generally  my  heart 
wandered  after  vanities. 

44  After  this,  for  four  or  five  years,  I in  many  things 
followed  the  multitude  to  do  evil.  During  this  time  I went 
on  heedlessly,  without  concern  about  a future  state,  either 
of  happiness  or  of  misery.  During  all  my  former  attendance 
on  duties,  I cannot  say  that  I ever  felt  the  Word  of  God 
come  home  to  me  with  power,  so  as  to  make  me  see  and 
feel  my  lost  condition.  I was  never  led  to  feel  my  condi- 
tion till  about  the  middle  of  April  1742;  and  it  was  thus: 

• — I had  gone  to  Cambuslang,  where  I heard  Mr.  M4Cul- 
loch  preach  from  these  words,  4 There  are  some  of  you  that 


JAMES  KIItKLAND. 


149 


believe  not/  (John  vi.  64.)  Even  then  I heard  as  I had 
been  accustomed  to  do;  hut  on  the  Tuesday  following, 
while  thinking  on  that  text,  I was  made  to  see  and  judge 
concerning  myself,  that  I did  not  yet  believe.  1 continued 
under  this  impression  for  the  space  of  nine  days,  during 
which  my  distress  was  so  great  that  I was  rendered  unfit 
for  work,  and  would  scarcely  venture  to  eat,  thinking  I had 
no  right  to  the  comforts  of  life,  and  feeling  as  if  the  wrath 
of  God  would  overtake  me  when  receiving  what  I did  not 
deserve. 

“ On  the  tenth  day,  acting  under  the  advice  of  a friend, 
I tried  to  give  myself  to  God  after  the  manner  of  a cove- 
nant; but  I had  little  satisfaction.  Sometimes  that  Scrip- 
ture came  into  my  mind,  6 I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth 
out  thy  transgressions  for  mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  re- 
member thy  sins/  (Isa.  xliii.  25.)  But  for  the  time,  it  had 
no  effect.  After  a little,  however,  the  latter  part  of  the 
verse  came  back  upon  me  with  power,  namely,  that  God 
would  pardon  for  his  own  name’s  sake.  Under  this  im- 
pression, I was  made  solidly  to  trust  and  believe  that  he 
would  be  as  good  as  his  word,  and  that  he  would  do  it  for 
his  own  name’s  sake.  And  from  this  time,  I got  a hum- 
bling sense  of  my  sins,  both  in  heart  and  in  life,  particularly 
of  that  great  sin,  the  sin  of  unbelief,  and  of  distrusting 
God.  I experienced  much  inward  grief  on  account  of  in- 
ward corruption,  the  fruit  of  original  sm.  I was  thus 
made  to  own  that  God  would  have  been  just  though  he 
had  cast  me  into  hell  on  account  of  my  sins — on  account 
of  the  dishonour  I had  done  to  him  by  my  sins.  In  this 
condition  I was  much  engaged  in  prayer  to  God ; and  I 
found  great  liberty,  so  that  I was  enabled  to  pour  forth 
tears  of  sorrow,  such  as  I knew  not  before.  Sometimes  I 
thought  that  I could  not  contain  myself,  or  refrain  from 
crying  out.  But  though  with  difficulty,  I was  enabled  to 
restrain  myself,  smothering  my  grief  in  my  own  breast. 
About  this  time,  I was  frequently  made  to  think  that  all 
I had  found,  either  from  the  Word  of  God  or  in  prayer, 


150 


JAMES  KIRKLAND. 


was  a delusion.  At  other  times,  I was  led  to  fear  that, 
after  all,  I could  not  obtain  mercy,  seeing  I had  been  so 
guilty  before  God.  New  convictions  shot  up  in  my  mind, 
sometimes  when  hearing  the  Word,  and  sometimes  when 
engaged  in  other  duties.  And  this  is  a short  account  of 
what  befell  me  till  I went  back  to  Cambuslang. 

“ On  returning,  I heard  Mr.  M ‘Knight  of  Irvine  preach 
from  these  words:  6 Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus/  (John  xii. 
21.)  In  opening  this  subject,  he  showed  what  it  was  to 
see  Jesus,  and  who  were  the  persons  that  would  see  Jesus; 
and  he  gave  it  as  a mark  of  such,  that  they  had  a hungering 
and  thirsting  after  Christ  and  his  righteousness.  This 
enabled  me  to  try  myself,  and  I found  that  this  was  the 
very  exercise  of  my  soul;  and  from  this  conviction  I found 
relief.  That  same  night,  however,  when  in  the  hall  at  the 
exercise,  a cloud  returned  and  settled  upon  me  again.  It 
seemed  now  as  if  I had  no  right  to  Christ  or  the  promises ; 
and  in  this  condition  I returned  home  much  distressed,  and 
continued  so  for  some  time. 

“ On  returning,  I heard  Mr.  M‘Culloch  preach  from  these 
words:  c O Jerusalem,  wash  thine  heart  from  wickedness, 
that  thou  mayest  be  saved ; how  long  shall  thy  vain  thoughts 
lodge  within  thee?”  (Jer.  iv.  14.)  In  hearing  this  sermon, 
I all  the  while  felt  as  if  I were  the  person  pointed  at  as 
not  cleansed  from  wickedness.  My  case  seemed  now  to  be 
blacker  and  more  dismal  than  ever.  All  I heard  led  me 
so  to  conclude  concerning  myself.  On  Monday  morning, 
I again  heard  Mr.  M4Culloch  preaching  from  that  other 
text,  c Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous 
sins/  (Ps.  xix.  13.)  In  opening  his  subject,  he  showed 
what  presumptuous  sins  were,  under  seven  or  eight  heads. 
In  examining  myself,  I thought  that  I was  guilty  of  them 
all,  whereupon  I fell  into  such  distress  that  I had  to  retire 
to  a dyke- side,  and  there  allow  myself  to  burst  into  tears, 
for  I was  no  longer  able  to  restrain  myself.  Afterwards,  I 
was  -enabled  to  reason  with  myself  as  to  the  cause  of  this 
distress  after,  as  I believed,  true  comfort,  and  I came  to 


R.  SHEARER. 


151 


the  conclusion,  that  it  was  because  I had  not  received  the 
promises  as  yea  and  amen  in  Christ ; and  so  I was  enabled 
to  receive  Christ  anew,  and  to  see  him  in  the  promises. 

“ And  now,  as  to  the  ordinary  bent  of  my  heart,  it  is  that 
I may,  through  grace,  be  kept  at  the  utmost  distance  from 
sin,  and  in  the  practice  of  holiness.  I hate  every  false  and 
wicked  way — the  sins  of  my  heart  as  well  as  those  of  my 
life.  I now  feel,  as  I think,  some  delighting  in  the  law  of 
the  Lord,  after  the  inner  man;  and  I have  pleasure  in  the 
duties  of  religion,  particularly  in  hearing  the  Word  and  in 
prayer.  I have,  as  I trust,  though  in  much  weakness, 
closed  with  Christ  on  his  own  terms;  and  seeing  my  need, 
I have  received  him  in  all  his  offices.  And  I think  that  I 
can  say  of  God  in  Christ,  that  he  is  my  chief  good  and 
satisfying  portion,  and  that  there  is  none  in  heaven  or  in 
earth  that  I desire  besides  him.” 

This  case  is  short  and  simple.  It  is  also  remarkably 
free  from  anything  like  attaching  undue  importance  to  the 
suggestions  of  particular  passages.  But  there  is  in  it  enough 
to  remind  us  of  that  important  saying,  “Not  as  though  I 
had  already  attained,  either  were  already  perfect.”  (Phil, 
iii.  12.)  The  mere  theorist  is  ever  stumbling  at  the  return- 
ing unbelief  and  distressful  condition  of  persons  said  to  be 
in  Christ.  He  might  as  well  wonder  at  the  wailing  of 
the  infant,  and  at  the  tottering  steps  of  the  child.  “We 
live  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight ; ” and  yet,  earth-born  as  we 
all  are,  we  naturally  seek  rather  to  walk  by  sight;  and 
hence  our  falls.  Losing  hold  of  what  faith  sees,  we  are 
again  among  the  pots,  and  can  with  difficulty  regain  our 
loss. 

9.  R.  Shearer,  a young  man,  aged  nineteen: — 

1 “ I never  used  to  pray  in  secret  before  last  year,  except  when, 
after  committing  some  sin  which  smote  my  conscience, 
I was  for  a time  driven  to  it.  I w^ent  to  church,  but  more 
from  curiosity  and  custom  than  anything  else.  When  there, 
I would  sometimes  have  been  glad  to  be  out  again,  that  I 
might  saunter  about.  Till  of  late,  I was  also  much  given 


152 


R.  SHEARER. 


to  cursing  and  swearing,  and  to  the  profanation  of  the 
Lord’s-day.  In  thinking  of  death,  I fancied  that  I would 
then  weep  and  cry  to  God,  and  that  he  would  hear  me — 
that  I would  send  for  a minister  or  elder,  who  would  pray 
for  me;  and  so  I concluded  that  I would  in  this  way  get  to 
heaven. 

“ When  the  awakening  broke  out  at  Cambuslang,  I went 
thither  and  heard  a sermon.  It  was  about  the  middle  of 
March  1742.  Nothing  struck  me  at  the  time;  but  about 
two  or  three  days  after,  these  words  came  into  my  mind, 

1 Blessed  are  they  which  do  hunger  and  thirst  after  right- 
eousness; for  they  shall  be  filled/  (Matt.  v.  6.)  They  had 
merely  the  effect  of  leading  me  to  think,  and  causing  me  to 
be  more  diligent  in  duty.  I now  attended  at  Cambuslang 
every  Sabbath,  and  usually  every  Thursday,  for  about  a 
quarter  of  a year.  Still  it  was  without  any  sensible  effect. 
I was,  however,  impressed,  in  observing  so  many  flock  to 
Christ,  and  I had  some  fear  that  I might  be  left  to  perish. 
On  a particular  occasion,  Mr.  McCulloch  preached  on  these 
words,  c He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life: 
and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life;  but 
the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him/  (John  iii.  36.)  In 
speaking  from  this  text,  he  said  that  the  wrath  of  God 
rested  on  as  many  as  believed  not,  wherever  they  went  or 
whatever  they  did.  This  seemed  to  me  to  be  very  awful, 
and  for  a lono*  time  I felt  as  if  this  were  mv  own  case. 

O * 

On  the  20th  of  June,  when  hearing  Mr.  Whitefield,  the 
same  words  struck  me  as  if  the  sword  of  divine  justice  was 
hanging  over  me,  and  even  hell  seemed  less  than  my  iniqui- 
ties deserved.  My  feelings  were  such,  that  I was  forced 
to  cry  out  among  the  people  on  the  brae.  After  sermon, 
I was  assisted  into  the  manse,  thinking  every  moment  that 
I was  going  to  hell.  Instructions  were  given  me,  but  I 
was  unable  to  attend  to  them.  I was  removed  to  another 
apartment,  that  I might  engage  in  secret  prayer.  I tried 
to  do  so,  and  would  fain  have  sung  these  lines : — 


It.  SHEARER. 


153 


‘ How  long  wilt  thou  forget  me,  Lord? 

Shall  it  for  ever  be? 

O how  long  shall  it  be  that  thou 

Wilt  hide  thy  face  from  me?*  (Ps.  xiii.  1.) 

But  I was  unable  even  to  speak,  and  scarcely  to  draw 
breath. 

“ I was  again  assisted  to  go  where  I might  hear  sermon ; 
but  my  distress  continued.  I remained  all  night,  a good 
part  of  which,  as  well  as  the  morning,  I spent  in  prayer. 
These  words  were  very  terrible  to  me,  ‘ Because  I have 
called,  and  ye  refused;  I have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and 
no  man  regarded;  but  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  coun- 
sel, and  would  none  of  my  reproof:  I also  will  laugh  at 
your  calamity ; I will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh.’ 
(Prov.  i.  24-26.)  I felt  that  it  would  be  just  for  God  so 
to  deal  with  me.  My  sins  stared  me  in  the  face.  I saw 
them  as  dishonouring  to  him,  especially  my  profaning  the 
Lord’s-day  and  his  holy  name,  and  my  going  up  and  down 
drinking  and  playing  at  cards,  &c.  Still  I felt  that  I 
could  not  mourn  as  it  became  me.  My  heart  was  still 
hard. 

“ Soon  after  I joined  a meeting  of  young  lads  for  prayer. 
We  met  twice  a- week.  I had  still  a very  deep  sense  of 
my  guilt  and  unworthiness,  wondering  that  the  Lord  should 
have  spared  me  so  long,  and  not  cut  me  down  as  a cum- 
berer  of  the  ground.  And  when  I observed  persons  going 
on  in  sin,  I have  been  made  to  tremble ; my  very  hair  stand- 
ing on  end.  At  Calder  sacrament,  I heard  Mr.  Warden 
of  Campsie  preach  from  Tsa.  xlv.  22 ; and  during  the 
sermon  these  words  came  forcibly  into  my  mind,  c But 
unto  you  that  fear  my  name  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
arise  with  healing  in  his  wings;  and  ye  shall  go  forth,  and 
grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall.”  (Mai.  iv.  2.)  This  filled  me 
with  much  joy,  only  I feared  that  I was  still  mixing  up  my  own 
righteousness  with  that  of  Christ’s;  and  I was  all  the  while 
praying  for  sanctifying  grace.  On  looking  forward  to  the 
first  sacrament  at  Cambuslang,  where  I commonly  sat,  that 

L 


154 


R.  SHEARER. 


other  passage  proved  useful,  ; Not  unto  us,  0 Lord,  not 
unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory,  for  thy  mercy,  and 
for  thy  truth’s  sake/  (Ps.  cxv.  1.)  It  showed  me  more 
of  my  need  to  disown  all  but  what  is  of  God.  I went  to 
the  communion,  but  profited  little.  On  hearing  that  there 
was  to  be  another  soon,  I was  much  engaged  in  preparation, 
and  had  joys  and  sorrows.  During  the  Saturday  night, 
which  I spent  in  a yard  near  where  the  tent  stood,  I had 
great  comfort  and  confidence  in  God,  and  in  the  unchange- 
ableness of  his  love.  My  own  heart  was  so  filled  with  love 
and  joy,  that  I found  it  easy  to  give  and  devote  myself  en- 
tirely to  God,  as  reconciled  to  me  in  Christ ; resolving,  by 
his  grace,  to  follow  him  through  good  and  bad  report. 
On  Sabbath  morning  I was  much  engaged  pleading  for 
his  presence  that  day  as  a conquering  Saviour.  When 
I went  to  the  table,  I besought  him  for  a broken  heart; 
and  on  receiving  the  elements,  I had  a lively  and  affecting 
sense  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  brought  before  me.  It 
seemed  as  if  I had  seen  him  evidently  crucified,  hanging,  and 
bleeding,  and  dying  on  the  cross;  while  my  sins  seemed 
saying,  with  the  Jews,  6 Crucify  him,  crucify  him/  This 
sight  melted  me  into  tears.  They  ran  down  my  cheeks.  I 
could  have  wished  they  had  been  tears  of  blood,  so  heinous 
was  I in  my  own  sight.  Tender  expressions  of  Christ’s 
love  now  rushed  into  my  soul ; and  as  one  of  the  pas  - 
sages  was  immediately  repeated  by  the  minister  serving  the 
table  (Mr.  Bonar  of  Torphichen)  I was  so  affected,  that  I 
thought  I could  have  died  for  Christ.  On  retiring  from 
the  table,  I went  to  the  place  where  I had  been  the  night 
before,  and  gave  God  thanks  for  his  great  goodness,  and 
devoted  myself  anew  to  his  service ; resolving,  with  J oshua, 
that  whatever  others  might  do,  I would  serve  the  Lord. 
This  frame  continued  with  me  a considerable  time ; and 
ever  since  I can  say,  that  though  in  the  former  part  of  my 
life  I could  see  no  beauty  in  Christ,  he  is  now  to  me  al- 
together lovely,  and  I find  my  heart  going  out  after  him 
above  all  things.  On  going  out  to  the  fields,  that  I might 


R.  SHEARER. 


155 


engage  in  secret  prayer,  I have  had  lively  discoveries  made 
to  me  of  the  glory  of  God  as  shining  forth  in  all  around 
me — in  the  heavens,  the  earth,  and  the  creatures  about  me ; 
and  this  caused  me  the  more  to  wonder  at  the  goodness 
and  love  of  God  to  such  a sinner  as  I was.  Sometimes  I 
have  had  great  enlargement  of  heart  in  prayer  and  other 
devotional  duties.  Sometimes,  at  my  work,  I have  got  such 
manifestations  of  the  love  of  God  to  my  soul,  that  I could 
have  wished,  had  it  been  the  divine  will,  to  be  removed 
out  of  this  wilderness  of  sin  and  vanity,  that  I might  for 
ever  praise  God ; and  yet  I was  at  the  same  time  willing  to 
wait  his  pleasure  and  to  do  his  will.  And  on  observing 
others  going  on  in  sin,  I wondered  at  God’s  patience ; and 
this  made  me  wonder  more  at  his  distinguishing  love  to- 
wards me,  while  others  w^ere  left. 

44  After  this  I had  many  changes.  Returning  from 
Cambuslang,  I was  grievously  tempted  of  the  wicked  one. 
I retired  to  some  distance  from  those  who  were  with  me, 
and  made  my  appeal  to  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  that  God 
was  my  only  portion,  my  chief  good;  and  my  faith  grew 
stronger.  As  I arose  from  prayer,  that  word  came  sweetly 
home  to  me,  4 My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee;  for  my 
strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness/  (2  Cor.  xii.  9.) 
My  soul  was  made  again  to  rejoice.  I laid  hold  anew  on 
the  grace  and  strength  of  Jesus  Christ.  I wras  enabled  to 
renew  my  acceptance  of  him,  as  regarded  his  cross  as  well 
as  his  crown ; and  my  feelings  of  love  and  gratitude  were 
such  as  I thought  eternity  alone  would  suffice  to  declare. 
This  state  of  feeling  continued  also  for  a considerable  time. 

44  On  another  occasion,  after  being  led  to  fear  that  I was 
after  all  a hypocrite,  the  Lord  helped  me  thus:  I had  been 
on  Sabbath  morning  pleading  writh  God  that  he  wrould 
enable  his  servant  to  speak  from  the  heart  to  the  heart,  and 
that  many  might  be  awakened,  as  in  a day  of  power,  and 
that  I might  myself  find  a blessing ; and  so  I went  to  one 
of  the  churches.  The  minister  (Dr.  Gillies  of  the  College 
Church,  Glasgow),  in  his  sermon,  quoting  from  Scripture, 


156 


R.  SHEARER. 


said,  c And  ye  will  not  come  to  me  that  ye  might  have  life/ 
(John  vi.  40.)  This  seemed  a call  to  me,  and  I was  en- 
abled to  renew  my  acceptance  of  Christ.  My  whole  soul 
seemed  to  say,  4 Behold,  I come  to  thee ; for  thou  art  the 
Lord  my  God/  This  was  a gracious  visit  from  God,  for 
now  it  was  light,  whereas  before  I was  in  darkness.  And 
this  sweet  temper  of  mind  remained  with  me  again  for  an- 
other period. 

“ In  February  1743,  I again  fell  into  heaviness.  Some- 
times Satan  seemed  to  restrain  me  from  secret  prayer.  I 
persevered,  but  heavily,  till  the  Lord  again  delivered  me 
by  his  word.  On  the  2 2d  of  that  month,  I heard  Mr. 
McCulloch  lecture  on  these  words,  ‘ I will  betroth  thee 
unto  me  for  ever;  yea,  I will  betroth  thee  in  righteousness, 
and  in  judgment,  and  in  loving-kindness,  and  in  mercies; 
I will  even  betroth  thee  unto  me  in  faithfulness;  and  thou 
shaltknow  the  Lord/  (Hos.  ii.  19,  20.)  He  observed,  that 
the  expression  6 1 will  betroth  thee/  was  said  three  times. 
This  seemed  as  if  sent  the  more  to  confirm  me.  My  faith  be- 
came strong,  my  love  warm,  and  mine  eyes  gushed  with  the 
tears  of  godly  sorrow  on  account  of  my  sins.  All  things 
seemed  truly  but  as  dross  for  the  excellency  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord.  And  this  frame  continues 
with  me  to  the  present  day. 

“ I have  often  accepted  of  Christ  as  my  Redeemer  in  all 
his  offices — as  my  prophet,  my  priest,  and  my  king.  I now 
find  the  Bible  to  be  as  a new  book.  Every  word  of  it  is 
precious.  I can  scarcely  be  without  it,  wherever  I go.  I 
long  for  the  Sabbath  and  other  occasions  of  hearing  the 
gospel,  that  I may  receive  another  message  from  God,  and 
love  him  the  more  for  it.  I have  much  pleasure  in  meet- 
ings for  prayer,  and  am  allowed  much  intercourse  with 
God  wdien  so  engaged.  Besides  stated  prayer,  from  day  to 
day,  I am  often  sending  up  my  petitions  to  God  when  at 
my  work,  and  wherever  I am.” 

God  alone  can  truly  judge  of  mens  hearts,  yet  is  there 
much  in  this  case  to  show  how  very  different  the  feelings 


R.  BARCLAY. 


157 


of  a man  made  thoroughly  alive  to  divine  things  are, 
from  the  dreamy  observance  of  religious  duties,  common 
among  professors.  And  there  is  great  truth  in  the  remark, 
that  he  who  would  ever  live  on  the  borders  of  Satan’s  king- 
dom, ought  not  to  expect  the  sunshine  of  Immanuel’s  land. 
An  apostle  speaks  of  even  the  righteous  being  “ scarcely 
saved;”  and  this,  we  fear,  is  a very  numerous  class.  It  is 
our  feeling,  that  much  has  been  forgiven,  which  will  cause 
us  to  love  much.  And  this  does  not  so  much  turn  on  our 
having  had  comparatively  much  to  he  forgiven,  as  on  our 
knowing  that  our  sins,  which  are  in  every  case  great,  have 
been  forgiven. 

10.  R.  Barclay,  an  unmarried  man,  about  twenty  years 
of  age: — 

“ When  a child,  I was  put  to  secret  prayer  by  my 
parents,  and  so  long  as  they  lived  I kept  up  the  form. 
Their  example  and  precept  urged  me,  hut  I had  no  delight 
in  the  exercise.  I perhaps  fell  asleep  in  the  middle  of  it, 
and  when  I aivoke  I scarcely  knew  what  I had  been  say- 
ing. After  the  death  of  my  parents,  natural  conscience 
urged  me  for  a time  to  observe  prayer,  hut  irregularly  and 
formally.  In  like  manner,  I went,  though  not  regularly, 
to  church ; hut  the  service  seemed  wearisome.  When  the 
lecture  was  over,  I counted  the  task  as  half  done,  wishing 
the  remaining  half  to  be  done  also;  and  sometimes  I had 
scarce  patience  to  wait  during  the  last  prayer.  One  day, 
I went  out  at  the  first  prayer,  hut  my  conscience  checked  me, 
as  profaning  the  Lord’s-day;  yet  was  I afraid  of  returning, 
lest  I should  be  noticed,  and  challenged  by  the  elders. 

“ As  regarded  my  conduct  otherwise,  I spent  much  of 
my  time  going  up  and  down  with  my  companions,  en- 
gaging in  vain  and  sinful  amusements,  such  as  playing  at 
cards,  drinking,  and  sometimes  cursing  and  swearing.  On 
going  to  England,  I took  still  greater  liberties,  having  none 
to  reprove  me.  One  time,  while  there,  I heard  Mr.  White- 
field  preach;  but  I was  not  benefited.  After  returning,  I 
went  not  to  any  church  for  some  time,  making  the  want  of 


158 


R.  BARCLAY. 


suitable  dress  my  excuse.  I came  to  Cambuslang,  that  I 
might  not  be  so  much  noticed  by  my  acquaintances,  and 
because  I heard  that  many  were  getting  good.  The  first 
day  I came,  Mr.  McCulloch  preached  from  that  text:  c He 
that  believeth  not  God,  hath  made  him  a liar;  because  he 
believeth  not  the  record  that  God  gave  of  his  Son/  (1  John 
v.  10.)  He  spoke  much  of  the  heinous  nature  of  unbelief ; 
but  I could  not  at  first  see  how  what  he  said  could  apply 
to  me,  as  I reckoned  that  my  belief  had  all  along  been 
sound  enough.  But  he  proceeded  to  show,  that  if  it  gives 
great  offence  to  an  equal  to  be  so  treated,  still  more  must 
it  to  a superior;  still  more  to  one  who,  as  a king,  is  over 
all ; and  greatly  more  to  Him  who  is  King  of  kings,  infi- 
nitely exalted  above  all  creatures ; and  that  every  unbeliever, 
in  every  act  of  unbelief,  gave  God  the  lie.  These  state- 
ments did  not  strike  me  at  the  time,  but  they  stuck  by  me, 
and  had  afterwards  more  effect  upon  me  than  all  the  ser- 
mons I had  ever  heard.  That  day  fortnight,  I again  heard 
him  from  that  saying  in  Luke  xi.  21,  22:  6 When  a strong 
man  armed  keepeth  his  palace,  his  goods  are  in  peace ; but 
when  a stronger  than  he  shall  come  upon  him,  and  over- 
come him,  he  taketh  from  him  all  his  armour  wherein  he 
trusted,  and  divideth  his  spoils/  The  palace,  he  said,  meant 
the  heart  of  man;  the  strong  man,  the  devil;  his  goods,  the 
lusts  of  the  heart;  the  armour,  those  shifts,  excuses,  and 
pretences,  which  sinners,  under  Satans  teaching,  use  as 
covers  and  fences  to  their  sins.  By  these,  he  added,  they 
lull  themselves  asleep  in  carnal  security.  Such  are  inade- 
quate views  of  sin,  a fancy  that  they  are  in  the  way  to 
heaven;  or  if  awakened  to  concern,  the  belief  that  they  are 
able  to  repent  at  pleasure,  and  that  they  have  yet  time 
enough.  All  this,  and  more  to  the  same  purpose,  seemed 
to  describe  my  very  case.  I found  myself,  my  practice,  my 
thoughts,  and  the  workings  of  my  heart,  so  exactly  brought 
out,  that  it  seemed  as  if  no  man  could  have  so  laid  open 
my  state.  It  seemed  to  be  God  himself  convincing  me  and 
speaking  to  my  heart.  Now  I saw  that  I was  indeed  an 


R.  BARCLAY. 


159 


unbeliever,  which  I could  hardly  admit  on  hearing  the  same 
minister  before.  I was  now  reduced  to  great  confusion 
and  distress. 

“ Next  day,  when  sitting  at  my  work,  the  sermon  on 
unbelief,  and  that  on  the  devil  keeping  the  palace  of  the 
heart,  came  fresh  into  my  mind,  and  my  convictions  and 
distress  grew  to  a great  height.  I seemed  to  be  a rebel 
against  God,  and  the  most  guilty  of  men;  so  that  I was 
made  to  wonder  at  the  patience  of  God  in  bearing  so  long 
with  me,  and  that  the  earth  did  not  now  open  her  mouth 
and  swallow  me  up  where  I sat.  Thinking  of  myself  as  in 
league  with  Satan,  and  carrying  on  a war  against  God,  I 
was  overwhelmed  with  the  thought,  that  he  could  at  any 
moment  turn  the  whole  world  into  ashes,  and,  by  his  frown 
merely,  send  me  to  hell.  I became  persuaded  that  I as 
really  deserved  hell-fire  as  I did  the  penny  which  I had 
earned  by  my  labours.  Yet  the  Lord  kept  me  from  sinking 
into  a state  of  despair.  I still  thought  it  possible  that  God 
might  show  me  mercy.  Satan,  indeed,  tempted  me  to 
conclude,  that  though  there  was  mercy  for  others,  I had 
gone  beyond  it.  I was  thrown  into  such  a state,  that  I 
felt  I could  not  submit  my  case,  as  some  others  had  done, 
to  ministers;  but  I was  advised  by  an  acquaintance  to  read 
my  Shorter  Catechism.  I did  so,  and  saw  things  in  a new 
light.  On  coming  to  the  question,  c What  is  effectual 
calling?’  I was  led  to  see  that  the  Spirit  of  God  was 
dealing  with  me,  convincing  me  of  my  sin  and  misery; 
and  I was  made  to  hope  that  he  would,  in  due  time,  en- 
lighten my  mind  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  also  renew 
my  will,  and  so  bring  me  to  embrace  and  close  with  Christ 
in  his  gospel  offer.  And  reading  on  till  I came  to  that 
other  question,  c What  is  repentance  unto  life?’  I found 
what  had  till  now  been  a dead  letter,  become  a thing  of 
life.  Seeing,  from  the  answer  to  this  question,  the  mercy  of 
God  in  Christ  to  penitent  sinners,  I wished  to  feel  more  of 
my  sins,  and  to  be  delivered  from  them;  and  resolved,  through 
divine  grace,  on  a course  of  new  obedience. 


160 


R.  BARCLAY. 


“ From  that  clay  till  now,  nothing  could  ever  satisfy  me 
hut  a God  reconciled  in  Christ.  And  this  was  my  experi- 
ence before  hearing  that  Christ  would,  as  the  prophet  of 
the  church,  reveal  to  me  the  will  of  God  savingly,  and  so 
direct  his  ministers  as  to  speak  to  my  case.  My  thirst  after 
gospel  ordinances  became  now  very  great;  and  in  returning 
from  these,  I usually  sought  to  walk  with  such  as  had 
good  memories,  and  were  able  to  repeat  a good  deal  of 
what  they  heard.  I joined  a prayer-meeting,  and  was 
always  happy  to  hear  from  any  what  God  had  done  for 
their  souls;  and  when  he  was  pleased  to  bless  their  sayings 
to  me,  I was  made  to  rejoice. 

“ After  being  satisfied  of  Christ’s  ability  to  save  me,  I 
was  some  time  before  I got  over  the  difficulty  of  believing 
that  he  was  willing;  hut  after  a time,  I saw  that  he  was  more 
willing  than  I was,  and  that,  had  it  not  been  so,  he  would 
never  have  convinced  me  of  my  sin,  and  drawn  my  heart  to 
him,  so  as  to  make  me  also  willing.  I got  also  a deep  sense 
of  my  own  inability,  and  became  much  afraid  of  mixing  up 
my  own  righteousness,  which  I saw  to  be  as  filthy  rags, 
with  that  of  Christ’s.  I now  forsook  my  former  com- 
panions and  sinful  practices,  and  found  the  very  thoughts 
of  them  bitter  to  my  soul. 

“ Hearing  that  the  sacrament  was  to  be  dispensed  at 
Cambuslang,  I was  glad,  and  attempted  some  preparation, 
with  the  view  of  communicating.  On  the  fast-day  and 
Saturday  I was  much  taken  up  with  self-examination  and 
prayer.  On  Sabbath  I went  to  the  table  wTith  holy  fear, 
earnestly  pleading  for  some  token  of  the  divine  favour,  with  a 
proper  sense  of  my  own  unworthiness ; and  the  Lord  was  very 
gracious.  My  soul  was  filled  with  great  joy  and  thankfulness. 
In  the  evening  I heard  Mr.  Whitefield  preach  from  the  text, 
4 Thy  Maker  is  thy  husband ; the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name ; 
and  thy  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel;  The  God  of 
the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called.’  (Isa.  liv.  5.)  He  showed 
how  such  as  had  chosen  Christ  for  their  husband  should 
honour  and  obey  him ; and  he  gave  some  of  the  marks  of 


R.  BARCLAY. 


161 


such  as  were  in  these  circumstances.  I got  liberty  to  apply 
these  to  myself,  and  was  greatly  rejoiced  in  spirit  with  the 
satisfying  evidence  of  this  my  relation  to  Christ.  The  views 
which  1 now  had  of  the  glory  of  his  person,  and  the  sweet- 
ness of  the  relation  in  which  he  thus  stands  to  his  people, 
were  also  satisfying.  Doubts  were  afterwards  cast  into  my 
mind ; yet  from  day  to  day  I found  my  love  increasing,  so 
that  if  jDersecution  had  arisen,  I believed  that  I could  have 
laid  down  my  life  for  Christ’s  sake. 

“ When  I heard  of  a second  communion,  I rejoiced  at 
the  prospect  of  again  sitting  down  at  the  Lord’s  table. 
After  much  prayer  and  other  preparatory  exercises,  as  well 
as  hearing  on  the  fast-day  and  the  Saturday,  I concluded 
that  it  was  my  duty  to  go  forward.  On  sitting  down  at 
the  table,  I was  again  earnestly  pleading;  but  it  was  not  till 
the  second  element  had  reached,  that  I experienced  as  I after- 
wards did.  It  seemed  as  if  with  the  cup  it  had  been  said 
to  me  by  the  Master  himself,  c This  is  my  blood,  shed  for  the 
remission  of  thy  sins/  This  filled  me  with  great  joy ; and  this 
frame  remained  with  me  during  the  remainder  of  the  day. 
Again,  I was  visited  with  doubt  as  if  all  had  been  a delusion, 
but  through  divine  grace  I was  afterwards  enabled  to  believe. 

“ Since  then  I have  had  many  down-castings,  but  also 
many  manifestations  of  God’s  love.  I have  now  great  de- 
light in  reading  my  Bible ; and,  blessed  be  God,  he  enables 
me  to  read  it  with  some  knowledge  of  what  was  before  an 
unrevealed  mystery.  I have  great  pleasure  in  hearing  the 
gospel,  so  that  I can  never  hear  enough.  In  every  sermon 
which  I hear  I find  some  new  and  glad  tidings.  Sin  of 
all  sorts  I abhor,  and  that  not  so  much  because  of  the  shame 
and  pain  which  follow,  as  on  account  of  the  dishonour  it 
does  to  God,  its  crucifying  Christ  afresh,  and  polluting  the 
soul  so  as  to  make  it  loathsome  to  God.  As  regards  heart 
sins,  I feel  as  the  apostle  describes  it,  from  the  20th  verse 
to  the  end  of  the  7th  chapter  of  the  Epistle  of  Paul  to 
the  Romans.  As  for  my  dealings  with  men,  I love  plain- 
ness and  simplicity,  and  would  not,  if  I could,  take  advan- 


162 


ARCHIBALD  BELL. 


tage  of  any.  Sometimes  I have  my  fears  in  looking  forward 
to  death ; at  other  times  I would  be  glad,  were  it  the  Lord's 
will  that  I should  die  instantly ; and  I often  look  and  long 
for  the  blessed  hope  and  glorious  appearing  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  trusting  that  he  will  preserve  mer  to  his  heavenly 
kingdom." 

The  general  similarity  of  the  change  produced  on  diffe  - 
rent individuals  will  lessen  the  interest  felt  by  many.  Their 
appetite  is  for  excitement,  and  this  requires  incident.  But 
as  so  many  specimens  of  a divine  work,  it  is  instructive  to 
observe  that,  with  a diversity  of  circumstances  and  dealings, 
the  change  is  substantially  the  same  in  all.  Men  living  in 
sin,  have  to  be  awakened — men  already  awakened,  have  to 
be  led  to  Jesus.  In  attempting  to  walk,  they  cannot ; in  at- 
tempting to  look,  they  cannot  : and  in  these  circumstances 
they  cry  to  God.  It  is  not  now  a saying  of  their  prayers — 
they  cry  to  God ; and  in  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  the  Spirit 
is  given  to  lead  them  into  truth,  through  a change  of  heart ; 
and  hence  the  fruits  which  now  begin  to  appear. 

11.  Archibald  Bell,  a married  man,  about  thirty-eight 
years  of  age,  and  by  trade  a tailor : — 

“ I was  born  in  the  Highlands  ; and  as  my  parents  lived 
far  from  any  school,  I was  about  fourteen  years  of  age  before 
I was  taught  to  read,  and  even  then  I was  at  my  apprentice- 
ship, and  dependent  on  others  for  the  lessons  I got.  Still  I 
was  enabled  to  read  the  Bible,  and  I got  also  the  Catechism 
by  heart.  I was  put  to  secret  prayer  in  my  childhood,  by  my 
grandfather,  and  I continued  to  observe  it,  but  not  regularly, 
nor  with  good  will.  I also  went  to  church,  thinking  it  right 
to  hear  and  read,  and  my  outward  conduct  was  free  from 
gross  sins;  but  I knew  nothing  of  heart  holiness,  nor  had 
I any  liveliness  in  religious  exercises,  and  I was  wholly 
ignorant  of  that  quickening  power  which  I have  since  ex- 
perienced in  the  gospel.  I w^ould  have  been  glad  to  go 
to  heaven,  but  I had  no  idea  of  what  was  wanting  to  pre- 
pare me  for  it.  And  on  observing  the  miscarriages  of 
some  who  attended  meetings  for  prayer,  I was  apt  to  be- 


ARCHIBALD  BELL. 


163 


lieve  them  insincere,  or  that  religion  was  not  what  it  is 
said  to  be. 

“During  the  winter  of  1742,  I sometimes  heard  Mr. 
Hamilton  of  the  Barony,  and  sometimes  Mr.  Fisher  of 
the  Secession,  and  found  them  both  excellent  gospel  mini- 
sters. On  hearing  of  the  revival  at  Cambuslang,  I 
thought  that  it  must  be  of  God ; hut  before  going  there,  I 
went  to  converse  with  a young  woman  of  my  acquaintance 
who  had  been  there,  and  was  said  to  he  in  great  trouble  of 
mind.  I found  her  at  the  fire-side  holding  her  Bible.  I 
asked  her  how  she  came  to  he  so  troubled.  She  told  me 
that  it  was  by  hearing  Mr.  Nasmith,  a preacher  at  Cam- 
buslang, who  said,  in  the  course  of  his  sermon,  4 He  that 
believeth  not,  is  condemned  already/  On  hearing  these 
words,  she  was  struck  to  the  heart,  and  continued  in  great 
distress  from  that  time  down.  This  surprised  me,  as  I had 
never  felt  in  this  way ; and  so  I left  her,  strongly  suspect- 
ing that  there  was  something  in  religion  of  which  I was 
wholly  ignorant.  And  so  I fell  into  a state  of  great  terror. 
This,  however,  wore  off,  and  although  I went  to  Cambus- 
lang, I experienced  nothing  more  than  ordinary. 

44  Hearing  Mr.  Hamilton  of  the  Barony  preach  one  day 
from  these  words,  4 Blessed  are  they  that  mourn  ; for  they 
shall  be  comforted ' (Matt.  v.  4),  he  remarked  concerning 
the  mourners  who  had  this  promise  of  comfort,  that  per- 
sons might  be  outwardly  blameless,  and  might  go  the  round 
of  duties,  might  have  some  concern  on  account  of  sin, 
might  go  to  the  Lord’s  table  out  of  regard  to  that  ordinance, 
and  yet  be  all  the  while  strangers  to  true  religion.  This 
struck  me  to  the  heart,  for  I saw  that  I was  one  of  the  per- 
sons described.  I sank  down,  and  covered  my  face  with  my 
napkin,  only  I did  not  cry  out.  This  was  in  the  forenoon, 
and  during  the  remainder  of  the  sermon  I continued  in 
great  distress.  But  in  the  afternoon,  I heard  a preacher 
from  the  words,  4 O that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for 
his  goodness  ’ (Ps.  cvii.)  ; showing  for  how  many  natural 
blessings  we  should  praise  God ; which  being  unsuitable  to 


164 


ARCHIBALD  BELL. 


iny  case,  I allowed  my  fears  again  to  be  forgotten,  conclud- 
ing that  they  were  imaginary. 

“Some  time  after  this,  I was  at  Cambuslang,  and  heard 
Mr.  Willison  of  Dundee  speak,  in  his  first  prayer,  of  Christ 
coming  to  draw  up  poor  perishing  sinners  out  of  the  pit 
where  there  was  no  water,  with  the  cords  of  salvation.  I 
was  made  to  weep,  from  mixed  feelings  of  grief  because  of 
my  condition  and  joy  because  of  Christ’s  coming  on  such 
an  errand  of  mercy.  But  this  frame  did  not  continue, 
only  it  left  some  concern  on  my  mind  about  salvation. 

“ On  a Saturday  some  time  after  this,  I was  again  at  Cam- 
buslang; and  after  sermon,  I went  into  the  manse,  where  I 
heard  Robert  Wright,  a good,  grave  man,  pray  among  the  dis- 
tressed in  the  hall.  At  first,  he  seemed  weak  and  straiten- 
ed, but  towards  the  end  he  was  exceedingly  strengthened. 
Several  others  prayed  ; after  which  Mr.  M’Culloch  gave  a 
short  exhortation,  dividing  those  present  into  several  sorts — 
such  as  had  got  convictions,  such  as  had  not,  or  whose 
convictions  had  not  come  to  a proper  issue.  Addressing 
these,  he  showed  the  necessity  of  convictions  in  order  to 
conversion;  and  the  others  the  necessity  of  conversion,  so  as 
to  fit  for  communion  with  God  here  and  afterwards  in 
heaven.  He  remarked,  that  if  it  were  possible  for  an  un- 
converted man  to  reach  the  gate  of  heaven,  and  to  look  in 
at  the  employment  of  the  blessed,  he  would  have  no  wish  to 
enter.  He  would  not  be  able  to  witness  the  glory  of  Christ ; 
and  finding  no  company  like  himself,  and  struck  w ith  the 
fear  of  what  he  saw,  he  wTould  hasten  away.  These  re- 
marks wrere  too  much  for  me.  I had  to  support  myself 
from  falling  by  leaning  on  the  wall,  and  I turned  away  my 
face,  that  my  condition  might  not  be  observed.  I sawr  that 
I was  just  such  a person  as  had  been  described.  I went 
home  in  great  distress,  praying  as  I was  able  by  the  way. 
On  reaching  home,  I knew  not  wrhat  to  do,  but  my  wife 
advised  me  to  go  to  bed.  In  bed,  these  words  of  the 
psalmist,  4 1 muse  on  the  work  of  thy  hands,’  came  into 
my  mind ; and  so  I resolved  to  meditate  on  the  glorious 


ARCHIBALD  BELL. 


165 


work  of  man's  redemption,  and  the  great  love  of  Christ  in 
coming  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  I did  so  for  a 
while,  and  afterwards  fell  asleep.  In  the  morning,  as  I 
awoke,  I blessed  God  in  that  I had  been  spared  to  see  the 
light  of  a new  day,  and  then  I thought  of  it  as  the  morning 
of  the  Lord’s-day,  the  day  of  his  resurrection,  and  that,  if 
risen  with  Christ,  I ought  now  especially  to  seek  those 
things  which  are  above.  After  getting  up,  and  putting  on 
my  clothes,  I went  into  a barn  for  secret  prayer,  and  found 
wonderful  enlargement  I became  so  inflamed  and  ravished 
with  the  love  of  Christ,  that  I thought,  were  it  possible,  I 
would  fly  after  him  on  the  wings  of  the  wind.  I lamented 
my  having  lived  so  long  estranged  from  him.  4 What  a 
wretch,'  said  I,  ‘have  I been,  to  live  contented  with  myself  so 
long,  and  in  so  woful  a condition,  not  knowing  the  sweet- 
ness which  is  to  be  found  in  Christ  and  in  communion 
with  him  ! ' I went  that  same  Sabbath  to  Cambuslansr, 
counting  on  its  proving  a glorious  day  of  the  Son  of  man, 
as  it  proved. 

“ Multitudes  flocked  thither,  and  so  much  did  I feel, 
that  I could,  as  I thought,  have  laid  down  my  very  life  to  help 
any  of  them  to  Christ.  Mr.  McCulloch  preached  from  these 
wrords,  c There  are  some  of  you  that  believe  not.'  (John  vi. 
64.)  From  this  he  showed,  by  many  marks  and  characters, 
who  they  are  that  believe  not.  Every  word  of  that  sermon 
came  with  power  to  my  heart,  as  if  Jesus  had  said  it,  and 
to  me  alone.  In  this  way  I got  a deeper  sense  of  my  un- 
belief, and  was  enabled  to  cast  myself  at  his  feet  for  mercy, 
closing  with  him  on  his  own  terms.  My  heart  became  sen- 
sibly warmed  with  love  to  Christ;  and  so  joyful  was  I,  as 
to  wish  that  all  present  had  shared  my  feelings ; and  I con- 
tinued in  this  state  all  day,  and  on  my  way  home,  resolving 
to  return  the  day  following  to  join  in  the  giving  of  thanks  for 
what  had  been  experienced  by  others  as  well  as  by  me.  And 
on  my  w^ay  back,  I was  again  so  transported  with  the  love 
and  loveliness  of  Christ,  that  I wondered  howr  any  could 
refrain  from  crying  out  in  his  praises.  I scarcely  knew 


166 


ARCHIBALD  BELL. 


where  I was  going  or  what  I was  doing,  so  much  was  I 
filled  with  a sense  of  his  condescending  grace  to  one  so  vile 
and  filthy  with  sin. 

“ Again  I had  comfort  in  what  I had  heard,  and  in  the 
exercises  of  prayer  and  praise;  hut  after  getting  home,  un- 
belief so  prevailed,  that  it  seemed  as  if  I had  been  only 
deceiving  myself.  This  renewed  my  distress,  which  con- 
tinued for  several  days,  till,  in  family  worship,  I was  enabled 
anew  to  lay  hold  on  Christ,  and  all  my  comfort  returned. 

64  On  several  occasions,  the  difficulty  of  living  to  God 
had  nearly  overcome  me;  but  his  promises  proved  my  help. 
When  the  first  communion  at  Cambuslang  came  round,  I 
desired  much  to  give  myself  to  God  at  his  table ; and  after 
many  struggles,  as  well  as  preparation,  I did  communicate, 
and  had  much  comfort.  When  I approached  the  end  of 
the  table,  the  Lord  was  with  me  after  a very  sensible  man- 
ner, and  at  the  table  I had  great  comfort  in  giving  myself 
anew  to  God. 

“ During  the  summer  of  1742, 1 went  very  often  to  Cam- 
buslang; and  although  I had  not  always  sensible  enjoy- 
ment, yet  I cannot  say  that  I ever  left  without  being  en- 
abled to  resolve  anew  to  serve  Christ,  and  in  some  measure 
strengthened  for  his  service. 

“ And  now,  I am  at  a point  with  the  world — I care  not  for 
its  riches  or  profits.  If  I have  food  and  raiment,  I hope 
therewith  to  be  content;  and  these  I hope  the  Lord  will 
not  deny  me.  And  as  to  pleasure,  I wish  that  I may  never 
meet  with  anything  to  draw  away  my  heart  from  things 
spiritual.  I am  not  without  my  fears  that  I may  yet  fall 
away,  or  even  have  doubts  as  to  my  state;  but  that  which 
usually  bears  me  up  under  such  fears,  is  some  word  of  pro- 
mise that  the  Lord  may  have  before  given  me,  or  that  he 
sends  me  in  times  of  darkness.  I hope  that  he  has  made 
with  me  a well-ordered  covenant,  sure  and  everlasting; 
Christ  having  in  it  undertaken  for  his  people,  whether  as  to 
their  debt  or  their  duty.  The  whole  of  this  is  true,  and 
there  is  more  than  I can  express  in  words/' 


JAMES  TENANT. 


167 


In  this  case,  there^is  more  simplicity  and  fewer  changes 
than  in  most.  It  does  not,  however,  spread  over  so  long  a 
period  as  some,  which  may  he  partly  the  cause.  And  there 
is  one  truth,  common  to  most,  hut  very  evident  here,  namely, 
that  “we  live  by  faith,  not  by  sight/’  This  is  a sad 
stumbling-block  to  many.  They  expect  that,  on  obtaining 
light,  it  should  continue  to  shine:  that  on  being  reconciled 
to  God,  his  love  should  ever  be  their  resting-place;  whereas 
these,  as  to  sensible  enjoyment,  are  both  dependent  on  a 
continued  exercise  of  faith.  The  condition  remains  un- 
changed, but  not  the  feeling  of  that  condition ; God's  love  is 
unchangeable,  but  not  man’s  apprehension  of  it;  and  so  it  is 
that  God  is  still  light,  though  the  believer  be  in  darkness. 
How  ? Simply  because  God  is  what  he  is  of  himself,  and 
man  is  what  he  is  of  another,  and  of  that  other  only  through 
faith,  which  is  an  exercise  of  a changeable  and  imperfect 
creature. 

12.  James  Tenant,  an  unmarried  man,  about  twenty 
years  of  age  : — 

“ I was  exhorted  by  my  parents  to  read  my  Bible,  at- 
tend public  ordinances,  and  pray  in  secret ; and  so  long  as 
I was  under  their  care  I kept  up  a form  of  religion ; but 
on  leaving  home,  I neglected  the  advices  I had  received, 
was  led  away  with  light  and  frothy  companions,  and  had 
no  serious  thoughts  till  within  these  twelve  months  past. 
During  my  time  of  neglect,  my  conscience  sometimes  smote 
me;  but  when  the  temptation  returned,  I fell  anew  into 
sin.  On  hearing  about  the  people  that  had  been  awakened 
at  Cambuslang,  I went  to  see  them.  I had  no  desire  to 
hear  on  my  own  account,  but  washed  to  see  the  awakened. 
On  seeing  them,  I was  concerned  on  their  account,  but 
not  on  my  own.  Sometimes,  on  returning  home,  I won- 
dered what  could  affect  them,  seeing  I felt  nothing.  When 
engaged  at  my  work,  it  seemed  as  if  their  cries  were  still 
ringing  in  my  ears,  and  yet  I could  not  help  returning ; and 
as  I again  heard  the  mourning  of  those  awakened,  I still 
wondered  how  it  could  be  so  with  them  and  not  with  me. 


168 


JAMES  TENANT. 


Hearing  Mr.  M4Culloch  preach  from  John  y.  42,  4 But  I 
know  you,  that  ye  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  you/  I 
felt  what  put  me  a little  to  a stand  concerning  myself  and 
others.  But  no  sooner  had  I left  the  place,  than  my  un- 
easiness left  me.  Still,  I had  more  and  more  of  a desire  to 
return,  and  so  I was  constrained  to  go  out  every  Lord’s-day 
and  every  Thursday.  I had  now  some  faint  resolutions  to 
leave  off  frequenting  had  company,  but  these  always  gave 
way  before  the  temptation,  only  I could  not  endure  any 
to  speak  evil  of  the  work  at  Cambuslang;  and  when 
asked  why  I left  the  minister  of  the  place  and  went  there, 
my  answer  was,  4 Because  I had  more  pleasure  in  hearing 
there  than  at  home/ 

44  But  the  first  thing  which  really  awakened  me,  was  a 
lecture  which  I heard  there  towards  the  end  of  June,  from 
Mr.  Whitefield,  on  the  conversion  of  the  Philippian  jailer. 
When  he  was  speaking  of  the  jailer’s  trembling,  and  falling 
down,  and  crying  out,  4 What  shall  I do  to  be  saved  V my 
conscience  began  to  tell  me  that  I was  of  all  others  lost 
and  undone,  unless  the  Lord  should  in  pity  deliver  me.  1 
fell  into  great  terror,  and  trembled  so  much,  that  I had  to 
be  supported  by  those  near.  Still  I had  some  glimmering 
of  hope,  believing  Christ  to  be  able  and  willing  to  save  sin- 
ners, and  so  I began  to  pray.  But  not  having  had  particu- 
lar convictions  of  sin,  I saw  myself  only  in  the  general  in 
a state  of  condemnation.  I was  taken  to  the  manse  to  hear 
the  exhortations  usually  addressed  to  the  awakened ; but  as 
there  was  no  minister  present,  I went  to  my  quarters,  and 
then  to  the  fields,  attempting  to  pray,  and  especially  plead- 
ing for  a more  thorough  sense  of  my  sins  and  true  condi- 
tion. After  being  above  an  hour  so  engaged,  I was  much 
impressed  with  these  words  of  the  Saviour,  4 1 came  not  to 
call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance.’  (Matt.  ix.  13.) 
From  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  I saw  myself  to  be  one  of 
the  chief  of  sinners.  Special  sins,  and  particularly  such  as 
were  gross,  as  profanation  of  the  Lord’s-day,  keeping  loose 
company,  slighting  the  admonitions  of  parents,  and  doing 


JAMES  TENANT. 


169 


nothing  in  church,  but  looking  about  me.  I went  to  my 
quarters,  lay  in  bed  for  an  hour  or  so,  and  again  went  forth 
to  the  fields,  that  I might  give  vent  to  my  feelings  in  plead- 
ing with  God.  My  chief  petition  was,  that  he  would  en- 
able me  to  take  his  yoke  upon  me,  which  I felt  I was 
unable  of  myself  to  do ; and  this  I was  led  to  hope 
would  be  granted. 

“ On  hearing  Mr.  Whitefield  again,  I was  again  seized 
with  great  fear  and  trembling,  because  of  the  wickedness  of 
my  heart  and  life,  and  was  therefore  unable  to  follow  all 
he  said.  After  this  I followed  him  to  Calder  sacra- 
ment. Some  advised  me  to  go  to  the  Lord’s  table,  but  the 
sense  which  I had  of  my  own  unworthiness  prevented  me. 
Still  I attended  all  the  days  as  a hearer,  and  learned  from 
what  I heard  much  of  my  own  sinful  condition.  One  night, 
when  engaged  in  prayer  with  some  others  in  a barn,  I got 
a clear  discovery  of  myself  as  still  in  an  unconverted  state ; 
and  so  strong  and  piercing  were  my  convictions  that  I was 
forced  to  cry  out  before  all  present.  On  the  meeting  be- 
ing dismissed,  I went  alone,  and  besought  God  not  to  allow 
my  convictions  to  abate  till  i should  attain  to  a thorough 
change  of  heart;  that  he  would  graciously  lift  upon  me  the 
light  of  liis  reconciled  countenance,  and  give  me  a continued 
hatred  of  sin.  Now  I wras  enabled  to  lay  hold  on  the  promise, 
4 Fear  thou  not;  for  I am  with  thee:  be  not  dismayed;  for 
I am  thy  God : I will  strengthen  thee ; yea,  I will  help  thee ; 
yea,  I w ill  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteous- 
ness/ (Isa.  xli.  10.)  My  heart  wTas  now  filled  with  the  love 
of  Christ.  I wras  made  to  rejoice  in  him  and  in  all  his  ordi- 
nances, and  to  praise  him  because  he  had  dealt  so  bounti- 
fully with  my  soul.  For  several  days  I could  do  nothing 
but  praise  God  for  what  he  had  done,  and  pray  that  he  might 
perfect  what  I trusted  he  had  begun ; and  ever  since  I have 
felt  a strong  love  to  the  people  of  God,  w hose  company  be- 
fore I used  to  abhor.  I love  also  to  be  in  the  house  of  God, 
sitting  under  the  droppings  of  the  gospel,  whereas  before 
I had  a strong  aversion  to  everything  of  the  kind.  My 
M 


170 


JAMES  TENANT. 


Bible  also  is  now  my  delight,  especially  as  it  unfolds  to  me 
discoveries  of  God’s  love  and  mercy  to  poor  sinners.” 

After  detailing  temptations  which  were  overcome,  and 
liow  God  delivered  him  from  these,  he  goes  on  to  say: — 

44  I resumed  my  visits  to  Cambuslang  on  Sabbath  and  some 
of  the  week-days,  and  on  these  occasions  I have  often  been 
quite  overcome  with  a sense  of  divine  love ; but  sometimes  on 
the  way  I have  been  anew  tempted  with  unbelieving  thoughts, 
as  if  ordinances  were  vain.  After  committing  my  case  to 
God,  I saw  it  to  be  my  duty  to  persevere  in  the  observance 
of  these  and  in  my  course  of  Christian  conversation.  This 
was  impressed  on  me,  particularly  from  these  words,  4 If 
any  man  draw  back,  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in 
him/  (Heb.  x.  38.)  One  good  effect  of  this  trial  was  to 
awaken  in  me  great  fear  of  backsliding,  through  the  neglect 
of  commanded  duty. 

44  When  the  first  communion  was  about  to  be  given  at 
Cambuslang,  I set  about  preparation  for  the  due  observance 
of  that  holy  ordinance,  especially  by  pleading  for  clearer 
views  of  my  state.  On  the  preparation  Sabbath,  I ex- 
perienced, under  Mr.  M4Culloch’s  preaching,  growing  free- 
dom in  giving  myself  to  God,  a deeper  sense  of  my  own 
unworthiness,  and  some  measure  of  confidence  in  looking 
forward  to  the  ordinance.  On  the  fast-day  and  Saturday 
I found  no  sensible  enjoyment,  and  was  in  consequence 
discouraged.  On  Saturday  night  and  Sabbath  morning  I 
was  again  engaged  in  prayer.  During  the  action-sermon  I 
was  sustained,  yet  had  many  fears,  till,  as  Mr.  Whifi  field 
addressed  the  table  at  which  I sat,  these  all  vanished,  and 
the  words  of  the  apostle  rushed  into  my  mind,  4 All  are 
yours,  and  ye  are  Christ’s  and  Christ  is  God’s/  On  re- 
tiring from  the  table,  I engaged  in  secret  prayer,  giving  God 
thanks  for  his  great  goodness,  and  beseeching  him  for 
grace  to  walk  worthy  of  the  profession  I had  now  made  be- 
fore so  many  witnesses.  These  words  came  then  home  with 
power,  4 1 will  have  mercy  on  whom  I will  have  mercy, 
and  I will  have  compassion  on  whom  1 will  have  compas- 


JAMES  TENANT. 


171 


si  oil.’  (Rom.  ix.  15.)  This  was  laying  open  to  me  a strong 
foundation,  which  gave  me  great  comfort ; and  as  I con- 
tinued pleading,  I felt,  with  Joshua,  that  as  for  me  I would 
serve  the  Lord.  Nothing  remarkable  occurred  during  the 
evening  or  Monday  services ; but  when  all  was  over,  I could 
scarcely  settle  at  my  work,  I was  so  taken  up  with  prayers 
and  praises,  and  with  recalling 'what  I had  heard.  1 had 
even  a desire  to  depart,  that  I might  be  free  from  sin,  and 
that  I might  not  again  fall  back  from  my  stedfastness ; and 
this  frame  continued  with  me  very  fully  for  fourteen  days, 
and,  although  in  a less  measure,  it  continued  till  the  time 
of  the  second  communion. 

44  On  hearing  that  there  was  to  be  a second  communion, 
I greatly  rejoiced;  and  when  it  came  round,  I had  much 
peace  and  comfort,  especially  on  Monday  morning,  when 
Mr.  Webster  read  as  his  text  Luke  xii.  32:  4 Fear  not, 

little  flock;  for  it  is  your  Fathers  good  pleasure  to  give  you 
the  kingdom/  After  this,  I returned  to  my  work  and 
ordinary  place  of  residence/" 

From  this  till  the  19th  of  March  1743,  -when  this  ac- 
count was  drawn  up,  he  continued,  subject  to  the  changes 
common  to  the  people  of  God,  to  hold  on  in  his  Christian 
course ; and  the  following  is  the  summary  which  he  gives  of 
his  condition  then: — 

44  Though  now  I am  not  so  sensible  of  the  workings 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  within  me  as  formerly,  yet  through 
grace  I can  say,  with  the  psalmist, — 

4 Nevertheless  continually, 

O Lord,  I am  with  thee;’ 

And  with  the  apostle,  4 My  conversation  is  in  heaven,  from 
whence  I look  for  my  Saviour ;’  and  that  my  chief  desire  is  to 
walk  before  God,  in  righteousness  and  holiness,  all  the  days 
of  my  life/  I have  been  forecasting  sufferings  for  Christ,  and 
sometimes  I think  that  I could  lay  down  my  life  for  him, 
while  at  other  times  I fear  that  I might  draw  back ; and  it  is 
my  prayer  that  the  Lord  would  strengthen  me.  My  feelings 
are  similar  concerning  death.  I have  sometimes  had  a de- 


172 


JAMES  TENANT. 


sire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  while  at  other  times  I 
shrink  from  the  thought ; but  my  hope  is,  that  He  who  is  to 
be  judge  of  all,  is  now  my  advocate  within  the  veil,  and 
that  when  he  appears,  it  will  be  for  my  salvation.  It  is  my 
practice  to  pray  for  the  church  of  God,  that  the  Lord 
would  revive  his  own  work  throughout  the  land  and 
throughout  the  earth ; that  very  many,  who  are  now  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins,  may  be  quickened  and  brought  home 
to  God ; yea,  I hope  that  there  will  be  such  an  ingathering 
of  souls  to  Christ,  as  to  resemble  flocks  of  doves  hastening 
to  their  windows.  And,  in  conclusion,  I long  tp  be  perfect 
in  holiness,  and  to  begin  that  never-ending  song:  c Unto 

him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 
blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  imto  God  and 
his  Father;  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and 
ever.  Amen/  ” 

Let  any  one  now  compare  the  person  so  speaking  of  him- 
self with  what  he  was  only  a twelvemonth  before,  and  then 
say  whether  there  be  not  a practical  reality  in  the  words  of 
Scripture : “ If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a new  creature : 
old  things  are  passed  away;  behold,  all  things  are  become 
new”  (2  Cor.  v.  17);  and  farther,  whether  if  this  be  the 
case,  very  many  are  not  satisfied  with  a condition  which 
will  at  last  deceive  them.  “ Examine  yourselves,  whether 
ye  be  in  the  faith;  prove  your  owtl  selves.  Know  ye  not 
your  own  selves,  how  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  you,  except  ye 
be  reprobates  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5.) 


CHAPTER  XI. 


A SELECTION  OF  CASES  PREPARED  FROM  THE  SECOND 
MANUSCRIPT  VOLUME. 

There  are  upwards  of  sixty  cases  in  this  volume;  and  these 
differ  in  various  particulars  from  those  of  the  other.  They 
had  not  been  revised,  as  those  of  the  other  volume ; most 
of  them  have  been  copied,  but  not  in  the  same  hand,  and 
a few  are  still  in  the  hand- writing  apparently  of  the  parties 
themselves;  they  seem  to  have  been  drawn  up  at  a later 
period — some  in  1744,  and  following  years ; they  are  also 
gathered  from  a wider  extent  of  country.  There  is  an  index, 
from  which  may  he  learned  concerning  them  not  only  the 
names  and  ages,  but  also  the  circumstances  of  the  parties ; 
not  a few  stop  short  in  detailing  grounds  sufficient  lor  any 
conclusive  judgment;  but  many  are  full  and  interesting, 
containing  also  fewer  repetitions  and  passages  unnecessary 
for  publication,  than  those  of  the  other  volume;  and  they 
contain  a greater  variety  of  reference  to  the  work  of  God 
in  different  parishes.  Still,  from  the  general  similarity  of 
circumstances,  it  would  he  tedious  to  rehearse  any  con- 
siderable number,  at  least  fully ; and  to  secure,  as  far  as 
may  he,  the  advantage  of  numbers,  with  the  avoidance  of 
repetition,  we  shall  only  give  a few  pretty  full,  and  a greater 
number  more  briefly. 

1.  Bailie  Weir  of  Hamilton,  a married  man,  aged  fifty, 
and  who  had  received  in  early  life  a classical  education : — 

“ I was  trained  to  a habit  of  prayer  in  early  life,  but  as  I 


174 


BAILIE  WEIR. 


grew  up,  I very  mucli  laid  it  aside,  and  never  engaged  in 
it  with  pleasure.  I attended  church  mainly  from  custom. 

I was  at  the  same  time  fond  of  idle  company,  and  given  to 
card-playing  and  drinking  even  to  excess,  and  so  it  con- 
tinued till  about  two  years  ago.  About  the  end  of  February 
1742,  I went  to  Cambuslang,  and  hearing  Mr.  McCulloch 
speak  of  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  as  dishonouring  to 
God,  and  as  having  pierced  the  Saviour,  I felt  strangely , 
and  got  such  a sense  of  my  own  sins  both  of  heart  and  of 
life,  that  I could  have  torn  myself  to  pieces  in  revenge,  and 
it  was  with  difficulty  that  I could  restrain  myself  from 
crying  out. 

“ The  distress  into  which  I was  now  thrown  continued  for 
about  a month,  during  which  I thought  that  I should  have 
gone  distracted.  I went  to  Cambuslang  every  Sabbath, 
and  often  on  week-days,  and  got  clearer  and  clearer  views 
and  convictions  of  my  sinful  and  lost  condition.  I was 
also  led  more  into  the  exercise,  or  attempted  exercise,  of 
secret  prayer.  But  this  I found  to  be  no  easy  duty.  I 
have  been  half- an- hour  on  my  knees  before  I felt  that 
I could  pray;  and  I was  often  tempted  to  leave  off  my 
fruitless  endeavours  to  turn  to  God>  as  if  it  were  now  too 
late.  Still  I could  not  but  return  anew  to  Cambuslang ; 
and  about  the  end  of  the  month,  when  turning  to  a passage 
cited,  that  other  passage  cast  up,  c Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye 
saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth ; for  1 am  Gdd,  and  there  is 
none  else/  (Isa.  xlv.  22.)  O what  a greedy  grasp  did  my 
soul  make  at  Christ  on  reading  these  words ! My  mind  be- 
came calm.  In  about  an  hour,  these  other  words  gave  me 
farther  help:  c The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son,  cleanseth 
from  all  sin/  (1  John  i.  7.)  I came  straight  home,  went  to 
my  closet,  and  found  freer  access  than  ever  I had  before;  and 
as  I rose  from  my  knees,  I saw  in  Christ  a perfect  suffi- 
ciency to  deliver  and  cleanse  me  from  all  sin,  and  in  the 
excellences  of  his  person  so  much  of  willingness  and 
grace,  that  I could  not  but  love  him  and  give  myself  wholly 
to  him  in  love. 


MRS.  WHIR. 


175 


“ And  ever  since  that  time  all  things  seem  new.  Hearing 
God's  word  preached,  praying  and  praising  God  in  my 
family,  and  engaging  in  my  own  secret  exercises  of  devo- 
tion, give  me  real  delight.  In  hearing  and  communicating 
I see  more  and  more  of  Christ's  beauty  and  desirableness, 
more  and  more  of  his  fulness  and  suitableness,  and  my  soul 
is  more  and  more  led  out  into  a hearty  and  rejoicing  ap- 
proval of  God’s  method  of  saving  sinners.  My  soul  now 
trembles  at  the  very  thought  of  sin;  and  when  I look  back 
and  see  what  I was,  the  very  thought  is  terrible;  and  yet  I 
daily  feel  that  I have  about  me  a body  of  sin  and  death, 
which  causes  me  to  heave  many  a heavy  groan,  and  even 
sigh  to  be  delivered  by  a removal  from  the  body.  My  de- 
lights are  now  in  converse,  not  with  the  men  of  the  world, 
but  the  people  of  God.  My  love  of  the  world  has  given 
way  to  the  preciousness  of  Christ;  so  that  the  things  which 
were  formerly  matters  of  ambition  and  sinful  indulgence, 
are  nowr  tasteless.  What  I now  covet  is  the  righteousness 
of  Christ;  to  whose  name  be  all  the  glory!" 

2.  Mrs.  Weir,  also  of  Hamilton,  apparently  The  wife  of 
the  above,  and  aged  twenty-eight: — 

44  I had  the  advantage  of  being  brought  up  religiously, 
was  taught  to  pray  twice  a-day,  and  this  I have  continued 
all  along,  sometimes  enjoying  in  this  and  other  religious 
exercises  much  sweetness.  The  consciousness  of  this  and 
the  general  consistency  of  my  conduct  induced  the  belief 
that  I was  in  a good  wray.  But  in  1740,  1741,  and  for 
some  years  before,  I fell  off,  became  worldly-minded,  irre- 
gular in  my  attendance  on  divine  ordinances,  and  listless  in 
their  observance.  Hearing  of  the  awakening  in  Cambus- 
lang,  I went  thither  in  March,  and  heard  Mr.  McCulloch 
preach  from  2 Cor.  v.  17:  4 If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is 
a new  creature:  old  things  are  passed  away;  behold,  all 
things  are  become  new.'  From  the  mark  given,  I con- 
cluded that  I had  not  undergone  this  change;  and  the  fol- 
lowing words  quoted  in  the  sermon  went  to  my  heart:  c If 
any  man  draw  back,  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in 


176 


MRS.  WEIR. 


him.*  (Heb.  x.  38.)  I continued  in  deep  distress  for  many 
days.  One  morning,  on  retiring  to  secret  prayer,  I found 
that  I could  pray  none — my  heart  was  hard  as  a stone;  and 
yet  Satan  and  my  own  deceitful  imaginations  would  have 
it  that  all  was  nevertheless  well.  I knew  this  to  be  un- 
true, and  taking  up  my  Bible  and  beseeching  God  to  direct 
me  and  give  me  light,  I turned  to  the  60th  chapter  of 
Isaiah,  with  which  I was  much  affected,  particularly  the 
19tli  and  20th  verses.  God  so  blessed  to  me  the  reading 
of  this  chapter,  that  I felt  the  load  taken  off,  the  love  of 
Christ  being  shed  abroad  in  my  heart.  I scarcely  knew 
where  I was,  and  my  tongue  became  as  the  pen  of  a ready 
writer.  But  again  darkness  settled  upon  me — all  seemed 
to  be  but  hypocrisy,  and  I was  again  in  distress. 

“ I went  again  to  Cambuslang.  My  soul  w'as  lifted  up  in 
singing,  as  we  entered,  at  the  beginning  of  the  34th  psalm, 
and  my  joy  wras  increased  when  Mr.  McCulloch  read  as  his 
text  1 John  v.  10:  c He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath 
the  wdtness  in  himself : he  that  believeth  not  God,  hath 
made  him  a liar;  because  he  believeth  not  the  record  that 
God  gave  of  his  Son/  From  this  sermon  I was  made  to 
see  the  great  evil  of  unbelief,  which  I saw'  not  before.  I 
felt  as  if  I could  nowr  cleave  to  Christ  by  a living  faith ; but 
again  after  returning  home,  I was  anew  thrown  back,  which 
sent  me  anew'  to  prayer  and  to  God's  faithful  promises,  till 
I was  even  filled  with  peace  and  joy  in  believing.  Since 
that  time  I have  also  experienced  many  changes — I have 
been  cast  down  and  afterwards  lifted  up,  so  as  to  lay  hold 
on  the  promises,  and  thus  to  essay  a life  of  faith. 

u And  nowr  I can  say — to  the  glory  of  His  grace  be  it  said — 
that  for  upwards  of  two  years,  the  prevailing  and  habitual 
bent  of  my  heart  has  been  on  things  spiritual,  whereas 
aforetime  it  wras  towards  the  things  of  this  world.  For- 
merly, these  wrere  in  my  thoughts  wThen  I wTent  to  bed  and 
wrhen  I awroke;  now  God’s  testimonies  take  their  place. 
My  fellow'ship  is,  to  some  considerable  extent,  truly  with 
the  Father  and  his  Son  Christ  Jesus.  I see  a glory  in 


J0I1N  PARKER. 


177 


Christ,  and  a suitableness  to  all  my  wants,  and  I feel  re- 
signed to  his  will,  so  that  I even  sometimes  desire  to  be 
absent  from  the  body,  that  1 may  be  for  ever  with  the 
Lord.” 

3.  John  Parker,  a wauker  and  dyer  at  Busby,  in  the 
parish  of  Cann unnock,  unmarried,  aged  twenty-  three : — 

“ My  parents  being  both  religiously  disposed,  I had  the 
advantage  of  obtaining  a good  education  and  of  having  a 
proper  example  set  before  me.  I was  trained  to  the  habit 
of  observing  secret  prayer,  and  of  waiting  on  God  in  family 
worship  and  in  the  services  of  the  sanctuary.  These  habits 
I continued  all  along;  and  I was  in  everything  external 
sober,  and  of  becoming  conduct.  I also  recollect  that  many 
of  my  feelings  in  early  life  had  a religious  tendency.  I 
was  accustomed  to  confess  my  sins  before  God  in  prayer; 
I even  bewailed  them  with  many  tears.  When  hearing  the 
word  preached,  I was  sometimes  distressed  because  of  my 
shortcomings,  but  sought  refuge  in  the  saying,  that  no  one 
does  all  he  should  do.  I recollect  being  much  affected 
reading  various  religious  books,  such  as  Willison  on  the 
Sacrament,  the  Life  of  Elizabeth  West,  and  a work  written 
by  Isaac  Ambrose.  One  Sabbath  evening,  when  reading 
in  the  Bible  concerning  Elijah’s  being  carried  up  to  heaven, 
and  Elisha  crying  out,  4 My  father,  my  father!  the  chariot 
of  Israel  and  the  horsemen  thereof’  (2  Kings  ii.  12),  I felt 
my  heart  melt  wonderfully;  but  this  lasted  only  for  the 
night.  On  recovering  from  a dangerous  fever,  my  father 
came  up  to  me  in  the  fields,  and  told  me  that  he  had  been 
much  exercised  on  my  account  during  my  illness,  and  that 
he  had  vowed  to  God,  should  it  be  his  will  to  spare  me,  that 
I should  be  specially  devoted  to  his  service;  and  pro- 
ceeding upon  this,  he  exhorted  me,  with  great  earnestness, 
to  give  myself  to  God  in  Christ.  I felt  much  while  he 
addressed  me.  At  another  time,  I was  listening  to  the 
exhortation  of  a communion  table  in  Carmunnock  church, 
and  I was  so  impressed  that  I almost  cried  out  among 
the  people ; and  yet,  after  all,  my  heart  required  only 


178 


JOHN  PARKER. 


temptation  to  discover  its  folly.  So  much  was  I set  on 
attending  fairs  and  weddings,  and  enjoying  every  kind  of 
merriment,  that  if  my  money  had  been  equal  to  my  wishes, 
I would  have  been  ready  for  every  occasion  which  offered. 
Although  I went  the  round  of  all  outward  duties,  I am 
persuaded  that  this  was  little  else  than  the  fruit  of  educa- 
tion and  example,  and  of  these  acting  oil  a natural  con- 
science. I had  flashes  of  religious  feelings,  yet  they  left  no 
abiding  effects.  In  this  state  I was  admitted  to  the  Lord’s 
table  four  times.  On  the  first  occasion  I was  guilty,  I fear, 
of  presumption ; on  the  other  times  I had  more  searching  of 
heart,  striving  against  corruption,  and  even  meltings  because 
of  sin.  Many  of  these  things  look  very  like  saving  grace, 
yet  am  I now  persuaded  that  1 was  all  the  while  in  an 
unchanged  state. 

44  At  length,  in  September  1741,  I heard  Mr.  Whitefield 
preach  on  a Sabbath  morning,  in  the  High  Church-yard  of 
Glasgow,  from  the  text,  4 They  haye  healed  also  the  hurt 
of  the  daughter  of  my  people  slightly,  saying,  Peace,  peace; 
when  there  is  no  peace.’  (Jer.  vi.  14.)  After  describing 
what  it  is  to  have  a false  peace,  he  said,  1 If  ye  have  no 
other  peace  but  this,  it  is  a peace  of  the  devil’s  making.’ 
These  words  came  home  to  me  with  such  power  as  to  throw 
me  into  a state  of  great  confusion.  I could  scarcely  attend 
to  what  was  farther  said.  I went  into  the  High  Church, 
and  during  the  psalms  I felt,  as  I had  often  done,  a passing 
glow  of  emotion.  In  the  evening,  I heard  Mr.  Whitefield 
again  in  the  church-yard.  His  text  was,  4 The  kingdom  of 
God  is  not  meat  and  drink;  hut  righteousness,  and  peace, 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.’  (Rom.  xiv.  17.)  As  soon  as 
the  text  was  read,  my  heart  began  to  melt;  hut  as  he  went 
on  opening  up  the  subject,  I felt  my  whole  soul  melted,  and 
I became  flooded  with  tears.  I felt  especially  that  he  was 
describing  my  own  case,  when  he  said,  4 Many  of  you  seem 
very  good  and  devout  during  a communion  season,  hut  a little 
after  you  will  be  as  vain  and  carnal  as  ever.’  Now  I felt 
that  I was  still  in  a lost  state,  and  my  heart  was  ever  crying, 


JOHN  PARKER. 


179 


‘ What  shall  I do  to  be  saved?  Hearing  a minister  speak 
of  what  it  was  to  look  upon  Him  whom  we  had  pierced,  and 
to  mourn  for  him  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  son  (Zech. 
xii.  10),  I felt  as  if,  though  all  my  friends  and  relations  had 
but  recently  died,  I could  not  so  mourn  for  them  as  I then 
felt  and  bewailed  my  sins  as  dishonouring  to  God;  yet, 
nevertheless  of  my  deep  and  very  painful  sense  of  the  evil 
of  sin,  I had  no  fear  of  hell  or  of  the  wrath  to  come.  When 
the  preacher  opened  up  to  us  what  the  kingdom  of  God  is, 
his  words  fell  on  my  heart  with  unwonted  power.  When 
exhorting,  towards  the  close  of  his  sermon,  he  bade  such 
as  had  obtained  a sense  of  their  lost  condition,  and  had 
not  yet  found  Christ,  cast  themselves  at  his  feet,  there  to 
perish  if  they  were  to  perish ; knowing  that  there  no  one 
had  ever  yet  been  allowed  to  perish.  I thought  this  to  be 
good  news,  and  was  enabled  heartily  to  comply.  During 
prayer  after  sermon,  I stood  up  and  felt  as  if  my  condition 
had  been  much  altered.  I was  now  calm,  and  my  heart 
seemed  softened.  I went  home,  took  my  dinner  comfort- 
ably, and  then  retired  to  secret  prayer ; and  when  so 
engaged,  X said,  among  other  things,  6 Now,  0 Lord,  X 
renounce  all  righteousness  of  my  own,  and  am  walling  to 
submit  to  the  righteousness  of  Christ/  I was  thus  enabled 
to  close  with  Christ  in  all  his  offices,  and,  under  a deep  sense 
of  my  own  helplessness,  to  look  to  him  and  the  fulness 
which  is  treasured  up  in  him. 

u After  this,  I continued  long  in  a very  desirable  frame, 
enjoying  much  calmness  and  satisfaction  of  mind.  Often, 
when  engaged  at  my  worldly  calling,  my  heart  was  melt- 
ed because  of  sin,  and  much  occupied  with  meditations 
on  things  spiritual.  I also  frequently  retired,  to  be  alone 
with  God  in  prayer.  About  two  weeks  after,  and  on  the 
morning  of  the  Lord’s- day,  I turned  up  my  Bible,  that  I 
might  find  a suitable  passage  for  meditation  while  I was  on 
my  wray  to  church,  and  these  words  occurred  : c That  he 
would  grant  you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  glory,  to  be 
strengthened  with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man/ 


180 


JOHN  PARKER* 


(Eph.  iii.  16.;  They  laid  deep  hold  of  my  mind.  I kept 
meditating  on  them,  and  offering  them  to  God  as  my  prayer 
nearly  all  the  way;  and  I was  so  filled  with  a sense  of 
their  power,  that  my  tears  scarcely  ceased  to  flow  while  I 
walked.  Much  of  this  frame  continued  during  worship, 
especially  in  the  time  of  singing  and  prayer,  so  that  I could 
not  forbear  saying  to  myself,  4 Lord,  I now  feel  thy  blessed 
Spirit  at  work  in  my  soul/  On  one  occasion  I had  been 
praying  much  that  the  Lord  would  direct  his  servant  whom 
I was  to  hear  to  what  "would  prove  useful  to  me.  He 
preached  on  John  iii.  3,  respecting  the  new  birth;  and  as 
he  went  along  explaining  it,  and  fixing  the  marks  of  a true 
change,  my  heart  kept  pace,  and  I was  enabled  to  see  them 
all  in  my  own  soul.  One  night,  after  having  done  with 
my  work,  I took  up  4 Vincent  on  True  Love  to  an  Unseen 
Saviour/  In  reading,  and  praying  over  what  I read,  my 
heart  was  wonderfully  filled  with  a sense  of  divine  love. 
When  going  to  bed,  and  long  after,  passages  expressive  of 
the  love  which  subsists  between  Christ  and  his  people  were 
ever  occurring,  as  fitly  expressing  what  I felt. 

44  In  these  times  I began  to  see  many  things,  which  for- 
merly seemed  indifferent,  now  to  he  sinful ; and  as  I saw 
them  to  he  so,  I left  them  off.  One  of  these  was  the  practice 
of  associating  with  others  between  sermons  in  the  church- 
yard and  elsewhere,  and  thus  spending  the  interval  in  carnal 
conversation.  I now  saw  this  to  he  sinful,  and  a mean  of 
doing  away  with  impressions  which  had  been  made  in 
the  forenoon;  and  from  this  time  forward  I have  avoided 
it,  seeking  rather  to  be  alone  for  meditation  and  prayer. 
Another  was  the  practice  of  singing  foolish  and  sometimes 
not  over- chaste  ballads,  to  while  away  the  time.  I found 
from  experience  the  evil  of  this  and  other  kindred  amuse- 
ments, and  I committed  to  memory  instead  of  these,  portions 
of  the  Psalms,  which  I chanted  over  when  at  my  work, 
and  found  in  them  as  much  delight  as  I had  ever  done  in 
the  other.  Some  of  the  passages  which  greatly  delighted 
me  were,  Ps.  xxvii.  8,  cxix.  60.  It  was  about  this 


JOHN  PARKER. 


1S1 


time,  also,  that  I found  great  sweetness  in  these  words: 
4 For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain/  (Phil.  i.  21.) 
Repeating  these  words  as  my  own,  it  occurred  to  ask  whether 
1 was  entitled  to  speak  of  myself  as  an  apostle  had  done. 
And  I was  led  to  see  that,  though  in  many  things  I had 
no  pretension  to  use  his  language,  yet  in  this  I felt  that  the 
language  was  fitting  to  me  as  well  as  to  him. 

44  Family  worship  became  now  very  delightful.  I can  say, 
to  the  praise  of  sovereign  grace,  that  many  a time  has  my 
soul  been  delighted  when  engaged  in  this  exercise.  One  day 
in  particular,  when  the  master  of  the  family  read  the  4th 
chapter  of  the  First  Epistle  of  John,  it  seemed  to  me  as  if 
it  particularly  suited  my  case.  These  words,  4 God  is  love/ 
met  with  such  a response  in  my  breast  as  to  convince  me 
that,  dwelling  in  love,  I had  my  dwelling  in  God,  and  he 
in  me.  (Verse  16.) 

44  One  day  when  engaged  in  secret  prayer,  I found  great 
enlargement  in  pleading  for  the  revival  of  God’s  work 
throughout  the  land,  and  for  the  spreading  abroad  of  the 
gospel  all  over  the  world;  and  I was  at  the  same  time 
enabled  to  plead  for  my  friends,  companions,  and  acquain- 
tances. A minister,  preaching  on  God’s  answering  his 
people’s  prayer  sometimes  by  fire,  exhorted  us  to  seek  that 
we  might  obtain  answers  by  the  fire  of  divine  love  being 
sent  into  our  hearts.  This  seemed  to  be  my  very  experi- 
ence. On  some  occasions  I had  felt  so  much  of  the  love 
of  God  coming  into  my  soul,  that  I had  also  fancied  my 
very  body  to  be  warmed  thereby.  At  other  times,  however, 
I have  been  straitened  in  prayer,  and  have  been  greatly  cast 
down  because  of  sin  and  indwelling  corruption,  even  to  such 
an  extent  as  to  make  me  cry  out,  4 O wretched  man  that  I 
am ! who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? * 
(Rom.  vii.  24.)  Yet  here  also  the  Lord  was  often  very 
gracious.  On  one  occasion,  these  words  were  to  me  as  a 
healing  balsam:  4 The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  con- 
cerneth  me/  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  8.) 

44  When  the  awakening  broke  out  in  Cambuslang  in 


182 


JOHN  PARKER. 


February  1742,  I was  much  rejoiced,  and  went  thither  to 
hear  sermon  ; and  after  coming  home,  I was  so  much  over- 
joyed, that  I felt  it  difficult  to  restrain  myself,  even  during 
dinner;  and  hastening  to  be  alone,  I had  much  freedom 
in  believing  that  God  would  yet  pour  forth  farther  bless- 
ings. 

44  During  the  spring  and  summer,  my  feelings  were  less 
lively,  yet  I had  abiding  desires  after  what  was  good;  I 
continued  much  in  secret  duty;  I was  helped  to  great  ear- 
nestness in  pleading.  I got  more  and  more  insight  into  the 
hidden  springs  of  my  corruption,  and  I was  enabled  to 
abstain  from  causes  of  sin.  I was  often  in  difficulties,  but 
had  many  gracious  outgates,  and  often  by  means  of  some 
passage  of  Scripture,  particularly  in  the  Psalms,  such  as 
Ps.  xxx.  6-12.  One  time,  while  meditating  on  the 
Redeemers  sufferings,  I got  my  heart  melted  anew,  on 
account  of  sin,  and  because  of  his  great  love  in  dying  for 
poor  sinners,  and  particularly  as  regarded  myself.  In 
March,  I heard  Mr.  McCulloch  at  Cambuslang  on  the  text, 
4 A bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax 
shall  he  not  quench.’  (Isa.  xlii.  3.)  I was  enabled  to  at- 
tend with  great  earnestness;  and  on  returning  home,  what 
I had  heard  Avas  made  useful,  as  Avere  also  various  passages, 
particularly  from  the  54th  chapter  of  Isaiah.  Going  again 
to  Cambuslang  on  a Saturday  evening,  I heard  Mr.  McCul- 
loch  preach  from  that  other  text,  4 The  heart  is  deceitful 
above  all  things,  and  desperately  Avicked;  Avho  can  know 
it?’  (Jer.  xvii.  9.)  This  gave  me  such  a view  of  myself 
as  greatly  to  humble  me.  On  Sabbath,  he  preached  from 
these  words,  4 Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast  led 
captivity  captive:  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men;  yea, 
for  the  rebellious  also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dAvell 
among  them/  (Ps.  lxviii.  18.)  In  speaking  from  these 
Avords,  he  took  occasion  to  speak  of  the  duty  of  restitution ; 
and  so  much  Avas  my  conscience  made  to  feel  alive  to  what- 
ever appeared  duty,  that  I could  not  be  at  peace  till  I went 
to  my  master  and  offered  him  some  small  gratuities  I had 


JOHN  PARKER* 


183 


received  in  his  service,  and  which,  as  now  appeared,  be- 
longed rather  to  him  than  to  me.  He  set  me  right  in  this 
matter,  and  refused  to  accept  of  anything.  Still  I remained 
in  a state  of  comparative  bondage  of  spirit,  till  reading  a 
sermon  of  Mr.  Whitefield’s  on  the  Evidences  of  Regenera- 
tion, I became  again  satisfied,  and  was  so  far  relieved. 
The  126th  psalm  came  also  home  to  my  mind  with  great 
sweetness,  so  that  I sung  it  for  very  joy,  and  my  bonds 
seemed  loosened. 

“ Still  I was  left  to  know  that  I was  yet  in  the  wilder- 
ness, sometimes  making  way  in  my  journey,  and  at  other 
times  turning  back  and  becoming  discouraged  because  of 
the  way.  I was  not  allowed  to  be  ever  singing  the  song  of 
triumph,  as  on  my  escape  from  Egypt.  I went  to  the  com- 
munion at  Cathcart  in  May  1742;  but  both  on  Saturday 
and  during  the  forenoon  sermon,  my  heart  was  very  hard 
and  dead,  and  it  was  little  better  at  the  table,  which  grieved 
me  much.  The  minister  who  addressed  the  table  spoke 
much  concerning  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  then  offered 
this  as  a test,  that  if  any  of  the  communicants  failed  to  be 
affected  with  what  had  been  said,  they  ought  not  to  be  there. 
I was  deeply  humbled  in  being  so  little  affected,  but  felt  as 
if  this  were  going  too  far.  Between  sermons,  I retired  to 
a secret  place,  and  got  some  freedom  in  prayer,  particularly 
in  reading  and  turning  into  a prayer  the  last  section  of  the 
119th  psalm.  The  evening  sermon  was  on  these  words, 
4 O Lord,  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the 
midst  of  the  years  make  know  n ; in  wrath  remember  mercy.’ 
(ITab.  iii.  2.)  In  speaking  from  these  words,  the  preacher 
said,  that  such  as  had  never  been  concerned  about  the  sal- 
vation of  others  had  reason  to  suspect  their  own  state.  This 
was  helpful  to  me,  as  God  had  truly  given  me  a heart  to  be 
often  deeply  concerned  for  others.  On  Monday,  I was  still 
farther  refreshed,  although  my  joy  fell  greatly  short  of  w hat 
it  had  once  been. 

“ I also  attended  the  communion  at  Kilbride  that  sum- 
mer; still  seeking  Him  w7hom  my  soul  loved;  but  I had  no 


184 


JOHN  PARKER. 


sensible  enjoyment  during  any  of  the  days.  Sitting  by  my- 
self before  the  Sabbath  evening  sermon,  I felt  myself  de- 
pressed, and  that  word,  4 No  man  cared  for  my  soul/  came 
home  as  if  descriptive  of  my  state ; but  when  in  danger  of 
giving  way  to  melancholy  feelings,  that  other  word  proved 
a comforter:  4 The  Lord  God  hath  given  me  the  tongue 
of  the  learned,  that  I should  know  how  to  speak  a word 
in  season  to  him  that  is  weary/  (Isa.  1.  4.)  Matters  still 
remained,  however,  in  a very  unsatisfactory  state,  till  the 
Friday  after,  when  I had  become  so  distressed  as,  with 
Jonah,  even  to  desire  death  rather  than  life.  It  was  in  these 
circumstances  that  light  as  of  God  broke  in  upon  my  mind, 
conveying  to  me  with  great  power  these  precious  words  : 
4 But  unto  you  that  fear  my  name,  shall  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness arise  with  healing  in  his  wings;  and  ye  shall  go 
forth  and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall/  (Mai.  iv.  2.) 
After  praying  also  that  the  Lord  would  satisfy  me  with  his 
goodness,  I was  looking  for  some  promise  on  which  I might 
be  enabled  to  lay  hold,  when  that  saying  came  into  my 
heart  with  such  sweetness  and  satisfaction,  that  I could 
desire  no  more:  4 For  the  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the 
hills  be  removed;  but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  from 
thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed, 
saith  the  Lord  that  hath  mercy  on  thee/  (Isa.  liv.  10.)  I 
could  wish  for  nothing  more,  and  therefore  I sang  to  God, 
with  great  delight,  the  whole  of  the  116th  psalm. 

u At  the  first  communion  which  was  held  at  Cambus- 
lang,  in  July  the  same  summer,  I heard  a sermon  from  these 
words : 4 For  unto  us  a child  is  born,  unto  us  a son  is  given; 
and  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder;  and  his 
name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  mighty 
God,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace  (Isa.  ix. 
6);  which  was  brought  home  with  great  delight  to  my  soul. 
On  Monday,  I heard  another  discourse  from  the  saying, 
4 Let  this  mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  J esus/ 
(Phil.  ii.  5.)  On  hearing  the  text,  I said  to  myself,  4 Let 
these  words  be  written  in  a book and  the  discourse  itself 


JOHN  PARKER. 


185 


was  brought  home  to  me  with  so  much  sweetness  and  power, 
that  I besought  the  Lord  to  write  what  I had  heard  on  the 
pages  of  my  heart. 

“ After  this  I was  again  cast  down;  and  in  looking  for- 
ward to  the  second  communion  at  Cambuslang,  I employed 
myself  in  preparatory  exercises.  I recollected,  among  other 
things,  that  in  the  observance  of  the  passover,  the  leaven 
had  to  be  searched  out  with  lighted  candles;  and  I besought 
the  Lord  to  give  me  light  in  searching  my  heart,  for  the 
leaven  of  hypocrisy,  malice,  or  wickedness,  and  to  give  me 
help  in  putting  it  away.  I gave  myself  also,  soul,  body,  and 
spirit,  to  God,  accepting  in  covenant  God  the  Father,  Son, 
ancT  Holy  Ghost,  as  my  God,  in  the  capacity  of  Father, 
Redeemer,  and  Sanctifier;  and  this  also  I subscribed  with 
my  hand  unto  the  Lord.  On  the  fast-day  I heard  a ser- 
mon in  the  afternoon,  from  these  words,  4 He  that  hath 
the  bride  is  the  bridegroom’  (John  iii.  29);  which  proved 
very  refreshing.  On  Sabbath,  after  three  tables  had  been 
served,  I went  to  prayer  alone,  and  had  great  melting  of 
heart,  after  which  I communicated,  but  without  experi- 
encing anything  remarkable.  From  the  table  I went  to  one 
of  the  tents,  where,  hearing  from  these  words,  c He  is 
altogether  lovely’  (Song  v.  16),  every  word  was  to  me 
sweeter  than  honey.  Truly,  Christ  was  to  my  soul  al- 
together lovely. 

“ And  now,  to  draw  to  a close.  Whereas  I had  experi- 
enced some  kind  of  heart-meltings  and  feelings  of  love  to 
God  before  September  1741,  and  thought  myself  sincere 
and  heavenly  while  these  lasted,  yet  they  soon  wore 
away  and  left  me  where  I was,  I cannot  otherwise  judge 
of  them  than  that  they  were  not  the  genuine  fruits  of  a 
saved  state.  And  whereas  ever  since  that  time,  the  habitual 
bent  of  my  heart  has  been  after  communion  with  God,  and 
conformity  to  his  will,  I cannot  otherwise  judge  than  that 
since  that  period  my  state  has  been  different.  I admit 
that  my  heart  often  wanders  and  turns  aside  from  God  in 
duty;  but  he  himself  knows  that  I am  never  happy  in  such 

N 


186 


DANIEL  MCLARTY. 


a state — that  I can  never  rest  satisfied  in  such  a state;  that 
my  poor  heart,  like  the  mariner’s  needle,  when  jogged  to 
either  side,  is  never  at  rest  when  turned  aside  from  Christ, 
till,  trembling  and  disquieted,  it  returns  anew  to  the  point 
of  attraction — a God  reconciled  in  Christ,  in  whose  bosom, 
and  there  only,  it  can  find  rest.  To  God,  therefore,  as  re- 
conciled in  Christ,  he  all  the  glory.  Amen.” 

4.  Daniel  M4Larty,  son  to  Angus  M4Larty,  weaver  in 
the  parish  of  Kirkmichael,  Knapdale,  Argyleshire,  un- 
married, aged  twenty-one,  and  employed  as  a servant  in 
Paisley : — 

4<  When  twelve  years  of  age  I was  put  to  school,  where 
I was  taught  to  read  the  Bible  in  English,  and  the  psalm- 
book in  Gaelic,  which  was  my  mother- tongue.  In  early 
life  I was  given  to  many  vices,  and  I was  not  accustomed 
to  prayer  till  about  five  years  ago,  that  I went  to  reside  in  a 
religious  family.  Observing  the  others  to  retire  daily  to  their 
secret  devotion,  I seemed  to  myself  singular  in  the  neglect 
of  that  duty,  and  so  set  about  it  twice  a-day ; hut  my  devo- 
tion was  merely  in  form.  I also  read  my  Bible,  and  not 
without  some  measure  of  interest ; and  all  along  I went  to 
church,  and  sometimes  resolved  on  following  out  what  I had 
heard;  hut  my  resolutions  were  not  abiding.  At  length,  on 
hearing  of  the  revival  at  Cambuslang,  in  February  1742,  I 
thought  that  I might  get  some  good  by  going,  and  so  I 
went  frequently,  and  was  not  without  concern  in  hearing, 
but  my  desire  was  to  feel  greatly  more.  And  so  when 
hearing  Mr.  Hamilton  of  Douglas  one  day  preaching  from 
Exod.  v.  3,  4 The  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  met  with  us,* 
the  very  words  of  the  text  arrested  and  alarmed  me.  And 
when  I heard  Mr.  M-Culloch  preach  from  that  other  text, 
1 John  v.  10,  and  showing  the  heinous  nature  of  unbelief, 
in  making  4 God  a liar,’  and  declare  that  of  this  very  sin 
all  the  unregenerate  before  him  were  guilty,  I was  im- 
pressed and  astonished.  I admitted,  concerning  myself, 
that  I was  guilty  of  unbelief ; but  that  I was,  in  this, 
guilty  of  a sin  similar  to  that  of  crucifying  Christ, 


DANIEL  M*LARTY. 


1ST 


which  ho  said  was  the  case,  I could  not  see,  and  would  not 
bear  to  have  said  ; and  so  I resolved  to  hear  Mr.  McCulloch 
no  more.  Next  Sabbath  I accordingly  remained  away,  but 
I afterwards  returned,  and  hearing  him  on  that  and  other 
subjects,  came  to  feel  that  I was  verily  guilVv  of  what  he 
described,  and  was  in  consequence  very  uneasy,  but  not 
so  distressed  as  some  others,  or  as  I thought  necessary  to 
a true  sense  of  my  condition.  Still  I continued  to  attend 
at  Cambuslang;  to  pray  not  only  formally,  but  also  in 
my  heart,  and  my  condition  was  seldom  absent  from  my 
mind.  In  these  circumstances,  I often  experienced  con- 
siderable liberty,  and  wras  even  haunted  with  a spirit  of 
self-righteousness.  But  on  hearing  Mr.  Whitefield,  at  the 
sacrament  of  Kilbride,  preach  from  John  ix.  35,  "Dost 
thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  V I found  comfort.  The 
marks  which  he  gave  of  a believing  state,  and  as  warrant- 
ing an  approach  to  the  Lord’s  table,  were  such  as  I thought 
I could  claim,  and  so  I resolved  to  go  forward  at  Cambus- 
lang. But  after  much  thought,  examination  of  my  Bible, 
and  prayer,  and  even  after  I had  got  a token  from  Mr. 
M4Culloch,  I had  much  fear.  On  Friday  before  the  sacra- 
ment, I spent  most  of  the  night  in  secret  prayer  on  Ruther- 
glen  green,  where  I had  some  manifestations  of  the  love 
of  Christ,  and  my  soul  was  filled  with  joy.  This  continued 
on  Saturday  and  on  Sabbath  during  the  action  sermon; 
but  when  at  the  table,  my  very  body  was  made  to  shake, 
and  all  was  darkness  and  confusion.  In  the  evening,  when 
hearing  Mr.  Whitefield  from  Isa.  liv.  5,  4 Thy  Maker  is 
thine  husband,’  my  joy  was  such,  that  I could  scarce! v 
refrain  from  crying  out  that  I was  ready  to  strike  hands 
on  the  bargain;  and  on  meeting  a young  man  of  my  ac- 
quaintance after  sermon,  I threw  my  arms  about  him,  ex- 
claiming, that  Mr.  Whitefield  had  married  my  soul  to 
Christ.  I lay  down  on  the  brae,  and  was  so  filled  with 
the  love  of  Christ  and  disregard  for  the  vrorld,  that  I ever 
wished  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ ; and  ever  since,  my 
feelings  have  been  different  from  what  they  were  before 


188 


BESSIE  LYON. 


I never  read  my  Bible,  or  ask  a blessing  to  my  food,  or 
engage  in  prayer,  or  bear  a sermon,  or  meditate  on  spiri- 
tual things,  which  I often  do,  without  experiencing  warm 
and  lively  feelings;  and  it  is  now  June  1743.  In  read- 
ing God’s  threatenings,  I am  little  moved;  but  his  pro- 
mises melt  my  soul.  In  hearing,  I am  often  reminded  of 
the  saying  of  the  disciples,  by  the  burning  of  my  heart 
within  me,  so  that  at  times  I can  scarcely  restrain  myself. 
Evil  and  daring  thoughts  sometimes  enter  my  mind,  as 
fiery  darts,  and  send  me  to  prayer.  And,  to  conclude,  I 
now  find  my  mind  running  out  after  spiritual,  and  not, 
as  before,  carnal  things — to  be  spiritually-minded  being 
with  me  life  and  peace;  I find  ordinances  to  be  as  living 
waters,  and  I long  to  drink  of  those  rivers  of  pleasure 
which  are  at  the  right  hand  of  God  for  evermore/’ 

5.  Bessie  Lyon,  daughter  of  John  Lyon,  cooper  in 
Blantyre,  unmarried,  and  aged  twenty- three  : — 

u So  far  as  T recollect,  my  conduct  was  always  quiet 
and  outwardly  irreproachable;  but  till  I was  twelve  years 
of  age,  I had  scarcely  any  form  of  prayer.  About  this 
time,  I fell  under  concern,  and  for  a time  I prayed  much, 
often  weeping.  A friend  asked  me  the  cause,  which  I 
concealed;  and  partly  from  what  he  said,  I became  thought- 
less, fell  in  with  vain  companions,  and  gradually  learned 
their  ways,  till,  in  the  end,  I was  foolish  and  frothy  even 
as  they.  My  concern  occasionally  returned,  and  I thought 
of  becoming  serious,  but  my  resolutions  were  as  often 
broken  through,  till,  when  about  twenty  years  of  age,  a 
relation  being  on  his  death-bed,  I was  much  concerned  for 
his  salvation,  and  also  my  own.  After  his  death,  some 
very  horrid  temptations  were  suggested,  which  for  a time 
greatly  distressed  me ; but  this  impression  also  wore  off*, 
and  I became  vain,  fond  of  companions,  and  of  dress, 
that  I might  keep  their  company.  In  this  way,  I continued 
till  the  awakening  broke  out  in  February  1742.  About 
two  or  three  weeks  after  it  began,  I went  to  Cambuslang, 
and  hearing  Mr.  M‘Laurin  from  Glasgow  preach,  I got  my 


BESSIE  LYON. 


189 


mind  more  staid  to  liear  than  it  had  long  been ; my  sym  • 
pathies  were  also  drawn  out  as  I observed  those  in  dis- 
tress; And  during  the  singing  of  the  126th  psalm,  I was 
even  melted  into  tears.  Still  I had  no  sense  of  my  own 
sins.  Next  Lord’s- day,  I returned  and  heard,  and  I also 
went  into  the  manse;  but  my  heart  remained  unmoved.  I 
returned  on  the  Monday,  and  still  my  heart  remained  hard  ; 
but  after  going  into  the  manse,  and  hearing  these  words  of 
the  6 th  psalm  given  out — 

4 In  thy  great  indignation, 

O Lord,  rebuke  me  not,’ 

T fell  under  such  a sense  of  the  divine  wrath,  as  to  trem 
ble  and  cry  out  in  agony,  and  I returned  home  in  a state 
of  very  deep  distress.  I went  back  almost  daily;  and 
walking  one  day  with  some  others,  it  was  remarked  by 
one,  that  the  persons  awakened  had  been  previously  very 
ungodly  persons,  and,  therefore,  it  was  doubtful  whether 
the  work  could  be  of  God ; and  this  would  have  caused 
me  to  stumble,  but  recollecting  that  our  Lord  himself 
says,  that  he  c came  not  to  call  the  righteous  but  sinners 
to  repentance,’  I wras  only  the  more  confirmed.  It  w^as 
also  suggested  to  me,  that  our  concern  at  Cambuslang 
might  be  owing  to  our  own  endeavours  to  be  stirred  up, 
and  therefore  I resolved  to  do  nothing  but  be  wrholly  pas- 
sive; and  yet,  in  spite  of  me,  I could  not  now  but  strive 
and  pray  continually.  On  one  occasion,  Mr.  McCulloch 
was  preaching  from  these  words,  4 In  whom  the  god  of 
this  world  hath  blinded  the  minds  of  them  which  believe 
not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ,  w ho  is 
the  image  of  God,  should  shine  unto  them.’  (2  Cor.  iv.  4.) 
And  under  this  sermon  I got  a sense  of  my  sins,  and  en- 
mity to  God  and  every  thing  spiritual,  which  I never  had 
before.  Next  day,  while  at  home,  this  apprehension  of 
my  state  led  me  to  see  my  danger  in  a very  alarming  wray. 
It  seemed  as  if  I wrere  like  one  on  the  top  of  a tree,  with 
nothing  to  hold  by  above  him,  and  the  wind  blowing 
fiercely  to  cast  him  down — my  place  of  falling  being  into 


190 


BESSIE  LYON* 


hell-fire,  which  seemed  even  now  ready  to  receive  me.  In 
this  state,  Mr.  Henderson,  my  parish  minister,  was  sent 
for,  who  gave  me  good  advices,  but  I could  not  lay  hold 
on  any  of  them.  Returning  to  Cambuslang,  I heard  Mr. 
Arrot  on  the  sin  of  unbelief,  which  I now  saw  more  clear- 
ly than  before,  and  with  it  many  other  sins.  On  my  way 
home,  I turned  up  and  read  in  my  Bible  the  3d  chapter 
of  Zechariah,  and  wondered  at  what  is  there  said  of  the 
lilthy .garments  being  removed  and  clean  raiment  bestow- 
ed, which  I came  to  understand  better  on  hearing  Mr. 
McCulloch  lecture  on  the  passage,  and  I was  greatly  com- 
forted. Some  time  after,  I heard  Mr.  M4Laurin  preach 
concerning  the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt  having  to  sprin- 
kle their  door-posts  with  blood,  and  the  necessity  of  our 
having  our  hearts  so  sprinkled.  I was  comforted,  but  I 
was  chiefly  moved  by  what  followed  in  the  manse.  Robert 
Wright,  a grave  old  man,  vras  giving  out  the  91st  psalm, 
and  in  the  reading  and  singing  of  these  lines, 

6 He  that  doth  in  the  secret  place 
Of  the  Most  High  reside, 

Under  the  shade  of  him  that  is 
Th’  Almighty  shall  abide,’ 

My  heart  was  drawn  out  towards  God,  and  I sensibly  felt 
something  in  my  heart  drawing  me  back ; and  as  the 
good  old  man  said  in  his  prayers,  4 O for  the  wings  of 
faith,  to  fly  above  the  world  and  all  the  things  of  it,'  my 
soul  went  with  his  petition,  as  if  mounting  up  to  heaven, 
while  I felt  corruption  pulling  me  down.  Next  day,  Mr. 
Henderson  asked  if  I was  wanting  to  be  an  open  (perhaps 
ostentatious)  professor ; to  which  I replied  that  I was  not, 
but  desired  to  serve  Christ  in  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart." 

After  much  detail  of  her  experience,  she  relates,  in  par- 
ticular, her  having  heard  Mr.  M4Laurin  at  Cambuslang,  her 
having  retired  to  the  manse,  and,  at  the  urgent  request  of 
others,  having  gone  into  the  study  to  speak  with  him  about 
her  state;  and  she  adds,  that  w'hile  there,  and  receiving 
instructions,  another  minister  who  wras  present,  turned 


SAII.VII  GILCHRIST. 


101 


with  his  face  towards  her,  simply  repeating  these  words  of 
the  80th  psalm,  u God’s  mercies  I will  ever  sing.”  “ These 
words,”  says  she,  “ filled  me  with  such  joy  that  I could  not 
help  crying  out,  because  of  his  mercy  towards  me  while 
sinning  against  him,  and  because  of  his  preventing  me 
from  turning  away  through  unbelief.  Now  I came  to  see 
my  great  ignorance  of  God  and  his  ways,  to  know  the  value 
of  his  unspeakable  gift,  and  to  accept  of  Christ  in  all  his 
offices,  and  on  his  own  terms,  hoping  to  sing  eternally  of 
the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.” 

After  detailing  her  farther  experience,  especially  on  com- 
munion occasions,  she  thus  concludes: — “ My  former  light 
companions  are  now  unwelcome,  and  I shun  them.  I for- 
merly excused  myself,  though  guilty,  on  being  found  fault 
with — now  I dare  not;  formerly  I could  neglect  secret 
prayer,  and  think  little  of  my  neglect — now  my  conscience 
will  not  allow  me;  formerly  I was  ready  enough  to  put  in  my 
word,  when  others  spoke  of  what  was  good — now  I have  a 
sense  of  fear,  lest  I should  say  anything  which  1 feel  not. 
Temptations  often  assail  me,  but,  through  the  word,  their 
force  is  broken;  and  though  I enjoy  not  always  a sense  of 
God’s  love  in  Christ,  my  desires  are  always  towards  him.” 
6.  Sarah  Gilchrist,  daughter  of  Mr.  James  Gilchrist, 
schoolmaster  in  Cardross,  Dumbartonshire,  twenty- three 
years  of  age,  and  unmarried : — 

“ As  to  my  former  manner  of  life,  it  was,  as  the  world 
judges,  all  along,  blameless.  I had  the  advantage  of  a reli- 
gious education,  and  a proper  example  set  me  by  my  parents. 
They  trained  me  during  childhood  to  walk  in  the  way  I 
should  go,  though  in  many  instances  I have  departed  from 
it.  It  was  my  rule  to  pray  to  God  daily.  While  very 
young,  and  engaged  in  this  exercise,  the  Lord  sometimes 
brought  my  mind  under  conviction,  and  I also  had  delight 
in  the  exercise.  But  after  some  time  these  impressions 
wore  off,  and  I became  more  careless.  I also  heard  many 
sermons  in  early  life,  which  impressed  me,  particularly  one 
by  Mr.  McMillan,  from  Isa.  lv.  3:  4 Incline  your  ear,  and 


192 


SARAH  GILCHRIST. 


come  unto  me:  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live;  and  I will 
make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  even  the  sure 
mercies  of  David.’  Many  a time  during  my  younger  years, 
when  pleading  that  the  Lord  would  give  me  a discovery  of 
mv  condition,  has  he  laid  open  to  me  my  sin  in  Adam,  the 
corruption  of  my  whole  nature,  the  defilement  of  my  very 
best  actions,  so  as  to  make  them  appear  like  filthy  rags,  and 
my  condemnation  even  on  their  account. 

“ When  about  seventeen  or  eighteen  years  of  age,  my 
convictions  became,  I have  often  thought,  as  distressing  as 
any  I have  seen  at  Cambuslang  during  the  awakening  of 
1742,  only  they  were  not  so  observable  to  others.  Though 
outwardly  blameless,  I verily  thought  my  heart  to  be  more 
wicked  than  any  one  else,  especially  in  rejecting,  through 
unbelief,  the  grace  and  favour  of  Christ,  set  forth  in  the 
gospel.  Under  these  convictions,  I was  graciously  led  to 
close  with  Christ  as  my  only  Saviour.  On  one  occasion  in 
particular,  when  engaged  in  secret  prayer,  I was  in  a state 
of  great  agony  through  a sense  of  sin.  original  and  actual, 
and  through  a discovery  of  the  sword  of  divine  justice 
drawn  against  me;  and  was,  when  in  this  state,  enabled  to 
cast  myself  at  God’s  feet  for  mercy,  and  to  place  myself 
under  the  cover  of  the  Redeemer’s  blood.  In  this  way  I 
was  led  to  trust  God  for  mercy  and  pardon,  and  I found  my 
heart  eased  of  its  burden ; yet  had  I no  sensible  experience 
of  joy.  On  the  1st  of  June  1740,  which  Avas  the  Saturday 
before  the  sacrament  at  Cathcart,  I was  there,  and  heard 
Mr.  M4Culloch  of  Cambuslang  preach  from  these  words: 

4 Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost 
that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  them.’  (Heb.  vii.  25.)  On  this  occasion, 
I was  enabled  more  distinctly  to  close  with  Christ  in  all  his 
offices,  and  as  an  all-sufficient  Saviour.  After  this  I was 
often  pleading  with  God  to  destroy  in  me  the  power  of 
heart-corruption  more  and  more,  yet  still  I found  it  some- 
times to  prevail. 

44  In  September  1741,  I heard  Mr.  Whitefield  in  the 


SARAH  GILCHRIST. 


193 


High  Church- yard  of  Glasgow.  He  insisted  much  on  mak- 
ing  sure  of  an  interest  in  Christ,  and  said,  among  other 
things,  4 Never  call  yourselves  Christians  till  he  has  made 
you  sensible  of  your  lost  condition,  and  has  drawn  out  your 
soul  to  close  with  Christ  on  his  own  terms/  I could  ap- 
peal to  God  that  this  had  been  my  experience,  hut  I was 
still  in  doubt  whether  this  was  enough;  and  I prayed 
therefore  the  more  earnestly  that  he  would  make  me  clear 
in  this  matter.  And  I obtained  more  satisfying  views;  on 
account  of  which  I held  on  in  the  way  of  duty,  till  the 
awakening  broke  out  at  Cambuslang,  which  brought  me 
into  fresh  difficulties. 

44  About  ten  or  twelve  days  after  that  awakening  began,  I 
went  out  to  Cambuslang,  on  a Tuesday,  and  heard  Mr. 
M4Culloch  preach  from  these  words:  4 A bruised  reed 

shall  he  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench : 
he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth/  (Isa.  xlii.  3.) 
In  listening  to  this  sermon,  I was  led  to  hope  that,  though 
I was  as  a bruised  reed,  the  Lord  would  not  break,  but  rather 
heal  me,  and  that  he  would  blow  up  the  spark  of  grace  which 
was  in  my  soul  into  a flame,  and  also  return  in  mercy  to 
this  poor  church  and  land.  I went  into  the  manse  before 
sermon,  and  was  engaged  on  my  knees  in  prayer,  when  I 
heard  some  cry  out  so  as  to  make  me  start  up,  afraid  that 
the  work  was,  after  all,  as  had  been  said,  a delusion ; but 
on  observing  how  the  subjects  of  that  work  valued  and  used 
their  Bibles,  turning  up  the  places  where  they  had  found 
relief,  and  bewailing  their  past  unbelief,  I altered  my  opi- 
nion of  them,  and  prayed  for  as  many  as  were  still  in  dis- 
tress. This  led  me  again  to  doubt  whether  my  own  con- 
victions had  been  real,  seeing  that  theirs  did  in  some  things 
differ.  But  after  hearing  some  of  the  prayers  then  offered 
I was  greatly  refreshed,  and  went  home  quite  satisfied  that 
the  work  was  of  God,  and  eagerly  desiring  and  hoping  that 
the  Lord  was  about  to  do  great  things;  and  after  return- 
ing home  I was  much  engaged  in  prayer  for  those  who  had 
not  found  deliverance,  and  for  the  furtherance  of  the  work. 


194 


SARAH  GILCHRIST. 


“ I continued  to  go  out  to  Cambuslang  usually  tlirice 
a-week,  and  during  the  exhortations,  prayers,  and  praises 
in  the  manse  hall,  I have  often  had  great  melting  of  heart 
and  much  sweetness  of  soul,  and  these  while  I continued  to 
put  up  to  God  secret  prayers  on  behalf  of  the  distressed.  I 
had  also  much  satisfaction  in  hearing  the  sermons  wTliich 
were  preached.  But  when  I observed  the  crying  and  faint- 
ing of  many  of  the  hearers,  I was  made  to  wonder  at  my 
own  stupidity,  in  not  feeling  more  sensibly  the  power  of  the 
truth.  I recollected  well  my  former  convictions,  and  I saw 
in  those  of  others  the  same  moral  experience;  but  judging 
from  the  bodily  effects  produced,  I concluded  that  their 
feelings  must  have  been  deeper  and  more  distressing,  and 
this  led  me  to  be  jealous  of  myself.  The  terrors  of  the  law 
were  at  this  time  set  forth  with  great  solemnity  and  power, 
and  perhaps  even  more,  the  terrible  things  contained  in  the 
gospel  against  them  that  believed  not;  and  these  were  the 
views  of  divine  truth  which  struck  terror  into  the  hearts  of 
so  many.  Yet  these  very  awful  addresses  had  but  little 
effect  on  me.  What  affected  me  most  were  the  sweet  and 
gracious  offers  of  Christ,  and  the  promises  of  the  gospel. 
These  were  often  made  sweetly  to  cheer,  warm,  and  melt 
my  heart.  It  was  also  a source  of  great  delight,  when  I 
heard  from  time  to  time  of  many  who  had  been  in  distress 
obtaining  an  outgate,  and  being  filled  with  great  delight  on 
their  closing  with  Christ,  as  offered  to  them  in  the  gospel. 
Knowing  all  this  to  be  the  experience  of  others,  I was  often 
much  engaged  in  prayer,  pleading  with  God  for  clearer  and 
more  satisfying  views  of  my  interest  in  Christ. 

At  the  first  sacrament  which  was  observed  during  the 
awakening,  namely,  in  July  1742,  I got  nothing  sensible; 
but  I was  much  engaged,  as  I had  been  pleading  with  God. 
On  Saturday  night  Satan  was  very  active,  seeking  to  keep 
me  back  from  the  Lord’s  table,  alleging  against  me  what  is 
said  of  Esau,  that  4 when  he  would  have  inherited  the  bless- 
ing, he  was  rejected : for  he  found  no  place  of  repentance, 
though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears.’  (Heb.  xii.  17.) 


SARAH  GILCHRIST. 


195 


By  this  I was  much  discomposed,  and  discouraged.  Still  I 
was  enabled  to  persevere  in  pleading  that  the  Lord  would, 
in  his  own  time,  •send  me  some  clear  and  satisfying  token 
of  his  love  and  favour,  and  that  I might  in  the  meantime  be 
kept  waiting.  And  while  I was  thus  pleading,  these  words 
came  home  to  me  as  specially  sent : 6 The  vision  is  yet  fov 
an  appointed  time,  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not 
lie;  though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it;  because  it  will  surely  come, 
it  will  not  tarry/  (Hab.  ii.  3.)  This  enabled  me  to  hope 
that  times  of  refreshing  would  yet  come,  and  were  drawing 
near. 

“ When  I heard  that  the  sacrament  was  to  he  dispensed 
a second  time  at  Cambuslang,  I was  glad,  and  sought  to 
make  some  preparation  for  it ; yet  this  went  but  wearily 
on.  There  was  sermon  on  Friday  evening,  and  before 
going  to  church  I went  alone  into  the  fields,  and  engaged 
in  the  duty  of  prayer  and  personal  covenanting  with  God, 
and  I renewed  my  former  pleading  for  some  manifestation 
of  divine  grace  and  favour.  On  Saturday,  I was  much  af- 
fected, hearing  especially  Mr.  Whitefield  preaching  from 
that  text,  c If  I wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me/ 
(John  xiii.  8.)  That  night,  after  taking  some  refreshment 
in  my  lodging  at  Cambuslang,  I went  out  to  the  fields  to  be 
alone  in  prayer.  I then  pled  with  God  to  give  me  a more 
affecting  sense  of  my  sins,  as  dishonouring  to  him,  and  as 
the  procuring  cause  of  Christs  sufferings.  The  Lord  was 
pleased  to  give  me  the  desire  of  my  heart,  and  more  than  I 
could  have  expected.  I then  and  there  got  a humbling 
sight  of  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  I was  made  to 
see  my  own  sins,  especially  those  of  unbelief,  as  the  very 
nails  and  the  spear  which  pierced  Chris/s  hands,  and  feet, 
and  side;  and  I wras  made  spiritually  and  by  faith,  yet  in  a 
very  lively  manner,  to  see,  through  the  wound  in  his  side,  a 
heart  full  of  love,  and  that  love  expressed  in  the  bitterness 
of  his  sufferings  for  me.  I saw'  that,  after  all  the  evil  I had 
done,  he  was  willing  to  forgive,  and  that  he  had  already 
forgiven  me  all  my  sins,  and  that  now',  though  my  iniquities 


196 


SARAH  GILCHRIST. 


were  to  be  sought  for,  they  would  not  he  found.  Many 
passages  of  the  53d  chapter  of  Isaiah  were  now  brought  to 
mv  mind  with  greater  power  than  anything  I had  eyer  met 
with,  particularly  these : 4 He  was  wounded  for  our  trans- 
gressions: he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities : the  chastije- 
ment  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and  with  his  stripes  we 
are  healed.  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall 
be  satisfied/  These  sayings  were  brought  home  to  my 
heart,  with  a particular  application  to  myself.  I was  really 
persuaded  that  Christ  had  after  this  manner  been  wounded 
and  bruised  for  me — that  he  had  purchased  for  me  eternal 
life,  and  would  see  in  me  of  the  trayail  of  his  soul.  When 
these  discoyeries  were  made  to  me,  my  very  soul  rose 
against  sin,  and  my  heart  was  melted  because  of  God's  par- 
doning love.  It  seemed  as  if  Christ  were  now  speaking  to 
me  in  the  language  of  the  Song,  saying,  c Open  to  me,  my 
sister,  my  love,  my  doye,  my  undefiled : for  my  head  is  filled 
with  dew,  and  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night.'  And 
I was  at  the  same  time  made  to  grieve  that  I had  kept  him 
so  long  knocking  at  the  door  of  my  heart — that  I had  not 
more  freely  and  readily  opened  to  him.  But  now,  he  was 
himself  pleased  to  open,  enabling  me  to  close  with  him  in 
all  his  offices,  and  to  devote  myself  wholly  and  unreservedly 
to  him,  now,  and  for  ever.  This  was  followed  by  the  en- 
trance of  a beam  of  heavenly  light — I know  not  how  else 
to  describe  it — shining  upon  my  soul,  affording  me  the  most 
ravishing  discoveries  of  the  glory  and  excellency  of  Christ 
in  his  person  as  God,  more  in  his  offices  as  our  Redeemer, 
and  in  his  perfect  suitableness  to  all  my  wants  and  desires: 
yea,  so  as  to  make  me  greatly  long  to  be  with  him.  This 
was  followed  by  the  saving  of  Job  sweetly  darting  into  my 
mind,  as  the  fitting  expression  of  what  I now  felt : 4 1 have 
heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear;  but  now  mine  eye 
seeth  thee:  wherefore  I abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust 
and  ashes.'  (Job  xlii.  5,  6.)  And  with  this  I got  the 
most  humbling  and  self -abasing  sense  of  my  own  vileness 
through  sin.  I was  made  truly  to  loathe  and  abhor  myself 


SARAII  GILCHRIST. 


107 


in  dust  and  ashes,  and  to  wonder  that  he  should  ever  have 
thought  of  setting  his  love  on  a creature  so  vile  and  polluted; 
and  therefore  all  my  confidence  was  now  in  his  free, 
sovereign  grace. 

o o 

“ While  this  manifestation  of  God  lasted,  I scarcely 
knew  where  I was,  or  how  I was,  so  much  was  I lifted  up 
with  these  glorious  and  ravishing  discoveries.  But  after 
some  time,  I began  again  to  reflect  on  my  former  treachery 
and  deceitfulness  of  heart,  leading  me  to  break  vows  and 
resolutions  which  I had  before  made;  and  therefore  I be- 
sought God  that,  if  it  were  consistent  with  his  own  pur- 
poses and  glory,  he  would  take  me  to  himself;  but  that  if 
his  will  were  otherwise  he  would  undertake  for  me,  and 
keep  my  feet  from  falling.  I was  led  also  to  forecast  and 
to  lay  my  account  with  coming  trials ; and  yet  such  was  the 
courage  with  which  the  Lord  had  inspired  me,  that  I would 
have  been  content,  if  every  hair  of  my  head  had  been  a life, 
to  have  laid  them  all  down  for  Christ.  This  was  my  feel- 
ing of  willingness  at  the  time,  yet  was  I afraid  that  I might 
faint  when  the  hour  came.  I was  therefore  engaged  plead- 
ing for  grace  and  strength,  and  these  promises  came  home 
to  me  with  great  sweetness  and  power:  c When  thou 

passest  through  the  waters,  I shall  be  with  thee:  and  through 
the  rivers,  they  shall  not  overfloAv  thee : when  thou  walkest 
through  the  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be  burned : neither  shall  the 
flame  kindle  upon  thee’ — c For  the  mountains  shall  depart, 
and  the  hills  be  removed ; but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart 
from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  re- 
moved, saith  the  Lord,  that  hath  mercy  on  thee.’  (Isa. 
xliii.  2,  liv.  10.) 

“ Next  day,  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  grant  me  holy  com- 
munion with  himself  during  the  serving  of  the  tables,  and 
in  secret  prayer;  and  so  also  on  Monday,  and  much  of 
this  gracious  frame  remained  with  me  for  weeks  after  that 
solemn  occasion:  and  often  since  I have  had  much  near- 
ness to  God  in  duty. 

“ And  now  to  conclude:  As  to  the  habitual  temper  of 


198 


CATHERINE  ANDERSON. 


my  mind,  I find  a principle  within  me  opposing  and  striv- 
ing  against  indwelling  corruption  and  sin  of  all  kinds; 
and  on  falling  into  sin,  there  is  nothing  in  it  so  bitter  to 
me,  as  that  it  is  against  so  much  love,  and  a God  so  loving. 
I look  upon  all  things  as  enemies,  that  would  separate  be- 
tween me  and  Christ,  or  mar  and  interrupt  the  communi- 
cation of  his  love  towards  me.  His  ordinances  are  very 
dear  to  me,  yet  am  I restless  and  unsatisfied  in  waiting  on 
them,  unless  I find  Christ’s  presence  in  them.  I often  long 
to  be  with  him  in  heaven,  and  yet  I am  satisfied  to  wait  his 
will  on  earth.  The  advancement  of  Christ’s  kingdom  is, 
among  earthly  things,  my  chief  desire.  4 If  I forget  thee,  O 
Jerusalem,  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth/ 
Come,  O come,  Lord  Jesus.  Come  quickly  in  the  mani- 
festation of  thy  glory,  and  the  advancement  of  thy  king- 
dom. Amen.” 

7.  Catherine  Anderson,  daughter  of  Mr.  William  An- 
derson, portioner  in  Little  Govan,  near  Glasgow,  and  only 
thirteen  years  of  age : — 

* u 

44  In  reviewing  my  life  before  1742,  I have  reason  to 
bless  God  for  having  preserved  me  outwardly  blameless 
before  the  world.  But  I now  see  that  I was  all  aloncr  a 
stranger  to  saving  grace.  I was  indeed  taught  to  pray  by 
myself  twice  a- day,  and  I was  accustomed  to  go  to  the  kirk, 
and  for  a while  to  the  seceders’  meetings.  But  it  was  only 
because  I saw  others  go,  and  because  of  my  parents'  desire. 
My  heart  did  not  lie  to  these  things.  I could  make  no  dif- 
ference between  one  preaching  and  another,  except  as  they 
were  long  or  short,  and  to  me  the  shortest  sermons  were 
always  the  best,  while  a long  one  was,  as  I thought,  a great 
evil. 

44  When  the  awakening  broke  out  at  Cambuslang,  in 
February  1742,  I heard  a woman  call  it  a delusion.  A 
friend  of  mine,  to  whom  this  was  said,  expressed  her  regret 
if  it  should  so  turn  out,  especially  under  Mr.  M4Culloch’s 
ministry.  I heard  much  more  on  the  subject  from  time  to 
time;  and  observing  that  they  called  the  persons  who  had 


CATHERINE  ANDERSON.  199 

become  serious,  converts,  I wondered  what  this  meant.  I 
went  myself  to  Cambuslang  about  the  end  of  February,  and- 
heard  a sermon,  but  felt  nothing.  I observed  a woman 
weeping  greatly,  and  pointing  to  her,  I said  to  the  friend 
that  was  with  me,  ‘ That  is  perhaps  one  of  the  persons  they 
call  converts / I was  little  or  scarcely  at  all  affected  by  any 
thins  I had  either  seen  or  heard.  I returned  next  Tues- 
day,  and  again  saw  several  weeping  on  account  of  their 
sins.  Next  time  I went,  I heard  Mr.  McCulloch  preach 
from  that  text,  c He  that  belie veth  not  is  condemned  al- 
ready/ (John  iii.  18.)  These  words  were  often  repeated 
in  the  sermon,  and  as  they  were  repeated  they  came  home 
to  my  heart  with  power.  My  sleeping  conscience  became 
awakened,  and  set  before  me  my  sins.  The  first  sin  of 
which  I became  convinced  was  that  of  unbelief.  I saw 
myself  condemned  already,  truly  in  a lost  state.  But  my 
awakened  conscience  set  before  me  other  sins,  and  as  clearly 
as  if  I had  seen  them  in  print,  and  each  stood  against  me  as 
if  attested  by  ever  so  many  witnesses.  I was  thus  brought 
into  great  distress,  partly  on  account  of  my  condemned 
state;  for  I clearly  saw  that,  if  I were  to  die  in  that  state, 
there  was  nothing  for  me  but  hell-fire,  and  that  it  was  per- 
fectly just  it  should  be  so:  but  partly  also,  and  mainly,  be- 
cause through  my  unbelief  I had  been  doing  dishonour  to 
the  redeeming  love  of  a God  reconciled  in  Christ.  In  this 
there  was  an  amount  of  evil  which  I could  not  bear.  God’s 
very  love  was  what  in  this  wounded  my  spirit.  But  the 
Lord  had  mercy  on  me.  I was  made  to  look  upon  Him 
whom  I had  pierced,  and  to  mourn  as  one  mourns  for  the 
loss  of  the  dearest  friend.  I did  not,  however,  cry  out, 
either  at  this  time  or  any  other,  nor  did  I ever  faint.  I was 
made,  however,  both  at  this  time  and  often  since,  to  weep 
abundantly.  On  some  occasions,  when  sitting  in  the  warm 
sunshine  on  Cambuslang  brae,  I have  been  so  affected  while 
hearing  as  to  tremble  with  very  grief  on  account  of  sin,  as 
if  I were  to  be  shaken  to  pieces. 

“ From  this  time  I continued  till  August  in  darkness  and 


200 


CATHERINE  ANDERSON. 


distress,  unable  to  apply  any  thing  to  myself  in  the  way  of 
comfort.  Yet  the  Lord  was  pleased  all  that  time  to  keep 
me  diligent  in  the  use  of  means.  I went  for  a long  time 
almost  every  day  to  Cambuslang.  I often  read  my  Bible 
alone,  and  I was  much  engaged  in  secret  prayer  and  in 
mourning  for  sin ; and  though  I was  often  at  the  point  of 
despair,  yet  the  Lord  kept  me  from  altogether  sinking, 
granting  me  from  time  to  time  some  glimmering  of  hope. 

“ At  length,  when  sitting,  as  I had  often  done,  on  the  brae, 
on  a Thursday,  about  the  beginning  of  August,  and  before 
sermon,  that  word  came  home  to  me  with  special  power, 
6 Who  is  among  you  that  feareth  the  Lord,  that  obeyeth  the 
voice  of  his  servant,  that  walketh  in  darkness,  and  hath  no 
light?  let  him  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  stay  upon 
his  God.’  (Isa.  1.  10.)  The  Lord  showed  me  that  I was 
such  an  one  as  is  here  described,  and  I was  enabled  to  take  to 
myself  the  exhortation,  staying  myself  upon  God,  and  with 
the  hope  of  his  being  my  God.  I was  in  this  way  much 
eased  of  my  burden,  and  in  some  measure  comforted.  Next 
Lord’s-day,  which  was  the  preparation  Sabbath,  my  confi- 
dence was  somewhat  shaken.  I was  afraid  lest  I had  been 
taking  comfort  to  myself  to  which  I was  not  entitled ; but 
this  also  was  got  over.  I had  great  difficulty  in  resolving 
whether  I ought  to  ask  admission  to  the  table  of  the  Lord. 
I was  afraid  of  being  rash,  and  yet  I could  not  allow  my- 
self to  stay  away.  A sermon  preached  by  Mr.  Robe  of 
Kilsyth,  on  Saturday,  from  these  words,  4 He  hath  put  him 
to  grief:  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he 
shall  see  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  days,  and  the  pleasure 
of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hand’  (Isa.  liii.  10),  was 
made  useful  to  me.  On  Sabbath,  when  I came  to  the 
Lord’s  table,  I may  say  that  the  Master  took  me  into  his 
banqueting-house,  and  his  banner  over  me  was  love. 

“ At  Cathcart  sacrament,  in  May  1743,  that  saying  was 
brought  powerfully  home  to  me  when  at  the  Lord’s  table : 
c I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions,  for 
mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy  sins.’  (Isa. 


CATHERINE  ANDERSON. 


201 


xliii.  25.)  I was  made  to  feel  that  the  Lord  had  indeed 
blotted  out  and  freely  pardoned  all  my  sins.  At  the  com- 
munion of  Cambuslang,  also,  in  1743, 1 could  say,  with  the 
spouse,  that  I was  sick  of  love.  I was  made  greatly  to  re- 
joice in  this,  that  Christ  was  now  seated  on  the  throne  of 
my  heart.  So  very  lively  was  my  joy,  that  I had  great 
difficulty  in  restraining  myself  from  crying  out. 

u But,  that  I he  not  tedious,  1 shall  only  further  notice 
my  general  habit  of  mind  down  to  the  present  time,  March 
8,  1744.  It  is  now  about  two  years  since  I was  awakened 
out  of  the  sleep  of  sin,  and  I trust  also  out  of  a state  of 
death.  For  in  looking  back  over  these  two  years,  T cannot  but 
observe  a great  change.  Formerly  I was  indifferent  about 
ordinances ; now  1 could  not  think  of  being  away  from  them, 
except  in  cases  of  necessity;  and  I have  great  delight  in 
hearing  the  gospel,  and  in  taking  part  in  the  other  services 
of  the  sanctuary.  I come  to  hear,  expecting  Christ  to 
speak  through  his  servant  to  his  people,  and  in  particular 
to  myself.  I look,  for  this  in  the  way  of  conviction,  of 
comfort,  and  of  seasonable  instruction  as  regards  duty. 
And  the  Lord  also  has  thus  graciously  dealt  with  me  from 
time  to  time.  Formerly  I had  no  heart  for  secret  prayer; 
now  I know  not  how  I could  live  without  it,  even  for  one 
day.  I take  delight  in  it  as  a duty,  as  profitable  also  to 
my  soul ; and  my  gracious  Lord  has  given  me  to  experience 
many  answers  of  prayer,  and  among  these,  very  precious 
spiritual  blessings.  Formerly  I did  not  know  what  heart- 
corruptions  were ; now  I feel  them  very  sensibly,  and  I am 
often  sent  to  Christ  beseeching  him  to  help  me  to  over- 
come them,  that  I may  be  wholly  and  unrestrainedly  his. 
Formerly  I understood  not  what  it  was  to  have  recourse  to 
Christ  for  anything ; now  he  is  mine,  and  I am  his,  and 
through  him  I can  do  all  things.  I pretend  not  to  be 
absolutely  assured  as  to  the  issue;  but  I am  willing  to  wait 
in  hope  of  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  unto  eternal  life. 
To  him,  therefore,  be  all  the  glory  and  honour,  now  and  for 
ever ! Amen.’* 


o 


202 


JEAN  WALKER. 


8.  Joan  Walker,  daughter  of  Archibald  Walker,  shoe- 
maker in  Calder,  unmarried,  and  aged  nineteen : — 

“ As  to  the  earlier  part  of  my  life,  I was  outwardly  as 
other  moral  and  well-doing  people.  Sometimes  I prayed  in 
secret,  and  sometimes  not.  Family  worship  was  observed 
twice  a-day  during  the  week,  and  thrice  on  Sabbath;  hut 
it  was  a weariness  to  me.  I attended  church,  and  had  to 
bring  home  some  notes  of  the  sermon  to  my  father,  and  if  I 
succeeded  in  this,  I was  satisfied ; and  religious  conversa- 
tion was  very  unwelcome  to  me;  and  so  matters  went  on 
till  the  awakening  in  Cambuslang,  when  I attended  every 
Sabbath,  and  often  on  week-days.*  I now  began  to  have 
some  concern  about  myself,  particularly  after  hearing  a ser- 
mon one  Sabbath  in  May.  I said  to  myself,  ‘ O,  what  is  this  ! 
what  a wretched  creature  must  I be,  in  going  home  night 
after  night  without  having  obtained  any  interest  in  Christ !’ 
And  so  I went  with  others  to  the  manse,  but  after  waiting 
till  about  ten  o’clock  unavailingly,  another  young  woman  and 
myself  set  out  for  Glasgow.  We  had  not,  however,  got  far, 
when  she,  walking  a little  way  behind,  cried  out,  c O what 
shall  I do  ? I am  lost  and  undone  ! * I ran  back  and  laid 
hold  of  her,  but  as  I did  so  I was  myself  struck  to  the 
heart,  and  made  to  repeat  the  same  complaint.  My  con- 
science, which  was  till  now  asleep,  awoke  armed  with  ter- 
rors. The  young  woman  returned  to  the  manse ; but  as 
another  young  woman,  and  a man  with  her,  came  up  on 
their  way  to  Glasgow,  I was  induced  to  accompany  them. 
The  man  laid  before  me,  as  we  walked,  many  comfortable 
promises,  but  I could  not  lay  hold  on  any.  Still  my  con- 
victions were  as  yet  general,  and  fearing  that  they  might 
wear  off,  I thought  of  concealing  them  at  home ; but  I was 
unable.  I was  not  long  home,  when  my  distress  so 
grew  upon  me  as  to  compel  me  to  cry  out,  so  that  some 
about  laid  hold  on  me,  to  prevent  my  falling.  I returned 
to  Cambuslang  next  day,  when  my  convictions  were  re- 
newed and  deepened,  and  they  gradually  became  more  par- 
* She  seems  to  have  been  now  in  Glasgow. 


ANDREW  FAULDS. 


203 


ticular ; and  for  five  or  six  weeks  I continued  in  great 
distress,  and  without  finding  any  relief.  As  I walked  along 
the  street  it  seemed  as  if  I should  sink  through  the  ground. 
I slept  little  and  ate  little ; and  although  I tried  to  work, 
my  mind  was  so  much  bent  on  reading  and  prayer,  that  I 
could  do  little.  One  day,  when  hearing  in  the  Ramshorn 
Church,  I found  a secret  spring  of  hope  and  joy  rising  in 
my  soul,  my  heart  glowing  with  love  to  God ; and  at  night, 
while  my  mother  was  conducting  family  worship,  these 
words,  ‘I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love’  (Jer. 
xxxi.  3),  shot  up  in  my  mind ; and  regarding  them  as  ap- 
plicable to  my  own  case,  I was  overcome  and  made  to  cry 
out  with  joy.  This  was  accompanied  with  a very  humb- 
ling sense  of  my  unbelief,  and  of  Christ’s  greater  willing- 
ness to  save  me  than  I was  to  go  to  him  for  salvation ; and 
from  that  time  to  this  (9th  November  1743),  which  is 
about  a year  and  a quarter,  I never  could  even  once  doubt 
of  his  love/* 

Passing  over  her  detailed  experience,  especially  on  sacra- 
mental occasions  at  Glasgow  and  Cambuslang,  she  says  of 
her  usual  state : “ I was  enabled  to  live  much  above  the 
world,  having  my  heart  in  a good  measure  set  upon  things 
which  are  above.  During  last  winter,  I was  often  so  over- 
joyed, when  engaged  at  work  or  walking  along  the  street, 
as  scarcely  to  know  what  I wTas  about — my  soul  being  in 
heaven,  while  there  was  little  more  than  my  body  on  earth. 
At  other  times,  I had  a sad  feeling  of  the  burden  of  sin, 
and  would  even  that  I should  depart  to  be  free  from  it,  and 
from  all  imperfections/’ 

9.  Andrew  Faulds,  son  of  Robert  Faulds,  at  Cambus- 
lang,  unmarried,  and  aged  twenty-one  : — 

“ When  I was  a child,  I had  some  feeling  of  religion ; 
but  as  I grew  up,  all  my  observances  were  formal,  and  I 
knew  not  that  I was  blind  and  naked,  but  fancying  that 
all  was  right  with  me,  I had  no  concern  about  myself. 
But  soon  after  the  great  hurricane,  on  the  12th  of  January 
1740,  Mr.  McCulloch  preached  from  Ps.  cxlviii.  8 : ‘ Fire, 


204 


ANDREW  FAULDS. 


and  hail ; snow,  and  vapours ; stormy  wind  fulfilling  his 
w ord/  And,  addressing  us,  he  said  : 4 Will  neither  the 
voice  of  God  in  the  tempests  of  the  air,  nor  in  the  threaten- 
ings  of  devouring  fire  and  everlasting  burnings,  awaken 
you  ? ’ This  question  had  a reference  to  two  things — to 
the  hurricane,  and  to  the  text  preached  from  on  the  day 
of  the  hurricane,  namely,  Isa.  xxxiii.  14:  4 Who  among 
us  shall  dwrell  with  the  devouring  fire  ? who  among  us  shall 
dwTell  writh  everlasting  burnings  ? ’ The  question  so  put, 
came  home  to  me  as  a message  from  God,  and  I had  for  a 
time  some  impression;  but  it  wore  off,  till  the  revival  oc- 
curred in  February  1742  ; and  then  these  very  words  came 
back  upon  me,  aijd  awakened  me  from  my  slumber.  Hearing 
Mr.  MtCulloch  give,  as  a mark  of  an  unbelieving  state,  that 
persons  remain  secure,  I saw  that  I had  been  all  along  in 
an  unregenerate  state,  and  I was  thereby  thrown  into  great 
perplexity.  While  hearing,  these  w'ords  came  into  my 
mind  wTith  extraordinary  light  and  powrer : 4 Then  shall  we 
know,  if  wre  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord : his  going  forth 
is  prepared  as  the  morning ; and  he  shall  come  unto  us  as 
the  rain,  as  the  latter  and  former  rain  unto  the  earth/ 
(Hos.  vi.  3.)  The  hope  awakened  in  my  mind  by  these 
wrords  so  grew  upon  me,  that,  at  a meeting  of  young  people 
that  very  evening,  I could  not  forbear  telling  them  that, 
up  till  that  very  day,  I could  never  say  I had  a right 
to  Christ,  but  that  nowr  I thought  I could ; that  formerly 
my  claim  always  rested  on  something  of  my  owm,  but  that 
now  I saw  it  in  Christ,  and  the  words  of  his  promise. 

44  I thus  came  to  have  a reliance  on  Christ,  and  there- 
fore to  have  much  love  and  joy,  so  that  I besought  many 
to  join  with  me  in  praising  God.  I continued  thus  for 
several  days ; but  afterw  ards  I began  to  doubt,  but  was 
sustained  by  the  promises.  On  a thanksgiving  day  in 
May  1742,  the  minister  preached  from  Ps.  cxxvi.  3: 
4 The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us  ; whereof  wre  are 
glad ; ’ and  wThen  hearing,  I wras  made  clearly  to  see,  from 
Scripture  evidence,  that  the  Lord  had  done  for  me  the 


MARGARET  BORLAND. 


20  5 


groat  work  of  regeneration.  On  Sabbath  evening,  after 
our  first  communion,  I heard  Mr.  Whitefield  preach  from 
Isa.  liv.  5 : ‘ Thy  Maker  is  thy  husband/  and  was  enabled 
anew  to  accept  and  close  with  Christ,  to  my  great  joy  and 
satisfaction. 

“ And  now,  on  comparing  my  present  state  with  what  it 
wras,  I find  that  whereas  before  the  world  was  in  my  heart, 
and  its  concerns  occupied  my  thoughts,  now  God  is  there, 
and  I mind  spiritual  things ; that  whereas  formerly  I went 
away,  after  hearing,  giving  my  opinion  of  the  sermon,  I 
now  leave,  thinking  of  myself,  as  set  forth  in  what  I have 
been  hearing;  and  whereas  before  I had  little  feeling  of 
sin,  it  is  now  felt  to  be  a burden ; so  that  I earnestly  long 
to  be  free,  even  by  death.” 

10.  Margaret  Borland,  daughter  of  James  Borland, 
tenant  in  Bothwell,  unmarried,  and  aged  twenty-three  : — 

“ When  a child,  I was  put  to  school,  but  learned  little, 
from  playfulness;  but,  by  following  the  minister  when 
reading  in  church,  I gradually  learned  in  that  way  more 
than  in  any  other.  Till  I was  about  fourteen  years  of  age, 
I prayed  not  alone ; but  observing  the  minister  (Mr. 
Hamilton)  in  his  prayer  plead  that  the  worship  of  God 
might  be  set  up  in  eyery  family,  that  his  fear  might  be  in 
every  heart,  and  that  there  might  not  be  a prayerless  person 
in  the  congregation,  I thought  it  sad  that  I should  be 
prayerless,  and  resolved  on  getting  home  to  make  the  at- 
tempt. I went  out  to  a dyke-side  twice,  but  could  get 
nothing  to  say;  and  on  this  I wept.  I tried  it  a third  time, 
and  got  some  expressions  to  use  and  some  freedom ; and 
on  thus  succeeding,  I usually  prayed  once  a-day  ; and  as  my 
conduct  outwardly  was  regular,  I now  supposed  that  all 
was  right.  And  so,  being  fast  asleep  as  to  my  state,  when 
vexed  at  anything,  I sometimes  said,  ‘ I wish  I were  dead,’ 
and  this  without  even  thinking  where  death  would  send 
me.  And,  on  reading  or  hearing  of  the  wickedness  of  the 
heart,  I would  say  to  myself,  c My  heart  is  not  wicked  : ' but 
when  observing  in  Scripture  that  Christ  came  to  call  not 


206 


MARGARET  BORLAND. 


the  righteous,  but  sinners,  I said, 4 W ell,  he  is  my  Saviour;  for 
I sometimes  sin / and  thus  the  strong  man  kept  his  house. 
And  thus  it  continued,  till  one  Sabbath  in  the  spring  of  1742, 
I was  at  Cambuslang,  and  heard  Mr.  McCulloch  preach  from 
John  iii.  36:  4 He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  ever- 
lasting life  : and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see 
life ; but  the  wrath  of  God  abide th  on  him/  From  the 
marks  of  an  unbelieving  state  given  in  this  sermon,  I saw 
that  I was  still  in  that  state ; and  when  he  said,  addressing 
himself  to  such,  4 The  wrath  of  God  is  abiding  on  you, 
whatever  ye  do,  wherever  ye  go  ; and  even  now,  as  ye  sit  on 
that  brae,  it  is  hanging  over  you/  I became  deeply  con- 
cerned. After  getting  home,  I often  turned  to  that  text  in 
my  Bible ; and  as  I looked  on  it  I wept,  for  I saw  not  how 
to  escape.  About  three  weeks  after,  I was  again  at  Cam- 
buslang on  a Thursday ; and,  after  sermon,  I went  into  the 
manse,  and  heard  Mr.  M4Laurin  exhorting,  in  the  course 
of  which  he  quoted  these  words  : 4 Awake,  thou  that  sleepi- 
est, and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee 
light/  (Eph.  v.  14.)  These  words  pierced  my  very  heart. 
I was  now  more  than  confirmed  in  all  my  fears.  I saw 
myself  to  be  asleep,  and  my  steep  to  be  the  steep  of  death. 
I returned  home,  and  remained  in  this  state  for  twenty 
days  more,  scarcely  daring  to  pray,  and  scarcely  able  either 
to  eat  or  steep. 

44  My  first  relief  was  found  when  reading  in  Isa.  i.  19, 
20  : 4 If  ye  be  willing  and  obedient/  &c.  I thought  of  the 
rebellion  of  my  heart,  and  was  perplexed ; and  that  saying 
came  to  my  relief : ‘ It  is  of  the  Lord’s  mercies  that  we  are 
not  consumed,  because  his  compassions  fail  not/  (Lam. 
iii.  22.),,  Her  progress  from  this  time  is  detailed  at  con- 
siderable length ; but  it  is  so  variable,  and  the  account  so 
minute,  that  we  shall  only  sum  it  up  in  this — That  her 
change  from  darkness  to  light,  though  less  distinct  and 
assignable  to  any  one  period  than  some  others,  seems  to 
have  been  real  and  abiding.  The  following  is  her  own 
conclusion  : 44  Though  the  world  cannot  observe  any  great 


ARCHIBALD  SMITH. 


207 


alteration  in  my  behaviour  from  what  it  used  to  be,  as  it 
was  all  along  regular,  yet  I find  a great  change  in  myself — 
a change  as  great  as  from  darkness  to  light.  Formerly,  my 
mind  was  ever  running  out  after  something  worldly ; now  I 
am  crucified  to  the  world,  and  the  world  to  me — the  Word 
of  God  being  the  man  of  my  counsel.  Formerly,  1 liked  to 
hear  the  gospel,  but  the  words  of  the  preacher  going  in  at 
one  ear,  went  out  at  the  other ; but  now  I hear  with  delight 
and  self-application.  Formerly,  I loved  not  Christ,  and  yet 
fancied  I did;  now  I love  him,  and  am  so  grieved  at  sinning 
against  him,  that  often  I would  be  with  him,  to  be  free  from 
sin.” 

11.  Archibald  Smith,  mason  in  Kilbride,  married,  aged 
forty:— 

“ I was  taught  in  childhood  to  pray,  but  being  for  some 
time  in  a house  wanting  in  every  form  of  religion,  I laid 
aside  the  practice;  and  during  my  five  years’  apprenticeship, 
I thought  of  it  only  when  in  worldly  difficulties.  On  be- 
coming a man,  I was  carried  away  with  follies,  and  even 
worse.  On  getting  married  I occasionally  prayed,  both  in 
secret  and  with  my  family,  and  I was  brought  into  a sense 
of  the  divine  wrath ; which,  however,  wore  off.  Generally, 
I was  sober ; but  sometimes,  in  passion,  I fell  into  the  use  of 
profane  language ; and  in  company  I used  to  boast  of  my 
being  able  to  make  others  drunk,  while  I remained  sober ; 
yet  I was  myself  sometimes  drunk. 

“ Hearing  of  the  awakening  at  Cambuslang,  which  some 
said  was  of  God,  and  others  of  the  wicked  one,  I one  week- 
day put  my  Bible  in  my  pocket,  remarking,  that  ere  I re- 
turned I should  know  something  of  it.  I soon  satisfied 
myself  that  the  work  was  of  God,  especially  on  observing 
so  much  brotherly  love  on  the  part  of  such  as  had  found 
peace.  I heard  sermon,  and  was  conscious  of  a certain 
awe  on  my  spirit,  but  nothing  more.  I came  home,  but 
in  a day  or  two  after  I again  went  out,  taking  with  me  all 
of  my  family  that  could  go.  This  was  on  Saturday,  and  I 
remained,  and  two  of  my  children  with  me,  till  the  Thurs- 


208 


ARCI1IBALD  SMITH. 


day  following.  On  Sabbath  night  I tried  to  get  into  the 
manse,  but  could  not  for  the  crowd,  and  after  standing 
a while,  I went  into  the  garden  to  pray ; and  as  I returned, 
I found  a son  of  my  own,  a boy  about  thirteen,  weeping 
and  crying  under  deep  convictions,  and  I hastened  to  carry 
him  away  to  some  house,  that  something  might  be  done  to 
quiet  him.  But  on  the  way,  a remark  which  I had  heard 
some  days  before,  on  the  sin  and  danger  of  stifling  convic- 
tions, sprang  up  in  my  mind,  so  as  to  overawe  me.  I 
came  back  with  my  son,  and  about  two  in  the  morning  he 
found  some  outgate.  Another  [[probably  his  wife]  of  my 
family  feil  under  convictions,  at  which  I was  glad ; but  sur- 
prised to  think  that  this  person,  who  had  been  so  much 
more  blameless  and  attentive  to  religion  than  I had  been, 
should  be  so  distressed.  This  also  filled  me  with  indigna- 
tion at  my  own  stupidity  and  indifference.  I now  attended 
to  what  I heard  more  closely,  and  gave  myself  to  prayer, 
and  the  Lord  opened  my  mind  to  a sense  of  my  condition ; 
sins  long  forgotten  coming  fresh  into  my  memory,  and 
imbittered  not  only  as  exposing  me  to  wrath,  but  as  dis- 
honouring to  God.  I went  on  seeking  to  know  more  of 
myself  and  of  the  way  of  salvation,  amidst  a mixture  of 
hope  and  fear.  I continued  the  diligent  use  of  the  means 
of  grace,  and  opened  my  case  to  some  serious  persons  of 
more  experience  for  advice.  But  after  going  on  for  a time 
in  this  way,  I heard  Mr.  Whitefield  preaching  from  Gen. 
xli.  55:  c Go  unto  Joseph;  what  he  saith  to  you,  do/ 
From  this,  he  showed  us  that  we  ought  to  go  directly  to 
Christ.  This  was  useful  to  me : I learned  to  go  oftener  to 
him,  and  less  to  man.  While  seeking  thus  to  draw  near 
to  him,  and  while  engaged  in  prayer,  these  words  came 
home,  as  if  given  to  me  of  God : c Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  and  thy  house/ 
(Acts  xvi.  81.)  If  my  heart  deceive  me  not,  I had  al- 
ready c believed,’  fully  accepting  of  Christ  in  all  his  offices, 
especially  on  hearing  Mr.  Whitefield,  as  above;  and  now 
my  faith  went  out  on  behalf  of  my  family,  and  from  this 


REMARKS. 


209 


time  I was  enabled  to  receive  with  great  sweetness  many 
of  the  promises.  As  the  first  sacrament  at  Cambuslang 
approached,  I began  to  think  how  I should  do  during  so 
many  week-day  services.  I w*as  at  the  time  making  good 
wages,  and  counting  up  what  sum  the  loss  of  time  would 
cost,  I stumbled  for  a little ; but  after  betaking  myself  to 
prayer,  I was  delivered  from  all  thoughts  of  the  kind,  and 
waiting  on  the  ordinances,  my  heart  was  left  undisturbed, 
being  filled  with  peace  and  joy  in  believing ; and  this 
sweet  frame  remained  with  me  in  a good  measure  for  half 
a year  after.  And  when  my  sensible  enjoyment  abated,  I 
was  instructed  and  taught  all  the  more  to  wrait  upon  God, 
living  by  faith  and  not  by  feeling. 

“And  now,  in  July  1744,  I find  a very  great  difference 
in  my  state  from  what  it  was  before.  Formerly  I had  no 
relish  for  the  Sabbath  and  its  ordinances;  nowT  I weary  for 
both.  Sometimes  I think  that  I would  even  consent  to 
my  own  ruin,  if  Christ  were  to  be  glorified  thereby.  Some- 
times when  walking  alone,  and  meditating  on  the  things  of 
God,  I am  so  carried  out  of  myself,  as  scarcely  to  knowT 
where  I am.  And  sin  seems  now  to  be  exceeding  sinful, 
so  that  I would  do  anything  to  be  wholly  freed  from  it/* 

REMARKS. 

In  narrating  these  cases,  we  refrained  from  offering 
any  remarks;  but  now  that  the  selection  has  been  com- 
pleted, it  may  be  well  to  draw  the  attention  of  the 
reader  to  some  of  the  more  important  and  obvious  reflec- 
tions suggested  by  these  details : — 

And  first,  every  intelligent  reader  must  have  been  struck 
with  the  texts  preached  from  during  the  awakening.  It 
is  easy  to  see,  from  the  choice  made,  that  the  preacher  had 
some  direct  and  practical  end  in  view;  that  he  had  before 
him  certain  conditions  of  mind  and  particular  classes  of 
hearers.  Then  the  texts  themselves  wTere  generally  free 
from  anything  requiring  exegetical  discussion.  They  stood 
forth  as  so  many  direct  messages  from  God,  or  they  were 


210 


REMARKS. 


such  as  to  hold  up  to  the  sinner  the  very  picture  of  his  own 
si  ate.  This  characteristic,  no  doubt,  grew  out  of  the  circum- 
stances. The  preacher  was  very  often  engaged  in  conversa- 
tion with  the  awakened;  from  them  he  learned  much  of  the 
actual  condition  of  many,  and  so  he  chose  his  text  as  the 
warrior  would  his  weapon  or  the  barrister  his  plea.  Our 
circumstances  are  generally  different;  but  in  so  far  as  our 
direct  and  special  end  is  conversion , rather  than  edification, 
is  there  not  much  to  be  learned  from  their  example  ? — much 
as  regards  texts,  looking  forth  from  the  context,  and  speaking 
their  own  meaning,  and  also  as  regards  the  employment  of 
these  in  plain  and  direct  dealing  with  souls  ? 

Another  reflection  suggested,  is  the  very  marked  differ- 
ence between  an  awakened  and  unawakened  state.  In  the 
one,  there  is  the  most  profound  mi  consciousness  of  any 
thing  real  in  practical  godliness;  and  in  the  other,  a living 
sense  of  divine  things.  And  in  passing  out  of  the  one 
state  into  the  other,  the  individual  is  very  like  one  who  is 
being  awakened  out  of  deep  sleep;  thus  showing  the  one  state 
to  be  as  when  one  dreameth  of  what  is  not  real,  and  the 
other  as  when  the  same  person,  now  awrake,  sees  and  hears 
things  as  they  are.  The  application  of  this  to  the  existing 
state  of  society  is  very  awful.  The  persons  introduced  in 
these  cases  wrere  not  more  wicked  than  others  previous  to 
their  awakening.  They  were  perhaps,  on  the  wdiole,  no  un- 
fair specimens  of  what  we  may  suppose  the  classes  to  which 
they  belonged  are  among  ourselves.  They  had,  in  their 
unawrakened  state,  as  little  suspicion  of  anything  being 
wrong  as  those  of  the  same  class  have  now ; and  yet,  when 
awrakened,  they  found  that  the  wrath  of  God  had  all  along 
been  abiding  on  them,  nay,  that  their  very  security  w^as  itself 
the  effect  of  strong  delusion,  and  of  the  powrer  which  sin 
had  obtained  over  them.  This  is  very  evident  in  the  cases 
given ; and  we  may  add,  that  it  is  equally  so  in  those  not 
given.  Here,  then,  is  the  concurring  testimony  of  more 
than  a hundred  witnesses , who  once  were  as  many  now' 
are,  and  who  declare,  that  it  they  had  died  in  that  state 


REMARKS. 


211 


they  must  have  perished.  And  what,  then,  becomes  of  the 
hundreds  who  are  dying  daily  in  no  other  state,  so  far  as 
appearances  go,  mid  of  the  thousands  living  it  may  be  sober- 
ly,  yet  altogether  unconcerned,  at  least  in  the  sense  meant 
by  the  awakened  ? 

There  is  a similar  difference,  scarcel}*  less  observable,  be- 
tween the  times  of  an  awakening  and  those  of  general 
security.  Previous  to  the  awakening  of  1742,  the  very  per- 
sons who  were  then  awakened  lived,  in  many  cases,  without 
any  suspicion  of  themselves,  and  some  who  had  been  con- 
cerned, were  so  only  as  in  the  occasional  awakenings  of  a 
sleeping  man.  Society,  as  a whole,  was  buried  in  thought- 
lessness as  to  everything  real  in  matters  spiritual;  and 
had  this  condition  continued,  nothing  more  would  have 
been  expected.  Everything  like  the  means  afterwards 
employed  would  have  been  accounted  extravagant — every 
thing  like  the  earnest  seeking  and  deep  concern  experienced 
would  have  been  accounted  madness ; and  yet,  when  the 
awakening  took  place,  these  were  regarded  as  not  more 
than  the  comparative  importance  of  the  soul  required. 
How  do  we  pronounce  upon  this? — as  during  the  awakened 
or  unawakened  age  ? and  if  as  the  latter,  are  we  right  ? and 
can  we  in  this  way  expect  the  fruits  of  an  awakened  state  ? 

But  farther,  and  closely  connected  with  the  above,  the 
proper  end  of  an  awakening  does  not  require  that  it  should 
continue.  One  of  the  most  common  objections  to  such 
seasons  is  that  they  are  temporary.  And  so  ought  they. 
A soul  asleep  in  sin  has  to  be  awakened,  so  as  to  think  of 
its  condition,  and  be  led  to  Christ;  but  being  awakened,  it 
has  only  to  be  kept  awake,  not  to  be  awakened  anew  in 
the  same  way  as  before.  A church  is  different  in  this, 
that,  for  the  sake  of  awakening  sinners,  it  has  itself  to  be 
from  time  to  time  awakened;  but  it  would  not  do,  even  for 
a church,  to  be  always  in  the  condition  of  Cambuslang  in 
1742  and  1743.  Ministers  have  to  study  edification  as 
well  as  conversion,  and  in  this  they  have  to  teach  the 
whole  counsel  of  God.  The  people  also  have  to  cultivate 


212 


REMARKS. 


holiness  in  all  the  duties  of  life,  society  itself  becoming 
sanctified  through  their  example  and  influence.  Alterna- 
tions of  activity  and  rest  are  almost,  if  not  altogether,  uni- 
versal in  nature,  and  they  have  a place  also  in  spiritual 
things.  But  surely  our  barren  season,  as  regards  the  country 
at  large,  has  already  been  very  long ; it  has  now  been  winter 
with  us  for  about  a century,  and  we  scarcely  venture  to 
expect  more  than  we  have.  And  yet  there  are  many  of 
those  very  symptoms  which  preceded  the  revival  of  1742 
crowding  upon  us.  God  is  in  effect  saying  unto  us  in  his 
providence,  “ Wherefore  criest  thou  unto  me?  speak  unto 
the  children  of  Israel  that  they  go  forward/' 

But  there  is  yet  one  other  reflection,  more  direct  than  any 
other.  It  is  the  extraordinary  clearness  and  freeness  where- 
with that  saying  of  Scripture,  u If  any  man  be  in  Christ 
Jesus,  he  is  a new  creature,"  is  brought  out.  Many  appa- 
rently of  God’s  people  are  at  a loss  to  find  in  themselves 
anything  like  full  and  substantial  evidence  of  a change; 
but  here  the  difference  is,  as  the  saying  imparts,  all  old 
things  having  passed  away,  and  all  things  become  new. 
This  was  no  doubt  in  part  owing  to  the  suddenness  of 
the  change  and  the  circumstances  in  which  it  occurred. 
But  the  evidence  so  afforded  is  not  the  less  valuable. 
Substantially  the  same  change  has  to  take  place  at  one 
period  of  life  or  other  in  all  the  redeemed;  and  there- 
fore are  there  in  these  cases  two  specimens  of  what  ought 
to  be  sought  in  evidence  of  regeneration.  In  this  respect, 
it  is  remarkable  how  very  similar,  in  everything  sub- 
stantial, the  actual  experience  of  so  many  proved.  They 
answered  to  one  another,  even  as  face  answereth  to  face 
in  a glass  ; and  simply  because  the  lineaments  portrayed 
were  all  after  one  likeness — that  of  Christ ; and  the  work- 
manship of  one  Spirit,  through  whom  believers  are  created 
anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  Let  men  read  what  is  here  brought 
before  them,  and  then  ask  themselves,  Is  it  so  with  me  ? — 
not,  Has  my  change  been  as  theirs  ? but,  Is  my  condition 
as  theirs? 


CHAPTER  Xli. 


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  WORK  TO  OTHER  PARTS  OF 
SCOTLAND. 

44  From  you,”  says  an  apostle,  addressing  the  Thessalonians, 
“ sounded  out  the  word  of  the  Lord,  not  only  in  Macedonia 
and  Achaia,  but  also  in  every  place  your  faith  to  God- 
ward  is  spread  abroad.”  (1  Thess.  i.  8.)  This  was  not 
peculiar  to  the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians,  neither  was  it  con- 
fined to  apostolic  ages.  Wherever  the  power  of  the  truth  is 
greatly  felt,  this  is  the  case;  and  in  times  of  general  re- 
vival, it  is  eminently  so.  The  conversation  of  the  day, 
whether  among  friends  or  foes,  all  turns  on  it.  The  corre- 
spondence, especially  of  the  pious,  hastens  to  carry  into  all 
corners  of  the  land,  and  into  different  countries,  the  glad- 
dening news;  and  by-and-by,  the  press  sends  forth  its 
“ flying  rolls,”  proclaiming  to  all  the  unusual  disturbance 
of  the  world’s  slumber.  It  has  been  often  noticed,  as  one 
of  the  beautiful  provisions  in  the  works  of  God,  that  the 
seeds  of  some  plants  are  carried  by  the  winds  of  heaven 
from  field  to  field,  and  in  some  cases  from  country  to 
country,  that  thus  the  world  itself  may  be  sown.  And  the 
same  wisdom,  as  regards  the  moral  world,  may  be  seen  in  the 
curiosity  awakened  as  means  of  spreading  abroad  the  news, 
especially  of  a revival.  We  see  in  this  how,  when  God’s  time 
comes,  whole  countries  may,  without  the  use  of  any  extra- 
ordinary means,  be  awakened  to  concern ; and  how,  through 
the  blessing  of  God,  even  nations  may  be  born  in  a day. 

It  is  very  much  on  this  account,  that  we  are  now  to  sub- 


214 


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  WORK  TO 


join  a few  particulars  concerning  other  places  in  Scot- 
land, which  shared  in  the  revival  of  1742,  1743.  A some- 
what extended  delineation  of  these  would  be  interesting, 
but  it  would  unduly  enlarge  a single  chapter.  Moreover, 
anything  professing  to  give  an  account  of  that  revival  over 
Scotland,  would  be  necessarily  faulty,  as  our  knowledge  of 
what  then  occurred  is  mainly  dependent  on  authors  con- 
nected with  particular  districts,  and  whose  information, 
though  gathered  from  distant  parts,  never  proceeded  on  any- 
thing like  a general  survey.  The  voluminous  correspond- 
ence of  Mr.  Whitefield  spreads  over  a wide  extent  of  country, 
and  would  lead  one  to  expect  that  much  of  the  work  of  God 
must  have  been  going  on  in  places  of  which  we  otherwise  hear 
little.  The  Glasgow  “ W eekly  History,”  which  was  published 
during  1742,  embraces  a very  wide  extent  of  intelligence ; hut 
as  yet  the  revival  was  felt  only  in  a few  places.  The  “ Month- 
ly History,”  which  followed,  obtained  information  from 
quarters  not  noticed  in  the  other;  hut  it  also  was  depen- 
dent on  the  correspondence  of  the  editor,  who,  though  most 
zealous,  could  not  he  expected  to  reach  all.  And  Dr. 
Gillies,  whose  copy  of  the  “ Monthly  History”  we  have  now 
before  us,  marked  as  it  is  for  the  printer,  was  not  only 
judicious  in  his  selections,  hut  he  drew  also  from  other  ac- 
cessible sources,  some  of  them  original.  Still  his  work.  too. 
was  from  the  Glasgow  press;  and  his  means  of  information, 
concerning  contemporary  events,  were  much  greater  as  re- 
garded the  west  country  and  certain  other  parts,  where  cor- 
respondence had  been  kept  up,  than  generally  over 
Scotland. 

These  remarks  seem  necessary,  to  prevent  any  undue  im- 
pression concerning  the  extent  of  this  work  in  Scotland. 
It  certainly  prevailed  most  in  the  west  of  Scotland,  and 
other  places  to  be  named,  but  was,  we  are  persuaded,  far 
more  general  than  many  imagine,  or  than  any  can  well  show. 
There  was  truly  a spring  season  wherever  there  was  spiri- 
tual life,  and  in  many  places  a shaking  among  the  dry 
bones. 


OTHER  PARTS  OF  SCOTLAND. 


215 


Looking  now  at  the  country,  even  under  the  partial 
lights  afforded  us,  the  several  sources,  more  or  less  inde- 
pendent of  each  other,  may  be  seen  sending  forth  their 
healing  waters  over  the  land.  One  of  these  consisted  of 
separate  and  hidden  springs,  that  would  of  themselves  have 
proved  blessings,  but  which  flowed  much  more  freely  and 
fully  when  news  arrived  of  what  God  was  doing  in  other 
parts  of  the  world.  This  was  the  case,  for  example,  in  the 
remote  counties  of  Ross  and  Sutherland  on  the  one  hand,  and 
various  parts  of  the  west  on  the  other.  And  there  was  one 
predisposing  cause  of  these  already  noticed,  namely,  that 
the  children  of  persecuted  fathers,  who  retained  among 
them  the  piety  of  an  earlier  and  suffering  age,  had  been 
driven  into  their  closets  before  a storm  of  ungodliness,  and 
were  now  gathering  strength  and  coming  forth  as  a people 
dwelling  alone  and  caring  for  the  things  of  God ; and 
these,  God  was  owning  in  different  parts  of  the  country 
previous  to  any  general  movement. 

A second  source  of  reviving  power  flowed  in  upon  the 
country  from  without.  The  news  from  America  and  from 
England  awakened  very  general  expectation  among  the 
pious;  and  when  Mr.  Whitefield  arrived,  it  seemed  as  if 
the  waters  which  had  flooded  and  fertilized  other  lands  had 
also  burst  in  upon  Scotland.  According  to  Mr.  White- 
field’s  own  repeated  statements,  in  no  country  had  he  so 
experienced  in  his  own  soul  the  power  of  divine  love,  and 
in  no  other  had  he  been  so  enabled  to  speak  as  of  God;  and 
the  effects  of  his  ministrations  corresponded.  The  friends 
of  religion  in  Scotland  ought  never  to  forget  how  much 
their  country  was  blessed  by  the  labours  of  that  truly  great 
man.  God  seems  in  an  eminent  manner  to  have  raised  him 
up  and  sent  him  forth  for  the  revival  of  the  English-speaking 
Churches  of  Christendom;  and  he  may  be  said,  in  some 
sense,  to  have  belonged  in  some  measure  to  all,  and  exclu- 
sively to  none.  Born  an  Englishman,  he  began  his  labours 
in  England,  but  soon  after  visited  also  Wales.  The  colo- 
nies were  very  early  his  chief  care.  He  visited  Ireland  in 


216 


THE  EXTENSION  OF  THE  WORK  TO 


1751,  and  several  times  thereafter.  But  few,  perhaps,  are 
aware  that  he  visited  Scotland  not  fewer  than  fourteen  times , 
generally  travelling  over  large  districts  of  the  country,  and 
preaching  daily,  often  several  times  each  day.  Moreover, 
these  visits  were  spread  over  a period  of  not  less  than 
twenty- seven  years , namely,  in  1741,  1742,  1748,  1750, 
1751,  1752,  1753,  1756,  1757,  1758,  1759,  1762,  1763, 
and  1768.  England  gave  him  birth,  America  retains  his 
bones,  and  one  of  Scotland’s  best  ministers  had  the  honour 
to  write  his  life.  Dr.  Gillies,  his  biographer  and  personal 
friend,  says,  of  his  visits  to  Scotland: — “Though,  after  the 
years  1741,  1742,  there  wer.e  no  such  extensive  new 
awakenings,  Mr.  Whitefield’s  coming  was  always  refresh- 
ing to  serious  persons,  and  seemed  to  put  new  life  into 
them,  and  also  to  be  the  means  of  increasing  their  number. 
His  preaching  was  still  eminently  useful  in  various  respects. 
In  the  first  place,  it  had  an  excellent  tendency  to  destroy 
the  hurtful  spirit  of  bigotry  and  excessive  zeal  for  smaller 
matters,  and  to  turn  men  s attention  to  the  great  and  sub- 
stantial things  of  religion.  Another  effect  was,  that  it  drew 
several  persons  to  hear  the  gospel,  who  seldom  went  to  hear 
it  from  other  ministers.  Again,  young  people  in  general 
were  much  benefited  by  his  ministry,  and  particularly  young 
students,  who  became  afterwards  serious,  evangelical 
preachers.  Lastly,  his  morning  discourses,  which  were 
mostly  intended  for  sincere  but  disconsolate  souls,  were  pe- 
culiarly fitted  to  direct  and  encourage  such  in  the  Christian 
life;  and  his  addresses  in  the  evening  to  the  promiscuous 
multitudes  who  then  attended  him,  were  of  a very  alarming 
kind.  There  was  something  exceedingly  striking  in  the 
solemnity  of  his  evening  congregations,  in  the  Orphan-house 
park  at  Edinburgh  and  the  High  Church-yard  at  Glasgow, 
especially  towards  the  conclusion  of  his  sermons  (which 
were  commonly  very  long,  though  they  seemed  short  to  the 
hearers),  when  the  whole  multitude  stood  fixed,  and  like 
one  man,  hung  upon  his  lips  with  silent  attention,  and 
many  under  deep  impressions  of  the  great  objects  of  reli- 


OTHER  PARTS  OF  SCOTLAND. 


217 


gion  and  the  concerns  of  eternity.  These  things  will  not 
soon  be  forgotten,  and  it  is  hoped  that  the  many  good 
effects  which,  by  the  divine  blessing,  attended  them, 
never  will. 

u Ilis  conversation  was  no  less  reviving  than  his  sermons. 
Many  in  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  are  witnesses  of  this; 
especially  at  Glasgow,  when,  in  company  with  his  good 
friends,  Mr.  M4Laurin,  Mr.  Robert  Scott,  &c.,  one  might 
challenge  the  sons  of  pleasure,  with  all  their  wit,  good 
humour,  and  gaiety,  to  furnish  entertainments  so  agreeable. 
At  the  same  time,  every  part  of  it  was  not  more  agreeable 
than  it  was  useful  and  edifying. 

“ His  friends  in  Scotland,  among  wThom  wrere  many  of 
ail  ranks  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  were  very  constant 
and  steady  in  their  great  regard  for  him,  and  his  opposers 
grew  more  and  more  mild.  But,  indeed,  Mr.  Wliitefield’s 
whole  behaviour  wras  so  open  to  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and 
his  character,  after  it  had  stood  many  attacks  from  all 
quarters,  came  at  last  to  be  so  thoroughly  established,  that 
several  of  his  opposers  in  Scotland  seemed  rather  to  acquire 
a certain  degree  of  esteem  for  him;  at  least  they  all  thought 
proper  to  give  over  speaking  against  him.  When  he  wras 
in  Glasgow,  he  always  lodged  writh  Mr.  James  Niven, 
merchant  above  the  cross,  till,  towards  the  end  of  his  life, 
his  asthmatic  disorder  made  the  towrn  air  disagree  writh  him; 
and,  then,  he  went  out  in  the  evenings,  and  stayed  writh 
his  good  friend,  Mr.  M4Culloch,  at  Cambuslang.” 

W ere  we  to  follow  the  track  of  Mr.  Whitefield's  labours 
in  Scotland,  in  noticing  the  extension  of  the  revival,  Edin- 
burgh would  be  our  starting-point.  This  was  his  usual 
landing-place,  and  it  was,  more  than  any  other  locality, 
the  scene  of  his  labours,  and,  to  a large  extent,  of  his 
triumphs.  And  then  from  this,  there  wrould  be  tracks  di- 
verging southward,  upwards  along  the  Forth,  and  north- 
ward as  far  as  Aberdeen,  as  well  as  into  the  west 
country. 

The  third  source  is  less  original  than  either  of  these,  but 

p 


218 


PRESBYTERY  OF  HAMILTON. 


it  flowed  out,  if  not  in  a broader,  at  least  in  a deeper  and 
more  commanding  stream  ; we  mean  the  work  of  God 
first  and  chiefly  noticed  in  the  west  country,  and  particu- 
larly at  Camhuslang  and  Kilsyth.  It  was,  doubtless,  de- 
pendent on  the  influence  already  noticed,  hut  haying  about 
it  great  breadth  and  distinctness  of  character,  it  drew  upon 
itself  the  attention  of  the  whole  country,  and  thus  the 
west  became  at  once  the  centre  of  intelligence  from  other 
quarters,  and  the  place  from  which  the  sound  that  was  to 
awaken  the  whole  land  went  mainly  forth,  for  several  years. 
And  therefore,  it  is  from  this  that  we  shall  do  best  to  pro- 
ceed in  offering  some  notices  of  the  extension  of  the  work 
over  Scotland.  And  bearing  in  mind,  that  we  have  not 
the  means  of  surveying  the  whole,  and  that  it  forms  no 
part  of  our  plan  to  attempt  it,  we  shall,  for  convenience 
and  distinctness,  arrange  our  notices  under  so  many  of  the 
ecclesiastical  divisions  of  the  church,  as  bringing  before  us 
somewhat  of  the  moral  relation,  as  well  as  local  connection 
of  the  parishes  referred  to. 

The  Presbytery  of  Hamilton. — Camhuslang  lies  in  this 
presbytery.  And  we  have  many  reasons  for  believing 
that  the  revival  extended  into  other  of  its  parishes,  and 
especially  those  adjoining,  and  into  several  of  the  Glas- 
gow presbytery  lying  on  the  south  side  of  the  Clyde, 
although  they  are  not  separately  and  specially  mention- 
ed. The  ministers  of  East  Kilbride,  Blantyre,  Both- 
well,  and  Cathcart,  took  all  part  in  the  work;  and  one  of 
them  (Mr.  Hamilton  of  Bothwell)  speaks  of  its  having 
spread  into  his  own  parish.  4i  There  are  a good  many  of 
my  people,”  says  he,  “ mostly  young,  who  have  been 
awakened  at  Camhuslang ; and  I have  much  the  same  ac- 
count to  give  of  them.  All  of  them  are  very  serious  and 
concerned  about  their  souls,  and  very  solicitous  to  have 
others  brought  to  an  acquaintance  with  Christ  and  the  way 
of  salvation  through  him  ; which  has,  I hope,  had  this 
blessed  effect,  that  there  seems  to  be  a more  than  ordinary 
seriousness  among  a goodly  number  in  several  comers  of 


PRESBYTERY  OF  IRVINE. 


21<J 

this  congregation,  more  conscience  is  made  of  family  wor- 
ship in  several  families,  who  made  but  too  little  account  of 
it  before  ; as  likewise,  there  are  some  new  societies  for 
prayer  and  Christian  conference  set  up  in  this  congregation, 
wherein  several  persons,  besides  those  awakened  at  Cam- 
buslang,  have  joined.” 

Many  of  the  manuscript  cases  also  refer  to  these  parishes 
as  the  residence  of  the  persons  described ; but,  from  their 
nearness  to  Cambuslang,  they  are  not  spoken  of  as  forming 
separate  companies,  but  are  associated  with  Cambuslang 
itselfl * 

The  Presbytery  of  Irvine . — The  chief  track  along  which 
the  awakened  parishes  lie,  is  from  Glasgow  northward. 
But  before  entering  on  it,  the  extension  of  the  work  -west- 
ward must  be  noticed.  The  Cunningham  of  Ayrshire  is 
separated  from  Clydesdale  by  a range  of  hills  across  which 
the  godly  on  both  sides  were  long  accustomed  to  hold  in- 
tercourse. When  Mr.  William  Guthrie  was  in  Fenwick, 
in  Ayrshire,  many  wTent  from  Glasgow  and  the  surrounding 
district  of  Clydesdale  very  frequently  to  hear  him ; the 
distance  from  Glasgow  being  eighteen  miles.  And  many 
from  the  country  sloping  down  from  Fenwick  towards 

* Since  finishing  what  concerned  Cambuslang  proper,  we  have  been 
reminded  of  certain  allegations  published  in  the  first  statistical  account, 
and  of  a vindication  written  by  the  late  Dr.  Robertson.  We  have  again 
examined  Dr.  Robertson’s  statement,  and  beg  leave  to  refer  to  it  in  the 
Christian  Instructor  for  August,  1831,  as  containing  a full  and  satisfactory 
vindication;  and  this  is  all  the  more  valuable,  that  Dr.  Robertson  was 
settled  at  Cambuslang,  while  many  who  recollected  the  revival  were 
still  alive.  He  was  elected  as  assistant  to  Dr.  Meek  in  1795,  and  ordained 
on  the  22d  of  August  1797.  In  preaching  his  funeral  sermon,  Mr.  James 
Clason  of  Dalziel,  one  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  said,  “ Of  that  blessed 
revival  of  religion  which  took  place  in  1742,  he  delighted  to  speak;  and 
his  testimony  to  the  reality  of  that  work  is  invaluable — sufficient  to  stop 
the  mouths  of  gainsayers ; for  he  had  been  a witness  to  the  Christian 
life  and  the  peaceful  death  of  some  who  dated  their  commencement  in 
the  divine  life  from  the  saving  impressions  they  received  at  that  most 
interesting  period.’’  Dr.  Robertson,  whose  testimony  is  thus  spoken  of, 
was  himself  distinguished  as  a scholar,  and  esteemed  by  all  who  knew 
him. 


220 


PRESBYTERY  OF  IRVINE. 


Irvine  were  often  at  Cambuslang,  during  the  revival.  At 
the  second  communion,  two  hundred  of  the  communicants 
were  supposed  to  be  from  Kilmarnock,  a hundred  from 
Stewarton,  and  a hundred  from  Irvine. 

About  fifty  connected  with  Kilmarnock  are  said  to  have 
been  awakened  at  Cambuslang,  and  there  was  to  some  ex- 
tent a revival  in  Kilmarnock  itself,  which  wras  promoted 
by  the  visits  of  Mr.  Whitefield.  Other  places  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood, such  as  Stewarton  and  Dreghom,  seem  to  have 
shared  in  it ; but  the  town  of  Irvine  is  chiefly  spoken  of.  The 
godly  Mr.  M 4 Knight,  as  already  noticed,  was  minister  here. 
Writing  to  Mr.  Whitefield  on  the  21st  June,  1742,  he  says  : 
44  Blessed  be  our  glorious  God,  there  are  some  awakenings 
among  us  at  Irvine;  not  only  of  those  who  have  been  at 
Cambuslang,  but  several  others  are  lately  brought  into 
great  concern  about  their  eternal  state,  and  among  them 
several  children ; the  news  of  which  I know  will  rejoice 
you,  and  I hope  will  encourage  you  to  visit  us,  to  help  for- 
ward this  great  and  glorious  work.”  Mr.  Whitefield  did 
visit  that  district  in  the  month  of  August.  He  preached 
in  Irvine,  and,  as  in  other  places,  held  many  private  meet- 
ings.* Speaking  of  this  visit  to  Irvine  and  some  of  the 
neighbouring  parishes,  in  August  1742,  he  says:  “ On 
Friday  I preached  three  times  at  Kilbride,  and  again  on 
Saturday  once,  and  twice  at  Stevenson ; on  Sabbath  four 
times  at  Irvine.  On  Monday,  once  at  Irvine,  and  three 
times  at  Kilmarnock ; on  Tuesday,  once  at  Kilmar- 
nock, and  four  times  at  Stevrarton.  I never  preached 
with  so  much  apparent  success  before.  At  Irvine,  Kil- 
bride, Kilmarnock,  and  Stewarton,  the  concern  was  great ; 
at  the  three  last*  very  extraordinary.”  And  it  is  said, 

* The  minister’s  house  was  then  on  the  south  side  of  the  street,  op 
posite  the  church,  and  is  now  occupied  by  Mrs.  Hunter,  a worthy 
descendant  of  Mr.  'Walker,  then  minister  of  Dundonald.  Here  Mr. 
Whitefield  held  his  private  meetings;  but  he  preached  to  crowds  in 
the  golf-fields,  an  open  space  not  far  distant,  and  on  the  street  at  the 
Tolbooth. 


GLASGOW MR.  JOHN  MCLAURIN. 


221 


that  in  October  1743,  when  the  sacrament  was  dispensed 
at  Irvine,  the  number  of  communicants  then,  and  on  the 
preceding  occasion,  was  from  tico  to  three  hundred  more 
than  in  former  years ; and  this  was  reckoned  from  a fourth 
to  a fifth  part  of  die  whole. 

The  Presbytery  of  Paisley , which  then  comprehended 
the  whole  county  of  Renfrew,  and  stretched  across  from 
the  presbytery  of  Irvine  to  the  Clyde,  shared  in  the  labours 
of  Mr.  Whitefield,  and  the  revival  at  Cambuslang;  but  no 
one  parish  is  so  marked  out  as  to  warrant  any  separate 
notice.  And  therefore,  we  may  now  return  to  those  parishes 
which  stretch  away  through  Glasgow  northward,  as  before 
noticed. 

Glasgow. — The  ministers  of  Glasgow  whose  names  occur 
as  most  deeply  interested  in  the  revival,  were  Mr.  John 
M‘Laurin  of  the  Ramshorn  parish,  Dr.  John  Gillies  of 
the  College  parish,  and  Dr.  John  Hamilton  of  the  Barony 
parish.  The  names  of  Mr.  John  Anderson  of  the  Tron 
parish,  and  Mr.  Michael  Potter,  professor  of  divinity  in 
the  university,  also  occur,  though  less  prominently.* 

Speaking  of  the  first  three,  the  first  place  is  due  to  Mr. 
John  M‘Laurin.  His  father  was  minister  of  Glendarual, 
in  Argyleshire,  and  was  distinguished,  in  his  day,  as  one 
of  the  translators  of  the  Psalms  into  Gaelic.  He  had  three 
sons,  all  of  more  than  ordinary  talent.  One  died  young, 
but  full  of  promise;  another  was  the  celebrated  Colin 
McLaurin,  the  great  Scottish  mathematician  ; and  John, 
his  eldest,  of  whom  Sir  Henry  Moncrieff  says,  that  he  was 
“ not  less  distinguished  as  a divine,  than  his  brother  Colin 
was  as  a mathematician.”  He  was  born  in  1693,  and 
studied  first  at  Glasgow,  and  afterwards  at  Leyden,  in  Hol- 
land. He  was  licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  Dumbarton, 
and,  in  1719,  ordained  minister  of  Luss,  a parish  within 
that  presbytery,  and  on  the  banks  of  Loch  Lomond,  Here 

* Mr.  Potter’s  father  suffered  persecution,  and  died  minister  of  Dun- 
blane. His  son  was  first  minister  of  Kippen,  succeeded  professor  Simp- 
eon  in  1740,  and  died  in  November  1743. 


222 


MR.  JOHN  M'-LAURIN. 


he  remained  till  1723,  when  he  was  called  and  inducted  to 
the  Ramshorn  parish  of  Glasgow.  And  now  properly  his 
life  of  labour  began.  Deeply  studious,  and  thoroughly 
alive  to  everything  practical,  whether  in  religion  or  matters 
of  philanthropy,  his  noiseless  steps  and  active  mind  were 
soon  in  almost  perpetual  motion.  He  is  said  to  have  been 
eminently  a pastor,  as  well  as  an  able  expounder  of  the  will 
of  God ; and  he  seems,  as  he  advanced  in  years,  to  have 
taken  a lead  in  every  scheme,  whether  of  general  philan- 
thropy or  of  religious  improvement.  One  of  these  was  his 
own.  At  this  time  there  was  no  Gaelic  church  in  Glas- 
gow, and  Mr.  M4Laurin  set  up,  for  the  benefit  of  his  coun- 
trymen, a monthly  sermon  in  Gaelic,  which  he  regularly 
preached. 

In  Glasgow,  as  well  as  other  large  towns  in  which  re- 
vivals occurred,  the  zeal  of  the  godly  first  appeared  in 
attempting  the  suppression  of  immorality,  and  advancing 
the  moral  improvement  of  society.  The  first  opening  of 
the  public  mind  was  to  apprehend  only  gross  evils ; and 
hence  the  first  efforts  of  those  who  afterwards  beheld  the 
glory  of  redeeming  grace,  and  sought  chiefly  the  conversion 
of  the  soul,  were  put  forth  on  behalf  of  outward  reforma- 
tion. And  in  these  efforts  Mr.  M4Laurin  took  an  active 
part.  But  before  these  had  been  long  continued,  whether 
in  the  colonies,  in  England,  or  in  the  cities  of  Edinburgh 
and  Glasgow,  the  power  of  Jehovah,  going  forth  with  a 
preached  gospel,  was  announced  over  all  these  countries; 
and  Mr.  M'Laurin  was  one  of  the  first,  if  not  the  very  first 
minister  in  Scotland,  who  opened  an  active  correspondence, 
especially  with  New  England  and  other  of  the  colonies, 
that  had  been  early  visited.  When  he  began,  neither  Dr. 
Gillies  nor  Dr.  Erskine  had  yet  entered  the  field ; and  it 
was  most  probably  by  him  that  they  were  first  introduced 
to  their  correspondents.  At  this  time  the  American  States 
were  colonies  of  Great  Britain,  and  Glasgow  was  the  seat 
of  an  extensive  and  active  trade  with  them ; and  this,  no 
doubt,  gave  Mr.  MlLaurin  and  others  great  advantages. 


DR.  J.  GILLIES. 


223 


But  it  is  important  to  observe  the  fact,  as  from  it  we  see 
how  Glasgow  became,  at  an  earlv  period,  an  emporium  of 
religious  intelligence  from  the  colonies,  and  then  became  to 
the  country  at  large,  but  especially  in  the  west,  a source  of 
influence  altogether  peculiar.  And  hence  one  of  the  causes 
that  the  periodicals  of  1742  and  1743,  on  the  state  of  reli- 
gion all  over  the  world,  were  published  in  Glasgow.  But 
Mr.  M^aurin's  correspondence  was  not  merely  foreign. 
When  the  revival  commenced  in  the  west  of  Scotland,  he 
maintained  intercourse  very  largely  with  his  brethren  all 
around,  and,  it  is  said,  met  weekly  in  Glasgow,  with  Chris- 
tian friends,  whether  of  the  city  or  neighbourhood,  for  re- 
ceiving and  communicating  intelligence.  His  standing, 
his  talents,  and  his  Christian  wisdom,  as  well  as  zeal,  gave 
him  a chief  place  among  his  brethren,  as  a leader  and  ad- 
viser in  whatever  concerned  the  spiritual  interests  of  Zion 
and  Zion's  King ; and  therefore  references  to  his  opinions 
and  co-operation  are  very  frequent  in  the  correspondence 
of  the  day.  It  is  only  necessary  to  add,  that  he  died  in 
1754,  leaving  a memory  embalmed  in  the  affectionate  re- 
gards of  an  awakened  and  praying  people. 

Dr.  John  Gillies,  as  already  noticed,  * was  son-in- 
law  to  Mr.  M‘Laurin.  He  was  himself  of  a like  spi- 
rit. He  co-operated  with  his  more  aged  relative,  as  a 
son  with  his  father;  and  although  different  in  the  cast 
and  character  of  his  gifts,  yet  he  also  grew  up,  so  as  to 
occupy  the  place  of  a spiritual  father,  especially  in  Glasgow. 
One  after  another  of  his  early  coadjutors  departed  within 
the  veil,  and  he  was  himself  so  long  spared  as  to  be  recol- 
lected by  many  of  the  present  generation,  who  all  speak  of 
him  as  associated  with  whatever  was  truly  pious,  evangeli- 
cal, and  philanthropic  in  his  day.  And  those  who  know 
his  works,  will  regard  the  light  which  they  shed  on  the 
times  with  which  he  was  connected  as  that  of  an  evening 
in  summer,  leaving  behind  it  the  saddening  thought,  that 


See  chapter  vii. 


224 


DR.  JOHN  HAMILTON. 


for  a season,  at  least,  the  sun  which  then  set  has  not  as  yet 
been  restored  to  the  spiritual  horizon  of  our  country. 

Dr.  John  Hamilton  was  inducted  minister  of  the  Baron  v 
parish  in  1737,  and  was  translated  to  the  High  Church 
parish  in  1749,  where  he  seems  to  have  remained  till  his 
death,  which  was  probably  in  1779  or  1780.  Sir  Henry 
Moncrieff  says,  that  he  was  “as  eminent  for  the  soundness 
and  vigour  of  his  understanding,  as  for  the  steadiness  and 
respectability  of  his  pastoral  character/’  The  interest  which 
he  took  in  the  work  at  Cambuslang,  and  the  extension  of 
that  work  into  his  own  parish,  have  been  already  noticed  in 
his  attestation.  It  may  be  added,  that  many  references  occur 
in  the  manuscript  cases,  to  the  religious  services  of  the 
Barony  Church,  showing  how  much  these  tended  to  pro- 
mote the  work  of  God.  But  he  was  also,  like  Mr.  M4Laurin, 
in  the  habit  of  corresponding  with  friends  in  the  colonies, 
concerning  the  progress  of  the  revival  there,  and  commu- 
nicating, in  turn,  its  progress,  especially  in  the  west  of 
Scotland. 

The  Barony  Parish. — This  parish  still  surrounds  Glas- 
gow on  the  north  side  of  the  river,  so  far  as  it  per- 
mits, and  stretches  within  a short  distance  of  Cambuslang. 
At  that  time,  instead  of  having  within  it  a large  portion  of 
the  city  of  Glasgow,  it  wTas  chiefly  rural,  being  merely 
studded  with  villages,  and  encroached  upon  by  one  or  two 
outskirts  of  the  city;  and  there  was  connected  with  it,  so 
far  as  appears,  only  the  one  church,  that  of  which  Dr. 
H amilton  was  minister. 

One  of  Dr.  Hamilton’s  colonial  correspondents  was  Mr. 
Prince  of  Boston,  the  Dr.  Gillies  of  that  city;  and  in 
writing  him  on  the  13th  September  1742,  he  describes  the 
state  of  matters  generally  around  Glasgow,  and  especially 
in  the  Barony  parish.  And  the  account  which  he  gives  is 
perhaps  the  best  introduction  that  can  be  had  to  a review 
of  the  district.  The  extract  on  this  subject  is  as  follows: — 

“ We  in  the  south  and  west  of  Scotland,  have  great 
reason  to  join  you  in  thanksgiving  to  God,  for  the  days 


BARONY  PARISH. 


225 


we  have  been  enjoying  of  the  Redeemers  power.  Mr. 
Whitefield  came  to  Scotland,  for  the  first  time,  in  1741 ; 
and  in  many  places  where  he  preached,  his  ministrations 
were  remarkably  blessed,  particularly  in  the  cities  of  Edin- 
burgh and  Glasgow.  In  these  places,  a considerable  number 
were  brought  under  serious  impressions,  and  they  are  still 
following  on  to  know  the  Lord.  This,  however,  was  only 
the  beginning  of  things  yet  greater  than  these.  In  February 
last,  a great  concern  appeared  among  the  people  of  Cambus- 
lang,  a small  parish  lying  about  four  miles  south-east  of 
Glasgow,  and  under  the  pastoral  care  of  the  Rev.  William 
McCulloch,  a man  of  considerable  parts  and  great  piety. 
This  concern  was  connected  with  some  circumstances  very 
unusual  among  us,  namely,  severe  bodily  agonies,  outcries, 
and  faintings,  in  the  congregation.  The  report  spread  like 
fire:  vast  multitudes  were  attracted  thither.  I believe  that, 
in  less  than  two  months  from  its  commencement,  there  icere 
fere  parishes  within  twelve  miles  that  had  not  more  or  less 
of  their  people  awakened  by  resorting  thither ; and  many 
who  were  awakened  there  came  from  places  greatly  more 
distant.  I am  verily  persuaded,  with  your  worthy  brother 
Mr.  Cooper,  in  his  preface  to  Edwards'  Sermon,  that  God 
has  made  use  of  these  uncommon  occurrences  to  make  his 
work  spread  the  faster. 

“But,  blessed  be  God,  Cambuslang  is  not  the  only  place  in 
which  the  work  of  God  has  appeared.  The  same  work  is 
spreading  in  other  parishes,  and  under  the  ministrations  of 
their  ordinary  pastors.  This  has  been  the  case,  particularly 
at  Calder,  Kilsyth,  and  Cumbernauld,  all  to  the  north  and 
north-east  of  Glasgow.  And  I have  no  doubt,  that  since 
the  middle  of  February,  when  the  work  began  at  Cambus- 
lang, there  have  been  upwards  of  two  thousand  persons 
awakened ; and  almost  all  of  them  are,  according  to  the 
best  accounts,  in  a promising  condition.  There  is  greatly 
more  seriousness  and  concern  about  religion  in  most  of  our 
congregations  than  formerly.  There  is  also  a great  desire 
after  the  word,  and  more  prayer — more  meetings  for  prayer 


22  G 


CITY  OF  GLASGOW. 


and  spiritual  conference.  From  these  evidences,  we  have  the 
cheering  prospect  ot  seeing  the  Redeemer  s kingdom  consi- 
derably enlarged.  In  my  own  parish,  there  have  been  more 
than  a hundred  new  communicants  this  summer — a number 
more  than  five  times  as  many  as  I ever  admitted  during  any 
former  year.  Most  of  them  had  been  awakened  at  Cambus- 
lang,  some  of  them  in  our  own  church,  and  sdme  had  been 
the  subjects  of  a gradual  and  protracted  change;  and  these 
have  had  nothing  uncommon  in  their  circumstances.” 

The  City  of  Glasgow . — In  noticing  what  was  properly  the 
revival  in  this  city,  we  must  refer  to  the  account  contained  in 
chapter  iv.,  of  Mr.  Whitfield’s  first  visit  to  Glasgow  in  1741. 
From  that  time  forward,  he  generally  spent  some  time  in 
it,  as  often  as  he  came  to  Scotland ; even  when  unable  any 
longer  to  travel  largely  over  the  country,  Glasgow  was  usu- 
ally visited  by  him,  as  well  as  Edfnhurgh.  These  two  cities 
being  comparatively  near  each  other,  and  both  large,  they  were 
easily  reached,  and  had  a commanding  influence  over  large 
districts  of  country.  And  it  is  interesting  to  observe,  that  so 
late  as  1751,  the  interest  usually  excited  on  his  arrival,  had 
by  no  means  ceased.  Writing  in  July  1751,  and  when 
about  to  leave  for  America,  he  says : “ The  parting  at 
Glasgow  was  very  sorrowful  indeed.  Numbers  set  out 
from  the  country  to  hear  the  word  by  three  or  four  in  the 
morning . Congregations  increase  greatly.  I now  preach 
daily  to  many  thousands.  Many  of  the  best  rank  attend.” 

But,  besides  the  influence  of  such  visits  as  these,  much 
good  must  have  been  done  by  other  special  means.  In 
October  1744,  a general  concert  for  weekly  and  quarterly 
prayer-meetings  began  to  be  observed,  and  in  the  year  fol- 
lowing to  become  general  among  the  more  pious  on  both 
sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Many  prayer-meetings  and  other 
special  means  of  instruction  came  thus  into  operation,  and 
were  continued  long  after,  preserving,  in  the  midst  of 
a rapidly  growing  population,  a large  measure  of  practical 
godliness  among  professors. 

Were  we  to  go  farther  into  detail,  and  to  speak  of  the 


CITY  OF  GLASGOW. 


227 


ordinary  means  of  grace,  particular  congregations  would 
require  to  be  distinguished,  as  blessed  with  evangelical 
and  devoted  ministers,  and  as  cherishing  among  them  a 
more  than  ordinary  share  of  the  piety  of  their  age.  But 
this,  besides  its  invidiousness,  would  lead  away  from  our 
object — the  extension  of  the  revival  into  various  parts  of 
Scotland. 

It  is  even  necessary,  in  speaking  of  so  large  a city  as 
Glasgow,  to  avoid  going  into  those  desultory  illustrations 
which  might  in  other  circumstances  be  suitable,  and  very 
much  to  confine  our  farther  notices  to  what  was  statistically 
ascertained.  And  the  first  evidence  which  we  have  of  this 
kind  consists  of  a document  apparently  drawn  up  by  the 
general  session,  or  some  one  speaking  with  its  authority,  in 
the  44 Monthly  History”  for  December,  1743: — 

44  The  increase  of  the  number  of  tables,  when  the  Lord’s 
supper  was  given  in  October,  is  computed,  by  persons  fit 
to  give  a just  account  of  that  matter,  to  amount  to  about 
eighteen  beyond  what  was  usual  for  a course  of  years  before 
the  late  revival.  And  it  is  computed  that  in  almost  all  the 
churches,  three  tables  may  contain  about  two  hundred 
communicants  ( making  the  amount  twelve  hundred). 
This  increase  is,  indeed,  supposed  to  be  owing,  in  some 
measure,  to  numbers  from  the  adjacent  country,  and  so  to 
be  a confirmation  of  the  revival  there;  but  also  owing,  in  a 
good  measure,  to  a more  than  ordinary  addition  of  late  years 
to  the  number  of  new  communicants  in  the  town  itself. 
And  this  is  the  more  remarkable,  seeing  that  from  the 
number  who  have  seceded,  the  ordinary  amount  would 
otherwise  have  been  Jess.  There  was  also  a more  than 
ordinary  concern  manifest  both  in  hearing  and  communi- 
cating, and  some  are  said  to  have  experienced  much  of 
divine  power.” 

In  1751,  attestations  were  drawn  up  and  published  con- 
cerning the  fruits  of  the  revival,  intimating  whether  these  had 
continued,  or  whether  they  had  fallen  away.  A statement  of 
this  kind  concerning  the  city  of  Glasgow,  signed  by  twenty- 


228 


CITY  OF  GLASGOW. 


five  members  of  the  general  session,  and  dated  25th  March 
1751,  was  published  by  Mr.  Robe.  W e quote  only  an  extract. 
After  referring  to  the  above  statement,  published  in  1 ? 43,  they 
add:  “We  reckon  that  computation  to  be  very  moderate,  and 
think  it  requisite  to  observe  that  preceding  the  time  of  revival, 
for  a course  of  years,  ordinarily  there  was  at  most  only  about 
fifty-four  tables  of  communicants  at  giving  of  the  Lord’s 
supper  in  this  place,  containing  about  three  thousand  six 
hundred  communicants;  and  that  since  the  revival  to  this 
time,  there  has  been  little  or  no  decrease  of  the  numbers 
then  given,  and  which  amounted  to  four  thousand  eight 
hundred  persons;  and  that  the  number  of  backsliders  since 
that  time,  so  far  as  we  know,  or  have  been  able  to  learn, 
is  comparatively  small;  that  several  of  those  persons,  who 
were  the  subjects  of  the  late  revival,  and  have  since  died, 
gave  comfortable  evidence  of  their  perseverance  to  the  end. 
Had  it  been  needful  and  expedient,  we  could  have  been 
more  particular,  both  as  to  the  number  and  names  of  those 
we  write  of.  That  preceding  this  reviving  period,  religion 
seemed  to  be  at  a low  ebb,  and  like  to  degenerate,  in  its 
life  and  power,  to  mere  form.  The  benefits  of  this  revival 
and  spring-tide  of  divine  influences,  were  not  confined 
simply  to  those  above-noticed,  said  to  be  the  subjects  of 
that  blessed  work,  who  indeed  shared  deeply  in  the  con- 
vincing and  regenerating,  yea,  and  comforting,  operations 
of  the  ever-blessed  and  Holy  Spirit,  but  also  great  numbers 
who,  in  the  judgment  of  charity,  might  be  termed  God's 
people,  many  of  them  of  long  standing,  and  who  attended 
at  these  places  where  that  blessed  work  was,  did  share 
deeply  in  these  uncommon  and  extraordinary  blessings,  and 
showers  of  divine  influence,  to  their  great  joy,  confirmation, 
and  upbuilding.  And,  we  may  add,  that  a very  uncommon 
liberty,  life,  and  strength,  were  bestowed  upon  numbers  of 
the  ministers  who  were  employed  at  these  places,  and  that 
they  were  enabled  to  speak  in  evidence  and  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit  and  of  power.” 

The  following  letter  from  Mr.  M‘Laurin,  after  he  had 


CITY  OF  GLASGOW, 


229 


seen  the  above  attestation,  not  only  confirms  but  also 
farther  illustrates  the  facts  attested : — 

“ Glasgow,  May  8,  1751. 

“ Rev.  and  Dear  Brother, — When  you  are  publishing 
attestations  of  the  perseverance  of  goodly  numbers  of  the 
subjects  of  the  revivals  in  1?42  and  about  that  time,  how- 
ever much  we  here  came  short  at  that  period  of  other 
places  near  us,  yet,  as  that  period  did,  and  still  does,  appear 
to  me  the  most  extraordinary  I ever  saw  as  to  evidences  of 
the  success  of  the  gospel,  and  as  I am  almost  the  only 
minister  of  this  town  that  was  in  that  station  here  during 
the  whole  of  that  period,  and  have  had  all  along  the  evidence 
which  things  of  this  kind  admit  of,  and  which  is  sustained 
in  other  cases,  of  the  perseverance  of  goodly  numbers  of 
these  people,  I judge  it  incumbent  on  me  on  these  accounts 
to  join  with  others  in  attesting  what  is  so  fit  to  be  remem- 
bered and  recorded. 

“ If  facts,  that  have  the  important  character  of  public 
notoriety,  are  on  that  account  attended  with  distinguished 
moral  evidence,  that  character  appears  plainly  applicable  to 
the  facts  relating  to  the  increase  of  persevering  communicants, 
so  well  attested  by  twenty-five  members  of  sessions  of  this 
city,  in  a letter  signed  by  them  and  directed  to  you.  It  is 
proper  to  observe,  that  though  it  wrere  only  supposed  that 
one - fourth  part  of  the  increase  mentioned  in  that  estimate 
were  inhabitants,  it  must  far  surpass  anything  of  that  kind 
known  here  these  twenty-eight  years  that  I have  been  a 
minister  in  this  place,  or,  so  far  as  I can  learn,  in  the  me- 
mory of  any  now  living  in  it — though  it  is  still  to  be  much 
regretted  that  there  are  not  many  more  communicants  (I 
mean  worthy  ones)  in  so  populous  a place;*  that  after  so 
uncommon  an  increase  of  communicants  as  in  the  estimate 

* The  population  of  Glasgow  in  1740  was  seventeen  thousand  and 
thirty-four ; and  as  the  communicants  of  the  Establishment  alone  were 
four  thousand  eight  hundred,  and  as  there  were,  besides,  those  of  the 
Secession  and  the  Episcopal  congregations,  there  could  scarcely  be 
fewer  than  one  communicant  for  every  three  of  the  population,  includ- 
ing persons  of  all  ages. 


230 


PARISH  OF  CALDER. 


referred  to,  had  there  been  so  many  backslidings  as  some 
aspersions  imply,  a proportional  number  of  suspensions  from 
the  sacrament  must  be  presumed  to  have  ensued,  which  is 
not  the  case;  that  continued  admissions  are  really  continued 
attestations  of  the  perseverance  now  inquired  into ; that  the 
attestations  implied  in  such  admissions,  and  those  contained 
in  the  above-mentioned  paper,  have  the  concurring  charac- 
ters which,  in  other  cases,  render  testimony  valid,  namely, 
that  the  witnesses  are  sufficient  as  to  their  character,  their 
number,  and  their  means  of  knowing  wffiat  they  testify; 
that  among  real  backsliders  there  are,  through  divine 
mercy,  instances  of  return ; that  some,  who  at  first  were 
much  suspected  to  he  deceivers,  have,  for  a tract  of  time, 
given  to  those  who  know  them  best,  strong  proofs  of  their 
uprightness;  that  persons  whose  conduct  has  occasioned 
reproach  to  the  revivals,  are  not  ahvays  found,  upon  inquiry, 
to  be  persons  whose  profession  of  religion  began  at  that 
period ; that  the  unfavourable  things  above-mentioned  are 
far  from  being  said  in  the  way  of  mere  charitable  conjec- 
ture ; that,  instead  of  that,  they  are  the  consequences  of  such 
evidence  as  arises  partly  from  extensive  personal  acquain- 
tance with  these  persons,  partly  from  occasional  inquiries 
about  them  from  time  to  time,  partly  from  more  laborious 
scrutinies  set  on  foot  privately,  both  formerly  and  of  late, 
among  persons  attentive  to  such  things;  and,  lastly,  that  if 
any  who  possibly  know  only  backsliders,  can  be  supposed  to 
claim  a right  of  judging  harshly  of  those  wdiom  they  own  they 
do  not  know  by  those  whom  they  do  know,  merely  because  the 
religious  profession  of  both  began  about  the  same  time  or  place, 
it  must  be  easy  for  the  unprejudiced  to  observe  wrhat  principles 
such  reasoning  must  be  built  on,  wdiat  consequences  it  must 
infer,  and  what  affinity  it  has  to  some  people’s  way  of  judg- 
ing of  all  professors  of  religion  in  general,  at  whatever  time 
their  profession  began. — I am  yours,  &c. 

“ John  M‘Laurin.” 

The  Parish  of  Calder. — This  parish  stretches  along  the 
north  side  of  the  Barony  parish.  At  this  time,  the  mini- 


PARISH  OP  BALDERNOCK. 


231 


ster  was  Mr.  Warden,  a relation  [probably  a cousin ] 
of  the  minister  of  Campsie,  concerning  whom  some  ac- 
count will  be  cfiven.  The  minister  of  Calder,  of  whom  we 
now  speak,  was  pains-taking  and  devoted.  There  is  a tradi- 
tion, reported  by  the  editor  of  the  last  edition  of  Mr.  Robes 
Narrative,  concerning  the  commencement  of  the  work  in 
this  parish : “ Mr.  Warden  had  been  in  the  habit  of  preaching 
occasionally  to  the  people  of  Auchenloch,  a distant  part  of 
Calder  parish,  and  had  to  complain  that  few  comparatively 
availed  themselves  of  the  opportunity.  Mr.  Warden,  on  the 
occasion  referred  to,  had  said,  on  intimating  his  purpose 
of  preaching  at  Auchenloch,  that  it  was  scarcely  worth 
while  to  give  such  notice,  as  the  people  seemed  to  be 
unconcerned  about  the  meeting,  but  that  he  would,  God 
willing,  give  them  another  opportunity.  He  went  with 
very  low  expectations ; but,  finding  a large  meeting,  he 
felt  as  if  he  would  that  he  had  been  more  fully  prepared, 
and  had  misgivings  about  the  work.  He  took  for  his 
text:  ‘Unto  you,  O men,  I call;  and  my  voice  is  to 
the  sons  of  men/  (Prov.  viii.  4.)  The  audience  was 
melted  under  the  word,  and  a goodly  number  dated 
their  conversion  from  that  sermon .”  This  appears  to  have 
been  the  meeting  on  the  11th  of  May  1742,  concerning 
which  Mr.  Robe  says,  that  there  was  much  outcrying,  and 
that  about  fourteen  were  brought  under  great  concern 
about  their  state.  And  writing  somewhat  later,  he  adds 
that,  according  to  information  which  he  had  from  Mr. 
Warden,  above  a hundred  had  then  been  awakened. 

The  Parish  of  Baldernock.— This  parish  lies  north  and 
west  from  Calder,  and  somewhat  out  of  the  track  of  the 
other  parishes  to  be  mentioned.  Moreover,  it  belongs  to 
the  presbytery  of  Dumbarton,  and  is  in  the  county  of  Stir- 
ling; but  it  is  sufficiently  near  the  other  parishes  to  be 
noticed,  and  it  held  communion  with  them  chiefly,  as  re- 
garded the  revival — its  circumstances  also  were  special. 
Mr.  Robert  Wallace  had  been  minister  of  that  parish  for 
upwards  of  fifty  years.  He  is  said  to  have  been  pious, 


232 


PARISH  OF  BALDERNOCK. 


faithful,  and  much  beloved  by  his  people.  But  at  the  time 
when  the  revival  commenced,  he  was  gone,  and  the  church 
was  vacant.  He  had  left,  however,  behind  him,  a valuable 
substitute,  in  the  person  of  Mr.  James  Forsyth,  parish 
schoolmaster,  from  whose  account  of  what  occurred  in  this 
parish,  as  communicated  to  Mr.  Robe  in  various  letters,  we 
shall  give  an  abstract : “ From  the  beginning  of  February 
1742,  he  had  anxiously  sought  to  instruct  the  young  under 
his  charge  in  the  principles  of  religion,  urging  on  them 
personally  a practical  use  of  what  they  had  been  taught, 
and  the  necessity  of  abstaining  from  all  known  sin.  These 
instructions  and  exhortations  laid  hold  on  the  minds  of  the 
young,  and  some  of  the  more  aged  were  apparently  moved 
by  what  they  observed  among  the  children.  One  of  the 
school-boys,  who  had  gone  to  Cambuslang  in  March,  re- 
turned awakened,  and  asked  his  teacher  whether  he  would 
allow  two  or  three  of  the  scholars  to  meet  for  prayer  and 
the  singing  of  psalms.  This  was  readily  allowed,  and  in 
the  course  of  two  weeks,  ten  or  twelve  more  were  awakened 
and  under  deep  convictions.  Some  of  these  were  not  more 
than  eight  or  nine  years  of  age,  and  others  twelve  or  thir- 
teen. And  so  much  were  they  engrossed  with  the  ‘ one 
thing  needful,’  as  to  meet  thrice  a-day — in  the  morning,  at 
mid-day,  and  at  night. 

“ The  account  wdiich  they  gave  of  themselves  was  also 
very  rational.  They  spoke  of  their  sinfulness  by  nature, 
their  actual  sins,  and  their  sins  of  unbelief;  and  on  being 
reminded  of  Christ’s  ability  and  willingness  to  save,  they 
replied,  W e know  it,  but  our  hearts  are  so  hard,  that  unless 
God  work  in  them,  we  cannot  believe.” 

Several  of  the  grown  people  were  first  awakened  at 
Cambuslang,  Calder,  and  Kirkintilloch,  but  the  greater 
part  were  brought  into  a state  of  concern  while  attending 
the  prayer-meetings,  which  were  set  up  in  the  parish. 
These  were  held  among  the  awakened,  twice  a- week,  and 
almost  daily  meetings  of  this  kind  were  held  in  some 
place  or  other.  At  the  second  of  the  general  meetings, 


PARISH  OF  KIRKINTILLOCH. 


233 


there  were  nine  awakened;  at  the  third,  four;  and  at  another, 
five  or  six.  Among  these  were  some  who  had  been  known 
chiefly  for  rudeness  and  profanity;  and  the  impression  pro- 
duced among  the  parishioners  was  such  as  to  engross  gene- 
ral attention,  and  to  bring  some  from  other  parishes  to 
attend  their  meetings.  Among  these,  two  young  women, 
who  had  been  at  Cambuslang,  and  brought  back  an  evil 
report,  expressing  wonder  that  any  should  so  give  way  as 
to  cry  out,  came  into  one  of  their  meetings.  But  before 
they  had  been  an  hour  present,  they  were  so  convinced 
of  their  lost  condition,  as  to  be  thrown  into  the  deep- 
est distress.  Many  also  found  relief,  and  were  brought 
into  a believing  state.  In  this  way  the  work  went  on,  till 
the  number  of  the  awakened  was  reckoned  to  be  about  a 
hundred. 

The  case  of  this  parish  is  interesting  on  various  accounts, 
but  especially  as  showing,  what  many  seem  unwilling  to 
understand,  that  all  who  know  God  as  reconciled  in  Christ, 
may  and  ought  to  bring  others  to  him ; and  that  now  as 
well  as  aforetime,  God  perfects  his  own  praise  out  of  the 
mouths  even  of  babes  and  sucklings. 

The  Parish  of  Kirkintilloch. — This  parish  lies  north  of 
Calder,  and  was,  when  the  revival  commenced,  under  the 
pastoral  charge  of  Mr.  James  Burnside,  who  was  esteemed 
an  able  and  judicious,  as  well  as  pious  minister.  There 
was  in  this  parish,  also,  a not  uninteresting  incident  con- 
nected with  the  commencement  of  the  revival.  In  the 
month  of'  April  1742,  about  sixteen  children  in  the  town 
were  observed  to  meet  together  in  a barn  for  prayer.  Mr. 
Burnside  heard  of  it,  had  frequent  meetings  with  them, 
and  they  continued  to  improve.  And  this  being  reported, 
many  were  the  more  impressed.  But  apparently  before 
this,  the  ministrations  of  that  good  man  had  begun  to 
take  effect,  and  this  was  probably  but  the  first  remarkable 
manifestation  of  what  was  to  follow;  for  on  the  20th  of 
May,  Mr.  McLaurin  and  Mr.  Robe  were  there;  and  the 
latter  says,  “ There  we  saw  Zion's  mighty  King  appearing 

Q 


234 


PARISH  OF  CAMPSIE. 


in  his  glory  and  majesty,  and  his  arrows  sharp  in  the 
heart  of  his  enemies ; many  were  awakened  and  brought 
under  great  spiritual  distress/'  And  soon  after,  he  learned 
from  the  minister,  that  about  a hundred  and  twenty  were 
under  a more  than  ordinary  concern,  and  praying  societies 
were,  as  usual,  formed.  Mr.  Burnside  died  in  September 
1743.  In  December  (that  is,  two  months  after  Mr.  Bum- 
side's  death),  the  elders  drew  up  and  published  a statement, 
in  which  they  declare  that  a goodly  number  persevered 
in  seeking  God,  and  generally  met  once  a- week  in  praying 
societies.  And  Dr.  Erskine,  afterwards  of  Edinburgh, 
who  was  inducted  minister  of  Kirkintilloch  in  May  1744, 
confirms  their  statement,  and  enlarges  on  the  same  subject. 

The  Parish  of  Campsie . — This  parish  lies  pn  the  north 
side  of  Kirkintilloch,  and  was  at  this  time  under  the  pas- 
toral charge  of  Mr.  John  Warden,  a son  of  Mr.  Warden 
of  Gargunnock ; in  connection  with  whom  a notice  will  be 
found  concerning  the  date  of  his  son's  induction,  and  other 
changes. 

Mr.  Robe  says,  that  he  “ had  always  a singular  dex- 
terity in  instructing  and  dealing  with  the  consciences  of 
the  people  under  his  charge.”  As  this  parish  is  adjacent 
to  Kilsyth,  some  of  the  first  awakened  there  belonged 
to  Campsie,  and  the  wrork  went  on  to  a greater  or  less 
extent  in  both  parishes  simultaneously.  In  the  course  of 
the  summer  of  1742,  about  a hundred  were  said  to  have 
been  awakened  in  Campsie.  But  as  a description  of  what 
is  seen  and  heard  is  usually  preferred  to  mere  statistics, 
we  shall  here  introduce  a letter,  written  by  a gentleman  in 
Glasgow  to  his  friend  in  Edinburgh,  concerning  the  first 
communion  occasion  at  Campsie,  after  the  commencement 
of  the  revival : — 

“Dear  Sir, — The  Lord,  in  his  kind  providence,  carried  me 
to  Campsie  on  Saturday  last,  where  I stayed  during  the 
communion  solemnity.  But  truly,  I will  not  pretend  to 
give  you  a suitable  account  of  the  blessed  and  visible  ef- 
fects of  our  glorious  Immanuel  taking  to  himself  his  great 


PARISH  OF  CAMPSTE. 


235 


power,  and  there,  to  a demonstration,  going  on  conquering  and 
to  conquer.  The  first  sermon  I heard  was  from  1 Tim.  i. 
15:  c This  is  a faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  accepta- 
tion, that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners; 
of  whom  I am  chief1 — when  there  appeared  a desirable 
and  attentive  congregation.  The  second  discourse  was  by 

Mr.  R , K [jprobably  Mr.  Robe,  Kilsyth],  from 

Ileb.  vi.  18  : 4 That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it 
was  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a strong  con- 
solation, who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope 
set  before  us/  During  this  sermon  there  was  great  melt- 
ing and  mourning  among  the  people,  with  some  outcrying, 
but  not  much.  In  the  evening,  there  was  an  exercise  or 
lecture  in  the  church,  upon  the  first  three  verses  of  the  40th 
psalm,  by  Mr.  Burnside  of  Kirkintilloch,  on  five  minutes’ 
warning  or  so.  In  his  first  prayer,  which  was  not  usual 
with  him,  the  tears  wrere  running  dowrn  his  cheeks.  A little 
after  he  began,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  like  a mighty  rush- 
ing wdnd,  filled  the  house  in  such  a manner  that  almost 
the  whole  congregation  wTas  melted  into  a flood  of  tears, 
accompanied  with  bitter  outcries,  on  the  part  of  some  newly 
awakened.  The  minister  was  obliged  to  stop ; and,  after  a 
few  exhortations,  ended  the  lecture,  and  left  behind  him  a 
multitude  of  distressed  souls,  thirsting  after  a soul-satisfying 
discovery  of  the  dear  Redeemer.  Near  where  I had  my 
quarters,  there  were  five  or  six  of  these — tw-o  of  them 
gentlemen’s  servants,  known  to  have  been  wficked. 

44  On  the  Sabbath,  Mr.  Warden  had  an  excellent  sermon 
on  these  words  : 4 For  when  we  were  yet  w ithout  strength, 
in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly/  (Rom.  v.  6.) 
The  congregation  was  moved,  mourning  swreetly  and  de- 
voutly ; and  such  a set  of  communicants  as  wrere  at  the  first 
table  you  never  saw\  There  used  to  be  nine  or  ten  tables, 
some  years  one  or  two  more,  but  this  year  there  were 

eighteen . Our  sermon  within  wras  by  Mr.  S of  Fintrv, 

from  these  w^ords : 4 Faith  wrorketh  by  love’  (Gal.  v.  6); 
and  he  had  a most  desirable  auditory. 


236 


PARISH  OF  CAMPSIE. 


44  On  Monday  morning,  we  again  assembled  in  a very  be- 
coming manner.  One  of  my  acquaintance  told  me  that, 
in  liis  quarters,  a young  woman,  who  had  been  mocking 
the  distressed,  and  who  refused  to  come  near  family  worship 
that  morning,  placed  herself  behind  the  door  to  listen,  and 
was  pricked  to  the  heart,  and  constrained  to  cry  out.  She 
was  with  us  to-day  hearing  sermon,  and  in  great  distress. 
Mr.  Warden  of  Calder  preached  a desirable  sermon  from 
Fs.  cxix.  30  : 4 I have  chosen  the  way  of  truth : thy 
judgments  have  I laid  before  me/  There  was  a pleasant 
motion  among  the  hearers.  Mr.  M‘Laurin  of  Glasgow 
succeeded  him,  from  Isa.  xliy.  3 : 4 1 will  pour  water  on 
him  that  is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground/  But 
of  all  the  days  of  power,  I never  saw  the  like,  considering 
the  size  of  the  meeting.  The  dear  Redeemer,  by  the  in- 
fluences of  his  Spirit,  went  from  corner  to  corner;  which 
appeared  not  so  much  in  outcries,  as  in  a sweet  mourning 
and  low  motion.  The  last  was  truly  the  great  day  of  the 
feast.  When  the  bulk  of  the  meeting  was  dismissed,  they 
came  out  of  the  church-yard  like  a company  or  two  of  sol  - 
diers,  in  three  and  four  abreast,  supporting  the  distressed 
men  and  women.  The  state  of  the  parish  before,  was 
eighty  under  soul  distress,  who  had  by  this  time  found  re- 
lief ; but  now  it  is  far  advanced,  besides  many  from  the 
parishes  northward,  which  were,  I know,  awakened  there 
that  day. — In  haste,  yours,”  &c. 

A very  full  statement  was  published  by  Mr.  Warden, 
which  was  written  in  December  1743;  but  it  is  much  too 
long  for  insertion.  In  1748,  when  now  in  Perth,  he  was 
asked  by  Mr.  Robe  to  state  how  far  the  fruits  of  the  pre- 
ceding revival  had  continued.  And  he  then  wrote  anew, 
declaring  that,  up  till  the  time  of  his  leaving  Campsie,  in 
1747,  he  did  not  know  of  more  than  four  who  had  fallen 
from  their  profession ; adding  : 44  With  great  pleasure  I yet 
think  on  many  of  them,  of  whom  I could  not  but  entertain 
the  highest  opinion,  and  the  greatest  hopes.  A solid  and 
lively  sense  of  divine  things  seems  to  fill  them  with  love 


PARISH  OF  KILSYTH. 


287 


to  God,  humility,  self-deniedness,  meekness,  and  charity; 
and  a jealousy  of  themselves,  and  their  own  attainments, 
seems  to  animate  them  with- a peculiar  earnestness  in  every 
religious  exercise/’ 

The  Parish  of  Kilsyth. — This  parish  lies  east  from  Camp- 
sie,  in  the  great  Scottish  vale,  through  which  the  Roman 
wall  once  passed,  and  where  is  now  the  Forth  and  Clyde 
canal.  Mr.  James  Rohe,  the  minister,  has  already  been 
noticed  as  one  of  the  earliest  promoters  of  the  revival,  and 
as  having  shared  in  the  triumphs  of  Cambuslang.  Rut, 
speaking  now  of  him  as  the  minister  of  Kilsyth,  it  is  due 
to  observe,  that  as  this  parish  became  very  much  a second 
source  of  influence  to  the  surrounding  district,  so  he  became 
eminently  the  herald  of  the  day,  corresponding  with  all 
quarters,  collecting  intelligence,  and  publishing  it  in  a 
variety  of  forms,  but  especially  in  his  “ Monthly  History,5’ 
and  in  his  “ Narrative,55  which,  as  before  noticed,  has  been 
recently  reprinted.  In  consequence  of  this  last  publication, 
it  is  not  necessary  to  give  so  full  an  account  of  this  parish 
as  otherwise  its  importance  would  demand.  Still,  as  re- 
gards the  commencement  of  the  revival  in  Kilsyth,  it  is  so 
interesting,  that  we  can  scarcely  think  of  doing  otherwise 
than  glancing  at  it  as  we  proceed.  The  good  man  had 
long  been  on  the  mount,  as  the  prophet  was  on  Carmel, 
pleading  with  God ; and  many  a weary  look  he  cast  to- 
wards the  sea,  without  observing  any  sign  even  of  clouds. 
He  preached  also  much  and  long  on  the  work  of  the 
Spirit,  as  if  to  bring  the  people  under  its  power  ; and  yet, 
so  far  as  for  the  time  appeared,  his  preaching  was  only  of 
the  work — it  wanted  evidence  of  the  Worker  being  himself 
there.  At  last  the  news  were  brought  him  of  what  had 
occurred  at  Cambuslang.  It  appeared  very  much  as  the 
prophet’s  little  cloud;  but  the  good  man  ventured  not,  like 
the  prophet,  to  declare  that  the  heavens  would  soon  be  black 
with  clouds,  full  of  rain,  and  pouring  down  their  treasures 
on  many  a parish  and  district.  Still,  like  a true  child  of 
faith,  he  betook  himself  anew  to  prayer,  crying  continually 


238 


PARISH  OF  KILSYTH. 


to  God  that  his  fleece  should  not  be  left  dry,  when  others 
were  thus  wetted;  and  God  heard  and  answered  him — yet 
not  perhaps  as  he  expected.  In  Cumbernauld,  Kirkin- 
tilloch, Calder,  and  Campsie — all  neighbouring  parishes — 
there  were  some  who  had  been  awakened  at  Cambuslang. 
And  the  ministers  of  these  parishes,  because  of  this,  were 
full  of  expectation;  but  the  minister  of  Kilsyth  knew  of 
none  belonging  to  his  parish.  The  godly  Mr.  Willison  had 
come  all  the  way  from  Dundee  to  witness  what  he  had 
heard  was  going  on  at  Cambuslang,  and  was  on  his  way 
homeward,  when,  on  the  15th  of  April,  he  arrived  at  the 
manse  of  Kilsyth.  This  was  Thursday  evening.  His 
news  awakened  the  despondent  feelings  of  the  tried  minis- 
ter. u You  must  address  my  people,”  said  he,  44  to-morrow 
morning.”  Mr.  Willison  consented.  Intimations  were 
sent  to  all  quarters,  and  short  as  the  warning  was,  the 
meeting  was  large.  u Mr.  Willison  preached,”  says  Mr. 
Robe,  44  a distinct,  plain,  and  moving  sermon,  from  Ps.  xl. 
2,  3 : 4 He  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible  pit,  out 
of  the  miry  clay,  and  set  my  feet  upon  a rock,  and  estab- 
lished my  goings.  And  he  hath  put  a new  song  in  my 
mouth,  even  praise  unto  our  God : many  shall  see  it,  and 
fear,  and  shall  trust  in  the  Lord.’  ” Still  the  doings  of  God 
were  yet  in  secret.  On  the  Sabbath,  Mr.  Robe  himself 
preached  from  Gal.  iv.  19  : 44  My  little  children,  of  whom 
I travail  in  birth  again,  until  Christ  be  formed  in  you.” 
The  tide  of  feeling  at  last  began  to  rise.  The  preacher  so 
felt  as  scarcely  to  be  able  to  go  on  ; and  deep  seriousness 
marked  the  countenances  of  the  hearers.  The  Sabbath 
following,  one  woman  wras  sensibly  awakened,  but  she  be- 
longed to  the  parish  of  Campsie;  and  so  the  fear  recurred, 
that,  after  all,  Kilsyth  was  to  be  as  the  dry  fleece,  though 
all  around  should  be  as  the  wret.  On  the  Sabbath  follow- 
ing, nothing  remarkable  occurred ; but  by  this  time  seve- 
ral prayer-meetings  had  begun  to  be  formed,  and  several 
girls,  between  ten  and  fourteen  years  of  age,  had  been 
observed  to  meet  in  an  out-house  for  prayer.  On  Sab- 


OTHER  PARISHES. 


239 


bath  the  9th  of  May,  four  or  five  were  awakened;  and,  on 
the  Wednesday  following,  Mr.  Rohe  proceeded  to  Cambus- 
lang,  where  he  saw  evidence  of  the  mighty  power  of  God. 
Returning  on  Friday,  he  called  at  the  house  of  a friend 
who  had  a bleachfield,  and  employed  a number  of  young 
women;  and,  to  his  surprise,  he  found  six  of  them  who 
had  been  awakened  at  Cambuslang  a few  days  before,  in 
deep  distress,  and  crying  out  for  help.  As  he  was  hastening 
home,  he  spent  but  a short  time  with  them,  and  was  about 
to  mount  his  horse,  when  the  cries  of  another  reached  him, 
then  another,  and  another,  till  he  had  other  six  in  the  same 
state  with  the  former.  On  Sabbath  the  16th,  he  again 
preached  from  Gal.  iv.  29,  and  extraordinary  power  now 
appeared.  There  was  great  mourning  now  over  the  con- 
gregation, and  many  crying  out — some  of  them  strong  young 
men.  The  number  awakened  was  believed  to  be  between 
forty  and  fifty.  But,  instead  of  following  out  the  progress 
of  the  work  in  this  parish,  we  must  again  refer  to  Mr. 
Robe's  Narrative,  merely  adding,  that  upwards  of  three 
hundred  were  said  to  be  awakened  in  this  place — two  hun- 
dred of  them  more  or  less  connected  with  the  parish,  and 
the  others  strangers ; and  that,  in  1751,  upwards  of  a hun- 
dred of  those  in  the  parish  had  either  died  hopefully,  or 
continued  to  walk  worthy  of  their  profession ; and  farther, 
that  this  reaping  with  joy  turned  out  to  be  closely  connect- 
ed with  his  long  sowing  in  tears,  and  with  Mr.  Willison’s 
sermon. 

Parishes  lying  east  and  north  of  Kilsyth . — These  were 
connected  with  the  presbyteries  of  Glasgow , Linlithgow , 
Stirling  in  particular,  and  also  Dumbarton.  To  all  of 
them  the  revival  extended,  yet  not  in  such  a way  as  to  re- 
quire for  each  a separate  section.  Cumbernauld,  which 
lies  east  and  partly  south  of  Kilsyth,  had  about  eighty 
awakened  in  it ; but  as  the  two  parishes  are  contiguous,  the 
influence  of  the  one  mingled  with  that  of  the  other.  In 
the  parish  of  Torphichen,  which  is  in  the  presbytery  of 
Linlithgow,  seven  were  awakened  at  one  communion,  and 


240 


PARISH  OF  GARG UNNOCK. 


the  work  went  noiselessly  on.  And  it  was  also  experienced 
in  Falkirk,  and  other  parishes  of  the  Linlithgow  presbytery. 
And,  on  entering  the  presbytery  of  Stirling,  there  were 
awakenings  in  the  parishes  of  Denny,  Larbert,  Dunipace, 
and  St.  Ninians — in  the  last  of  these  to  a considerable  ex- 
tent. There  was  a district  on  the  river  Carron,  called 
Dundaff,  partly  in  the  parish  of  Kilsyth,  and  partly  in  the 
parish  of  St.  Ninians,  but  separated  from  the  former  by  a 
range  of  hills,  and  from  the  latter  by  a distance  of  five 
miles.  Hither  the  work  was  also  carried  in  1742,  and 
there  are  attestations  of  its  continuance  in  1743.  And  at 
St.  Ninians  itself,  which  stretches  all  the  way  from  Kilsyth 
to  Stirling,  and  a great  way  east,  there  seems  to  have  been 
a very  considerable  awakening.  It  first  appeared  at  the 
observance  of  the  communion  in  August  1742.  Several 
were  awakened  on  the  Saturday,  many  more  on  the  Lord’s- 
day,  and  a still  greater  number  on  the  Monday,  which  was 
reckoned  a great  day  of  the  Mediators  power.  And  the 
work  seems  to  have  been  going  on  months  after.  West 
from  St.  Ninians,  also,  the  work  extended  into  the  parishes 
of  Fintry  and  Killearn , both  in  the  presbytery  of  Dum- 
barton, but  in  the  county  of  Stirling.  Mr.  James  Bain,  the 
minister  of  the  latter  parish,  had  taken  part  in  the  work  at 
Cambuslang  and  elsewhere,  from  an  early  period.  In  July 
1742,  when  the  communion  was  observed,  there  was  a con- 
siderable awakening;  especially  on  the  Monday,  when 
professor  Potter  from  Glasgow,  and  the  minister  of  St. 
Ninians,  preached.  In  1751,  Mr.  Bain  wrote,  regretting 
that  it  had  been  so  limited  in  his  parish  beyond  many 
others;  but  giving  God  thanks  that,  even  then,  some  of  the 
most  eminent  Christians  he  had  ever  met  were  among  the 
fruits  of  that  revival.  They  were  poor  in  spirit,  they  attained 
to  high  measures  of  communion  with  God,  and  cherished 
fervent  love  for  the  whole  human  race,  even  their  enemies. 

The,  Parish  of  GargunnocJc. — This  parish  is  in  the  pres- 
bytery of  Stirling,  and  bes  immediately  west  of  Stirling 
itself.  The  minister  was  Mr.  John  Warden,  a native  of 


PARISH  OP  GARG UNNOCIC. 


241 


Falkirk.  Ilis  father  was  a merchant  in  that  town,  and 
had  taken  part  in  the  troublous  times  of  the  persecution 
against  the  covenanters;  but  his  son,  deeply  lamenting  this, 
gave  himself  wholly  to  the  work  of  God  as  a follower  of 
the  faithful;  and  soon  after  the  revolution,  he  became 
minister  of  Gargunnock.  Here  he  was  known  as  a faithful 
gospel  minister,  “ well  seen,”  as  Boston  says  of  him,  “ in 
the  doctrines  of  free  grace.”  Mr.  Alexander  Archibald,  a 
very  eminent  Christian  of  those  days,  says  of  him,  “ Mr. 
Warden,  in  an  action  sermon  from  Isa.  lv.  2,  c Eat  ye  that 
which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness/ 
with  great  clearness  and  earnestness,  held  forth  Jesus 
Christ  and  his  fulness,  and  our  warrant  as  sinners  to  take 
him  as  our  own.  Trickling  tears  and  eager  looks  marked 
the  inward  frame  of  almost  every  hearer.  My  heart  was 
almost  melted  with  the  views  of  redeeming  grace,  and  filled 
with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.”  In  church  courts 
he  was  among  those  who  stood  on  the  side  of  gospel  truth  in 
the  “Marrow”  controversy,  and  although  averse  to  extreme 
measures,  he  remained  the  friend  of  such  men  as  the 
Erskines,  regularly  assisting  Mr.  Ebenezer  after  his  removal 
to  Stirling.  As  an  author,  he  wrote  a treatise  on  baptism, 
mid  another  on  the  Lord’s  supper,  which  was  re-published  not 
very  long  ago,  with  a recommendation  by  Dr.  Colqulioun  and 
Dr.  Ireland,  both  of  Leith.  By  the  time  of  the  revival  in 
1742,  Mr.  Warden  was  far  advanced  in  life;  yet  did  he  re- 
joice in  it,  as  one  would  in  the  bursting  forth  of  a late  and 
long  expected  spring.  Some  of  his  people,  who  were  at 
Kilsyth,  attending  the  sacrament  on  the  second  Sabbath  of 
July,  came  home  in  an  awakened  state;  others,  who  were 
at  Campsie  on  a like  occasion  on  the  last  of  the  same 
month,  were  also  awakened;  and  others  still,  who  were  at 
St.  Ninians  the  Sabbath  following,  also  a sacramental 
Sabbath,  returned  similarly  impressed : and  on  the  Thursday 
thereafter,  Mr.  Warden  himself  preached,  and  eighteen 
more  were  awakened  that  day.  The  week  following,  his 
son  from  Campsie  arrived;  and  under  his  preaching,  as  well 


242 


PARISH  OF  MUTIIIL. 


as  his  fathers,  the  awakening  became  general,  deep,  and 
powerful,  the  gross  number  of  those  affected  being  reckoned 
at  nearly  a hundred,  which  was  then  a considerable  propor- 
tion of  the  parishioners.* 

The  Presbytery  of  A uchterarder.  The  Parish  of  Muthil. 
— The  presbytery  of  Auchterarder,  and  particularly  the 
parish  of  Muthil,  occupies  a central  position  in  the  southern 
division  of  Perthshire.  At  this  time  the  minister  of  Muthil 
was  Mr.  William  Halley.  During  the  prevalence  of  epis- 
copacy in  the  seventeenth  century,  the  parishioners  seem 
to  have  become  substantially  episcopalian.  When  the  re- 
volution settlement  took  place,  it  was  laid  upon  the  presby- 
tery to  look  out  for  a proper  person  to  be  inducted  as  presby- 

* Mr.  Warden,  the  minister  of  Gargunnock,  died  probably  in  1756. 
His  son,  Mr.  John  Warden,  was  ordained  minister  of  Campsie  on  the  3d 
of  April  1732;  was  translated  to  Perth  on  the  16th  of  March  1747,  and 
to  the  Canongate  of  Edinburgh  in  1755,  where  he  died  probably  in  1765. 
He  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Dr.  Erskine,  who,  when  in  Kirkintilloch, 
and  the  other  in  Campsie,  was  his  nearest  neighbour,  and  who  in  Edin- 
burgh knew  him  as  a fellow-labourer,  and  always  spoke  of  him  with  much 
affection ; and  he  is  still  known  as  the  able  and  judicious  author  of  a work 
called  “ The  System  of  Revealed  Religion.”  His  son,  Mr.  John  Warden, 
succeeded  him  in  the  Canongate.  But  as  his  mother  was  a daughter  of 
the  laird  of  Kirkton,  in  Campsie,  and  as  that  property  was  entailed  on 
her  son  and  heirs  male,  he  took  her  name  on  succeeding  to  the  property 
about  1775,  and  is  therefore  best  known  by  the  adopted  name  of 
M‘Farlan,  which  his  descendants  bear.  His  name  occurs  in  the  life  of 
Dr.  Erskine,  as  the  author  of  a pamphlet  on  the  subject  of  Catholic 
emancipation,  “ in  which,”  says  sir  H.  Moncrieff,  “ there  is  a display  of 
good  sense,  moderation,  and  well-conducted  argument,  worthy  of  the 
high  character  of  its  estimable  author.”  He  wrote  also  a work  on  the 
poor-laws,  similar  in  its  principles  to  those  of  Dr.  Chalmers ; but  he  died 
at  the  early  age  of  forty-nine.  This  was  on  the  24th  December  1788. 
Speaking  of  his  death,  sir  H.  Moncrieff  says,  “ Dr.  M‘Farlan  died  deeply 
regretted  by  the  whole  community  of  Edinburgh,  who  lost  in  him  one  of 
its  most  useful  and  valuable  members.  He  will  always  be  remembered 
by  his  personal  friends,  and  by  every  individual  who  had  access  to  know 
his  worth,  with  the  most  perfect  respect  and  affection.”  Dr.  Patrick 
M‘Farlan,  now  at  Greenock,  and  one  of  the  fathers  of  the  Free  church, 
is  his  only  remaining  son;  and  Mr.  John  M‘Farlan,  minister  at  Monkton, 
also  of  the  Free  church,  is  his  son,  and  the  fifth  in  this  ministerial  line 
of  descent.  Mr.  James  M‘Farlan  of  Muiravonside  is  also  a grandson  of 
Dr.  M‘Farlan  of  the  Canongate. 


PARISH  OF  MUTIIIL. 


243 


terian  minister.  They  named  Mr.  Halley.  But  so  much 
were  the  people  set  against  both  him  and  the  presbytery, 
and,  as  would  appear,  presbyterianism  itself,  that-,  armed 
with  swords  and  staves,  they  occupied  the  church-yard, 
guarded  the  church  doors,  and  refused  to  admit  either  the 
presbytery  or  Mr.  Halley.  He  was,  accordingly,  ordained 
in  the  church -yard,  where  he  had  for  a time  to  preach,  and 
was  sometimes  even  here  pelted  with  stones.  At  last  this 
opposition  gave  way,  and  he  entered,  as  is  said,  the  church 
on  the  20th  of  March  1705.  It  is  at  least  questionable 
whether,  even  in  the  circumstances,  such  an  induction  as 
this  was  justifiable,  or  not  rather  to  be  condemned:  but  it 
ought  to  be  observed,  that  the  opposition  was  virtually 
against  the  revolution  settlement,  and  for  the  continuance 
of  a system  which  had  proved  unrighteous,  oppressive, 
and  persecuting.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  what  we  have  to 
do  with  is  the  work  of  God  under  Mr.  Halley’s  ministry, 
and  which  extended  to  a period  of  nearly  fifty  years.  He 
proved  alike  faithful  and  painstaking ; and  the  writer  of 
the  last  statistical  account  adds,  that,  in  1837,  when  that 
document  was  written,  the  name  of  Halley  was  still  em- 
balmed in  the  traditional  recollections  of  the  people. 

As  regards  the  revival  in  that  parish,  the  earliest  notice 
of  it  is  contained  in  a letter  addressed  to  a friend  in  Edin- 
burgh, and  published  in  the  colonies.  The  following  is  an 
extract : “ About  a year  before  this  work  came  to  be  openly 
observed,  there  was  a secret  stirring  and  concern  among  the 
people.  This  I was  informed  of  by  some  religious  elders 
from  different  corners  of  the  parish.  Something  of  it  ap- 
peared on  the  first  Sabbath  of  January  1742,  which  hap- 
pened to  be  a stormy  day.  I had  prepared  a sermon  which 
I wished  the  whole  congregation  to  hear ; and,  counting  on 
a small  meeting,  I changed  my  text ; and  finding  more  than 
ordinary  freedom  in  preaching,  I continued  to  preach  from 
the  same  text  the  Sabbath  following.  Both  days  I observed 
an  unusual  tenderness  among  the  hearers,  and  I heard  more 
of  it  afterwards.  I was  also  told  of  a spirit  of  prayer  ap- 


244 


PARISH  OF  MUTHIL. 


pearing  among  the  people  ; and  so  it  continued,  till  the 
third  Sabbath  of  July,  when  we  had  the  Lord’s  supper/' 
Writing  to  Mr.  Rohe  on  the  28th  of  September,  he  says,  in 
continuation  : “ At  this  time,  I think  our  conquering  Re- 
deemer made  some  visible  inroads  upon  the  kingdom  of 
Satan.  I hope  that  there  are  not  a few',  both  in  this  and  other 
congregations,  that  can  say  that  God  wTas  in  this  place,  and 
that  they  felt  his  power  and  saw  his  glory.  But,  whatever 
the  Lord  was  pleased  to  shed  down  of  the  influences  of  his 
Spirit  upon  that  solemn  occasion,  it  may,  comparatively 
speaking,  he  accounted  a day  of  small  things,  in  respect  of 
what  a gracious  God  has  been  pleased  to  do  amongst  us 
since.  I must  acknowledge,  to  the  praise  of  our  gracious 
God,  that  an  unusual  power  hath  attended  the  word 
preached  every  Sabbath-day  since;  few,  if  any,  having 
passed  hut  some  have  been  awakened,  and  particularly  last 
Lord’s-day,  which  I hope  I may  say  was  a day  of  the  Son 
of  man  in  this  place.  For,  besides  the  general  concern 
which  w'as  seen  in  the  congregation,  about  eighteen  of  whom, 
I got  information  that  night,  were  pricked  to  the  heart,  and 
deeply  wounded  with  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty,  the 
work  of  the  law  has  been  severe  and  outwardly  noticeable 
upon  all  that  I have  conversed  with.  Their  convictions 
have  been  deep,  cutting,  and  abiding : and  yet  I have  not 
observed  in  any  a tendency  to  despair.  The  law  has  been 
to  many  as  a schoolmaster  leading  to  Christ,  and  many 
seem  to  have  attained  to  peace  and  joy  in  believing.  Some 
have  been  so  filled  wTith  heavenly  joys,  as  to  he  almost  too 
much  for  their  frail  bodies.  Some  old  people  have  been 
awakened,  hut  they  are  chiefly  such  as  are  younger ; some 
not  more  than  twelve  years  of  age  are  manifesting  very  de- 
lightful fruits,  as  in  the  exercise  of  prayer.  They  are  said 
to  astonish  many.  Our  Sabbath  evening  meetings  are  also 
greatly  blessed.  As  soon  as  worship  is  over,  crowrds  come 
to  the  manse,  filling  both  it  and  the  court  before  the  doors. 
Their  thirst  for  the  word  is  great,  and  their  concern  so 
deep,  that  their  mourning  frequently  drowns  my  voice,  so 


PARISH  OF  MUT11IL. 


245 


that  I am  obliged  to  stop  till  they  compose  themselves. 
And,  when  this  meeting  is  over,  I am  occupied  with  the 
awakened,  it  may  he,  for  hours  longer.  Many  afford  such 
evidence  of  real  conversion,  that,  to  call  it  in  doubt,  would 
be  to  call  in  question  the  experience  of  the  saints  spoken  of 
in  Scripture.” 

AY  riting  again  on  the  29th,  he  refers  particularly  to  a 
little  company  of  his  people,  who  had  just  returned  home, 
after  being  all  the  way  to  Kilsyth,  attending  the  communion 
there — a distance  of  nearly  thirty  miles  : “It  gave  me  much 
pleasure  to  hear  Mr.  Porteous  (the  minister  of  Monivaird,  a 
neighbouring  parish)  and  some  of  my  people  giving  such  an 
account  of  the  work  of  God  wTith  you,  at  your  last  sacrament. 
Such  of  my  flock  as  attended  on  that  solemn  occasion,  have 
not,  I hope,  lost  their  travel.  About  seyen-and-twenty  of 
them,  all  in  one  company,  were  overtaken  on  their  way 
homeward  by  Mr.  Porteous,  Mr.  Erskine,  and  Mr.  David 
Erskine,  who  proved  eminently  useful  to  them.  Such  was 
the  distress  of  many,  that,  had  they  not  found  relief,  they 
would  probably  have  had  to  lodge  in  the  desert  place,  where 
night  would  have  overtaken  them ; for  they  were  scarcely 
able  to  travel  farther.  The  work  here  is  still  advancing. 
Every  Sabbath,  since  I wrote  you  last,  has  been  a day  of 
the  Son  of  man.  Many  are  so  deeply  affected  in  hearing, 
as  to  cause  a general  sound  of  weeping  throughout  the  con- 
gregation, which  sometimes  rises  till  I have  to  stop.  Their 
conversation,  coming  and  going  from  the  church,  is  spiri- 
tual, and  their  whole  course  of  life  devotional.  My  Sab- 
bath evening  meeting  had  to  be  removed  to  the  church, 
where  almost  the  whole  congregation  attend,  and  this  after 
a lecture  and  two  sermons;  some  having  a long  dark  moor 
to  travel  after  all.  There  is  also  a meeting  of  themselves 
in  the  school-house,  after  the  evening  exercise,  where  some 
hours  are  spent  in  prayer  to  their  own  edification,  and,  in  some 
cases,  to  the  conviction  of  persons  standing  and  listening  at 
the  doors  and  windows.  Our  praying  societies  prosper ; they 
are  still  growing  in  numbers.  They  are  frequent  in  their 


246 


PARISH  OF  MUTHIL. 


meetings,  and  the  Lord  is  observably  present  with  them. 
The  meetings  formed  of  boys  and  girls,  give  me  great  satis- 
faction. One  of  them,  which  began  after  the  late  commu- 
nion, has  now  increased  to  about  twenty  members.  They 
first  met  in  the  town ; hut  as  several  of  them  fell  under 
deep  concern,  and  I was  in  consequence  sent  for,  I gave 
them  a room  here  in  the  manse,  where  they  meet  every 
night.  And  O how  pleasant  it  is  to  hear  the  poor  young 
lambs  addressing  themselves  to  God  in  prayer  ! Sometimes, 
standing  outside  the  room,  I am  myself  often  melted  into 
tears,  listening.  There  is  another  meeting  of  young  ones 
in  a different  corner  of  the  parish,  where  Mr.  Robertson 
teaches  a charity  school.  Some  of  the  children  desired  his 
permission  to  meet  in  the  school-house.  This  was  readily 
granted,  and  about  twenty  of  them  meet  twice  a- week,  some 
of  them  having  a considerable  way  to  travel  homeward  in 
the  dark.  Both  among  old  and  young,  the  devotional 
spirit  is  quite  unprecedented  in  this  quarter.” 

Writing  in  January  1743,  he  speaks  of  the  work  as  still 
going  on,  and  notices  particularly  the  progress  of  the  young. 
“ We  have  now,”  says  he,  “three  praying  societies.  One 
of  them,  at  a place  about  two  miles  distant,  made  me  a very 
agreeable  visit  on  the  first  Monday  of  the  year — a day  that 
young  people  especially  used  to  be  otherwise  employed. 
We  had,  I think,  upwards  of  forty  of  them,  and  they  con- 
tinued in  prayer  and  other  exercises  till  about  ten  o'clock  at 
night.”  Writing  again  in  March,  he  says:  “Though  the 
public  awakenings  be  not  so  discernible  as  they  were  some 
time  ago,  yet  few  Sabbaths  pass  hut  we  have  some  pricked 
in  their  hearts,  and,  with  greatanguish  of  spirit,  crying  out, 

4 What  shall  we  do? ’ A law- work  is  long  continued  with 
many,  and  some  who  had  their  wounds  apparently  bound 
up,  have  them  opened  afresh ; and  when  the  Lord  hides 
his  face,  they  are  exceedingly  troubled.  Ignorant  of 
God’s  ways  wdth  others,  they  think  that  there  can  be 
no  sorrow  like  their  own.  But  they  will  gather  experience 
as  the  Lord  teaches.” 


AUCIITERARDER  PRESBYTERY. 


247 


Two  more  of  Mr.  Halley's  letters  were  published  in  the 
“Monthly  History,*'  the  one  dated  28th  August,  1744,  and 
the  other  in  November  of  the  same  year;  from  both  of  which 
the  work  of  God  seems  then  to  have  been  going  silently 
on ; the  subjects  of  earlier  awakenings  growing  more  and 
more  into  the  condition  of  persons  bringing  forth  the 
peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.  In  the  last  of  these,  he 
mentions  that  some  of  his  people  had  been  again  at  Kilsyth, 
attending  the  sacrament,  and  that  they  had  returned 
greatly  refreshed,  many  more  regretting  that  the  lateness  of 
their  harvest  had  prevented  them  from  being  there  also. 
But  we  shall  now  conclude  this  article,  by  giving  an  ex- 
tract of  his  attestation  in  1751,  ten  years  after  the  first  ob- 
servable change.  “ About  six  of  those  persons  who  were 
the  subjects  of  that  glorious  work  in  1742,  1743,  I have 
every  reason  to  believe,  have  gone  to  partake  of  the  rest 
which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God.  As  they  had  a 
gospel  walk,  and  were  exercised  unto  godliness,  so  at  their 
death  they  gave  a notable  testimony  to  the  truth  and 
reality  of  religion  and  experimental  godliness.  With  some 
of  them,  who  had  been  long  in  the  dark  about  their  state, 
at  evening  tide  it  was  light.  Their  doubts  and  fears  were 
dispelled,  and  an  abundant  entrance  was  ministered  unto 
them  to  the  heavenly  kingdom  of  our  Lord.  There  are 
a great  many,  in  this  and  some  neighbouring  parishes,  yet 
in  the  land  of  the  living,  who  were  the  subjects  of  that 
work,  to  whom,  as  far  as  man  can  judge,  it  proved  saving ; 
their  walk  being  such  as  becometh  the  gospel.” 

Other  Parishes  in  the  Presbytery  of  A uchterarder. — The 
Parish  of  Monivaird  lies  directly  north  of  Muthil,  and  was, 
as  would  be  observed,  under  the  pastoral  care  of  Mr.  James 
Porteous,  who  wTas  ordained  in  1730,  and  died  in  1780. 
He  took  part  with  Mr.  Robe  at  Kilsyth.  And  it  was  re- 
ported concerning  his  parish,  during  the  revival  season, 
that  an  unusual  attention  in  hearing  was  observed ; that 
many  families,  formerly  neglectful,  set  up  the  worship  of 
God ; that  four  praying  societies  were  formed ; that  much 


248 


DUNDEE. 


concern  appeared  among  the  young,  who  had  two  meetings 
of  their  own. 

Crieff  lies  also  to  the  north,  but  eastward,  and  was  at 
this  time  under  the  pastoral  care  of  Mr.  John  Drummond. 
He  was  inducted  in  1699,  and  continued  till  1755.  And 
during  the  revival,  there  were  discernible  awakenings 
among  his  people,  and  some  brought  into  distress.  Not 
fewer  than  eight  prayer-meetings  were  also  set  up. 

It  is  mentioned  that  in  the  parish  of  Madderty,  which 
lies  farther  east  and  southward,  a few  boys  were  found  in 
the  fields  engaged  in  prayer.  They  were  allowed  the  use 
of  a house.  Many  joined  them,  both  old  and  young;  and 
they  continued,  when  the  information  was  communicated, 
to  make  progress.  And  in  the  parish  of  Auchterarder, 
which  lies  farther  south,  manifestations  of  the  same  spirit 
appeared  in  the  formation  of  six  prayer-meetings. 

It  is  also  important  to  observe,  that  the  presbytery  of 
Auchterarder  resolved,  collectively,  to  divide  themselves 
into  meetings  for  prayer  and  conference,  towards  the  for- 
warding of  this  work.  Few  things  are  more  hopeful  than 
this  at  present,  in  the  Free  church;  some  at  least  of 
the  presbyteries  spending  more  of  their  time  in  prayer 
and  brotherly  conference,  than  in  ecclesiastical  proceedings. 
And  when  this  shall  have  become  general,  and  shall  be 
followed  out  in  a proper  spirit,  a spiritual  harvest  may  at 
last  be  expected. 

Other  parts  of  Perthshire,  and  also  of  Fife  which  lies 
south-east,  were  more  or  less  visited  with  the  revival  of 
1742,  1743.  But  we  must  again  look  northward,  cross- 
ing the  Tay  into  Forfarshire.  Here,  and  northwards  to- 
wards Aberdeen,  there  is  scarcely  any  place  of  which  it 
can  be  said,  so  far  as  our  information  goes,  that  there  was 
anything  like  a decided  awakening,  at  least  in  the  sense 
then  understood.  We  shall,  however,  collect  what  is  said 
of  Dundee,  and  one  or  two  other  places,  and  so  pass  -on  to 
the  far  north. 

The  Toicn  of  Dundee.— Mr.  Willison,  of  whom  some  ac- 


DUNDEE. 


249 


count  was  given  in  chapter  ix.,  was  at  this  time  in  Dun- 
dee, and  likely,  above  most  men,  to  share  in  the  blessings 
which  were  so  largely  dispensed,  and  the  following  is  the 
substance  of  what  we  have  observed  concerning  it.  On 
Mr.  Whitefield’ s first  visit  to  Scotland,  he  was  very  early 
solicited  by  Mr.  Willison  to  visit  Dundee,  and  he  proba- 
bly reached  that  town  on  the  4th  of  September,  1741. 
And  in  a letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Whitefield,  soon  after  this 
visit,  Mr.  Willison  says  : “ As  for  Dundee,  I desire  always  to 
bless  God  for  the  many  tears  I saw  shed,  while  you  were 
here  preaching,  and  also  since  your  departure,  particularly 
when  your  labours  are  spoken  of.  A good  many  of  the 
young  people  in  this  place  have  joined  meetings  for  prayer 
and  repeating  sermons.  I have  myself  heard  some  of  these 
young  persons  pray,  and  have  been  delighted  with  their 
fervour,  and  with  the  expressions  employed,  confessing,  as 
they  do,  that  they  knew  nothing  of  their  state  till  you 
came  among  us.”  In  October,  on  his  way  back  from  Aber- 
deen, Mr.  Whitefield  preached  at  a number  of  places,  both 
in  Kincardineshire  and  Forfarshire,  and  lastly  at  Dundee. 
Concerning  the  former,  he  says : “ Wherever  1 have  preach- 
ed, I hear  of  the  good  fruits  of  it,  both  in  convicting  sin- 
ners and  reviving  saints.”  And,  as  a specimen  of  the 
fruits  referred  to,  we  shall  take  the  case  of  Lundie,  as  de- 
scribed in  a letter  by  his  fellow-traveller,  Mr.  Thomas 
Davidson : “ In  several  places,  the  Lord,  I thought,  coun- 

tenanced him  in  a very  convincing  manner,  particularly  at 
a place  called  Lundie,  five  miles  north  from  Dundee,  where 
there  is  a considerable  number  of  serious  Christians,  who, 
hearing  that  he  was  to  come  that  way,  spent  most  part  of 
the  preceding  night  in  prayer.  It  was  betwixt  three  and  four 
o’clock  ere  he  reached,  and  he  had  still  to  go  on  to  Dundee. 
Yet  scarcely  had  he  begun,  when  the  presence  of  divine 
power  was  very  discernible.  Never  did  I see  such  melting 
in  any  congregation.”  And  his  own  remark  concerning 
Dundee  was,  “ At  Dundee,  the  concern  among  the  hearers 
is  very  remarkable.”  Again,  on  the  22d  of  March,  1742, 

R 


250 


DUNDEE. 


Mr.  Willison  says : “ Although  here  in  Dundee,  we  have 
not  such  an  effusion  as  at  Cambuslang,  or  other  places,  yet 
we  have  cause  to  he  thankful  for  the  present  hopeful  be- 
ginnings and  promising  appearances  among  the  young. 
W e see  now  great  numbers  of  them  awakened  to  seek  the 
Lord  and  cry  after  Jesus.  And  still  their  numbers  are 
increasing,  and  prayer-meetings  setting  up  so  fast  in  all 
places  of  the  town,  that  our  difficulty  is  to  get  houses  to 
accommodate  them.  I get  very  little  rest,  as  they  are  con- 
stantly coming  for  instruction.  I cannot  say  that  many  of 
them  hare  deep  convictions,  but  they  have  thirsting  desires 
after  Christ,  after  prayer,  after  hearing  the  word,  and  after 
Christian  fellowship.  Many  very  young  persons  were  ad- 
mitted to  the  Lord’s  table  here  on  the  first  Sabbath  of  this 


month.”  And  writing  on  the  5th  April,  1743,  he  says, 
“ Blessed  he  God,  we  have  also  a great  increase  of  praying 
societies  in  this  place.  I think  there  will  he  above  twenty 
of  such  societies  here,  and  in  several  of  them  between 
twenty  and  thirty  persons ; and  much  time  is  spent  in  them — 
sometimes  whole  nights.  Yet,  alas  ! we  have  not  the 
awakenings  lior  deep  humiliation  of  your  people.”  And 
when  writing  in  1745,  he  says  with  much  feeling:  “ Surely 
the  glorious  marchings  of  Zion’s  King  for  many  months 
along  the  braes  of  Cambuslang,  and  the  awful  steps  of 
majesty  there,  should  never  he  forgotten.  Oh,  to  see  or 
hear  tell  of  the  like  in  the  'parched  braes  of  Angus  and 
M earns  /” * 


* In  one  of  his  letters  dated  March,  1746,  there  are  some  curious 
notices  concerning  the  rebellion : “AVe  had  a good  number  of  fierce  j 
lion-like  men  quartered  in  this  town,  who  threatened  us  very  much 
with  plundering  and  killing,  if  we  complied  not  with  their  measures,  j 
travelling  still  up  and  down  our  streets  with  guns,  swords,  and  pistols  in  i 
their  hands  and  bosoms.  Hundreds  of  them  came  sometimes  into  our 
churches,  having  their  pistols  loaded  with  ball,  and  threatening  in  pri- 
vate to  let  them  fly  at  us  if  we  prayed  for  king  George ; yet  they  were 
restrained  when  they  heard  us  do  so,  and  were  sometimes  overheard,  on 
going  out,  blaming  themselves  for  not  executing  their  intention.  One  , 
day  five  of  their  officers,  of  the  name  of  Farquarson,  M‘Intosh,  and  , 
M‘Giivray,  &c.,  advanced  towards  the  pulpit,  and  three  of  them  coming 
up  close  to  me,  discharged  me  from  praying  for  king  George.  I began 


PARISH  OF  ROSSKEEN. 


251 


The  Synod  of  Boss. — The  district  comprehended  within 
this  synod  forms  hut  a limited  portion  of  the  county  of 
Ross,  including  Cromarty,  and  lies  along  the  Moray  Frith 
on  the  south  and  east,  the  Dornoch  Frith  on  the  north,  and 
is  so  intersected  by  the  Cromarty  Frith,  as  to  have  many 
of  its  parishes  connected  therewith,  and  so  to  have  frequent 
intercourse,  though  belonging  to  different  presbyteries.  On 
this  account,  the  parishes  to  be  noticed  may  be  reviewed  to- 
gether, though  connected  with  three  separate  presbyteries. 

The  Parish  of  Rosskeen. — The  minister  of  this  parish 
was  Mr.  David  Bethune.  He  was  ordained  in  the  parish 
of  Ardersier,  then  also  of  the  synod  of  Ross,  in  1713,  and 
translated  to  Rosskeen  in  1717.  “Up  till  this  time,”  says 
Mr.  Bethune,  “ the  parish  had  been  supplied  with  an 
episcopal  incumbent,  and  everything  like  effective  instruc- 
tion and  discipline  had  to  be  begun.”  In  1721,  he  ventured 
for  the  first  time  to  celebrate  among  his  parishioners  the 
Lord’s  supper,  six  or  seven  only  being  admitted.  For 
nine  or  ten  years  thereafter,  the  work  of  God  seemed  to  go 
on  gradually  and  hopefully.  From  1732  to  1742,  this 
progress  appeared  to  be  very  much  at  a stand.  But  from 
the  harvest  of  1742,  to  Martinmas  1743,  there  was  a re- 
markable revival.  About  thirty-six  men  and  women  fell 
under  deep  concern,  and  were  some  weeks  thereafter  receiv- 
ed into  a fellowship-meeting.  The  discourses  most  owned 
of  God  in  the  commencement  of  this  work  were  from 
Hos.  xiii.  13  : “ He  is  an  unwise  son;  for  he  should  not 
stay  long  in  the  place  of  the  breaking  forth  of  children  ’* — 
Gal.  iv.  19  : “ My  little  children  of  whom  I travail  in  birth 
again,  till  Christ  be  formed  in  you ; ” and  J ohn  iii.  3 : 
“ Except  a man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom 

to  reason  with  them,  but  the  women  cried  so  much  that  after  attempting 
in  vain  to  calm  them,  and  after  singing  a psalm  with  that  view,  I had  to 
pronounce  the  blessing  and  dismiss  the  congregation.  They  afterwards 
sent  to  my  house  forbidding  me  to  preach,  unless  I complied  with  their 
terms.  It  was  thought  best  to  leave  the  churches,  and  we  betook  our- 
selves to  private  houses  in  different  parts  of  the  town.  I was,  however, 
only  three  Sabbaths  out  of  the  church.” 


2.52 


PARISH  OF  NIGG. 


of  God  ” — especially  the  first.  Those  awakened  were  thrown 
into  a state  of  great  fear,  bordering  on  despondency,  and 
hut  slowly  attained  to  the  confidence  of  faith ; their  walk 
and  conversation,  however,  and  their  earnest  seeking  going 
along  with  their  fears,  and  seriousness  spreading  among 
others.  About  twelve  children,  from  nine  to  fifteen,  be- 
gan to  meet  in  a widow's  house  for  prayer  and  conference. 
On  Sabbath  and  Monday  nights  they  met,  sang  psalms, 
prayed  in  turn,  and  conferred  on  what  they  had  been 
hearing  in  church.  Some  who  overheard  them  were  as- 
tonished as  they  listened;  and  young  as  they  were,  they 
cared  for  each  other,  and  watched  over  each  other's  con- 
duct with  faithfulness  and  affection. 

The  Parish  of  Nigg. — The  minister  of  this  parish  was 
Mr.  John  Balfour.  Writing  in  February,  1744,  he  de- 
scribes religion  as  slowly  on  the  advance  from  1730  down, 
and  especially  in  1739.  He  speaks  of  a great  increase  in 
meetings  for  prayer  and  religious  conference.  Of  this  kind 
there  were  two  general  meetings,  in  which  the  minister 
presided,  and  ten  special  meetings,  in  different  parts  of  the 
parish,  and  to  wdiich  members  were  admitted  only  on  their 
giving  satisfactory  evidence  of  their  seriousness.  “ Wor- 
ship,” he  says,  “ was  observed  in  every  family  of  the  parish, 
except  three  or  four.  After  public  worship  on  the  Lord's 
day,  the  families  of  each  neighbourhood  met  and  joined 
in  reading,  prayer,  and  repeating  the  discourses.  They 
were  also  greatly  rejoiced  to  hear  of  the  Lord's  work  in  the 
south.'' 

Writing  in  June  1744,  he  speaks  of  a farther  and  in- 
creased awakening,  the  feelings  of  those  affected  being 
deeper  and  more  frequent.  They  generally  resolved  their 
first  awakening  into  some  passage  of  Scripture  or  search- 
ing subject,  of  which  the  following  is  given  as  an  instance  : 
A poor  illiterate  servant  lad  had  called  the  day  before  he 
wrote,  and  his  account  was,  that  on  hearing  these  wrords, 
u Awake,  0 sword,  against  the  man  that  is  my  fellow,” 
he  gathered  that  as  the  Father  had  given  commission  to  the 


PARISH  OF  ROSEMARKIE. 


253 


sword  against  Christ,  for  the  sins  of  his  people,  it  would 
he  commissioned  also  against  him  for  his  own  sins,  unless 
he  attained  to  an  interest  in  Christ's  sufferings  on  his  be- 
half. He  had  often,  he  said,  purposed  to  turn  to  God 
before,  and  afterwards  fallen  back  into  sin,  and  therefore 
he  now  came  for  advice.  The  awakening  had  by  this 
time  reached  persons  of  all  classes,  and  as  the  greater  part 
were  uneducated,  and  understood  only  the  Gaelic,  it  is  in- 
teresting to  observe  how  their  difficulties  were  met  and 
overcome.  The  psalms  were  then  in  Gaelic,  and  these 
many  set  about  learning  to  read,  not  by  spelling  the  words, 
but  by  taking  them  as  so  many  separate  characters  or  signs 
of  sounds,  already  familiar  to  them.  And  as  all  who 
could  read  became  teachers,  the  work  went  rapidly  on. 
Then  such  as  were  able  to  read  English  were  set  up  as 
translators,  reading  their  authors  fluently,  whether  accurately 
or  not,  in  Gaelic , each  to  a little  company  of  attentive  and 
inquisitive  hearers.  This  was  practised  in  the  weekly 
meetings,  and  also  in  families. 

And  writing  again  in  January,  1745,  he  speaks  of  the 
work  still  going  on.  At  the  communion  in  July,  about 
twenty  were  admitted  for  the  first  time,  ten  were  on  that 
occasion  awakened,  and  soon  after  ten  more,  and  altogether, 
between  July  and  January,  there  were  about  forty  in 
addition  to  those  admitted  in  July. 

The  Parish  of  JRosemarkie. — Mr.  John  Wood  was  minis- 
ter of  this  parish,  and  writing  on  the  1st  of  May,  1744,  he 
speaks  of  the  state  of  religion  being  low  and  discouraging 
previous  to  1743.  From  the  time  of  their  communion, 
which  was  in  July,  there  was  a growing  attention  to  ordinances 
and  a desire  after  instruction,  and  by  the  month  of  May, 
about  thirty  had  waited  on  him  in  an  awakened  state.  From 
the  account  which  they  gave,  their  convictions  seemed  to 
have  been  long  gathering  strength — in  some  cases  for  two 
years.  Others,  who  had  not  waited  on  him,  were  reported 
to  the  number  of  fourteen  or  sixteen.  And  he  was  then 
waiting,  in  the  expectation  of  still  greater  things.  “I  am 


254 


PARISH  OF  GOLSPIE. 


the  more  earnest  in  this  longing  expectation/’  says  he, 
“when  I observe  the  stedfast  eyes,  the  piercing  looks,  the 
seemingly  serious  and  greedy  desires  of  many,  who  hare, 
as  yet,  discovered  their  concern  in  no  other  way.” 

Other  Parishes  in  the  same  district. — Mr.  Wood  speaks 
of  a similar  awakening,  to  a greater  or  less  extent,  in  the 
parishes  of  Logie,  Alness,  Killearn,  Cromarty,  and  Kirk- 
michael ; and  Kilmuir-Easter  is  mentioned  both  by  him 
and  Mr.  Balfour. 

? The  Parish  of  Golspie  in  Sutherland. — We  have  now 
got  to  one  of  the  two  most  northerly  counties  on  the  main- 
land of  Scotland.  Golspie,  however,  lies  in  a southern 
portion  of  Sutherland,  and  not  very  far  north  from  the  Dor- 
noch Frith.  The  minister  of  this  parish  was  Mr.  John 
Sutherland,  and  the  following  is  the  substance  of  the 
account  given  by  himself  in  August,  1745  : “The  parish  of 
Golspie  was,  for  some  time  previous  to  the  revolution  of 
1688,  a sanctuary  to  several  eminent  Christians,  who  had 
been  driven  out  of  a neighbouring  county  by  persecution. 
Here  they  were  protected  by  the  Sutherland  family,  who 
steadily  adhered  to  the  interests  of  religion.  And  although, 
at  the  revolution,  they  might  have  returned  to  their  own 
county,  yet,  out  of  attachment  to  the  family  by  whom  they 
had  been  protected,  they  remained,  and  proved  a blessing 
to  others.  And  under  the  forty  years’  ministration  of 
my  predecessor,  Mr.  Walter  Denoon,  religion  flourished. 
At  my  admission  in  1731,  there  were  many  of  the  people 
godly,  and  conversions  continued  occasionally  to  take  place; 
but  down  to  1744,  religion  was  by  no  means  in  a thriving 
state.  On  receiving  the  intelligence  of  the  revival  else- 
where, I read  to  my  people  concerning  the  American  re- 
vivals, and  those  at  Cambuslang  and  Kilsyth,  and  told  them 
what  I had  myself  witnessed  at  the  two  last  places,  and  at 
Muthil,  when  I was  on  my  way  to  the  assembly ; yet  no 
effect  seemed  to  follow.  When  assisting  Mr.  Balfour  of 
Nigg,  at  the  communion  in  August  1743,  I lamented  to 
him  our  sad  state.  He  told  me  what  he  had  himself  done, 


PARISH  OF  GOLSPIE. 


255 


and  with  what  effect ; and  on  returning,  I proposed  to  some 
of  the  serious  people  that  there  should  be  three  separate 
meetings  on  the  Saturday  evenings,  to  plead  with  God  con- 
cerning his  work  on  the  Lord’s-day.  These  met  with  the 
other  communicants,  to  consider  the  proposal,  and  it  was 
adopted  and  acted  upon  for  a whole  year,  apparently  with- 
out fruit.  But  when  our  hopes  had  well-nigh  failed  us, 
a merciful  God  breathed  on  the  dry  bones,  and  since 
November  last,  upwards  of  seventy  persons  have  waited  on 
me  under  soul-exercise.  Some  had  been  months  in  this  state 
before  they  ventured  to  make  it  known.  I have  had  sundry 
conferences  with  nearly  all  of  them,  and  they  seem  to  have 
a proper  sense  of  sin,  as  directed  against  the  authority  of 
God  and  his  love  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  to  be  filled  with  holy 
wonder  at  the  mercy  of  God,  and  at  their  own  infatuation 
in  past  years.”  He  then  details  their  experience,  as  very 
much  what  has  been  seen  in  other  places,  and  also  their  re- 
formation of  conduct,  as  thorough  and  universal,  adding  : 
“The  work  was  advanced  in  some  by  quicker,  and  in  others 
by  slowrer  degrees  ; yet  in  both,  a decent,  grave,  and  solemn 
deportment,  or  shedding  abundance  of  tears,  which  they 
concealed  all  they  were  able,  were  all  the  visible  signs  we 
had,  in  time  of  hearing,  of  their  inward  concern.  About 
forty  of  them  have,  with  weeping  eyes  and  trembling  hands, 
received  tokens  for  the  Lord’s  table,  at  the  late  solemn  or- 
dinance; and  it  is  hoped  that  the  rest  will  be  encouraged 
to  follow  their  example.  As  regards  bodily  effects,  some 
have  spoken  of  their  wanting  rest  for  many  nights,  and 
some  for  many  hours  every  night,  through  the  deep  exer- 
cises of  their  minds  ; some  have,  for  a time,  lost  nearly  all 
appetite  for  food;  some  have  felt  their  health  and  strength 
impaired ; and  a few  have  owned  their  being  overtaken  with 
trembling ; but  no  other  bodily  effect  has  been  observed. 
The  far  greater  number  of  those  awakened  are  between 
twenty  and  fifty  years  of  age,  few  are  under  twenty,  and  only 
four  from  sixty  to  seventy.  They  are,  some  of  them,  farmers  ; 
some  of  them  tradesmen,  with  their  wives  and  servants;  and 


258 


EDINBURGH. 


seven  of  them  are  poor  widows.  The  doctrines  taught  and 
specially  owned,  were  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  against  wil- 
ful transgressors  and  unbelieving  despisers  of  gospel  grace; 
the  impossibility  of  being  saved  on  the  score  of  self-righte- 
ousness; the  necessity  of  divine  power  in  effecting  a vital 
union  with  Christ — that  it  is  through  this  the  blessings  of 
the  covenant  are  enjoyed;  and  the  discourses  most  blessed* 
were  in  a course  of  lectures  on  the  sufferings,  death,  and 
resurrection  of  Christ,  with  sermons  from  Deut.  xxxi.  21  y 
22;  Eph.  iv.  3;  1 Pet.  iv.  17,  18;  2 Pet.  ii.  9;  Eph. 
v.  14  ; and  Matt.  xxii.  4.  ” 

Other  Parishes  in  the  district . — Several  seem  to  be  re- 
ferred to;  but  Mr.  Sutherland,  who  had  made  inquiry  con- 
cerning Bogart , says,  that  in  1740,  fifteen  were  awakened; 
that  these,  and  other  serious  persons,  finding  in  1741,  1742, 
a sad  decay  in  practical  godliness,  gave  themselves  much  to 
special  prayer;  and  that  in  1743,  1744,  but  especially  the 
former,  about  fifty  more  were  awakened,  and  that  they 
were  in  1745  in  a hopeful  way. 

But  we  must  again  look  southward,  and  notice  what  is 
said  especially  of  Edinburgh,  before  concluding  this  gene- 
ral review — and  so  end  at  last,  as  regards  Mr.  Whitefield, 
where  we  began. 

The  City  of  Edinburgh . — Mr.  Alexander  Webster  had, 
it  may  be  with  others,  written  to  Mr.  Whitefield,  inviting 
him  to  Edinburgh,  some  time  before  he  visited  Scotland. 
In  reply  to  two  of  his  letters,  Mr.  Whitefield  says,  on  the 
16th  of  May,  1741,  u God  only  knows  when  I come.” 
His  actual  arrival  at  Leith,  however,  was  on  the  30th  of  July 
1741,  and  after  meeting  with  the  associate  presbytery  in 
Dunfermline,  he  preached  his  first  sermon  in  the  Orphan- 
house  park,  Edinburgh,  from  these  characteristic  words : 
“ The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righte- 
ousness, and,  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.”  (Rom. 
xiv.  17.)  * This  was  on  the  1st  of  August,  and  the  day 

* See  on  this,  his  first  visit,  chapter  iv.  This  sermon,  as  preached  in 
Glasgow  soon  after,  is  in  the  Appendix. 


EDINBURGH. 


257 


following  he  preached  in  the  West  Church,  where  he  also 
heard  Mr.  Gusthart,  and  Mr.  M4Vicar  with  much  satisfac- 
tion. And  next  day  he  preached  in  the  Canongate.  Writ- 
ing on  the  8th,  he  says : “ I preach  to  many  thousands 
daily,  and  several  have  applied  to  me  already,  under  convic- 
tions.” On  the  13th,  he  says:  “ On  Sunday  morning,  I 
visited  and  preached  to  the  orphans  here,  and  in  the  evening 
to  as  many  people  as  the  Sunday  before.  People  are  daily 
coming  under  deep  convictions.”  And  again  on  the  21st, 
“ It  would  make  your  heart  leap  for  joy,  to  be  now  in 
Edinburgh.  I question  if  there  be  not  upwards  of  three 
hundred  in  this  city  seeking  after  Jesus.  Every  morning 
I have  a levee  of  wounded  souls,  many  of  whom  are  quite 
slain  by  the  law.  At  seven  in  the  morning,  we  have  a 
lecture  in  the  fields,  attended  not  only  by  the  common 
people,  hut  also  by  persons  of  great  rank.  I have  reason 
to  think  that  several  of  the  latter  sort  are  coming  to  J esus. 
Little  children  are  also  much  wrought  upon.  Never  did  I see 
so  many  Bibles,  nor  people  look  into  them,  when  I am  ex- 
pounding, with  such  attention.  I preach  twice  daily,  and 
expound  at  private  houses  at  night,  and  am  employed  in 
speaking  to  souls  great  part  of  the  day.”  And  again  on 
the  27th  October,  he  says : 46  It  would  delight  your  soul  to 
see  the  effects  of  the  power  of  God.  Both  in  the  church 
and  park  the  Lord  was  with  us.  The  girls  in  the  hospital 
were  exceedingly  affected,  and  so  were  the  standers  by. 
One  of  the  mistresses  told  me,  that  she  is  now  awakened 
in  the  morning  with  the  voice  of  prayer  and  praise.  The 
master  of  the  boys  says,  that  they  meet  every  night  to  sing 
and  pray,  and  that  when  he  goes  into  their  rooms,  to  see  if 
all  be  right,  he  generally  finds  some  at  their  devotion. 
The  presence  of  God  at  the  old  people’s  hospital  was 
really  wonderful.  The  weeping  of  the  people  was  like 
that  in  fhe  valley  of  Hadad-rimmon.  They  appear  more 
and  more  hungry.  Every  day  I hear  of  some  fresh  good, 
wrought  by  the  power  of  God.  I scarcely  know  how  to 
leave  Scotland.” 


258 


EDINBURGH. 


In  turning  to  the  effects  produced,  we  shall  understand 
them  better,  if  we  observe  that  there  are  different  classes 
spoken  of : and  first,  the  hoys  of  Heriot’s  hospital.  The  hoys 
in  this  hospital  had  the  character  of  being  very  unruly,  and 
some  of  them  vicious ; hut  through  the  blessing  of  God 
on  Mr.  Whitefield’s  ministry,  a remarkable  change  took 
place,  which  is  described  by  one  of  the  masters  in  a letter 
dated  8th  December : “ An  external  reformation  prevails 
among  them,  and  I hope  that  God  hath  wrought  effectually 
on  the  hearts  of  many.  One  night,  a number  of  them 
came  to  my  room,  and  on  being  encouraged,  they  ex- 
plained to  me  their  circumstances.  One  said,  c I am  troubled 
with  had  thoughts  when  I pray ; * another,  4 I think  it  ex- 
ceedingly difficult  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  I can  be- 
lieve him  to  he  the  Son  of  God,  and  Saviour  of  lost  sin- 
ners, hut  I find  it  very  hard  to  believe  that  he  is  my 
Saviour/  And  so  said  others.  On  leaving,  they  went 
into  the  school-room,  and  spent  much  of  the  night  in 
reading  and  prayer.  Before  many  days,  they  told  me  that 
they  had,  to  a great  extent,  got  over  their  fears ; and  they 
now  continue  fervent  in  prayer  for  themselves  and  all  men. 
Indeed,  nearly  all  our  hoys  are  now  in  love  with  their  Bibles, 
and  delight  in  prayer.  I have  often  entered  their  rooms 
at  ten  and  eleven  o’clock  at  night,  to  see  that  all  was  right, 
and  stumbled  on  them  in  prayer,  some  in  little  companies 
and  others  alone ; and  this  is  their  daily  practice — the  elder 
teaching  the  younger.  No  fault  is  now  concealed,  as  be- 
fore ; they  abhor  every  vice,  love  one  another,  and  talk  of 
the  things  of  God  with  th.  boys  of  the  other  hospitals, 
with  whom  they  often  used  to  fall  out.  Heriot’s  hospital 
is  no  longer  a den  of  vicious  boys,  but  a Bethel/*  A gen- 
tleman in  Edinburgh,  writing  about  the  same  time,  says  of 
the  Trades*  hospital,  that  the  change  there  was  equally  re- 
markable; that  about  sixteen  of  the  girls  met  for  devotional 
purposes  every  week,  and  that  two  young  ladies  had  joined; 
and  he  adds,  that  their  teachers  reported  concerning  their 
conduct  as  was  said  of  ITeriot*s  boys.  After  giving  a simi- 


EDINBURGH. 


250 


lar  account  of  the  girls  in  the  Merchants  hospital,  he  adds, 
“ About  nine  of  them  meet  thrice  a- week  for  prayer, 
eleven  or  twelve  more  meet  in  smaller  companies ; and  some 
of  those  so  wrought  upon  were  among  the  most  ignorant 
and  thoughtless  in  the  house.”  And  passing  from  the  hos  - 
pitals,  there  was  a general  awakening  among  persons  of 
different  ages,  and  instances  are  given  to  illustrate  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  on  those.  But  as  effects  are  best  judged 
of  some  time  after  the  immediate  season  of  excitement,  we 
shall  pass  over  the  more  immediate  reports,  and  copy 
merely  part  of  the  following  letter,  addressed  to  Mr. 
Whitefield  by  Dr.  Webster  of  Edinburgh,  and  which  was 
written  half-a-year  after  Mr.  Whitefield  had  left  for  Eng- 
land : — 

“April  20, 1742. 

“ Rev.  and  Dear  Sir, — Knowing  that  many  are  careful 
to  inform  you,  from  time  to  time,  wrhat  passes  here,  I have 
hitherto  delayed  answering  your  most  acceptable  letter,  un- 
til I should  he  able  to  tell  you,  with  the  greatest  certainty , 
what  were  the  blessed  effects  of  your  ministrations  amongst 
us ; and  now  I can  assure  you,  that  they  were  not  more 
surprising  than  they  are  lasting.  I do  not  know  or  hear 
of  any  wrought  upon  by  your  ministry  who  are  not  hold- 
ing on  in  the  paths  of  truth  and  righteousness.  They 
seem  possessed  of  a truly  Christian  spirit.  Jesus  is  pre- 
cious to  their  souls,  and,  like  the  morning  light,  they  are 
advancing  with  increasing  brightness  to  the  perfect  day. 
The  state  of  religion  in  this  sinful  city  revives  and  flourishes. 
Ordinances  are  more  punctually  attended.  People  hear 
the  word  with  gladness,  and  receive  it  in  faith  and  love. 
New  meetings  for  prayer  and  spiritual  conference  are 
erecting  everywhere.  Religious  conversation  has  banished 
slander  and  calumny  from  several  tea  tables ; and  Christians 
are  not  ashamed  to  own  their  dear  Lord  and  Master. 
Praise  is  perfected  out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  suck- 
lings, and  some  stout-hearted  sinners  are  made  captive  to 
the  obedience  of  Christ.  Amidst  all  these  approaches  of 


260 


EDINBURGH. 


Immanuel's  kingdom,  the  enemy  does  not,  however,  cease 
to  rage;  and  some,  of  whom  better  things  might  he  expected, 
join  with  infidels  in  blaspheming  the  operations  of  the 
Holy  Ghost ; but  the  work  is  the  Lord’s,  and  the  gates  of 
hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.’* 

We  must  now  conceive  of  matters  going  on  thus  till, 
after  a few  months,  Mr.  Whitefield  again  arrived  at  Leith. 
He  had  been  earnestly  solicited  to  return  by  many  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  country,  and  by  none  more  than  by  Mr. 
Webster,  in  the  very  letter  of  which  the  above  is  an  ex- 
tract. On  the  3d  of  June,  he  accordingly  landed  at 
Leith,  and  the  folio Aving  is  his  own  account  of  his  recep- 
tion : “ As  soon  as  I came  on  shore  at  Leith,  many  came 
blessing  me,  and,  wreeping,  took  hold  of  me.  About  four 
in  the  afternoon,  we  came  to  Edinburgh.  Great  numbers 
followed  our  coach,  and  almost  caught  me  in  their  arms, 
as  soon  as  I came  out  of  it.  How  did  they  weep  for  joy  ! 
It  would  have  melted  you  down  to  have  seen  them.  When 
I reached  my  lodging,  many  dear  friends  came  to  salute  us 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  About  seven  o’clock,  I went  to 
see  some  persons  of  distinction,  whose  hearts  the  Lord  had 
touched  when  I was  here  last.  Some  were  ready  to  faint 
with  joy;  and  with  these  I prayed  and  gave  thanks.  We 
were  all  filled  with  peace  and  joy  in  believing.  At  eight, 
I went  to  a nobleman's  house,  whose  lady  and  other  friends 
received  us  with  great  gladness.  The  cushions  and  Bible 
Avere  immediately  brought.  I gave  a word  of  exhortation. 
W e sang  and  prayed,  and  spent  the  remainder  of  the  even- 
ing most  delightfully,  in  talking  of  the  things  of  God. 
When  Ave  came  home,  Ave  joined  in  blessing  God’s  holy 
name.  Though  late,  I scarce  kneAV  hoAV  to  go  to  rest. 
This  morning  I received  glorious  accounts  of  the  carrying 
on  of  the  Mediator’s  kingdom.  The  Avork  of  God  is  be- 
yond expression.  Three  of  the  little  boys  that  Avere  con- 
verted Avhen  I AAras  last  here,  came  to  me  and  Avept  and 
begged  me  to  pray  for  and  Avith  them.” 

The  hospital  park  Avas  again  fitted  up  for  his  meetings. 


EDINBURGH. 


261 


He  was  not  generally  admitted  to  the  city  pulpits,  or  in- 
deed to  those  of  the  presbytery ; hut  the  magistrates 
allowed  him  the  use  of  a church  as  often  as  he  came,  and 
the  park  was  fitted  up  with  seats  and  shades  in  the  form  of 
an  amphitheatre,  and  there  he  preached  twice  a- day  to  many 
thousands.  It  was  now  the  very  middle  of  summer,  the 
month  of  June  ; and  especially  in  the  evenings,  when  the 
slanting  rays  of  the  departing  sun  fell  on  the  vast  assembly, 
and  gradually  disappeared  in  the  west,  as  if  to  demonstrate 
the  sayings  of  the  preacher  concerning  the  passing  moment 
being  alone  the  acceptable  time,  the  effect  is  said  to  have 
been  on  some  occasions  quite  overpowering.  But  to  copy 
reports  of  what  was  seen  and  felt,  would  be  only  to  repeat 
what  has  already  been  often  said.  We  shall  therefore  again 
have  recourse  to  what  is  recorded  of  the  fruits  of  this  second 
visit;  and,  first,  from  a communication  dated  8th  August, 
1743,  by  Mr.  George  Muir,  afterwards  minister  of  the  Low 
Church  of  Paisley:  “The  prayer-meetings  are  from  twenty- 
four  to  thirty  in  number,  and  so  large  that  some  of  them  will 
have  to  be  divided.  Among  them  are  several  of  boys  and 
girls,  who,  in  general,  seem  to  be  growing  in  grace  and  in 
sound  views  of  divine  truth.  There  are  several  meetings 
of  young  women,  who,  as  I am  informed,  hold  on  well. 
Many  young  men  meet  for  mutual  instruction  and  other- 
wise serving  God.  Many  aged  men  of  high  standing  in  the 
Christian  life  meet  also  for  edification.  And,  generally, 
all  of  these  make  it  evident  to  the  world  that  they  have 
been  with  Jesus.” 

On  the  23d  of  October,  the  communion  was  dispensed 
in  Edinburgh;  and  it  is  said  that  then  the  number  of  com- 
municants was  greatly  beyond  what  it  had  been  only  two 
years  before,  that  week-day  sermons  were  much  better  at- 
tended, and  that  a more  than  ordinary  concern  was  mani- 
fest both  in  hearing  and  communicating. 

Were  it  our  object  to  follow  out  the  history  of  Mr. 
Whitefield’s  labours  in  Edinburgh,  it  would  be  necessary  to 
repeat  similar  accounts  very  often,  as  he  came  to  Edinburgh 


262 


EDINBURGH. 


not  fewer  than  fourteen  times,  and  over  a period  of  twenty- 
seven  years.  Even  as  regards  the  revival  in  Edinburgh, 
more  than  ordinary  attention  to  these  visits  is  due , as  it  was 
to  a greater  extent  than  in  most  other  places  dependent  on 
these.  But  as  this  is  not  our  object,  we  shall  only  farther 
refer  to  his  last  visit , when  now  worn  out  with  labour,  and 
suffering  from  bodily  sickness.  He  arrived  in  June  1768, 
and  writing  on  the  15  th  of  that  month,  he  says:  “You 
would  be  delighted  to  see  our  Orphan-house  park  assem- 
blies— as  large,  attentive,  and  affectionate  as  ever.  Twenty- 
seven-year -old  friends  and  spiritual  children  remember  the 
days  of  old;  they  are  seeking  after  their  first  love,  and  there 
seems  to  be  a stirring  among  the  dry  bones.”  j^gain, 
■writing  on  the  2d  July,  he  adds : “ Could  I preach  ten 
times  a-day,  thousands  and  thousands  would  attend.  I 
have  been  confined  for  a few  days ; but  on  Monday  or 
Tuesday  next,  hope  to  mount  my  throne  again.  O,  to  die 
there! — too  great,  too  great  an  honour  to  be  expected.” 
Again,  on  the  9th  of  July:  “ Everything  goes  on  better 
and  better  here;  but  I am  so  worn  down  by  preaching 
abroad  and  talking  at  home  almost  all  the  day  long,  that  I 
have  determined,  God  willing,  to  set  off  for  London  next 
Tuesday.”* 

In  various  parts  of  the  south,  indications  of  more  than 
ordinary  attention  to  divine  things  were  noticed ; but  these 
were  not  so  remarkable  as  to  require  any  separate  article. 
And,  therefore,  we  now  take  leave  with  Mr.  Whitefield 
w'here  we  began;  but,  in  concluding  this  general  though 
brief  review,  there  are  several  questions  wrhich  suggest 
themselves,  and  which  are  at  least  worthy  of  considera- 
tion. 

And  first , Is  it  not  true  that  we  also  live  under  the 
ministration  of  the  Spirit,  and  as  regards  everything  essential 

* On  the  9th  of  August,  his  wife  died;  on  the  4th  of  September  1769, 
he  embarked  for  America,  this  being  his  seventh  visit  to  that  country ; 
and,  on  the  30th  of  September  1770,  he  breathed  his  last  at  Newbury, 
near  Boston. 


REFLECTIONS. 


263 


to  conversion,  as  really  as  did  tlie  apostles?  See  Matt,  xxviii. 
20;  John  xiv.  16,  17,  xvi.  8-11;  and  2 Cor.  iii.  11. 

Secondly , Is  it  not  equally  true  that,  as  a generation,  we 
come  sadly  short  of  the  power  which  accompanied  the 
Word  during  the  age  of  the  apostles,  and  also  during  the 
times  which  we  have  been  reviewing?  See  concerning  the 
one,  2 Cor.  ii.  14-17;  and  concerning  the  other,  the  review 
just  concluded. 

Thirdly , Is  it  not  equally  true,  that  an  awakening  such 
as  that  now  reviewed  is  much  wanted,  because  of  the  pre- 
valence of  an  ungodly  and  worldly  spirit  among  professors, 
and  on  account  of  the  multitude  who  make  not  even  a pro- 
fession of  religion  ? Evidence  of  both  is  within  the  reach 
of  all. 

Fourthly , Is  it  not  farther  true,  as  formerly  noticed,  that 
there  is  an  important  end  to  be  served  by  awakenings,  how  - 
ever temporary,  namely,  in  disturbing  the  deep  slumber 
of  an  ungodly  and  worldly  age  ? The  ministry  of  John  the 
Baptist  was  awakening,  and  meant  to  prepare  the  way  for 
a fuller  gospel;^  and  the  day  of  Pentecost  itself  was  but  a 
day,  a day  of  grace ; moreover  the  apostle  Peter  seems  to 
refer  to  something  of  this  kind  in  Acts  iii.  19. 

And  lastly , Might  it  not,  then,  be  well  to  consider  whether 
we  are  not  sinning  in  this  through  unbelief  ? whether,  like 
the  Israelitish  lord,  we  are  not  sinning  against  the  faithful- 
ness of  God  to  his  own  promise  ? “ O thou  that  art  named 
the  house  of  Jacob,  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ? 
are  these  his  doings  ? do  not  my  words  do  good  to  him 
that  walketh  uprightly.”  (Micah  ii.  7.) 


SERMONS 

PREACHED  BY 

THE  EEV.  GEORGE  WHITEFIELD 

IN  THE 

HIGH  CHURCH-YARD,  GLASGOW. 


s 


The  three  following  sermons  were  preached  in  the  High 
Church-Yard  of  Glasgow;  that  from  Luke  iy.  18,  19,  oil 
Saturday  morning,  the  12th  of  September  1741;  that  from 
Jer.  yi.  14,  on  the  morning  of  the  Lord's-day,  13th  Sep- 
tember ; and  that  from  Rom.  xiy.  1 7,  on  the  evening  of  the 
same  day.  It  had  also  been  preached  on  the  1st  of  August, 
in  the  Orphan-house  park,  Edinburgh,  on  Mr.  Whitefi eld’s 
first  arrival  in  Scotland. 


SERMONS. 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 

“ The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed  me  to 
preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor;  he  hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken- 
hearted, to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives,  and  recovering  of- 
sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised,  to  preach 
the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord.”— Luke  iv.  18.  19. 

Though  you  are  all  here,  I hope,  sitting  seriously  in  the  presence 
of  God,  with  desire  to  hear  his  Word  to  your  profit,  yet  I cannot 
but  think  it  will  engage  your  attention  still  the  more  if  I 
inform  you  that  the  words  now  read  seem  to  be  one  of  the  first  texts 
on  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  preached,  when  he  came 
to  publish  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  a benighted  world. 
The  occasion  of  our  Lord’s  preaching  upon  these  words,  we  find 
at  the  16th  verse  of  this  chapter:  “And  he  came  to  Nazareth, 
where  he  had  been  brought  up;  and,  as  his  custom  was,  he  went 
into  the  synagogue  on  the  Sabbath-day,  and  stood  up  for  to  read. 
And  there  was  delivered  unto  him  the  book  of  the  prophet 
Esaias ; and  when  he  had  opened  the  book,  he  found  the  place 
where  it  was  written,  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because 
he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor ; he  hath 
sent  me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  to  preach  deliverance  to  the 
captives,  and  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  a’t  liberty 
them  that  are  bruised,”  &e. 

The  words,  then,  plainly  contain  a prophecy  of  the  Lord  Jesus 


4 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


Christ.  He  it  is  who  wras  here  spoken  of  by  the  prophet  Isaiah; 
he  it  is  who  wTas  anointed  and  qualified  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  having 
received  the  Spirit  of  God  without  measure,  in  order  to  enable 
him  to  perform  the  mediatorial  office  betwixt  God  and  man. 
But  the  words  may  be  plainly  referred  to  gospel  ministers  as  wrell 
as  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  very  w^ords  of  the  text  plainly  give 
ministers  a direction  how  they  are  to  preach  the  gospel.  And, 
therefore,  from  the  words, 

I shall  first  endeavour  to  prove  that  every  minister,  before  he 
pretends  to  have  orders  to  preach  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ, 
from  a full  evidence  • of  a work  of  conversion  passing  upon  his 
soul,  ought  to  be  enabled  in  some  degree  to  say,  “ The  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  is  upon  me,  and  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the 
gospel.” 

Secondly , I shall  showr  you  w'hat  that  gospel  is,  which  ministers 
thus  qualified  are  to  preach. 

Thirdly , I shall  show  you  the  persons  whom  this  gospel  is  to 
be  preached  unto,  namely,  “ The  poor,  the  broken-hearted,  the 
captives,  the  blind,  the  bruised.” 

Lastly , I shall  make  application  of  the  whole,  hoping  thaft 
while  I am  preaching,  the  people  of  God  will  lift  up  their  hearts 
to  Jesus  Christ : and  wrho  knowrs  but  we  may  have  an  acceptable 
morning  of  the  Lord? 

1.  I w'ould  endeavour  to  show  you  that  every  minister, 
before  he  undertakes  to  preach  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  from  a full  evidence  of  a wTork  of  conversion,  ought  to  be 
enabled  to  say,  “ The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because  he 
hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel.” — It  is  certain  there  is 
now  a great  degeneracy  through  all  the  Christian  world,  and 
though  there  may  be  many  reasons  assigned  for  that  deadness, 
that  lukewarmness,  both  in  their  principle,  discipline,  and  prac- 
tice, yet  I am  verily  persuaded  one  great  reason  is  this,  That 
many  pretend  to  preach  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  are  strangers 
to  the  power  of  Jesus  Christ  upon  their  own  hearts.  There  are 
many  who  do  run  before  they  are  called  of  God,  and  there- 
fore it  is  no  wonder  they  do  not  profit  the  people  at  all.  A dead 
clergy  will  make  a dead  people.  It  is  absolutely  necessary, 
before  a minister  undertakes  to  preach  the  gospel,  that  he  should 
have  an  experimental  acquaintance  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
A man  wrhen  he  comes  out  to  preach,  should  preach  so  feelingly 
that  all  wdio  hear  him  might  take  notice  of  him,  as  the  scribes 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


and  pharisees  did,  that  he  has  been  with  Jesus.  It  is  a shocking 
question  which  Jesus  Christ  put  toNicodemus — says  he,  “Art  thou 
a master  in  Israel  ?” — Dost  thou  pretend  to  be  a teacher  of  others, 
a guide  to  those  that  are  blind,  to  instruct  others  in  the  nature  of 
true  religion — “and  knowest  not  these  things,”  art  not  acquainted 
with  the  new  birth  thyself?  If  Christ  were  to  come  to  preach 
the  gospel,  how  many  ministers  must  he  be  obliged  to  put  this 
question  to!  When  there  were  only  deacons  to  be  chosen,  the 
apostles  said,  “Look  ye  out  among  you  men  of  faith,  and  full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.”  And  if  it  was  necessary  for  the  office  of  a deacon 
that  he  was  to  be  thus  qualified,  who  was  only  to  take  care  of 
the  poor’s  box,  how  much  more  necessary  is  it  that  those  should 
be  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  who  are  to  deal  out 
bread  to  the  spiritually  hungry,  starving  soul?  When  there  was  only 
a material  tabernacle  to  be  built,  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon 
two  special  men  to  qualify  them  for  that;  and  if  the  Spirit  of 
God  was  necessary  to  qualify  them,  how  much  more  is  the  Spirit 
of  God  absolutely  necessary  to  enable  men  to  build  up  the  living 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost! 

Besides,  my  dear  friends,  it  is  not  the  business  of  the  ministers 
of  the  gospel  merely  to  entertain  people  with  harangues  of  dry 
morality,  and  leave  out  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  not  our  business  to 
entertain  our  people,  as  Cicero,  Seneca,  and  other  heathen  moral- 
ists did ; but  we  are  to  preach  Christ,  not  ourselves ; we  are  to 
preach  the  hidden  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  Now,  if  a 
man  is  a natural  man,  he  can  have  no  notion  of  the  hidden  things 
of  Christ’s  kingdom.  “ The  natural  man  discerneth  not  the  things 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  spiritually  discerned.”  And 
how  can  a man  that  does  not  know  them,  preach  them  ? It 
is  true  a man  may  study  a scheme  of  divinity,  and  in  order  to  get 
into  a place,  to  please  a patron  or  some  great  man,  he  may  get 
Calvin’s  scheme,  or  any  other  scheme  of  religion.  What  is  all 
this,  if  it  doth  not  come  from  the  heart?  the  poor  people  cannot 
expect  to  be  profited  at  all.  It  is  poor  preaching  to  preach  an 
unknown  Christ;  for  my  own  part,  I would  not  preach  an  un- 
known Christ  for  ten  thousand  worlds.  Such  offer  God  strange 
fire,  and  their  sermons  will  but  increase  their  own  damnation. 
It  is  absolutely  necessary,  therefore,  for  all  ministers  before  they 
undertake  to  preach  the  gospel  to  others,  that  they  are  taught  of 
God. 

Human  learning  is  an  admirable  thing,  when  made  use  of  to 


6 


THE  DTTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


divinity.  The  apostle  Paul  was  a learned  man.  Every  man 
that  reads  his  writings,  must  own  he  was  accurate  in  his  style, 
and  a great  orator;  yet  what  was  all  this  unless  the  Spirit  of 
God  was  in  his  heart  ? Great  accomplishments  in  an  unsanctified 
heart  only  make  a man  a more  accomplished  devil;  and  the  more 
a clergyman  knows,  if  he  is  not  sanctified,  he  will  only  be  the  more 
fit  for  propagating  the  devil’s  kingdom.  It  is  indeed  impossible, 
in  the  very  nature  of  things,  that  a man  should  preach  Christ 
that  doth  not  know  him.  I have  often  thought  the  minister 
that  does  not  know  Christ,  and  preaches  him  for  a maintenance, 
has  the  greatest  drudgery  in  the  world.  He  is  always  preaching 
the  thing  he  doth  not  love  in  his  heart — and  what  a drudgery 
must  it  be  for  a man  to  do  so ! It  is  therefore  necessary  for  all 
ministers,  before  they  undertake  to  preach  the  gospel,  to  examine 
themselves,  and  see  whether  they  have  got  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
in  their  hearts.  It  is  not  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  pres- 
bytery, and  having  a call  of  a particular  people,  that  makes  a 
man  a minister.  These  outward  calls  are  certainly  good,  and  I 
would  have  every  man  called  as  was  Aaron ; but  if  you  are  not 
called  of  God  as  well  as  of  the  people,  you  are  no  minister  in  the 
eye  of  Jesus  Christ,  you  are  carrying  your  own  condemnation 
with  you  in  every  sermon  you  preach;  you  will  never  preach  with 
power  feelingly,  while  you  deal  in  a false  commerce  with  truths 
unfelt.  Every  word  a minister  preaches  should  be  engraven 
on  his  heart.  It  is,  therefore,  remarkable  (though  indeed  our 
clergy  as  well  as  the  clergy  of  other  kingdoms  have  sadly  fallen 
from  their  constitution),  that  in  the  church  of  England,  the  first 
question  the  bishop  puts  to  him  is,  “Are  you  inwardly  moved  by 
the  Holy  Ghost?”  By  which  they  own  that  an  inward  call  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  absolutely  necessary  for  a gospel  minister. 
Many  ordained  do  not  mind  that  question,  or  rather  they  lie,  not 
unto  men,  but  unto  God.  But  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  reformed 
churches,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  absolutely  necessary  before  a 
man  can  take  on  him  the  office  of  a minister. 

And  though  I would,  with  all  humility,  own  myself  the  chief  of 
sinners,  yet  if  there  are  any  persons  here  in  the  ministry,  I would 
exhort  you,  in  the  name  and  by  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  to  examine  your  hearts,  and  see  whether  you  are  in  Jesus 
Christ  or  not,  and  see  whether  you  feel  these  truths  you  are 
preaching  to  your  congregations  or  not.  It  will  be  but  poor, 
dry,  sapless  stuff — your  people  will  go  away  out  of  the  church  as 


TIIE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


7 


cold  as  they  came  in — except  your  ministry  be  attended  with  the 
power  of  God.  I would  likewise  exhort  all  people  who  make  up 
presbyteries,  and  are  intrusted  with  the  laying  on  of  hands  on 
those  that  are  sent  out  to  preach,  to  examine  into  their  experience 
before  they  examine  into  their  learning.  Learning  is  a good 
thing,  I am  not  for  crying  down  learning;  but  then,  for  Christ’s 
sake,  when  persons  come  to  offer  themselves  for  holy  orders, 
examine  into  their  hearts,  see  whether  they  are  saints  more  than 
scholars;  and  if  they  are  not  renewed  and  converted,  and  give  a 
satisfactory  account  of  the  work  of  God  on  their  hearts,  let  their 
qualifications  be  what  they  will,  they  ought  to  be  dismissed. 
There  is  a great  deal  of  guilt  lies  on  those  who  lay  hands  on  men 
suddenly,  and  I would  not  for  ten  thousand  worlds  lay  hands  on 
any  without  examining  into  their  experiences:  you  are  partakers 
of  other  men’s  sin,  and  whole  parishes  together  may  rise  up 
against  you  at  the  great  day. 

I would  likewise,  as  I am  near  the  university,  and  perhaps  as 
some  young  gentlemen  are  come  out  this  morning  to  hear  me — I 
would  exhort  you  with  all  humility,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  to 
consider  the  importance  of  that  office  you  are  breeding  up  for. 
You  are  to  be  ambassadors  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  me 
therefore  exhort  you  to  get  acquaintance  with  Christ  in  the 
entry  of  your  studies;  study  not  so  much  to  be  great  scholars  as 
great  saints.  Know  yourselves  and  God,  and  a good  experience 
of  Christ  in  the  heart,  with  a moderate  share  of  learning,  will 
make  you  noble  instruments  of  doing  good  to  mankind.  It  is 
true,  God  may  convert  people  by  the  devil  if  he  please;  but  I 
believe  God  neither  works  by  him,  neither  does  he  convert  others 
by  unconverted  men.  I would  therefore  exhort  all  young  men 
that  are  now  employing  their  time  in  studies,  to  take  care,  first, 
that  their  hearts  be  renewed;  not  so  much  to  study  the  stars  as 
themselves.  Study  the  precious  Bible,  the  book  of  God.  My 
heart  is  much  drawn  out  for  the  sons  of  the  prophets ; for  it  is  in 
vain  to  hope  for  a reformation  in  this  kingdom,  until  it  begin  in 
the  clergy,  and  those  who  are  intrusted  with  the  care  of  youth. 
O that  it  might  be  done  here  in  Scotland  as  in  New  England 
universities ! I have  at  present  letters  from  Boston,  giving  an 
account  of  the  glorious  progress  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  there. 
Not  above  seven  in  Cambridge  college  are  left  without  a witness 
for  their  soul ! When  shall  we  hear  or  see  such  a day  of  power 
in  Scotland?  Until  we  find  a work  of  God  stirring  among  minis- 


8 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


ters,  we  cannot  find  it  among  the  people.  Pour  out  your  prayers 
for  your  ministers.  Many,  perhaps,  deserve  bad  ministers,  be- 
cause perhaps  you  do  not  pray  for  them.  Pray,  says  Christ,  pray 
to  the  44  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  he  may  send  labourers  into  his 
harvest.”  Pray  for  students;  pray  for  those  who  are  tutors  to 
students,  that  they  may  be  taught  of  God,  that  when  they  come 
out  they  may  say,  44  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me.”  When 
it  is  upon  them,  the  whole  world  will  be  set  on  fire  of  love.  I 
would  not  speak  it  out  of  pertness;  I speak  as  I think,  as  I hope 
the  Spirit  of  God  gives  me  freedom,  and  I wish  well  to  this  poor 
kingdom — but  this  will  never  be,  until  the  Spirit  of  God  is  poured 
out  on  the  sons  of  the  prophets. 

I think  it  is  plain,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  every  one, 
before  he  undertakes  to  preach  the  gospel  of  Christ,  ought  to  be 
able  to  say,  44  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me.” 

Before  I dismiss  this,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  relate  a story 
a good  man  gives  an  account  of.  There  was  a presbytery  of 
ministers  met  together,  and  one  of  their  number  preached.  In 
his  sermon  he  made  a supposition  that  the  last  judgment  was 
come,  and  that  Jesus  Christ  was  now  upon  the  throne  of  his 
judgment,  and  calling  his  ministers  to  an  account.  He  asked  one 
of  them,  44  What  did  you  preach  for  ? ” Says  he,  44  Lord,  there 
was  a patronage  in  the  family  of  £150  a-year;  I therefore  took 
orders  to  get  the  presentation.”  44  Stand  thou  by,”  says  he ; 
44  verily  thou  hast  thy  reward.”  He  asks  another,  44  What  did 
you  preach  for?”  And  he  said,  44 1 preached  that  I might  be 
reckoned  a fine  orator,  and  to  have  applause  of  men.”  Says  he, 
44  Stand  thou  by ; verily  thou  hast  thy  reward.”  A third  comes, 
and  he  said  unto  him,  44  And  what  did  you  preach  for  ? ” Says 
he,  44  Lord,  thou  knowest  my  heart — I did  not  seek  to  please  men  ; 
and  though  many  infirmities  have  passed  in  my  ministry,  I did  it 
with  an  upright  design  to  promote  thy  glory.”  Jesus  Christ 
immediately  cries  out,  44  Make  room,  angels,  for  this  my  dear  ser- 
vant : thou  hast  honoured  me  on  earth ; sit  here  by  me  on  my 
throne.”  0 that  this  story  may  have  the  same  effect  on  minis- 
ters now,  as  it  had  when  preached ; for  we  hear  they  went  away 
affected,  and  said  they  would  preach  Jesus  Christ  more  than  ever. 

2.  But  we  shall  go  to  the  second  thing,  and  point  out  what 
ministers  are  to  preach — the  gospel : 44  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is 
upon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel.” 
Observe,  we  are  to  preach  the  gospel,  not  to  preach  up  moral 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


9 


harangues.  Morality  is  a good  thing,  but  we  must  preach  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  The  gospel  we  are  to  preach  is — that  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  God  the  Father 
entered  into  an  eternal  covenant  with  God  the  Son;  he  made 
Christ  the  head,  the  representative  of  the  elect,  as  Adam  was  the 
head,  the  representative  of  all  his  seed.  For  these  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  undertook  to  fulfil  the  covenant  of  works.  For 
these  Jesus  Christ  died  a painful,  cursed,  ignominious  death ; and 
by  his  obedience,  and  by  his  death,  wrought  out  an  everlasting 
righteousness  for  them.  So  that  now,  whosoever  believeth  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  he  shall  be  saved : 
let  him  be  what  he  will,  be  who  he  will,  if  he  believe  on  Christ, 
there  is  no  condemnation  for  him.  This  is,  in  a few  words,  the 
gospel.  It  is  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  to  all  who  feel  their  want 
of  Christ.  And  this  gospel  is  to  be  preached  to  all.  We  are  to 
make  an  offer  of  Jesus  Christ  to  you  all.  “ Whosoever  thirsteth, 
let  him  come  to  the  water  of  life,  and  drink  freely.” 

I take  the  gospel  here,  more  particularly,  as  signifying  the 
comforts  of  the  gospel ; and,  therefore,  though  we  are  to  preach 
Christ  Jesus  to  all  freely,  to  all  indefinitely,  yet  people  will  never 
accept  of  him,  and  we  can  give  them  no  comfort,  until  that  we 
find  they  are  made  sick  of  sin,  and  made  willing  to  embrace  an 
offered  Jesus. 

3.  The  persons,  therefore,  we  are  to  preach  this  gospel  to, 
are  described  in  the  latter  part  of  the  text : “ He  hath  ap- 
pointed me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor.”  Who  are  we 
to  understand  by  the  poor  ? We  are  not  merely  to  understand 
those  who  are  poor  as  to  outward  circumstances,  though  indeed 
they  are  the  poor  that  generally  receive  the  gospel.  There  are  a 
great  many  of  you  perhaps  who  wish  to  be  great,  whereas  you  should 
be  thankful  to  God  that  you  are  poor.  Christ  hath  pronounced 
a woe  against  the  rich,  and  hath  told  us,  “ Not  many  mighty 
are  called ; ” but  it  is  the  poor  who  receive  the  gospel  gladly. 
The  poor  Christ  hath  chosen,  to  make  them  rich  in  faith.  There 
are  many  poor  people,  clothed  in  rags,  who  are  as  proud  as  the 
devil  himself.  But  by  the  poor,  you  are  to  understand  the  poor 
in  spirit;  those  who  feel  their  poverty,  who  bewail  their  misery; 
those  who  feel  they  are  lost  and  undone  on  account  of  their  ori- 
ginal and  actual  sin,  and  on  the  account  of  the  deficiency  of  their 
own  righteousness.  They  find  they  must  accept  of  salvation,  or 
be  damned  of  God  for  evermore ; they  find  they  have  nothing  to 


10 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


buy  salvation  with — they  must  he  entirely  beholden  to  God  for 
it.  Are  there  any  such  here  ? And  perhaps  we  have  all  more 
knowledge  than  practice.  Are  ye  poor  now  ? Do  ye  feel  con- 
victions fastening  on  you?  And  are  you  really  poor  sinners? 
Can  you  say  from  your  heart,  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a poor  sin- 
ner ? Many  of  you  may  say  you  are  sinners ; but  if  another  say 
so,  you  will  not  believe  him.  But  do  you  feel  yourselves  lost,  un- 
done, poor,  miserable,  blind,  and  naked,  without  Jesus  Christ? 
Do  you  say  so  ? Then  I hope  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  will  enable 
me  this  morning  to  preach  the  comforts  of  the  gospel  to  your 
souls.  Ye  poor  souls,  God  hath  chosen  you  to  make  you  rich  in 
faith ; to  you  I bring  the  gospel,  the  glad  tidings  of  great  joy. 
For  you  Christ  was  born ; for  you  the  Son  of  God  was  given ; for 
you  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  became  poor,  that  he  might  make  you 
rich — to  purchase  a crown  of  glory  for  you.  The  Lord  Jesus, 
having  shed  his  own  precious  heart’s  blood,  hath  said,  “ Blessed 
are  ye,  for  yours  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.” 

You  may  be  as  poor  as  Lazarus,  and  not  have  a bit  to  put  into 
your  mouth ; you  may  be  glad  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  that  fall 
from  the  rich  man’s  table ; but  fear  not,  you  are  rich — you  shall  be 
heirs  with  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ.  If  you  are 
willing  to  accept  of  him,  behold,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  willing 
to  accept  of  you.  Though  you  are  poor,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will 
not  disdain  you ; the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  take  care  of  you ; 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  make  you  heirs  of  God ; you  shall  be 
joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ;  you  shall  have  crowns  on  your 
heads,  and  sit  on  God’s  right  hand  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  This 
is  the  gospel — this  is  glad  tidings  to  you  who  are  poor. 

The  next  persons  are  the  broken-hearted : “ He  hath  sent  me 
to  heal  the  broken-hearted.”  By  nature  we  are  whole-hearted ; 
and  while  we  are  whole,  while  we  are  righteous,  we  need  not  the 
Physician ; while  we  do  not  feel  the  want  of  Christ,  Jesus  Christ 
and  his  gospel  are  not  precious  to  us.  Our  hearts,  by  nature,  are 
harder  than  the  nether  millstone : they  are  so  hard,  that  none  but 
God  can  break  them.  We  reckon  it  a great  misfortune,  if  we  say 
that  such  a person  has  broken  his  heart — for  that  sorrow  of  the 
world  which  worketh  death  is  a pitiful  case  indeed ; but  do  not  be 
angry  at  me,  when  I pray  God  to  break  every  one  of  your  hearts. 
But  what  shall  it  be  broken  with  ? With  the  sight  of  a wounded 
Saviour? — of  a bleeding,  panting,  dying  Redeemer  ? The  heart 
broken  is  the  result  of  looking  to  Him — of  the  soul’s  looking  to  him 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


11 


whom  it  has  pierced,  and  mourning  as  a woman  mourneth  for  her 
first-born.  Are  there  any  poor  broken-hearted  creatures  in  this 
congregation?  And,  indeed,  how  can  you  look  up  to  Christ  hanging 
on  an  accursed  tree,  and  yet  not  have  your  hearts  broken  ? The 
rocks  rent,  the  graves  opened,  when  Jesus  Christ  was  giving  up 
the  ghost ; nay,  the  sun  itself  withdrew  its  light,  as  ashamed  and 
blushing,  as  it  were,  to  see  the  God  of  nature  suffer.  And  shall 
we  see  Christ  crucified  before  us,  and  yet  our  hearts  remain  hard 
and  unbroken  still  ? For  such  as  are  unbroken,  and  not  changed, 

1 cannot  give  them  comfort;  but  if  there  are  any  broken- 
hearted creatures  here,  there  is  healing  in  Christ  for  them ; he 
hath  sent  me  to  heal  broken-hearted  sinners — first  to  break  them, 
to  wound  them,  and  then  to  heal  them.  I know  very  well,  when 
your  hearts  are  broken  with  a sense  of  sin,  the  devil  will  strike 
in  with  terror,  and  tell  you  ye  are  past  recovery ; the  devil  will 
bid  you  despair  of  mercy,  and  not  trust  in  Jesus  Christ.  But 
what  says  the  text  ? “ He  hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken- 

hearted.” Though  this  is  impossible  with  men,  yet  it  is  possible 
with  God. 

Jesus  Christ  feels  every  sigh,  every  pang,  every  throe  of  your 
poor  soul ; Jesus  feels  the  load  with  you,  and  he  will  take  the 
load  off  from  you.  Jesus  Christ  has  got  a sovereign  remedy  to 
heal  you.  What  is  that  ? It  is  his  precious  blood — it  is  a soul- 
saving remedy.  Here  is  a healing  remedy;  and,  therefore,  if  your 
hearts  are  broken  with  a sense  of  sin,  come  away  to  the  blood  of 
Christ.  There  is  the  remedy  the  poor  creature  shall  have  for 
the  accepting  of.  No  one  came  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  went  away 
uncured.  And  when  the  Lord  undertakes  to  cure  you,  he  will 
do  it  to  purpose.  Come  to  Jesus  Christ — look  at  him — do  not 
look  to  yourselves  too  much  ; look  out  of  yourselves,  and  look  up 
to  Christ.  The  more  you  look  to  yourselves,  the  more  you  will 
fall  into  unbelief ; but  look  out  of  yourselves  to  Christ  by  a direct 
act  of  faith,  and  one  look  of  faith  will  heal  your  hearts.  You  will 
feel  the  power  of  Christ's  blood — it  is  omnipotent ! it  is  almighty ! 
it  can  cure  all  broken  hearts ! Come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  he  will  heal  you.  He  can  but  speak  the  word,  and  it  is  done ; 
and  the  more  you  come,  the  more  welcome  you  are  to  Jesus  Christ. 

Well,  the  next  is  the  captive:  “He  hath  sent  me  to  preach 
deliverance  to  the  captives.”  By  captives  we  may  here  first 
understand  all  mankind.  We  are  all  captives  by  nature — led 
captive  by  the  devil,  by  the  world,  by  our  own  corrupt  hearts ; 


12 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


we  are  led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will ; by  nature  we  tempt 
the  devil  to  tempt  us  ; we  love  the  broad  way ; we  hate  God  and 
his  laws,  and  bid  God  depart  from  us ; we  are  willing  drudges 
to  the  devil.  We  are  captives  in  general;  but  more  particularly 
those  who,  though  they  are  in  captivity,  yet  feel  the  misery  of  capti- 
vity. Those  who  are  desirous  to  get  rid  of  captivity,  these  we 
are  in  a special  manner  to  preach  deliverance  unto.  It  is  just 
like  a proclamation  from  the  king  to  the  captives  in  Babylon : 
they  who  were  fond  of  their  captivity,  stayed  in  Babylon ; but 
they  who  were  weary  of  it,  they  had  leave  given  them  to  go  back 
to  Jerusalem.  We  issue  out  a proclamation  from  the  King  of 
kings,  to  all  poor  captive  souls  now  taken  captive  by  the  devil. 
Is  there  any  of  you  weary  of  your  burden? — or  do  you  hug 
your  chains,  and  look  on  ministers  as  troublers  of  Israel  ? — or  do 
you  say,  0 that  my  heart  were  set  at  liberty!  O that  I were 
delivered  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin ! O that  my  heart- 
lusts  were  mortified ! O that  old  things  were  passed  away,  and 
all  things  were  become  new  in  my  soul!  Is  this  the  language  of 
your  heart?  Then,  behold,  I preach  to  you  deliverance  by  the 
blood,  by  the  power  and  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.  Jesus  Christ 
has  led  captivity  captive  ; Jesus  Christ  has  the  keys  of  death  and 
hell  in  his  hand.  Jesus  Christ  can  open  the  prison  doors ; and 
though  you  are  prisoners,  yet  you  are  prisoners  of  hope.  But  yet 
you  may  say,  I have  been  such  a sinner  against  God,  that  there  is 
no  ransom  can  be  paid  for  my  sin — I deserve  to  be  kept  captive, 
and  damned  for  ever ; and  I despair  of  having  a sufficient  ransom 
paid  fov  me.  But  I say,  The  blood  of  Christ  is  the  ransom. 
Christ  nas  bought  thy  deliverance  with  a great  price — the  inesti- 
mable price  of  his  blood ; Jesus  Christ  hath  purchased  it  by  his 
precious  blood,  and  God  the  Father  is  as  willing  to  release  you, 
as  God  the  Son  is  to  have  you  released.  The  great  question  is, 
Whether  you  are  willing  to  come  out  of  your  Sodom,  to  the  new 
Jerusalem  ? Are  you  so?  Behold,  then,  your  Jesus,  the  finisher 
of  your  salvation,  that  triumphed  over  his  enemies  on  the  cross, 
is  willing  to  deliver  you.  Fear  not  deliverance ! When  Jesus 
is  your  deliverer,  he  will  deliver  you  from  the  guilt  and  from  the 
power  of  sin ; he  will  make  you  new  creatures ; you  shall  have 
love,  and  peace,  and  joy,  and  sweetness,  and  meekness,  in  your 
hearts ; and  being  delivered  from  death  and  hell,  you  shall  be  in- 
vested with  eternal  glory.  This  is  the  deliverance  we  preach  to 
all  who  are  led  captive — who  are  weary  of  their  captivity.  Be- 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


13 


hold,  we  preach  deliverance  to  you  from  captivity  this  morning ; 
may  the  Lord  give  you  a heart  to  accept  of  it ! 

Again,  we  are  to  preach  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind.  We 
are  all  by  nature  blind ; and  this  is  our  great  misfortune,  we  do 
not  know  it — we  think  we  see.  There  are  some  men  think 
they  are  mighty  seeing  men,  but  they  do  not  see ; they  say  they 
see,  and  yet  they  do  not  see  original  sin — they  do  not  see  the 
corruption  of  their  hearts.  These  “poor  creatures  are  blind : we 
are  blind  by  nature ; we  know  not  the  way,  by  nature,  of  being 
reconciled  to  God,  more  than  a man  born  blind  knows  how  to 
describe  the  sun.  But  the  blind  here  mentioned  are  those  who, 
like  Bartimeus,  are  sensible  of  their  blindness,  and  desire  to  see 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There  are  a great  many  of  you  here ; 
but  who  of  you  is  a blind  beggar,  and  cries  out : “ Jesus,  thou  Son 
of  David,  have  mercy  on  me?”  If  God  were  to  ask  you  what  you 
want,  can  any  of  you  say,  with  blind  Bartimeus,  “ Lord,  I want 
to  receive  my  sight?”  Do  you  want  to  receive  Christ?  If  you 
know  him,  you  will  long  to  see  him  again  ; he  is  the  fairest  among 
ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely.  Are  any  of  you  really 
willing  to  see  Christ  ? Are  you  like  the  Greeks  that  came  up  to 
worship  at  Jerusalem,  that  came  to  Andrew,  saying : “ Sir,  we 
would  see  Jesus  ? ” Then  Jesus  you  shall  see.  But  you  say,  I am 
blind.  I know  you  are.  There  are  scales  on  the  eyes  of  your 
mind,  and  a veil  on  your  heart,  which  intercepts  your  sight  of 
Christ.  But  what  says  Christ  to  the  church  of  Laodicea ? “I 
counsel  thee  to  come  to  me  and  buy  eye-salve,  to  anoint  thine 
eyes,  that  thou  mayest  see!”  We  are  blind;  though  we  did  see 
when  we  came  first  out  of  the  hand  of  our  Maker,  yet  now  we 
are  blind.  But  yet,  blessed  be  God,*  there  is  recovering  of  sight 
to  such  blind  souls  as  we  are.  How  are  we  to  recover  our  sight? 
It  is  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  it  is  Jesus  who  opened  the  eyes 
of  the  man  that  was  born  blind;  the  same  Jesus  who  touched  this 
man’s  eyes,  must  touch  your  eyes,  and  must  cause  the  scales  to 
fall  from  your  eyes,  as  they  fell  from  Paul’s,  otherwise  you  shall 
be  damned  for  ever.  You  shall  see  Christ,  indeed,  whether  you 
be  born  again  of  God  or  not;  but  if  you  are  not  born  again  of 
Christ,  you  shall  see  him  only  to  damn  you — you  shall  see  him 
once,  that  it  may  be  your  judgment  to  see  what  you  have  lost. 
But  never,  never,  shall  you  see  him  any  more.  Blind  soul,  look 
up  to  Jesus  Christ.  Now  some  of  you  may  be  drooping,  and 
think  you  shall  never  see  Christ,  because  you  have  been  in  the 


14 


THE  DUTY  OF  A.  GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


dark  for  some  time;  but  do  not  despair,  Jesus  Christ  has  recover- 
ed the  sight  of  thousands  of  millions;  why  may  not  each  of  you 
say,  Lord,  why  wilt  thou  not  give  sight  to  me  also  ? Can  you 
not  put  in  a wvord  ? If  you  can  mix  faith  with  the  promise,  and 
look  up  to  Jesus  Christ,  you  shall  see.  What  shall  you  see  ? You 
shall  see  winders;  you  shall  see  Christ,  and  you  shall  he  so 
ravished  with  his  beauty,  that  you  shall  be  scarcely  able  to  contain 
yourself.  You  shall  see  fulness  and  righteousness  in  the  Son  of 
God — something  in  Christ  that  wfill  satisfy  all  your  w*ants ; you 
shall  see  your  interest  in  him;  you  shall  see  that  you  shall  be 
with  him  for  evermore;  you  shall  sec  him  here  by  faith,  and  see 
him  as  he  is  in  heaven;  you  shall  see  wrondrous  things.  May 
God  recover  the  sight  of  all  you  poor  blind  sinners ! 

Once  more,  Christ  6ays,  “ The  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  set  at  li- 
berty them  that  are  bruised.”  We  are  described  as  poor,  broken, 
blind,  bruised  creatures.  What  a poor  helpless  creature  is  man  in 
his  natural  state!  We  are  all  bruised  even  unto  death,  and  if  you 
want  to  know  how  we  come  to  be  thus  bruised:  by  falling  out 
with  God,  the  devil  bruised  our  heel  most  wretchedly.  But, 
blessed  be  God,  we  shall  yet  bruise  his  cursed  head.  Our  whole 
head  is  sick,  our  whole  heart  is  faint ; from  the  crown  of  the  head 
to  the  sole  of  the  foot,  we  are  full  of  wounds,  bruises,  and  putre- 
fying sores.  In  our  flesh  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing.  We 
are  like  the  poor  creature  that  fell  among  the  thieves — quite  des- 
titute and  forlorn;  and  there  shall  for  ever  lie,  unless  Jesus 
Christ  come  to  set  us  at  liberty.  Are  any  here  feeling  their 
bruises?  What  signifies  your  hearing  without  feeling?  Are  any 
here  made  sensible  of  their  dreadful  fall  from  God?  then  do  not 
despair,  your  case  is  not  desperate,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  set 
your  hearts  at  liberty.  “ He  hath  sent  me  to  set  at  liberty  them 
that  are  bruised.”  Christ  will  open  the  prison-door,  and  let  your 
bruised  souls  come  forth.  God  the  Father  sent  Christ,  and  Jesus 
Christ  never  came  to  do  the  thing  he  will  not  perform;  there- 
fore he  will  take  care  of  poor,  bruised  souls.  Christ  shall  pour 
in  the  wfine  of  his  consolation  into  your  souls;  Christ  will  do 
more  for  you  than  what  the  Samaritan  did  for  the  wounded  travel- 
ler. You  are  so  bruised  that  you  cannot  walk  and  come  to  God; 
but  take  comfort,  Christ  has  borne  thy  sins  in  his  own  body  on 
the  tree.  The  Samaritan  carried  that  man  on  his  own  beast;  but 
Jesus  Christ  has  carried  thy  sins  on  his  own  body.  You  want 
to  be  taken  care  of:  Jesus  Christ  will  take  care  of  you;  he  will 


TIIE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER.  1 5 

put  you  into  the  inn  of  the  visible  church,  he  will  give  his  minis- 
ters charge  to  nurse  you  up,  until  he  come  and  call  you  to  judg- 
ment. You  cannot  tell  how  tenderly  and  lovingly  he  will  deal 
with  you.  He  has  wounded  you,  but  indeed  he  will  heal  you  tho- 
roughly, and  present  you  at  last  blameless  and  spotless  before  his 
Father,  saying,  “ Behold  me,  O Father,  and  these  children  thou 
has  given  me.”  Thus  shall  it  be  done  to  all  you  who  are  bruised, 
and  are  willing  to  be  set  at  liberty  by  Jesus  Christ.  Here,  then,  I 
preach  the  gospel  to  all  such  poor  creatures  that  feel  the  want  of 
a Redeemer,  that  are  blind,  poor,  broken-hearted,  bruised;  this 
will  be  acceptable  doctrine  to  your  souls. 

4.  But  what  shall  I say  to  you  (and  perhaps  the  greatest  part  of 
this  congregation  consists  of  such),  who,  instead  of  being  poor,  are 
rich.  You  do  not  want  Jesus  Christ ; you  will  be  saved  by  your 
own  morality.  What  shall  I say  to  you  who,  instead  of  being 
broken-hearted,  your  hearts  are  hard  as  the  nether  millstone? — 
they  are  so  hard  and  impenetrable,  that  they  cannot  be  moved  at 
the  thoughts  of  a crucified  Jesus.  Instead  of  being  blind,  you 
think  you  see ; you  see  no  want  of  Christ,  no  want  of  the  divinity  of 
Christ,  no  want  of  free  justification  through  the  imputed  righ- 
teousness of  Christ — what  shall  I say  to  you?  You  love  the 
ways  of  the  devil,  hate  God  in  your  hearts,  and  are  every  day 
tempting  the  devil  to  tempt  you — what  shall  I say  to  you?  You 
think  you  are  mighty  fine  creatures,  and  hate  those  ministers  that 
describe  man  in  such  a black  colour.  Shall  I preach  the  gospel 
to  you  ? Thus  far  I will  preach  it ; you  are  welcome  to  Christ  if 
you  will  accept  it;  but  if  you  continue  in  this  condition,  I will 
preach  hell  to  you.  Ye  poor  miserable  creatures,  what  a damnable 
condition  are  your  souls  in ! Ye  poor  blind  souls,  ye  poor  whole- 
hearted creatures,  you  think  you  lack  nothing,  but,  alas!  you  know 
not  that  you  are  poor,  miserable,  blind,  and  naked.  What  shall 
I say  to  you  ? For  Jesus  Christ’s  sake,  consider  the  danger  you 
are  in;  the  next  step  you  may  go  to  hell — you  may  go  to  the  devil 
directly.  You  may  scoff  at  Christ  and  despise  the  offer  of  a blessed 
Redeemer — the  preaching  of  the  gospel  may  to  your  hardened  hearts 
be  foolishness,  and  you  may  bid  God  depart  from  you,  as  you 
desire  not  the  knowledge  of  his  way;  and  because  all  things 
continue  as  they  were,  you  may  mbck  and  say,  “ Where  is  the 
promise  of  his  coming?  for  since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things 
continue  as  they  were  from  the  beginning.”  But  remember, 
Jesus  Christ  will  avenge  himself  of  his  adversaries  by-and-by. 


16 


THE  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


God  may  bear  with  you  long,  but  God  will  not  forbear  'with  you 
always.  Now  the  time  is  coming  when  God  will  vindicate  his 
injured  honour,  when  God  shall  lay  hold  on  his  glittering  sword, 
when  God  shall  sheathe  his  sword  in  your  heart’s  blood;  and  if  you 
will  not  come  to  Jesus  Christ  now,  Christ  shall  say,  “ Depart  from 
me,  ye  cursed,”  when  he  comes  to  judgment.  Hear,  then;  I preach 
the  law  to  you,  to  you  that  will  not  come  to  Christ ; and  O that 
God  would  give  this  word  a commission  as  once  Moses’  rod  got. 
I would  strike  the  rock  of  your  hearts  through  and  through,  but 
out  of  love,  that  your  poor  souls  should  come  to  Christ  to  be  saved 
in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Sinners!  sinners!  how  will  you  escape, 
if  you  neglect  the  great  salvation — salvation  wrought  out  for  poor 
sinners  by  a bleeding  Saviour?  Do  you  think  God  will  take  it  kind? 
He  hath  left  fallen  angels  to  perish  in  their  sin,  he  hath  sent  fallen 
man  the  offer  of  a Saviour;  and  if  you  deny  Christ,  and  will  not 
come  to  him,  you  commit  a crime  the  devil  never  did  commit,  and 
justly  will  you  be  made  to  say,  I am  damned  for  evermore. 

O sinners,  I would  fain  turn  to  preach  the  comforts  of  the 
gospel,  but  I must  speak  a little  more  of  the  law  to  you.  You  are 
hanging  over  the  fiery  furnace,  over  hell-fire,  by  a single  thread 
of  this  life.  God  Almighty  knows  but  this  may  be  the  last  time 
you  shall  hear  this  word,  and  out  of  Christ  you  will  find  God  to 
be  to  you  a consuming  fire.  “ Kiss  the  Son,  then,  lest  he  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  right  way.”  Indeed,  it  is  out  of 
love  and  sincere  affection  to  your  souls  I speak  so.  Let  me  pre- 
vail upon  some  one  of  you,  do  not  at  all  despise  Jesus  Christ,  but 
accept  of  salvation  by  Christ.  There  is  no  entering  into  the 
gates  of  heaven  but  by  Christ ; he  is  the  way,  he  is  the  truth,  he 
is  the  life.  Are  there  any  of  the  children  of  God  here  ? I hope 
there  are  many.  I have  heard  that  this  place  was  famous  for  the 
work  of  God.  Sure  there  are  some  few  names  in  Sardis,  who 
have  not  defiled  their  garments.  Help  me  by  your  Christian 
prayers,  and  wrestle  with  God,  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  may 
wound  them  that  are  sinners,  and  convince  them  of  their  danger, 
and  make  them  willing  to  accept  of  Jesus  Christ.  O ! what  shall 
I say?  How  shall  I prevail?  I know  I can  do  nothing  without 
God;  but  I hope  God  will  send  his  Spirit  to  bring  some  of  you 
home  to  himself. 

It  would  be  my  meat  and  drink  to  hear  of  your  coming  to 
Christ,  more  than  to  hear  that  your  corn  and  wine  increaseth.  Beg 
of  God  to  wound  you,  that  you  may  see  your  want  of  a Redeemer. 


TI1E  DUTY  OF  A GOSPEL  MINISTER. 


17 


As  for  you  who  do  see  him,  I open  all  the  magazine  of  God’s 
storehouse  to  you ; I proclaim  peace  to  you,  be  you  what  you  may; 
come  eat  of  Christ’s  bread,  and  drink  of  Christ’s  wine — you  are 
welcome.  Come  and  feed  on  a crucified  Lamb.  Jesus  Christ  is 
become  our  passover;  he  is  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world.  Come  and  feast  on  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  you 
poor,  broken-hearted  souls ; poor  sinners  that  feel  your  poverty, 
you  are  welcome  to  Jesus  Christ.  O that  God  may  make  this 
an  acceptable  morning  of  the  Lord  to  some  of  your  souls ! My 
dear  friends,  I would  have  you  feed  on  Christ  by  faith  with 
thanksgiving;  that  is  real  feeding  on  Christ.  Those  who  know' 
what  it  is  to  be  born  again,  can  feed  on  Jesus  Christ.  I hope 
some  of  you  are  feeding  on  Christ,  and  I am  sure  you  have  pre- 
cious food.  I have  been  but  a little  while  in  Christ’s  service, 
but  I hope  I have  fed  on  him,  and  0!  he  is  mighty,  mighty 
sweet.  May  God  give  you  to  feed  on  him;  as  you  grow  in 
years,  so  may  you  grow  in  grace.  Let  ministers  preach  Jesus, 
let  them  venture  their  souls  for  preaching  Christ ; if  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  is  upon  them,  they  will  be  able  to  do  wonders.  May 
God  do  wonders  on  ministers  and  people;  and  may  wre  meet  to- 
gether to  feed  on  Christ  in  the  beatific  vision  hereafter.  Amen. 


T 


THE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


“ They  have  healed  algo  the  hurt  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  slightly, 
saying,  Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace.” — Jer.  vi.  14. 

As  God  can  send  a nation  or  people  no  greater  blessing  than  to 
give  them  faithful,  sincere,  and  upright  ministers,  so  the  greatest 
curse  that  God  can  possibly  send  upon  a people  in  this  world,  is 
to  give  them  over  to  blind,  unregenerate,  carnal,  lukewarm,  and 
unskilful  guides.  And  yet,  in  all  ages,  we  find  that  there  have 
been  many  wolves  in  sheep’s  clothing,  many  that  daubed  with 
untempered  mortar,  that  prophesied  smoother  things  than  God 
did  allow.  As  it  was  formerly,  so  it  is  now;  there  are  many  that 
corrupt  the  Word  of  God  and  deal  deceitfully  with  it.  It  was  so 
in  a special  manner  in  the  prophet  Jeremiah’s  time;  and  he,  faith- 
ful to  his  Lord,  faithful  to  that  God  who  employed  him,  did  not  fail 
from  time  to  time  to  open  his  mouth  against  them,  and  to  bear  a 
noble  testimony  to  the  honour  of  that  God  in  whose  name  he  from 
time  to  time  spake.  If  you  will  read  his  prophecy,  you  will  find 
that  none  spake  more  against  such  ministers  than  Jeremiah,  and 
here  especially  in  the  chapter  out  of  which  the  text  is  taken,  he 
speaks  very  severely  against  them — he  charges  them  with  several 
crimes ; particularly,  he  charges  them  with  covetousness : “ For,” 
says  he  in  the  13th  verse,  “from  the  least  of  them  even  to  the 
greatest  of  them,  every  one  is  given  to  covetousness;  and  from 
the  prophet  even  unto  the  priest,  everyone  dealeth  falsely.”  And 
then,  in  the  words  of  the  text,  in  a more  special  manner,  he  ex- 
emplifies how  they  had  dealt  falsely,  how  they  had  behaved 
treacherously  to  poor  souls:  says  he,  “They  have  healed  also  the 
hurt  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  slightly,  saying,  Peace,  peace, 
when  there  is  no  peace.”  The  prophet,  in  the  name  of  God,  had 
been  denouncing  war  against  the  people,  he  had  been  telling 
them  that  their  house  should  be  left  desolate,  and  that  the  Lord 


TIIE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


19 


would  certainly  visit  the  land  with  war.  “ Therefore,”  says  he, 
in  the  11th  verse,  “I  am  full  of  the  fury  of  the  Lord;  I am 
weary  with  holding  in ; I will  pour  it  out  upon  the  children 
abroad,  and  upon  the  assembly  of  young  men  together;  for  even 
the  husband  with  the  wife  shall  be  taken,  the  aged  with  him 
that  is  full  of  days.  And  their  houses  shall  be  turned  unto 
others,  with  their  fields  and  wives  together ; for  I will  stretch  out 
my  hand  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  saith  the  Lord.”  The 
prophet  gives  a thundering  message,  that  they  might  be  terrified 
and  have  some  convictions  and  inclinations  to  repent;  but  it 
seems  that  the  false  prophets,  the  false  priests,  went  about  stifling 
people’s  convictions,  and  when  they  were  hurt  or  a little  terrified, 
they  were  for  daubing  over  the  wound,  telling  them  that  Jere- 
miah was  but  an  enthusiastic  preacher,  that  there  could  be 
no  such  thing  as  war  among  them,  and  saying  to  people,  Peace, 
peace,  be  still,  when  the  prophet  told  them  there  was  no  peace. 
The  words,  then,  refer  primarily  unto  outward  things,  but  I verily 
believe  have  also  a further  reference  to  the  soul,  and  are  to  be 
referred  to  those  false  teachers,  who,  when  people  were  under 
conviction  of  sin,  when  people  were  beginning  to  look  towards 
heaven,  were  for  stifling  their  convictions  and  telling  them  they 
were  good  enough  before.  And,  indeed,  people  generally  love  to 
have  it  so;  our  hearts  are  exceedingly  deceitful,  and  desperately 
wicked;  none  but  the  eternal  God  knows  how  treacherous  they 
are.  How  many  of  us  cry,  Peace,  peace,  to  our  souls,  when 
there  is  no  peace!  How  many  are  there  who  are  now  settled 
upon  their  lees,  that  now  think  they  are  Christians,  that  now 
flatter  themselves  that  they  have  an  interest  in  Jesus  Christ; 
whereas  if  we  come  to  examine  their  experiences,  we  shall  find 
that  their  peace  is  but  a peace  of  the  devil’s  making — it  is  not  a 
peace  of  God’s  giving — it  is  not  a peace  that  passeth  human  un- 
derstanding. It  is  matter,  therefore,  of  great  importance,  mv 
dear  hearers,  to  know  whether  we  may  speak  peace  to  our  hearts. 
We  are  all  desirous  of  peace;  peace  is  an  unspeakable  blessing; 
how  can  we  live  without  peace?  And,  therefore,  people  from 
time  to  time  must  be  taught  how  far  they  must  go,  and  what 
must  be  wrought  in  them,  before  they  can  speak  peace  to  their 
hearts.  This  is  what  I design  at  present,  that  I may  deliver  my 
soul,  that  I may  be  free  from  the  blood  of  all  those  to  whom  I 
preach — that  I may  not  fail  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God. 
I shall,  from  the  w ords  of  the  text,  endeavour  to  showr  you  what 


20 


THE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


you  must  undergo,  and  what  must  be  wrought  in  you  before  you 
can  speak  peace  to  your  hearts. 

But  before  I come  directly  to  this,  give  me  leave  to  premise  a 
caution  or  two.  And  the  first  is,  that  I take  it  for  granted 
you  believe  religion  to  he  an  inward  thing ; you  believe  it  to  be  a 
wrork  in  the  heart,  a -work  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  power  of 
the  Spirit  of  God.  If  you  do  not  believe  this,  you  do  not  believe 
your  Bibles.  If  you  do  not  believe  this,  though  you  have  got 
your  Bibles  in  your  hand,  you  hate  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  your 
heart;  for  religion  is  everywhere  represented  in  Scripture  as  the 
work  of  God  in  the  heart.  “ The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  us,” 
says  our  Lord;  and,  “He  is  not  a Christian  w'ho  is  one  outwardly: 
but  he  is  a Christian  who  is  one  inwardly.”  If  any  of  you 
place  religion  in  outward  things,  I shall  not  perhaps  please  you 
this  morning ; you  will  understand  me  no  more  when  I speak  of 
the  work  of  God  upon  a poor  sinner’s  heart,  than  if  I wrere  talk- 
ing in  an  unknown  tongue.  I w^ould  further  premise  a caution, 
that  I -would  by  no  means  confine  God  to  one  way  of  acting.  I 
-would  by  no  means  say,  that  all  persons,  before  they  come  to  have 
a settled  peace  in  their  hearts,  are  obliged  to  undergo  the  same 
degrees  of  conviction.  Xo;  God  has  various  ways  of  bringing 
his  children  home;  his  sacred  Spirit  bio  weth  when,  and  where,  and 
howr  it  listeth.  But,  however,  I wdll  venture  to  affirm  this,  that  be- 
fore ever  you  can  speak  peace  to  your  heart,  whether  by  shorter  or 
longer  continuance  of  your  convictions,  whether  in  a more  pun- 
gent or  in  a more  gentle  way,  you  must  undergo  what  I shall 
hereafter  lay  down  in  the  folio-wing  discourse. 

First,  then,  before  you  can  speak  peace  to  your  hearts,  you 
must  be  made  to  see,  made  to  feel,  made  to  w-eep  over,  made  to 
bewail,  your  actual  transgressions  against  the  law  of  God.  Ac- 
cording to  the  covenant  of  wTorks,  “ The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall 
die;”  cursed  is  that  man, be  he  what  he  may,  be  he  who  he  may, that 
continueth  not  in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the  book  of  the 
law  to  do  them.  We  are  not  only  to  do  some  things,  but  we  are  to 
do  all  things,  and  we  are  to  continue  so  to  do;  so  that  the  least 
deviation  from  the  moral  law,  according  to  the  covenant  of  w^orks, 
whether  in  thought,  word,  or  deed,  deserves  eternal  death  at  the 
hand  of  God.  And  if  one  evil  thought,  if  one  evil  word,  if  one 
evil  action,  deserves  eternal  damnation,  how  many  hells,  my 
friends,  do  every  one  of  us  deserve,  whose  whole  lives  have  been 
one  continued  rebellion  against  God!  Before  ever,  therefore, 


T1IE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


21 


you  can  speak  peace  to  your  hearts,  you  must  be  brought  to  see, 
brought  to  believe,  what  a dreadful  thing  it  is  to  depart  from  the 
living  God.  And  now,  my  dear  friends,  examine  your  hearts, 
for  I hope  you  came  hither  with  a design  to  have  your  souls 
made  better.  Give  me  leave  to  ask  you,  in  the  presence  of  God, 
whether  you  know  the  time,  and  if  you  do  not  know  exactly  the 
time,  do  you  know  there  was  a time,  when  God  wrote  bitter 
things  against  you,  when  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  were  within 
you?  Was  ever  the  remembrance  of  your  sins  grievous  to  you? 
Was  the  burden  of  your  sins  intolerable  to  your  thoughts?  Did 
you  ever  see  that  God’s  wrath  might  justly  fall  upon  you, 
on  account  of  your  actual  transgressions  against  God  ? 
Were  you  ever  in  all  your  life  sorry  for  your  sins?  Could  you 
ever  say,  My  sins  are  gone  over  my  head  as  a burden  too  heavy 
for  me  to  bear  ? Did  you  ever  experience  any  such  thing  as 
this  ? Did  ever  any  such  thing  as  this  pass  between  God  and 
your  soul?  If  not,  for  Jesus  Christ’s  sake,  do  not  call  yourselves 
Christians;  you  may  speak  peace  to  your  hearts,  but  there  is  no 
peace.  May  the  Lord  awaken  you,  may  the  Lord  convert  you, 
may  the  Lord  give  you  peace,  if  it  be  his  will,  before  you  go 
home ! 

But  further:  you  may  be  convinced  of  your  actual  sins,  so  as 
to  be  made  to  tremble,  and  yet  you  may  be  strangers  to  Jesus 
Christ,  you  may  have  no  true  work  of  grace  upon  your  hearts. 
Before  ever,  therefore,  you  can  speak  peace  to  your  hearts,  convic- 
tion must  go  deeper ; you  must  not  only  be  convinced  of  your 
actual  transgressions  against  the  law  of  God,  but  likewise  of  the 
foundation  of  all  your  transgressions.  And  what  is  that  ? I mean 
original  sin,  that  original  corruption  each  of  us  brings  into  the 
world  with  us,  which  renders  us  liable  to  God’s  wrath  and  dam- 
nation. There  are  many  poor  souls  that  think  themselves  fine 
reasoners,  yet  they  pretend  to  say  there  is  no  such  thing  as  ori- 
ginal sin;  they  will  charge  God  w7ith  injustice  in  imputing  Adam’s 
sin  to  us ; although  we  have  got  the  mark  of  the  beast  and  of  the 
devil  upon  us,  yet  they  tell  us  we  are  not  born  in  sin.  Let  them 
look  abroad  into  the  world  and  see  the  disorders  in  it,  and  think, 
if  they  can,  if  this  is  the  paradise  in  which  God  did  put  man.  No! 
everything  in  the  world  is  out  of  order.  I have  often  thought, 
when  I was  abroad,  that  if  there  were  no  other  argument  to  prove 
original  sin,  the  rising  of  wolves  and  tigers  against  man,  nay, 
the  barking  of  a dog  against  us,  is  a proof  of  original  sin.  Tigers 


22 


THE  3IETH0D  OF  GRACE. 


and  lions  durst  not  rise  against  us,  if  it  were  not  for  Adam's 
first  sin : for  when  the  creatures  rise  up  against  us,  it  is  as  much 
as  to  say,  You  have  sinned  against  God,  and  we  take  up  our 
Master’s  quarrel.  If  we  look  inwardly,  we  shall  see  enough  of 
lusts,  and  man’s  temper  contrary  to  the  temper  of  God.  There  is 
pride,  malice,  and  revenge,  in  all  our  hearts  : and  this  temper  can- 
not come  from  God;  it  comes  from  our  first  parent,  Adam,  who, 
after  he  fell  from  God,  fell  out  of  God  into  the  devil.  However, 
therefore,  some  people  may  deny  this,  yet  when  conviction  comes, 
all  carnal  reasonings  are  battered  down  immediately,  and  the 
poor  soul  begins  to  feel  and  see  the  fountain  from  which  all  the 
polluted  streams  do  flow’.  When  the  sinner  is  first  awrakened, 
he  begins  to  w’onder — How7  came  I to  be  so  wdcked  ? The  Spirit 
of  God  then  strikes  in,  and  show’s  that  he  has  no  good  thing  in 
him  by  nature;  then  he  sees  that  he  is  altogether  gone  out  of  the 
way,  that  he  is  altogether  become  abominable,  and  the  poor 
creature  is  made  to  lie  dowm  at  the  foot  of  the  throne  of  God,  and 
to  acknowdedge  that  God  would  be  just  to  damn  him,  just  to  cut 
him  off,  though  he  never  had  committed  one  actual  sin  in  his  life. 
Did  you  ever  feel  and  experience  this,  any  of  you — to  justify  God 
in  your  damnation — to  owrn  that  you  are  by  nature  children  of 
wrath,  and  that  God  may  justly  cut  you  off,  though  you  never 
actually  had  offended  him  in  all  your  life?  If  you  wrere  ever 
truly  convicted,  if  your  hearts  wrere  ever  truly  cut,  if  self  wrere 
truly  taken  out  of  you,  you  wrould  be  made  to  see  and  feel  this. 
And  if  you  have  never  felt  the  weight  of  original  sin,  do  not  call 
yourselves  Christians.  I am  verily  persuaded  original  sin  is  the 
greatest  burden  of  a true  convert;  this  ever  grieves  the  regene- 
rate soul,  the  sanctified  soul.  The  indwelling  of  sin  in  the  heart 
is  the  burden  of  a converted  person;  it  is  the  burden  of  a true 
Christian.  He  continually  cries  out,  “O!  who  will  deliver  me 
from  this  body  of  death,”  this  indwelling  corruption  in  my  heart? 
This  is  that  w'hich  disturbs  a poor  soul  most.  And,  therefore, 
if  you  never  felt  this  inw’ard  corruption,  if  you  never  saw  that 
God  might  justly  curse  you  for  it,  indeed,  my  dear  friends,  you 
may  speak  peace  to  your  hearts,  but  I fear,  nay,  I know7,  there  is 
no  true  peace. 

Further:  before  you  can  speak  peace  to  your  hearts,  you  must 
not  only  be  troubled  for  the  sins  of  your  life,  the  sin,  of  your 
nature,  but  likewise  for  the  sins  of  your  best  duties  and  perfor- 
mances. When  a poor  soul  is  somew’hat  aw’akened  by  the  terrors 


THIS  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


23 


of  the  Lord,  then  the  poor  creature,  being  born  under  the  cove- 
nant of  works,  flies  directly  to  a covenant  of  works  again.  And 
as  Adam  and  Eve  hid  themselves  among  the  trees  of  the  garden, 
and  sewed  fig  leaves  together  to  cover  their  nakedness,  so  the 
poor  sinner,  when  awakened,  flies  to  his  duties  and  to  his 
performances,  to  hide  himself  from  God,  and  goes  to  patch  up 
a righteousness  of  his  own.  Says  he,  I will  be  mighty  good 
now — I will  reform — I will  do  all  I can;  and  then  certainly 
Jesus  Christ  will  have  mercy  on  me.  But  before  you  can 
speak  peace  to  your  heart,  you  must  be  brought  to  see  that  God 
may  damn  you  for  the  best  prayer  you  ever  put  up ; you  must 
be  brought  to  see  that  all  your  duties — all  your  righteousness — as 
the  prophet  elegantly  expresses  it — put  them  all  together,  are  so 
far  from  recommending  you  to  God,  are  so  far  from  being  any 
motive  and  inducement  to  God  to  have  mercy  on  your  poor  soul, 
that  he  will  see  them  to  be  filthy  rags,  a menstruous  cloth — 
that  God  hates  them,  and  cannot  away  with  them,  if  you  bring 
them  to  him  in  order  to  recommend  you  to  his  favour.  My  dear 
friends,  what  is  there  in  our  performances  to  recommend  us  unto 
God  ? Our  persons  are  in  an  unjustified  state  by  nature,  we  de- 
serve to  be  damned  ten  thousand  times  over ; and  what  must 
our  performances  be?  We  can  do  no  good  thing  by  nature: 
“ They  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God.”  You  may  do 
things  materially  good,  but  you  cannot  do  a thing  formally  and 
rightly  good;  because  nature  cannot  act  above  itself.  It  is  im- 
possible that  a man  who  is  unconverted  can  act  for  the  glory  of 
God;  he  cannot  do  anything  in  taith,  and  “ whatsoever  is  not  of 
faith  is  sin.”  After  we  are  renewed,  yet  we  are  renewed  but  in 
part,  indwelling  sin  continues  in  us,  there  is  a mixture  of  corrup- 
tion in  every  one  of  our  duties ; so  that  after  we  are  converted, 
were  Jesus  Christ  only  to  accept  us  according  to  our  works,  our 
works  would  damn  us,  for  we  cannot  put  up  a prayer  but  it  is 
far  from  that  perfection  which  the  moral  law  requireth.  I do 
not  know  what  you  may  think,  but  I can  say  that  I cannot  pray 
but  I sin — I cannot  preach  to  you  or  any  others  but  I sin — I can 
do  nothing  without  sin ; and,  as  one  expresseth  it,  my  repentance 
wants  to  be  repented  of,  and  my  tears  to  be  washed  in  the  pre- 
cious blood  of  my  dear  Redeemer.  Our  best  duties  are  as  so 
many  splendid  sins.  Before  you  can  speak  peace  to  your  heart, 
you  must  not  only  be  sick  of  your  original  and  actual  sin,  but 
you  must  be  made  sick  of  your  righteousness,  of  all  your  duties 


24 


THE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


and  performances.  There  must  be  a deep  conviction  before  you 
can  be  brought  out  of  your  self-righteousness ; it  is  the  last  idol 
taken  out  of  our  heart.  The  pride  of  our  heart  will  not  let  us  sub- 
mit to  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  if  you  never  felt 
that  you  had  no  righteousness  of  your  own,  if  you  never  felt  the 
deficiency  of  your  own  righteousness,  you  cannot  come  to  Jesus 
Christ.  There  are  a great  many  now  who  may  say,  Well,  we 
believe  all  this;  but  there  is  a great  difference  betwixt  talking 
and  feeling.  Did  you  ever  feel  the  want  of  a dear  Redeemer? 
Did  you  ever  feel  the  want  of  Jesus  Christ,  upon  the  account  of 
the  deficiency  of  your  own  righteousness  ? And  can  you  now  say 
from  your  heart,  Lord,  thou  mayst  justly  damn  me  for  the  best 
duties  that  ever  I did  perform  ? If  you  are  not  thus  brought  out 
of  self,  you  may  speak  peace  to  yourselves,  but  yet  there  is  no  peace. 

But  then,  before  you  can  speak  peace  to  your  souls,  there  is 
one  particular  sin  you  must  be  greatly  troubled  for,  and  yet  I 
fear  there  are  few  of  you  think  what  it  is;  it  is  the  reigning,  the 
damning  sin  of  the  Christian  world,  and  yet  the  Christian  world 
seldom  or  never  think  of  it.  And  pray  what  is  that  ? It  is  what 
most  of  you  think  you  are  not  guilty  of — and  that  is,  the  sin  of 
unbelief.  Before  you  can  speak  peace  to  your  heart,  you  must 
be  troubled  for  the  unbelief  of  your  heart.  But,  can  it  be  sup- 
posed that  any  of  you  are  unbelievers  here  in  this  church-yard, 
that  are  born  in  Scotland,  in  a reformed  country,  that  go  to 
church  every  Sabbath?  Can  any  of  you  that  receive  the  sacra- 
ment once  a-year — 0 that  it  were  administered  oftener! — can  it 
be  supposed  that  you  who  had  tokens  for  the  sacrament,  that  you 
who  keep  up  family  prayer,  that  any  of  you  do  not  believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ?  I appeal  to  your  own  hearts,  if  you  would 
not  think  me  uncharitable,  if  I doubted  whether  any  of  you  be- 
lieved in  Christ;  and  yet,  I fear  upon  examination,  we  should 
find  that  most  of  you  have  not  so  much  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  the  devil  himself.  I am  persuaded  the  devil  believes 
more  of  the  Bible  than  most  of  us  do.  He  believes  the  divinity  of 
Jesus  Christ;  that  is  more  than  many  who  call  themselves  Chris- 
tians do;  nay,  he  believes  and  trembles,  and  that  is  more  than 
thousands  amongst  us  do.  My  friends,  we  mistake  a historical 
faith  for  a true  faith,  wrought  in  the  heart  by  the  Spirit  of 
God.  You  fancy  you  believe,  because  you  believe  there  is  such  a 
book  as  we  call  the  Bible — because  you  go  to  church;  all  this  you 
may  do,  and  have  no  true  faith  in  Christ.  Merely  to  believe 


THE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


25 


there  was  such  a person  as  Christ,  merely  to  believe  there  is 
a book  called  the  Bible,  will  do  you  no  good,  more  than  to 
believe  there  was  such  a man  as  Caesar  or  Alexander  the  Great. 
The  Bible  is  a sacred  depository.  What  thanks  have  we  to  give  to 
God  for  these  lively  oracles!  But  yet  we  may  have  these,  and  not 
believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  My  dear  friends,  there  must 
be  a principle  wrought  in  the  heart  by  the  Spirit  of  the  living 
God.  Did  I ask  you  how  long  it  is  since  you  believed  in  Jesus 
Christ,  I suppose  most  of  you  would  tell  me,  you  believed  in  Jesus 
Christ  as  long  as  ever  you  remember — you  never  did  misbelieve. 
Then,  you  could  not  give  me  a better  proof  that  you  never  yet 
believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  unless  you  were  sanctified  early,  as  from 
the  womb ; for,  they  that  otherwise  believe  in  Christ  know  there 
was  a time  when  they  did  not  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  You  say  you 
love  God  with  all  your  heart,  soul,  and  strength.  If  I were  to  ask 
you  how  long  it  is  since  you  loved  God,  you  would  say,  As  long 
as  you  can  remember ; you  never  hated  God,  you  know  no  time 
when  there  was  enmity  in  your  heart  against  God.  Then,  unless 
you  were  sanctified  very  early,  you  never  loved  God  in  your  life. 
My  dear  friends,  I am  more  particular  in  this,  because  it  is  a most 
deceitful  delusion,  whereby  so  many  people  are  carried  away,  that 
they  believe  already.  Therefore,  it  is  remarked  of  Mr.  Marshall, 
giving  account  of  his  experiences,  that  he  had  been  working  for 
life,  and  he  had  ranged  all  his  sins  under  the  ten  commandments, 
and  then  coming  to  a minister,  asked  him  the  reason  why  he 
could  not  get  peace.  The  minister  looked  to  his  catalogue,  Away, 
says  he,  I do  not  find  one  word  of  the  sin  of  unbelief  in  all 
your  catalogue.  It  is  the  peculiar  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
to  convince  us  of  our  unbelief — that  we  have  got  no  faith. 
Says  Jesus  Christ,  “I  will  send  the  Comforter;  and  when  he  is 
come,  he  will  reprove  the  world”  of  the  sin  of  unbelief;  “of  sin,” 
says  Christ,  “because  they  believe  not  on  me.”  Now,  my  dear 
friends,  did  God  ever  show  you  that  you  had  no  faith?  Were  you 
ever  made  to  bewail  a hard  heart  of  unbelief?  Was  it  ever  the 
language  of  your  heart,  Lord,  give  me  faith  ; Lord,  enable  me  to 
lay  hold  on  thee ; Lord,  enable  me  to  call  +hee  my  Lord  and  my 
God?  Did  Jesus  Christ  ever  convince  you  in  this  manner?  Did 
he  ever  convince  you  of  your  inability  to  close  with  Christ,  and 
make  you  to  cry  out  to  God  to  give  you  faith  ? If  not,  do  not 
speak  peace  to  your  heart.  May  the  Lord  awaken  you,  and  give 
you  true,  solid  peace  before  you  go  hence  and  be  no  more ! 


26 


THE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


Once  more,  then : before  you  can  speak  peace  to  your  heart, 
you  must  not  only  be  convinced  of  your  actual  and  original  sin, 
the  sins  of  your  own  righteousness,  the  sin  of  unbelief,  but  you 
must  be  enabled  to  lay  hold  upon  the  perfect  righteousness,  the 
all-sufficient  righteousness,  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  you  must 
lay  hold  by  faith  on  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  then 
you  shall  have  peace.  “ Come,”  says  Jesus,  “unto  me,  all  ye 
that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden,  and  I will  give  you  rest.”  This 
speaks  encouragement  to  all  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden ; but 
the  promise  of  rest  is  made  to  them  only  upon  their  coming  and 
believing,  and  taking  him  to  be  their  God  and  their  all.  Before 
we  can  ever  have  peace  with  God,  we  must  be  justified  by  faith 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  must  be  enabled  to  apply 
Christ  to  our  hearts,  we  must  have  Christ  brought  home  to  our 
souls,  so  as  his  righteousness  may  be  made  our  righteousness,  so 
as  his  merits  may  be  imputed  to  our  souls.  My  dear  friends, 
were  you  ever  married  to  Jesus  Christ?  Did  Jesus  Christ  ever 
give  himself  to  you?  Did  you  ever  close  with  Christ  by  a lively 
faith,  so  as  to  feel  Christ  in  your  hearts,  so  as  to  hear  him  speak- 
ing peace  to  your  souls?  Did  peace  ever  flow  in  upon  your  hearts 
like  a river?  Did  you  ever  feel  that  peace  that  Christ  spoke  to 
his  disciples  ? I pray  God  he  may  come  and  speak  peace  to  you. 
These  things  you  must  experience.  I am  now  talking  of  the  in- 
visible realities  of  another  wrorld,  of  inward  religion,  of  the  work 
of  God  upon  a poor  sinner’s  heart.  I am  now  talking  of  a matter 
of  great  importance,  my  dear  hearers ; you  are  all  concerned  in 
it,  your  souls  are  concerned  in  it,  your  eternal  salvation  is  con- 
cerned in  it.  You  may  be  all  at  peace,  but  perhaps  the  devil  has 
lulled  you  asleep  into  a carnal  lethargy  and  security,  and  will  en- 
deavour to  keep  you  there,  till  he  get  you  to  hell,  and  there  you 
will  be  awakened ; but  it  will  be  dreadful  to  be  awakened  and 
And  yourselves  so  fearfully  mistaken,  when  the  great  gulf  is 
fixed,  when  you  will  be  calling  to  all  eternity  for  a drop  of  water 
to  cool  your  tongue,  and  shall  not  obtain  it. 

Give  me  leave,  then,  to  address  myself  to  several  sorts  of  per- 
sons ; and  O may  God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  bless  the  application! 
There  are  some  of  you  perhaps  can  say,  Through  grace  we  can 
go  along  with  you.  Blessed  be  God,  we  have  been  convinced  of 
our  actual  sins,  we  have  been  convinced  of  original  sin,  we  have 
been  convinced  of  self-righteousness,  we  have  felt  the  bitterness 
of  unbelief,  and  through  grace  we  have  closed  with  Jesus  Christ ; 


THE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


27 


we  can  speak  peace  to  our  hearts,  because  God  hath  spoken  peace 
to  us.  Can  you  say  so  ? Then  I will  salute  you,  as  the  angels 
did  the  women  the  first  day  of  the  week,  All  hail!  fear  not  ye, 
my  dear  brethren,  you  are  happy  souls;  you  may  lie  down  and  be 
at  peace  indeed,  for  God  hath  given  you  peace ; you  may  be  con- 
tent under  all  the  dispensations  of  providence,  for  nothing  can 
happen  to  you  now,  but  what  shall  be  the  effect  of  God's  love  to 
your  soul;  you  need  not  fear  what  fightings  may  be  without, 
seeing  there  is  peace  within.  Have  you  closed  with  Christ?  Is 
God  your  friend?  Is  Christ  your  friend?  Then,  look  up  with 
comfort ; all  is  yours,  and  you  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's. 
Everything  shall  work  together  for  your  good ; the  very  hairs  of 
your  head  are  numbered;  he  that  toucheth  you,  toucheth  the  apple 
of  God's  eye.  But  then,  my  dear  friends,  beware  of  resting  on 
your  first  conversion.  You  that  are  young  believers  in  Christ,  you 
should  be  looking  out  for  fresh  discoveries  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  every  moment ; you  must  not  build  upon  your  past  expe- 
riences, you  must  not  build  upon  a work  within  you,  but  always 
come  out  of  yourselves  to  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  with- 
out you;  you  must  be  always  coming  as  poor  sinners  to  draw 
water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation;  you  must  be  forgetting  the 
things  that  are  behind,  and  be  continually  pressing  forward  to 
the  things  that  are  before.  My  dear  friends,  you  must  keep  up 
a tender,  close  walk  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There  are  many 
of  us  who  lose  our  peace  by  our  untender  walk;  something  or 
other  gets  in  betwixt  Christ  and  us,  and  we  fall  into  darkness ; 
something  or  other  steals  our  hearts  from  God,  and  this  grieves 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  leaves  us  to  ourselves.  Let 
me,  therefore,  exhort  you  that  have  got  peace  with  God,  to  take 
care  that  you  do  not  lose  this  peace.  It  is  true,  if  you  are  once 
in  Christ,  you  cannot  finally  fall  from  God : “ There  is  no  con- 
demnation to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus;''  but  if  you  cannot 
fall  finally,  you  may  fall  foully,  and  may  go  with  broken  bones  all 
your  days.  Take  care  of  backslidings;  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  do 
not  grieve  the  Holy  Ghost — you  may  never  recover  your  comfort 
while  you  live.  O take  care  of  going  a gadding  and  wandering 
from  God,  after  you  have  closed  with  Jesus  Christ.  My  dear 
friends,  I have  paid  dear  for  backsliding.  Our  hearts  are  so 
cursedly  wicked,  that  if  you  take  not  care,  if  you  do  not  keep  up 
a constant  watch,  your  wicked  hearts  will  deceive  you,  and  draw 
you  aside.  It  will  be  sad  to  be  under  the  scourge  of  a correcting 


28 


TIIE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


Father;  witness  the  visitations  of  Job,  David,  and  other  saints  in 
Scripture.  Let  me,  therefore,  exhort  you  that  have  got  peace 
to  keep  a close  walk  with  Christ.  I am  grieved  with  the  loose 
walk  of  those  that  are  Christians,  that  have  had  discoveries  of 
Jesus  Christ  ; there  is  so  little  difference  betwixt  them  and  other 
people,  that  I scarce  know  which  is  the  true  Christian.  Chris- 
tians are  afraid  to  speak  for  God — they  run  down  with  the  stream ; 
if  they  come  into  worldly  company,  they  will  talk  of  the  world  as 
if  they  were  in  their  element;  this  you  would  not  do  when  you 
had  the  first  discoveries  of  Christ’s  love ; you  could  talk  then  of 
Christ’s  love  for  ever,  when  the  candle  of  the  Lord  shined  upon 
your  soul.  That  time  has  been  when  you  had  something  to  say 
for  your  dear  Lord;  but  now  you  can  go  into  company  and  hear 
others  speaking  about  the  world  bold  enough,  and  you  are  afraid 
of  being  laughed  at  if  you  speak  for  Jesus  Christ.  A great  many 
people  have  grown  conformists  now  in  the  worst  sense  of  the 
word;  they  will  cry  out  against  the  ceremonies  of  the  church, 
as  they  may  justly  do;  but  then  you  are  mighty  fond  of  cere- 
monies in  your  behaviour;  you  will  conform  to  the  world,  which 
is  a great  deal  worse.  Many  will  stay  till  the  devil  bring  up  new 
fashions.  Take  care,  then,  not  to  be  conformed  to  the  world. 
What  have  Christians  to  do  with  the  world?  Christians  should 
be  singularly  good,  bold  for  their  Lord,  that  all  who  are  with 
you  may  take  notice  that  you  have  been  with  Jesus.  I would 
exhort  you  to  come  to  a settlement  in  Jesus  Christ,  so  as  to  have 
a continual  abiding  of  God  in  your  heart.  We  go  a-building  on 
our  faith  of  adherence,  and  lose  our  comfort;  but  we  should  be 
growing  up  to  a faith  of  assurance,  to  know  that  wre  are  God’s, 
and  so  walk  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  be  edified. 
Jesus  Christ  is  now  much  wounded  in  the  house  of  his  friends. 
Excuse  me  in  being  particular ; for,  my  friends,  it  grieves  me  more 
that  Jesus  Christ  should  be  wounded  by  his  friends  than  by  his 
enemies.  We  cannot  expect  anything  else  from  Deists;  but  for 
such  as  have  felt  his  power,  to  fall  away,  for  them  not  to  walk 
agreeably  to  the  vocation  wherewith  they  are  called — by  these 
means  we  bring  our  Lord’s  religion  into  contempt,  to  be  a by- 
word among  the  heathen.  For  Christ’s  sake,  if  you  know  Christ 
keep  close  by  him;  if  God  have  spoken  peace,  0 keep  that  peace 
by  looking  up  to  Jesus  Christ  every  moment.  Such  as  have  got 
peace  with  God,  if  you  are  under  trials,  fear  not,  all  things  shall 
work  for  your  good;  if  you  are  under  temptations,  fear  not,  if  he 


TIIE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


29 


has  spoken  peace  to  your  hearts,  all  these  things  shall  be  for  your 
good. 

But  what  shall  I say  to  you  that  have  got  no  peace  with  God? — 
and  these  are,  perhaps,  the  most  of  this  congregation  : it  makes 
me  weep  to  think  of  it.  Most  of  you,  if  you  examine  your  hearts, 
must  confess  that  God  never  yet  spoke  peace  to  you ; you  are 
children  of  the  devil,  if  Christ  is  not  in  you,  if  God  has  not 
spoken  peace  to  your  heart.  Poor  soul!  what  a cursed  condition 
are  you  in.  I would  not  be  in  your  case  for  ten  thousand, 
thousand  worlds.  Why?  You  are  just  hanging  over  hell.  What 
peace  can  you  have  when  God  is  your  enemy,  when  the  wrath 
of  God  is  abiding  upon  your  poor  soul  ? Awake,  then,  you  that 
are  sleeping  in  a false  peace ; awake,  ye  carnal  professors,  ye 
hypocrites  that  go  to  church,  receive  the  sacrament,  read 
your  Bibles,  and  never  felt  the  power  of  God  upon  your  hearts ; 
you  that  are  formal  professors,  you  that  are  baptized  heathens ; 
awake,  awake,  and  do  not  rest  on  a false  bottom.  Blame  me 
not  for  addressing  myself  to  you;  indeed,  it  is  out  of  love  to  your 
souls.  I see  you  are  lingering  in  your  Sodom,  and  wanting  to 
stay  there ; but  I come  to  you  as  the  angel  did  to  Lot,  to  take 
you  by  the  hand.  Come  away,  my  dear  brethren — fly,  fly,  fly  for 
your  lives  to  Jesus  Christ,  fly  to  a bleeding  God,  fly  to  a throne 
of  grace ; and  beg  of  God  to  break  your  hearts,  beg  of  God  to 
convince  you  of  your  actual  sins,  beg  of  God  to  convince  you  of 
your  original  sin,  beg  of  God  to  convince  you  of  your  self-righ- 
teousness— beg  of  God  to  give  you  faith,  and  to  enable  you  to 
close  with  Jesus  Christ.  O you  that  are  secure,  I must  be  a 
son  of  thunder  to  you,  and  O that  God  may  awaken  you, 
though  it  be  with  thunder ; it  is  out  of  love,  indeed,  that  I speak 
to  you.  I know  by  sad  experience  what  it  is  to  be  lulled 
asleep  with  a false  peace;  long  was  I lulled  asleep,  long  did  I 
think  myself  a Christian,  when  I knew  nothing  of  the  Lord 
J esus  Christ.  I went  perhaps  farther  than  many  of  you  do ; I used 
to  fast  twice  a- week,  I used  to  pray  sometimes  nine  times  a-day, 
I used  to  receive  the  sacrament  constantly  every  Lord’s-day  ; and 
yet  I knew  nothing  of  Jesus  Christ  in  my  heart,  I knew  not  that 
I must  be  a new  creature — I knew  nothing  of  inward  religion  in 
my  soul.  And  perhaps,  many  of  you  may  be  deceived  as  I,  poor 
creature,  was;  and,  therefore,  it  is  out  of  love  to  you  indeed,  that 
I speak  to  you.  0 if  you  do  not  take  care,  a form  of  religion 
will  destroy  your  soul : you  will  rest  in  it,  and  will  not  come  to 


30 


THE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


Jesus  Christ  at  all;  whereas,  these  things  are  only  the  means, 
and  not  the  end  of  religion ; Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  right- 
eousness to  all  that  believe.  O,  then,  awake,  you  that  are  settled 
on  your  lees ; awake  you  Church  professors ; awake  you  that  have 
got  a name  to  live,  that  are  rich  and  think  you  want  nothing, 
not  considering  that  you  are  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked ; I coun- 
sel you  to  come  and  buy  of  Jesus  Christ  gold,  white  raiment,  and 
eye-salve.  But  I hope  there  are  some  that  are  a little  wounded ; 
I hope  God  does  not  intend  to  let  me  preach  in  vain ; I hope  God 
will  reach  some  of  your  precious  souls,  and  awaken  some  of  you 
out  of  your  carnal  security;  I hope  there  are  some  who  are 
willing  to  come  to  Christ,  and  beginning  to  think  that  they  have 
been  building  upon  a false  foundation.  Perhaps  the  devil  may 
strike  in,  and  bid  you  despair  of  mercy;  but  fear  not,  what  I 
have  been  speaking  to  you  is  only  out  of  love  to  you — is  only  to 
awaken  you,  and  let  you  see  your  danger.  If  any  of  you  are  will- 
ing to  be  reconciled  to  God,  God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 
is  willing  to  be  reconciled  to  you.  O then,  though  you  have  no 
peace  as  yet,  come  away  to  Jesus  Christ;  he  is  our  peace,  he  is 
our  peace-maker — he  has  made  peace  betwixt  God  and  offending 
man.  Would  you  have  peace  with  God?  Away,  then,  to  God 
through  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  purchased  peace ; the  Lord  Jesus 
• has  shed  his  heart’s  blood  for  this.  He  died  for  this;  he 
rose  again  for  this;  he  ascended  into  the  highest  heaven, 
and  is  now  interceding  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Perhaps 
you  think  there  will  be  no  peace  for  you.  Why  so?  Be- 
cause you  are  sinners  ? because  you  have  crucified  Christ — you 
have  put  him  to  open  shame — you  have  trampled  under  foot  the 
blood  of  the  Son  of  God?  What  of  all  this?  Yet  there  is  peace 
for  you.  Pray,  what  did  Jesus  Christ  say  to  his  disciples,  when 
he  came  to  them  the  first  day  of  the  week  ? The  first  w’ord  he 
said  was,  “ Peace  be  unto  you ;”  he  showed  them  his  hands  and 
his  side,  and  said,  “ Peace  be  unto  you.”  It  is  as  much  as  if  he 
had  said,  Fear  not,  my  disciples;  see  my  hands  and  my  feet  how 
they  have  been  pierced  for  your  sake ; therefore,  fear  not.  How 
did  Christ  speak  to  his  disciples  ? “ Go  tell  my  brethren,  and  tell 
broken-hearted  Peter  in  particular,  that  Christ  is  risen,  that  he 
is  ascended  unto  his  Father  and  your  Father,  to  his  God  and 
your  God.”  And  after  Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  he  came 
preaching  peace,  with  an  olive  branch  of  peace,  like  Noah’s 
dove:  4<Mv  peace  I leave  with  you.”  Who  were  they?  They 


TIIE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


31 


were  enemies  of  Christ  as  well  as  we,  they  were  deniers  of 
Christ  once  as  well  as  we.  Perhaps  some  of  you  have  back- 
slidden and  lost  your  peace,  and  you  think  you  deserve  no  peace ; 
and  no  more  you  do.  But,  then,  God  will  heal  your  backslid- 
ings,  he  will  love  you  freely.  As  for  you  that  are  wounded,  if 
you  are  made  willing  to  come  to  Christ,  come  away.  Perhaps 
some  of  you  want  to  dress  yourselves  in  your  duties,  that  are  but 
rotten  rags.  No,  you  had  better  come  naked  as  you  are,  for  you 
must  throw  aside  your  rags,  and  come  in  your  blood.  Some  of 
you  may  say,  We  would  come,  but  we  have  got  a hard  heart.  But 
you  will  never  get  it  made  soft  till  ye  come  to  Christ ; he  will  take 
away  the  heart  of  stone,  and  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh;  he  will 
speak  peace  to  your  souls ; though  ye  have  betrayed  him,  yet  he 
will  be  your  peace.  Shall  I prevail  upon  any  of  you  this  morn- 
ing to  come  to  Jesus  Christ?  There  is  a great  multitude  of 
souls  here  ; how  shortly  must  you  all  die,  and  go  to  judgment ! 
Even  before  night,  or  to-morrow’s  night,  some  of  you  may  be  laid 
out  for  this  kirk-yard.  And  how  will  you  do  if  you  be  not  at 
peace  with  God — if  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  not  spoken  peace 
to  your  heart?  If  God  speak  not  peace  to  you  here,  you  will  be 
damned  for  ever.  I must  not  flatter  you,  my  dear  friends ; I will 
deal  sincerely  with  your  souls.  Some  of  you  may  think  I carry  things 
too  far.  But,  indeed,  when  you  come  to  judgment,  you  will 
find  what  I say  is  true,  either  to  your  eternal  damnation  or  com- 
fort. May  God  influence  your  hearts  to  come  to  him ! I am  not 
willing  to  go  away  without  persuading  you.  I cannot  be  per- 
suaded but  God  may  make  use  of  me  as  a mean  of  persuading 
some  of  you  to  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  O did  you  but 
feel  the  peace  which  they  have  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ! 
“ Great  peace  have  they,”  says  the  psalmist,  “ that  love  thy  law ; 
nothing  shall  offend  them.”  But  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked. 
I know  what  it  is  to  live  a life  of  sin ; I was  obliged  to  sin  in 
order  to  stifle  conviction.  And  I am  sure  this  is  the  way  many 
of  you  take ; if  you  get  into  company,  you  drive  off  conviction. 
But  you  had  better  go  to  the  bottom  at  once ; it  must  be  done — 
your  wound  must  be  searched,  or  you  must  be  damned.  If  it 
were  a matter  of  indifference,  I would  not  speak  one  word  about 
it.  But  you  will  be  damned  without  Christ.  He  is  the  way,  he 
is  the  truth,  and  the  life.  I cannot  think  you  should  go  to 
hell  without  Christ.  How  can  you  dwell  with  everlasting  burn- 
ings? How  can  you  abide  the  thought  of  living  with  the 


32 


THE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


devil  for  ever  ? Is  it  not  better  to  have  some  soul-trouble  here, 
than  to  be  sent  to  hell  by  Jesus  Christ  hereafter  ? What  is  hell, 
but  to  be  absent  from  Christ  ? If  there  were  no  other  hell,  that 
would  be  hell  enough.  It  will  be  hell  to  be  tormented  with  the 
devil  for  ever.  Get  acquaintance  with  God,  then,  and  be  at 
peace.  I beseech  you,  as  a poor  worthless  ambassador  of  Jesus 
Christ,  that  you  would  be  reconciled  to  God.  My  business  this 
morning,  the  first  day  of  the  week,  is  to  tell  you  that  Christ  is 
willing  to  be  reconciled  to  you.  Will  any  of  you  be  reconciled 
to  Jesus  Christ  ? Then,  he  will  forgive  you  all  your  sins,  he 
will  blot  out  all  your  transgressions.  But  if  you  will  go  on  and 
rebel  against  Christ,  and  stab  him  daily — if  you  will  go  on  and 
abuse  Jesus  Christ,  the  wrath  of  God  you  must  expect  will  fall 
upon  you.  God  will  not  be  mocked;  that  which  a man  soweth, 
that  shall  he  also  reap.  And  if  you  will  not  be  at  peace  with 
God,  God  will  not  be  at  peace  with  you.  Who  can  stand  be- 
fore God  when  he  is  angry?  It  is  a dreadful  thing  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  an  angry  God.  When  the  people  came  to  apprehend 
Christ,  they  fell  to  the  ground  when  Jesus  said,  “I  am  he.” 
And  if  they  could  not  bear  the  sight  of  Christ  when  clothed 
with  the  rags  of  mortality,  how  will  they  bear  the  sight  of  him 
when  he  is  on  his  Father’s  throne  ? Methinks  I see  the  poor 
wretches  dragged  out  of  their  graves  by  the  devil ; methinks  I 
see  them  trembling,  crying  out  to  the  hills  and  rocks  to  cover 
them.  But  the  devil  will  say,  Come,  I will  take  you  away  ; and 
then  they  sha  1 stand  trembling  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ.  They  shall  appear  before  him  to  see  him  once,  and  hear 
him  pronounce  that  irrevocable  sentence,  “ Depart  from  me,  ye 
cursed.”  Methinks  I hear  the  poor  creatures  saying,  Lord,  if  we 
must  be  damned,  let  some  angel  pronounce  the  sentence.  No, 
the  God  of  love,  Jesus  Christ,  will  pronounce  it.  Will  ye  not  be- 
lieve this?  Do  not  think  I am  talking  at  random,  but  agreeably 
to  the  Scriptures  of  truth.  If  you  do  not,  then  show  yourselves 
men,  and  this  morning  go  away  with  full  resolution,  in  the 
strength  of  God,  to  cleave  to  Christ.  And  may  you  have  no 
rest  in  your  souls  till  you  rest  in  Jesus  Christ!  I could  still  go 
on,  for  it  is  sweet  to  talk  of  Christ.  Do  you  not  long  for  the 
time  when  you  shall  have  new  bodies — when  they  shall  be  immor- 
tal, and  made  like  Christ’s  glorious  body?  and  then  they  will  talk 
of  Jesus  Christ  for  evermore.  But  it  is  time,  perhaps,  for  you 
to  go  and  prepare  for  your  respective  worship,  and  I would  not 


THE  METHOD  OF  GRACE. 


33 


hinder  any  of  you.  My  design  is,  to  bring  poor  sinners  to 
Jesus  Christ.  O that  God  may  bring  some  of  you  to  himself! 
May  the  Lord  Jesus  now  dismiss  you  with  his  blessing,  and  may 
the  dear  Redeemer  convince  you  that  are  un awakened,  and  turn 
the  wicked  from  the  evil  of  their  way!  And  may  the  love  of 
God,  that  passeth  all  understanding,  fill  your  hearts.  Grant  this, 
O Father,  for  Christ’s  sake;  to  whom,  with  thee  and  the  blessed 
Spirit,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  now  and  for  evermore.  Amen. 


V 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


“ For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink;  but  righteousness,  and 
peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.'” — Rom.  xiv.  17. 

Though  we  all  profess  to  own  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism; 
though  Jesus  Christ  never  was,  and  never  will  be,  divided  in  him- 
self; yet  the  followers  of  Jesus  Christ  have  in  all  ages  been  sadly 
divided  among  themselves  : and  what  has  rendered  the  case  the 
more  to  be  pitied,  is,  that  they  have  generally  been  divided  about 
the  circumstantials  of  religion,  they  have  generally  received  one 
another  to  doubtful  disputation,  and  imbittered  one  another’s 
hearts,  by  talking  about  those  things  which  they  might  either  do 
or  not  do,  either  know  or  not  know,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  be 
the  true  followers  of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus.  I am  verily 
persuaded  that  this  is  the  great  artifice  and  engine  of  the  devil. 
He  knows  if  he  can  divide  Christians,  he  will  get  the  better  of 
them : and  therefore  he  endeavours  to  sow  the  tares  of  division 
among  them,  in  order  to  make  them  a common  prey  to  their 
enemies  And,  indeed,  this  God  hath  permitted  in  all  ages  of  the 
Church.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  early  ages  of  Christianity 
were  not  altogether  free  of  it.  No,  this  text  gives  us  a pregnant 
and  sufficient  proof  of  it. 

It  seems  the  first  converts  of  Christianity  consisted  of  two 
sorts  of  people — either  those  who  were  Jews  before  they  be- 
came Christians,  or  those  who  were  heathens,  and  never  had 
been  subject  to  the  law  of  Moses,  but  were  converted  from  a 
state  of  Gentilism,  from  a state  of  heathenish  darkness,  and 
brought  to  the  marvellous  gospel  light.  The  first  of  these, 
knowing  that  every  rite,  every  ceremony  of  the  law  of  Moses, 
had  a divine  superscription  wrought  upon  it,  they  thought  them- 
selves obliged,  notwithstanding  they  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  to  abstain  from  such  meats  and  drinks  as  were  for- 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


bidden,  and  to  submit  to  such  festivals  as  were  enjoined  by  the 
law.  Whereas,  on  the  contrary,  the  heathen,  who  never  were 
brought  under  this  yoke,  nay,  even  the  Jews  themselves  who 
were  better  instructed  in  their  Christian  liberty,  knowing 
that  every  creature  of  God  was  now  good,  if  sanctified  by  tlie 
Word  of  God  and  prayer;  knowing  that,  “Touch  not,  taste 
not,  handle  not,”  were  no  longer  precepts  for  those  who  believed 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  they  could  not  submit  to  them — they 
could  not  submit  to  the  new  moons  and  Sabbaths — they  ate  what 
wras  set  before  them,  and  made  no  scruple  about  meat  or  drink. 
But,  however,  it  seems  there  were  two  contending  parties — many 
right  souls,  no  doubt,  on  both  sides.  What  must,  then,  the  great 
apostle  do  ? Why,  like  a true  follower  of  the  meek  and  lowly 
Jesus,  he  preached  up  to  both  sides  the  golden  rule  of  modera- 
tion, and  endeavoured  to  persuade  them  to  dispute  no  more  about 
these  outward  things. 

If  we  will,  therefore,  look  to  the  1st  verse  of  this  chapter,  we 
shall  find  the  apostle  giving  them  a healing  advice.  “ Him,” 
says  he,  “ that  is  weak  in  the  faith,  receive  ye  ” — do  not  separate 
from  him,  do  not  forbid  him  to  come  into  your  Christian  fellow- 
ship ; “ receive  him” — look  upon  him  as  a disciple,  receive  him 
with  open  arms  into  your  communion ; “ but  not  to  doubtful  dis- 
putation”— do  not  fall  into  disputing  with  him  as  soon  as  ever 
he  comes  into  your  church.  “ For,”  says  he,  in  the  2d  verse, 
“one,”  that  is  well  instructed  in  his  Christian  liberty,  “believeth 
that  he  may  eat  all  things,”  without  scruple.  Why,  “ another 
that  is  weak,”  and  hath  not  got  so  much  light  concerning  gospel 
liberty,  thinks  himself  obliged  to  abstain  from  such  meats  as  were 
forbidden  by  the  law,  and  therefore,  for  conscience’  sake,  “ eateth 
herbs.”  Why  then,  says  the  apostle  in  the  3d  verse,  “Let  not 
him  that  eateth,  despise  him  that  eateth  not,”  though  he  be  but 
a novice  in  grace:  on  the  other  hand,  “let  not  him  that  eateth 
not,  judge  him  that  eateth,”  as  though  he. took  more  liberty  than 
God  Almighty  or  the  rules  of  the  gospel  allowed  him;  “for 
God  hath  received  him.”  Though  he  is  weak,  he  is  a believer 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  God  hath  received  him  into  his  favour, 
and  how,  then,  dare  you  refuse  to  receive  him  into  your  communion? 

In  order,  therefore,  that  the  apostle  might  put  a stop  to  this 
spirit  of  division  and  opposition  that  was  among  them,  he  goes 
on,  and  tells  them  that  their  despising,  that  their  judging  and 
disputing  with  one  another  at  this  rate,  was  taking  Christ’s  pre- 


TIIE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


rogative  out  of  his  hand.  For,  says  he  in  the  10  th  verse,  “Why 
dost  thou  judge  thy  brother  ? ” On  the  other  hand,  “ Why  dost 
thou  set  at  nought  thy  brother  ? we  shall  all  stand  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ.”  And  Jesus  Christ,  who  seeth  the 
springs  of  our  actions,  can  bear  with  us,  though  we  cannot  bear 
with  one  another.  For,  says  he,  “ One  man  esteemeth  one  day 
above  another,  another  esteemeth  every  day  alike ; let  every  man 
be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind ; ” that  is,  let  every  man 
take  the  utmost  care  to  inform  his  conscience,  according  to  the 
rule  of  God’s  Word ; and  after  he  has  done  that,  let  him  bear 
with  other  people,  though  they  may  not  follow  him  in  all  things. 
And  then,  as  the  most  prevailing  and  most  cogent  argument 
the  apostle  could  possibly  bring,  to  put  an  end  to  their  divisions, 
he  tells  them,  in  the  words  of  the  text,  that  religion  doth  not 
consist  in  these  things.  “ For,”  says  he,  “ the  kingdom  of  God  is 
not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost.”  As  though  he  had  said,  My  dear  friends,  beware 
of  disputing,  beware  of  dividing  from  one  another  on  account 
of  the  circumstantials  of  religion,  beware  of  receiving  one  an- 
other to  doubtful  disputations  about  meat  or  drink,  or  observing 
holy  days.  “For,”  says  he,  “ the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and 
drink;  but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.” 
This  is  a short,  but  when  I read  it,  I think  it  is  one  of  the 
most  comprehensive  verses  in  the  whole  book  of  God.  And  I 
am  sure  if  ever  it  was  necessary  for  a minister  to  preach  upon  such 
subjects  as  these,  it  must  be  in  the  days  wherein  we  live;  for, 
my  friends,  the  devil  is  getting  advantage  over  us  by  our  mani- 
fold divisions.  We  have  been  settled  upon  our  lees,  we  have  had 
no  outward  persecution ; and  now  God,  in  his  righteous  judg- 
ment, has  suffered  us  to  divide  among  ourselves.  It  is  high 
time,  therefore,  for  ministers  to  stand  in  the  gap,  to  preach  up  a 
catholic  spirit,  to  preach  out  bigotry,  to  preach  out  prejudice ; 
for  we  will  never  be  all  of  one  mind,  as  long  as  we  are  in  the 
world,  about  externals  in  religion;  that  is  a privilege  reserved  to 
heaven,  to  a future  state.  But  while  we  have  different  degrees 
of  light,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  we  should  bear  with  all 
who  cannot  in  all  things  follow  with  us.  I am  by  no  means  for 
bringing  the  church  into  a state  of  anarchy  and  confusion ; but 
that  we  should  bear  with  one  another : we  should  not  divide  from 
one  another,  so  as  not  to  keep  fellowship  with  one  another,  be- 
cause we  are  not  of  the  same  mind  in  some  particular  circum- 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


37 


stances,  I verily  believe  Jesus  Christ  suffers  us  to  differ,  to 
teach  us  that  his  kingdom  is  of  a spiritual  nature — it  is  not  such  a 
legal  dispensation  as  the  Jewish  was;  and  therefore  we  should 
not  divide  about  externals.  Besides,  by  being  left  thus  to  differ 
with  one  another  in  our  sentiments  about  externals,  we  learn  to  ex- 
ercise our  passive  graces.  I am  sure  there  is  one  good  effect  which 
division  has  on  my  own  and  many  other  people’s  hearts — it  makes 
us  long  for  heaven,  where  we  shall  be  all  of  one  mind  and  one 
heart.  It  will  be  our  perfection  in  heaven,  to  be  all  of  one  heart ; 
and  therefore  it  must  be  our  imperfection  on  earth  to  be  divided. 

There  are  two  things  which  those  who  call  themselves  Chris- 
tians, want  much  to  be  convinced  of,  namely,  First , What  religion 
is  not;  Second , What  religion  positively  is.  Both  these  are  in  the 
words  of  the  text  plainly  taught,  and  therefore,  as  God  shall 
enable  me,  I shall  endeavour,  Isf,  To  explain  what  you  are  to 
understand  by  “the  kingdom  of  God;”  2 dly>  I shall  en- 
deavour to  show  that  “ the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and 
drink;”  and  3 dly,  I shall  show  you  what  “the  kingdom 
of  God  ” positively  is,  namely,  “ righteousness,  and  peace,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.” 

ls£,  I am  to  explain  to  you  what  you  are  to  understand  by 
“ the  kingdom  of  God.”  Bv  the  kingdom  of  God  in  some  places 
of  Scripture,  you  are  to  understand  no  more  than  the  outward 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  as,  when  the  apostles  went  out  and 
preached  that  “ the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
was  at  hand.”  In  other  places  of  Scripture,  you  are  to  under- 
stand it  as  implying  that  work  of  grace,  that  inward  holiness, 
which  is  wrought  in  the  heart  of  every  soul  that  is  truly  convert- 
ed and  brought  home  to  God.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  king 
of  his  church,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  got  a kingdom ; 
and  this  kingdom  is  erected  and  set  up  in  the  hearts  of  sinners, 
when  they  are  brought  to  be  subject  to  the  government  of  our  dear 
Redeemer’s  laws.  In  this  sense,  therefore,  we  are  to  understand 
the  kingdom  of  God,  when  Jesus  Christ  said,  “ The  kingdom  of 
God  is  within  you,”  in  your  hearts ; and  when  he  tells  Nico- 
demus,  that  “ unless  a man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God,”  he  can  have  no  notion  of  the  inward  life  of  a 
Christian.  In  other  places  of  Scripture,  the  kingdom  of  God 
not  only  signifies  the  kingdom  of  grace,  but  the  kingdom  of 
grace  and  of  glory  also ; as  when  Jesus  said,  “ It  is  easier  for  a 
camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a needle,  than  for  a rich  man  to 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God ; ” that  is,  either  to  be  a true 
member  of  his  mystical  church  here,  or  a partaker  of  the  glory 
of  the  church  triumphant  hereafter.  We  are  to  take  the  king- 
dom of  God  in  the  text  as  signifying  that  inward  work  of  grace, 
that  kingdom  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  sets  up  in  the  hearts 
of  all  that  are  truly  brought  home  to  God ; so  that  wdien  the 
apostle  tells  us,  u The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,” 
it  is  the  same  as  though  he  had  said,  “ My  dear  friends,  do  not 
quarrel  about  outward  things ; for  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  true  and 
undefiled  religion,  heart  and  soul  religion,  is  not  meat  and  drink.” 

2 dly,  By  meat  and  drink,  if  wre  compare  the  text  with  the  con- 
text, we  are  to  understand  no  more  than  this,  that  the  kingdom  of 
God,  or  true  religion,  doth  not  consist  in  abstaining  from  a par- 
ticular meat  or  drink.  But  I shall  take  the  words  in  a more 
comprehensive  sense,  and  shall  endeavour  to  show  you  on  this 
head,  that  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  true  and  undefiled  religion, 
doth  not  consist  in  any,  no,  not  in  all  outward  things,  put  them 
altogether.  And, 

First,  The  kingdom  of  God,  or  true  and  undefiled  religion, 
doth  not  consist  in  being  of  this  or  that  particular  sect  or  com- 
munion. Perhaps,  my  dear  friends,  wrere  many  of  you  asked 
w'hat  reason  you  can  give  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  what  title 
you  have  to  call  yourselves  Christians — perhaps  you  could  say  no 
more  for  yourselves  than  this,  namely,  that  you  belong  to  such  a 
church,  and  worship  God  in  the  same  wray  in  which  your  fathers 
and  mothers  worshipped  God  before  you ; and  perhaps,  at  the 
same  time,  you  are  so  narrow  in  your  thoughts,  that  you  think  none 
can  worship  God  but  those  that  worship  God  just  in  your  way.  It 
is  certainly,  my  dear  friends,  a blessing  to  be  born  as  you  are,  in  a 
reformed  church ; it  is  certainly  a blessing  to  have  the  outward 
government  and  discipline  of  the  church  exercised ; but  then,  if 
you  place  religion  merely  in  being  of  this  or  that  sect — if  you  con- 
tend to  monopolize  or  confine  the  grace  of  God  to  your  particular 
party — if  you  rest  in  that,  you  place  the  kingdom  of  God  in  some- 
thing in  which  it  doth  not  consist — you  had  as  good  place  it  in  meat 
and  drink.  There  are  certainly  Christians  among  all  sects  and 
communions  that  have  learned  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 
I do  not  mean  that  there  are  Christians  among  Arians,  Socinians, 
or  those  that  deny  the  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ — I am  sure  the 
devil  is  priest  of  such  congregations  as  these;  but  I mean  there 
are  Christians  among  other  sects  that  may  differ  from  us  in  the 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


39 


outward  worship  of  God.  Therefore,  my  dear  friends,  learn  to 
be  more  catholic,  more  unconfined  in  your  notions ; for  if  you 
place  the  kingdom  of  God  merely  in  a sect,  you  place  it  in  that 
in  which  it  doth  not  consist. 

Again : as  the  kingdom  of  God  doth  not  consist  in  being  of 
this  or  that  sect,  so  neither  doth  it  consist  in  being  baptized 
when  you  were  young.  Baptism  is  certainly  an  ordinance  of 
the  Lord  J esus  Christ — it  ought  certainly  to  be  administered ; 
but  then,  my  dear  friends,  take  care  that  you  do  not  make  a 
Christ  of  your  baptism,  for  there  have  been  many  baptized  with  water 
as  you  were,  who  were  never  savingly  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Paul  had  a great  value  for  circumcision  ; but  wrhen  he  saw  the 
Jews  resting  upon  their  circumcision,  he  told  them  circumcision 
was  nothing,  and  uncircumcision  wras  nothing,  but  a new  crea- 
ture. And  yet  most  people  live  as  if  they  thought  it  will  be 
sufficient  to  entitle  them  to  heaven,  to  tell  Jesus  Christ  that  their 
name  was  in  the  register-book  of  such  and  such  a parish.  Your 
name  may  be  in  the  register-book,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  not 
be  in  the  book  of  life.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  were  baptized — 
Simon  Magus  was  baptized ; and,  therefore,  if  you  place  religion 
merely  in  being  baptized,  in  having  the  outward  washing  of 
water,  without  receiving  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  you 
place  the  kingdom  of  God  in  something  in  which  it  doth  not 
consist — in  effect,  you  place  it  in  meat  and  drink. 

But  further : as  the  kingdom  of  God  and  true  religion  doth 
not  consist  in  being  baptized,  neither  doth  it  consist  in  being 
orthodox  in  our  notions,  or  being  able  to  talk  fluently  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel.  There  are  a great  many  who  can  talk 
of  free  grace,  of  free  justification,  of  final  perseverance,  of  elec- 
tion, and  God’s  everlasting  love.  All  these  are  precious  truths 
— they  are  all  connected  in  a chain  ; take  away  one  link,  and  you 
spoil  the  whole  chain  of  gospel  truths.  But  then  I am  persuaded 
that  there  are  many  who  talk  of  these  truths,  who  preach  up 
these  truths,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  never,  never  felt  the  power 
of  these  truths  upon  their  hearts.  It  is  a good  thing  to  have  a 
form  of  sound  words ; and  I think  you  have  got  a form  of  sound 
words  in  your  Larger  and  Shorter  Catechism.  But  you  may 
have  orthodox  heads,  and  yet  you  may  have  the  devil  in  your 
hearts ; you  may  have  clear  heads,  you  may  be  able  to  speak,  as 
it  were,  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  angels,  the  doctrines  of  the 
gospel,  but  yet,  at  the  same  time,  you  may  never  have  felt  them 


40 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD, 


upon  your  own  souls.  And  if  you  have  never  felt  the  power  of 
them  upon  your  hearts,  your  talk  of  Christ  and  free  justification, 
and  having  rational  convictions  of  these  truths,  will  but  increase 
your  condemnation,  and  you  will  only  go  to  hell  with  so  much 
more  solemnity.  Take  care,  therefore,  of  resting  in  a form  of 
knowledge — it  is  dangerous ; if  you  do,  you  place  the  kingdom 
of  God  in  meat  and  drink. 

Again : as  the  kingdom  of  God  doth  not  consist  in  orthodox 
notions,  much  less  doth  it  consist  in  being  sincere.  I know  not 
what  sort  of  religion  we  have  got  among  us.  I fear  many 
ministers  as  well  as  people  want  to  recommend  themselves  to 
God  by  their  sincerity ; they  think,  If  we  do  all  we  can,  if  we 
are  but  sincere,  Jesus  Christ  will  have  mercy  upon  us.  But 
pray  what  is  there  in  our  sincerity  to  recommend  us  to  God  ? 
There  is  no  natural  man  in  the  world  sincere,  till  God  make  us 
new  creatures  in  Jesus  Christ ; and,  therefore,  if  you  depend  upon 
your  sincerity  for  your  salvation,  your  sincerity  will  damn  you. 

Further : as  the  kingdom  of  God  doth  not  consist  merely  in 
sincerity  (for  nothing  will  recommend  us  to  God  but  the  righ- 
teousness of  Jesus  Christ),  neither  doth  it  consist  in  being  nega- 
tively good ; and  yet  I believe,  my  dear  friends,  if  many  of  you 
were  to  be  visited  by  a minister  when  you  are  upon  a death-bed, 
and  if  he  were  to  ask  you  how  you  hope  to  be  saved,  why, 
you  would  say,  Yes,  you  hoped  to  be  saved ; you  never  did  man, 
woman,  or  child,  any  harm  in  your  life ; you  have  done  nobody 
harm.  And,  indeed,  I do  not  find  that  the  unprofitable  servant 
did  any  one  harm ; no,  the  poor  man,  he  only  innocently  wrapt 
up  his  talent  in  a napkin ; and  when  his  Lord  came  to  call  him 
to  account,  he  thought  he  should  be  applauded  by  his  Lord,  and 
therefore  introduces  himself  with  the  word,  lo — 44  Lo,  there  thou 
hast  what  is  thine.”  But  what  says  Jesus  Christ?  44  Cast  ye 
the  unprofitable  servant  into  outer  darkness  : there  shall  be  weep- 
ing and  gnashing  of  teeth.”  Suppose  it  to  be  true  that  you  had 
done  nobody  harm,  yet  it  will  not  avail  you  to  salvation.  If  you 
bring  forth  only  the  fig-leaves  of  an  outward  profession,  and 
bring  not  forth  good  fruit,  it  will  not  send  you  to  heaven — it 
will  send  you  to  hell. 

Again : some  of  you  perhaps  may  think  I have  not  reached  you 
yet ; therefore  I go  on  further  to  show  you  that  the  kingdom  of 
God  doth  not  consist  in  a dry,  lifeless  morality.  I am  not  speak- 
ing against  morality— it  is  a blessed  thing,  when  Jesus  Christ  is 


TIIE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


41 


laid  as  the  foundation  of  it;  and  I could  heartily  wish  that 
you  moral  gentlemen,  who  are  for  talking  so  much  of  your 
morality,  I wish  we  could  see  a little  more  of  it  than  we  do. 
I do  not  cry  down  morality,  but  so  far  as  this,  that  you  do  not 
rest  in  your  morality,  that  you  do  not  think  you  are  Christians 
because  you  are  not  vicious — because  you  now  and  then  do  some 
good  action.  Why,  self-love  will  carry  a man  to  perform  all 
moral  actions.  A man,  perhaps,  will  not  get  drunk  for  fear  of 
making  his  head  ache;  a man  may  be  honest,  because  it  would 
spoil  his  reputation  to  steal.  And  so  a man  who  has  not  the 
love  of  God  in  his  heart,  may  do  moral  actions.  But  if  you  de- 
pend on  morality,  if  you  make  a Christ  of  it,  and  go  about  to 
establish  a righteousness  of  your  own,  and  think  your  morality 
will  recommend  you  to  God,  my  dear  friends,  you  are  building 
upon  a rotten  foundation  ; you  will  find  yourselves  mistaken,  and 
that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  your  hearts. 

Again : as  the  kingdom  of  God  doth  not  consist  in  doing  no- 
body hurt,  nor  in  doing  moral  actions,  neither  doth  it  consist  in 
attending  upon  all  outward  ordinances  whatsoever.  A great  many 
of  you  may  think  that  you  go  to  church,  and  receive  the  sacrament 
once  or  twice  a-year  (though  I do  think  that  is  too  seldom  by  a great 
deal  to  have  it  administered),  you  may  read  your  Bibles,  you  may 
have  family  worship,  you  may  say  your  prayers  in  your  closets,  and 
yet  at  the  same  time,  my  dear  friends,  know  nothing  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  in  your  hearts.  You  may  have  a token,  and  receive 
the  sacrament,  and  perhaps  at  the  same  time  be  eating  and 
drinking  your  own  damnation.  I speak  this,  because  it  is  a most 
fatal  snare  that  poor  professors  are  exposed  to — we  stop  our  con- 
sciences by  our  duties.  Many  of  you,  perhaps,  lead  a lukewarm, 
loose  life — you  are  Gallio-like ; yet  you  will  be  very  good  the 
sacrament  week ; you  will  attend  all  the  sermons,  and  come  to 
the  sacrament ; you  will  be  very  good  for  some  time  after  that, 
and  then  afterwards  go  on  in  your  former  way  till  the  next- 
sacrament.  You  are  resting  on  the  means  of  grace  all  the  while, 
and  placing  religion  in  that  which  is  only  a mean  of  religion. 
I speak  from  mine  own  experience.  I know  how  much  I was 
deceived  with  a form  of  godliness.  I made  conscience  of  fasting 
twice  a-week,  I made  conscience  of  praying  sometimes  nine  times 
a-day,  and  received  the  sacrament  every  Sabbath-day,  and  yet 
knew  nothing  of  inward  religion  in  my  heart,  till  God  was  pleased 
to  dart  a ray  of  light  into  my  soul,  and  show  me  I must  be  a new 


42 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


creature,  or  be  damned  for  evermore.  Being,  therefore,  so  long 
deceived  myself,  I speak  with  the  more  sympathy  to  you,  who  are 
resting  on  a round  of  duties  and  model  of  performances.  And  now, 
my  friends,  if  your  hearts  were  to  be  searched,  and  you  were  to 
speak  your  minds,  I appeal  to  your  own  hearts  whether  you  are 
not  thinking  within  yourselves,  though  you  may  have  so  much 
charity  as  to  think  I mean  well,  yet  I verily  believe  many  of  you 
think  I have  carried  matters  a little  too  far ; and  why  is  this,  but 
because  I come  close  to  some  of  your  cases  ? The  pride  of  your 
hearts  does  not  care  to  admit  of  conviction ; therefore  you  would 
fain  retort  on  the  preacher,  and  say  he  is  wrong,  whereas  it  is 
your  hearts  that  are  wrong  all  the  while. 

Others,  again,  perhaps  may  be  saying,  Well,  if  a man  may  go 
thus  far  and  not  be  a Christian,  as  I am  sure  he  may,  and  a great 
deal  farther,  you  will  be  apt  to  cry  out,  Who,  then,  can  be  saved  ? 
And  O that  I could  hear  you  asking  this  question  in  earnest!  for, 
my  friends,  I am  obliged,  wherever  I go,  to  endeavour  to  plough 
up  people’s  fallow  ground ; to  bring  them  off  from  their  duties, 
and  making  a Christ  of  them.  There  are  so  many  shadows  in  reli- 
gion, that  if  you  do  not  take  care,  ye  will  grasp  at  the  shadow  and 
lose  the  substance.  The  devil  has  so  ordered  the  affairs  of  the 
church  now,  and  our  hearts  are  so  desperately  deceitful,  that  if  we 
do  not  take  a great  deal  of  care,  we  shall  come  short  of  true  religion 
— of  the  true  kingdom  of  God  in  the  soul.  The  great  question, 
then,  is,  Whether  any  of  you  are  convinced  of  what  has  been  said  ? 
Does  power  come  with  the  word  ? When  I was  reading  a book, 
entitled  “ The  Life  of  God  in  the  Soul  of  Man,”*  and  reading  that 
a man  may  read,  pray,  and  go  to  church,  and  be  constant  in  the 
duties  of  the  Sabbath,  and  yet  not  be  a Christian,  I wondered 
what  the  man  would  be  at ; I was  ready  to  throw  it  from  me, 
till  at  last  he  told  me,  that  religion  was  an  union  of  the  soul  with 
God — the  image  of  God  wrought  upon  the  heart,  or  Christ  Jesus 
formed  in  us.  Then  God  was  pleased  with  these  words  to  cast 
a ray  of  light  into  my  soul ; with  the  light  there  came  a power,  and 
from  that  very  moment  I knew  I must  be  a new  creature.  This 
perhaps  may  be  your  case,  my  dear  hearers.  Perchance  many  of 
you  may  be  loving,  good-natured  people,  and  attend  the  duties  of 
religion ; but  take  care,  for  Christ’s  sake,  that  you  do  not  rest 
on  these  things. 

I think  I cannot  sum  up  what  has  been  said  better,  than  to  give 

* This  must  have  been  Scougal’s  well  known  work. 


TTli:  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


43 


you  the  character  of  the  apostle  Paul.  Are  you  a Christian,  do 
you  think,  because  you  are  of  this  or  that  sect? — Paul  was  a Jew 
and  a Pharisee.  Are  you  a Christian  because  you  are  baptized, 
and  enjoy  Christian  privileges? — Then  Paul  wras  circumcised. 
Are  you  a Christian  because  you  do  nobody  hurt,  and  are  sincere  ? 
— Paul  was  blameless  before  his  conversion  ; and  was  not  a Gallio 
in  religion,  as  many  of  us  are : he  was  so  zealous  for  God,  that 
he  persecuted  the  church  of  Christ.  But  yet  when  God  was 
pleased  to  reveal  his  Son  in  him,  when  God  wras  pleased  to  strike 
him  to  the  ground,  and  let  him  see  what  heart-religion  was,  then 
Paul  dropt  his  false  confidence  immediately ; those  things  which 
he  counted  gain,  which  he  depended  on  before,  he  now  counted 
loss,  that  he  might  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him ; not  having 
his  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  righteous- 
ness which  is  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  time,  my  dear 
friends,  to  proceed  to, 

3 dli/,  The  next  thing  proposed,  namely,  To  show  you  w hat  the 
kingdom  of  God,  or  true  religion,  positively  is.  I have  told  you  what 
it  is  not ; I shall  now  proceed  to  show  you  what  it  is.  It  is 
“ righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.”  But  be- 
fore I proceed  to  this,  I must  make  a little  digression.  Perhaps 
curiosity  has  brought  many  here  who  have  neither  regard 
to  God  nor  man.  A man  may  be  a member  of  the  purest 
church,  a man  may  be  baptized,  do  nobody  harm,  do  a great  deal 
of  good,  attend  on  all  the  ordinances  of  Christianity,  and  yet  at 
the  same  time  may  be  a child  of  the  devil.  If  a man  may  go 
thus  far,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  miss  salvation,  what  will  be- 
come of  you  who  do  not  keep  up  a form  of  religion,  who  scarcely 
know  the  time  when  you  have  been  at  church  and  attending 
sermons,  unless  curiosity  brought  you  to  hear  a particular  stran- 
ger? What  wall  become  of  you  who,  instead  of  believing  the 
gospel  and  reading  the  Bible,  set  up  your  corrupt  religion  in 
opposition  to  divine  revelation  ? What  will  become  of  you,  who 
count  it  your  pleasure  to  riot  in  the  day  time,  to  spend  time  in 
rioting  and  wantonness ; who  are  sitting  in  the  scorner’s  chair, 
and  joining  with  your  hellish  companions,  who  love  to  dress  the 
children  of  God  in  bear-skins  ? What  wrill  become  of  you  w7ho 
live  in  acts  of  uncleanness,  drunkenness,  adultery,  Sabbath- 
breaking ? Surely,  without  repentance,  you  wrill  be  lost — your 
damnation  slumbereth  not.  God  may  bear  wdth  you  long,  but 
he  will  not  forbear  always.  The  time  wfill  come  when  he  will 


44 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


ease  himself  of  his  adversaries,  and  then  you  will  be  undone  for 
evermore,  unless  you  come  to  him  as  poor,  lost  sinners. 

But  I now  go  on  to  show  you  what  true  religion  positively  is; 
“ it  is  righteousness,”  it  is  “peace,”  it  is  “joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.”  And 

First,  The  kingdom  of  God  is  “ righteousness.”  By  righteous- 
ness we  are  here  to  understand  the  complete,  perfect,  and  all-suf- 
ficient righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  including  both 
his  active  and  his  passive  obedience.  My  dear  friends,  we  have 
no  righteousness  of  our  own ; our  best  righteousnesses,  take  them 
altogether,  are  but  as  so  many  filthy  rags ; we  can  only  be  ac- 
cepted for  the  sake  of  the  righteousness  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  This  righteousness  must  be  imputed  and  made  over  to 
us,  and  applied  to  our  hearts;  and  till  we  get  this  righteousness 
brought  home  to  our  souls,  we  are  in  a state  of  death  and  dam- 
nation— the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  us. 

Before  I go  farther,  I would  endeavour  to.  apply  this. 
Give  me  leave  to  put  this  question  to  your  hearts.  You  call 
yourselves  Christians,  and  would  count  me  uncharitable  to  call 
it  in  question;  but  I exhort  you  to  let  conscience  speak  out,  do 
not  bribe  it  any  longer.  Did  you  ever  see  yourselves  as  damned 
sinners  ? Did  conviction  ever  fasten  upon  your  hearts  ? And 
after  you  had  been  made  to  see  your  want  of  Christ,  and  made 
to  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  did  you  lay  hold  on 
Christ  by  faith  ? Did  you  ever  close  with  Christ  ? Was  Christ’s 
righteousness  ever  put  upon  your  naked  souls?  Was  ever  a 
feeling  application  of  his  righteousness  made  to  your  hearts? 
Was  it,  or  was  it  not  ? If  not,  you  are  in  a damnable  state — you 
are  out  of  Christ;  for  the  apostle  says  here,  “The  kingdom  of 
God  is  righteousness ; ” that  is,  the  righteousness  of  Christ  applied 
and  brought  home  to  the  heart. 

It  follows,  “ peace.”  “ The  kingdom  of  God  is  righteousness,  and 
peace.”  By  peace  I do  not  understand  that  false  peace,  or  rather 
carnal  security,  into  which  so  many  are  fallen.  There  are  thou- 
sands who  speak  peace  to  themselves,  when  there  is  no  peace. 
Thousands  have  got  a peace  of  the  devil’s  making ; the  strong  man 
armed  has  got  possession  of  their  hearts,  and  therefore  their  goods 
are  all  in  peace.  But  the  peace  here  spoken  of  is  a peace  that 
follows  after  a great  deal  of  soul  trouble;  it  is  like  that  calm 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  spoke  to  the  wind,  “ Peace,  be  still; 
and  immediately  there  was  a great  calm ; ” it  is  like  that  peace 
which  Christ  spoke  to  his  disciples,  when  he  came  and  said, 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


45 


«e  Peace  be  unto  you” — “My  peace  I leave  with  you.”  It  is  a 
peace  of  God’s  making,  it  is  a peace  of  God’s  giving,  it  is  a peace 
that  the  world  cannot  give,  it  is  a peace  that  can  be  felt,  it  is  a 
peace  that  passeth  human  understanding — it  is  a peace  that  results 
from  a sense  of  having  Christ’s  righteousness  brought  home  to 
the  soul.  For  a poor  soul  before  this  is  full  of  trouble;  Christ 
makes  application  of  his  righteousness  to  his  heart ; and  then  the 
poor  creature,  being  justified  by  faith,  hath  peace  with  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  My  dear  friends,  I am  now 
talking  of  heart-religion,  of  an  inw'ard  wrork  of  God,  an  inward 
kingdom  in  your  hearts,  which  you  must  have,  or  you  shall  never 
sit  with  Jesus  Christ  in  his  kingdom.  The  most  of  you  may 
have  peace,  but  for  Christ’s  sake  examine  upon  what  this  peace 
is  founded — see  if  Christ  be  brought  home  to  your  souls,  if  you 
have  had  a feeling  application  of  the  merits  of  Christ  brought 
home  to  your  souls.  Is  God  at  peace  with  you  ? Did  Jesus 
Christ  ever  say,  “ Peace  be  to  you  ” — “ Be  of  good  cheer  ” — “ Go 
thy  way,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee  ” — “ My  peace  I leave  with 
you,  my  peace  I give  unto  you  ? ” Did  God  ever  bring  a com- 
fortable promise  with  power  to  your  soul  ? And  after  you  have 
been  praying,  and  fearing  you  would  be  damned,  did  you  ever  feel 
peace  flow  in  like  a river  upon  your  soul  ? so  that  you  could  say, 
Now  I know  that  God  is  my  friend,  now  I know  that  Jesus  is 
my  Saviour,  now'  I can  call  him,  “ My  Lord,  and  my  God ; ” 
now  I know  that  Christ  hath  not  only  died  for  others,  but  I 
know  that  Jesus  hath  died  for  me  in  particular.  O my  dear 
friends,  it  is  impossible  to  tell  you  the  comfort  of  this  peace,  and 
I am  astonished  (only  man’s  heart  is  desperately  wdcked)  how 
you  can  have  peace  one  moment,  and  yet  not  know  that  God  is 
at  peace  with  you.  How  can  you  go  to  bed  this  night  without 
this  peace  ? It  is  a blessed  thing  to  know  when  sin  is  forgiven  ; 
would  you  not  be  glad  if  an  angel  were  to  come  and  tell  you  so 
this  night  ? 

But  there  is  something  more — there  is  “joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.” 
I have  often  thought,  that  if  the  apostle  Paul  were  to  come  and 
preach  now,  he  would  be  reckoned  one  of  the  greatest  enthusiasts 
on  earth.  He  talked  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  feeling  the  Holy 
Ghost;  and  so  we  must  all  feel  it,  all  experience  it,  all  receive  it, 
or  wre  can  never  see  a holy  God  with  comfort.  We  are  not  to 
receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  work  miracles ; for, 
“Many  will  say  in  that  day,  We  have  cast  out  devils  in  thy  name, 


4 G 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


and  in  thy  name  done  many  wonderful  works.”  But  we  must 
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  to  sanctify  our  nature,  to  purify  our 
hearts,  and  make  us  meet  for  heaven.  Unless  we  are  born  again, 
and  have  the  Holy  Ghost  in  our  hearts,  if  we  were  in  heaven  we 
could  take  no  pleasure  there.  The  apostle  not  only  supposes  we 
must  have  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  he  supposes,  as  a necessary  in- 
gredient to  make  up  the  kingdom  of  God  in  a believer’s  heart, 
that  he  must  have  “joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.”  There  are  a great 
many,  I believe,  who  think  religion  is  a poor  melancholy  thing, 
and  they  are  afraid  to  be  Christians.  But,  my  dear  friends,  there  is 
no  true  joy  till  you  can  joy  in  God  and  Christ.  I know  wicked 
men  and  men  of  pleasure  will  have  a little  laughter ; but  what  is 
it,  but  like  the  crackling  of  a few  thorns  under  a pot  ? it  makes  a 
blaze,  and  soon  goes  out.  I know  what  it  is  to  take  pleasure  in 
sin  ; but  I always  found  the  smart  that  followed  was  ten  thou- 
sand times  more  hurtful  than  any  gratification  I could  receive. 
But  they  who  joy  in  God,  have  a joy  that  strangers  intermeddle 
not  with — it  is  a joy  that  no  man  can  take  from  them ; it  amounts 
to  a full  assurance  of  faith  that  the  soul  is  reconciled  to  God 
through  Christ,  that  Jesus  dwells  in  the  heart;  and  when 
the  soul  reflects  on  itself,  it  magnifies  the  Lord,  and  re- 
joices in  God  its  Saviour.  Thus  we  are  told  that  “ Zaccheus  re- 
ceived Christ  joyfully,”  that  “the  eunuch  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing,”  and  that  “ the  jailer  rejoiced  in  God  with  all  his  house.” 
O.  my  friends,  what  joy  have  they  that  know  their  sins  are  for- 
given them!  What  a blessed  thing  is  it  for  a man  to  look 
forward,  and  see  an  endless  eternity  of  happiness  before  him, 
knowing  that  everything  shall  work  together  for  his  good! — it  is 
joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  0 may  God  make  you  all 
partakers  of  it ! 

Here,  then,  we  will  put  the  kingdom  of  God  together.  It  is 
“ righteousness,”  it  is  “peace,”  it  is  “joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.”  When 
this  is  placed  in  the  heart,  God  there  reigns,  God  there  dwells 
and  walks — the  creature  is  a son  or  daughter  of  the  Almighty. 
But,  my  friends,  how  few  are  there  here  who  have  been  made 
partakers  of  this  kingdom  ! Perhaps  the  kingdom  of  the  devil, 
instead  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  in  most  of  our  hearts.  This 
has  been  a place  much  favoured  of  God;  may  I hope  some  of 
you  can  go  alongs  with  me  and  say  “Blessed  be  God,  we  have 
got  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  ?”  Have  you 
so  ? Then,  you  are  kings,  though  beggars ; you  are  happy  above 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


47 


all  men  in  the  world — you  have  got  heaven  in  your  hearts ; and 
when  the  crust  of  your  bodies  drops,  your  souls  will  meet  with 
God,  your  souls  will  enter  into  the  world  of  peace,  and  you  shall 
be  happy  with  God  for  evermore.  I hope  there  is  none  of  you 
who  will  fear  death ; fy  for  shame,  if  ye  do ! What ! afraid  to  go 
to  Jesus,  to  your  Lord  ? You  may  cry  out,  “ 0 death,  where  is  thy 
sting?  0 grave,  where  is  thy  victory?”  You  may  go  on  your 
way  rejoicing,  knowing  that  God  is  your  friend;  die  when  you 
will,  angels  will  carry  you  safe  to  heaven. 

But,  O,  how  many  are  here  in  this  church-yard,  who  will  be 
laid  in  some  grave  ere  long,  who  are  entire  strangers  to  this 
work  of  God  upon  their  souls!  My  dear  friends,  I think  this  is 
an  awful  sight.  Here  are  many  thousands  of  souls,  that  must 
shortly  appear  with  me,  a poor  creature,  in  the  general  assembly 
of  all  mankind  before  God  in  judgment.  God  Almighty  knows 
whether  some  of  you  may  not  drop  down  dead  before  you  go  out 
of  the  church-yard;  and  yet,  perhaps  most  are  strangers  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  their  hearts.  Perhaps  curiosity  has 
brought  you  out  to  hear  a poor  babbler  preach.  But,  my  friends,  I 
hope  I came  out  of  a better  principle.  If  I know  anything  of  my 
heart,  I came  to  promote  God’s  glory ; and  if  the  Lord  should 
make  use  of  such  a worthless  worm,  such  a wretched  creature, 
as  I am,  to  do  your  precious  souls  good,  nothing  would  rejoice 
me  more  than  to  hear  that  God  makes  the  foolishness  of  preach- 
ing a means  of  making  many  believe.  I was  long  myself  deceiv- 
ed with  a form  of  godliness,  and  I know  what  it  is  to  be  a factor 
for  the  devil,  to  be  led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will,  to  have 
the  kingdom  of  the  devil  in  my  heart;  and  I hope  I can  say, 
through  free  grace,  I know  what  it  is  to  have  the  kingdom  of 
God  erected  in  me.  It  is  God’s  goodness  that  such  a poor 
wretch  as  I am  converted;  though  sometimes  when  lam  speak- 
ing of  God’s  goodness,  I am  afraid  he  strike  me  down  dead. 
Let  me  draw  out  mv  soul  and  heart  to  you,  my  dear  friends,  my 
dear  guilty  friends,  poor  bleeding  souls,  who  must  shortly  take 
your  last  farewell,  and  fly  into  endless  eternity.  Let  me  entreat 
you  to  lay  these  things  seriously  to  heart  this  night.  Now, 
when  the  Sabbath  is  over,  and  the  evening  is  drawing  near,  me- 
thinks  the  very  sight  is  awful  (I  could  almost  weep  over  you,  as 
our  Lord  did  over  Jerusalem),  to  think  in  how  short  a time 
every  soul  of  you  must  die — some  of  you  to  go  to  heaven,  and 
others  to  go  to  the  devil  for  evermore. 


48 


THE  KINGDOM  OP  GOD. 


O my  dear  friends,  these  are  matters  of  eternal  moment.  I did 
not  come  to  tickle  your  ears ; if  I had  a mind  to  do  so,  I would 
play  the  orator ; no,  but  I came,  if  God  should  be  pleased,  to 
touch  your  hearts.  What  shall  I say  to  you?  Open  the  door 
of  your  heart,  that  the  king  of  glory,  the  blessed  Jesus,  may 
come  in  and  erect  his  kingdom  in  your  soul.  Make  room  for 
Christ;  the  Lord  Jesus  desires  to  sup  with  you  to-night;  Christ  is 
willing  to  come  into  any  of  your  hearts,  that  will  be  pleased  to 
open  and  receive  him.  Are  there  any  of  you  made  willing 
Lydias?  There  are  many  women  here,  but  how  many  Lydias 
are  there  here  ? Does  powder  go  with  the  word  to  open  your 
heart?  and  find  you  a sweet  melting  in  your  soul?  Are  you 
willing?  Then  Christ  Jesus  is  walling  to  come  to  you.  But 
you  may  say,  Will  Christ  come  to  my  wicked,  polluted  heart? 
Yes,  though  you  have  many  devils  in  your  heart,  Christ  will 
come  and  erect  his  throne  there ; though  the  devils  be  in  your 
heart,  the  Lord  Jesus  will  scourge  out  a legion  of  devils,  and  his 
throne  shall  be  exalted  in  thy  soul.  Sinners,  be  ye  what  you  will, 
come  to  Christ,  you  shall  have  righteousness  and  peace.  If  you 
have  got  no  peace,  come  to  Christ,  and  he  will  give  you  peace. 
When  you  come  to  Christ,  you  will  feel  such  joy  that  it  is  im- 
possible for  you  to  tell.  0 may  God  pity  you  all!  I hope  this 
will  be  a night  of  salvation  to  some  of  your  souls. 

My  dear  friends,  I wrould  preach  with  all  my  heart  till  midnight, 
to  do  you  good,  till  I could  preach  no  more.  0 that  this  body 
might  hold  out  to  speak  more  for  my  dear  Redeemer!  Had  I a 
thousand  lives,  had  I a thousand  tongues,  they  should  be  em- 
ployed in  inviting  sinners  to  come  to  Jesus  Christ!  Come,  then, 
let  me  prevail  with  some  of  you  to  come  along  with  me.  Come 
poor,  lost,  undone  sinner,  come  just  as  you  are  to  Christ,  and 
say,  If  I be  damned,  I will  perish  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  Christ, 
where  never  one  perished  yet.  He  will  receive  you  wdth  open 
arms ; the  dear  Redeemer  is  willing  to  receive  you  all.  Fly,  then, 
for  your  lives.  The  devil  is  in  you  wdiile  unconverted;  and  will 
you  go  with  the  devil  in  your  heart  to  bed  this  night  ? God  Al- 
mighty knows  if  ever  you  and  I shall  see  one  another  again.  In 
one  or  twTo  days  more  I must  go,  and,  perhaps,  I may  never  see 
you  again,  till  I meet  you  at  the  judgment-day.  0 my  dear 
friends,  think  of  that  solemn  meeting;  think  of  that  important 
hour,  when  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  wdth  a great  noise,  when 
the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat,  wrhen  the  sea  and  the 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 


49 


graves  shall  be  giving  up  their  dead,  and  all  shall  be  summoned 
to  appear  before  the  great  God.  What  will  you  do  then,  if  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  not  erected  in  your  hearts?  You  must  go 
to  the  devil — like  must  go  to  like — if  you  are  not  converted 
Christ  hath  asserted  it  in  the  strongest  manner:  “ Verily,  verily,  I 
say  unto  you,  Except  a man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God.”  Who  can  dwell  with  devouring  fire  ? 
Who  can  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings?  O,  my  heart  is  melt- 
ing with  love  to  you.  Surely  God  intends  to  do  good  to  your  poor 
souls.  Will  no  one  be  persuaded  to  accept  of  Christ  ? If  those 
who  are  settled  Pharisees  will  not  come,  I desire  to  speak  to  you 
who  are  drunkards,  Sabbath-breakers,  cursers  and  swearers — will 
you  come  to  Christ  ? I know  that  many  of  you  come  here  out  of 
curiosity:  though  you  come  only  to  see  the  congregation,  yet  if 
you  come  to  Jesus  Christ,  Christ  will  accept  of  you.  Are  there 
any  cursing,  swearing  soldiers  here?  Will  you  come  to  Jesus  Christ, 
and  list  yourselves  under  the  banner  of  the  dear  Redeemer? 
You  are  all  welcome  to  Christ,  Are  there  any  little  boys  or  little 
girls  here?  Come  to  Christ,  and  he  will  erect  his  kingdom  in 
you.  There  are  many  little  children  whom  God  is  working  on,  both 
at  home  and  abroad.  O,  if  some  of  the  little  lambs  would  come 
to  Christ,  they  shall  have  peace  and  joy  in  the  day  that  the  Re- 
deemer shall  set  up  his  kingdom  in  their  hearts.  Parents,  tell 
them  that  Jesus  Christ  will  take  them  in  his  arms,  that  he  will 
dandle  them  on  his  knees.  All  of  you,  old  and  young,  you  that 
are  old  and  grey-headed,  come  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  shall  be 
kings  and  priests  to  your  God.  The  Lord  will  abundantly  pardon 
you  at  the  eleventh  hour.  “ Ho,  every  one  of  you  that  thirsteth.” 
If  there  be  any  of  you  ambitious  of  honour,  do  you  want  a 
crown,  a sceptre?  Come  to  Christ,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will 
give  you  a kingdom  that  no  man  shall  take  from  you. 


TEE  END. 


X 


Date  Due 

Demco  293-5 

P#  2 8 ’6 f 

£FH  x v *■>•! 


TUFTS  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES 


3 9090  00 


329  560 


