\    STUDIA    IN 


THE  LIBRARY 

of 
VICTORIA  UNIVERSITY 

Toronto 


Ex  dono 
M.  Rynor 


I) 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

IN 
THE  PRESENT  HOUR 


By  R.  A.  TORREY,  D.D. 

LATEST  ISSUES 
The  Voice  of  God  in  the  Present  Hour. 

Cloth net  $1.25 

The  Person  and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Cloth net  $1.00 

Difficulties  and  Alleged  Errors  and  Contradic 
tions  in  the  Bible.     Cloth      .     .     net  6oc. 
Practical  and  Perplexing  Questions  Answered. 

Cloth netobc. 

Anecdotes  and  Illustrations.     Illustrated. 

Cloth,  net  750.  ;  paper,  net  350. 
FOR  REVIVAL  WORK 
How  to  Bring  Men  to  Christ.     Cloth,  750.  ; 

paper,  net  250. 

How  to  Work  for  Christ.     Cloth     .    net  $2.50 
How  to   Promote   and  Conduct  a  Successful 

Revival, net$i.oo 

REVIVAL  TALKS  AND  ADDRESSES 
The  Bible  and  Its  Christ.     Cloth,  net  750.  ; 

paper,  net  250. 

Revival  Addresses.   Clo.,  net  $i.,  pa.,  net  500. 
Real  Salvation  and   Whole-Hearted  Service. 

I2mo,  cloth,  net  $1.00,  paper,  net  500. 

FOR  BIBLE  STUDY 
What  the  Bible  Teaches.     Cloth    .     net  $2.50 
The  Divine  Origin  of  the  Bible. 

Cloth net  500. 

How  to  Study  the  Bible  for  Greatest  Profit. 

Cloth net  750. 

FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE 
How  to  Succeed  in  the  Christian  Life.     Cloth, 

net  6oc.  ;  paper,  net  250. 
How  to  Pray.     Cloth   .     .     .     .     .     net  6oc. 
How  to  Obtain  Fullness  of  Power  m  Christian 

Life  and  Service.     Cloth  .     .     .     net  6oc. 
The  Baptism  With  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Cloth net  6oc. 

A  Vest  Pocket  Companion  for  Christian  Workers. 

Leatherette net  2c. 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

IN 

THE  PRESENT  HOUR 


BY 

R.  A.  TORREY,  D.D. 

AUTHOR   OF 

"  What  the  Bible  Teaches,"    "  How  to  Work  for  Christ," 
" Revival  Addresses"  etc.,  etc. 


NEW  YORK          CHICAGO         TORONTO 

Fleming    H.    Revell    Company 

LONDON    AND    EDINBURGH 


Copyright,  1917,  by 
FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY 


JEMMANUEl 


New  York:  158  Fifth  Avenue 
Chicago:  17  North  Wabash  Ave. 
Toronto:  25  Richmond  Street,  W. 
London:  21  Paternoster  Square 
Edinburgh:  100  Princes  Street 


PREFACE 

I  HAVE  received  urgent  requests,  especially  from 
evangelists  and  ministers,  to  publish  another 
volume  of  sermons.  I  am  putting  forth  this 
volume  in  response  to  this  request.  Quite  a  number 
of  requests  have  come  for  the  publication  of  different 
sermons  preached  in  The  Church  of  the  Open  Door 
in  Los  Angeles,  the  past  winter.  Almost  all  the  ser 
mons  found  in  this  volume  were  preached  to  this  con 
gregation  in  the  autumn  of  1916  and  winter  and 
spring  of  1917.  The  sermons,  of  course,  bear  the 
marks  of  their  having  been  preached  in  the  midst  of 
the  anxieties  and  perplexities  that  are  in  many  hearts 
because  of  present  war  conditions  in  this  and  other 
lands.  It  is  the  hope  and  prayer  of  the  writer  that 
they  will  not  only  be  blessed  to  those  who  read  them, 
but  also  that  the  material  found  in  them  may  be  used 
by  others  in  preaching  and  teaching  the  truth  of  God. 
It  has  been  a  great  joy  to  the  writer  that  so  many 
evangelists  and  preachers  have  used  so  generously 
material  found  in  his  previous  volumes  of  sermons. 
Sometimes  such  use  has  not  been  acknowledged ;  but  it 
frequently  has  been  acknowledged  and,  even  when  not 
acknowledged,  I  have  reason  to  think  that  great  good 
has  been  accomplished  by  the  truth  thus  given.  In 
deed,  I  have  reason  to  know  that  some  have  used  the 
material  found  in  my  sermons  with  an  effectiveness 
far  beyond  that  with  which  I  used  it  myself,  and  it  has 


6  PREFACE 

been  a  great  joy  to  me  to  have  it  thus  used.  As  the 
purpose  of  the  publication  of  these  sermons  is  the  con 
vincing  of  unbelievers,  the  salvation  of  sinners,  and 
the  confirmation  and  guidance  of  God's  people,  it 
does  not  matter  at  all  to  me  whether  there  is  any 
acknowledgment  on  the  part  of  those  who  use  the 
material  or  not.  If  good  is  done,  and  I  know  much 
good  is  done,  I  therein  greatly  rejoice.  (Phil.  1: 18.) 

R.  A.  TORREY. 
Los  Angeles,  CaL 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAOB 

I.  NOT  A  WORD  OF  CHRIST  SHALL  EVER  FAIL     9 

II.  WHEREIN  THE  BIBLE  DIFFERS  FROM  ALL 

OTHER  BOOKS  .  . . 20 

III.  Is  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER? 32 

IV.  WHY  I  BELIEVE  THAT  JESUS  CHRIST  is 

GOD  IN  HUMAN  FORM 51 

V.  JESUS  THE  WONDERFUL 64 

VI.  THE  FOOL'S  CREED 75 

VII.  No  HOPE 85 

VIII.  WHERE  WILL  You  SPEND  ETERNITY?.  .  .   100 
IX.  WHICH  SHALL  WE  BELIEVE,  GOD  OR  MAN?  112 

X.  THE  NEW  BIRTH  AS  SET  FORTH  IN  JOHN 

3:2-21 125 

XI.  GOD'S  GUIDANCE  AND  How  TO  GET  IT.  .  137 
XII.  How  GOD  GUIDES 152 

XIII.  GOD'S  KEEPING  AND  How  TO  MAKE  SURE 

OF  IT 171 

XIV.  THE  COMPLETE  AND  SYMMETRICAL  LIFE 

AND  How  TO  ATTAIN  IT 184 

XV.  THE  SECRET  OF  BLESSEDNESS  IN  HEART, 
BEAUTY  IN  CHARACTER,  FRUITFULNESS 
IN  SERVICE,  AND  PROSPERITY  IN  EVERY 
THING 197 

7 


8  CONTENTS 

XVI.  LOVE  CONTRASTED,  DESCRIBED,  EXALTED 

(1  Cor.  13) 210 

.  XVTI.  A  CHRIST-LIKE  MAN 220 

XVIII.  WALKING  AS  JESUS  WALKED 231 

XIX.  THE  SECRET  OF  ABIDING  PEACE,  ABOUND 
ING  JOY,  AND  ABUNDANT  VICTORY  IN 
WAR  TIMES  AND  AT  ALL  TIMES.  .  .  243 


NOT  A  WORD  OF  CHRIST  SHALL  EVER  FAIL 

"Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  lut  my  word 
shall  not  pass  away." — Matt.  24:  35. 

JESUS  CHRIST  here  asserts  that  His  words  are 
more   stable    and    enduring   than   heaven   or 
earth:  that  while  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away,  His  word  shall  not  pass  away.    When  we  con 
sider  the  position  that  Jesus  Christ  occupied  when 
He  made  this  extraordinary  claim,  it  appears  absurd 
in  the  extreme.    He  was  an  uneducated  artisan  of  an 
obscure  and  despised  people.     Furthermore,  it  was 
only  a  few  days  before  His  crucifixion.    The  man  who 
uttered  these  words  in  less  than  a  week  was  to  be  the 
butt  of  the  scorn  and  ridicule  of  jeering  mobs  as  He 
ended  His  life  as  a  condemned  malefactor  on  a  gibbet, 
only  a  short  walk  from  where  He  was  now  speaking. 
If  these  words  spoken  by  such  a  man,  at  such  a  time, 
prove  true,  then  He  must  be  more  than  appears  at 
first  sight.    Indeed,  He  must  be  as  He  claimed  to  be, 
Divine.    Heaven  and  earth  are  God's  own  handiwork, 
and  if  Christ's  words  prove  more  stable  than  they, 
then  He  Himself  must  be  Divine. 


10  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

I.  CHRIST'S  WORDS  ARE  SURE. 

But  these  remarkable  words  of  Christ  after  the 
lapse  of  more  than  eighteen  centuries  are  proven  to 
be  true.  This  stupendous  claim  of  Christ  that  not  a 
word  of  His  shall  ever  fail  has  been  substantiated. 
That  the  words  of  Jesus  Christ  shall^never  pass  away 
is  proven  by  the  tests  that  they  have  already  stood. 

1.  First  of  all,  the  words  of  Jesus  have  stood  the 
test  of  bitterest  opposition.  No  sooner  had  Christ's 
words  fallen  from  His  lips  than  they  were  hated. 
They  have  been  hated  through  the  nearly  nineteen 
centuries  that  have  elapsed  since  they  were  spoken. 
This  hatred  has  been  most  bitter,  most  relentless, 
most  energetic,  most  skilful,  most  wily,  most  power 
ful,  but  it  has  been  utterly  ineffective.  This  hatred 
manifested  itself  in  literary  attacks  upon  the  words 
of  Christ,  like  that  of  Lucian  the  great  master  of 
satire  in  his  day,  in  philosophical  attacks  like  that  of 
the  great  philosopher  Porphyry,  in  learned  attacks 
like  that  of  the  scholar  Celsus,  in  physical  attacks 
like  that  of  the  great  Roman  Emperor  Diocletian,  in 
which  he  summoned  all  the  political  and  military 
forces  of  the  empire  with  torch,  and  stake,  and  prison, 
and  wild  beast  to  obliterate  from  the  pages  of  history 
the  memory  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  words.  From 
those  early  days  to  this,  this  opposition  has  gone  on, 
more  than  eighteen  centuries  of  it.  All  the  artillery 
of  science,  literature,  philosophy,  political  intrigue, 
sarcasm,  ridicule,  worldly  ambition,  force,  all  the  artil 
lery  of  earth  and  hell,  have  been  trained  upon  the 
words  of  Christ,  and  for  centuries  at  a  time  an  almost 
incessant  cannonade  has  been  kept  up.  Sometimes 


NOT  A  WORD  OF  CHRIST  SHALL  FAIL      11 

weak  hearts  have  been  shaken  by  the  roar  of  battle, 
but  the  words  of  Christ  have  remained  absolutely  un 
shaken.  There  has  not  been  one  single  stone  dis 
lodged  from  these  fortifications.  Words  that  can  come 
out  of  eighteen  centuries  of  such  experience  as  that 
unscathed,  unscarred,  unmarred,  will  stand  forever. 
Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  the  words  of 
Christ  shall  not  pass  away. 

2.  In  the  next  place,  Christ's  words  have  not  only 
stood  the  test  of  bitter  opposition,  but  they  have  also 
stood  the  test  of  time.  The  test  of  time  is  a  severe 
test  of  men's  utterances.  What  seemed  like  wisdom 
when  uttered  a  few  years  ago  is  seen  to-day  to  be  con 
summate  folly.  Ptolemy  was  by  far  the  greatest  as 
tronomer  of  antiquity,  and  his  utterances  were  con 
sidered  the  sum  of  all  wisdom,  but  they  have  not  stood 
the  test  of  time,  and  his  theories  are  to-day  the  laugh 
ing-stock  of  the  schoolroom.  What  is  true  of  the 
words  of  Ptolemy  is  true  of  all  other  books  of  the  past 
but  one;  they  are  outgrown,  but  the  utterances  of 
Jesus  Christ  are  not  outgrown,  they  are  as  precious 
to-day  as  in  that  long-ago  time  when  they  were  first 
spoken.  They  are  as  perfectly  applicable  to  present- 
day  needs  as  to  the  needs  of  that  day.  They  contain 
the  solution  of  all  modern  individual  and  social  prob 
lems;  they  have  perpetual  youth.  There  is  not  one 
single  point  at  which  the  teachings  of  Jesus  Christ 
have  been  outgrown  or  become  antiquated.  The 
human  mind  has  been  expanding  for  more  than  eigh 
teen  centuries  since  Jesus  Christ  spoke  here  on  earth, 
but  it  has  not  outgrown  Him.  Words  that  can  en 
dure  eighteen  centuries  of  growth  and  still  prove  as 
thoroughly  adequate  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  race 


12  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

and  each  member  of  it  as  when  first  given  will  stand 
forever.  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  the 
words  of  Jesus  Christ  shall  not  pass  away. 

Let  me  say  in  passing  that  in  the  light  of  history  it 
is  nothing  short  of  preposterous,  and  even  ludicrous, 
to  hear  men  put  forward  the  claims  of  the  newly 
hatched  philosophies  of  a  day  against  the  utterances 
of  Jesus  Christ  that  have  stood  the  test  of  more  than 
eighteen  centuries,  especially  in  view  of  the  well- 
known  fact  that  just  such  philosophies,  full  of  self- 
confidence,  have  appeared  by  the  thousands  in  the 
past,  and  after  a  brief  day  of  notoriety  have  flashed 
out  again  into  the  darkness  from  which  they  had  so 
recently  emerged.  The  history  of  eighteen  centuries 
of  human  thought  is  largely  a  history  of  men  who 
counted  themselves  wiser  than  Christ,  but  whom  it 
took  only  a  few  years  to  prove  utter  fools. 

3.  The  words  of  Christ  have  stood  a  third  test,  the 
test  of  rigid  scrutiny.  No  other  words  have  ever  been 
so  examined,  scrutinized,  analyzed,  pulled  to  pieces, 
subjected  to  the  most  minute,  microscopic  and  unspar 
ing  examination,  as  have  the  words  of  Christ.  They 
have  undergone  eighteen  centuries  of  scrutiny,  and 
what  is  the  result  ? 

a.  The  first  result  is,  not  one  single  flaw  has  been 
discovered.  What  would  not  men  give  to  find  one 
real  flaw  in  the  words  of  Jesus  ?  What  would  not  Tn- 
gersoll  have  given  in  his  day  ?  What  would  not  some 
of  our  liberal  teachers  who  would  like  to  set  themselves 
up  by  putting  Jesus  Christ  down,  give  ?  What  would 
not  some  of  our  professedly  orthodox  preachers,  who 
care  far  more  for  a  petty  reputation  for  originality 
and  advanced  scholarship  than  they  do  for  the  untar- 


NOT  A  WORD  OF  CHRIST  SHALL  FAIL      13 

nished  splendour  of  the  Son  of  God,  give  ?  They  have 
searched  for  a  flaw — generation  after  generation  of 
the  enemies  of  Christ.  One  generation  failing  to  find 
such  a  flaw  has  bequeathed  the  search  to  another,  and 
this  search  has  gone  on  for  more  than  eighteen  cen 
turies  with  the  best  microscopes  that  could  be  devised, 
and  the  search  has  failed,  utterly  failed.  The  words 
of  Jesus  stand  out  absolutely  flawless.  The  words 
that  have  stood  eighteen  centuries  of  such  scrutiny  will 
stand  forever.  Heaven  and  earth  will  pass  away,  but 
the  words  of  Jesus  Christ  shall  not  pass  away. 

Z>.  But  there  is  a  second  result  of  this  scrutiny: 
the  words  of  Christ  have  not  only  proven  themselves 
flawless,  but  inexhaustible.  These  eighteen  centuries 
have  not  only  been  centuries  of  scrutiny,  they  have 
also  been  centuries  of  profound,  earnest,  and  honest 
study  as  well.  Men  have  dug  and  dug  for  eighteen 
centuries  into  this  mine  of  precious  metal  that  they 
have  found  in  the  words  of  Christ.  Thousands  and 
tens  of  thousands  have  dug  and  the  mine  has  proven 
absolutely  inexhaustible.  There  is  more  for  the  new 
miner  that  comes  to-day  than  there  was  for  the  first 
digger.  Eighteen  centuries  of  digging  and  discovery 
and  no  hint  of  touching  the  bottom  of  the  mine.  The 
bottom  is  farther  off  than  ever.  The  mine  that  has  en 
dured  eighteen  centuries  of  such  digging  and  not  given 
out  never  will  give  out.  With  the  confidence  born  of 
eighteen  centuries  of  experience,  we  can  shout, 
"Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  the  words  of 
Jesus  shall  not  pass  away." 

4.  The  words  of  Jesus  Christ  have  stood  another 
test,  the  test  of  history,  measuring  the  accuracy  of  His 
prophecies.  Jesus  Christ  was  a  prophet.  He  under- 


14  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

took  to  tell  the  things  that  were  to  be.  History  is  the 
touchstone  of  prophecy.  The  prophet  who  is  not  of 
God  falls  before  the  test  of  history,  but  Jesus  Christ 
stands.  Jesus  Christ,  while  Jerusalem  and  the  temple 
were  still  standing  in  their  pride,  magnificence  and 
seeming  security,  foretold  that  the  armies  of  Rome 
would  come  and  besiege  the  city,  that  there  would  be 
a  siege  of  such  horror  as  was  absolutely  unparalleled 
in  history;  that  not  one  stone  should  be  left  upon 
another,  and  that  for  long  periods  of  time  to  come 
Jerusalem  would  be  trodden  under  foot  of  the  Gen 
tiles.  So  it  has  come  to  pass  to  the  letter,  and  so  it  is 
being  fulfilled  even  to  our  day.  Jesus  foretold  that 
the  Jew,  though  crushed,  scattered  throughout  the 
earth,  subjected  to  unparalleled  tyranny,  would  pre 
serve  his  race  identity  until  the  Christ  should  come 
again.  Centuries  have  rolled  on,  nations  have  arisen, 
fallen,  been  obliterated  and  forgotten,  the  Jew  has 
not  had  a  foothold  anywhere  for  centuries,  yet  the 
Jew  retains  his  race  identity  to  this  day  as  perfectly 
as  he  possessed  it  in  the  first  century.  It  is  the  miracle 
of  history,  and  the  words  of  Christ  stand.  Jesus 
Christ  predicted  furthermore  that  the  little  church  He 
was  founding  of  obscure  men  in  that  obscure  corner 
of  the  earth  would  spread  throughout  the  earth  until 
the  nations  of  the  earth  took  shelter  under  the 
branches  thereof.  The  prediction  seemed  utterly  wild 
and  preposterous,  but  it  has  come  true.  The  words  of 
Christ  have  stood  the  test  of  history.  He  predicted 
furthermore  that  His  church  having  spread  thus  out 
wardly,  corruption  would  begin  inwardly  and  that  this 
corruption  would  spread  "until  all  was  leavened." 
It  was  a  passing  strange  prediction  to  make  about 


NOT  A  WORD  OF  CHRIST  SHALL  FAIL      15 

one's  own  kingdom,  but  it  has  been  fulfilled  to  the 
letter.  The  apparently  preposterous  and  impossible 
words  of  Christ  have  stood  the  test  of  more  than 
eighteen  centuries  of  history.  The  words  of  prophecy 
that  can  stand  the  rigid  test  of  eighteen  centuries  of 
history  will  stand  forever.  Heaven  and  earth  shall 
pass  away,  but  Christ 's  words  shall  not  pass  away. 

5.  The  words  of  Christ  have  stood  the  test  of  more 
than  eighteen  centuries  of  practical  application. 
Through  these  more  than  eighteen  centuries  men  and 
women  have  had  these  words  of  Christ  before  them  to 
live  by  if  they  would,  and  thousands  and  tens  of  thous 
ands,  hundreds  of  thousands,  millions,  have  decided 
that  they  would.  Men  and  women  have  tested  the 
words  of  Christ,  His  promises,  His  moral  precepts,  His 
commandments,  His  warnings,  in  all  the  relations  of 
life.  They  have  tested  His  promises  and  His  precepts 
in  the  home,  they  have  tested  them  in  the  church  life, 
in  the  place  of  business ;  they  have  tested  them  in  pros 
perity  and  in  adversity ;  they  have  tested  them  in  sick 
ness  and  in  health ;  they  have  tested  them  in  the  joys 
of  peace,  and  in  the  horrors  of  war ;  they  have  tested 
them  in  life,  and  when  face  to  face  with  death ;  they 
have  tested  them  in  the  sweet  fullness  of  the  unbroken 
family  circle,  and  in  the  desolation  when  every  earthly 
friend  has  been  taken  away.  For  eighteen  centuries 
men  have  tested  these  words  of  Christ  from  the  cradle 
to  the  grave,  and  the  words  of  Christ  have  stood  the 
test.  They  never  fail,  they  never  will  fail.  In  all, 
these  words  of  Christ  have  stood  millions  upon  millions 
of  tests  and  not  one  single  case  of  failure.  What  may 
we  say  then  without  the  shadow  of  the  shade  of  a 
doubt?  Not  one  word  of  Christ  shall  ever  fail. 


16  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away  but  the  words  of 
Jesus  Christ  shall  not  pass  away. 

If  there  is  anything  absolutely  sure  it  is  the  words 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away, 
they  are  material  and  subject  to  the  changes  and  decay 
that  are  always  going  on  in  matter.  They  have  stood 
for  ages,  but  they  will  not  always  stand.  There  was 
a  time,  as  both  the  Bible  and  science  tell  us,  when  the 
heavens  and  earth  did  not  exist,  and  there  will  be  a 
time  when  they  do  not  continue  to  exist  in  their  pres 
ent  form;  but  Christ's  words  are  spiritual  not  mate 
rial,  unchanging  not  changing,  eternal  not  temporal, 
and  while  the  endless  ages  of  eternity  roll  on  they  will 
still  endure.  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but 
the  words  of  Jesus  Christ  shall  not  pass  away. 

II.  SOME  OTHER  THINGS  THAT  ARE  SURE  ALSO. 

We  see  that  Christ's  words  are  absolutely  sure. 
Not  one  word  of  His  shall  ever  fail.  But,  if  Jesus 
Christ's  words  are  sure,  some  other  things  are  sure 
also. 

1.  It  is  sure  that  there  is  a  future  eternal  heaven 
and  eternal  hell.  This,  Jesus  Christ  plainly  declares. 
The  doctrines  of  an  eternal  heaven  and  an  eternal  hell 
are  not  speculations  of  the  theologians,  but  proclama 
tions  of  the  Son  of  God.  Jesus  says  that  at  His  coming 
again  all  nations  then  living  on  the  earth  shall  be 
gathered  before  Him  and  He  shall  separate  them  one 
from  the  other  as  a  shepherd  separateth  his  sheep  from 
the  goats,  and  that  He  shall  set  the  sheep  on  His  right 
hand  and  the  goats  to  the  left,  and  of  those  on  the  left 
hand  He  says,  "  These  shall  go  away  into  eternal 


NOT  A  WORD  OF  CHRIST  SHALL  FAIL      17 

punishment:  but  the  righteous  into  eternal  life." 
(Matt.  25:31-34,  41,  46.)  Remember  that  these  are 
not  the  words  of  some  ' '  antiquated,  mediaeval,  bigoted 
theologian,"  they  are  the  words  of  the  Son  of  God, 
the  words  of  Him  not  one  word  of  whom  shall  ever 
fail. 

2.  It  is  sure  again  that  anyone  who  believes  in 
Jesus  Christ  shall  receive  forgiveness  of  sins  and 
eternal  life,  no  matter  how  greatly  nor  how  long  he 
may  have  sinned.  Jesus  says  that  He  "has  power  on 
earth  to  forgive  sins"  (Mark  2: 10).  He  says  again, 
"As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness, 
even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up :  that  who 
soever  believeth  in  Him  may  have  eternal  life"  (John 
3: 14,  15).  These  words  seem  incredible.  They  seem 
too  good  to  be  true,  but  Jesus  Christ  is  the  speaker  and 
not  one  word  of  His  shall  ever  fail.  The  heavens  and 
the  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  His  words  shall  not 
pass  away.  This  statement  that  there  is  pardon  and 
eternal  life  for  anyone  who  will  believe  in  Jesus 
Christ  is  absolutely  sure.  Is  there  anyone  here  to 
night  who  is  heartily  sick  of  sin,  and  heartily  tired  of 
death?  Come,  believe  on  Jesus  Christ  arid  be  saved 
and  get  pardon  and  eternal  life  to-night. 

3.  It  is  sure  again  that  no  one  who  rejects  Jesus 
Christ  shall  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  dbideth  upon 
him.  Men  do  not  like  that  doctrine.  They  like  to 
think  they  can  reject  Jesus  Christ  and  yet  be  saved 
by  their  imagined  morality,  or  in  some  other  way. 
There  is  absolutely  no  foundation  for  such  a  hope. 
It  is  not  the  doctrine  of  "fierce  old  John  Calvin"  nor 
of  "bigoted  Jonathan  Edwards,"  it  is  the  declaration 
of  Jesus  Christ,  who  says  in  John  3 : 18,  19,  "He  that 


18  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

believeth  on  Him  is  not  condemned.  But  he  that  be- 
lieveth  not,  is  condemned  already,  because  he  has  not 
believed  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God. 
And  this  is  the  condemnation  that  light  is  come  into 
the  world  and  men  love  darkness  rather  than  light, 
because  their  deeds  were  evil."  He  says  again  in  the 
14th  and  15th  verses  of  the  same  chapter,  "As  Moses 
lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness :  even  so  must 
the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up :  that  whosoever  believeth 
in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life," 
the  unmistakable  implication  of  which  is  that  the  one 
who  does  not  believe  shall  perish,  no  matter  what  else 
he  may  do,  and  John  sums  up  the  teaching  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  on  this  point  by  saying,  "He  that  believeth  on 
the  Son  hath  everlasting  life;  and  He  that  believeth 
not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  Him."  Before  you  dare  question  the 
statement  to  your  own  eternal  ruin,  remember  who 
makes  it,  the  One  not  one  of  whose  words  shall  ever 
fail. 

4.  There  is  another  thing  that  is  absolutely  sure,  it 
is  sure  that  if  a  man  is  not  born  again  he  shall  not 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  is  the  word  of 
Jesus  Christ  who  says  in  John  3 :  3,  5,  "Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  thee,  except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God. ' '  And  again, ' '  Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  thee,  except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and 
of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
God. ' '  It  becomes  a  matter  of  tremendous  importance 
to  each  one  of  us  that  we  know  whether  we  have  been 
born  again.  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but 
Christ's  words  shall  not  pass  away,  and  Jesus  Christ 
says  that  no  one  who  has  not  been  born  again  shall 


NOT  A  WORD  OF  CHRIST  SHALL  FAIL      19 

enter  His  Kingdom.     Oh  man,  oh  woman,  have  you 
been  born  again  ? 

5.  Still  another  thing  is  sure :  it  is  sure  if  one  seeks 
to  be  a  Christian  without  letting  the  world  know  it, 
seeks  to  be  a  Christian  in  the  privacy  of  his  own  heart, 
it  is  sure  that  Jesus  Christ  will  not  acknowledge  such 
a  disciple  when  He  comes.    His  words  on  this  point 
are  very  plain.    He  says  in  Mark  8 :  38,  "  Whosoever 
shall  be  ashamed  of  me,  and  of  my  words,  in  this 
adulterous  and  sinful  generation,  of  him  also  shall 
the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed  when  He  cometh  in  the 
glory  of  His  Father,  with  the  holy  angels."     And 
again  He  says  in  Matt.  10:  32,  33,  "Whosoever  there 
fore  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him  will  I  confess 
before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.    But  whosoever 
shall  deny  me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before 
my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."    Your  own  deceitful 
heart  may  seek  to  make  you  think  that  you  can  be  a 
Christian  and  not  tell  it.    False  friends  may  try  to 
persuade  you  of  the  same  thing,  but  He,  not  one  word 
of  whose  shall  ever  fail,  says,  "Whosoever  shall  be 
ashamed  of  me,  and  of  my  words,  of  him  also  shall  the 
Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  when  He  cometh  in  the  glory 
of  His  father  with  the  holy  angels."     Your  opinion 
will  pass  away;  your  friends'  false  arguments  shall 
pass  away,  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but 
Christ's  words  shall  not  pass  away. 


II 


WHEREIN  THE  BIBLE  DIFFERS  FROM  ALL 
OTHER  BOOKS 

Sermon  to  the  graduating  class  of  Bible  Institute  of 
Los  Angeles,  June  25,  1916. 

"The  prophet  that  hath  a  dream,  let  him  tell  a 
dream;  and  he  that  hath  my  word,  let  him  speak  my 
word  faithfully.  What  is  the  straw  to  the  wheat  f 
saith  the  LORD."—Jer.  23:28  R.V. 

THE  Bible  stands  absolutely  alone.  It  is  an  en 
tirely  unique  book.  All  other  messages  com 
pared  with  the  message  of  the  Bible  are  as 
chaff  as  compared  with  wheat.  The  attempt  to  com 
pare  the  Bible  with  other  books  as  if  it  were  one  of  a 
class,  possibly  the  best  of  the  class,  arises  either  from 
ignorance  or  thoughtlessness,  or  else  from  the  fixed 
determination  to  do  the  Bible  an  injustice.  We  shall 
see  this  morning  that  there  is  none  like  it.  The  Bible 
is  not  a  book,  it  is  the  Book.  It  is  an  often  repeated 
incident  that  Sir  Walter  Scott,  when  he  was  dying 
asked  his  son-in-law  Lockhart  to  read  to  him,  and  that 
Lockhart  asked,  "What  book  shall  I  read?"  to  which 
Sir  Walter  Scott  replied,  "There  is  but  one  book." 
Beyond  a  question  Sir  Walter  Scott  was  right.  But 

20 


WHEREIN  THE  BIBLE  DIFFERS  21 

some  one  may  challenge  that  statement  that  the  Bible 
stands  absolutely  alone  as  an  entirely  unique  book. 
Anyone  has  a  perfect  right  to  challenge  the  statement 
and  demand  wherein  the  Bible  differs  from  all  other 
books,  and  this  morning  I  propose  to  take  up  the  chal 
lenge  and  answer  the  question. 

I.  IN  ITS  DEPTH. 

First  of  all  the  Bible  differs  from  all  other  books  in 
its  depth.  The  Bible  is  unfathomable  and  inexhaust 
ible.  It  is  unfathomable  not  because  of  the  obscurity 
of  its  style,  but  because  of  the  profundity  of  its  teach 
ing.  No  other  book  is  more  simple  in  its  style  than  the 
Bible.  Its  style  is  so  simple  and  clear  that  a  child 
can  understand  it,  but  its  truth  is  so  profound  that  we 
explore  the  Book  from  childhood  to  old  age  and  can 
never  say  we  have  reached  the  bottom.  However 
deep  we  may  go  there  are  always  deeper  depths  be 
neath.  For  eighteen  centuries  many  of  the  greatest 
minds  the  world  has  ever  known  have  been  sounding 
its  depths,  but  the  bottom  is  not  yet  reached.  Men  of 
the  greatest  possible  intellectual  reach  and  power  have 
devoted  a  lifetime  to  the  study  of  this  book,  but  what 
man  has  ever  dared  to  say  or  dreamed  of  saying,  "I 
know  now  all  that  the  Bible  contains."  If  any  man 
should  say  that  he  would  be  unanimously  voted  a  sub 
lime  egotist  or  an  egregious  simpleton.  Whole  genera 
tions  of  scholars  have  devoted  their  lives  to  the  study 
of  this  book,  each  generation  having  the  advantage  of 
the  labours  and  researches  and  discoveries  of  preceding 
generations,  but  can  even  the  latest  generation  say, 
1 1  we  have  discovered  it  all  now,  there  is  nothing  left  in 


22  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

the  Bible  for  the  next  generation  to  discover"?  The 
whole  human  race  has  been  unable  not  only  to  exhaust, 
but  even  to  fathom  this  book.  Well  may  we  exclaim 
with  the  Psalmist,  ' '  Thy  judgments  are  a  great  deep ' ' 
(Ps.  36:6).  The  judgments  of  God,  God's  thoughts 
as  revealed  in  this  book,  are  beyond  any  man  and  be 
yond  any  generation  of  men.  They  are  beyond  the 
whole  race.  This  Book,  like  God's  other  book,  the 
book  of  nature,  and  unlike  any  book  of  man,  is  un 
fathomable  and  inexhaustible  by  men.  This  fact,  if 
it  stood  alone  would  be  sufficient  proof  of  its  Divine 
origin. 

1.  There  are  whole  volumes  of  meaning  in  a  single 
and  apparently  simple  verse.    A  single  verse  of  Scrip 
ture  has  often  formed  the  basis  upon  which  a  literature 
of  many  volumes,  both  of  prose  and  poetry,  has  been 
erected.    This  is  true,  for  example,  of  John  3 : 16,  "For 
God  so  loved  the  world,  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten 
Son,   that  whosoever  believeth   in   Him  should   not 
perish  but  have  everlasting  life."    It  is  true  of  1  John 
4:8,"  God  is  love. "    It  is  true  of  Ps.  23 : 1, ' '  The  Lord 
is  my  shepherd;  I  shall  not  want."     What  single 
utterance  of  any  other  book  could  be  the  foundation 
of  so  much  thought  and  expression  as  these  utterances 
of  the  Bible.    Who  but  God  could  pack  so  many  vol 
umes  into  one  little  verse,  or  part  of  a  verse  ? 

2.  The  Bible  is  always  ahead  of  man.    The  world  is 
certainly  making  progress  in  its  thinking.    It  is  con 
stantly  leaving  behind  the  scientists,  philosophers,  and 
sages  of  the  past.  But  the  world  never  leaves  the  Bible 
behind.   It  has  never  caught  up  with  it.    Show  me  a 
man  who  says  he  has  outgrown  the  Bible  and  I  will 


WHEREIN  THE  BIBLE  DIFFERS  23 

show  you  a  man  every  time  who  is  ignorant  of  the 
Bible  and  is  talking  of  what  he  knows  nothing  about. 
Whence  comes  this  Book  which  is  always  ahead  of  the 
age? 

"What  other  book  ought  to  command  the  attention, 
the  time,  and  the  study  that  this  book  does,  which  is 
deeper  than  all  other  books,  ahead  of  all  other  books, 
and  ahead  of  every  age.  You  study  to-day  the  latest 
things  in  science  and  it  will  be  out  of  date  in  less  than 
ten  years,  but  the  Bible  is  never  out  of  date.  It  is  not 
only  up  to  date,  but  ahead  of  date.  If  you  wish  to  be 
not  only  abreast  of  the  times,  but  ahead  of  the  times, 
study  the  Bible.  Jesus  was  ahead  of  His  times  be 
cause  He  studied  so  much  of  the  Bible  as  then  existed. 
Paul  was  ahead  of  his  times  for  the  same  reason.  Huss, 
and  Wycliff,  and  Luther,  and  John  Knox,  and  Wes 
ley,  and  Finney,  and  Moody  were  ahead  of  their  times 
simply  because  they  sought  their  wisdom  from  this 
book. 

II.  IN  THE  ABSOLUTE  ACCURACY  OF  ITS  STATEMENTS. 

The  Bible  differs  from  other  books  in  the  second 
place  in  the  absolute  accuracy  of  its  statements.  The 
Bible  is  the  only  book  that  always  says  all  that  it 
means  to  say  and  never  says  anything  more  than  it 
means  to  say.  The  more  rigidly  one  examines  the 
Bible  and  the  more  closely  he  studies  it,  the  more  will 
he  be  filled  with  admiration  for  the  accuracy  with 
which  it  expresses  the  truth.  It  never  overstates,  it 
never  understates  the  truth.  There  is  not  one  word. too 
many  and  not  one  word  too  few.  It  is  the  model  wit 
ness:  it  tells  "the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing 


24  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

but  the  truth."  A  very  large  part  of  man's  difficulties 
with  the  Bible  comes  from  not  noting  exactly  what  it 
says.  Time  and  time  again  men  have  come  to  me 
and  said,  "I  cannot  believe  this  which  the  Bible 
says/7  and  then  have  quoted  something  which  they 
supposed  the  Bible  said.  But  I  have  replied,  "the 
Bible  does  not  say  that, ' '  and  when  we  have  looked  it 
up,  lo,  it  is  some  minute  modification  of  what  the 
Bible  really  says  that  has  given  rise  to  the  difficulty. 
The  Bible  is  always  so  absolutely  exact,  that  I  have 
found  the  best  solution  for  very  many  apparent  dif 
ficulties  in  the  Bible  to  be  to  take  the  difficult  verses 
precisely  as  they  read. 

III.  IN  ITS  POWER. 

In  the  third  place  the  Bible  differs  from  all  other 
books  in  its  power.  There  is  perhaps  no  other  place 
where  the  supremacy  and  solitariness  of  the  Bible 
shines  out  as  in  its  power.  Col.  Ingersoll  once  said  in 
Chicago  that  the  money  expended  in  teaching  the 
supernatural  religion  of  the  Bible  was  wasted,  and 
advised  the  ministers  to  "take  for  a  series  of  sermons 
the  history  of  the  philosophy,  of  the  art,  and  the  gen 
ius  of  the  Greeks.  Let  him  tell,"  he  continued,  "of 
the  wondrous  metaphysics,  myths,  and  religions  of 
India  and  Egypt.  Let  him  make  his  congregation  con 
versant  with  the  philosophies  of  the  world,  with  the 
great  thinkers,  the  great  poets,  the  great  artists,  the 
great  inventors,  the  captains  of  industry,  and  the 
soldiers  of  progress."  This  suggested  scheme  of  Col. 
Ingersoll 's  was  no  new  scheme,  it  has  been  tried  over 
and  over  again,  and  I  challenge  any  man  who  has 


WHEREIN  THE  BIBLE  DIFFERS  25 

eyes  and  is  honest  to  say  that  the  pulpits  that  have 
tried  it  have  the  power  to  elevate,  save  and  gladden, 
that  the  pulpits  have  that  preach  the  supernatural 
religion  of  the  old  Bible.  The  man  who  thus  talks  is 
either  talking  about  something  of  which  he  has  made 
no  thorough  and  candid  study,  or  else  he  is  delib 
erately  shutting  his  eyes  to  very  evident  facts.  In 
either  case  he  is  playing  the  hypocrite  in  posing  as  a 
teacher. 

In  what  directions  does  the  Bible  show  a  power  that 
no  other  book  or  books  possess  ? 

1.  First  of  all,  in  its  saving  power.  Does  it  need 
any  proof  that  the  Bible  has  a  saving  power  that  no 
other  book  possesses,  and  that  all  other  books  together 
do  not  possess? 

a.  The  Bible  has  a  unique  saving  power  in  individ 
ual  lives.  What  book  or  books  can  match  the  Bible's 
record  of  men  and  women  saved  from  sin  and  vice  in 
all  their  forms,  saved  from  drunkenness,  drugs,  lust, 
greed,  ruffianism,  barbarism,  meanness,  selfishness,  by 
the  power  of  this  Book?  Worthless  sots  transformed 
into  honest  citizens  and  fathers ;  degraded  prostitutes 
transformed  into  holy  women  of  God;  savages  who 
drank  blood  from  human  skulls  transformed  into  noble 
lovers  of  friends  and  foes ;  murderers  transformed  into 
ministering  angels.  Single  verses  of  this  book  have 
more  saving  power  than  all  other  books  put  together. 
John  3:16  has  saved  more  men  from  sin  to  holiness, 
from  degradation  to  honour,  from  bondage  to  the 
Devil  to  sonship  of  God,  than  all  books  outside  of  the 
Bible.  Try  and  account  for  it  as  you  may,  the  fact 
stands  and  does  not  admit  of  a  moment's  honest 
denial  or  question. 


26  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

b.  But  the  saving  power  of  the  Bible  is  not  limited 
to  the  lives  of  individuals.  It  has  saving  power  in 
national  life.  Try  to  obscure  the  fact  as  you  may,  all 
that  is  best  in  America,  Germany,  and  England  is  due 
to  this  Book,  and  in  our  own  day  nations  have  been 
lifted  out  of  savagery  into  Christian  civilization  by 
this  book.  If  this  Book  had  been  heeded  the  awful 
cataclysm  of  war  that  is  devastating  Germany,  France 
and  England  to-day  would  have  been  avoided.  The 
undermining  of  faith  in  this  Book  is  the  real  cause 
of  the  present  murderous  war  with  all  its  unspeakable 
and  immeasurable  calamities,  atrocities  and  horrors. 

2.  But  the  Bible  has  not  only  a  saving  power  that 
no  other  book  possesses,  it  has  also  a  comforting  power 
that  no  other  book  possesses.    What  book  like  this  can 
stay  the  human  heart  in  sickness  and  adversity,  and 
comfort  it  in  the  bereavement  that  takes  from  us  the 
light  of  our  eyes  and  the  joy  of  our  homes.    There  is 
no  heart  wound  for  which  the  Bible  has  not  a  balsam. 
I  hold  in  my  hand  a  New  Testament  that  is  very 
precious  to  me  because  it  was  the  gift  of  my  mother 
to  my  grandmother,  my  father's  mother,  which  was 
the  stay  of  her  life  in  her  closing  years.    On  the  title- 
page  of  his  Bible  is  written  in  my  mother's  hand, 
"Earth  has   no   sorrow  that   heaven  cannot   heal." 
This  is  true,  but  thank  God  something  better  is  true, 
and  that  is,  earth  has  no  sorrows  that  the  Bible  can 
not  heal  even  in  the  life  that  now  is. 

3.  Furthermore,  the  Bible  has  a  joy-giving  power 
no  other  book  possesses.     There  is  no  other  joy  so 
great,  so  exceeding,  so  overflowing,  and  so  enduring 
as  those  know  who  study  and  discover  the  truth  con 
tained  in  this  Book.     This  is  a  fact  that  any  of  you 


WHEREIN  THE  BIBLE  DIFFERS  27 

can  discover  by  observation,  and  better  yet,  that  all 
of  you  can  know  if  you  will  by  blessed  experience. 
There  are  many  who  have  sought  joy  wherever  it  was 
to  be  found,  in  pleasure,  in  study,  and  in  sin,  and 
have  at  last  found  a  joy  in  the  Bible  they  found  no 
where  else.  There  is  a  countless  multitude  who  have 
been  lifted  out  of  awful  depths  of  despair  into  lofty 
heights  of  unutterable  joy  by  the  truths  this  Book 
contains,  and  the  speaker  of  this  morning  is  one  of 
them. 

4.  The  Bible  has  a  wisdom-giving  power  that  no 
other  book  possesses.     "The  entrance  of  thy  words 
giveth  light."  (Ps.  119 : 130.)    I  have  known  people  of 
very  meagre  educational  advantages  but  who  have 
studied  the  Bible,  who  have  more  wisdom  in  the  things 
of  greatest  practical  and  eternal  import  than  many 
very  learned  men  who  have  neglected  this  Book  of 
matchless  wisdom. 

5.  The  Bible  has  a  courage-giving  power  no  other 
book  possesses.    No  other  book  has  made  so  many  and 
such  peerless  heroes,  it  has  made  them  too  out  of  most 
unpromising  stuff.    It  has  transformed  beardless  boys 
and  tender  maidens  into  heroes. 

6.  The  Bible  has  a  power  to  inspire  activity  that 
no  other  book  possesses.     It  makes  lazy  men  indus 
trious;  half  alive  men  fully  alive.    There  are  said  to 
be  but  two  things  of  which  a  professional  tramp  is 
afraid,  water  and  work,  but  I  have  seen  the  very 
tramp  from  whom  I  got  this  information  transformed 
into  a  man  of  untiring  industry  by  the  matchless 
teaching  of  this  Book. 


28  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

IV.  IN  ITS  UNIVERSAL  ADAPTABILITY. 
The  Bible  differs  from  all  other  books  in  its  uni 
versal  adaptability.    Other  books  fit  certain  classes  or 
certain  types,  or  certain  races  of  men,  but  the  Bible 
fits  men  universally. 

1.  It  fits  all  nations.    No  nation  has  ever  been  dis 
covered  that  the  Bible  does  not  fit.    Charles  Darwin, 
the  greatest  naturalist  of  his  day,  thought  he  had  dis 
covered  in  the  Terra  del  Fuegans  a  people  the  Bible 
would  not  fit,  and  frankly  stated  that  missionary  work 
among  them  would  be  in  vain.    His  exact  words  writ 
ten  after  his  visit  to  Patagonia  were,  '  *  Nothing  can  be 
done  by  mission  work ;  all  the  pains  bestowed  upon  the 
natives  will  be  thrown  away,  they  never  can  be  civi 
lized."    But  more  humble  believers  in  the  universal 
adaptation  of  the  Bible  and  the  gospel  it  contains 
thought  differently,  and  proved  their  faith  and  so 
thoroughly  convinced  Charles  Darwin  by  facts  of  his 
mistake,  that  he  became  a  regular  subscriber  to  the 
funds  of  the  society  they  represented. 

2.  The  Bible  not  only  fits  all  nations,  but  it  fits  all 
ages.    It  is  the  child's  book,  the  young  man's  book,  the 
book  of  the  middle-aged,  and  the  book  of  the  old. 

3.  -The  Bible  fits  all  classes.    It  fits  the  poor  and  it 
fits  the  rich.    It  fits  the  palace  and  it  fits  the  garret. 
It  fits  the  learned  and  it  fits  the  ignorant.    It  fits  the 
nobleman  and  it  fits  the  peasant.     It  fits  Gladstone, 
and  James  D.  Dana,  and  Eomanes,  and  Neander,  and 
it  fits  the  man  so  illiterate  that  he  can  scarce  spell  out 
its  words. 

4.  The  Bible  fits  all  experiences.    It  is  the  book  for 
the  hour  of  gladness,  and  the  book  for  the  hour  of 
sadness ;  the  book  for  the  day  of  victory,  and  the  book 


WHEREIN  THE  BIBLE  DIFFERS  29 

for  the  day  of  defeat ;  the  book  for  the  day  in  which 
we  have  achieved  the  greatest  moral  triumph,  and 
for  the  day  when  we  have  fallen  deepest  into  sin ;  the 
book  for  the  day  of  clearest  faith,  and  the  book  for  the 
day  of  darkest  doubt ;  the  book  for  the  wedding  day 
and  the  book  for  the  day  of  funerals.  There  is  not 
an  experience  in  life  wherein  the  Bible  does  not  have 
the  message  which  we  most  need.  To  that  fact  there 
are  tens  of  thousands  of  people  of  all  classes  in  many 
nations  ready  to  testify.  The  testimony  is  from  such 
a  host  of  witnesses  and  such  competent  witnesses  that 
the  only  one  who  can  doubt  it  is  the  man  who  is  bound 
he  won't  believe. 

V.  IN  ITS  HISTORY. 

The  Bible   differs  from   every   other  book  in  its 
history. 

1.  The  Bible  lias  been  hated  as  no  other  book.  No 
book  has  ever  aroused  the  animosity  of  men  of  all 
classes  as  the  Bible  has.  The  Bible  has  been  hated  by 
rich  men  and  it  has  been  hated  by  poor  men.  It  has 
been  hated  by  the  scholar  and  it  has  been  hated  by  the 
fool.  It  has  been  hated  by  common  people  and  it  has 
been  hated  by  rulers,  governors,  and  kings.  No^  other 
book  has  so  aroused  the  bitterest  antagonism.  Men 
of  seeming  moderation  and  kindness  of  heart  have  been 
aroused  to  such  a  pitch  of  hatred  by  the  Bible  that 
they  became  murderers  and  torturers  of  men,  women, 
and  children;  for  example,  Marcus  Aurelius  Antoni 
nus.  Even  in  our  own  day  kind  fathers  and  tender 
husbands  have  been  moved  by  hatred  of  this  Book  to 
brutal  treatment  of  children  and  of  wives  who  have 
been  led  to  accept  the  truth  it  contains. 


30  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

2.  It  has  been  loved  as  no  other  book.    If  it  has  been 
intensely  hated  it  has  still  more  been  intensely  loved, 
loved  by  all  classes,  loved  by  the  rich  and  loved  by  the 
poor ;  loved  by  the  illiterate  and  loved  by  the  greatest 
scholars  the  world  has  ever  known ;  loved  by  men  dig 
ging  in  the  ditch,  and  loved  by  men  ruling  on  a  throne. 
Men,  women  and  tender  children  have  gladly  laid 
down  their  lives  for  this  Book. 

3.  It  has  been  victorious  as  no  other  book.    Though 
the  Bible  has  been  so  bitterly  hated  and  so  vigorously 
assaulted,  it  has  come  off  a  complete  victor.    Centuries 
of  assault  have  served  only  to  prove  its  indestructibil 
ity  and  confirm  its  power.    Celsus,  Porphyry,  Lucian, 
Diocletian,    Voltaire,    Volney,    Hume,    Tom    Paine, 
Wellhausen,  Graf,  Kiihnen,  Cheyne,  and  an  innumer 
able  host  have  trained  their  mighty  guns  against  this 
Book.     They  have  brought  to  bear  against  it  all  the 
powers  of  science,  philosophy,  literary  criticism,  ridi 
cule,  force,  political  and  military  power,  and  every 
other  form  of  power  that  they  possessed,  and  all  their 
assaults  have  come  to  nothing.     The  Bible  has  come 
off  a  complete  victor  in  every  conflict.     Anyone  who 
will  take  the  pains  to  consult  history  will  have  no 
doubts  as  to  the  outcome  of  the  present  attacks  upon 
the  Bible.    Individuals  of  the  past  have  talked  just  as 
boastingly  of  what  they  would  do  with  the  Bible  in  a 
few  years  as  do  the  individuals  of  to-day,  and  with  far 
more   show   of  reason.     But   their   confident   boasts 
proved  empty  and  futile  and  as  we  recall  them  now 
in  the  light  of  the  established  facts  of  subsequent  his 
tory  they  only  move  us  to  a  pitying  smile.    Voltaire 
is  dead  and  forgotten,  but  the  Bible  is  still  alive  and 
marching  on.    Attacks  on  the  Bible  may  do  injury  to 


WHEREIN  THE  BIBLE  DIFFERS  31 

a  few  weak  individuals,  principally  callow  young  men 
and  romantic  young  maidens  in  high  schools,  colleges 
and  universities,  who  allow  themselves  to  be  thus 
robbed  of  the  saving,  comforting,  joy-giving,  en 
nobling  power  there  is  in  the  Bible,  but  they  do  not 
hurt  the  cause  of  truth,  for  they  but  prove  anew  the 
Divine  indestructibility  of  the  imperishable  Book  of 
God 

VI.  IN  ITS  AUTHORSHIP. 

Finally,  the  Book  differs  from  every  other  book  in 
its  authorship.  Other  books  are  men's  books.  This  is 
God's  Book.  Much  that  has  already  been  said  proves 
this.  Its  inexhaustible  depth  proves  it.  Only  an  in 
finitely  wise  God  can  be  the  author  of  an  inexhaustible 
book.  Its  absolute  accuracy  proves  it.  Men  under 
state  or  overstate:  God  alone  always  states  things 
just  as  they  are.  Its  Divine  power  proves  it.  Only  a 
book  that  comes  down  from  God  can  lift  men  up  to 
God  as  this  Book  does.  Its  universal  adaptability 
proves  it.  Only  the  Creator  of  all  men  can  make  a 
book  that  is  fitted  to  all  men  and  every  need  of  these 
men.  Its  history  proves  it.  Only  God  can  make  a 
book  so  indestructible  against  assault,  against  human 
reasoning,  and  human  philosophy  as  this.  An  omnip 
otent  book  must  have  an  omnipotent  author.  There 
are  many  other  facts  about  this  Book  that  prove  its 
Divine  authorship,  but  these  are  enough.  There  is 
evidently  a  certain  Infinite  character  about  this  Book 
that  points  unmistakably  to  the  Infinite  character  of 
its  author.  What  this  Book  says  God  says,  and  who 
ever  speaks  according  to  this  Book  speaks  the  message 
of  God  and  God  speaks  through  him.  He  is  God's 
mouthpiece. 


Ill 

IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER? 

"Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  words 
shall  not  pass  away." — Matt.  24: 35. 

SOME  weeks  ago  I  preached  on  this  same  text, 
but  we  are  going  to  approach  it  to-night  from 
a  different  standpoint.  The  question  before 
us  is,  is  the  Bible  in  danger  ?  Our  text  asserts  that  it 
is  not,  and  I  propose  to  show  you  to-night  some  reasons 
why  the  Bible  certainly  is  not  in  danger.  There  are 
two  classes  who  think  that  the  Bible  is  in  danger: 
first,  there  are  those  who  think  it  is  in  danger  because 
they  are  glad  to  think  so,  because  it  gives  their  con 
sciences  some  little  consolation  in  a  life  of  sin  to  think 
that  the  Bible  will  not  stand.  But  there  is  another  class 
who  fear  the  Bible  is  in  danger,  and  it  is  with  great 
reluctance  that  they  think  that  it  is;  they  love  the 
Bible,  they  would  be  glad  to  believe  the  Bible,  but  they 
are  afraid  the  old  book  must  go.  Let  us  then  honestly 
face  the  question,  Is  the  Bible  in  danger?  I  shall 
prove  to  a  demonstration  that  it  is  not  in  danger.  I 
will  not  deny  that  the  Bible  has  enemies,  and  most 
able  enemies,  most  persistent  enemies.  Eighteen  years 
ago  when  Col.  Ingersoll  suddenly  died  there  were 
many  who  breathed  a  sigh  of  relief,  for  they  thought 
that  the  most  dangerous  enemy  of  the  Bible  was  gone. 

32 


IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER?  33 

But  Col.  Ingersoll  was  not  the  most  dangerous  enemy 
of  the  Bible.  There  were  more  dangerous  enemies  of 
the  Bible  even  during  his  lifetime  than  he  himself  was, 
and  there  are  far  more  dangerous  enemies  of  the  Bible 
than  he  to-day.  They  are  more  dangerous  because  they 
do  not  make  the  mistake  that  he  made  of  thinking  that 
the  world  would  accept  caricature  for  argument,  and 
ridicule  for  reason,  and  rhetoric  for  logic.  They  are 
more  dangerous  also  because  they  do  not  come  out  into 
the  open,  as  he  did,  and  frankly  avow  themselves  to 
be  infidels.  They  claim,  in  some  sense,  to  believe  in  the 
Bible,  but  all  the  while  that  they  claim  to  believe  in  it 
they  are  seeking,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  to  un 
dermine  the  faith  of  others  in  the  absolute  inerrancy 
and  authority  of  the  Bible.  The  most  dangerous  ene 
mies  of  the  Bible  to-day  are  the  college  professors  and 
principals  of  high  schools,  and  even  theological  profes 
sors  who,  while  they  claim  to  be  endeavoring  to  estab 
lish  faith  upon  a  broader  and  therefore  better  basis, 
are  all  the  time  attempting  to  show  that  the  Bible  is 
full  of  errors  and  not  in  accord  with  the  assured  re 
sults  of  modern  science  and  history.  These  enemies  are 
legion,  they  are  found  practically  everywhere,  many 
of  them  are  able  men,  and  they  have  formulated  a  skil 
fully  planned  campaign  against  the  Bible.  Neverthe 
less  the  Bible  is  in  no  danger.  There  are  six  reasons 
why  the  Bible  is  not  in  danger. 

1.  BECAUSE  THE  BIBLE  HAS  ALREADY  SURVIVED  THE 
ATTACKS  OF  MORE  THAN  1800  YEARS. 

The  attacks  now  being  made  upon  the  Bible  are  not 
something  new.    The  Bible  has  always  been  hated  and 


34  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

assaulted.  The  Bible's  stern  denunciation  of  sin,  the 
Bible's  uncompromising  demand  of  a  holy,  unselfish, 
consecrated  life,  the  Bible 's  merciless  laying  of  human 
pride  in  the  dust,  have  aroused  for  the  Bible  a  more 
bitter  hatred  from  men  than  any  other  book  has  ever 
met.  No  sooner  was  the  Bible  given  to  the  world  than 
it  met  the  hatred  of  men  and  they  tried  to  stamp  it 
out  by  every  method  and  instrument  of  destruction 
they  could  bring  to  bear  against  it.  The  arguments 
that  are  brought  against  the  Bible  to-day  are  not  new 
arguments,  all  of  them  were  met  and  answered  long 
ago.  I  am  not  aware  of  one  single  new  argument  that 
has  been  brought  forward  against  the  Bible  in  the  last 
ten  years.  The  antagonists  of  the  Bible  have  tricked 
out  the  old  arguments  in  new  and  more  attractive 
garments,  but  they  are  the  same  old  arguments.  The 
arguments  brought  forward  by  the  most  learned  and 
most  able  enemies  of  the  book  to-day  are  the  very  ar 
guments  that  have  been  employed  for  more  than  a 
century.  If  anyone  will  take  the  trouble  to  read  Tom 
Paine 's  Age  of  Reason,  he  will  be  amazed  to  dis 
cover  how  many  of  the  positions  which  men  persist 
in  calling  ' '  the  new  views ' '  of  the  Bible  were  exploited 
by  Tom  Paine  in  his  Age  of  Reason  more  than  a  cen 
tury  ago.  Dr.  Howard  Osgood,  a  great  scholar,  in  a 
discussion  with  the  destructive  critics  some  years  ago, 
read  a  statement  of  the  positions  of  the  destructive 
critics  as  he  understood  them,  and  then  turned  to 
President  Harper  and  inquired  if  the  statements  that 
he  had  read  were  not  fair  statements  of  the  positions 
they  held.  President  Harper  replied  that  they  were, 
and  then  Prof.  Osgood  startled  his  auditors,  and  espec 
ially  his  opponents,  by  saying,  "In  this  statement  that 


IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER?  35 

I  have  just  read  of  your  position,  I  have  been  reading 
verbatim  from  Tom  Paine 's  Age  of  Reason."  With 
all  the  researches  and  all  the  laboured  efforts  to  find 
something  against  the  Bible,  not  one  single  new  argu 
ment  has  been  forged  in  the  last  twenty  years.  There 
have  been  times  in  the  past  when  the  Bible  has  seemed 
to  be  in  more  peril  than  to-day,  but  when  the  storm  of 
battle  was  over  and  the  smoke  of  conflict  had  cleared 
away  from  the  battlefield,  this  old,  impregnable  citadel 
of  God's  eternal  truth  has  been  seen  standing  there 
absolutely  unhurt  and  unscarred,  and  the  battle  has 
only  served  to  illustrate  how  impregnable  is  the  cita 
del.  Those  who  fancy  that  they  are  going  to  destroy 
the  Bible  with  their  puny  weapons,  and  those  also  who 
fear  it  is  going  to  be  destroyed,  would  do  well  to  re 
flect  upon  its  history.  The  Book  that  has  so  trium 
phantly  withstood  the  terrific  assaults  of  eighteen  cen 
turies  is  not  likely  to  succumb  in  a  day.  Voltaire,  a 
far  more  gifted,  versatile  and  skilful  enemy  of  Chris 
tianity  than  any  enemy  living  to-day,  once  boasted, 
"It  took  twelve  men  to  establish  Christianity.  I  will 
show  the  world  it  takes  but  one  to  destroy  it."  But 
somehow  or  other  it  did  not  destroy  as  easily  as  he 
imagined  it  would.  Voltaire  has  passed  into  history, 
and  largely  into  oblivion,  and  he  will  soon  pass  into 
utter  oblivion,  but  the  Bible  has  gained  in  power,  and 
the  very  room  in  which  Voltaire  wrote  the  words 
quoted  has  been  packed  from  floor  to  ceiling  with 
Bibles  for  distribution,  owned  by  the  British  and 
Foreign  Bible  Society.  The  advance  of  research  from 
excavations  in  Bible  lands,  the  advance  of  historical 
investigation,  and  the  advance  of  science,  have  all 
served  to  confirm  the  truthfulness  of  the  Bible.  For 


36  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

example,  the  unearthing  and  deciphering  of  the  cunei 
form  inscriptions,  and  the  Moabite  stone  have  shown 
the  truth  of  Bible  statements  that  were  once  ques 
tioned  by  scholars.  As  another  illustration,  not  so 
many  years  ago  ridicule  was  heaped  upon  the  Bible 
implication  of  the  existence  of  a  great  Hittite  people. 
The  investigations  of  comparatively  recent  years  have 
proven  the  Bible  right,  and  the  critics  utterly  wrong. 
The  sceptics  of  my  early  years  made  merry  over  the 
Bible  mention  of  light  before  there  was  a  sun,  but 
to-day  every  man  of  science  knows  that  according  to 
the  generally  accepted  nebular  hypothesis  there  was 
light,  cosmic  light,  before  the  sun  became  a  separate 
body,  and  he  also  knows  that  even  after  the  sun  had 
become  a  separate  body  and  the  earth  had  been  thrown 
off  from  the  sun  and  the  moon  from  the  earth,  that 
such  dense  clouds  surrounded  the  earth  for  a  long 
period  of  time  that  no  light  either  from  the  sun  or 
moon  could  reach  the  earth,  and  that  afterwards  the 
clouds  became  thin  and  dissipated  and  then,  and  only 
then,  in  that  day,  or  period,  of  the  earth's  history  did 
the  sun  and  moon  appear  as  definite  heavenly  bodies, 
giving  light  upon  the  earth  by  day  or  night.  A  very 
few  years  ago  the  destructive  critics  ridiculed  the  14th 
chapter  of  Genesis  and  its  mention  of  Amraphel,  whom 
they  asserted  was  an  altogether  mythical  character, 
and  many  of  them  asserted  that  Abraham  himself  was 
a  mythical  character,  but  inscriptions  made  by  this 
very  Amraphel,  or  to  use  the  modern  name  Hammu- 
rabbai,  have  been  discovered,  and  a  code  of  laws  issued 
by  him  has  been  found,  a  code  of  a  very  lofty  char 
acter,  and  now  instead  of  sneering  at  Amraphel  as  a 
mythical  character,  the  critics  are  trying  to  make  us 


IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER?  37 

believe  that  Moses  derived  his  legislation  from  him. 
The  greatest  scientist  that  America  produced  in  the 
nineteenth  century,  my  friend  and  beloved  instructor 
in  geology,  Prof.  James  D.  Dana,  said,  "The  grand 
old  book  of  God  still  stands;  and  this  old  earth  the 
more  its  leaves  are  turned  and  pondered,  the  more 
will  it  sustain  and  illustrate  the  sacred  word."  Eigh 
teen  centuries  of  triumphant  history  and  eighteen  cen 
turies  of  accumulating  confirmation  show  that  the 
Bible  is  not  in  any  peril. 

II.  THE  BIBLE  is  NOT  IN  DANGER  BECAUSE  IT  MEETS 
AND  SATISFIES  THE  DEEPEST  NEEDS  OP  MAN  IN  EVERY 
GENERATION. 

Arthur  Hallam  said,  "I  see  that  the  Bible  fits  into 
every  fold  and  crevice  of  the  human  heart. "  This  is 
true,  but  more  than  this  is  true.  The  Bible  has  an 
answer  to  every  cry  of  the  human  souL  a  balm  for 
every  wound  of  the  human  heart,  a  supply  for  every 
need  of  man.  What  are  the  deeper  needs  of  man? 

1.  First  of  all,  the  need  of  pardon  and  peace.  We 
are  all  sinners.  We  may  try  to  dispute  or  obscure  that 
fact,  but  we  all  know  it  is  true.  The  Christian 
Scientist  may  assert  that  there  is  really  no  such  thing 
as  sin,  that  sin  is  only  "mortal  thought,"  or  "illu 
sion,"  and  yet  the  Christian  Scientist  himself  shows 
that  he  really  believes  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  sin 
by  his  holding  other  men  responsible  for  their  wrong 
acts.  New  theologians  of  the  Reginald  Campbell  type 
may  assert  that  the  supposed  fall  of  man  was  a  fall 
upward,  and  that  even  man  when  he  gets  drunk  or 
goes  into  lust  is  seeking  after  God,  but  in  our  deeper 


38  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

moments  we  all  know  that  this  is  utter  nonsense.  In 
our  deepest  moments  we  all  know  we  are  not  right  and, 
though  we  may  try  to  question  it,  we  also  fear  that 
there  is  a  holy  God  to  whom  we  shall  have  to  give 
answer  for  this  sinful  life  of  ours,  and  even  if  there 
is  not  such  a  holy  God  we  know  we  shall  have  to  give 
answer  to  our  own  consciences,  which,  like  Banquo's 
ghost,  will  not  down.  Man  is  a  sinner.  Every  man  is 
a  sinner.  The  great  question  then  is,  is  there  any  place 
where  pardon  from  God  and  peace  in  our  own  con 
sciences  can  be  found?  The  Bible  answers  this  all- 
important  question.  It  tells  us  that  pardon  and  peace 
can  be  found  in  Jesus  Christ  through  His  atoning 
blood,  and  when  we  seek  pardon  and  peace  in  Him  we 
find  that  what  the  Bible  says  on  this  point  is  true. 
There  are  many  on  every  hand  who  can  testify  that 
they  have  found  pardon  and  peace  in  Jesus  Christ  to 
whom  the  Bible  pointed  them.  Years  ago  in  Chicago 
a  woman  came  to  me  who  had  been  in  a  very  real  hell 
for  fourteen  years.  For  fourteen  years  conscience  had 
tormented  her  with  the  thought  of  the  man  into  whose 
throat  she  had  driven  a  dagger  and  killed  him.  Often 
times  in  her  agony  she  had  gone  down  to  Lake  Michi 
gan  by  night  and  thought  of  plunging  into  its  dark 
waters  to  drown  herself  and  thus  be  free  from  her 
accusing  conscience,  but  she  hesitated  to  do  it  for  fear 
of  the  awakening  that  might  lie  beyond  death.  I 
pointed  her  to  Isa.  53 :  6  and  she  found  pardon  and 
perfect  peace  through  the  One  who  had  borne  in  her 
place  the  murder  she  had  committed.  The  last  three 
days  of  week  before  last  and  the  first  two  days  of  last 
week  I  was  in  Chicago  again.  The  first  day  I  was  there 
this  woman  came  to  me  with  a  smiling  face  and  told 


IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER?  39 

we  how  happy  she  was  in  Christ,  and  time  and  again 
she  came  to  me  at  the  close  of  some  of  the  meetings, 
telling  me  how  God  was  using  even  her  in  service  for 
Him.  This  book  has  saved  many  a  conscience-tortured 
one  from  suicide  and  despair. 

2.  The  next  need  of  man  is  deliverance  from  sin's 
power.  Men  are  in  the  grip  of  sin,  we  all  know  that. 
They  are  unable  to  break  away  from  the  grip  of  sin. 
It  is  well  enough  to  tell  a  man  to  assert  his  manhood, 
but  it  doesn't  work.  The  very  lecturer  who  tells  men 
that  they  do  not  need  a  Saviour,  Jesus,  to  set  them  free 
from  the  power  of  sin,  that  all  they  need  to  do  is  to 
assert  their  manhood,  has  not  asserted  his  own  man 
hood  and  broken  away  from  sin's  grip.  This  slavery 
of  sin  is  awful ;  the  soul  cries  out,  where  is  deliverance 
to  be  found?  The  cry  of  Paul  in  his  failure  and  de 
feat  is  the  universal  cry  of  the  thoughtful  heart,  ' '  Oh, 
wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  out  of 
the  body  of  this  death?"  (Rom.  7:24).  The  Bible 
answers  the  question  in  John  8 :  36,  ' '  If  the  Son  shall 
make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed. ' '  When  we  try 
it  we  find  it  is  true.  How  many  men  there  are  whom 
we  know  who  have  been  saved  from  lives  of  drunken 
ness  and  sin  by  this  book  ?  How  many  homes  there  are 
in  Los  Angeles  and  throughout  the  land  that  were 
once  poor,  and  dirty,  and  quarrelsome,  that  to-day  are 
clean  and  well  supplied  and  loving  through  the  in 
fluence  of  this  book?  How  many  men  and  women 
have  been  saved  from  lives  of  sin  by  this  book  ?  With 
this,  contrast  infidelity.  Where  is  the  man  who  has 
been  saved  from  drunkenness  by  the  power  of  infi 
delity?  Where  is  the  home  that  was  once  poor  and 
dirty  and  quarrelsome  that  is  to-day  clean  and  well 


40  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

supplied  and  loving  which  has  been  made  so  by  the 
power  of  infidelity  ?  "Where  is  the  sinning  woman  who 
has  been  saved  from  a  life  of  sin  by  infidelity  in  any 
form? 

3.  The  next  need  of  man  is  comfort  in  sorrow.  We 
live  in  a  world  that  is  full  of  sorrow  and  bereavement. 
Families  are  broken  up,  dear  ones  taken  away.  Man 
needs  consolation  as  he  stands  by  the  dying  bed  of  wife 
or  child  or  mother;  he  needs  consolation  as  he  looks 
into  the  grave  into  which  the  dearest  one  of  earth  has 
been  lowered.  Where  can  he  find  consolation  in  such 
an  hour?  In  the  Bible,  and  in  the  Bible  alone.  On 
October  19,  1894,  five  years  after  the  Johnstown  flood, 
I  stood  in  Johnstown  cemetery.  I  looked  upon  the 
graves  of  several  thousand  who  were  in  one  day,  May 
31,  1889,  swept  into  eternity — 816  unknown  ones  lay 
in  a  single  plot.  I  read  the  inscriptions  on  the  tomb 
stones.  What  stories  of  sorrow  they  told.  There  lay 
side  by  side  a  young  mother  and  her  baby  child;  in 
another  place  lay  ' '  father,  34  years ;  Anne,  10  years  ; 
Tommy,  6  years ;  Elmer,  2, ' '  and  the  rest  of  the  family 
were  left  to  mourn.  In  another  place  lay  seven  of  one 
family  side  by  side.  There  was  need  of  consolation  in 
those  days  in  Johnstown.  Was  there  any  place  where 
it  could  be  found?  Yes,  in  the  Bible,  and  in  Jesus 
Christ  of  whom  the  Bible  tells.  On  one  tombstone  I 
read,  "Annie  Llewellyn,  died  May  31, 1889,  five  years, 
three  months,  seventeen  days,  'Safe  in  the  arms  of 
Jesus.'  '  Was  there  any  comfort  in  that  for  those 
parents  as  they  thought  of  their  little  one  caught  by 
the  swirling  flood,  tossed  about  mid  trees  and  crash 
ing  ruins,  buried  at  last  in  the  awful  mass  of  drift  and 
dying  ones  at  the  bridge?  On  the  family  tombstone 


IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER?  41 

mentioned  above  I  read  these  words,  "Be  ye  also 
ready,  for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of 
man  cometh."  (Matt.  24:44).  I  read  not  one  single 
inscription  from  Tom  Paine,  Voltaire,  Col.  Ingersoll, 
or  from  any  infidel  writer  or  speaker,  ancient  or  mod 
ern.  Why  not  ?  Because  there  is  no  comfort  in  them. 
A  few  years  before  his  death  Col.  Ingersoll  wrote 
recommending  suicide  as  the  best  refuge  he  could  sug 
gest  in  great  sorrow  and  failure.  The  Bible  has  some 
thing  immeasurably  better  to  offer. 

4.  Man's  next  need  is  hope  in  the  face  of  death. 
We  must  all  sooner  or  later  stand  face  to  face  with 
death,  then  the  soul  of  man,  unless  it  has  been  burned 
out  by  sin,  cries,  Does  this  end  all,  is  there  no  light  in 
the  grave?     The  Bible  again  meets  and  satisfies  this 
cry.     Col.  Ingersoll  onoe  asked  in  a  lecture  delivered 
in  Chicago,   (October  13,  1894),  "Why  did  not  He 
(Christ)   say  something  positive,  definite  and  satis 
factory  about  another  world?    Why  did  He  not  turn 
the  tear-stained  hope  of  heaven  into  glad  knowledge  of 
another  life  ? ' '    Then  he  answered  his  own  question  in 
this  way :   "I  will  tell  you  why.    He  was  a  man  and 
did  not  know."     The  audacity  of  such  an  answer  to 
an  intelligent  audience  with  an  open  Bible,  is  amazing. 
To  imply  that  Christ  did  not  tell  something  "positive, 
definite,  and  satisfactory  about  another  world."    To 
imply  that  He  did  not  "turn  the  tear-stained  hope  of 
heaven  into  glad  knowledge  of  another  life, ' '  and  then 
try  to  account  for  His  not  doing  so!     Col.  Ingersoll 
must  have  thought  that  his  hearers  either  had  no  Bible 
or  else  would  not  read  it.    Jesus  said  in  John  14 : 1-3, 
"Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled:  believe  in  God,  be 
lieve  also  in  me.     In  my  father's  house  are  many 


42  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

mansions ;  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you ;  for 
I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  And  if  I  go  and 
prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and  will 
receive  you  unto  myself;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye 
may  be  also."  Is  not  that  something  positive,  some 
thing  definite,  something  satisfactory  about  another 
world?  Again  Jesus  says  in  John  11:  25,  26,  "I  am 
the  resurrection,  and  the  life :  he  that  believeth  in  me, 
though  he  were  dead  yet  shall  he  live.  And  whosoever 
liveth,  and  believeth  in  me  shall  never  die."  Is  not 
that  something  positive,  something  definite,  something 
satisfactory  about  another  world?  Again  He  says  in 
John  5 :  28,  29,  * '  The  hour  is  coming,  in  which  all  that 
are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  His  voice,  and  shall  come 
forth,  they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resurrec 
tion  of  life,  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the 
resurrection  of  judgment."  That  certainly  is  plain 
enough,  though  it  is  not  very  satisfactory  to  those  who 
are  living  lives  of  sin.  But  has  the  critical  Colonel 
himself  ever  said  anything  "positive,  definite  and  sat 
isfactory"  about  another  world?  He  had  a  most 
excellent  chance  to  do  so  if  he  had  anything  to  say, 
when  he  stood  beside  the  grave  of  his  own  brother,  but 
his  pathetic  but  hollow  eloquence  on  that  occasion 
served  only  to  illustrate  the  utter  hollowness  and 
emptiness  of  scepticism.  The  Bible  has  given  men 
courage  to  die  bravely  and  triumphantly  in  all  the 
ages  of  its  history.  Infidels  sometimes  die  stolidly  and 
clinch  their  teeth  and  face  it  out,  but  they  never  die 
joyously  and  gloriously. 

We  might  go  on  and  show  other  needs  of  man  that 
the  Bible  meets,  but  enough  has  been  said  to  show  that 
the  Bible  meets  the  deepest  needs  of  man.  As  long 


IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER?  43 

as  man  needs  pardon  and  peace,  as  long  as  man  needs 
deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin,  as  long  as  man 
needs  comfort  in  sorrow,  as  long  as  man  needs  hope  in 
the  face  of  death,  the  Bible  is  not  in  danger.  Man  will 
not  give  up  to  satisfy  any  number  of  keen  satirists 
or  carping  critics  or  plausible  reasoners,  the  book  that 
meets  his  deepest  needs,  that  brings  pardon  and  peace 
instead  of  guilt  and  remorse,  that  brings  liberty,  man 
hood  and  nobility  instead  of  bondage  to  sin,  that 
brings  comfort  in  the  darkest  hours  of  sorrow,  trans 
forming  the  thunder-cloud  into  the  rainbow,  that  in 
spires  man  with  unquenchable  hope  in  the  face  of 
death  and  its  terrors. 

III.  THE  BIBLE  is  NOT  IN  DANGER  BECAUSE  THERE  is 
NOTHING  ELSE  TO  TAKE  THE  PLACE  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

The  Bible  contains  all  the  truth  on  moral  and  spirit 
ual  subjects  that  all  other  books  together  contain.  It 
contains  more  than  all  other  books  put  together,  and 
it  contains  all  this  in  portable  compass.  Not  a  truth 
on  moral  or  spiritual  topics  that  cannot  be  found  for 
substance  within  the  covers  of  this  little  book.  Even 
infidels'  best  thoughts  are  stolen  from  this  book.  For 
example,  Ingersoll  once  said,  "The  doctrine  that 
woman  is  the  slave,  or  serf  of  man — whether  it  comes 
from  hell  or  heaven,  from  God  or  demon,  from  the 
golden  streets  of  the  New  Jerusalem  or  the  very  Sodom 
of  perdition — is  savagery  pure  and  simple/'  This 
statement  is  true,  but  where  did  Col.  Ingersoll  learn 
this  doctrine  of  woman's  equality  with  man?  He 
either  learned  it  from  the  Bible  or  from  some  one  else 
who  had  learned  it  from  the  Bible.  What  is  the  first 


44  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

thing  that  the  Bible  says  about  woman  ?    You  will  find 
it  in  Gen.  2: 18,  "And  the  LORD  God  said,  it  is  not 
good  that  man  should  be  alone;  I  will  make  him  a 
helpmeet  for  him."    Here  in  its  opening  chapters  the 
Bible  proclaims  the  equality  of  woman  with  man. 
It  declares  that  woman  is  not  "the  slave,  or  serf  of 
man, ' '  but  his  companion  and  equal.  Ingersoll  was  all 
right  in  his  doctrine  about  the  equality  of  woman,  but 
he  was  unfortunately  three  thousand  five  hundred 
years  behind  the  book  that  he  sought  to  hold  up  to 
scorn.    Turning  to  the  New  Testament  he  might  have 
read  in  Gal.  3 : 28  the  statement  that  in  Christ  Jesus 
"there  is  neither  male  nor  female."    He  might  have 
read  again  in  Eph.  5 :  25,  "Husbands,  love  your  wives, 
even  as  Christ  also  loved  the  church,  and  gave  Himself 
up  for  it.'7     Certainly  there  is  no  suggestion  there 
that  "woman  is  the  slave  or  serf  of  man."    And  he 
might  have  read  a  few  verses  further  down  in  verses 
28  and  29,  "So  ought  men  to  love  their  wives  as  their 
own  bodies.    He  that  loveth  his  own  wife,  loves  him 
self.    For  no  man  ever  hated  his  own  flesh ;  but  nour- 
isheth  and  cherisheth  it,  even  as  the  Lord  the  church." 
And  then  he  might  have  read  two  verses  still  further 
down,  "For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and 
his  mother,  and  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  two 
shall  be  one  flesh."    All  the  respect  and  honour  and 
love  and  care  bestowed  upon  woman  to-day,  woman 
owes  to  the  Bible.     But  not  only  can  we  find  every 
truth  in  the  Bible  that  we  find  elsewhere,  but  there  is 
more  truth  in  the  Bible  than  al]  other  literature  put 
together,  and  it  is  in  portable  compass.    In  the  lecture 
already  referred  to  Col.  Ingersoll  proposed  to  give  to 
the  world  another  and  better  Bible  in  place  of  this  one, 


IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER?  45 

but  where  is  it?  Listen  to  what  he  says:  "For  thou 
sands  of  years  men  have  been  writing  the  real  Bible, 
and  it  is  being  written  from  day  to  day  and  it  will 
never  be  finished  while  man  has  life. 

1 1  All  the  wisdom  that  lengthens  and  ennobles  life — 
all  that  avoids  or  cures  diseases,  or  conquers  pain — 
all  just  and  perfect  laws  and  rulos  that  guide  and 
shape  our  lives,  all  thoughts  that  feed  the  flames  of 
love,  the  music  that  transfigures,  enraptures,  and  en 
thralls,  the  victories  of  heart  and  brain,  the  miracles 
that  hands  have  wrought,  the  deft  and  cunning  hands 
of  those  who  worked  for  wife  and  child,  the  histories 
of  noble  deeds,  of  brave  and  useful  men,  of  faithful, 
loving  wives,  or  quenchless  mother-love,  of  conflicts 
for  the  right,  of  sufferings  for  the  truth,  of  all  the  best 
that  all  the  men  and  women  of  the  world  have  said 
and  thought  and  done  through  all  the  years. 

"These  treasures  of  the  heart  and  brain — these  are 
the  sacred  scriptures  of  the  human  race." 

That  sounds  pretty,  doesn't  it?  I  challenge  any 
man  to  say  that  that  is  not  a  masterpiece  of  diction. 
But  after  all  it  is  only  rhetoric.  Where  is  this  Bible 
of  which  Ingersoll  spoke?  People  want  a  Bible  that 
they  can  lay  their  hands  on,  that  they  can  make  use 
of,  that  they  can  carry  with  them.  A  poor  man  can 
not  very  well  carry  a  Carnegie  library  in  his  trunk, 
and  it  would  not  do  him  much  good  in  the  great 
emergencies  of  life  if  he  could.  But  here  in  this  book 
we  have  a  Bible  that  a  man  can  carry  in  his  pocket 
wherever  he  goes,  and  in  this  one  small  book  he 
has  more  of  truth  of  eternal  value  than  in  all  the 
libraries  of  the  world.  No,  the  Bible  is  not  in  any 
danger,  for  there  is  nothing  else  to  take  its  place. 


46  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

IV.  THE  BIBLE  is  NOT  IN  DANGER  BECAUSE  IT  HAS 
A  HOLD  THAT  CANNOT  BE  SHAKEN,  ON  THE  CONFI 
DENCE  AND  AFFECTION  OF  THE  WISEST  AND  BEST 
MEN  AND  WOMEN. 

The  Bible  has  the  distrust  and  hatred  of  some,  but 
it  has  the  confidence  and  affection  of  the  wisest,  and 
especially  the  holiest  of  men  and  women.  The  men 
who  know  the  Bible  best  are  the  men  who  trust  it 
most  and  love  it  best.  A  superficial  knowledge  of  the 
Bible,  such  as  Col.  Ingersoll,  for  example,  had,  or  Tom 
Paine  had,  or  that  many  a  college  and  even  theolo 
gical  professor  to-day  has,  may  lead  one  to  distrust  it 
and  hate  it,  but  the  deep  and  thorough  knowledge  of 
that  book  comes  from  a  pure  heart  and  profound  study 
will  always  lead  one  to  love  and  trust  it.  The  Bible 
is  distrusted  and  hated  by  those  whose  influence  dies 
with  them.  The  Bible  is  loved  and  trusted  by  those 
whose  influence  lives  after  them.  Lucian,  Celsus,  and 
Porphyry  were  great  men,  but  their  influence  died 
with  them,  but  the  influence  of  John  and  Paul  lives 
on  in  ever- widening  power.  Voltaire  and  Volney  were 
able  men,  among  the  ablest  men  of  their  day,  but  their 
influence  belongs  wholly  to  the  past,  but  the  influence 
of  Whitfield  and  Wesley  is  greater  to-day  than  when 
they  were  here  on  earth.  Col.  Ingersoll  was  a  man  of 
brilliant  gifts,  but  his  influence  has  not  lived  after 
him.  Indeed  it  is  amazing  how  completely  he  has 
sunken  out  of  sight  in  the  eighteen  years  that  have 
elapsed  since  his  death.  But  the  influence  of  Spur- 
geon  and  Moody  is  with  us  still.  No,  the  Bible  is  not 
in  danger,  for  it  has  the  ever-increasing  confidence  of 
the  best  men  and  women,  of  those  men  and  women 


IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER?  47 

whose  influence  lives  after  them,  and  only  the  dis 
trust  and  hatred  of  those  whose  influence  dies  with 
them. 

V.  THE  BIBLE  is  NOT  IN  DANGER  BECAUSE  IT  is  THE 
WORD  OF  GOD. 

I  have  not  space  to  go  into  that  at  this  time.  Many 
things  prove  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God :  its  ful 
filled  prophecies,  its  unity,  its  Divine  power,  its  in 
exhaustible  depth,  the  fact  that  as  we  grow  in  knowl 
edge  and  holiness — grow  Godward — we  grow  toward 
the  Bible.  Just  a  moment  on  its  fulfilled  prophe 
cies.  Look  at  the  53rd  chapter  of  Isaiah.  This 
chapter  has  been  the  rock  upon  which  infidelity 
has  always  gone  to  pieces.  Men  have  tried  to  get 
around  the  force  of  the  argument  by  the  desperate 
expedient  of  saying  that  the  chapter  does  not  refer  to 
the  Christ  but  to  suffering  Israel,  but  even  one  careful 
reading  of  the  chapter  will  show  that  it  cannot  refer  to 
suffering  Israel.  Look  at  Dan.  9 :  25-27  with  its  pre 
diction  of  the  exact  time  of  the  manifestation  of  the 
Messiah  to  Israel  and  its  prediction  of  His  death  and 
what  would  follow.  '  Look  at  Mic.  5 : 2  and  its  pre 
diction  of  the  very  place  in  which  the  Messiah  should 
be  born.  Right  before  our  own  eyes  in  the  last  two 
years  we  have  seen  predictions  from  the  Bible  fulfilled 
that  men  said  never  could  be  fulfilled.  They  told  us 
that  wars  were  at  an  end  forever,  that  man  had  made 
such  progress  in  his  evolution  that  a  great  war  would 
never  be  possible  again  among  civilized  nations  of  the 
earth,  and  that  the  predictions  of  the  Bible  that 
greater  wars  and  times  of  distress  were  coming  than 


48  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

the  world  had  ever  seen  were  foolish  and  impossible  of 
fulfilment,  but  to-day  we  see  these  prophecies  being 
fulfilled  before  our  very  eyes.  The  other  arguments 
to  prove  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God  I  have 
not  time  to  go  into  at  all,  but  they  are  absolutely 
conclusive.  The  Bible  is  not  in  danger  because  it  is 
God's  book.  "Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away  but 
God's  Word  shall  not  pass  away"  (Matt.  24:25),  or 
to  put  it  as  Peter  puts  it  in  I  Peter  1:  24,  25,  "All 
flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower 
of  grass.  The  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof 
falleth  away:  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  abideth  for- 


VI.  THE  BIBLE  is  NOT  IN  DANGER  BECAUSE  ANY  HON 
EST  AND  EARNEST  SEEKER  AFTER  TRUTH  CAN  FIND 
OUT  FOR  HIMSELF  THAT  THE  BIBLE  is  GOD'S  WORD. 

In  John  7 : 17  Jesus  offers  a  test  that  any  man  can 
try  for  himself.  He  says,  "If  any  man  willeth  to  do 
his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  teaching,  whether  it  is 
of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  from  myself."  Many 
have  tried  this  test  and  it  has  never  failed.  A  few 
weeks  ago  at  the  close  of  one  of  our  evening  services 
a  man  came  to  me  saying  that  he  was  full  of  doubts, 
that  while  he  believed  that  there  was  a  God,  he  doubted 
that  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God,  or  that  the 
Bible  was  the  Word  of  God.  He  said  further,  he  had 
been  advised  to  accept  it  on  blind  faith  without  evi 
dence.  I  told  him  to  do  nothing  of  the  sort.  I  told 
him  that  believing  without  evidence  was  not  faith  but 
credulity,  and  that  God  did  not  ask  any  man  to  believe 
without  evidence.  Then  I  gave  him  the  passage  just 


IS  THE  BIBLE  IN  DANGER?  49 

quoted,  "If  any  man  willeth  to  do  his  will,  he  shall 
know  of  the  teaching,  whether  it  is  of  God,  or  whether 
I  speak  from  myself."  I  told  him  to  surrender  his 
will  to  God  and  then  ask  God  to  show  him  whether 
Jesus  Christ  was  His  Son  or  not,  and  whether  the  Bible 
was  His  Word  or  not,  and  to  take  the  gospel  of  John 
and  read  it,  not  trying  to  believe  it,  but  being  willing 
to  be  convinced  if  it  was  true,  and  promising  God  that 
he  would  take  his  stand  upon  everything  in  it  that  he 
found  to  be  true.  Within  a  week  I  received  a  letter 
from  this  man  telling  me  how  he  had  come  out  into 
the  clear  light  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of 
God.  I  have  seen  the  man  again  to-day  and  not  only 
has  his  own  scepticism  entirely  vanished,  but  he  is 
leading  other  sceptics  to  Christ. 

The  Bible  is  in  no  danger.  As  far  as  the  Bible  is 
concerned  all  these  attacks  from  different  sources  upon 
the  Bible  do  only  good,  they  set  people  to  thinking 
about  the  Bible,  they  set  preachers  to  preaching  about 
the  Bible,  they  serve  to  illustrate  the  invincible  truth 
and  power  of  the  Bible  by  showing  the  ease  with 
which  such  fierce  attacks  upon  it  are  repelled.  But 
while  the  Bible  itself  is  in  no  danger,  those  who  vent 
their  spleen  upon  it  are  in  danger.  It  is  no  small  sin 
to  ridicule  the  Word  of  an  all  holy  and  all  mighty 
God.  There  are  others  also  who  are  in  danger,  those 
who  listen  to  the  fascinating  eloquence  of  gifted  unbe 
lievers  and  allow  it  to  lull  them  to  repose  in  a  life  of 
sin,  they  are  in  danger.  Men,  and  especially  young 
men,  your  consciences  were  once  troubling  you  and 
you  were  contemplating  forsaking  your  folly,  but  you 
have  allowed  yourselves  to  be  blinded  by  the  voice  of 
some  brilliant  agnostic  and  you  are  now  about  to  tram- 


50  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

pie  under  foot  the  Word  of  God  and  the  Christ  of 
God.  Do  not  be  deceived,  these  voices  that  speak  to 
you  are  not  the  voices  of  truth  but  the  voices  of  false 
hood,  infamous,  dastardly,  soul-destroying  falsehood. 
To  listen  to  these  voices  means  ruin,  eternal  ruin.  Do 
not  listen  to  such  voices,  listen  to  the  voice  of  God  that 
speaks  to  you  in  wondrous  love  from  this  book  and 
says,  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  un 
righteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto 
the  LORD,  and  He  will  have  mercy  upon  him,  and 
to  our  God,  for  He  will  abundantly  pardon."  Yes, 
and  there  is  another  class  in  danger.  All  those  who  do 
not  accept  Jesus  Christ  are  in  danger.  This  book  is 
not  in  danger,  every  utterance  of  it  will  stand,  and  this 
book  declares  in  John  3 :  36,  "He  that  believeth  on  the 
Son  hath  everlasting  life:  and  he  that  believeth  not 
the  Son  shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  him. "  It  is  true,  and  if  you  do  not  believe 
on  Christ,  if  you  do  not  speedily  give  up  your  unbe 
lief  and  put  your  trust  in  Him,  you  must  perish. 


IV 


WHY  I  BELIEVE  THAT  JESUS  CHRIST  IS  GOD 
IN  HUMAN  FORM 

THERE  is  no  subject  more  important  than  that 
of  the  Deity  of  Jesus  Christ.  If  Jesus  Christ 
is  not  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  then  Chris 
tians  are  idolaters,  for  Christians  worship  Jesus 
Christ.  If  Jesus  Christ  is  God,  then  all  who  do  not 
acknowledge  Him  as  such  and  accept  Him  as  their 
Divine  Saviour  and  surrender  absolutely  to  Him  as 
their  Divine  Lord,  and  worship  Him  as  God,  are  guilty 
of  the  awful  sin  of  rejecting  a  Divine  person  and  rob 
bing  Him  of  the  honour  due  to  His  name.  It  is  then 
of  the  highest  importance  that  each  of  us  know 
whether  Jesus  Christ  is  God  or  not.  I  am  to  give  you 
to-night  some  of  the  reasons  why  I  believe  that  He  is 
the  Son  of  God  in  an  entirely  unique  sense,  the  Son 
of  God  in  a  sense  in  which  no  other  person  is  or  ever 
was  the  Son  of  God,  the  Son  of  God  in  such  a  sense 
that  all  the  attributes  and  perfections  and  glory  of 
God  dwelt  in  Him.  There  was  a  time  when  I  doubted 
it ;  very  seriously  and  very  earnestly  and  very  honestly 
doubted  it.  I  doubt  it  no  longer  and  will  tell  you  why 
not. 

51 


52  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

I.  I  BELIEVE  THAT  JESUS  CHRIST  is  THE  SON  OF  GOD  IN 
AN  ALTOGETHER  UNIQUE  SENSE,  THE  ONLY  BE 
GOTTEN  SON  OF  GOD,  THE  SON  OF  GOD  IN  SUCH  A 
SENSE  THAT  GOD  THE  FATHER  DWELT  IN  HIM  IN 
ALL  THE  FULNESS  OF  His  ATTRIBUTES  AND  GLORY, 
BECAUSE  OF  His  OWN  CLAIM  TO  BE  THE  SON  OF 
GOD  AND  THE  WAY  IN  WHICH  HE  SUBSTANTIATED 
THAT  CLAIM. 

There  can  be  no  honest  doubt  in  the  mind  of  any 
man  who  will  study  the  subject  candidly  and  carefully 
that  Jesus  Christ  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God  in  a 
sense  in  which  no  other  was  the  Son  of  God.  In  the 
twelfth  chapter  of  Mark  He  speaks  of  all  the  prophets 
that  had  gone  before  Him,  even  the  greatest  of  them, 
as  servants  of  God,  and  of  Himself  as  the  only  Son  of 
God  (v.  6.  K.  V.).  In  the  third  chapter  of  John,  the 
sixteenth  verse,  He  speaks  of  Himself  as  the  only  be 
gotten  Son  of  God.  In  John  5 :  23  He  claims  all  men 
should  honour  Him  "even  as  they  honour  the  Father." 
In  John  8:  24  He  says,  "If  ye  believe  not  that  I  am 
He,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins. ' '  During  His  last  hours 
before  His  crucifixion  the  Jewish  high  priest  said  to 
Him,  "I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  thou  tell 
us  whether  thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God," 
and  Jesus  replied,  "Thou  hast  said."  This  was  the 
strongest  form  of  affirmation,  and  He  went  on  to  em 
phasize  what  He  had  said  by  adding,  "I  say  unto  you, 
Henceforth  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  on  the  clouds  of 
heaven."  Now  throughout  the  Old  Testament  the 
only  one  who  made  the  clouds  His  chariot  was 
Jehovah,  and  Jesus  here  affirms  in  the  most  striking 


WHY  I  BELIEVE  JESUS  CHRIST  IS  GOD     53 

way  under  oath  that  He  is  a  Divine  person,  that  He 
is  Jehovah.  In  John  14 : 9  He  went  so  far  as  to  say, 
"He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  From 
these  and  from  many  other  utterances  of  our  Lord,  it 
is  perfectly  plain  that  the  Lord  Jesus  claimed  to  be  the 
Son  of  God  in  a  sense  that  no  other  was  the  Son  of 
God,  in  the  sense  that  in  attributes  and  authority  and 
worthiness  of  worship  He  was  on  an  equality  with 
God  the  Father.  HE  CLAIMED  TO  BE  DIVINE.  But  a 
claim  to  be  Divine  does  not  prove  one  to  be  Divine. 
Men  rightly  demand  that  such  a  claim  be  substan 
tiated,  and  /  do  not  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Divine 
simply  because  He  claimed  to  be,  but  because  of  the 
way  in  which  He  substantiated  the  claim. 

CHRIST'S  CLAIM  TO  BE  DIVINE  is  SUBSTANTIATED. 

1.  First  of  all  by  His  character.  The  beauty  and 
strength  and  nobility  of  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ 
is  well-nigh  universally  admitted.  The  Jew  admits 
it,  both  Rousseau  and  Renan,  the  great  French  sceptics, 
insisted  upon  it,  even  Colonel  Ingersoll  spoke  most 
beautifully  of  it.  On  one  of  his  last  visits  to  the  city 
of  Chicago  he  repeated  what  he  had  often  said  before, 
"I  wish  to  say  once  for  all  that  to  that  great  and 
serene  man  I  pay,  I  gladly  pay,  the  homage  of  my 
admiration  and  my  tears."  But  here  is  this  man 
whom  all  admit  to  have  been  a  good  man,  a  man  of 
honour,  humility,  truth,  and  nobility,  claiming  to  be 
Divine.  IF  HE  WAS  NOT  DIVINE  HE  WAS  THE  BOLDEST 

BLASPHEMER  AND   MOST  ARRANT  IMPOSTOR  THIS  WORLD 

HAS  EVER  SEEN.  Can  any  honest  man  who  has  ever 
read  the  story  of  Jesus  Christ  with  any  attention  and 


54  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

candour  believe  He  was  a  blasphemer  and  impostor? 
That  is  the  only  alternative:  you  must  either  admit 
the  lofty  claims  He  made  about  His  Deity,  or  hold 
Him  to  have  been  a  blasphemer  and  an  impostor. 
Every  one  who  denies  the  Deity  of  Christ  practically 
lays  at  His  door  the  charge  of  blasphemy  and  im 
posture.  Men  sometimes  say  to  me,  "I  do  not  believe 
that  Jesus  was  Divine,  but  I  believe  He  was  a  good 
man."  I  reply,  "No,  if  He  was  not  Divine,  He  was 
not  a  good  man."  If  Jesus  was  not  Divine  He  was 
rightfully  put  to  death  according  to  Jewish  law.  The 
manner  of  His  trial  was  illegal,  the  mode  of  death 
by  which  He  was  executed  was  not  that  prescribed, 
but  the  death  penalty  was  the  right  penalty  according 
to  Jewish  law.  The  one  who  denies  the  Divinity  of 
Christ  justifies  His  killing. 

2.  Jesus  Christ's  claim  to  be  Divine  is  substantiated 
by  the  miracles  which  He  performed.  Herculean 
efforts  have  been  put  forth  to  discredit  the  gospel 
stories  of  His  miracles,  but  these  efforts  have  all  failed. 
It  was  first  attempted  to  prove  that  these  recorded 
miracles  were  simply  natural  events,  but  this  at 
tempt  failed.  It  was  then  attempted  to  prove  that 
the  reports  were  fabrications,  pious  frauds,  of  Christ's 
disciples,  but  this  attempt  likewise  failed.  It  was 
then  attempted  to  prove  that  the  gospels  did  not  be 
long  to  the  time  of  Christ's  disciples,  but  were  written 
at  a  later  period  and  palmed  off  as  the  productions 
of  men  who  did  not  really  write  them.  This  last 
attempt  was  made  in  a  most  skilful,  laborious  and 
scholarly  way.  For  a  time  it  almost  seemed  as  if 
the  attempt  might  succeed,  but  at  the  last  it  broke 
down  utterly.  The  argument  for  the  early  date  and 


WHY  I  BELIEVE  JESUS  CHRIST  IS  GOD     55 

historical  accuracy  of  the  gospel  stories  in  the  ultimate 
outcome  was  only  brought  out  the  more  clearly  by 
the  attacks  made  upon  them,  and  the  argument  is 
absolutely  unanswerable.  It  is  an  interesting  fact 
that  the  final  and  decisive  blow  in  favour  of  the 
authenticity  of  the  most  important  of  the  four  gospels, 
the  gospel  of  John,  was  struck  by  a  Unitarian,  Dr. 
Ezra  Abbott.  Dr.  Ezra  Abbott's  demonstration  of 
the  Johannean  authorship  of  the  fourth  gospel  was 
written  many  years  ago,  but  all  attempts  to  answer 
it  have  failed  utterly.  The  miracles  then  attributed 
to  Jesus  Christ  He  actually  performed.  But  these 
substantiate  His  claim  to  be  Divine.  Not  that  the 
mere  performance  of  miracle  proves  one  to  be  Divine, 
but  when  one  claims  to  be  Divine  and  then  performs 
miracles  of  the  character  that  Christ  performed,  not 
merely  healing  the  sick,  but  stilling  the  wind,  calming 
the  waves  of  the  sea,  raising  the  dead,  casting  out 
demons,  by  His  mere  word,  these  works  taken  in 
connection  with  His  character  and  His  teaching  and 
His  claims  prove  Him  to  be  Divine. 

3.  Christ's  claim  to  be  Divine  is  substantiated  in 
the  third  place  ~by  His  influence  on  the  history  of  the 
world.  It  needs  no  argument  to  prove  that  Christ's 
influence  upon  the  history  of  the  world  has  been  bene 
ficial  immeasurably  beyond  that  of  any  other  who 
has  ever  lived.  His  influence  upon  domestic  life, 
His  influence  upon  social  life,  His  influence  upon  in 
dustrial  life,  His  influence  upon  political  life.  It 
would  be  foolish  to  compare  that  of  any  other  man, 
or  that  of  all  other  men  together,  with  His.  Other 
men  have  had  as  many  or  more  followers  than  He, 
but  what  is  the  quality  of  the  influence  of  these  men  ? 


56  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

Go  to  Turkey  and  note  the  influence  of  Mohammed; 
go  to  India  and  Ceylon  and  Japan  and  note  the 
boasted  influence  of  Buddha;  go  to  China  and  note 
the  influence  of  Confucius.  No,  Christ  has  had  an 
incomparably  Divine  influence  upon  men  of  all  suc 
ceeding  generations.  Now,  as  already  seen,  if  Jesus 
Christ  was  not  Divine  He  was  a  blasphemer  and  an 
impostor.  Is  it  conceivable  that  an  arch  impostor 
should  have  such  an  incomparable  influence  over  men 
in  all  the  relations  of  life?  The  question  needs  no 
answer,  it  answers  itself. 

4.  Christ's  claim  to  be  Divine  is  substantiated,  in 
the  fourth  place,  ly  His  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
We  have  not  time  to-night  to  go  at  length  into  the 
argument  for  the  truthfulness  of  the  gospel  stories  of 
Christ's  resurrection  from  the  dead,  but  the  argument 
is  clear  and  conclusive.  In  my  book,  The  Bible  and 
Its  Christ,  I  have  taken  up  the  argument  for  Christ's 
resurrection  and  shown  how  it  is  impossible  for  any 
honest  man  to  study  the  argument  for  Christ's  resur 
rection  and  come  to  any  other  conclusion  than  that 
Jesus  really  rose  from  the  dead  as  is  recorded  in  the 
four  gospels.  Now  the  mere  fact  that  one  rose  from 
the  dead  would  not  necessarily  prove  him  to  be 
Divine,  but  when  one  claims  to  be  Divine  and  is  put 
to  death  for  making  the  claim,  and  before  dying 
asserts  that  God  will  raise  Him  from  the  dead  and 
thus  endorse  His  claim,  if  then  God  actually  does 
raise  Him  from  the  dead  at  the  appointed  time,  cer 
tainly  God  does  by  that  act  in  a  most  unmistakable 
way  set  His  seal  to  the  claim,  and  in  this  way  God 
has  in  fact  set  His  seal  to  Jesus'  claim  to  be  Divine. 
As  Paul  puts  it  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  Jesus 


WHY  I  BELIEVE  JESUS  CHRIST  IS  GOD     57 

Christ  was  "declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power 
by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead"  (Rom.  1:4). 
All  these  things  taken  together  are  my  first  reason 
for  believing  Jesus  Christ  to  be  Divine,  because  of 
Eis  own  claim  to  be,  and  the  way  in  which  He  sub 
stantiated  this  claim,  by  His  character,  His  miracles, 
His  influence,  and  His  resurrection.  The  argument  is 
a  compound  one,  composed  of  several  strong  strands, 
and  when  these  strands  are  woven  together  there 
results  an  argument  that  it  is  absolutely  impossible 
to  break. 

II.  I  BELIEVE  JESUS  CHRIST  TO  BE  DIVINE  BECAUSE  OP 
THE  OTHER  TEACHINGS  OP  THE  BIBLE  BESIDE  His 
OWN. 

The  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God.  I  have  given  on 
many  occasions  my  reasons  for  believing  the  Bible 
to  be  the  Word  of  God.  (See  book,  The  Bible  and 
Its  Christ.)  The  argument  for  the  Divine  origin  of 
the  Bible  is  unanswerable.  The  Bible  is  the  Word 
of  God  and  therefore  true.  Whatever  the  Bible  says 
about  Jesus  Christ  is  the  truth  about  Jesus  Christ. 
But  the  Bible  in  the  most  unmistakable  terms  declares 
Him  to  be  Divine.  The  Bible  ascribes  Divine  at 
tributes  to  Jesus  Christ,  it  attributes  Divine  works  to 
Him,  in  the  New  Testament  it  applies  passages  to 
Jesus  which  in  the  Old  Testament  are  spoken  of 
Jehovah,  it  couples  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  with 
the  name  of  God  the  Father  in  a  way  in  which  it 
would  be  impossible  to  couple  that  of  any  finite  being 
with  that  of  the  Deity,  and  it  demands  for  Him 
Divine  homage  and  worship.  John  tells  us  that  his 
whole  purpose  in  writing  his  Gospel  was  that  men 


58  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

might  "believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  the  Son  of 
God;  and  that  believing"  they  might  "have  life  in 
His  name."  Paul  tells  us  "that  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
every  knee"  shall  bow,  "of  things  in  heaven  and 
things  on  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth,  and  that 
every  tongue"  shall  "confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father. "  He  is  quoting 
here  a  statement  made  in  the  Old  Testament  of  Je 
hovah  (Isa.  45:21-23).  In  Rom.  9:5  Paul  unhesi 
tatingly  declares  that  Christ  "is  over  all,  God  blessed 
forever,"  and  the  author  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
says,  "When  he  bringeth  in  the  first  begotten  (that 
of  course  is  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  the  context  clearly 
shows)  into  the  world,  he  saith,  And  let  all  the  angels 
of  God  worship  Him."  The  Bible  then,  in  the  clearest, 
most  definite  and  most  decisive  terms  teaches  the  true 
Deity  of  Christ,  and  therefore  I  believe  Him  to  be  God 
in  human  form. 

III.  I  BELIEVE  THAT  JESUS  CHRIST  is  DIVINE,  GOD 
MANIFEST  IN  HUMAN  FORM,  BECAUSE  OP  THE 
DIVINE  POWER  HE  POSSESSES  AND  EXERCISES 
TO-DAY. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  go  back  to  the  miracles  of 
Christ  when  upon  earth  to  prove  He  has  Divine 
power.  He  exercises  that  power  to-day  and  anyone 
can  test  it. 

1.  He  has  power  to  forgive  sins.  He  claimed  this 
power  when  here  on  earth  and  the  scribes  accused 
Him  of  blasphemy  for  making  the  claim,  and  if  He 
had  not  been  Divine  they  would  have  been  right  in 
accusing  Him  of  blasphemy,  but  He  silenced  them 


WHY  I  BELIEVE  JESUS  CHRIST  IS  GOD     59 

by  demonstrating  the  claim  (Mark  2:  5-12).  He  has 
the  same  power  to-day.  Thousands  can  testify  that 
they  came  to  Christ  burdened  with  an  awful  sense  of 
guilt  and  that  Christ  has  actually  given  their  guilty 
conscience  peace,  absolute  peace. 

2.  He  has  the  power  to-day  to  set  Satan's  victims 
free.  He  sets  the  one  chained  by  drink  free  from 
the  power  of  drink;  the  one  chained  by  opium  or 
other  drugs,  free  from  the  power  of  drugs.  He  sets 
the  slave  of  lust  free  from  the  power  of  lust.  You 
may  say  that  Keeley  sets  the  one  chained  by  drink 
or  the  power  of  drugs  free,  but  the  cases  are  not  at 
all  parallel.  Keeley  uses  drugs,  Christ  merely  spoke 
a  word.  Thousands  and  thousands  have  been  set  free 
from  the  power  of  drink  and  transformed  into  noble 
men  and  women  of  God  by  the  simple  word  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Christ  sets  free  not  merely  from  drunkenness 
and  other  vices,  but  from  sin.  He  makes  the  impure 
man  and  woman  pure.  He  makes  the  selfish  man  un 
selfish.  He  makes  the  devilish  man  and  woman  Christ- 
like.  I  believe  Jesus  Christ  is  Divine  because  of  the 
Divine  power  I  see  Him  exercising  in  the  lives  of 
many  men  and  women.  I  know  Jesus  is  Divine  be 
cause  of  the  Divine  work  that  He  and  He  alone  has 
wrought  in  my  own  life. 

IV.  I  BELIEVE  THAT  JESUS  CHRIST  is  DIVINE,  GOD 
MANIFEST  IN  HUMAN  FORM,  BECAUSE  OF  THE 
CHARACTER  OF  THOSE  WHO  ACCEPT  HIM  AS 
DIVINE. 

Those  who  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God 
are  those  who  live  nearest  God,  in  most  intimate  com 
munion  with  God,  and  who  know  God  best.  Those 


60  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

who  know  God  best  and  live  nearest  to  God  have  no 
doubts  whatever  that  Jesus  Christ  is  His  Son.  The 
cry,  "I  do  not  believe  Jesus  to  be  the  Son  of  God," 
never  comes  from  those  who  are  living  nearest  God 
and  know  God  best.  It  comes  most  often  from  those 
who  are  living  farthest  from  God  and  know  God  least. 
Those  who  once  believed  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  Son 
of  God  as  they  drift  away  from  God  into  worldliness, 
selfishness  and  sin  often  find  themselves  questioning 
the  Deity  of  Christ.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who 
once  questioned  the  Deity  of  Christ  when  they  come 
nearer  to  God,  when  they  turn  their  backs  upon  sin 
and  selfishness  and  give  themselves  up  more  wholly 
to  find  and  do  His  will,  find  their  doubts  about  the 
Deity  of  Christ  rapidly  vanishing. 

V.  I  BELIEVE  JESUS  CHRIST  TO  BE  DIVINE  BECAUSE  OF 
THE  EESULTS  OP  ACCEPTING  His  DEITY. 

The  religion  that  accepts  God  the  Father  but 
rejects  Jesus  Christ  as  His  Son  has  no  such  deep 
and  lasting  moral  power  as  the  religion  that  accepts 
Jesus  Christ  as  Divine.  Unitarianism  has  always 
proved  to  be  impotent.  Unitarianism  does  not  save 
the  fallen.  Wherever  you  find  a  rescue  mission  that 
is  doing  a  real  and  permanent  work  in  lifting  up  the 
fallen,  you  will  always  find  it  manned  and  womaned 
by  persons  who  believe  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God. 
Unitarianism  can  do  philanthropic  work,  it  can  build 
hospitals  and  operate  soup  kitchens  and  various  kinds 
of  clubs  for  helping  the  needy,  but  it  does  not  save. 
I  do  not  mean  merely  that  it  does  not  save  from  hell 
hereafter,  it  does  not  save  from  sin  here  and  now. 


WHY  I  BELIEVE  JESUS  CHRIST  IS  GOD     61 

It  is  the  gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  that  does  this. 
Unitarianism  never  begets  a  missionary  spirit.  With 
all  its  members  and  wealth  by  a  mighty  effort  it 
induced  one  man  to  go  as  a  foreign  missionary  for 
a  little  while,  but  even  that  poor  lone  missionary  soon 
returned.  Faith  in  Jesus  as  Divine  makes  mission 
aries  and  martyrs  and  produces  men  of  prayer  and 
faith,  it  produces  consecrated  living.  The  denial  of 
the  Deity  of  Christ  tends  to  prayerlessness,  religious 
carelessness,  unbelief,  worldliness,  selfishness,  and 
easy-going  living.  There  is  a  power  in  the  prayers  of 
those  who  approach  God  in  the  name  of  Christ  that 
there  is  not  in  the  prayers  of  those  who  reject  His 
Deity.  While  Mr.  Moody  was  still  in  business,  before 
he  had  taken  up  Christian  work  as  his  exclusive  oc 
cupation,  he  often  went  out  holding  meetings.  One 
time  he  was  holding  meetings  in  one  of  the  smaller 
towns  in  Illinois,  the  wife  of  the  district  judge  came 
to  Mr.  Moody  and  asked  him  to  speak  to  her  husband. 
He  replied,  "I  cannot  speak  to  your  husband.  Your 
husband  is  a  book  infidel  and  I  am  nothing  but  an 
uneducated  boot  clerk  from  Chicago."  But  the  wife 
was  so  insistent  that  Mr.  Moody  finally  called  upon 
the  judge.  As  he  passed  through  the  outer  office  the 
law  clerks  tittered  to  themselves  as  they  thought  how 
the  learned  judge  would  make  mincemeat  of  the 
uneducated  boot  clerk  from  Chicago.  Mr.  Moody  said 
to  the  judge  in  the  inner  office,  "Judge,  I  cannot 
talk  with  you,  you  are  an  educated  man ;  I  am  nothing 
but  an  uneducated  boot  clerk,  but  I  just  want  to  ask 
you  one  thing.  When  you  are  converted  will  you 
let  me  know?"  "Yes,"  the  judge  replied  banter- 
ingly,  "when  I  am  converted  I  will  let  you  know." 


62  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

And  then  he  raised  his  voice  louder  and  said,  "Yes, 
young  man,  when  I  am  converted  I  will  let  you  know. 
Good-morning."  As  Mr.  Moody  passed  into  the 
outer  office  the  judge  raised  his  voice  still  louder  so 
all  the  law  clerks  could  hear,  "Yes,  young  man,  when 
I  am  converted  I  will  let  you  know."  And  the  law 
clerks  tittered  louder  than  ever.  But  the  judge  was 
converted  within  a  year.  Mr.  Moody  revisited  the 
town  and  called  upon  the  judge.  He  said,  "Judge, 
will  you  tell  me  how  you  were  converted?"  "Yes," 
the  judge  replied,  "one  night  my  wife  went  to 
prayer  meeting  as  usual,  but  I  as  usual  stayed  at  home 
and  read  the  evening  paper.  I  began  to  get  very 
uneasy  and  miserable,  and  before  my  wife  returned 
from  the  prayer  meeting  I  was  so  miserable  I  was 
afraid  to  face  her  and  retired  for  the  night.  On  her 
return,  finding  me  in  bed  she  came  to  the  door  and 
asked  if  I  were  sick.  'No,'  I  replied,  'I  am  not  sick, 
only  I  was  not  feeling  very  well.  Good-night/  I 
had  a  miserable  night  and  was  so  miserable  in  the 
morning  that  I  dared  not  face  my  wife  at  the  break 
fast  table,  and  I  simply  looked  in  the  door  and  said, 
'"Wife,  I  am  not  feeling  very  well  this  morning,  I  will 
not  eat  any  breakfast.'  I  went  to  my  office  and  told 
the  clerks  they  could  take  a  holiday.  I  locked  the 
outside  door  and  then  went  into  my  inner  office  and 
locked  the  door  to  that.  I  sat  down,  getting  more 
and  more  miserable  all  the  time.  At  last,  in  my 
misery  and  in  my  overwhelming  sense  of  sin  I  knelt 
down  and  cried,  'Oh,  God,  forgive  my  sins.'  But 
there  was  no  answer.  Again  I  cried,  'Oh,  God,  for 
give  my  sins. '  But  still  no  answer.  I  would  not  say, 
'Oh,  God,  for  Christ's  sake  forgive  my  sins,'  because 


WHY  I  BELIEVE  JESUS  CHRIST  IS  GOD     63 

I  was  a  Unitarian  and  did  not  believe  in  the  Divinity 
of  Christ.  Again  I  cried,  'Oh,  God,  forgive  my  sins,' 
but  still  there  was  no  answer.  At  last  in  despera 
tion  I  cried,  'Ofo,  God,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake  forgive 
my  sins/  and  instantly  I  found  peace. "  By  their 
fruits  ye  shall  know  them.  There  is  a  Divine  power 
in  a  faith  that  accepts  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of 
God  that  there  is  not  in  a  faith  that  denies  His 
Deity. 

Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God.  He  is  Divine.  He 
is  God  in  human  form.  His  own  claims  substantiated 
by  His  character,  by  His  miracles,  by  His  influence 
upon  the  history  of  the  world,  by  His  resurrection 
from  the  dead,  prove  it.  The  teachings  of  the  Word 
of  God  prove  it.  The  character  of  those  who  accept 
Him  as  Divine  proves  it.  The  results  of  accepting 
Him  as  Divine  prove  it.  The  Divine  power  He  pos 
sesses  and  exercises  to-day  proves  it.  Jesus  Christ  is 
Divine,  He  is  God  in  human  form.  And  now  some 
one  will  say,  well  what  of  it  ?  Everything  of  it.  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  and  if  you  reject  Him  you 
are  rejecting  the  Son  of  God.  That  is  the  awful  sin 
that  lies  at  the  door  of  every  man  and  every  woman 
in  this  audience,  out  of  Christ,  REJECTING  THE  SON 
OF  GOD  !  If  your  hearts  were  not  hardened  and 
blinded  by  sin  you  would  tremble  at  that  indictment 
(Acts  2:36,  37).  In  the  light  of  the  clear  proof  of 
the  Deity  of  Christ  I  call  upon  you  to-night  to  accept 
Him  as  your  Divine  Saviour.  I  call  upon  you  to  sur 
render  to  Him  as  your  Divine  Lord.  I  call  upon  you 
to  submit  your  life  to  Him  as  your  rightful  sovereign, 
and  to  manfully  confess  Him  before  the  world  as 
your  Divine  Lord. 


JESUS  THE  WONDEKFUL 

"For  unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is 
given:  and  the  government  shall  ~be  upon  His  shoulder: 
and  His  name  shall  ~be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor, 
The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father,  the  Prince 
of  Peace."— Isa.  9:6. 

THE  prophet  Isaiah  with  a  mind  illumined  by 
the  Holy  Spirit,  looked  down  740  years  and 
saw  the  coming  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  and 
uttered  the  sublime  words  of  our  text.  In  them  is 
wrapped  up  a  world  of  meaning  concerning  the 
Divine  glory,  the  matchless  character,  and  wonderful 
offices  of  our  Lord.  But  to-night  we  must  limit  our 
thought  to  one  clause  in  this  great  verse,  "His  name 
shall  be  called  Wonderful. ' '  In  the  Bible  names  have 
meaning,  especially  when  applied  to  God  the  Father, 
the  Son  or  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  name  is  a  revelation 
of  what  one  is.  Jesus  is  called  *  *  Wonderful ' '  because 
He  is  wonderful.  First  Jesus  is  Wonderful  hi  His 
nature ;  second  Jesus  is  Wonderful  in  His  character ; 
third,  Jesus  is  Wonderful  in  His  work. 

1.  JESUS  is  WONDERFUL  IN  His  NATURE. 

First  of  all  Jesus  is  wonderful  in  His  nature. 
1.  He  is  a  Divine  Being.     He  is  Divine  in  a  sense 
in  which  no  other  man  is  Divine.    The  Bible,  both  the 

64 


JESUS  THE  WONDERFUL  65 

Old  Testament  and  the  New,  is  full  of  that  great 
truth.     He  most  unhesitatingly  made  the  claim.     In 
Mark   12 : 6,   after   speaking   of  the   Old   Testament 
prophets  as  servants,  He  speaks  of  Himself  as  the 
"beloved"  Son  of  God,  and  "only"  Son  of  God.    In 
John  10 :  30  He  says,  * '  I  and  my  Father  are  one. ' '    In 
John  14:9  He  goes  so  far  as  to  say,  ' '  He  that  hath 
seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father, ' '  and  in  John  5 :  23  He 
says,  "All  men  should  honour  the  Son  even  as  they 
honour  the  Father. ' '    The  Apostle  John  said  of  Jesus 
in  the  opening  verses  of  His  gospel,  ' '  In  the  beginning 
was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the 
Word  was  God.    The  same  was  in  the  beginning  with 
God.    All  things  were  made  through  Him ;  and  with 
out   Him   was   not   anything   made   that   hath   been 
made"    (John   1:1-3).      And   further   down  in  the 
14th  verse  he  says,  "And  the  Word  (that  is  this  Word 
that  was  in  the  beginning  and  that  was  with  God  and 
was  God)  became  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us  (and  we 
beheld   His   glory   as   of   the   only   begotten   of   the 
Father),   full   of   grace   and   truth."     The   Apostle 
Thomas  after  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord,  fell  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus  and  cried  to  Him,  "My  Lord  and  my 
God"  (John  20:28).  The  Apostle  Paul  said  of  Him 
that  "In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fullness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily"    (Col.  2:9),  and  he  says  of  Him  again  in 
Rom.  9:  5  that  He  "is  over  all,  God  blessed  forever." 
The  Apostle  Peter  in  Acts  10 :  36  says  of  Him,  "He  is 
Lord   of   all."      The    author   of   the   epistle   to   the 
Hebrews  said  of  Him,  "He  is  the  effulgence  of  His 
(God's)    glory,  and  the  very  image    (or  'exact  ex 
pression')   of  his   (God's)    substance,"  and  that  He 
upholds  all  things  by  the  Word  of  His  power  (Heb. 


66  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

1:3).  And  Paul  in  Phil.  2:6  says  that  before  He 
became  man  He  existed  originally  "in  the  form  of 
God."  If  the  Bible  makes  anything  as  plain  as  day, 
it  makes  it  plain  as  day  that  our  Lord  Jesus  is  a 
Divine  being  with  all  the  attributes,  glory,  majesty, 
and  power  that  belong  to  God.  He  is  God.  Well 
then  might  the  prophet  Isaiah  in  his  inspired  vision 
of  the  coming  of  Jesus,  cry,  '  *  His  name  shall  be  called 
Wonderful."  If  Jesus  was  not  "very  God  of  very 
God,"  then  John  was  mistaken,  and  Paul  was  mis 
taken,  and  Jesus  Himself  was  mistaken,  and  only  that 
denomination  that  has  never  been  noted  for  its 
prayerfulness,  its  spirituality,  its  devotion,  its  self- 
sacrifice,  its  missionary  enterprise,  that  denomination 
which  has  only  a  history  of  building  churches  to  see 
them  die,  that  denomination  alone  is  right,  and  John, 
Peter,  Paul,  and  Jesus  are  wrong.  Do  you  believe 
that?  Can  you  believe  that?  No,  a  thousand  times 
no.  No  man  who  is  thoroughly  sane  in  his  head  and 
thoroughly  honest  in  his  heart  can  believe  that.  Jesus 
then  is  a  Divine  being.  He  is  wonderful,  most  won 
derful,  wonderful  beyond  description,  wonderful  be 
yond  conception.  The  wonderfulness  of  His  being 
and  nature  will  be  the  object  of  our  glad  and  adoring 
contemplation  and  the  theme  of  our  highest  praises 
throughout  the  endless  a?ons  that  are  to  come,  through 
out  eternity. 

2.  But  there  is  another  wonderful  thing  about  the 
nature  of  Jesus.  While  He  is  Divine  He  is  at  the 
same  time  a  real  man.  "In  the  beginning  was  the 
Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word 
was  God."  But  "the  Word  became  flesh  and  dwelt 
among  us."  He  was  "the  only  begotten  Son  of 


JESUS  THE  WONDERFUL  67 

God,"  but  He  is  at  the  same  time  the  Son  of  man. 
He  is,  Paul  tells  us  in  1  Tim.  2:5,  the  ''mediator 
between  God  and  men,  Himself  man,  Christ  Jesus." 
Do  you  ask  how  are  the  perfect  Deity  and  the  perfect 
humanity  united  in  Jesus?  I  do  not  know.  Neither 
do  I  know  how  spirit  and  body  are  united  in  myself, 
but  I  know  that  they  are.  I  do  not  know  how  the 
Divine  nature  that  I  received  in  the  new  birth  is 
united  with  the  physical  and  intellectual  and  moral 
nature  that  I  received  by  my  natural  birth,  but  I 
know  that  it  is,  and  so  also  I  know  that  Jesus  is  per 
fectly  Divine  and  perfectly  human.  Well  might  the 
prophet  say,  "His  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful." 

II.  JESUS  is  WONDERFUL  IN  His  CHARACTER. 

But  while  Jesus  is  wonderful  in  His  nature,  in  His 
Divine  glory  and  perfect  humanity,  He  is  not  won 
derful  in  His  nature  alone,  He  is  wonderful  in  His 
character.  His  character  was  absolutely  perfect.  He 
was  absolutely  without  blemish  and  without  spot.  He 
was  not  only  faultless,  but  every  possible  perfection 
of  character  rested  upon  Him.  There  is  not  a  per 
fection  of  character  of  which  we  can  think  that  is  not 
to  be  found  in  Him,  and  found  in  Him  in  its  fullness. 
As  the  years  go  by  and  we  study  Him  more  and 
more  carefully  and  come  to  see  Him  as  He  was  and 
is  more  fully,  the  more  the  absolute  perfection  of  His 
character  shines  forth.  For  thirty-four  years  He 
lived  in  a  hostile  world  that  sought  to  find  some  im 
perfection  in  Him,  but  they  could  find  none.  For 
eighteen  centuries  since,  infidels  have  been  hunting 
for  some  flaw  in  the  character  of  Jesus  and  they 


68  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

cannot  find  it.  "What  would  not  the  infidels  give  if 
they  could  only  put  their  finger  upon  one  single  flaw, 
even  one  little  defect  in  that  character,  but  they  can 
not.  Even  the  bitterest  and  boldest  and  most  un 
scrupulous  infidel  of  his  day  was  forced  to  say,  "I 
wish  to  say  once  for  all  that  to  that  great  and  serene 
man  I  pay,  I  gladly  pay,  the  homage  of  my  admira 
tion  and  my  tears."  Jesus  in  the  perfection  of  His 
character  is  indeed  wonderful.  He  is  the  wonder  of 
the  ages.  He  stands  out  absolutely  peerless  and  alone. 
When  any  man  ventures  to  put  anyone  else  along 
side  of  Jesus  Christ  he  at  once  loses  the  confidence  of 
all  candid  and  fair-minded  men. 

1.  Jesus  was  perfect  in  holiness.     Peter  spoke  of 
Him  as  ''The  holy  One  and  the  just"  (Acts  3:14). 
John  spoke  of  Him  as  ' '  the  Holy  One  "  ( 1  John  2 :  20 ) . 
Even  the  unclean  spirits  when  they  met  Him  were 
forced  to  cry  out  to  Him,  "I  know  thee,  who  thou 
art,  the  Holy  One  of  God"  (Mark  1 :  24).    The  epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  speaks  about  Him  as  "holy,  guileless, 
undefiled,    separated    from    sinners."      He    passed 
through  all  our  experiences  of  conflict  and  temptation 
yet  "without  sin"  (Heb.  4: 15).    The  dazzling  white 
light  that  glorified  the  face  and  garments  of  Jesus 
on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  was  the  outshining 
of  the  moral  purity  within. 

2.  But  He  was  not  only  perfect  in  holiness,  He  was 
also  perfect  in  love.     His  love  to  God  was  perfect 
and  so  was  His  love  to  man.     His  love  to  God  re 
vealed  itself  in  His  unhesitating  obedience  to  every 
command  of  God,  in   His  unreserved  surrender  to 
God's  will,  in  His  drawing  back  from  no  sacrifice  that 
God  demanded,  in  His  delight  in  doing  God's  will, 


JESUS  THE  WONDERFUL  69 

a  delight  so  great  that  forgetting  the  long  denied 
demands  of  bodily  hunger,  He  could  triumphantly 
say,  "My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  who  sent 
me  and  to  accomplish  His  work"  (John  4:  34,  E.  V.). 
His  love  to  God  was  absolutely  perfect,  but  so  was 
His  love  to  man.    His  love  to  man  took  in  all  men, 
it  took  in  the  good,  but  it  took  in  the  vilest  as  well. 
It  took  in  men  like  John  and  Nathaniel,  but  it  took 
in  also  the  demoniac  of  Gadara,  the  thief  on  the  cross, 
the  woman  with  the  seven  devils,  and  the  woman  who 
was  a  sinner.     It  took  in  His  enemies  for  whom  He 
prayed  even  as  He  endured  the  agonies  and  the  re 
proaches   and   the   shame   they   heaped  upon   Him, 
"  Father,  forgive  them  for  they  know  not  what  they 
do."     His  love  hesitated  at  no  sacrifice.     "Though 
He  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor,  that 
we  through  His  poverty  might  become  rich"  (2  Cor. 
8:  9,  R.  V.).    "Being  in  the  form  of  God,  He  counted 
it  not  a  thing  to  be  grasped  to  be  on  an  equality  with 
God,   but   emptied   Himself,   taking  the   form   of   a 
servant,  being  made  in  the  likeness  of  men ;  and  being 
found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  He  humbled  Himself,  be 
coming  obedient  unto  death,  yea,  even  the  death  of 
the  cross"    (Phil.   2:6-8).     Wonderful,   wonderful, 
wonderful  love,  that  seeing  full  equality  with  God 
Himself  in  honour  and  glory,  turned  His  back  upon 
all  this  and  chose  the  cow  stable  for  His  birthplace, 
the  poor  carpenter  shop  for  His  school,  the  contempt 
and  rejection  of  men  for  His  reward,  the  agony  of 
Gethsemane  and  the  shame  and  ignominy  and  torture 
of  death  upon  the  cross  for  its  consummation,  be 
cause  by  these  things  He  could  save  the  vile  and 
worthless  and  outcast.     "Well  might  Isaiah  say  that 


70  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

Jesus'  name  should  be  called  Wonderful.  There  are 
many  other  perfections  in  the  character  of  Jesus, 
e.g.,  the  perfection  of  His  meekness  and  gentleness 
and  humility  and  patience  and  courage,  and  manli 
ness,  but  we  cannot  stop  to  dwell  upon  these  now. 
Enough  has  been  said  to  show  that  He  is  wonderful 
in  character. 

III.  JESUS  is  WONDERFUL  IN  His  WORK. 

But  as  wonderful  as  Jesus  is  in  His  nature  and  in 
His  character,  He  is  not  wonderful  in  His  nature 
and  character  alone,  He  is  also  wonderful  in  His 
work. 

1.  In  the  first  place  He  made  a  perfect  atonement 
for  sin.  "All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray;  we 
have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way;  and  the 
Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all" 
(Isa.  53:6).  Every  sin  of  ours  was  settled  by  the 
death  of  Jesus  upon  the  cross.  "Christ  hath  re 
deemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  having  become 
a  curse  for  us:  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one 
that  hangeth  upon  a  tree"  (Gal.  3:13).  The  death 
of  Christ  so  perfectly  atones  for  sin  that  the  moment 
I  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  and  thus  accept  the  atone 
ment  He  has  made  for  me,  every  sin  of  mine  is 
blotted  out  from  God's  account  and  God  reckons  me 
as  perfectly  righteous  in  Him:  "Him  who  knew  no 
sin  He  made  to  be  sin  in  our  behalf;  that  we  might 
become  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him"  (2  Cor. 
5:21).  Is  not  this  wonderful  ?  Is  it  not  amazing  ? 
that  the  vilest  sinner  there  is  in  Los  Angeles,  or 
anywhere  else  on  this  earth,  the  liar,  the  thief,  the 


JESUS  THE  WONDERFUL  71 

blasphemer,  the  murderer,  the  harlot  can  come  into 
this  place  to-night  all  crimson  with  the  sins  they 
have  committed,  and  yet  the  death  of  Christ  so  per 
fectly  atones  for  them  all  that  the  moment  they  accept 
that  atonement  all  their  sins  are  blotted  out  and  they 
become  as  white  as  snow.  Oh,  when  the  sins  that  I 
have  committed  come  up  before  me,  and  they  have 
been  great  (the  sins  of  every  one  here  to-night  have 
been  great),  but  when  they  come  up  I  look  away  at 
the  cross  and  I  see  Jesus  hanging  there,  I  hear  His 
dying  cry,  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  for 
saken  me  ? ' '  and  I  hear  His  other  cry, '  *  It  is  finished, ' ' 
and  I  can  see  the  Roman  soldier  draw  back  his  spear, 
and  I  see  it  go  crashing  into  that  side.  I  see  the  life 
blood  pouring  out,  and  I  know  that  all  my  sins  are 
atoned  for.  I  know  that, 

"  Jesus  paid  my  debt, 

All  the  debt  I  owe, 
Sin  had  left  a  crimson  stain, 
He  washed  it  white  as  snow." 

Oh,  it  is  wonderful :  the  sin  of  the  whole  race  atoned 
for  at  Calvary,  and  all  that  any  man  has  to  do  to 
enjoy  the  fruits  of  that  atonement  is,  just  to  accept  it. 
2.  But  Jesus  not  only  made  an  atonement  for  sin, 
He  also  saves  from  sin's  power.  Jesus  Christ  has 
power  to  set  any  man  who  will  put  his  trust  in  Him 
free  from  any  sin,  and  the  power  of  all  sin.  He 
Himself  said,  "If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free,  ye 
shall  be  free  indeed"  (John  8:36).  Is  it  not  won 
derful  that  there  is  not  a  man  on  earth  to-day  so 
completely  in  sin's  power  but  that  Jesus  Christ  can 


72  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

set  him  free?  'One  night  many  years  ago  I  met  a 
man  who  had  been  a  wanderer  on  the  face  of  the 
earth  for  many  years,  but  had  come  of  a  good  family, 
had  been  well  educated,  had  moved  in  good  society, 
but  who  had  turned  his  back  on  all  this  and  had  given 
himself  up  to  a  life  of  sin,  and  now -at  the  age  of 
perhaps  45  he  was  completely  in  sin's  power.  He 
was  a  large,  powerful  man,  but  he  approached  me 
with  such  hesitation  and  whispered  in  my  ear  the 
question,  "Do  you  think  Jesus  Christ  can  save  me?" 
I  replied,  "I  know  He  can."  Then  I  sat  down  and 
reasoned  with  Him  out  of  the  Scriptures  and  He 
listened  and  believed  and  was  saved.  For  years  he 
was  a  happy  Christian  and  enslaving  sins  were  things 
of  the  past.  To-night  he  is  with  Christ  in  the  glory. 
That  is  but  one  case  out  of  thousands  and  tens  of 
thousands.  I  have  known  many,  many  such,  person 
ally.  I  have  seen  Jesus  Christ  set  men  free  from 
sin  in  pretty  much  every  state  in  the  union.  I  have 
seen  Him  do  it  in  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  Ger 
many,  France,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Tasmania, 
China,  Japan  and  India.  There  are  right  in  this 
audience  to-night  many  men  and  women  whom  Jesus 
has  set  free  from  an  awful  slavery  that  once  held 
them  captive.  Indeed  Jesus  completely  transforms 
men.  The  man  who  was  once  a  blasphemer  now 
prays.  The  man  who  once  loved  the  vile  book,  now 
loves  the  Bible.  The  man  who  once  told  questionable 
stories  now  sings  hymns  of  praise.  The  men  and 
women  who  once  gave  themselves  over  to  sin  and  vice 
are  now  working  for  their  fellow  men.  "If  any  man 
is  in  Christ,  He  is  a  new  creature;  the  old  things 
are  passed  away;  behold,  they  are  become  new"  (2 


JESUS  THE  WONDERFUL  73 

Cor.  5:17).  Oh,  the  work  of  Jesus  is  wonderful 
indeed,  transforming  demons  into  angels.  One  Sun 
day  night  I  heard  a  man  who  a  few  years  before 
was  a  ruffian,  a  drunken,  profane,  cruel  brute,  speak 
ing  to  the  best  people  of  one  of  our  eastern  cities  with 
great  tenderness  and  pleading  that  they  too  accept 
the  same  Jesus  who  had  so  wonderfully  transformed 
his  life  and  that  of  his  wife.  Jesus  is  indeed  won 
derful  in  His  work. 

3.  But  Jesus  will  do  even  more  wonderful  things 
in  the  future.  When  He  comes  again  He  will  raise 
the  dead  with  His  voice,  and  we  shall  be  caught  up 
with  them  to  meet  Him  in  the  air.  He  will  transform 
us  into  His  own  perfect  likeness.  This  old,  weak, 
sickly,  pain-racked  body  will  be  changed  into  the 
likeness  of  His  own  glorious  body,  free  from  every 
ache  and  pain,  free  from  every  weakness,  free  from 
every  limitation,  resplendent  with  a  beauty  never 
seen  on  earth,  capable  of  unlimited  activity.  And 
He  will  transform  us  morally  also,  so  that  in  our 
inmost  character  we  shall  be  made  just  like  Him. 
He  will  bring  us  fully  into  our  glorious  inheritance 
as  heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with  Himself,  heirs 
of  all  God  is  and  all  God  has,  heirs  of  His  wisdom, 
His  power,  His  holiness.  Oh,  it  is  wonderful ! 

Jesus  is  indeed  wonderful.  He  is  wonderful  in  the 
infinite  glory  of  His  Divine  nature.  He  is  wonderful 
in  the  matchless  perfection  of  His  character.  He  is 
wonderful  in  His  work,  blotting  out  all  sin  by  His 
death,  delivering  from  all  sin  by  His  resurrection 
life,  transforming  us  from  all  remaining  imperfection 
into  the  full  glory  of  sons  of  God  by  His  coming 
again.  Jesus  is  the  Wonderful  One.  Now  what  will 


74  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

you  do  with  Him?  What  will  you  do  with  this 
wonderful  Jesus?  Will  you  accept  Him  or  reject 
Him?  Oh,  the  wisdom  and  the  blessedness  of  those 
who  accept  Him.  Oh,  the  folly  and  wretchedness  of 
those  who  reject  Him.  What  will  you  do  to-night  with 
this  wonderful  Jesus  ? 


VI 
THE  FOOL'S  CREED 

"The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God." 
—Ps.  14:1. 

OUR    subject    to-night    is    The    Fool's    Creed. 
Every  intelligent  man  has  a  creed.    You  hear 
men  in  our  days  inveighing  against  creeds, 
but  every  man  who  thinks  has  a  creed.     A  man's 
creed  is  what  a  man  believes,  and  every  man  who 
thinks  at  all  must  believe  something.     The  only  man 
who  believes  nothing  is  the  man  whose  mind  is  a 
perfect  blank— the  utter  idiot.    If  any  man  says,  "I 
believe  nothing,"  he  is  either  mistaken  or  deliberately 
lying.    If  he  believes  what  he  says  to  be  true,  when 
he  says  "I  believe  nothing,"  then  he  must  at  least  be 
lieve  that  he  believes  nothing,  and  in  that  case  he  is,  of 
course,  mistaken  when  he  says  that  he  believes  nothing. 
But  if  he  is  not  mistaken  when  he  says  "I  believe 
nothing,"  then  it  cannot  be  that  he  believes  that  he 
believes  nothing,  and  in  saying  "I  believe  nothing,"  he 
is  saying  what  he  does  not  believe ;  in  plain  English, 
he  is  lying.    To  think  is  to  believe,  and  the  only  man 
of  whom  it  can  be  truly  said  he  does  not  believe  any 
thing  is  the  idiot.     Our  subject,  however,  to-night  is 
not  creeds  in  general,  but  a  specific  creed,  The  Fool's 
Creed.    You  will  find  a  brief  and  plain  statement  of 
The  Fool's  Creed  in  Ps.  14: 1,  "The  fool  hath  said  in 

75 


76  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

his  heart,  there  is  no  God."  The  fool's  creed  has  at 
least  the  merit  of  brevity,  you  can  put  it  in  two 
words,  "no  God."  There  is  a  great  cry  in  our  day 
for  short  creeds.  The  fool's  creed  ought  to  satisfy 
this  demand.  He  has  reduced  his  creed  to  two  short 
words,  to  five  letters,  "no  God."  Why  is  the  one 
who  says  in  his  heart  "no  God"  a  fool,  or  rather, 
why  is  he  not  merely  a  fool  but  "the  fool,"  the  fool 
of  fools,  the  one  consummate  fool? 

I.  THE  MAN  WHO  SAYS  THERE  is  NO  GOD  is  A  FOOL, 
BECAUSE  THERE  is  A  GOD. 

The  first  reason  why  the  man  who  says  there  is  no 
God  is  a  fool  is  because  there  is  a  God.  The  proofs 
of  the  existence  of  a  God,  of  an  intelligent  and 
beneficent  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  physical  and 
moral  universe  are  manifold  and  conclusive. 

1.  First  of  all,  the  observed  facts  of  the  physical 
universe  point  conclusively  to  the  existence  of  an 
intelligent  and  beneficent  creator  and  governor  of 
that  universe.  There  are  four  kingdoms  in  the  uni 
verse  as  modern  science  investigates  and  knows  it: 
(1)  the  inorrganic  kingdom,  i.e.,  the  non-living  world 
with  its  mechanical  and  chemical  forces;  (2)  the 
vegetable  kingdom;  (3)  the  animal  kingdom;  (4) 
man.  The  inorganic  kingdom  is  the  least  wonderful 
of  all,  yet  how  wonderful  even  it  is  in  its  vastness, 
in  its  conformity  to  law,  in  its  structure  and  its  opera 
tions,  in  the  mechanical  and  chemical  forces,  ever 
working  out  such  beneficent  results.  But  when  we 
come  to  the  vegetable  kingdom  we  take  a  great  step 
upward  into  a  kingdom  whose  unveiled  mysteries 
fill  the  soul  with  increasing  admiration  and  astonish- 


THE  FOOL'S  CREED  77 

ment  the  more  we  explore  them.  The  laws  of  nutri 
tion,  of  growth  and  reproduction,  how  marvellous  they 
are.  Even  the  smallest  of  the  plans,  the  plants  that 
can  be  seen  only  with  the  aid  of  the  microscope  present 
models  of  symmetry,  proportion  and  beauty  that  man 
can  only  try  to  imitate  but  cannot  succeed  in  imitat 
ing.  When  we  come  to  the  animal  kingdom  we  see 
superadded  to  the  wonders  of  nutrition,  growth  and 
reproduction  the  still  greater  wonders  of  sensation 
and  instinct.  But  take  the  last  step  upward  to  man, 
and  we  have  superadded  to  these  wonders  the  won 
ders  of  man's  intellectual,  moral  and  spiritual  powers. 
Now  all  these  things  must  be  accounted  for.  We  live 
in  a  wonderful  world.  The  more  we  study  it  the 
more  wonderful  it  appears,  until  it  leads  us  on  and 
out  into  the  infinite,  and  until  w*  see  new  mean 
ing  in  the  words  of  Ps.  19:1,  "The  heavens  declare 
the  glory  of  God;  and  the  firmament  showeth  His 
handiwork,"  and  in  the  words  of  Paul  in  Rom.  1 : 20, 
"For  the  invisible  things  of  Him  (i.e.,  God)  since  the 
creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  perceived 
from  the  things  that  are  made,  even  His  everlasting 
power  and  Divinity;  that  they  may  be  without  ex 
cuse."  More  and  more  as  our  knowledge  enlarges 
do  we  find  that  everything  has  its  use,  even  down 
to  the  house  fly,  or  the  infusoria  in  the  brook. 
Everything  performs  its  functions  according  to  law, 
from  the  sun  one  million  two  hundred  and  eighty- 
three  thousand  times  as  large  as  the  earth  and  mov 
ing  through  space  with  incredible  rapidity,  down  to 
the  microscopic  cilia  of  some  simple  form  of  life  that 
sway  lazily  to  and  fro.  Even  the  seeming  monstrosi 
ties  of  nature  are  in  accordance  with  law.  It  takes 


78  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

no  profound  knowledge  of  nature  to  see  manifold 
adaptations  to  intelligent  purpose.  Take  for  example, 
the  eye,  the  most  marvellous  camera  obscura  that  was 
ever  constructed,  with  its  wonderful  chemical  and 
mechanical  and  sensatory  arrangement  for  vision, 
protection,  and  voluntary  and  involuntary  use.  Take 
the  bird,  with  its  hollow  bones,  its  light  feathers 
rendered  waterproof  by  oil  secretions.  A  scientific 
acquaintance  with  nature  enlarges  our  view.  The  tele 
scope  can  find  no  spaces  so  vast  that  order  and  law 
cease,  nor  can  the  microscope  discover  particles  so 
small  that  they  lack  in  symmetry,  beauty  and  adapta 
tion  to  their  end.  We  live  in  a  universe  of  law, 
beauty  and  utility.  Now  comes  the  question,  how  did 
this  universe  come  to  be  as  it  is  to-day.  There  are 
four  possible  suppositions  about  it': 

(1)  First,  that  it  was  always  as  it  is  now. 

(2)  Second,  that  it  came  to  be  as  it  is  by  chance, 
that  the  atoms  that  constitute  the  universe,  in  their 
eternal  dance,  have  at  last  assumed  their  present  as 
sociations  and  relations. 

(3)  Third,   that   there   existed  from   all   eternity 
certain  material  atoms  containing  in  themselves  the 
power  of  uniting  and  acting  upon  one  another  and 
developing  into  the  present  condition  of  the  universe. 

(4)  Fourth,  that  the  universe  is  the  work  of  God. 
This  covers  all  the  possible  suppositions.     Which 

is  the  true  one?  The  first  we  know  to  be  false.  We 
know  that  the  universe  was  not  always  as  it  is.  The 
second  is  easily  seen  to  be  false.  There  is  a  chance 
that  the  atoms  that  constitute  the  universe  in  their 
eternal  dance  might  assume  the  present  associations 
and  relations  displayed  in  such  marvellous  orderli- 


THE  FOOL'S  CREED  79 

ness,  obedience  to  law,  perfection  of  construction, 
and  adaptation  to  intelligent  ends.  I  say  there  may 
be  a  chance  that  that  is  true,  but  while  there  is  one 
chance  that  it  might  be  so,  there  is  an  infinite  number 
of  ehances  against  it.  The  bringing  in  of  infinite 
ages  in  which  it  might  happen  does  not  help  the 
theory,  for  while  there  might  be  one  chance  of  our 
living  in  that  particular  age  in  which  it  did  happen, 
there  would  be  an  infinite  number  of  chances  against 
it.  Now  the  man  who  chooses  to  believe  that  in  favour 
of  which  there  is  one  chance,  and  against  which  there 
are  an  infinite  number  of  chances  can  be  justly  char 
acterized  as  in  our  text,  "a  fool."  What  would  you 
call  a  man  who  believed  that  Webster's  dictionary 
was  not  the  intelligent  product  of  a  reasonable  being, 
or  a  number  of  reasonable  beings,  but  that  the  letters 
that  constitute  it  were  thrown  down  by  chance  and 
happened  to  fall  into  the  shape  we  find  them  in  the 
dictionary.  There  is  only  one  word  in  the  English 
language  by  which  you  would  dream  of  characterizing 
such  a  man,  you  would  call  him  a  fool.  But  the  theory 
that  Webster's  dictionary  came  to  be  in  that  way 
would  notJae  a  fractional  part  so  foolish  as  the  theory 
that  the  atoms  that  constitute  this  universe  in  their 
eternal  dance  at  last  assumed  their  present  associa 
tions  and  relations  displayed  in  such  marvellous  order 
liness,  obedience  to  law,  and  perfection  of  construc 
tion,  and  adaptation  to  intelligent  ends,  as  we  now 
find  in  the  physical  universe.  The  third  theory,  viz., 
that  there  existed  from  all  eternity  certain  material 
atoms  containing  in  themselves  the  power  of  uniting 
and  acting  upon  one  another  and  developing  into  the 
present  condition  of  the  universe,  is  untenable : 


80  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

First,  because  if  the  atoms  had  existed  from  all 
eternity  with  the  inherent  power  of  combining  into 
the  present  universe,  they  would  have  combined  into 
it  ages  ago. 

Second,  because,  while  we  have  abundant  experience 
of  the  construction  of  works  exhibiting  design  by  in 
telligent  agents,  we  have  absolutely  no  experience  of 
unintelligent  atoms  having  power  of  combining  them 
selves  into  works  exhibiting  the  marks  of  intelligence. 
Suppose  one  should  attempt  to  throw  a  thousand  dice 
and  have  them  all  turn  up  sixes,  and  succeed,  what 
would  you  say?  Every  intelligent  man  would  say 
the  dice  were  loaded.  But  who  loaded  the  dice  of  the 
universe?  It  is  evident  the  third  theory  will  not 
hold. 

We  have  only  the  fourth  theory  remaining,  viz., 
that  the  universe  is  the  work  of  an  intelligent 
and  beneficent  Creator.  There  is  a  God.  The  theory 
of  evolution  does  not  in  the  least  affect  the  argument. 
If  the  theory  of  evolution  were  true  it  would  only 
show  the  wonderful  method  by  which  this  intelli 
gent  and  beneficent  Creator  worked  out  His  plans. 

2.  Not  only  do  the  observed  facts  of  the  physical 
universe  point  conclusively  to  the  existence  of  God, 
the  facts  of  history  point  to  the  same  thing.  The  hand 
of  an  intelligent,  beneficent,  just  governor  of  the 
destinies  of  men  is  clearly  seen  in  history,  not  only 
in  Bible  history  but  in  all  secular  history  as  well. 
Anyone  who  carefully  studies  history  will  see  that 
throughout  the  whole  history  of  the  race,  as  Coleridge 
puts  it,  "one  increasing  purpose  runs."  We  see  that 
above  the  human  actors,  kings,  generals,  statesmen,  and 
commoners  trying  to  carry  out  their  own  ambitions 


THE  FOOL'S  CREED  81 

and  purposes,  there  has  been  the  guiding  hand  of 
One  who  has  made  even  the  wrath  of  men  to  praise 
Him,  and  who  has  worked  out  good  from  the  lowest 
ambitions  and  vilest  passions  of  men.  Cities,  kings, 
dynasties,  and  empires  fall,  but  history  marches  right 
on  to  the  goal  that  God  has  set  for  it — the  kingdom 
of  God  on  earth. 

3.  The  Bible  as  it  lies  before  us  proves  that  there 
is  a  God.     Here  is  a  book  altogether  unique  to  be 
accounted  for.    It  must  have  an  author.    It  is  entirely 
different  from  any  book,  or  all  books,  men  have  written 
it  differs  from  them  in  its  fulfilled  prophecies,   it 
differs  from  them  in  its  indestructibility  and  invul 
nerability  against  all  assaults ;  it  differs  from  them  in 
the  purity  and  loftiness  and  comprehensiveness  of  its 
teachings;  it  differs  from  them  in  its  power  to  save 
men  and  nations;  it  differs  from  them  in  its  inex 
haustible  depths  of  wisdom  and  truth.     This  book, 
to  anyone  who  will  study  it  deeply  and  thoroughly 
and  candidly,  is  manifestly  not  man's  book.    Whose 
book  then  is  it?     The  more  I  study  this  book  the 
more  overwhelmingly  convinced  I  am  that  there  must 
be  a  God  back  of  it. 

4.  Individual  experience  proves  that  there  is  a  God. 
(1)  Individual     experience     regarding     answered 

prayer  proves  this.  If  I  should  go  to  a  hole  in  the 
wall  and  order  beefsteak  rare,  and  beefsteak  rare 
should  be  passed  out,  and  then  order  mutton  chops 
and  mutton  chops  should  be  passed  out,  and  some 
other  time  should  order  turkey  and  cranberry  sauce, 
and  turkey  and  cranberry  sauce  should  be  passed 
out,  and  if  this  should  go  on  day  after  day,  and 
what  I  ordered  was  passed  out,  I  should  certainly 


82  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

soon  conclude  that  there  was  some  intelligent  person 
there  attending  to  my  orders,  even  though  I  saw  no 
one.  This  is  my  exact  experience  with  God.  There 
have  been  many  things  that  I  have  needed,  that  I 
have  gone  to  God  alone  about  and  have  told  him  of 
the  need,  and  no  human  being  knew  of  the  need,  and 
He  has  supplied  the  need,  supplied  it  oftentimes  in 
such  a  way  that  the  connection  between  the  prayer 
and  the  thing  obtained  was  of  such  a  character  that 
it  was  clear  that  the  prayer  brought  the  gift.  There 
have  been  times  in  my  life  when  I  have  risked  every 
thing  that  men  hold  dear  upon  there  being  a  God 
who  answered  prayer  on  the  conditions  laid  down  in 
the  Bible.  I  have  staked  my  health  and  that  of  my 
family,  my  temporal  needs,  my  reputation,  every 
thing  that  men  hold  dear  for  time  and  eternity,  on 
God's  answering  prayer  on  the  conditions  laid  down 
in  the  Bible,  and  I  have  won.  For  sixty  years  George 
Mueller  housed  and  fed  orphans  by  the  thousand  and 
secured  the  supplies  for  the  work  entirely  by  prayer. 
No  one  was  ever  told  of  the  need,  no  one  but  God, 
and  not  one  penny  of  debt  was  ever  incurred;  and 
money  and  supplies  came,  oftentimes  came  only  at 
the  last  moment,  sometimes  came  when  it  would  seem 
impossible  that  they  should  come  on  time,  but  there 
was  never  a  day  nor  a  meal  in  which  God  failed  to 
answer  prayer. 

(2)  Individual  experience  in  regard  to  salvation 
proves  that  there  is  a  God.  Lost  men,  men  utterly 
lost,  men  with,,  whom  every  human  effort  to  save  has 
failed,  have  at  last  cast  themselves  upon  God,  the 
God  of  the  Bible,  the  God  who  could  only  be  ap 
proached  through  Jesus  Christ,  God  in  Christ,  and 


THE  FOOL'S  CREED  83 

have  found  salvation,  such  a  salvation  as  God  alone 
could  work.  They  have  been  recreated,  made  new 
creatures,  they  have  been  raised  from  the  dead. 

The  man  who  in  anything  proceeds  upon  the  sup 
position  that  there  is  a  God,  just  such  a  God  as  the 
Bible  pictures,  will  always  find  this  supposition  works 
well  in  practice.  To  sum  up  thus  far,  the  observed 
facts  of  the  physical  universe,  the  facts  of  history, 
the  absolutely  unique  and  undeniable  character  of 
the  Bible,  and  individual  experience  all  prove  to  a 
demonstration  that  there  is  a  God.  Therefore,  he 
that  says  "no  God"  is  a  fool. 

II.  THE  MAN  WHO  SAYS  THERE  is  No  GOD  is  A  FOOL 
BECAUSE  NOT  ONLY  is  THERE  A  GOD,  BUT  IT  is 
WELL  THAT  THERE  is. 

In  the  second  place,  the  man  who  says  in  his  heart 
that  there  is  no  God  is  a  fool,  not  only  because  there  is 
a  God  but  also  because  it  is  well  that  there  is  a  God. 
Please  notice  that  it  is  "in  Ms  heart"  that  the  fool 
says,  "no  God" ;  i.e.,  he  denies  the  existence  of  God  be 
cause  he  does  not  wish  to  believe  that  there  is  a  God. 
For  a  man  to  wish  that  there  were  no  God  shows  him 
to  be  a  fool  because  there  not  only  is  a  God,  but  it  is 
well  that  there  is,  and  to  wish  that  there  were  not  is  a 
mark  of  consummate  folly.  If  there  is  a  God,  a  God 
such  as  the  Bible  describes,  the  present  life  and  the 
future  life  is  full  of  brightness  and  hope  to  anyone 
who  will  take  the  right  attitude  toward  that  God ;  but 
if  there  is  no  God,  then  the  sun  has  gone  out  of  the 
heavens  and  a  darkness  that  can  be  felt  broods  over 
the  universe.  If  there  is  no  God  we  know  nothing  of 
what  is  in  store  for  us,  the  present  apparent  harmony 


84  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

and  orderliness  of  the  universe  mav  cease  any  moment, 
and  all  plunge  into  chaos.  If  there  is  no  God  history 
has  no  guiding  hand  and  no  certain  destiny.  If  there 
is  no  God,  reason  and  thought,  conscience  and  right, 
purity  and  love  have  no  certain  and  eternal  basis.  If 
there  is  no  God  we  have  no  security  for  a  moment  that 
blind  fate  that  rules  all  may  not  seize,  and  rend  and 
crush  us  and  plunge  us  into  dark,  unutterable,  eternal 
misery.  This  is  a  true  picture  of  our  position  in  the 
universe  if  there  is  no  God.  What  intelligent  man 
would  wish  to  live  in  a  universe  without  a  God? 
Surely  it  is  the  fool,  the  fool  of  fools,  the  consummate 
fool  of  the  ages,  who  says  in  his  heart,  "no  God." 
There  are  many  who  do  not  say  with  their  lips,  "no 
God,"  but  who  say  it  in  their  "heart."  They  are  not 
theoretical  atheists,  but  they  are  practical  atheists. 
Anyone  who  does  not  surrender  his  will  to  God  is  a 
practical  atheist.  Anyone  in  this  building  to-night 
who  has  not  surrendered  to  God  is  practically  saying 
in  his  heart,  "there  is  no  God,"  and  is,  therefore,  a 
fool.  To  sum  up  there  is  a  God.  Thank  God  that 
there  is.  There  is  just  such  a  God  as  the  Bible  reveals. 
There  is  then  but  one  right  thing,  but  one  wise  thing 
for  any  man  here  to-night  to  do,  that  is  surrender  to 
His  will.  The  only  path  of  wisdom  in  the  face  of  the 
proven  facts,  is  to  give  ourselves  in  utter  obedience  to 
Him,  and  to  accept  as  our  mediator  Him  whom  God 
has  set  forth  to  be  the  mediator  between  us  and  Him 
self,  accept  Him  whom  He  has  provided  to  be  a  sin- 
bearer,  as  our  sin-bearer,  accept  Him  whom  He  has 
exalted  to  be  both  Lord  and  King,  as  our  Lord  and 
King  to-night.  Who  will  do  it?  Who  will  do  it  now? 


VII 
NO  HOPE 

"Ye  were  at  that  time  separated  from  Christ,  alien 
ated  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers 
from  the  covenants  of  the  promise,  having  no  hope  and 
without  God  in  the  world." — Eph.  2: 12. 

THESE  words  describe  the  appalling  condition  of 
the  Ephesians  before  they  were  saved,  but  to 
night  I  wish  to  impress  upon  you  just  three 
words  in  this  dark  picture,  " having  no  hope."  There 
are  no  words  in  the  language  more  dreadful  than  those 
two  words,  "no  hope."  A  doctor  stands  beside  a  bed 
upon  which  lies  a  man  who  is  very  ill.  The  doctor's 
finger  is  upon  the  sick  man's  pulse;  he  is  looking  in 
tently  into  the  sick  man's  eyes;  he  is  eagerly  watching 
every  movement  and  the  way  in  which  the  sick  man 
breathes.  The  sick  man's  wife  and  children  are  gath 
ered  around  the  bed,  looking  anxiously  first  at  the 
husband  and  father,  and  then  at  the  doctor.  At  last 
the  doctor  looks  up  and  says,  "no  hope."  A  ship  has 
sprung  a  leak  in  mid-ocean;  the  sailors  are  working 
with  all  their  might  at  the  pumps ;  the  water  from  the 
hold  dashes  across  the  deck  into  the  ocean.  An  officer 
stands  by,  now  and  then  dropping  a  line  into  the  hold 
measuring  the  depth  of  the  water,  seeking  to  find  if  it 

85 


86  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

is  falling  or  increasing.  At  last  he  looks  up  and  cries, 
"It  is  no  use,  boys;  there  is  no  hope."  A  man  has 
been  making  every  effort  to  keep  off  financial  ruin,  but 
at  last  he  is  obliged  to  throw  up  his  hands  in  despair 
and  cry  out, '  *  No  hope. ' '  A  little  company  of  men  are 
defending  a  citadel  against  a  yelling  horde  of  murder 
ous,  bloodthirsty  Turks  without.  Gathered  in  the 
citadel  are  not  only  the  men  who  are  defending  it,  but 
A  company  of  women  and  children.  The  men  know 
well  that  if  they  surrender  it  means  death  to  them  and 
rrorse  than  death  to  the  women  and  children,  and 
bravely  they  fight  on  to  defend  the  citadel,  but  now 
their  last  round  of  ammunition  is  exhausted ;  there  is 
a  crash  as  the  doors  give  way  below,  and  a  cry  rings 
through  the  citadel,  c '  No  hope,  no  hope ! ' '  Ah,  those 
are  dark  words,  but  they  are  even  darker  yet  in  import 
in  the  connection  in  which  we  find  them  in  our  text. 
Better  be  without  anything  else  than  be  without  hope. 
We  may  be  in  great  present  distress,  but  if  we  have  a 
good  and  sure  hope  for  the  future,  it  matters  little. 
We  may  have  great  present  prosperity,  but  if  we  have 
no  good  hope  for  the  future  it  is  of  little  worth.  I 
would  rather  be  the  poorest  man  who  walks  the  streets 
of  this  city  to-night  and  have  a  good  hope  for  the 
future,  than  to  be  the  richest  millionaire  and  have  no 
hope  for  the  future. 

I.  WHO  HAVE  No  HOPE  1 

There  are  three  classes  who  have  no  hope.  But  what 
do  we  mean  by  hope?  Desire,  no  matter  how  strong 
it  may  be,  is  not  hope.  Mere  expectation,  no  matter 
how  confident  it  may  be,  is  not  hope.  We  use  the  word 
hope  in  a  very  careless  way  in  much  of  our  modern 


NO  HOPE  87 

speech,  but  in  the  Bible  the  word  is  used  with  great 
care.  Hope  is  a  well-founded  expectation  for  the 
future.  Any  expectation  that  has  not  a  sure  founda 
tion  is  not  really  hope. 

1.  First  of  all  the  man  who  denies  or  doubts  the  ex 
istence  of  a  personal  God,  a  wise,  mighty,  loving  ruler 
of  the  universe,  has  no  hope.  He  may  cherish  fond 
wishes  about  the  future ;  he  may  even  entertain  confi 
dent  expectations  about  it,  but  wishes  are  not  hope, 
and  expectations,  no  matter  how  confident,  are  not 
hope.  His  expectations  are  not  well  founded,  and 
therefore  they  are  not  hope.  The  man  who  denies  or 
doubts  that  a  wise,  mighty  and  loving  Father  presides 
over  his  destiny  and  that  of  others,  can  have  no  well 
founded  expectations  for  the  future.  If  he  has  what 
he  calls  a  hope  it  is  utterly  irrational  and  baseless.  If 
there  is  not  a  God  who  is  wise  enough  to  know  what  is 
best,  and  loving  enough  to  desire  what  is  best,  and 
powerful  enough  to  carry  out  what  is  best,  if  there  is 
not  such  a  God  as  that,  there  is  absolutely  no  guar 
antee  that  at  any  moment  nature  may  not  plunge  into 
chaos  and  human  history  into  pandemonium,  absolute 
ly  no  guarantee  that  both  nature  and  man  may  not  be 
involved  any  day  in  a  universal  sway  of  pain,  destruc 
tion  and  despair;  no  guarantee  that  both  nature  and 
society  may  not  become  hell.  Man's  only  rational 
foundation  for  hope  in  the  future  is  the  existence  of 
an  intelligent,  beneficent,  and  omnipotent  God  ruling 
nature  and  the  affairs  of  men.  Atheism  and  agnosti 
cism  are  unspeakably  dark  faiths  if  any  man  has  the 
courage  to  think  them  out  to  their  logical  conclusion ; 
most  atheists  and  agnostics  dare  not  do  it.  But  some 
agnostics  and  atheists  have  done  it.  Listen  to  the 


88  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

words  of  two  men  men  who  were  agnostics  and  who 
have  thought  through  their  creed  of  unbelief  toward 
its  logical  and  utterly  dark  conclusion.  First  of  all 
listen  to  the  words  of  David  Strauss,  who  began  by 
questioning  the  miraculous  and  by  trying  to  recon 
struct  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus  from  the  Gospel  ma 
terial,  eliminating  the  supernatural  and  having  the 
character  and  conduct  left,  but  who  wound  up  in 
blank  agnotisticism.  He  says :  1 1  In  the  enormous  ma 
chine  of  the  universe,  amid  the  whirl  and  hiss  of  its 
jagged  iron  wheels,  amid  the  deafening  crash  of  its 
ponderous  stamps  and  hammers,  in  the  midst  of  this 
whole  terrific  commotion,  man  finds  himself  placed 
with  no  security,  for  a  moment,  that  on  an  imprudent 
motion  a  wheel  may  not  seize  and  rend  him,  or  a  ham 
mer  crush  him  to  powder."  That  is  an  awful  picture, 
but  if  there  is  no  personal  God,  no  God  wise  enough  to 
know  what  is  best,  loving  enough  to  desire  what  is  best, 
and  powerful  enough  to  carry  out  what  is  best,  no  such 
God  as  the  Bible  presents,  then  Strauss 's  conclusion  is 
inevitable,  only  he  has  understated  rather  than  over 
stated  the  darkness  of  the  outlook.  Now  listen  to  an 
other,  Morley:  "The  millions  of  hewers  of  wood  and 
drawers  of  water,  come  upon  the  earth  that  greets 
them  with  no  smile,  stagger  blindly  under  dull  bur 
dens  for  a  season,  and  are  then  shoveled  silently  back 
under  the  ground  with  no  outlook  and  no  hope." 
Pretty  dark  is  it  not  this  creed  of  agnosticism  ?  but  if 
there  is  no  God  these  statements,  terrible  as  they  are, 
appalling  as  they  are,  full  of  utter  despair  as  they  are, 
are  understatements  of  the  hopelessness  and  blackness 
of  the  outlook.  One  night  some  years  ago  the  thought 
came  to  me,  suppose  that  instead  of  the  God  of  wisdom 


NO  HOPE  89 

and  love  in  whom  we  believe,  there  sat  upon  the  throne 
of  this  universe  a  malignant  being,  a  being  just  the 
opposite  of  the  God  of  the  Bible,  what  then?  and  I  be 
gan  to  think  it  out  until  my  brain  almost  reeled.  ^The 
denier  or  the  doubter  of  the  existence  of  an  omniscient, 
omnipotent,  loving  God,  has  no  hope,  no  rational,  well- 
founded  expectation  for  the  future,  a  very  dark  hell 
may  be  his  portion  any  moment.  No  wonder  the  in 
spired  Psalmist  calls  the  one  who  says  in  his  heart 
there  is  no  God  a  fool  (Ps.  14 : 1) . 

2.  The  man  who  denies  the  truth  of  the  Bible  has 
no  hope.    It  does  not  necessarily  follow  because  a  man 
denies  the  truth  of  the  Bible  that  he  does  not  believe 
in  the  existence  of  God.    A  man  may  believe  in  God, 
he  may  be  a  theist,  and  yet  not  believe  the  Bible.  But 
even  though  a  man  is  a  believer  in  God,  if  he  rejects 
the  Bible  he  has  no  hope,  i.e.,  he  has  no  expectation 
for  the  future  that  has  a  solid  and  certain  foundation 
underneath  it.    The  conception  that  one  gets  of  God 
from  mere  philosophy  and  pure  reasoning  is  alto 
gether  too  inadequate  to  form  a  rational  foundation 
for  an  intelligent  hope.     Furthermore,  the  God  of 
philosophy  is  necessarily  an  ever  vanishing  quantity, 
for  philosophy  is  always  in  a  flux.    Philosophy  never 
reaches  conclusions  that  are  final  and  settled.    I  once 
was  very  fond  of  the  study  of  philosophy ;  I  waded 
through  the  teachings  of  the  great  philosophers  from 
the  time  of  Socrates  down  to  the  time  of  the  modern 
German  philosophers.    It  seemed  a  fascinating  study. 
At  times  I  thought  I  had  reached  settled  conclusions, 
but  at  last  I  discovered  what  every  other  thoughtful 
student  of  philosophy  discovers  sooner  or  later,  that 
one  philosopher  comes  upon  the  scene  to  demolish  all 


90  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

who  have  gone  before  him,  only  in  turn  to  have  his 
own  conclusions  demolished  by  those  who  follow  him. 
The  only  conception  of  God  that  gives  a  man  a  good 
basis  for  expectation  for  the  life  that  now  is,  or  the 
life  which  is  to  come,  is  the  conception  of  God  found 
in  the  Bible.  It  is  true  many  who  reject  the  Bible 
borrow  their  idea  of  God  from  the  Bible  and  build  up 
a  superstructure  of  hope  upon  the  conception  of  God 
which  they  have  borrowed  from  the  Bible,  and  then 
fancy  they  have  reasoned  it  out,  and  then  they  go  on 
to  discredit  the  Bible  and  throw  it  away;  but  by  so 
doing  unwittingly  they  tear  out  the  very  foundation 
of  their  own  faith.  If  you  give  up  the  Bible  you  most 
logically  give  up  the  contents  of  the  Bible,  the  teach 
ings  of  the  Bible — and  if  you  give  up  the  teachings  of 
the  Bible  you  must  give  up  hope.  There  is  no  hope 
for  the  man  who  discards  the  Bible;  that  is,  no  well 
founded  expectation  for  the  future.  Discard  the 
Bible,  discredit  the  Bible,  and  the  future  is  dark  and 
full  of  possibilities  of  evil,  awful  possibilities  of  evil. 

3.  Tlie  man  who  believes  in  the  Bible  but  does  not 
accept  and  confess  the  Christ  the  Bible  presents  as  his 
own  personal  Saviour  and  Master,  has  no  hope.  Many 
a  man  fancies  he  has  a  ground  for  hope  because  he  is 
not  an  infidel  or  an  atheist.  Many  a  man  says  to  me, 
"Why,  I  believe  the  Bible,  sir,"  but  that  is  not  the 
whole  question.  Have  you  accepted  the  Christ  of  the 
Bible  as  your  own  personal  Saviour,  and  are  you  con 
fessing  Him  before  the  world  as  your  Lord,  and  are 
you  proving  that  to  be  an  honest  confession  by  doing 
as  He  says?  The  Bible  holds  out  absolutely  no  hope 
to  any  except  those  who  accept  the  Saviour  whom  it  is 
its  main  purpose  to  reveal.  In  this  Bible  which  you 


NO  HOPE  91 

profess  to  believe  we  read  in  John  3 :  36,  "He  that  be- 
lieveth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life ;  and  he  that 
believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of 
God  abideth  on  him."     Again  we  read  in  this  Bible 
which  you  profess  to  believe,  in  2  Thess.  1:  7-9,  "The 
Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  the 
angels  of  His  power  in  naming  fire,  rendering  ven 
geance  to  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not 
the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  who  shall  suffer 
everlasting  destruction  from  the  face  of  the  Lord  and 
from  the  glory  of  His  might."    And  still  further  we 
read  in  this  Bible  which  you  profess  to  believe,  "  If  we 
sin  wilfully  after  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins, 
but  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery 
indignation,  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries.     He 
that  despised  Moses'  law  died  without  mercy  under 
two  or  three  witnesses ;  of  how  much  sorer  punishment, 
suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought  worthy,  who  hath 
trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God  (and  that  is  what 
you  are  doing  if  you  have  not  accepted  Him  as  your 
Saviour  and  confessed  Him  as  your  Lord),  and  hath 
counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was 
sanctified,   a  common  thing,   and  hath  insulted  the 
Spirit  of  grace  1 ' '  Heb.  10 :  26-29 ) .     The  one  who  be 
lieves  the  Bible  but  rejects  the  Saviour  whom  the  Bible 
presents,  has  every  vestige  of  hope  swept  away  by  that 
very  book  he  believes.     The  man  who  believes  the 
Bible  but  rejects  the  Christ  of  the  Bible  has  no  hope, 
the  future  has  in  it  nothing  but  the  appalling  black 
ness  of  utter  despair. 


92  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

II.  IN  WHAT  SENSE  HAVE  THESE  THREE  CLASSES 
No  HOPE? 

"Wo  see,  then,  that  the  atheist  and  the  agnostic  have 
no  hope,  that  the  infidel  and  sceptic  have  no  hope,  that 
the  orthodox  believer  in  the  Bible  who  rejects  Christ 
as  a  personal  Saviour  and  Lord  has  no  hope.  In 
what  sense  have  they  no  hope? 

1.  They  have  no  hope  for  the  life  that  now  is,  no 
well-founded  and  sure  expectation  of  blessedness  for 
the  life  that  now  is.  (1)  In  the  first  place,  they  have 
no  guarantee  of  continued  prosperity.  They  may  be 
very  prosperous  to-day,  they  may  have  perfect  health, 
a  comfortable  income,  hosts  of  friends,  every  earthly 
thing  that  heart  would  desire,  but  unless  they  are 
right  with  God,  unless  they  have  accepted  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ  and  therefore  have  a  right  to  claim  the 
promises  of  the  Bible  as  their  own,  there  is  absolutely 
no  guarantee  that  these  things  which  they  now  possess 
will  continue  to  be  theirs  twenty-four  hours.  A  thou 
sand  things  may  occur  to  change  it  all.  Upheavals  of 
nature  may  come,  such  as  laid  San  Francisco  in  ruins 
a  few  years  ago,  wrecking  the  fortunes  of  thousands 
and  bringing  bereavement  to  many  homes;  social  up 
heavals  may  come,  political  catastrophes  may  come, 
war  may  come ;  indeed  the  black  portent  of  war  over 
hangs  every  people  on  earth  to-day.  This  country  by 
its  recent  election  may  have  expressed  its  unwilling 
ness  to  go  to  war,  but  that  will  not  necessarily  keep  us 
out  of  war.  What  may  other  countries  plan  regarding 
us  ?  Innumerable  other  diverse  occurrences  may  come. 
A  thoughtful  man  can  conceive  of  many  things  that 
might  occur  that  would  sweep  away  in  a  few  minutes 


NO  HOPE  93 

the  vast  fortunes  of  even  a  Eockcfeller  or  a  Morgan. 
Indeed,  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  believe  that  it  is  al 
most  certain  that  all  these  fortunes  will  be  swept  away 
in  the  next  ten  or  twenty  years  as  an  outside  limit, 
either  by  great  social  and  political  revolutions,  or  by 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     (2)  In  the  next 
place  they  have  no  guarantee  of  continued  capacity  to 
enjoy  prosperity,  even  if  it  continues.    A  man's  pros 
perity  may  continue  and  he  lose  all  capacity  to  enjoy 
it.    When  I  lived  in  Chicago,  one  of  its  wealthiest  men 
had  been  for  several  years  in  a  madhouse.    His  busi 
ness  continued  to  prosper,  prosper  enormously,  but 
what  good  did  that  fact  do  him  ?    He  had  no  capacity 
to  enjoy  what  he  possessed.    No  man  out  of  Christ  has 
any  guarantee  of  continued  capacity  to   enjoy  the 
things  of  the  life  that  now  is.    He  may  have  the  money 
to  spread  his  table  with  all  the  delicacies  that  a  gour 
mand  might  desire,  but  if  he  has  dyspepsia  what  good 
will  it  do  him?     No,  the  man  out  of  Christ  has  no 
hope,  no  well-founded  expectation,  for  the  life  that 
now  is.     (3)  Furthermore,  the  man  out  of  Christ  has 
no  guarantee  of  continued  life.    There  is  never  but  a 
step  between  any  man  and  death.     Every  step  that 
each  one  of  us  takes  each  day  is  but  a  march  toward 
the  grave.  Every  step  we  take  is  along  the  edge  of  the 
grave,  and  any  moment  the  edge  may  crumble  away 
and  we  fall  into  the  grave.    It  takes  but  one  little  snip 
of  the  shears  of  fate  to  sever  the  cord  of  life.     Of 
course  if  a  man  is  a  true  Christian  this  fact  has  no  ter 
rors  for  him ;  for  what  men  call  death  is  simply  depart 
ing  to  be  with  Christ,  "which  is  very  far  better. "    No 
man  out  of  Christ  has  a  good  hope  for  the  next  ten 
minutes.   Let  us  go  back  some  years  and  go  to  New 


94  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

York  City.  "We  stand  in  the  doorway  of  the  library  of 
the  richest  American  of  his  day.  His  property  inven 
tories  at  one  hundred  and  ninety-six  millions  of  dol 
lars.  He  is  in  close  conversation  with  a  business 
friend ;  they  are  discussing  how  to  make  that  one  hun 
dred  and  ninety-six  millions  a  little  more.  Ah,  you 
say,  as  you  look  on  that  multimillionaire,  he  has  bright 
hopes  for  many  years  to  come.  You  are  absolutely 
mistaken;  no  hope,  absolutely  no  hope,  for  ten 
minutes;  even  as  you  look  at  him  he  pitches  forward 
from  the  chair  to  the  floor,  and  when  Mr.  Garrett  picks 
William  H.  Vanderbilt  from  the  floor  he  is  a  corpse. 
How  much  is  he  worth  now?  The  next  day  one  man 
asked  another  on  'change  in  New  York,  ''how  much 
did  William  H.  Vanderbilt  leave  ? ' '  The  other  man  re 
plied,  ' '  He  left  it  all. ' '  Yes,  he  left  it  all.  Men  out  of 
Christ  have  "no  hope"  for  the  life  that  now  is. 

2.  But  infinitely  worse  than  this  is  the  fact  that 
they  have  no  hope  for  the  life  that  is  to  come.  This 
earthly  life  is  but  a  brief  span  at  the  very  longest. 
Earthly  life  when  I  was  a  boy  appeared  very  long  to 
me,  but  the  other  day  I  was  reading  some  words  that 
I  wrote  about  twenty  years  ago.  I  said,  ' '  Life  used  to 
appear  long  when  I  was  a  boy,  but  now  that  I  have  just 
passed  the  fortieth  milestone  and  feel  confident  my 
race  is  more  than  half  run,  it  seems  very  short,  very 
short. ' '  But  now  that  twenty  years  more  have  passed, 
it  seems  shorter  still.  It  seems  shorter  every  year.  I 
never  knew  time  to  fly  as  it  has  the  past  month.  We 
are  hurrying  on  toward  the  grave  and  eternity  faster 
than  the  automobiles  yesterday  whirled  around  the 
course  in  the  Vanderbilt  Cup  Race.  Do  you  realize, 
men  and  women,  that  in  thirty  years  you  will  be  in 


NO  HOPE  95 

heaven  or  in  hell?    Yes,  some  of  you  in  twenty  years, 
some  of  you  in  five  years  ?    Do  you  realize  that  some  of 
you  who  are  here  to-night  will  be  in  heaven  or  hell 
within  a  year  ?  But  ETERNITY  is  LONG  ;  how  it  stretches 
out.  Let  us  stand  now  and  look  out  down  through  the 
stretches  of  eternity,  look  yonder,  a  thousand  years 
have  passed,  are  we  any  nearer  the  end  of  eternity? 
No.    A  million  years  have  passed  and  still  it  stretches 
on  before  us;  a  billion,  a  trillion,  a  quadrillion,  a 
vingintillion,  are  we  any  nearer  the  end?  Ah,  no !  On 
and  on  and  on !    The  farther  we  look  ahead  the  longer 
it  stretches  out.    It  is  an  awful  thing  to  have  no  hope 
for  eternity.     (1)  The  man  out  of  Christ  has  no  hope 
of  blessedness  after  death.  No,  there  is  no  light  in  the 
grave  for  the  Christless  man.    Let  us  stand  and  look 
into  the  Christless  man's  grave  right  now.    What  do 
you  see  ?    Oh,  it  is  dark  and  cold.    Black,  black,  black, 
eternal  blackness,  eternal  despair.     (2)   There  is  no 
hope  of  glad  reunion  with  friends  who  have  gone  or 
who  may  go.     The  believer  loses  his  friends,  but  he 
does  not  sorrow  as  those  w^o  have  no  hope  (1  Thess. 
4 : 13) ,  he  knows  that  the  time  is  fast  hurrying  on  when 
the  Lord  Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the 
trump  of  God ;  and  when  the  bodies  of  his  loved  ones 
who  have  gone  before  shall  be  raised,  and  when  he 
"shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air,"  and  so  shall  they  ever  be  with  the 
Lord  and  with  one  another  (1  Thess.  4:14-16).   Ah, 
Christless   man,    you   will   never   meet   that   sainted 
mother  again.   What  a  noble  woman  she  was,  what  a 
dark  hour  it  was  when  she  left  you  to  depart  and  be 
with  Christ.    How  you  have  longed  for  a  reunion  with 


96  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

that  woman  who,  as  you  thought,  was  the  noblest  wo 
man  that  ever  lived  on  earth.  But  you  will  never  meet 
again.  Ah,  Christless  woman,  you  will  never  meet 
again  that  sweet  and  innocent  babe  who  has  departed 
to  be  with  Christ.  When  God  put  that  babe  in  your 
arms  how  you  hugged  it  to  your  breast;  how  as  the 
days  went  by  you  looked  down  into  those  eyes  so  full 
of  mystery  and  meaning ;  but  the  day  came  when  God 
in  His  infinite  wisdom  took  that  child  from  this  world, 
and  now  it  is  safe  in  the  arms  of  Jesus,  but  you  are  out 
of  Christ  and  you  will  never  depart  to  be  with  Christ. 
You  will  never  meet  that  sweet  babe  again.  Oh, 
Christless  husband,  how  dear  and  noble  was  that 
woman  who  for  some  years  walked  by  your  side,  and 
then  she  was  called  away  and  now  she  is  with  Christ 
in  the  glory,  but  you  will  never  meet  her  again.  No, 
there  is  no  hope  for  the  man  out  of  Christ  of  happy 
reunions  in  that  world  where  there  is  no  sorrow,  no 
pain,  no  sickness,  no  death,  no  separation. 

3.  For  the  man  out  of  Christ  there  is  not  hope  of 
pardon  in  the  eternal  world.  Pardon  is  freely  offered 
here  to  any  one  who  will  accept  Christ,  but  there  is  no 
pardon  beyond  the  grave.  Our  Lord  Himself  has  told 
us  that  those  who  die  in  their  sins,  whither  He  goes 
they  cannot  come  (John  8:  21).  There  is  no  hope  of 
escaping  from  the  wrath  of  God  against  the  sin  of 
unbelief.  "The  wages  of  sin  is  death.  The  gift  of 
God  is  eternal  life,"  but  that  life  is  "in  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord,"  and  if  you  reject  Him  and  die  without 
Him  there  is  no  hope.  "He  that  believeth  on  the  Son 
hath  everlasting  life,  but  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son, 
shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  upon 
him."  No,  there  is  no  hope  of  escaping  the  wrath  of 


NO  HOPE  97 

God  against  sin  and  unbelief,  if  one  goes  out  of  this 
world  without  Christ. 

1 '  No  hope, "  ' '  no  hope, "  ' '  no  hope, ' '  for  the  man  out 
of  Christ,  no  hope  for  the  life  that  now  is,  no  hope  for 
the  life  to  come,  no  hope  for  time,  no  hope  for  eternity. 
There  is  nothing  ahead  but  the  blackness  of  darkness. 
The  joys  of  the  present  may  last  a  few  days,  but  even 
that  is  not  certain,  but  it  is  certain  that  they  cannot 
last  long,  and  then  nothing  left  but  separation  from 
God  with  all  its  consequent  misery  and  degradation 
for  all  eternity. 

III.  THE  BELIEVER  IN  CHRIST  HAS  HOPE. 

Before  we  close  let  it  be  said  that  the  believer  in 
Christ  has  hope. 

1.  He  has  hope  for  the  life  that  now  is.  It  is  true 
that  he  does  not  know  what  the  future  may  bring,  but 
he  has  the  sure  Word  of  God  for  it  that  it  will  bring 
nothing  but  good,  he  knows  that  all  things  work  to 
gether  for  good  for  those  that  love  God  (Rom.  8 :  28). 
He  knows  that  he  needs  to  be  careful  for  nothing,  but 
in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanks 
giving,  make  his  requests  known  unto  God,  and  that 
the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding  shall 
keep  his  mind  and  heart  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  knows 
that  God  will  supply  his  every  need  according  to  His 
riches  in  glory,  in  Christ  Jesus  (Phil.  4 :  6,  7, 19) .  He 
knows  that  "God  spared  not  His  only  begotten  Son 
but  freely  gave  Him  for"  him,  and  by  that  guarantee 
he  knows  that  He  will  withhold  no  good  thing  from 
him,  that  with  Him  He  will  freely  give  him  all  things 
(Rom.  8:32). 


98  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

2.  The  Christian  has  hope  for  the  life  to  come;  he 
has  "hope  of  eternal  life  which  God  who  cannot  lie 
hath  promised"  (Tit.  1:2).  How  certain  that  hope, 
resting  upon  the  Word  of  God  who  cannot  lie;  how 
magnificent  that  hope,  eternal  life.  He  has  in  the 
world  to  come  "an  inheritance  incorruptible  and  unde- 
filed,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven 
for"  him  (1  Pet.  1:4).  He  has  the  assurance  of  the 
"Word  of  God  and  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God  that  he 
is  a  child  of  God,  and  if  a  child,  then  an  heir,  an  heir 
of  God  and  a  joint  heir  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
any  "sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to 
be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed 
in"  Him  (Rom.  8:16).  Wonderful  hope,  immeasur 
able  hope,  glorious  hope  of  the  Christian,  but  the  man 
out  of  Christ  has  "no  hope." 

Friends,  which  do  you  prefer  to-night,  the  no  hope 
of  a  man  out  of  Christ,  or  the  glorious  hope  of  the  one 
who  has  received  Christ  as  his  Saviour,  surrendered  to 
Him  as  his  Lord  and  Master,  and  confessed  Him  as 
such  before  the  world  ?  You  have  your  choice.  Every 
one  here  has  his  choice.  Which  will  you  take  ?  All  of 
us  here  to-night  are  like  men  standing  on  the  seashore 
and  looking  out  over  the  boundless  ocean  of  eternity. 
Toward  some  of  us,  toward  every  one  of  us  here  to 
night  who  is  a  true  Christian,  there  come  gallant 
vessels  loaded  with  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones, 
with  every  sail  set,  wafted  swiftly  toward  us  by  the 
breezes  of  God's  favour.  But  toward  those  of  us  who 
have  rejected  Him  or  neglected  Him,  those  of  us  who 
have  never  publicly  confessed  Him  before  the  world, 
there  come  no  vessels,  but  dismantled  wrecks,  with  no 
cargoes  but  the  livid  corpses  of  lost  opportunities,  over 


NO  HOPE  9$ 

which  hover  the  vultures  of  eternal  despair,  driven  on 
toward  us  with  mad  velocity  before  the  fast  rising 
tempest  of  the  wrath  and  indignation  of  an  all  holy 
and  almighty  God.  Glorious  hope,  and  no  hope,  which 
will  you  take  ? 


VIII 

WHERE  WILL  YOU  SPEND  ETERNITY? 
"Whither  goest  thouf'—John.  16:  5. 

OUR  subject  to-night  is,  Where  Will  You  Spend 
Eternity?  You  will  find  the  text  in  John 
16:  5,  "Whither  goest  thou?"  Jesus  Christ 
was  about  to  leave  this  world.  He  told  the  disciples 
that  he  was  going,  but  none  of  them  asked  Him 
whither  He  was  going.  He  reproved  them  for  not 
asking.  Well  He  might,  for  the  most  important  ques 
tion  that  can  face  any  man  when  he  comes  to  leave 
this  present  world  is  "Whither  goest  thou?"  or 
"Where  will  you  spend  eternity?"  A  friend  of  mine 
was  in  a  store  one  evening  and  an  elderly  man  came  in 
and  said  to  the  proprietor  as  he  bought  a  cigar,  "Dr. 
Torrey  is  going  to  preach  to-morrow  night  on  'Where 
will  you  spend  eternity  ? '  "It  had  been  an  exceedingly 
cold  winter,  and  the  proprietor  replied,  ' '  Some  of  the 
poor  people  around  here  recently  have  felt  as  though 
they  would  like  to  spend  it  in  some  place  where  it  was 
hot."  I  suppose  the  man  was  simply  thoughtless 
when  he  said  it,  but  it  marks  a  shallow  man,  a  very 
shallow  man,  to  be  thoughtless  on  a  question  like  this. 
It  will  not  do  to  dismiss  a  question  like  this  in  that 
way.  Some  of  you  would  like  to  dismiss  it  in  some 

100 


ETERNITY?  101 

such  light,  thoughtless  way.  You  will  play  the  fool  if 
you  do.  When  Harry  Hay  ward,  the  brutal  Minne 
apolis  murderer,  who  murdered  a  woman  who  had 
been  kind  to  him  in  order  to  get  a  few  dollars  from 
her,  stood  upon  the  gallows  and  the  drop  was  about  to 
fall,  he  made  a  funny  speech  and  at  the  last  jestingly 
twitched  the  rope  about  his  neck  and  said  to  the  sheriff, 
"Let  her  go,  I  stand  pat."  I  fancy  he  thought  he  was 
smart.  No  intelligent  man  thought  so.  They  set  him 
down  as  a  fool  and  a  brute.  And  so,  my  friends,  you 
who  are  disposed  to  joke  about  this  solemn  question 
we  have  before  us  to-night,  I  beg  of  you  do  not  do  it. 
Your  friend  out  of  courtesy,  may  laugh  at  your  joke, 
but  in  his  inmost  heart  he  will  think  you  a  fool,  and  in 
your  inmost  heart  you  will  know  he  is  right.  That 
then  is  our  subject  to-night,  "Whither  goest  thou?" 
or  "Where  will  you  spend  eternity?" 

1.  First  of  all,  REMEMBER  THAT  THERE  IS 
AN  ETERNITY.  That  is  certain.  We  may  try  to 
shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact,  but  the  fact  stands.  Look 
ahead  to-night.  You  may  live  five  years,  ten  years, 
twenty  years,  thirty,  forty,  fifty  years.  But  then 
what  ?  The  fifty  years  will  soon  be  gone.  Then  what  ? 
ETERNITY  !  On  it  stretches  before  us,  on  and  on  and 
on.  Never  ending  centuries  will  roll  on,  ages  roll  on, 
but  still  eternity  stretches  on  and  on.  It  will  ever 
stretch  on,  never  any  nearer  an  end.  Oh,  thank  God 
for  eternity.  If  I  knew  I  were  to  live  a  thousand  years 
it  would  not  satisfy  me.  If  I  were  to  live  a  million 
years  it  would  not  satisfy  me.  I  would  always  be 
thinking  of  the  end  that  would  come  some  time.  I  am 
glad  that  as  I  look  out  into  the  future  I  see  an  eternity 
that  has  absolutely  no  end.  There  is  an  eternity. 


102  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

II.  In  the  second  place,  REMEMBER  YOU  MUST 
SPEND  THAT  ETERNITY  SOMEWHERE.     The 
time  will  never  come  when  you  cease  to  be,  the  time 
will  never  come  when  you  pass  into  the  nowhere.    You 
will  be  somewhere  throughout  all  eternity.    Men  some 
times  try  to  believe  that  when  they  die  they  will  cease 
to  be.    A  friend  of  mine  once  told  me  that  that  was 
what  he  believed;  that  when  he  died  that  would  be 
the  end  of  him.    He  was  very  sure  of  it.    Not  long 
after  his  mother  died  and  he  wrote  me  a  letter  about 
her  having  passed  into  a  better  life.     His  atheistic 
philosophy  would  not  stand.    Men  who  live  like  beasts 
naturally  wish  to  believe  that  they  will  die  like  beasts, 
but  there  is  something  in  all  our  souls  that  tells  us  that 
it  is  not  so.    It  is  your  6 easily  self  that  says  that  death 
ends  all.    Your  better  self  denies  it.     But,  however 
that  may  be,  there  is  One  who  came  to  us  out  of  eter 
nity,  came  to  us  from  the  unseen,  eternal  world,  came 
to  us  from  God,  with  whom  He  had  been  through  all 
eternity.     He   presented   His   perfectly   satisfactory 
credentials  of  His  divine  origin,  of  His  having  come 
from  eternity,  Jesus  Christ,  and  He  has  told  us  that 
there  is  an  eternity  for  each  of  us  and  that  we  must 
spend  it  somewhere. 

III.  Remember  in  the  third  place  that  THE  QUES 
TION  WHERE  YOU  WILL  SPEND  ETERNITY  IS 
VASTLY  MORE  IMPORTANT  THAN  THE  QUES 
TION  WHERE  YOU  WILL  SPEND  YOUR  PRES 
ENT  LIFE.     How  anxious  we  are  about  where  we 
shall  spend  our  present  life.    Shall  I  spend  my  life  in 
a  cottage  or  in  a  palace  ?    Shall  I  spend  my  life  in  the 
midst  of  the  luxuries  of  wealth  or  amid  the  privations 
of  poverty?     Shall  I  spend  my  life  in  the  midst  of 


ETERNITY?  103 

congenial  companions  or  amid  bitter  foes?  Shall  I 
spend  my  present  life  in  health  and  happiness  or  in 
pain  and  weariness  and  sorrow  ?  How  anxious  we  are 
about  these  questions.  But  they  are  of  comparatively 
no  importance.  Suppose  I  spend  my  life  in  a  palace. 
Suppose  that  I  have  all  that  money  can  buy.  I  dress 
elegantly  and  fare  sumptuously  every  day.  I  go  to 
gay  parties  and  often  off  to  Florida,  the  Sandwich 
Islands  or  Europe.  Oh,  what  a  happy  life !  Not  very. 
But  suppose  it  is.  How  long  will  it  last  ?  Ten  years, 
twenty  years,  forty  years,  fifty  years,  and  it  is  all  over. 
What  then?  What  then?  The  coffin,  the  grave,  eter 
nity.  On  the  other  hand,  suppose  I  spend  my  life  in 
poverty.  I  have  little  cooped-up  rooms,  not  very 
clean.  I  have  very  poor  food,  and  perhaps  oftentimes 
not  enough  of  that.  I  wear  shabby  clothes.  I  have 
to  work  hard  for  very  small  pay.  The  rich  brush  by 
me  and  my  children  in  the  street,  and  think  us  of  little 
more  account  than  the  dogs  and  cats.  Oh,  what  a 
wretched  life!  Not  necessarily.  It  may  be  a  very 
happy  life.  But  suppose  it  is  wretched.  How  long 
will  it  last  ?  Ten  years,  twenty  years,  forty  years,  and 
it  is  all  over.  And  what  then  ?  Eternity !  An  eter 
nity  of  joy,  or  it  may  be  an  eternity  of  woe,  to  which 
any  wretchedness  I  knew  here  is  as  nothing,  nothing 
at  all.  Ah,  the  question  of  where  we  shall  spend 
eternity  is  the  important  question.  Suppose  I  am 
taking  a  day's  journey  to  a  place  where  I  shall  spend 
forty  years.  Which  is  the  more  important,  the  accom 
modations  I  shall  have  on  the  cars  or  the  accommoda 
tions  I  shall  have  when  I  get  there?  This  life  is  a 
day's  journey  to  an  endless  eternity.  Some  travel  the 
journey  in  a  common  day  coach,  a  poor  one  at  that, 


104  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

but  they  travel  to  a  mansion  to  which  the  stateliest 
palace  on  earth  is  as  nothing.  We  can  easily  put  up 
with  some  inconveniences  by  the  way.  Some  travel  in 
a  very  sumptuous  Pullman  palace  car,  or  on  a  De  Luxe 
train,  but  they  are  travelling  to  a  hovel,  poor,  loath 
some,  pestilential,  nay,  they  are  travelling  to  a  prison- 
house,  to  a  dungeon,  nay  they  are  travelling  to  hell 
itself,  where  they  shall  spend  eternity.  I  don't  envy 
them.  Take  the  multimillionaires  who  are  travelling 
at  express  speed  to  hell.  Do  you  envy  them?  I  don't. 
Poor  wretches !  This  question  of  where  we  shall  spend 
eternity  is  a  far  more  important  question  than  the 
question  of  the  comforts  we  shall  enjoy  by  the  way. 
Are  you  giving  this  question  the  consideration  its  im 
portance  demands?  Many  of  you  will  soon  be  there. 
The  brother  of  a  friend  of  mine  lay  near  death,  near 
eternity's  door.  He  had  been  a  professed  Christian  in 
early  life,  but  he  had  become  a  backslider,  and  very 
bitter.  He  would  not  allow  anyone  to  speak  to  him 
about  Christ  or  the  future.  His  wife  and  daughters 
and  mother  were  praying  constantly.  They  could  not 
let  him  die  thus.  His  brother  was  praying.  At  last 
he  could  keep  silence  no  longer.  He  said  "  Willie, 
when  you  used  to  go  off  on  a  journey  did  you  make 
preparations  for  it?"  He  looked  up  with  surprise, 
"Why,  certainly."  "Willie,  do  you  know  you  are 
about  to  take  a  long  journey?  Have  you  made  any 
preparations?"  "No,  none."  "Don't  you  think  you 
ought?"  "It's  no  use.  Jesus  won't  take  me  now,  I 
am  too  great  a  sinner."  His  brother  quoted  to  him 
the  wonderful  promises  to  sinners  found  in  this  Book, 
and  he  found  peace  at  last.  But  what  if  he  had  gone 
to  that  great  eternity  persistently  refusing  to  make 


ETERNITY?  105 

preparations?  Men  and  women,  young  men  and 
young  women,  don't  be  foolish.  Face  this  great  ques 
tion,  ''Where  shall  I  spend  eternity?" 

IV.  The  next  point  to  consider  is  that  IT  IS  POS 
SIBLE  FOR  US  TO  KNOW  WHERE  WE  SHALL 
SPEND  ETERNITY.    Some  think  it  is  all  guesswork. 
It  is  with  some.     It  need  not  be.    Jesus  knew  where 
He  would  spend  eternity.    He  said,  "  I  go  to  Him  that 
sent  me. ' '    Paul  knew  where  he  would  spend  eternity. 
He  said,  "For  me  to  die  is  gain."     And  again,  "I 
depart  to  be  with  Christ  which  is  very  far  better" 
(Phil.  1:23).    And  still  again,  "  I  have  fought  the 
good  fight,  I  have  finished  the  course,  I  have  kept  the 
faith ;  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of 
righteousness  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge, 
shall  give  me  at  that  day :  and  not  only  to  me  but  also 
to  all  them  that  have  loved  His  appearing"  (2  Tim. 
4:7,8).    Albert  Cookman  knew  where  he  would  spend 
eternity.    As  he  was  dying,  he  lifted  up  his  voice  and 
shouted,  "I  am  sweeping  through  the  gates  to  the  New 
Jerusalem. "    D.  L.  Moody  knew  where  he  would  spend 
eternity.    As  he  was  slipping  away  from  life  he  said, 
"This  is  my  coronation  day,  I  have  long  been  looking 
forward  to  it. "    I  know  where  I  shall  spend  eternity. 
"How  do  you  know?"  some  one  will  ask.    I  have  the 
sure  word  of  God  for  it.    You  can  anyone  of  you  know 
if  you  will.    Now  you  nien  who  call  yourselves  agnos 
tics,  sceptics,  and  infidels  and  Universalists  and  Uni 
tarians  and  Spiritualists,  and  Christian  Scientists  and 
thesophists,  do  you  know  where  you  will  spend  eter 
nity?    Do  you  really  know?    Be  honest  with  your 
selves  now.    You  cannot  afford  to  be  deceived,  do  you 


106  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

know  ?    No,  no,  no,  you  don 't  know.    "Well  I  do,  so  I 
have  the  better  of  you. 

V.  The  fifth  fact  to  bear  in  mind  is  that  WE  "WILL 
SPEND  ETERNITY  IN  ONE  OF  TWO  PLACES— 
IN  HEAVEN  OR  IN  HELL.    The  exact  location  of 
Heaven  and  the  exact  location  of  hell  is  not  a  question 
we  need  to  enter  into.    The  character  of  the  places  is 
the  important  question.    Heaven  is  a  place  of  holiness, 
happiness  and  love.    Hell  is  a  place  of  violence,  misery 
and  hate.    In  one  or  the  other  you  and  I  shall  spend 
eternity.    "With  Christ  or  with  the  Devil.    With  the 
holy  and  pure  or  with  the  profane,  the  blasphemous, 
the  vile.    Which  will  it  be  for  all  eternity  ? 

VI.  Now  let  me  pin  into   your  memory  another 
thought,  WHERE  YOU  W^ILL  SPEND  ETERNITY 
WILL  BE  SETTLED  IN  THE  LIFE  THAT  NOW 
IS.    Jesus  Christ  says  in  John  8 :  24,  "I  said  therefore 
unto  you,  that  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins.    For  if  ye  be 
lieve  not  that  I  am  He,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins." 
And  we  read  in  the  twenty-first  verse  of  the  same 
chapter,  "Then  said  Jesus  again  unto  them,  I  go  my 
way,  and  ye  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  die  in  your  sins, 
Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come. ' '    In  other  words  Jesus 
says  that  unless  we  believe  in  Him  we  shall  die  in  our 
sins,  and  that  if  we  do  die  in  our  sins  our  eternal  des 
tiny  is  sealed.    Again  the  apostle  Paul  says  in  2  Cor. 
5: 10,  "We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment  seat 
of  Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done 
in  his  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether 
it  be  good  or  bad."    This  makes  it  clear  that  where  we 
will  spend  eternity  is  decided  by  the  deeds  done  in  the 
body,  the  things  done  this  side  the  grave.    It  makes  it 
clear  that  where  we  will  spend  eternity  will  be  settled 


ETERNITY?  107 

in  the  life  that  now  is.  Now  many  people  do  not  like 
to  believe  that.  They  know  that  their  present  life  is  a 
very  poor  preparation  for  eternity,  so  they  don't  like 
to  think  that  their  present  life  settles  their  eternal  des 
tiny.  But  it  does.  Jesus  taught  that  plainly  enough 
when  He  said  as  quoted  above :  i  l  If  ye  believe  not  that 
I  am  He,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins,  Whither  I  go  ye  can 
not  come."  Schemes  of  future  probation  are  pure 
speculations  with  absolutely  no  foundation  in  fact  and 
contrary  to  the  plain  teaching  of  the  Book  that  never 
lies.  It  is  not  a  question,  friends,  of  what  we  would 
like  to  believe,  but  what  is  true.  But  some  man  rises 
and  says,  "I  don't  think  that  where  we  shall  spend 
eternity  is  settled  in  this  life.  I  think  men  will  have 
another  chance. ' '  I  reply, l '  It  doesn  't  make  a  particle 
of  difference  what  you  think,  or  what  I  think.  The 
question  is  what  does  God  say. ' '  But  you  still  persist 
in  saying,  "But  some  very  scholarly  men  and  some 
very  brilliant  men  like  Lyman  Abbott,  for  example, 
think  there  is  to  be  another  chance."  I  reply,  "Who 
is  Lyman  Abbott  ?  A  man  who  some  eighty  years  or  so 
ago  came  out  of  the  great  unknown,  grew  to  manhood, 
talked  a  good  deal,  said  some  wise  things  and,  as  every 
one  knows,  a  good  many  foolish  things,  and  in  five 
years  or  less  he  will  disappear  again  and  soon  be  for 
gotten.  ' '  But  who  is  Jesus  ?  One  who  was  in  the  be 
ginning,  was  with  God  and  was  God.  Some  eighteen 
centuries  ago  He  took  upon  Himself  a  human  form, 
lived  thirty  odd  years  on  this  planet,  spake  as  never 
man  spake  before  nor  since,  revealing  the  truths  He 
had  learned  in  eternal  fellowship  with  God,  was  killed 
by  those  of  His  time  for  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of  God, 
was  raised  from  the  dead  by  God  Himself  in  testimony 


108  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

that  His  claim  was  true,  was  exalted  to  God's  right 
hand  "far  above  all  rule  and  authority  and  power  and 
dominion  and  every  name  that  is  named  in  this  world 
or  in  the  world  to  come. ' '  Which  are  you  going  to  be 
lieve  Lyman  Abbott  or  Jesus  Christ.  Pastor  Russell 
or  Jesus  Christ?  If  you  have  any  sense  you  will  be 
lieve  Jesus  Christ.  Through  all  the  centuries  of  Chris 
tian  history  men  have  appeared  who  have  differed 
with  Jesus  Christ,  men  who  have  been  accounted  just 
as  scholarly  and  brilliant  by  their  generations  as  these 
men  who  to-day  presume  to  set  up  their  opinions 
against  the  teachings  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  they  have 
disappeared  from  the  stage  again  and  their  vaunted 
discoveries  have  not  stood  the  test  of  time;  but  the 
teachings  of  Jesus  Christ  have  stood  the  test  of  nearly 
nineteen  centuries.  It  ought  not  to  take  a  man  of  fair 
average  common  sense  very  long  to  decide  whom  to 
believe  under  such  circumstances.  Believe  Jesus 
Christ.  "Well,  if  you  do  believe  Jesus  Christ,  write  it 
down  that  where  we  shall  spend  eternity  is  settled  in 
this  life,  settled  this  side  of  the  grave. 

VII.  Just  one  point  more,  WHERE  YOU  SPEND 
ETERNITY  WILL  BE  DETERMINED  BY  WHAT 
YOU  DO  WITH  JESUS  CHRIST.  If  you  accept 
Jesus  Christ  as  your  Lord  and  Saviour  you  will  spend 
eternity  with  Him.  If  you  reject  Jesus  Christ  you  will 
spend  eternity  away  from  Him.  Listen  to  the  sure 
word  of  God.  "He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath 
everlasting  life:  and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son 
shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
Him"  (John  3 :  36).  Listen  again.  "The  Lord  Jesus 
shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  His  mighty  angels, 
in  flaming  fire,  rendering  vengeance  to  them  that  know 


ETERNITY?  109 

not  God,  and  to  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ:  who  shall  suffer  punishment  even 
everlasting  destruction  from  the  face  of  the  Lord 
and  from  the  glory  of  His  might "  (2  Thess.  1:7-9, 
see  Revised  Version).  Where  we  spend  eternity  will 
be  determined  by  what  we  do  with  Jesus  Christ  in  the 
life  that  now  is. 

Let  us  sum  up  what  we  have  seen  to-night.  First 
there  is  an  eternity ;  second,  we  must  spend  that  eter 
nity  somewhere;  third,  the  question  where  you  will 
spend  eternity  is  vastly  more  important  than  the  ques 
tion  of  where  you  will  spend  your  present  life ;  fourth, 
it  is  possible  for  us  to  know  where  we  shall  spend 
eternity;  fifth,  we  shall  spend  eternity  in  one  of  two 
places,  in  heaven  or  in  hell;  sixth,  where  we  spend 
eternity  will  be  settled  in  the  life  that  now  is ;  seventh, 
where  you  spend  eternity  will  be  determined  by  what 
you  do  with  Jesus  Christ.  My  friend,  whither  goest 
thou?  "Where  will  you  spend  eternity?  There  is  a 
story  that  has  been  often  told,  but  I  wish  to  repeat 
to-night.  In  1867  a  young  French  nobleman  went  to 
London  to  consult  Dr.  Forbes  Winslow,  the  eminent 
pathologist  in  diseases  of  the  mind.  He  took  letters 
of  introduction  from  eminent  men  in  France,  among 
others  one  from  Napoleon  III,  who  was  then  Emperor 
of  France.  Reaching  London  he  called  upon  Dr. 
Forbes  Winslow  and  presented  his  letters  of  introduc 
tion.  Having  read  them  Dr.  Winslow  asked  him  what 
was  the  trouble.  The  young  man  replied,  "I  cannot 
sleep.  I  have  not  had  a  good  night's  sleep  for  two 
years,  and  unless  I  get  sleep  I  will  go  insane."  Dr. 
Forbes  Winslow  asked  him  why  he  could  not  sleep. 
He  replied  he  could  not  tell.  *  *  Have  you  lost  money  ? ' ' 


110  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

"No."  "Have  you  suffered  in  honour  or  reputa 
tion?"  "Not  that  I  know  of."  "Have  you  lost 
friends?"  "Not  recently."  "Why  then  can  you 
not  sleep?"  The  young  man  replied  that  he  would 
rather  not  tell.  Dr.  Winslow  said,  "Unless  you  tell 
me  I  cannot  help  you."  "Well  then  if  you  must 
know,  I  am  an  infidel.  My  father  was  an  infidel 
before  me,  but  strange  as  it  may  appear  to  you, 
though  I  am  an  infidel  and  though  my  father  was 
an  infidel  before  me,  when  I  go  to  bed  at  night 
I  am  haunted  with  this  thought:  Eternity,  and 
where  shall  I  spend  it?  And  it  drives  all  sleep  from 
me.  It  haunts  me  the  whole  night  through.  If  I  suc 
ceed  in  getting  a  little  sleep  my  sleeping  thoughts  are 
worse  than  my  waking  thoughts,  and  I  start  from  my 
sleep  haunted  with  the  question,  Eternity,  and  where 
shall  I  spend  it. "  "I  cannot  help  you, ' '  Dr.  Winslow 
quietly  replied.  "What,"  exclaimed  the  young  man, 
"you  cannot  help  me?  Have  I  come  all  the  way  from 
Paris  to  London,  to  have  my  last  hope  taken  away." 
"No,"  replied  Dr.  Winslow,  "I  cannot  help  you,  but  I 
can  tell  you  of  a  Physician  that  can."  He  walked 
across  his  office  and  took  from  the  table  a  Bible  and 
pointed  to  Isa.  53 :  5  and  read,  "  'But  He  was  wounded 
for  our  transgressions.  He  was  bruised  for  our  ini 
quities  :  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him ; 
and  with  His  stripes  we  are  healed. '  That  is  the  only 
Physician  in  the  universe  who  can  help  you,  Jesus 
Christ."  The  lip  of  the  young  French  nobleman 
curled  with  scorn.  "What,"  he  said,  "do  you  mean  to 
tell  me,  Dr.  Forbes  Winslow,  that  you,  one  of  the  lead 
ing  scientists  of  the  day,  the  most  eminent  pathologist 
in  the  diseases  of  the  mind  in  the  world,  that  you  be- 


.ETERNITY?  Ill 

lieve  that  effete  superstition  of  Christianity  ?' '  "Yes," 
replied  Dr.  Winslow  calmly,  "I  believe  in  Christ,  and 
believing  in  Him  has  saved  me  from  becoming  what 
you  are. ' '  The  young  Frenchman  stood  a  moment  in 
deep  thought,  then  he  looked  up  at  Dr.  Winslow  and 
said,  "Well  if  I  am  honest  I  ought  at  least  to  be  ready 
to  consider  it,  ought  I  not?"  "Yes."  "Well,  will  you 
be  my  teacher?"  "Yes,"  replied  Dr.  Forbes  Wins- 
low,  and  the  eminent  pathologist  in  diseases  of  the 
mind  became  the  physician  of  the  soul.  For  several 
days  he  opened  the  Word  of  God  about  Christ  and  His 
salvation  to  the  young  nobleman  until  the  light  dawned 
in  upon  his  soul,  and  his  heart  was  at  rest  and  he 
went  back  to  Paris  with  the  great  question  settled  of, 
Eternity,  and  where  shall  I  spend  it?  Eternity,  and 
where  shall  I  spend  it  ?  ETERNITY,  AND  WHERE  SHALL 
I  SPEND  IT  ?  I  thank  God  I  know  where  I  shall  spend 
eternity.  I  shall  spend  it  with  Christ  in  the  glory. 


IX 

WHICH  SHALL  WE  BELIEVE,  GOD  OR  MAN? 

"For  what  if  some  did  not  believe  f  Shall  their  un 
belief  make  the  faith  of  God  without  effect  f  God 
forbid:  yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar." — 
Horn.  3:3,4. 

WHAT  I  say  to-night  is  going  to  save  some  of 
you  and  it  is  going  to  damn  some  of  you. 
Some  of  you  are  going  to  heed  the  truth  and 
repent.    Some  of  you  are  going  to  harden  your  hearts 
against  the  truth  and  this  will  come  up  against  you  in 
the  day  of  judgment.    Our  subject  is,  Which  Shall  We 
Believe,  God  or  Man  ?    You  will  find  the  text  in  Rom. 
3  :  3,  4,  "For  what  if  some  did  not  believe ?    Shall  their 
unbelief  make  the  faith  of  God  without  effect?    God 
forbid :  yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar. ' ' 

I.  GOD'S  WORD  BETTER  THAN  MAN'S  WORD. 

My  main  proposition  to-night  is  that  God's  word  is 
better  than  man's.  We  live  in  a  day  when  men  are 
disposed  to  put  great  faith  in  what  men  say,  especially 
in  what  learned  men  say,  but  little  or  no  faith  in  what 
God  says.  Let  some  great  man  of  science  announce 
some  discovery  and  no  matter  how  incredible  it  may 
appear,  no  matter  how  much  there  is  about  it  that  we 
cannot  understand,  we  believe  it  at  once.  But  let  a 

112 


GOD  OR  MAN?  113 

man  find  something  in  the  Word  of  God  that  is  con 
trary  to  his  notions,  or  that  has  something  in  it  that  he 
cannot  understand,  and  he  discards  it  at  once.     Tell 
men  what  the  Bible  says  and  they  look  wise  and  shrug 
their  shoulders  and  say,  ''Yes,  but  I  do  not  think  so. 
I  think  this  way. ' '    Tell  them  what  some  great  scien 
tist  or  some  leading  literary  critic,  or  some  brilliant 
but  erratic  preacher  says,  and  they  think  that  settles  it. 
What  foolishness,  what  consummate  foolishness.    The 
opinion  of  the  greatest  scientist  that  ever  lived,  or  the 
greatest  philosopher,  or  the  most  learned  Hebrew  or 
Greek  scholar,  or  the  most  brilliant  pulpit  orator  is  of 
no  value  whatever  against  the  word  of  the  infinitely 
wise  and  eternally  truthful  God,  of  God  who  is  never 
mistaken  and  cannot  lie.    The  opinion  of  all  men  to 
gether  is  of  no  weight  against  the  Word  of  God.    "Let 
God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar. ' '    The  man  who  be 
lieves  any  man  against  God  is  a  fool.    The  man  who 
believes  any  company  of  men  against  God  is  a  fool. 
The  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God.    That  can  be  proven  by 
many  unanswerable  proofs.     I  have  proven  it  from 
this  platform.     On  the  other  hand,  for  eighteen  cen 
turies  and  more  the  opinions  of  scientists  and  philoso 
phers  have  come  and  gone,  to-day  regarded  as  the  final 
word  of  wisdom,  and  to-morrow  regarded  as  sheerest 
folly.     But  the  teachings  of  this  book  for  all  these 
centuries  have  stood  fast  amid  all  the  wreckage  of 
man's  thinking.    The  experience  of  eighteen  centuries 
proves  that  the  man  who  banks  on  the  Bible  is  wise. 
The  man  who  throws  the  Bible  overboard  and  turns 
to  any  other  source  of  light  and  guidance  always 
misses  it  in  the  long  run.    He  always  has  for  eighteen 
centuries,  and  he  always  will  for  all  the  centuries  that 


114  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

are  to  come.  The  truly  wise  man  is  he  who  always 
believes  this  book  against  the  opinion  of  any  man, 
against  any  scientist,  against  any  philosopher,  against 
any  literary  scholar,  against  any  council  of  theologians 
or  any  congress  of  philosophers  and  savants.  If  the 
Bible  says  one  thing  and  any  body  of  men,  or  any 
company  of  men  say  another,  the  truly  wise  man  will 
say,  "Let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar." 

II.  SOME  POINTS  ON  WHICH  MEN  DIFFER  FROM  GOD. 

1.  Let  us  look  at  some  points  at  which  many  men 
differ  from  God.  First  of  all,  a  great  many  men,  men 
who  are  considered  wise,  unusually  wise,  differ  from 
God  about  the  existence  of  a  personal  devil.  A  very 
large  number  of  men  in  our  day,  including  some  prom 
inent  theologians,  laugh  at  the  idea  of  their  being  any 
such  person  as  the  Devil.  One  frequently  hears  men 
say,  ''There  is  no  Devil  but  sin."  Now  that  is  what 
men  say,  very  many  men,  but  what  does  God  say? 
Turn  to  Eph.  6 : 11, 12  and  you  will  see  what  God  says : 
' '  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  ye  may  be  able 
to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  Devil.  For  our 
wrestlings  is  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against 
the  principalities,  against  the  powers,  against  the  . 
world — rulers  of  this  darkness  against  the  spiritual 
hosts  of  wickedness  in  the  heavenly  places. ' '  Turn  to 
1  Pet.  5 :  8  and  you  will  see  again  what  God  has  to  say 
on  this  point.  He  says,  ' '  Be  sober,  be  watchful :  your 
adversary  the  devil  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about, 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  God  says  that  there 
is  a  devil,  a  being  of  great  cunning  and  great  power, 
as  well  as  great  malignity,  a  being  who  is  more  than  a 


GOD  OR  MAN?  115 

match  for  you  or  me,  and  that  he  is  plotting  our  de 
struction  and  all  the  time  working  to  accomplish  it. 
God  is  certainly  right  about  this,  and,  if  you  believe 
there  is  no  devil  but  your  own  sin  you  are  a  greatly 
deceived  individual,  and  the  very  devil  you  think  does 
not  exist  has  deceived  you,  and  he  has  done  it  in  order 
to  destroy  you.  An  Indian  in  ambush  is  a  particularly 
dangerous  Indian  and  a  devil  who  has  persuaded  peo 
ple  that  he  does  not  exist  at  all  is  a  particularly  dan 
gerous  devil.  No  other  class  of  people  fall  so  easily  a 
prey  to  the  devil's  subtlety  as  do  the  people  who  do 
not  believe  there  is  any  devil.  Show  me  a  man  or 
woman  who  does  not  believe  there  is  a  devil  and  I  will 
show  you  every  time  a  man  or  woman  whom  the  devil 
has  blinded  and  on  whom  he  is  getting  in  his  work. 
The  Christian  Scientists  are  among  the  leaders  of 
those  who  deny  the  existence  of  a  personal  devil,  and 
what  other  class  of  intelligent  people  are  there  on 
earth  to-day  who  are  so  evidently  blinded  by  the  devil 
as  they  are.  Many  of  the  Christian  Scientists  are  peo 
ple  of  unusual  intelligence  in  many  matters,  but  when 
they  come  to  talk  about  their  peculiar  theories  their 
reasoning  is  the  most  absurd  and  preposterous  and 
ridiculous  and  ludicrous  that  was  ever  foisted  upon  a 
credulous  and  devil-blinded  people. 

2.  Many  men  differ  from  God  about  a  future  judg 
ment.  Many  and  many  in  this  day  do  not  believe  that 
there  is  to  be  a  future  judgment.  Tell  many  men  in 
our  day  that  there  is  a  time  coming  when  they  shall 
have  to  stand  before  the  judgment  bar  of  God  with 
His  holy  and  all-seeing  eye  piercing  them  through  and 
through,  and  answer  for  all  their  deeds  done  in  the 
body,  and  for  all  their  words  that  they  have  spoken ; 


116  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

tell  them  that  for  every  idle  word  a  man  speaks  he  will 
have  to  give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment, 
as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says  they  will  (Matt.  12 :  36), 
and  they  will  laugh  at  you  in  scorn.  But  what  does 
God  say?  Turn  to  Acts  17 :  30,  31  and  you  will  find 
what  God  says.  ' '  The  times  of  ignorance  therefore  God 
overlooked;  but  now  He  commandeth  men  that  they 
should  all  everywhere  repent:  inasmuch  as  He  hath 
appointed  a  day  in  which  He  will  judge  the  world  in 
righteousness  by  the  man  whom  He  hath  ordained; 
whereof  He  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in  that 
He  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  Turn  to  Rom. 
14 : 12  and  you  will  hear  what  God  has  to  say  on  this 
subject,  *  *  So  then  each  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of 
himself  to  God."  Turn  to  2  Cor.  5:10  and  you  will 
hear  again  what  God  has  to  say,  "For  we  must  all 
appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ,  that  every 
one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body,  ac 
cording  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or 
bad."  Turn  once  more  to  Matt.  12:  36  and  you  will 
hear  God's  very  plain  utterance  on  this  subject  spoken 
by  the  lips  of  His  own  Son,  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  "And  I  say  unto  you,  that  every  idle 
word  that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give  account 
thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment."  God  is  right  again. 
There  is  one  thing  absolutely  sure  about  the  future 
and  that  is  that  there  is  going  to  be  a  judgment  day. 
How  this  present  war  will  turn  out  I  do  not  know  and 
no  other  man  knows.  A  few  weeks  ago  we  were  told 
that  it  was  absolutely  sure  that  Germany  would  be 
conquered  in  three  months,  but  now  they  are  telling 
us  that  it  will  take  three  years,  and  the  fact  is  we  do 
not  know  that  it  will  be  conquered  at  all.  It  is  not 


GOD  OR  MAN?  117 

absolutely  sure.  It  is  not  absolutely  sure  that  there 
will  ever  be  another  summer  or  another  election  or 
another  Christmas,  but  it  is  sure  that  there  will  be  a 
judgment  day.  It  is  absolutely  sure  that  you  and  I 
will  stand  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  and  give 
account  of  the  deeds  done  here  in  the  body,  and  the 
words  spoken  here.  It  is  absolutely  sure  that  each 
one  of  us  will  give  account  of  himself  to  God. 

3.  Many  men  differ  from  God  about  Hell.     (1) 
There  are  many  in  our  day  who  do  not  believe  that 
there  is  any  hell  at  all.     There  are  many  who  say 
in  the  most  positive  way,  " There  is  no  hell."    A  lady 
once  said  to  me,  "Why,  Mr.  Torrey,  you  do  not  believe 
in  hell  ? "    It  is  not  a  question  what  I  believe,  but  what 
God  says.     What  does  God  say?     He  says  in  Matt. 
5 : 29,  30,  which  by  the  way  is  a  part  of  the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount  which  all  men  say  they  believe,  even  though 
they  do  not  believe  the  rest  of  the  Bible:  "And  if  thy 
right  eye  causeth  thee  to  stumble,  pluck  it  out,  and  cast 
it  from  thee:  for  it  is  profitable  for  thee  that  one  of 
thy  members  should  perish,  and  not  thy  whole  body 
be  cast  into  hell.    And  if  thy  right  hand  causeth  thee 
to  stumble,  cut  it  off,  and  cast  it  from  thee:  for  it  is 
profitable  for  thee  that  one  of  thy  members  should 
perish,  and  not  thy  whole  body  go  into  hell."    I  have 
quoted  these  words  of  God  from  the  Revised  Version, 
for  many  foolishly  say  that  hell  while  it  is  found  in 
the  Authorized  Version  has  disappeared  from  the  Re 
vised  Version.    They  evidently  know  as  little  about  the 
Revised  Version  as  they  do  about  the  Authorized. 
Again  you  will  find  what  God  says  on  this  subject  in 
Luke  12 :  4,  5,  "And  I  say  unto  you  my  friends,  Be  not 
afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have 


118  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

no  more  that  they  can  do.  But  I  will  warn  you  whom 
ye  shall  fear :  Fear  him,  who  after  he  hath  killed  hath 
power  to  cast  into  hell;  yea,  I  say  unto  you,  Fear 
him."  Let  me  say  in  passing  that  the  one  who  has 
power  to  cast  into  hell  is  not  the  devil.  The  devil  has 
no  power  to  cast  into  Hell  nor  in  Hell,  in  Hell  he  him 
self  is  one  of  the  prisoners.  God  is  the  One  who  has 
power  to  cast  into  hell  and  He  is  the  One  whom  we 
should  fear.  Turn  once  more  to  Kev.  21 : 8  and  you 
will  see  a  very  plain  statement  of  God  about  hell: 
"But  the  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and  abominable, 
and  murderers,  and  fornicators,  and  sorcerers  and 
idolaters,  and  all  liars,  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake 
that  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone;  which  is  the 
second  death. " 

(2)  There  are  some  again  who  believe  there  is  a  hell 
but  they  do  not  believe  it  is  an  everlasting  hell.  Many 
say,  "You  do  not  believe  in  everlasting  punishment,  do 
you  ? ' '  Again  I  say  it  is  not  a  question  of  what  I  be 
lieve,  or  what  you  believe,  but  of  what  God  says. 
Read  Matt.  25:  41,  "Then  shall  he  say  unto  them  on 
the  left  hand,  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  the 
eternal  fire  which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels."  As  to  how  long  that  punishment  lasts  that 
is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,  you  will  find 
it  set  forth  in  Rev.  20 : 10,  which  describes  what  will 
occur  at  the  end  of  the  millennium,  after  the  beast 
and  the  false  prophet  have  been  in  hell  a  thousand 
years:  "And  the  devil  that  deceived  them  was  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,  where  are  also  the 
beast  and  the  false  prophet  (remember  they  have  al 
ready  been  there  a  thousand  years)  ;  and  they  shall  be 
tormented  day  and  night  for  ever  and  ever."  Listen 


GOD  OR  MAN?  119 

again  to  what  God  says  in  Rev.  14:9-11,  "And  the 
third  angel  followed  them,  saying  with  a  loud  voice, 
If  any  man  worship  the  beast  and  his  image,  and  re 
ceive  his  mark  in  his  forehead,  or  in  his  hand,  the 
same  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God, 
which  is  poured  out  without  mixture  into  the  cup  of 
his  indignation ;  and  he  shall  be  tormented  with  fire 
and  brimstone  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and 
in  the  presence  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  smoke  of  their 
torment  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever:  and  they  have 
no  rest  day  nor  night,  who  worship  the  beast  and  his 
image,  and  whosoever  receiveth  the  mark  of  his  name." 
Listen  once  more  to  what  God  has  to  say  on  the  sub 
ject  of  eternal  hell  in  Rev.  20:15,  "And  if  any  was 
not  found  written  in  the  book  of  life,  he  was  cast  into 
the  lake  of  fire."    Is  your  name  written  in  the  book 
of  life  ?    If  it  is  not  you  will  spend  an  endless  eternity 
in  hell.    I  do  not  state  that  as  my  opinion,  but  as  God's 
Word.    Make  it  sure  to-night  that  your  name  is  in  the 
book  of  life  by  accepting  Jesus  Christ. 

4.  Again  men  differ  from  God  about  a  future  proba 
tion.  There  are  many  men  who  say,  and  they  are 
oftentimes  men  whom  the  world  considers  wise,  and 
they  say  it  with  great  positiveness,  that  if  men  do  not 
repent  of  their  sins  and  accept  Christ  now  in  this  life 
they  will  have  another  chance  to  repent  and  turn  to 
Christ  after  they  are  dead.  I  formerly  believed  and 
preached  that  myself,  but  what  does  God  say?  Turn 
to  John  8 :  21  and  you  will  find  what  God  says.  God 
tells  us  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  said  unto  the  people 
that  gathered  around  Him  when  He  was  here  on 
earth,  "I  go  away,  and  ye  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  die 
in  your  sin:  whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come."  In  other 


120  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

words,  God  says  through  His  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  that  if  a  man  dies  in  his  sin  he  cannot  go  where 
Jesus  Christ  does,  that  he  has  no  other  chance.  Turn 
again  to  Heb.  9 : 27  and  read  what  God  says  about  a 
future  probation:  "It,  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to 
die,  but  after  this  cometh  judgment."  Listen  once 
more  to  what  God  has  to  say  about  a  future  probation. 
You  will  find  it  in  2  Cor.  5:10,  "For  we  must  all 
appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  that  every 
one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body,  according 
to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad." 
Note  that  carefully.  The  basis  of  judgment  will  be 
"the  things  done  in  the  body,"  the  things  done  in  this 
present  life,  the  things  done  before  we  shuffle  off  this 
mortal  coil,  the  things  done  this  side  of  the  grave. 
When  a  man's  life  on  earth  is  ended  his  eternal  des 
tiny  is  settled. 

5.  Men  differ  from  God  about  the  way  of  salvation. 
Many  men  say  that  if  a  man  lives  a  good  moral  life 
he  will  be  saved ;  he  may  be  a  Jew  or  a  Mohammedan, 
or  a  Bhuddist,  or  a  Christian,  but  if  he  is  only  sincere 
he  will  be  saved.  They  say  no  man  will  be  lost  simply 
because  he  does  not  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  and  con 
fess  Jesus  Christ  before  the  world.  At  the  time  of 
Col.  Ingersoll's  death  a  Chicago  preacher  who  claimed 
to  be  a  Christian  said,  "Heaven  or  any  good  country 
will  welcome  a  man  like  Col.  Ingersoll."  Of  course, 
the  infidels  applauded  when  he  said  it,  and  I  suppose 
that  this  professedly  Christian  preacher  was  glad  to 
get  the  applause  of  the  avowed  enemies  of  Jesus 
Christ.  But  what  does  God  say?  Listen  to  John 
14:  6,  "Jesus  saith  unto  him,  I  am  the  "Way,  the  Truth 
and  the  Life :  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by 


GOD  OR  MAN?  121 

me."    Listen  again  to  what  God  says  in  Acts  4:12, 
11  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other  (than  Jesus 
Christ)  :  for  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven 
given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved. ' '    Listen 
still  again  as  God  speaks  in  John  3 : 18,  "He  that  be- 
liveth  on  Him    (i.e.,   on  Jesus   Christ)    is  not  con 
demned:  but  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  al 
ready,  because  he  hath  not  believed  on  the  name  of  the 
only  begotten  Son  of  God."    Listen  still  again  to  the 
voice  of  God  as  He  speaks  to  us  in  John  3:36,  "He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life :  and  he 
that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life:  but  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."    Listen  still  again  as 
God  speaks  in  Rom.  10:  9,  10,  "If  thou  shalt  confess 
with  thy  mouth  Jesus  as  Lord,  and  shalt  believe  in  thy 
heart  that  God  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be 
saved:  for  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  right 
eousness  ;  and  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto 
salvation. ' '    Listen  once  again,  and  now  God  is  speak 
ing  through  the  lips  of  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  Matt. 
10 :  32,  33) ,  "Every  one  therefore  who  shall  confess  me 
before  men,  him  will  I  also  confess  before  my  Father 
who  is  in  heaven.    But  whosoever  shall  deny  me  before 
men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father  who  is  in 
heaven." 

6.  Many  men  differ  from  God  about  the  conditions 
of  entering  the  kingdom  of  God.  Many  men  say  that 
the  way  to  get  into  the  kingdom  of  God  is  by  leading 
an  upright  life,  by  treating  your  wife  well,  and  your 
children  well,  and  being  honest  in  business,  and  kind 
to  the  poor,  and  doing  other  good  things.  Others  say 
the  way  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  is  by  being  bap 
tized  and  uniting  with  the  church  and  partaking  of 


122  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

the  communion,  and  reading  your  Bible,  and  saying 
your  prayers,  and  going  to  confession,  etc.  But  what 
does  God  say?  Listen,  John  3:3,  5,  "Jesus  answered, 
and  said  unto  him,  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Ex 
cept  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  can 
not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  Listen  again  on 
the  same  point  to  the  voice  of  God  as  He  speaks  in  Tit. 
3 :  5,  6,  "Not  by  works  done  in  righteousness,  which  we 
did  ourselves,  but  according  to  His  mercy  He  saved 
us,  through  the  washing  of  regeneration  and  renewing 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  He  poured  out  upon  us 
richly,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour." 

7.  Men  differ  from  God  about  the  best  time  to  repent 
and  accept  Christ.  Many  men  are  saying  that  there 
will  be  some  day  a  better  time  than  to-night  to  repent 
of  our  sins  and  to  turn  to  Christ.  Many  of  you  here 
to-night  are  saying  that,  or  thinking  it  if  you  do  not 
say  it,  or  acting  it  if  you  do  not  think  it.  But  what 
does  God  say?  Listen.  2  Cor.  6:2,  "Behold,  now  is 
the  accepted  time,  behold  now  is  the  day  of  salvation." 
Listen  again,  Heb.  3:7,  "The  Holy  Ghost  saith  to 
day."  Listen  still  again  (Prov.  27:1),  "Boast  not 
thyself  of  to-morrow ;  for  thou  knowest  not  what  a  day 
may  bring  forth."  And  now  listen  once  more  (Prov. 
29: 1),  "He  that  being  often  reproved  hardeneth  his 
neck  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without 
remedy."  When  the  Apostle  Paul  reasoning  before 
Felix,  the  corrupt  Roman  governor,  told  him  of  right 
eousness  and  self-control,  and  the  judgment  to.  come, 
Felix  was  terrified,  but  he  thought  there  would  be  a 
better  time  to  repent  than  just  then,  and  said,  "Go 
thy  way  for  this  time,  when  I  have  a  convenient  sea 
son,  I  will  call  for  thee. ' '  He  thought  some  other  time 


GOD  OR  MAN?  123 

would  be  more  convenient  than  that  time,  but  he  never 
found  the  more  convenient  time,  and  that  is  why  he  is 
in  Hades  now  and  why  he  will  spend  eternity  in 

hell. 

These  are  some  of  the  things  that  men  say  and  some 
of  the  things  God  says.    Which  will  you  believe?     I 
say,  "Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar."    But 
perhaps  some  one  will  say,  "But  I  do  not  believe  that 
the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God, ' '    My  friend,  did  it  ever 
occur  to  you  that  your  not  believing  that  the  Bible  is 
the  word  of  God  does  not  alter  the  fact  at  all?    At  the 
time  of  the  Boxer  uprising  in   China  some  of  the 
Boxers  did  not  believe  they  could  be  killed  by  bullets, 
they  thought  that  their  incantations  and  their  magic 
rites  made  them  invulnerable  against  bullets.  They 
were  very  sincere  in  their  belief.     A  Chinese  officer 
asked  them  to  prove  their  sincerity  by  drawing  up  in 
line  and  he  would  have  his  soldiers  shoot  at  them. 
They  consented.  They  drew  up  in  line  before  the  muz 
zles  of  the  guns.  They  were  very  sincere.  The  Chinese 
soldiers  blazed  away  and  every  Boxer  dropped  dead. 
Their  doubt  of  the  power  of  the  bullets  to  kill  them 
did  not  alter  the  fact.    Your  doubt  that  the  Bible  is 
God's  Word  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  it  is.     Sup 
pose  for  a  moment  that  the  Bible  turns  out  to  be  the 
Word  of  God,  as  all  those  who  know  it  best  and  know 
God  best  say  that  it  is.    You  must  at  least  admit  that 
it  is  possible  that  it  is  the  Word  of  God.    You  must 
admit  that  the  men  and  women  who  are  really  living 
nearest  God  and  know  God  best  believe  that  the  Bible 
is  the  Word  of  God.    Suppose  they  prove  to  be  right, 
where  will  you  be?     Damned.     And  that  is  exactly 
what  you  will  be  if  you  go  on  doubting  God's  Word 


124  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

and  rejecting  God 's  Son,  listening  to  the  voice  of  man 
rather  than  the  voice  of  God. 

God  says  that  there  is  a  devil  and  that  you  need 
Christ's  help  against  his  cunning  and  power.  God 
says  that  there  is  a  future  judgment  and  that  we  must 
all  give  account  to  God.  God  says  that  there  is  a  hell, 
and  that  it  is  a  place  of  torment  where  all  who  reject 
Christ  will  spend  eternity.  God  says  there  is  no  future 
probation,  that  the  issues  of  eternity  are  settled  in  the 
life  that  now  is.  God  says  there  is  but  one  way  to  be 
saved,  i.  e.,  by  the  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ  as  our 
Saviour,  and  surrender  to  Him  as  our  Lord,  and  con 
fession  of  Him  before  the  world.  God  says  that  the 
only  way  to  enter  the  kingdom  is  to  be  born  again. 
God  says  that  the  best  time  to  accept  Christ  and  be 
saved  is  right  now.  "Now  is  the  accepted  time;  now 
is  the  day  of  salvation."  "The  Holy  Ghost  saith  to 
day."  "Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow,  for  thou 
knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth."  "He  that 
being  often  reproved  hardeneth  his  neck  shall  sud 
denly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy. ' '  Who 
of  you  will  turn  from  sin  and  unbelief  and  turn  to 
Jesus  Christ  and  accept  Him  as  your  Saviour  and 
surrender  to  Him  as  your  Lord  and  Master,  and  con 
fess  Him  as  such  right  now? 


THE  NEW  BIRTH  AS  SET  FORTH  IN 
JOHN  3 : 2-21 

THE  subject  of  our  study  this  morning  is  The 
New  Birth.  One  of  the  most  fundamental 
and  vital  doctrines  in  Christianity  is  the  doc 
trine  of  the  New  Birth.  If  men  are  wrong  here  they 
are  likely  to  be  wrong  everywhere,  and  if  they  are 
right  and  clear  in  regard  to  this  doctrine,  they  are 
pretty  sure  to  be  right  and  clear  on  every  doctrine. 
We  shall  study  the  doctrine  of  the  New  Birth  as  it  is 
set  forth  in  the  third  chapter  of  John,  the  1st  to  21st 
verses.  In  this  chapter  our  Lord  tells  us  first  of  the 
Necessity  of  the  New  Birth;  second,  the  Nature  of  the 
New  Birth,  and  third,  the  Method  of  the  New  Birth. 

1.  THE  NECESSITY  OF  THE  NEW  BIRTH. 

1.  The  first  thing  that  our  Lord  Jesus  teaches  us  in 
the  third  chapter  of  John  in  regard  to  the  necessity  of 
the  new  birth  is  that  that  necessity  is  UNIVERSAL. 
In  the  third  verse  He  says,  "  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto 
thee,  except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God."  Literally  translated,  these  words 
would  read,  "Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  except 
anyone  be  born  again  (or,  from  above),  he  cannot  see 

125 


126  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

the   kingdom   of    God."      Not    one   single    man    or 
woman  or  child  will  be  able  to  see  the  kingdom  of 
God  except  they  be  born  from  above.     In  verse  7 
our  Lord  says,  "Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee, 
Ye  must   be   born   again    (or   from   above)."     The 
emphasis  is  upon  the  "thee"  and  "Ye."     Nicode- 
mus  would  not  have  been  at  all  amazed  or  surprised  if 
the  Lord  Jesus  had  taught  that  a  Gentile  needed  to  be 
born  again,  what  surprised  him  was  that  the  Lord 
should  have  said  it  to  him,  and  that  he  and  other  men 
of  his  class  must  be  born  again.     Our  Lord's  words 
when  taken  in  their  connection,  set  forth  in  the  most 
forcible  manner  possible  that  there  is  not  one  single 
man  on  earth  who  can  see  the  kingdom  of  God  ex 
cept  he  have  a  personal  experience  of  the  New  Birth. 
If  any  man  could  get  to  heaven  without  being  born 
again  Nicodemus  was  the  man.     He  seemed  to  have 
pretty  much  everything  that  would  entitle  one  to 
an  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  God.     He  was  a 
man  of  most  scrupulous  morality,  he  was  a  man  of 
lofty  aspirations,  he  was  a  man  who  longed  to  know 
the  truth  and  was  willing  to  make  sacrifices  in  order  to 
know  it,  he  was  a  man  who  was  endeavouring  to  live  up 
to  the  truth  as  far  as  he  did  know  it,  he  was  a  generous 
man,  giving  a  tithe  of  all  that  he  got  as  a  starting 
point  in  his  giving,  and  added  to  that  generous  free 
will  offerings;  he  was  an  intensely  religious  man,  a 
man  who  studied  his  Bible,  and  a  man  who  prayed,  he 
was  a  man  who  carefully  observed  the  ceremonials  of 
the  Jewish  religion  (which  was  a  Divinely  revealed  re 
ligion,  Jno.  4:  22),  he  was  an  active  worker,  he  was  a 
teacher  of  the  truth  as  far  as  he  knew  it,  indeed  he  was 
"the  teacher  of  Israel."  What  more  could  a  man  need 


THE  NEW  BIRTH  127 

in  order  to  fit  him  to  see  and  enter  the  kingdom  of 
God  ?  And  yet  the  Lord  Jesus  said  to  him,  "  You  need 
to  be  born  again."  If  Nicodenras  could  not  see  nor 
enter  the  kingdom  without  the  experience  of  the  New 
Birth,  certainly  none  of  us  can.  The  necessity  of  the 
New  Birth  is  absolutely  universal,  there  are  no  ex 
ceptions.  The  teaching  is  very  common  to-day  that 
while  certain  classes  of  men  and  women,  those  that 
have  gone  into  sin  and  whose  characters  have  become 
corrupted,  may  need  to  be  born  again,  people  who  are 
well  born  the  first  time,  of  pious  parents,  and  who  have 
a  naturally  amiable  disposition,  and  who  have  been 
reared  morally  and  religiously  from  early  childhood, 
do  not  need  to  be  born  again.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
says  that  they  do.  Not  one  man,  woman  or  child  shall 
see  or  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  without  being  born 
again. 

2.  The  seventh  verse  teaches  us  that  the  necessity  of 
the  New  Birth  is  not  only  universal,  but  that  it  is  also 
IMPERATIVE.    Our  Lord  Jesus  says  to  Nicodemus, 
"You  must  be  born  again,"  not  merely  you  may  be, 
but  "you  must  be."     The  New  Birth  is  not  merely 
a  matter  of  privilege,  it  is  a  matter  of  solemn  and 
imperative  necessity,  and  I  say  to  every  one  of  you 
here  to-day,  who  has  not  already  been  born  again, 
"You  must  be  born  again." 

3.  The  third  thing  that  Jesus  taught  regarding  the 
necessity  of  the  New  Birth  is  that  it  is  also  ABSO 
LUTE.    Nothing  else  will  take  the  place  of  the  New 
Birth.     (1)  Reform  will  not  take  the  place  of  the  New 
Birth.  Many  of  the  preachers  of  our  day  are  preach 
ing  reform,  they  are  telling  men,  and  telling  men  very 
forcefully,  that  they  must  give  up  this  sin  and  that 


128  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

sin  in  their  lives.  Well,  reform  is  well  enough  in  its 
way,  but  mere  reform  will  not  save,  no  matter  how 
thoroughgoing  the  reform  may  be.  Men  need  some 
thing  deeper  and  more  radical  than  reform,  they  must 
be  "born  again."  The  central  teaching  of  one  great 
preacher  in  this  land  was  "Quit  your  meanness,"  and 
he  led  thousands  of  people  in  this  country  to  quit 
their  meanness  in  many  forms,  but  quitting  one's 
meanness  is  not  enough,  however  desirable  it  may  be, 
as  far  as  it  goes.  What  men  need  to  be  told  is,  "You 
must  be  born  again."  There  must  be  not  mere  refor 
mation  but  regeneration. 

(2)  Morality  is  not  enough.  Morality  is  an  attrac 
tive  thing,  but  it  is  an  external  thing.  Nicodemus  had 
morality,  but  he  needed  something  more,  something 
deeper,  something  that  underlies  a  true  and  abiding 
morality.  Our  Lord  said  (Matt.  5:20),  "I  say  unto 
you,  that  except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed  the 
righteousness  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in 
no  wise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. "  The 
Pharisees  were  moral,  scrupulously  moral,  but  their 
morality  was  superficial,  it  was  not  a  morality  of 
the  heart.  The  only  man  who  will  enter  into  the  king 
dom  of  heaven  is  the  man  whose  morality  is  of  that 
deep  kind,  affecting  the  will  and  the  affections  and  the 
whole  inner  life,  that  results  from  the  New  Birth. 
(3)  Baptism  will  not  take  the  place  of  the  New  Birth. 
In  the  fifth  verse  we  are  told,  "Except  a  man  be  born 
of  water  and  tlie  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  king 
dom  of  God."  Even  if  we  take  the  water  in  this  pas 
sage  to  refer  to  the  water  of  baptism  (which  it  does 
not)  still  we  find  our  Lord  saying  that  it  is  not  enough 
to  be  born  of  water,  but  that  we  must  be  born,  "of 


THE  NEW  BIRTH  129 

water  and  the  Spirit."  The  birth  from  above,  the 
birth  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  necessary, 
even  though  one  has  been  baptized  by  water  in  any 
form  of  baptism.  In  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles  we  read  of  Simon  Magus  who  was  bap 
tized,  and  whatever  the  proper  form  of  baptism  may 
be,  he  was  certainly  baptized  by  the  proper  form  for 
the  work  was  done  by  a  Divinely  appointed  man,  and 
yet  further  on  in  the  record  we  hear  Peter  saying  unto 
this  same  properly  baptized  Simon  Magus,  "Thou 
hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter :  for  thy  heart 
is  not  right  before  God  ....  For  I  see  that  thou  art 
in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity." 
The  baptism  of  Simon  Magus  was  not  enough,  it  was 
not  the  new  birth,  and  he  needed  to  be  born  again. 

(4)  Religion  will  not  take  the  place  of  the  New  Birth. 
Religion  is  all  right   in  its  way,   if  it  is  true   re 
ligion,  but  religion  will  not  save.     No  amount  of 
observation  of  the  externalities  of  true  religion,  Bible 
reading,  prayer,  churchgoing,  observation  of  the  ordi 
nances,  will  save.    No  man  can  see  or  enter  the  king 
dom  of  heaven,  no  matter  how  religious,  except  he  be 
born  again.     Nicodemus  was  religious,  extremely  re 
ligious,  but  he  was  unsaved  until  he  was  born  again. 

(5)  Generosity  in  giving  will  not  take  the  place  of  the 
New  Birth.    How  many  there  are  to-day  who  are  really 
depending  for  their  hope  of  heaven  upon  their  gener 
ous  giving,  and  how  many  there  are  who  think  of 
others  who  are  generous  givers  that  these  men  cannot 
be  lost  because  they  give  so  much  for  the  poor  and  for 
God's  work,  but  even  though  one  should  give  all  his 
goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  have  not  that  love  which 
comes  from  being  born  again  it  would  profit  him  noth- 


130  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

ing  (1  Cor.  13:3).  The  Pharisees  were  generous 
givers,  they  were  careful  to  tithe  absolutely  everything 
they  received,  down  to  the  mint  and  anise  in  their 
gardens,  but  they  were  unsaved  and  needed  to  be  born 
again.  (6)  Conviction  of  sin  will  not  take  the  place 
of  the  New  Birth.  Many  think  that  they  are  saved 
because  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  they  have 
been  brought  under  deep  conviction  of  sin,  but  after 
they  have  spent  days  or  weeks  in  agony  over 
their  sins  they  find  that  conviction  is  not  conver 
sion,  much  less  is  it  the-.  New  Birth,  and  though 
one  should  sob  and  wail  over  his  sins  for  years 
or  his  whole  life,  he  could  not  by  that  means 
enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  No  amount  of  sobbing 
and  wailing  and  doing  penance  will  take  the  place  of 
the  New  Birth.  (7)  Culture  will  not  take  the  place  of 
the  New  Birth,  even  though  it  be  " ethical  culture"  or 
religious  culture.  Everywhere  through  Christendom 
the  churches  are  substituting  culture,  ''ethical  cul 
ture,"  or  religious  culture,  or  intellectual  culture,  for 
the  New  Birth,  but  culture  will  not  do  "you  must  be 
born  again."  Nicodemus  was  one  of  the  most  cultured 
men  among  his  people,  he  was  "the  teacher  of  Israel," 
but  he  was  lost,  and  the  most  cultured  people  of 
America  to-day,  the  most  cultured  men  and  women  of 
Los  Angeles  are  lost  men  and  women,  unless  they  have 
been  born  again.  (8)  Prayer  will  not  take  the  place 
of  the  New  Birth.  A  man  may  spend  hours  a  day  in 
prayer  and  yet  be  a  lost  man.  Cornelius  was  a  man  of 
prayer  and  a  generous  giver,  so  notable  was  he  for 
prayer  and  almsgiving  that  his  prayers  and  alms  went 
up  for  a  remembrance  before  God  (Acts  10 :  4),  but  he 
needed  to  be  saved  by  being  born  again  through  faith 


THE  NEW  BIRTH  131 

in  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  angel  said  to  him  to  send  to 
Joppa  for  a  man  called  Peter  who  would  speak  unto 
him  words  whereby  he  should  "be  saved"  (Acts 
11: 13,  14).  Evidently  he  was  not  saved  as  yet.  The 
necessity  of  the  New  Birth  is  absolute,  there  is  nothing 
else  that  will  take  its  place. 

4.  Why  is  the  New  Birth  absolutely  necessary? 
Verse  6  tells  us  why  the  new  birth  is  absolutely  neces 
sary,  why  nothing  else  will  take  its  place.  The  reason 
is  because  "that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh; 
and  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  In 
other  words,  all  that  we  can  get  by  our  human  parent 
age,  no  matter  how  godly  or  pious  or  moral  or  cultured 
our  parentage  may  be,  is  that  which  is  natural  and  not 
that  which  is  spiritual,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  is 
spiritual  and  in  order  to  enter  that  kingdom  we  must 
be  born  of  the  Spirit.  Human  nature  is  rotten  to  the 
core. 

II.  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  NEW  BIRTH. 

In  this  chapter  we  have  a  very  clear  explanation  of 
just  what  the  nature  of  the  New  Birth  is. 

1.  First  of  all  it  is  a  RADICAL  TRANSFORMA 
TION  OF  OUR  INMOST  NATURE.  This  comes  out 
in  the  very  wording  of  what  our  Lord  said,  "Ye  must 
be  born  again  (or,  anew,  or,  from  above)."  It  is  not 
a  mere  outward  change,  but  a  birth,  a  new  birth. 
Elsewhere  we  are  told  it  is  a  new  creation.  Paul  says 
in  2  Cor.  5 : 17,  "If  any  man  is  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new 
creation  (or,  there  is  a  new  creation)  :  the  old  things 
are  passed  away;  behold  they  are  become  new."  Evi 
dently  the  New  Birth  is  a  radical  transformation  in 


132  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

the  deepest  depths  of  our  being,  the  impartation  of  a 
new  nature,  a  new  intellectual  nature,  a  new  emotional 
nature,  a  new  volitional  nature.  That  is  to  say,  new 
thoughts,  new  ideas,  new  ambitions,  new  desires,  new 
feelings,  new  emotions,  a  new  will.  It  is  an  imparta 
tion  of  God's  own  nature  to  us.  As  the  Apostle  Peter 
puts  it  in  2  Pet.  1 :  4,  "By  these  (that  is  by  the  Word 
of  God,  by  God's  exceeding  great  and  precious  prom 
ises) "  we  "become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature. " 
We  are  born  into  this  world  with  a  corrupt  nature  in 
every  part  of  our  mental  and  moral  being.  Our  minds 
are  blind  to  the  truth  of  God.  As  Paul  puts  it,  "the 
natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him;  and  he  can 
not  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  dis 
cerned"  (1  Cor.  2:14)  ;  our  feelings  are  corrupt,  we 
love  the  things  that  God  hates  and  hate  the  things  that 
God  loves ;  our  will  is  perverse,  our  wills  are  set  upon 
pleasing  ourselves  instead  of  upon  pleasing  God.  In 
the  New  Birth  we  get  a  new  mind,  a  mind  that  is  open 
to  the  truth  of  God,  that  thinks  the  thoughts  of  God 
after  Him;  we  get  new  affections,  we  now  love  the 
things  that  God  loves  and  hate  the  things  that  God 
hates ;  we  get  a  new  will,  a  will  that  is  in  harmony 
with  the  will  of  God,  a  will  that  is  set  upon  pleasing 
God  and  not  set  upon  pleasing  self. 

2.  The  New  Birth  is  also  a  BIRTH  FROM  ABOVE.  We 
learn  this  from  verses  3  and  7.  Jesus  said,  "Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  from 
above,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  And 
again,  "Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee,  Ye  must  be 
born  from  above."  In  our  Authorized  Version  we 
find  the  words  "born  again,"  and  in  the  Revised  Ver- 


THE  NEW  BIRTH  133 

sion,  "born  anew,"  but  a  more  exact  translation  is 
"born  from  above."  The  New  Birth  is  a  birth  from 
above,  it  is  a  heavenly  birth,  it  is  a  birth  from  God,  a 
direct  work  of  God  in  the  individual  heart. 


III.    THE  METHOD  OF  THE  NEW  BIRTH,  OR  How  MEN 
ARE  BORN  AGAIN. 

We  come  now  to  the  directly  practical  questions, 
how  are  men  born  again,  and  what  must  we  do  in 
order  to  be  born  again.  This  question  is  answered 
plainly  in  the  chapter  we  are  studying. 

1.  First  of  all  we  are  born  again  by  the  Holy 
Spirit's  power.     We  read  in  verses  5  to  8,  "Jesus 
answered,  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a 
man  be  born  of  water  and  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God.  ' '    The  New  Birth  is  the  Holy 
Spirit's  work.    The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  living  person  to 
day  who  operates  directly  upon  the  spirits  of  men, 
quickening  them,   and  by  His  transforming  power 
working  directly  in  our  spirits  we  are  regenerated. 
The  Holy  Spirit  imparts  a  new  nature  to  us. 

2.  The  new  birth,  while  wrought  by  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  is  wrought  through  the  instrumen 
tality  of  the  Word  of  God.    This  comes  out  in  the  fifth 
verse,  "Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  the  Spirit, 
he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."    There  is 
reason  to  believe  that  the  water  here  means  the  water 
of  the  Word,  but  we  will  not  go  into  that  at  this  time. 
Whether  that  is  taught  here  or  not,  it  certainly  is 
taught  elsewhere  in  the  Bible.    For  example,  we  read 
in  1  Pet.  1 : 23,  "Being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible 
seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  through  the  Word  of  God, 


134  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

which  liveth  and  bideth. ' '  And  we  read  in  Jas.  1 : 18, 
"By  His  own  will  He  brought  us  forth  ly  the  word  of 
truth,  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of  first  fruits  of  his 
creatures."  The  Spirit  of  God  is  the  one  who  works 
the  New  Birth,  the  Word  of  God  is  the  instrument 
through  which  He  does  it.  We  preach  the  Word  of 
God  to  men,  God  quickens  it  by  the  power  of  His  Holy 
Spirit  as  we  preach  it,  it  takes  root  in  the  human 
heart,  and  the  result  is  the  new  nature.  If  we  wish  to 
see  others  born  again  we  should  give  them  the  Word 
of  God  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  result 
will  be  that  they  will  be  born  again.  If  we  have  not 
been  born  again  ourselves  we  should  read  and  ponder 
the  Word  of  God,  and  while  we  do  so  look  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  quicken  it  in  our  hearts,  and  the  new  birth 
will  be  the  result. 

3.  The  new  birth  is  wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
through  His  Word  in  us  when  we  look  to  or  believe  on 
Jesus  Christ.  This  comes  out  in  verses  1-4  and  15. 
Nicodemus  had  asked  the  Lord  how  these  things  could 
be,  and  how  one  could  be  born  when  he  is  old,  that  is, 
how  one  could  be  born  again.  Verses  14  and  15  con 
tain  the  Lord's  answer  to  the  question.  He  said, 
"And  as  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness, 
even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up ;  that  whoso 
ever  believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have 
eternal  life. ' '  The  Lord  was  referring  to  an  incident 
in  the  Wilderness  when  the  murmuring  Israelites  were 
bitten  by  fiery  serpents  and  were  dying  from  the  bite, 
and  Moses  cried  to  God  for  deliverance  and  God  com 
manded  Moses  to  make  a  serpent  of  brass  (in  appear 
ance  like  to  the  fiery  serpent  that  had  bitten  them)  and 
to  put  it  on  a  pole  and  that  it  would  come  to  pass  that 


THE  NEW  BIRTH  135 

every  one  that  was  bitten  when  he  looked  at  the  ser 
pent  on  the  pole  would  live  (Num.  21:5-9).    We  all 
have  been  bitten  by  the  serpent  of  sin.     His  bite  is 
death,  eternal  death.    But  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
been  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  and  "lifted 
up"  on  the  cross  of  Calvary  where  He  made  a  perfect 
atonement  for  sin,  and  as  soon  as  we  look  at  Him  on 
the  cross  and  put  our  trust  in  Him  as  our  sin-bearer, 
that  moment  we  are  born  again.     The  same  thought 
is  found  in  the  16th  verse,  "For  God  so  loved  the 
world,  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  who 
soever  lelieveth  on  Him  should  not  perish  but  have 
eternal  life. ' '   All  anyone  has  to  do  to  be  born  again  is, 
to  look  and  live,  to  look  at  Jesus  Christ,  putting  his 
confidence  in  Him,  to  look  at  Christ  crucified  and  put 
faith  in  Him  as  our  atoning  Saviour,  and  the  moment 
we  do  thus  put  our  faith  in  Him,  that  moment  the 
Spirit  of  God,  through  His  "Word,  which  presents  Him 
to  us  as  our  atoning  Saviour,  imparts  to  us  God's  own 
nature  and  we  are  born  again.    The  same  thought  is 
presented  very  clearly  and  very  simply  in  the  first 
chapter  and  the  12th  and  13th  verses,  "As  many  as 
received  Him  (i.  e.,  the  Lord  Jesus),  to  them  gave  He 
the  right  to  become  children  of  God,  even  to  them  that 
believe  on  His  name :  which  were  born,  not  of  blood, 
nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but 
of  God."    All  anyone  has  to  do  then  to  be  born  again 
is  to  receive  Jesus  Christ,  to  receive  Him  as  that  which 
He  offers  Himself  to  be  to  us :  as  our  atoning  Saviour, 
who  bore  all  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  cross ;  as 
our  risen  Saviour  and  Deliverer  from  the  power  of 
sin ;  as  our  Teacher  sent  from  God,  who  spoke  the  very 
words  of  God;  as  our  Lord  and  Master,  who  has  a 


136  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

right  to,  and  to  whom  we  surrender,  the  absolute  con 
trol  of  our  lives ;  and  as  our  Divine  Lord.  If  there  is 
anyone  here  this  morning  who  has  never  been  born 
again,  all  you  have  to  do  to  be  born  again  is  to  thus 
receive  Jesus  this  moment,  and  the  moment  you  do  so 
receive  Him  you  will  be  born  from  above,  born  of  God. 


XI 

GOD'S  GUIDANCE  AND  HOW  TO  GET  IT 

"/  will  instruct  thee  and  teach  thee  in  the  way 
which  thou  shalt  go;  I  will  guide  thee  with  mine 
eye."  Ps.  32:8. 

"But  if  any  of  you  lacketh  wisdom,  let  him  ask  God, 
who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not; 
and  it  shall  be  given  him.  But  let  him  ask  in  faith, 
nothing  doubting;  for  he  that  doubteth  is  like  the 
surge  of  the  sea  driven  by  the  wind  and  tossed.  For 
let  not  that  man  think  that  he  shall  receive  anything  of 
the  Lord;  a  double-minded  man,  unstable  in  all  his 
ways."  Jas  1:5-8. 

I.  THE  POSSIBILITY  AND  BLESSEDNESS  OF  BEING 
GUIDED  BY  GOD. 

ONE  of  the  greatest  and  most  precious  privileges 
of  the  believer  is  to  have  the  guidance  of  God 
at  every  turn  of  life.     One  of  the  most  im 
portant  of  all  practical  questions  is  how  to  get  this 
guidance.     There  are  many  who  say  very  positively 
that  they  are  guided  of  God  who  are  not  so  guided. 
The  event  proves  that  they  are  not  so  guided.    Some 
months  ago  a  young  woman  informed  me  that  she  was 
guided  of  God  to  leave  for  Africa  at  a  certain  date  and 
that  God  had  given  her  positive  assurance  that  the 

137 


138  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

money  would  be  provided  for  her  to  leave  at  that  date. 
I  was  not  at  all  sure  that  she  was  guided  as  she  said 
that  she  was,  and  the  event  proved  she  was  not ;  for  the 
money  was  not  furnished  for  her  to  leave  at  that  date. 
As  we  see  so  many  people  apparently  absolutely  sure 
that  God  is  guiding  them  when  in  the  event  it  becomes 
clear  that  He  is  not,  does  it  not  prove  that  the  sup 
posed  guidance  of  God  is  a  fancy  and  not  a  fact  ?  It 
does  not.  The  fact  that  some  people  are  confident 
that  they  are  guided  when  they  are  not  is  no  more  evi 
dence  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  guidance  than  the 
fact  that  some  people  are  sure  they  are-  saved  when 
they  are  not  is  an  evidence  that  there  is  no  such  thing 
as  salvation,  or  assurance  of  salvation.  The  fact  that 
some  people  are  misled  in  no  way  proves  that  all  peo 
ple  are  misled.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  guidance, 
and  there  is  a  way  to  get  guidance.  There  is  a  way 
to  avoid  the  illusions  regarding  guidance  into  which 
many  fall  through  ignorance  of  the  Word  of  God. 

II.  How  To  GET  GUIDANCE. 

We  come  now  face  to  face  with  the  question  of  how 
to  get  God's  guidance.  There  are  seven  steps,  clearly 
set  forth  in  the  Word  of  God,  in  the  path  that  leads  to 
God's  guidance. 

1.  The  first  step  toward  obtaining  God's  guidance 
is  that  we  accept  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our  own 
personal  Saviour,  and  surrender  to  Him  as  our  Lord 
and  Master.  This  comes  out  very  plainly  in  Jas.  1 :  5, 
''If  any  of  you  lacketh  wisdom,  let  Mm  ask  of  God." 
It  is  clear  that  the  promise  is  only  made  to  believers. 
James  does  not  say,  "If  any  man  lacketh  wisdom,  let 


GOD'S  GUIDANCE— HOW  TO  GET  IT       139 

him  ask  of  God, ' '  but, ' '  If  any  of  you  lacketh  wisdom, 
let  him  ask  of  God. ' '  There  is  no  promise  in  the  Word 
of  God  that  God  will  guide  anyone  but  the  believer  in 
Jesus  Christ.  Indeed  there  is  no  promise  in  the  Word 
of  God  that  He  will  answer  the  prayers  of  unbelievers 
about  anything.  God's  guidance  is  the  privilege  of 
the  believer  in  Jesus  Christ  and  of  him  alone.  By  be 
liever  I  do  not  mean  the  one  who  merely  has  an  ortho 
dox  faith  about  Jesus  Christ,  but  the  one  who  is  a  be 
liever  in  the  Bible  sense,  that  is,  the  one  who  has  that 
living  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  that  leads  him  to  receive 
Jesus  Christ  as  his  Lord  and  Saviour,  and  to  surren 
der  his  life  to  His  service  and  control.  If  then,  we 
would  have  God's  sure  guidance,  the  first  thing  to 
make  sure  of  is  that  we  really  are  believers,  that  we 
really  are  children  of  God,  that  we  really  have  ac 
cepted  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Saviour,  and  really  have 
surrendered  our  lives  to  His  Lordship. 

2.  The  second  step  toward  obtaining  God's  guidance 
is  that  we  clearly  realize  our  own  utter  inability  to 
decide  for  ourselves  the  way  in  which  we  should  go. 
The  promise,  as  we  find  it  in  the  Word  of  God,  makes 
this  very  plain.  James  says,  "If  any  of  you  lacketh 
wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  etc."  The  promise  is 
made  to  the  one  who  lacks  wisdom,  not  the  one  who 
has  it.  It  is  made  to  the  one  who  realizes  the  limita 
tions  of  his  own  wisdom  and  realizes  his  dependence 
upon  God  for  His  wisdom.  It  is  at  this  point  that 
many,  very  many,  fail  of  guidance.  They  have  such 
confidence  in  their  own  opinions,  in  their  own  judg 
ment,  in  their  own  ability  to  decide  the  course  that 
they  should  pursue,  that  though  they  may  as  a  for 
mality  ask  God  for  His  guidance,  they  do  not  really 


140  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

Jiave  any  deep  sense  of  their  need  of  His  guidance,  and 
they  have  such  confidence  in  their  own  wisdom  that 
they  mistake  their  own  judgment  for  the  guidance  of 
God.  Having  prayed  for  Wisdom,  but  still  being  con 
fident  in  their  own  judgment,  they  become  all  the 
more  sure  that  their  opinion  is  right  and  they  at 
tribute  their  own  opinion  to  God.  If  we  are  to  have 
God's  guidance  we  must  be  utterly  emptied  of  all  con 
fidence  in  our  own  judgment;  and,  in  a  sense  of  our 
own  inability  to  decide  for  ourselves,  we  should  come 
to  God,  putting  our  own  notions  utterly  aside,  for 
Him  to  tell  us  what  He  would  have  us  to  do,  and  we 
should  wait  silently  before  Him  to  make  known  His 
will. 

3.  The  third  step  toward  obtaining  Divine  guidance 
is  that  we  really  desire  to  know  God's  will,  and 
are  thoroughly  willing  to  do  it  whatever  it  may  be. 
This  also  comes  out  in  the  promise.  It  reads,  * '  If  any 
of  you  lacketh  wisdom  let  him  ask  of  God."  Of 
course,  the  asking  must  be  genuine,  and  there  is  no 
genuine  asking  wisdom  of  God  unless  we  are  eagerly 
desirous  of  knowing  God's  will  and  heartily  willing  to 
do  it  when  that  will  is  made  known.  The  genuine  and 
absolute  surrender  of  the  will  to  God  is  the  great 
secret  of  guidance.  The  promise,  "I  will  instruct 
thee  and  teach  thee  in  the  way  which  thou  shalt  go; 
I  will  counsel  thee  with  mine  eye  upon  thee, "  as  is  evi 
dent  from  the  context,  is  made  to  the  one  whose  will 
is  surrendered  to  God,  for  the  next  verse  reads,  "Be 
ye  not  as  the  horse,  or  as  a  mule,  which  have  no  under 
standing:  whose  trappings  must  be  bit  and  bridle  to 
hold  them  in,  else  they  will  not  come  unto  thee. ' '  If 
we  are  mulish,  that  is  if  we  are  bent  on  doing  our  own 


GOD'S  GUIDANCE— HOW  TO  GET  IT       141 

will,  then  God  must  guide  us  with  "bit  and  bridle," 
and  oftentimes  must  break  our  jaw  before  we  submit 
to  Him.  His  instruction,  teaching  and  guidance,  His 
gentle  guidance  "with  His  eye  upon  us,"  is  for  the 
one  whose  will  is  entirely  surrendered  to  Him.  The 
surrender  must  be  real  surrender.  There  are  many 
who  think  they  wish  to  know  and  are  willing  to  do 
God's  will,  and  that  it  is  God's  will  that  they  are 
waiting  to  know,  but,  what  they  are  really  seeking,  is 
to  get  God  to  say  yes  to  their  own  plans,  and  get  God 
to  endorse  the  plan  they  themselves  have  already  sub 
consciously  formed,  and  they  are  not  waiting,  as  they 
suppose  they  are,  until  God  tells  them  what  His  will 
really  is,  they  are  waiting  until  God  tells  them  to  do 
the  thing  that  they  want  to  do  and,  in  their  subcon 
scious  self,  have  made  up  their  mind  to  do,  so  they 
think  and  think  and  think,  and  pray  and  pray  and 
pray,  until  they  think  themselves  into  thinking  that 
God  tells  them  to  do  the  thing  that  they  themselves 
wished  to  do  from  the  outset,  and  this  thing  that  they 
wanted  to  do  from  the  outset  may  not  be  God's  plan  at 
all.  This  is  one  of  the  most  frequent  causes  of  think 
ing  we  have  the  mind  of  God  when  we  are  only  doing 
the  thing  that  we  want  to  do.  Men  and  women  who 
go  to  God  for  guidance  in  this  way,  i.  e.,  without  hav 
ing  absolutely  put  aside  their  own  will  and  their  own 
opinion,  when  they  do  think  themselves  into  the  place 
where  they  fancy  that  God  has  endorsed  their  plan, 
are  the  most  positive  in  saying  that  "God  tells  me  to 
do  thus  and  so."  So  then,  we  must,  if  we  would  be 
guided  of  God,  make  absolutely  sure  that  we  have  put 
away  our  own  will  entirely  and  are  utterly  willing  to 
and  desirous  of  doing  God's  will,  whatever  it  may  be. 


142  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

We  must  be  sure  that  we  are  silent  before  God  and 
truly  listening  to  His  voice,  and  not  still  listening 
to  this  desire  that  we  have  in  the  depths  of  our 
heart  that  God  shall  tell  us  to  do  the  thing  that  we 
want  to  do.  When  Mr.  Moody  invited  me  to  take  up 
the  work  in  Chicago  in  1889,  I  went  to  God  to  show 
me  what  might  be  His  will.  There  was  a  great  conflict 
in  my  heart.  There  were  reasons  why  I  wished  to 
go  to  Chicago;  there  are  reasons  why  I  wished  to 
stay  in  Minneapolis,  or  why  I  thought  I  must  stay 
in  Minneapolis.  It  took  me  three  days  to  get  abso 
lutely  silent  before  God,  and  to  put  away  my  own 
conflicting  ideas  on  both  sides.  When  I  did  come  to 
the  place  where  I  had  no  will  whatever  in  the  matter, 
but  simply  wished  to  know  what  God's  will  was, 
whichever  way  it  might  be,  when  I  became  absolutely 
silent  before  God,  God  soon  made  the  path  in  which 
He  would  have  me  go  as  plain  as  day. 

The  fact  that  the  thing  that  we  are  contemplating 
doing  is  a  hard  thing,  that  it  requires  great  sacrifice, 
does  not  by  any  means  make  it  sure  that  it  is  God's 
will  and  not  ours.  Our  hearts  naturally  are  deceitful 
above  all  things,  and  oftentimes  wilful  persons  will 
set  their  heart  on  doing  a  very  hard  thing.  They 
may  set  their  heart  upon  doing  it  out  of  spiritual 
pride,  or  for  many  other  reasons  than  because  of  sur 
render  to  the  will  of  God.  They  want  to  do  this 
hard  thing,  and  they  pray  and  pray  and  pray,  and 
brood  and  brood  and  brood  until  they  make  them 
selves  think  that  this  hard  thing  is  the  will  of  God, 
when  very  likely  the  thing  that  God  would  have  them 
do  is  some  very  humdrum,  everyday  sort  of  a  thing. 
There  is  many  a  man  and  many  a  woman  determined 


GOD'S  GUIDANCE— HOW  TO  GET  IT       143 

to  be  a  foreign  missionary,  and  a  foreign  missionary 
under  the  most  difficult  circumstances,  whom  God  has 
called  to  a  very  quiet  life  at  home,  and  while  they 
are  willing  to  endure  the  severest  hardships  in  the 
foreign  field,  they  are  not  willing  to  plod  on  quietly 
and  unseen  and  unnoticed  at  home.  But  the  best 
thing  is  God's  will,  whether  that  will  be  in  a  quiet 
humdrum  life  at  home,  or  whether  it  be  a  notable 
life  of  courage  and  self-sacrifice  in  the  foreign  field; 
and,  if  we  are  to  have  God's  guidance  we  must,  as 
already  said,  become  absolutely  silent  before  God,  and 
be  willing  and  glad  to  serve  Him  in  the  most  ordinary 
sort  of  life,  a  life  that  seems  far  beneath  our  talents 
and  our  training,  if  that  be  His  will,  just  as  ready 
to  do  that  as  to  serve  Him  in  a  field  that  demands 
large  abilities  and  great  sacrifice.  Satan  cheats  many 
of  God's  children  out  of  accomplishing  the  things  that 
God  would  have  them  do  by  making  them  restless 
in  the  homely  paths  that  God  opens  up  to  them  of 
doing  things  that  they  can  do,  and  sets  their  heart 
upon  doing  things  that  they  cannot  do ;  and  thus  they 
leave  the  path  of  actual  achievement  to  brood  over 
things  they  would  like  to  do,  but  which  it  is  not  God 's 
will  for  them  to  do,  and  which  they  never  will  do. 
Oftentimes  a  whole  life  is  spoiled  in  this  way. 

4.  The  fourth  step  toward  obtaining  God's  guidance 
is  definite  prayer  for  that  guidance.  "If  any  of  you 
lacketh  wisdom,"  says  God,  "let  him  ask  of  God." 
There  should  be  definite  prayer  for  definite  guidance. 
We  should  ask  God's  guidance  at  every  turn  of  life; 
we  should  ask  His  guidance  not  merely  in  the  great 
crises  of  life,  but  in  the  ordinary  matters  of  everyday 
life,  in  our  business,  in  our  domestic  work,  in  the 


144  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

most  simple  things.  None  of  us  knows  enough  to 
direct  our  own  steps  in  the  simplest  matters  of  every 
day  life.  We  need  God's  guidance  at  every  turn  of 
life,  and  we  can  have  it,  and  the  way  to  get  it  is 
to  ask  for  it.  But  the  asking  will  do  no  good  unless 
we  have  already  taken  the  other  steps  that  have  been 
mentioned.  The  definite  prayer  is  the  fourth  step 
and  not  the  first,  and  we  should  be  sure  we  have 
taken  the  first  three  steps  before  we  take  the  fourth. 
5.  The  fifth  step  toward  obtaining  God's  guidance 
is  positive  expectation  that  God  will  grant  our  prayer 
and  give  us  the  guidance  that  we  ask.  This  also 
comes  out  in  the  exact  wording  of  the  promise.  It 
reads,  "If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of 
God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth 
not,  and  it  shall  be  given  him.  But  let  him  ask  in 
faith,  nothing  doubting:  for  he  that  doubteth  is  like 
the  surge  of  the  sea  driven  by  the  wind  and  tossed. 
For  let  not  that  man  (i.e.,  the  man  that  doubts,  the 
man  who  does  not  confidently  expect)  think  that  he 
shall  receive  anything  of  the  Lord."  Here  is  where 
many  miss  God's  guidance.  Their  wills  are  sur 
rendered,  they  really  desire  to  know  and  do  God's 
will,  and  they  ask  God  for  His  guidance,  but  they  do 
not  confidently  expect  that  God  will  give  the  guid 
ance  they  ask.  They  hope  He  will,  but  they  are  not 
at  all  sure  that  He  will.  If  we  have  taken  the  other 
steps,  when  we  ask  God  for  His  guidance  we  may  be 
absolutely  sure  that  God  will  give  it.  Some  one  may 
say,  "But  others  have  asked  God's  guidance  and 
thought  they  had  it,  when  the  event  showed  they  did 
not.  May  not  I  also  be  mistaken?"  No,  not  if  you 
have  taken  the  other  steps  already  mentioned  and 


GOD'S  GUIDANCE— HOW  TO  GET  IT       145 

will  take  the  steps  that  we  are  still  to  mention.  We 
have  God's  absolute  promise  of  guidance  made  to 
those  who  meet  the  conditions  which  we  have  de 
scribed,  and  therefore  we  may  ask  guidance  with  the 
absolute  certainty  that  we  are  going  to  receive  it. 
When  we  ask  for  God's  wisdom,  if  we  are  of  those 
to  whom  the  promise  is  made,  we  know  that  we  have 
asked  something  according  to  God's  will,  for  He  has 
definitely  promised  it  in  His  Word,  and,  therefore, 
we  have  a  right  to  know  that  our  prayer  is  heard  and 
the  thing  we  have  asked  is  granted  ( 1  John  5:14,  15 ). 
Some  years  ago  I  was  speaking  at  a  Bible  Conference 
of  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  at  White  Bear  Lake,  Minn.  I 
was  speaking  on  the  subject  of  prayer.  As  I  left 
the  platform  to  hurry  to  a  train  I  found  the  next 
speaker  waiting  for  me  on  the  outside  of  the  audience. 
He  was  greatly  excited.  He  was  a  gifted  teacher  of 
the  Word  of  God  and  had  been  much  used  of  God. 
He  stopped  me  as  I  passed  by  hurrying  to  the  train 
and  said,  "I  am  going  to  tear  to  pieces  everything 
you  have  said  to  these  young  men."  I  replied,  "If 
I  have  not  spoken  according  to  the  Book  I  hope  you 
will  tear  it  to  pieces,  but  what  did  I  say  that  was 
not  according  to  the  Bible?"  He  answered,  "You 
have  produced  upon  these  young  men  the  impression 
that  we  can  ask  things  of  God  and  get  the  very 
thing  we  ask."  I  replied,  "I  do  not  know  whether 
that  is  the  impression  I  produced  or  not,  but  that  is 
certainly  the  impression  that  I  meant  to  produce." 
"But,"  he  said,  "that  is  not  right.  We  should  pray, 
'if  it  be  Thy  will.'  "  "Yes,"  I  replied,  "if  we  do 
not  know  what  the  will  of  God  is  in  the  case  we 
should  say  'if  it  be  Thy  will,'  but  if  God  has  revealed 


146  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

His  will  in  any  specific  instance  why  should  we  put 
in  any  'if?'  "  "But,"  he  said,  "we  cannot  know 
the  will  of  God."  "What  is  the  Word  of  God  given 
to  us  for/'  I  asked,  "if  it  is  not  to  show  us  what  the 
will  of  God  is?  For  example,  we  are  told  in  Jas. 
1 : 5-7,  '  if  any  of  you  lacketh  wisdom,  let  him  ask 
of  God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  up- 
braideth  not.'  Now,"  I  said,  "when  you  ask  for 
wisdom  do  you  not  know  by  this  specific  promise  that 
you  have  asked  something  according  to  the  will  of 
God,  and  that  you  are  going  to  get  it?"  "But,"  he 
replied,  "I  do  not  know  what  wisdom  is."  I  said, 
"If  you  knew  what  wisdom  was  you  would  not  need 
to  ask  for  it,  but  whatever  wisdom  may  be,  do  you 
not  know  that  when  you  ask  for  wisdom  God  is  going 
to  give  it?"  He  made  no  reply.  What  reply  was 
there  to  make?  Here  we  have  a  definite  promise  of 
God ;  and,  if  we  meet  the  conditions  of  that  promise, 
we  may  be,  and  ought  to  be,  absolutely  sure,  that  God 
will  do  as  He  says,  absolutely  sure  that  God  will 
give  us  wisdom  in  this  specific  case  in  which  we  ask 
it.  //  we  have  any  uncertainty  at  this  point  God  will 
not  give  us  the  wisdom  we  ask.  We  should  rest  abso 
lutely  on  God's  plain  promise,  and  when  we  ask  for 
wisdom  be  absolutely  sure  that  that  wisdom  is  com 
ing.  How  God  gives  wisdom  we  will  consider  later. 
6.  The  sixth  step  toward  obtaining  God's  guidance 
is  to  follow  God's  guidance  a  step  at  a  time  as  He 
gives  it.  Here  again  is  where  many  miss  their  way. 
Many  seek  to  know  the  whole  way  before  they  take 
a  single  step,  but  God's  method  is  to  show  us  a  step 
at  a  time.  Look  at  Peter  in  Acts  12.  God  led  him 
a  step  at  a  time:  first  the  angel  smote  Peter  on  the 


GOD'S  GUIDANCE— HOW  TO  GET  IT       147 

side  and  a*voke  him,  and  told  him  to  arise  up  quickly. 
This  Peter  did,  and  his  chains  fell  from  his  hands. 
Then  the  angel  said  unto  him,  ' '  Gird  thyself  and  bind 
on  thy  sandals,"  and  he  did  so.  Then  the  angel 
said,  * l  Cast  thy  garment  about  thee,  and  follow  me, ' ' 
and  Peter  did  exactly  as  he  was  told.  He  was  not 
even  sure  that  he  was  awake,  but  he  followed  step 
by  step,  even  when  he  thought  he  might  be  asleep. 
They  passed  the  first  and  second  guard  and  came  to 
the  iron  gate  that  led  into  the  city.  Peter  did  not 
stop  and  argue  as  to  whether  the  gate  would  be 
opened  or  not,  but  just  followed  up  to  the  gate,  and 
when  he  got  to  the  gate  the  gate  opened  of  its  own 
accord.  Thus  God  led  him  step  by  step,  and  thus  God 
leads  us.  The  Word  of  God  tells  us  that  "The  steps 
of  a  good  man  are  ordered  of  the  Lord"  (Ps.  37 :  23). 
The  trouble  with  many  of  us  is  we  wish  God  to  show 
us  the  whole  path,  and  are  not  willing  to  go  a  step 
at  a  time.  Look  at  Paul  in  the  16th  chapter  of  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  6th  to  8th  verses.  Paul 
and  his  companions  went  through  the  region  of 
Phrygia  and  Galatia  and  would  have  passed  into  the 
province  of  Asia  to  preach  the  Word  there,  but  the 
Holy  Ghost  said,  "No."  So  Paul  passed  over  against 
Hysia  and  was  about  to  go  into  Bithynia,  the  next 
province.  At  that  point  "the  Spirit  of  Jesus"  again 
said,  "No";  so  passing  by  Mysia  he  came  down  to 
Troas,  and  there  a  vision  appeared  to  Paul  in  the 
night,  leading  him  to  go  over  into  Macedonia.  Step 
~by  step  the  Spirit  led,  and  step  by  step  Paul  fol 
lowed  on.  The  thing  for  us  to  do  is  to  take  the  next 
step  that  God  shows  us  in  answer  to  our  prayer  and 
not  wait  until  God  shows  us  the  whole  way.  A  college 


148  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

student  once  came  to  me  at  the  Northfield  Students' 
Convention,  telling  me  that  he  was  greatly  perplexed 
as  to  his  future  life,  that  he  had  been  asking  God's 
guidance  and  could  not  get  it.  I  asked  Him  what 
he  was  asking  God's  guidance  about  and  he  said, 
about  what  he  should  do  when  he  got  out  of  college. 
I  said,  "How  far  are  you  along  in  college?"  and  he 
said  that  the  following  fall  he  would  begin  his  junior 
year.  I  said,  "Then  you  have  two  years  left  in 
college. "  "Yes."  "Are  you  sure  you  ought  to  take 
those  two  years  in  college?"  "Yes."  "Then  what 
you  are  perplexed  about  is  because  you  cannot  get 
guidance  for  two  years  from  now. "  "  Yes. "  "  Well, 
just  go  on  as  God  leads  you,  and  in  the  two  years 
if  not  before  God  will  show  you  what  to  do  next." 
A  very  large  share  of  our  perplexity  about  the  will 
of  God  is  of  this  kind.  "We  are  troubled  because  God 
has  not  shown  us  what  He  wants  us  to  do  next  year, 
or  it  may  be  next  month.  All  we  need  is  God's  guid 
ance  for  to-day.  Follow  on  step  ~by  step  as  He  leads 
you  and  the  way  will  open  as  you  go. 

7.  There  remains  just  one  more  step  in  the  path 
that  leads  to  God's  sure  guidance,  and  that  is  that 
we  always  I) ear  in  mind  that  God's  guidance  is  clear 
guidance.  Here  is  where  many  go  astray.  They  have 
impulses,  they  know  not  from  what  source ;  they  have 
what  appear  like  leadings,  for  example,  to  go  to  the 
foreign  field,  or  do  some  other  thing,  but  they  are 
not  at  all  sure  it  is  God's  leading.  Very  likely  it  is 
not  God's  leading;  and  yet  they  follow  it  for  fear 
they  may  be  disobeying  God,  or,  perhaps  they  do  not 
follow  it  and  then  get  into  condemnation  lest  they 
have  disobeyed  God.  I  have  met  many  in  the  deepest 


GOD'S  GUIDANCE— HOW  TO  GET  IT       149 

gloom  from  this  cause.  They  had  an  impression  they 
ought  to  do  a  certain  thing,  they  were  not  at  all  clear 
the  impression  was  from  God,  they  did  not  do  the 
thing,  and  then  the  devil  has  made  them  think  that 
they  have  disobeyed  God,  and  some  even  think  they 
have  committed  the  unpardonable  sin  because  they 
did  not  obey  this  prompting  (of  the  origin  of  which 
they  were  not  at  all  sure).  If  we  will  only  bear 
in  mind  that  God's  guidance  is  clear  guidance  we 
will  be  delivered  from  this  snare  of  Satan.  "We  are 
told  in  John  1 : 5  that  * i  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is 
no  darkness  at  all."  Any  leadings  that  are  not  abso 
lutely  clear,  provided  our  wills  are  surrendered  to 
God,  are  not  from  Him  as  yet.  We  have  a  right  in 
every  case  where  we  have  any  impression  that  we 
ought  to  do  a  certain  thing,  but  where  we  are  not 
absolutely  sure  it  is  the  will  of  God,  to  go  to  God 
and  say  to  Him,  "Heavenly  Father,  I  desire  to  do 
Thy  will ;  my  will  is  absolutely  surrendered  to  Thine, 
now  if  this  is  of  Thee,  make  it  clear  as  day  and  I 
will  do  it, ' '  and  if  our  wills  are  absolutely  surrendered 
to  God  and  we  fully  realize  our  own  inability  to 
decide  and  are  ready  to  be  led  by  Him,  God  will 
make  as  clear  as  day  if  it  is  His  will,  and  we 
have  a  right  not  to  do  it  until  He  does  make  it  clear, 
and  we  have  a  right  to  have  an  absolutely  clear  con 
science  in  not  doing  it  until  He  does  make  it  clear. 
God  is  a  Father  and  is  more  willing  to  make  His  will 
known  to  us  than  we  are  to  make  our  will  known  to 
our  children,  provided  we  really  wish  to  know  and 
wish  to  do  His  will.  We  have  no  right  to  be  in 
mortal  dread  before  God  and  to  be  in  constant  appre 
hension  that  we  have  not  done  His  will.  When  we 


150  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

accepted  Christ  and  surrendered  our  wills  to  God  we 
did ' '  not  receive  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  unto  fear, ' ' 
but  the  Spirit  that  gives  us  the  place  as  sons  where 
we  cry,  "Abba,  Father,"  in  perfect  childlike  trust  in 
Him  (Rom.  8:15).  We  would  not  mislead  our  chil 
dren  in  such  a  case,  we  would  not  leave  our  children 
to  any  doubts  or  uncertainty,  we  would  make  our  will 
as  clear  as  day,  and  so  will  God  make  His.  Satan  will 
prevent  a  man  or  woman  making  a  full  surrender  to 
God  just  as  long  as  he  can,  but  when  a  man  does  make 
a  full  surrender,  then  the  devil  will  do  everything  in 
his  power  to  torment  him.  He  will  suggest  all  kinds 
of  ridiculous  things  for  him  to  do,  and  then  the  man 
will  not  do  them  and  Satan  will  torment  him  by  mak 
ing  him  think  he  has  gone  back  on  his  surrender  to 
God.  Let  us  never  forget  that  not  all  spiritual  im 
pressions  are  from  the  Holy  Spirit.  There  are  other 
spirits  beside  the  Holy  Spirit  and  we  need  to  try  the 
spirits  whether  they  be  of  God  (1  John  4:1).  Some 
people  are  so  anxious  to  be  led  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
that  they  are  willing  to  be  led  by  any  spirit  and  thus 
plunge  into  the  delusions  of  spiritualism  or  "the 
tongues"  business  or  other  forms  of  fanaticism.  I 
repeat  it  again,  God's  guidance  is  clear  guidance  and 
we  should  not  follow  any  impression  until  God  makes 
it  as  clear  as  day  that  it  is  from  Him. 

The  main  point  in  the  whole  matter  of  guidance  is 
the  absolute  surrender  of  the  will  to  God,  the  delight 
ing  in  His  will  and  the  being  willing  to  do  joyfully 
the  very  things  we  would  not  like  to  do  naturally,  the 
very  things  in  connexion  with  which  there  may  be 
many  disagreeable  circumstances  because  of  associa 
tion  with  or  even  subordination  to  people  that  we  do 


GOD'S  GUIDANCE— HOW  TO  GET  IT       151 

not  altogether  like,  and  difficulties  of  other  kinds, 
doing  them  joyfully  simply  because  it  is  the  will  of 
God,  and  the  willingness  to  let  God  lead  in  any  way 
He  pleases,  whether  it  may  be  by  His  "Word  or  by  His 
Spirit.  If  we  will  only  completely  distrust  our  own 
judgment  and  have  absolute  confidence  in  God 's  judg 
ment,  and  God's  willingness  to  guide  us,  and  are  abso 
lutely  surrendered  to  His  will,  whatever  it  may  be, 
and  are  willing  to  let  God  choose  His  way  of  guidance, 
and  will  go  on  step  by  step  as  He  does  guide  us,  and 
are  studying  His  word  to  know  His  will,  and  are  listen 
ing  for  the  still  small  voice  of  the  Spirit,  going  step 
by  step  as  He  leads,  He  will  guide  us  with  His  eye. 
He  will  guide  us  with  His  counsel  to  the  end  of  our 
earthly  pilgrimage,  and  afterwards  receive  us  into 
glory  (Ps.  73:24). 


XII 
HOW  GOD  GUIDES 

"Nevertheless  I  am  continually  with  thee:  tlwu  hast 
holden  my  right  hand.  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with 
thy  counsel,  and  afterward  receive  me  to  glory." — 
Ps.  73 :  23,  24. 

TWO  weeks  ago  this  morning  we  considered  the 
question  of  God 's  guidance  and  how  to  obtain 
it.  We  have  to-day  a  closely  related  subject, 
How  God  Guides.  There  are  no  promises  of  God's 
Word  more  precious  to  the  man  who  wishes  to  do  His 
will,  and  who  realizes  the  goodness  of  His  will,  than 
the  promises  of  His  guidance.  What  a  cheering, 
gladdening,  inspiring  thought  that  contained  in  the 
text  is,  that  we  may  have  the  guidance  of  infinite 
wisdom  and  love  at  every  turn  of  life  and  that  we 
have  it  to  the  end  of  our  earthly  pilgrimage. 

There  are  few  more  precious  words  in  the  whole 
book  of  Psalms,  which  is  one  of  the  most  precious 
of  all  the  books  of  the  Bible,  than  these:  "Thou  hast 
holden  my  right  hand.  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with 
thy  counsel,  and  afterwards  receive  me  to  glory. " 
How  the  thoughtful  and  believing  and  obedient  heart 
burns  as  it  reads  these  wonderful  words  of  the  text. 
I  wish  we  had  time  to  dwell  upon  the  characteristics 

152 


HOW  GOD  GUIDES  153 

of  God's  guidance  as  they  are  set  forth  in  so  many 
places  in  the  Word  of  God,  but  we  must  turn  at  once 
to  consideration  of  the  means  God  uses  in  guiding  us. 

I.  GOD  GUIDES  BY  His  WORD. 

First  of  all  God  guides  ~by  His  word.    We  read  in 
Ps.  119:105,  "Thy  word  is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet, 
and  a  light  unto  my  path,"  and  in  the  130th  verse 
of  this  same  Psalm  we  read,  ''The  entrance  of  thy 
words  giveth  light ;  it  giveth  understanding  unto  the 
simple."     God's  own  written  word  is  the  chief  in 
strument  that  God  uses  in  our  guidance.    God  led  the 
children  of  Israel  by  a  pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and 
a  pillar  of  fire  by  night.     The  written  Word,  the 
Bible,  is  our  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire.    As  it  leads  we 
follow.     One  of  the  main  purposes  of  the  Bible,  the 
Word  of  God,  is  practical  guidance  in  the  affairs  of 
everyday  life.    All  other  leadings  must  be  tested  by 
the  Word.     Whatever  promptings  may  come  to  us 
from  any  other  source,  whether  it  be  by  human  coun 
sel,  or  by  the  prompting  of  some  invisible  spirit,  or 
in  whatever  way   it  may   come,  we  must  test  the 
promptings,  or  the  guidance  or  the  counsel  by  the 
sure  Word  of  God,  ''To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony; 
if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  Word,  it  is  because 
there  is  no  light  in  them"   (Isa.  8:20).     Whatever 
spirit  or  impulse  may  move  us,  whatever  dream  or 
vision  may  come  to  us,  or  whatever  apparently  provi 
dential  opening  we  may  have,  all  must  be  tested  by 
the  Word  of  God.     If  the  impulse  or  leading,   or 
prompting,  or  vision,  or  providential  opening  is  not 
according  to  the  book,  it  is  not  of  God.    "The  prophet 


154  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

that  hath  a  dream,  let  him  tell  a  dream;  and  he  that 
hath  my  Word,  let  him  speak  my  Word  faithfully. 
What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat f  saith  the  LORD" 
(Jer.  23:28).  If  Christians  would  only  study  the 
Word  they  would  not  be  misled  as  they  so  often  are 
by  seducing  spirits,  or  by  impulses  of  any  kind,  that 
are  not  of  God  but  of  Satan  or  of  their  own  deceitful 
hearts.  How  often  people  have  said  to  me  that  the 
Spirit  was  leading  them  to  do  this  or  that,  when  the 
thing  that  they  were  being  led  to  do  was  in  direct 
contradiction  to  God's  Word.  For  example,  a  man 
once  called  upon  me  to  consult  me  about  marrying  a 
woman  who  he  said  was  a  beautiful  Christian,  and 
that  they  had  deep  sympathy  in  the  work  of  God, 
and  the  Spirit  of  God  was  leading  them  to  marry  one 
another.  "But,"  I  said  to  the  man,  "you  already 
have  one  wife."  "Yes,"  he  replied,  "but  you  know 
we  have  not  gotten  on  well  together. "  "  Yes, ' '  I  said, 
"I  know  that,  and  furthermore,  I  have  had  a  con 
versation  with  her  and  believe  it  is  your  fault  more 
than  hers.  But,  however  that  may  be,  if  you  should 
put  her  away  and  marry  this  other  woman,  Jesus 
Christ  says  that  you  would  be  an  adulterer."  "Oh, 
but,"  he  replied,  "the  Spirit  of  God  is  leading  us  to 
one  another."  Now  whatever  spirit  may  have  been 
leading  that  man,  it  certainly  was  not  the  Spirit  of 
God,  for  the  Spirit  of  God  cannot  lead  anyone  to  do 
that  which  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  Word  of 
God.  I  replied  to  this  man:  "You  are  a  liar  and 
a  blasphemer.  How  dare  you  attribute  to  the  Spirit 
of  God  action  that  is  directly  contrary  to  the  teaching 
of  Jesus  Christ?"  Many,  many  times  Christian 
people  have  promptings  from  various  sources  which 


HOW  GOD  GUIDES  155 

they  attribute  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  which  are  in 
plain  and  flat  contradiction  to  the  clear  and  definite 
teachings  of  God's  Word.  The  truth  is,  many  so 
neglect  the  Word  that  they  are  all  in  a  maze  regard 
ing  the  impulses  and  leadings  that  come  to  them,  as 
to  whence  they  are ;  whereas,  if  they  studied  the  Word 
they  would  at  once  detect  the  real  character  of  these 
leadings. 

But  the  Word  itself  must  ~be  used  in  a  right  way  if 
we  are  to  find  the  leading  of  God  from  it.  We  have 
no  right  to  seek  guidance  from  the  Word  of  God  by 
using  it  in  any  fantastic  way,  as  some  do.  For  ex 
ample,  there  is  no  warrant  whatever  in  the  Word  of 
God  for  trying  to  find  out  God's  will  by  opening  the 
Bible  at  random  and  putting  our  finger  on  some  text 
without  regard  to  its  real  meaning  as  made  clear  by 
the  context.  There  is  no  warrant  whatever  in  the 
Bible  for  any  such  use  of  it.  The  Bible  is  not  a 
talisman,  or  a  fortune-telling  book,  it  is  not  in  any 
sense  a  magic  book;  it  is  a  revelation  from  an  in 
finitely  wise  Go(Ly  made  in  a  reasonable  way,  to  reason 
able  beings,  and  we  obtain  God's  guidance  from  the 
Bible  by  taking  the  verse  of  Scripture  in  which  the 
guidance  is  found,  in  the  connexion  in  which  it  is 
found  in  the  Bible,  and  interpreting  it,  led  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  in  its  context  as  found  in  the  Bible. 
Many  have  fallen  into  all  kinds  of  fanaticism  by 
using  their  Bible  in  this  irrational  and  fantastic  way. 
Some  years  ago  a  prediction  was  made  by  a  somewhat 
prominent  woman  Bible  teacher  that  on  a  certain 
date  Oakland  and  Alameda  and  some  other  California 
cities,  and  I  think  also  Chicago,  were  to  be  swallowed 
up  in  an  earthquake.  The  definite  day  was  set  and 


156  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

many  were  in  anticipation,  and  many  in  great  dread. 
A  friend  of  mine  living  in  Chicago  was  somewhat 
disturbed  over  the  matter  and  sought  God's  guidance 
by  opening  her  Bible  at  random,  and  this  was  the 
passage  to  which  she  opened:  Ezek.  12: 17-28,  " More 
over  the  word  of  the  LORD  came  to  me  saying,  Son 
of  man,  eat  thy  bread  with  quaking,  and  drink  thy 
water  with  trembling  and  with  carefulness;  and  say 
unto  the  people  of  the  land,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  GOD 
of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,,  and  of  the  land  of 
Israel:  They  shall  eat  their  bread  with  carefulness, 
and  drink  their  water  with  astonishment,  that  her 
land  may  be  desolate  from  all  that  is  therein,  because 
of  the  violence  of  all  them  that  dwell  therein.  And 
the  cities  that  are  inhabited  shall  be  laid  waste,  and 
the  land  shall  be  desolate;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I 
am  the  LORD.  And  the  word  of  the  LORD  came 
unto  me,  saying,  Son  of  man,  what  is  that  proverb 
that  ye  have  in  the  land  of  Israel,  saying,  The  days 
are  prolonged,  and  every  vision  failethf  Tell  them 
therefore,  Thus  saith  the  LORD  God;  I  will  make 
this  proverb  to  cease,  and  they  shall  no  more  use  it 
as  a  proverb  in  Israel;  but  say  unto  them,  The  days 
are  at  hand,  and  the  effect  of  every  vision.  For  there 
shall  be  no  more  any  vain  vision  nor  flattering  divina 
tion  within  the  house  of  Israel.  For  I  am  the  LORD  : 
I  will  speak,  and  the  word  that  I  shall  speak  shall 
come  to  pass;  it  shall  le  no  more  prolonged:  for  in 
your  days,  0  rebellious  house  will  I  say  the  word,  and 
will  perform  it,  saith  the  Lord  GOD.  Again  the 
word  of  the  LORD  came  to  me,  saying,  Son  of  man, 
behold  they  of  the  house  of  Israel  say,  The  vision  that 
he  seeth  is  for  many  days  to  come,  and  he  prophesieth 


HOW  GOD  GUIDES  157 

of  the  times  that  are  far  off.    Therefore  say  unto  them, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  There  shall  none  of  my 
words  le  prolonged  any  more,  but  the  word  which 
I  have  spoken  shall  le  done,  saith  the  Lord  GOD/' 
Of  course,  this  seemed  like  a  direct  answer,  and,  if 
it  were  a  direct  answer,  it  clearly  meant  that  the 
prophecy  of  the  destruction  of  Oakland,  Alameda,  and 
Chicago  would  be  fulfilled  at  once,  on  the  day  pre 
dicted.     The  woman  told  me  of  this  that  very  day, 
but  I  was  not  at  all  disturbed.    As  we  all  know,  the 
prophecy  was  not  fulfilled,  and  this  would-be  prophet 
ess  sank  out  of  sight,  and  as  far  as  I  know  has  not 
been  heard  from  since.     Many  years  afterward  an 
earthquake   did   come   to   San   Francisco   and  work 
great  destruction,  but  San  Francisco  was  not  in  this 
woman's  prophecy ,  and  Oakland  and  Alameda  were, 
and   they   were   left   practically   untouched   ~by   the 
earthquake  and  certainly  did  not  sink  out  of  sight  as 
the  woman  predicted.     And  furthermore,  the  earth 
quake  that  came  to  an  adjoining  city  was  many  years 
after  the  prophesied  date.    This  is  only  one  illustration 
among  many  that  might  be  given  of  how  utterly  mis 
leading  is  any  guidance  that  we  get  in  this  fantastic 
and  unwarranted  way. 

Furthermore,  the  fact  that  some  text  of  Scripture 
comes  into  your  mind  at  some  time  when  you  are 
trying  to  discover  God's  will  is  not  by  any  means 
proof  positive  that  it  is  just  the  Scripture  for  you 
at  that  time.  The  devil  can  suggest  Scripture.  He 
did  this  in  tempting  our  Lord  (Matt.  4:6),  and  he 
does  it  to-day.  If  the  text  suggested,  taken  in  its  real 
meaning  as  determined  by  the  language  used  and  by 
the  context,  applies  to  your  present  position,  it  is, 


158 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 


of  course,  a  message  from  God  for  you  but  the  mere 
fact  that  a  text  of  Scripture  comes  to  mind  at  some 
time,  which  by  a  distortion  from  its  proper  meaning 
might  apply  to  our  case,  is  no  evidence  whatever  that 
it  is  the  guidance  of  God.  May  I  repeat  once  more 
that  in  getting  guidance  from  God's  Word  we  must 
take  the  words  as  they  are  found  in  their  connexion, 
and  interpret  them  according  to  the  proper  meaning 
of  the  words  used  and  apply  them  to  those  to  whom 
it  is  evident  from  the  context  that  they  were  intended 
to  apply.  But  with  this  word  of  warning  against 
seeking  God's  guidance  from  the  Word  of  God  in 
fantastic  and  unwarranted  ways,  let  me  repeat  that 
God's  principal  way  of  guiding  us,  and  the  way  by 
which  all  other  methods  must  be  tested,  is  by  His 
written  Word. 


II.  GOD  LEADS  BY  His  SPIRIT. 

God  also  leads  us  ~by  His  Spirit,  i.e.,  "by  the  direct 
leading  of  the  Spirit  in  the  individual  heart.  Beyond 
a  question  there  is  such  a  thing  as  an  "inner  light." 
We  read  in  Acts  8:29,  "And  the  Spirit  said  unto 
Philip,  Go  near  and  join  thyself  to  this  chariot. ' '  In 
a  similar  way  we  read  in  Acts  16 :  6,  7,  of  the  Apostle 
Paul  and  his  companions:  "And  they  went  through 
the  region  of  Phrygia  and  the  region  of  Galatia,  hav 
ing  been  forbidden  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  speak  the 
word  in  Asia ;  and  when  they  were  come  over  against 
Mysia  they  assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia ;  and  the  Spirit 
of  Jesus  suffered  them  not."  In  one  of  these  passages 
we  see  the  Spirit  of  God  by  His  Holy  Spirit  giving 
direct  personal  guidance  to  Philip  as  to  what  he  should 


HOW  GOD  GUIDES  159 

do,  and  in  the  other  passage  we  see  the  Spirit  re 
straining  Paul  and  his  companions  from  doing  some 
thing  they  would  otherwise  have  done.     There  is  no 
reason  why  God  should  not  lead  us  as  directly  as  he 
led  Philip  and  Paul  in  their  day,  and  those  who  walk 
near  God  can  testify  that  He  does  so  lead.     I  was 
once  walking  on  South  Clark  Street,  Chicago,  near 
the  corner  of  Adams,  a  very  busy  corner.     I  had 
passed  by  hundreds  of  people  as  I  walked.    Suddenly 
I  met  a  man,  a  perfect  stranger,  and  it  seemed  to  me 
as  if  the  Spirit  of  God  said  to  me,  "  Speak  to  that 
man."    I  stopped  a  moment  and  stepped  into  a  door 
way  and  asked  God  to  show  me  if  the  guidance  was 
really  from  Him.    It  became  instantly  clear  that  it  was. 
I  turned  around  and  f  ollowed  the  man,  who  had  reached 
the  corner  and  was  crossing  from  one  side  of  Clark 
street  to  the  other.    I  caught  up  to  him  in  the  middle 
of  the  street.     Providentially,  for  a  moment  there 
was  no  traffic  at  that  point.    Even  on  that  busy  street, 
we  were  alone  in  the  middle  of  the  street.    I  laid  my 
hand  upon  his  shoulder  as  we  crossed  to  the  further 
sidewalk,  and  said  to  him,  "Are  you  a  Christian?" 
He  replied,  "That  is  a  strange  thing  to  ask  a  perfect 
stranger  on  the  street."     I  said,  "I  know  it  is,  and 
I  do  not  ask  every  man  that  I  meet  on  the  street  that 
question,  but  I  believe  God  told  me  to  ask  you."    He 
stopped  and  hung  his  head.    He  said,  "This  is  very 
strange.    I  am  a  graduate  of  Amherst  College,  but  I 
am  a  perfect  wreck  through  drink  here  in  Chicago, 
and  only  yesterday  my  cousin,  who  is  a  minister  in 
this  city,  was  speaking  to  me  about  my  soul,  and  for 
you,  a  perfect  stranger,  to  put  this  question  to  me 
here  on  this  busy  street!"  I  did  not  succeed  in  bring- 


1GO  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

ing  the  man  to  a  decision  there  on  the  street,  but 
shortly  afterward  he  was  led  to  a  definite  acceptance 
of  Christ.  A  friend  of  mine  walking  the  busy  streets 
of  Toronto  suddenly  had  a  deep  impression  that  he 
should  go  to  the  hospital  and  speak  to  some  one  out 
there.  He  tried  to  think  of  anyone  he  knew  at  the 
hospital  and  he  could  think  of  but  one  man.  He  took 
it  for  granted  that  he  was  the  man  he  was  to  speak 
to,  but  when  he  reached  the  hospital  and  came  to  this 
man's  bedside  there  was  no  reason  why  he  should 
speak  to  him,  and  nothing  came  of  the  conversation. 
He  was  in  great  perplexity,  and  standing  by  his 
friend's  bed  he  asked  God  to  guide  him.  He  saw  a 
man  lying  on  the  bed  right  across  the  aisle.  This 
man  was  a  stranger,  he  had  been  brought  to  the  hos 
pital  for  an  apparently  minor  trouble,  some  difficulty 
with  his  knee.  His  case  did  not  seem  at  all  urgent, 
but  my  friend  turned  and  spoke  to  him  and  had  the 
joy  of  leading  him  to  Christ.  To  everybody's  sur 
prise,  that  man  passed  into  eternity  that  very  night. 
It  was  then  or  never.  So  God  often  guides  us  to-day 
(if  we  are  near  Him  and  listening  for  His  guidance) 
leading  us  to  do  things  that  we  would  not  otherwise 
do,  and  restraining  us  from  doing  things  we  otherwise 
would  do.  But  these  inward  leadings  must  be  always 
tested  by  the  Word,  and  we  do  well  when  any  prompt 
ing  comes  to  look  up  to  God  and  ask  Him  to  make 
clear  to  us  if  this  leading  is  of  Him,  otherwise  we 
may  be  led  to  do  things  which  are  absurd  and  not  at 
all  according  to  the  will  of  God. 

But  though  it  is  oftentimes  our  privilege  to  be  thus 
led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  there  is  no  warrant  whatever 
in  the  Word  of  God  for  our  refusing  to  act  until  we 


HOW  GOD  GUIDE  ,1G1 

'are  thus  led.  Remember  this  is  not  God's  only  method 
of  guidance.  Oftentimes  we  do  not  need  this  particu 
lar  kind  of  guidance.  Take  the  cases  of  Philip  and 
of  Paul  to  which  we  have  referred.  God  did  not 
guide  Philip  and  Paul  in  this  way  in  every  step  they 
took.  Philip  had  done  many  things  in  coming  down 
through  Samaria  to  the  desert  where  he  met  the 
treasurer  of  Queen  Candace,  and  it  was  not  until  the 
chariot  of  the  treasurer  appeared  that  God  led  Philip 
directly  by  His  Spirit.  And  so  with  Paul,  Paul  in 
the  missionary  work  to  which  God  had  called  him  had 
followed  his  own  best  judgment  as  God  enlightened 
it  until  the  moment  came  when  he  needed  the  special 
direct  prohibition  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  his  going  into 
a  place  where  God  would  not  have  him  go  at  that  time. 
There  is  no  need  for  our  having  the  Spirit's  direction 
to  do  that  which  the  Spirit  has  already  told  us  to  do 
in  the  "Word.  For  example,  many  a  man  who  has 
fanatical  and  unscriptural  notions  about  the  guidance 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  refuses  to  work  in  an  after  meeting 
because,  as  he  says,  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not  lead  him 
to  speak  to  anyone,  and  he  is  waiting  until  He  does. 
But  as  the  Word  of  God  plainly  teaches  him  to  be  a 
fisher  of  men  (Matt.  4:19;  28:19;  Acts.  8:4),  if  he 
is  to  obey  God's  word  then  whenever  there  is  oppor 
tunity  to  work  with  men  he  should  go  to  work,  and 
there  is  no  need  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  special  guidance. 
Paul  would  have  gone  into  these  places  to  preach  the 
gospel  if  the  Holy  Spirit  had  not  forbidden  him.  He 
would  not  have  waited  for  some  direct  command  of 
the  Spirit  to  preach,  and  when  we  have  an  opportunity 
to  speak  to  lost  souls  we  should  speak  unless  restrained. 
What  we  need  is  not  some  direct  impulse  of  the  Holy 


162  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

Spirit  to  make  us  speak,  the  Word  already  commands 
us  to  do  that;  what  we  need,  if  we  are  not  to  speak, 
is  that  the  Spirit  should  directly  forbid  us  to  speak. 
Furthermore,  let  me  repeat  again  that  we  should 
bear  in  mind  about  the  Spirit's  guidance,  that  He 
will  not  lead  us  to  do  anything  that  is  contrary  to  the 
"Word  of  God.  The  Word  of  God  is  the  Holy  Spirit's 
book,  and  He  never  contradicts  His  own  teaching. 
Many  people  do  things  that  are  strictly  forbidden  in 
the  Word  of  God,  and  justify  themselves  in  so  doing 
by  saying  the  Spirit  of  God  guides  them  to  do  it, 
but  any  spirit  that  guides  us  to  do  something  that  is 
contrary  to  the  Holy  Spirit's  own  book  cannot  by  any 
possibility  be  the  Holy  Spirit.  For  example,  some 
time  ago  in  reasoning  with  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
Tongues  Movement  about  the  utterly  unscriptural 
character  of  their  assemblies,  I  called  his  attention  to 
the  fact  that  in  the  14th  chapter  of  1st  Corinthians 
we  have  God's  explicit  command  that  not  more  than 
two,  or  at  the  most  three,  persons  should  be  allowed 
to  speak  "in  a  tongue"  in  any  one  meeting,  and  that 
the  two  or  three  that  did  speak  must  not  speak  at  the 
same  time,  but  "in  turn,"  and  if  there  were  no  in 
terpreter  present,  not  even  one  should  be  allowed  to 
speak  in  a  tongue,  that  (while  he  might  speak  in 
private  with  himself  in  a  tongue,  even  with  no  in 
terpreter  present)  he  must  "keep  silence  in  the 
church."  I  called  his  attention  to  the  fact  that  in 
their  assembly  they  disobeyed  every  one  of  these  three 
things  that  God  commanded.  He  defended  himself 
and  his  companions  by  saying,  "But  we  are  led  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  do  these  things,  and  therefore 
are  not  subject  to  the  Word."  I  called  his  attention 


HOW  GOD  GUIDES  163 

to  the  fact  that  "Word  of  God  in  this  passage  was 
given  by  the  Holy  Spirit  for  the  specific  purpose  of 
guiding  the  assembly  in  its  conduct,  and  that  any 
spirit  that  led  them  to  disobey  these  explicit  com 
mandments  of  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself,  given  through 
His  Apostle  Paul  and  recorded  in  His  Word,  could 
not  by  any  possibility  be  the  Holy  Spirit.  Here  again 
we  should  always  bear  in  mind  that  there  are  other 
spirits  beside  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  we  should  "try 
the  spirits  whether  they  be  of  God,"  and  we  should 
try  them  by  the  Word.  One  of  the  gravest  mistakes 
that  anyone  can  make  in  his  Christian  life  is  that  of 
being  so  anxious  for  spirit  guidance  that  he  is  willing 
to  open  his  soul  to  any  spirit  who  may  come  along 
and  try  to  lead  him. 

Further  still,  we  should  always  bear  in  mind  that 
there  is  absolutely  no  warrant  in  the  Word  of  God  for 
supposing  that  the  Holy  Spirit  leads  up  in  strange 
and  absurd  ways,  or  to  do  strange  and  absurd  things. 
For  example,  some  have  certain  signs  by  which  they 
discern,  as  they  say,  the  Holy  Spirit's  guidance.  For 
example,  some  look  for  a  peculiar  twitching  of  the 
face,  or  for  some  other  physical  impulse.  With  some 
the  test  is  a  shudder,  or  cold  sensation  down  the 
back.  When  this  comes  they  take  is  as  clear  evidence 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  present.  In  a  former  day, 
and  to  a  certain  extent  to-day,  some  judge  the  Spirit 's 
presence  by  what  they  call  "the  jerks, "  that  is,  a 
peculiar  jerking  that  takes  possession  of  a  person, 
which  they  suppose  to  be  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
All  this  is  absolutely  unwarranted  by  the  Word  of  God 
and  dishonouring  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  are  told  dis 
tinctly  and  emphatically  in  2  Tim.  1 : 7  that  the  Holyj 


164  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

Spirit  is  a  spirit  "of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a 
sound  mind."  The  word  translated  "sound  mind" 
really  means  ' '  sound  sense, ' '  and,  therefore,  any  spirit 
that  leads  us  to  do  ridiculous  things,  cannot  be  the 
Holy  Spirit.  There  are  some  who  defend  the  most  out 
rageous  improprieties  and  even  indecencies  in  public 
assemblies,  saying  that  the  Holy  Spirit  prompts  them 
to  these  things.  By  this  claim  they  fly  directly  in  the 
face  of  God's  own  Word,  which  teaches  us  specifically 
in  1  Cor.  14:  32,  33,  that  "The  spirits  of  the  prophets 
are  subject  to  the  prophets;  for  God  is  not  a  God  of 
confusion,  but  of  peace."  And  in  the  40th  verse  we 
are  told  that  "all  things"  in  a  Spirit-governed  as 
sembly  should  be  1 1  done  decently  and  in  order. ' '  The 
word  translated  "decently"  in  this  passage  means 
"in  a  becoming  (or  respectable)  way,"  and  this  cer 
tainly  does  not  permit  the  disorders  and  immodesties, 
and  confusions  and  indecencies  and  absurdities  that 
occur  in  many  assemblies  that  claim  to  be  Spirit  led, 
but  which,  tested  by  the  Word  of  God,  certainly  are 
not  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

III.  GOD  GUIDES  Us  BY  ENLIGHTENING  OUR 
JUDGMENT. 

In  the  third  place  God  guides  us  by  enlightening 
our  judgment.  We  see  an  illustration  of  this  in  the 
case  of  the  Apostle  Paul  in  Acts  16 : 10.  God  had  been 
guiding  Paul  by  a  direct  impression  produced  in  his 
heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  keeping  him  from  going  to 
certain  places  whither  he  would  otherwise  have  gone. 
Then  God  gives  to  Paul  in  the  night  a  vision,  and,  hav 
ing  received  the  vision,  Paul,  by  his  own  enlightened 


HOW  GOD  GUIDES  165 

judgment,  concludes  from  it  what  God  has  called  him 
to  do.     This  is  God's  ordinary  method  of  guidance 
when  His  Word  does  not  specifically  tell  us  what  to 
do.     "We  go  to  God  for  wisdom,  we  make  sure  that 
our  wills  are  completely  surrendered  to  Him,  and 
that  we  realize  our  dependence  upon  Him  for  guid 
ance,  then  God  clears  up  our  judgment  and  makes  it 
clear  to  us  what  we  should  do.    Here  again  we  should 
always  bear  in  mind  that  "God  is  light  and  in  Him 
is  no  darkness  at  all,"   and  that,  therefore,  God's 
guidance  is  clear  guidance,  and  we  should  not  act 
until  things  are  made  perfectly  plain.     Many  miss 
God's  guidance  by  doing  things  too  soon.    Had  they 
waited  until  God  had  enabled  them  to  see  clearly, 
under  the  illumination  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  they  would 
have  avoided  disastrous  mistakes.    The  principle  that 
"he  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste"  (Isa.  28 : 16) 
applies  right  here.     On  the  other  hand,  when  any 
duty  is  made  clear  we  should  do  it  at  once.     If  we 
hesitate  to  act  when  the  way  is  made  clear,  then  we 
soon  get  into  doubt  and  perplexity  and  are  all  at  sea 
as  to  what  God  would  have  us  do.    Many  and  many 
a  man  has  seen  the  path  of  duty  as  clear  as  day 
before  him,  and  instead  of  stepping  out  at  once,  has 
hesitated  even  when  the  will  of  God  has  become  per 
fectly  clear,  and  before  long  he  was  plunged  into 
absolute  uncertainty   as   to   what   God   would   have 
him  do. 

IV.  GOD  MAY  GUIDE  BY  'VISIONS  AND  DREAMS. 

In  Acts  16:9,  10,  we  are  told  how  God  guided 
Paul  by  a  vision,  and  there  are  other  instances  of 
such  guidance  not  only  before  Pentecost,  but  after. 


166  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

God  may  so  guide  people  to-day.  However,  that  was 
not  God's  usual  method  of  guiding  men  even  in  Bible 
times,  and  it  is  even  less  His  usual  way  since  the 
giving  of  the  Word  of  God  and  the  giving  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  "We  do  not  need  that  mode  of  guidance 
as  the  Old  Testament  saints  did,  for  we  now  have 
the  complete  Word  and  we  also  have  the  Spirit  in 
a  sense  and  in  a  fullness  that  the  Old  Testament 
saints  did  not.  God  does  lead  by  dreams  to-day. 
When  I  was  a  boy,  sleeping  in  a  room  in  our  old 
home  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  I  dreamed  I  was  sleeping 
in  that  room  and  that  my  mother,  who  I  dreamed 
was  dead  (though  she  was  really  living  at  the 
time)  came  and  stood  by  my  bed,  with  a  face 
like  an  angel,  and  besought  me  to  enter  the  min 
istry,  and  in  my  sleep  I  promised  her  that  I  would. 
In  a  few  moments  I  awoke  and  found  it  all 
a  dream,  but  I  never  could  get  away  from  that 
promise.  I  never  had  rest  in  my  soul  until  I  did 
give  up  my  plans  for  life  and  promise  God  that  I 
would  preach.  But  the  matter  of  dreams  is  one  in 
which  we  should  exercise  the  utmost  care,  and  we 
should  be  very  careful  and  prayerful  and  Scriptural 
in  deciding  that  any  dream  is  from  Him.  Only  the 
other  day  a  brilliant  and  highly  educated  woman 
called  at  my  office  to  tell  me  some  wonderful  dreams 
that  she  had  and  what  these  dreams  proved.  Her 
interpretation  of  the  dreams  was  most  extraordinary 
and  fantastic.  But  while  dreams  are  a  very  uncertain 
method  of  guidance,  it  will  not  do  for  us  to  say  that 
God  never  so  guides,  but  it  is  the  height  of  folly  to 
seek  God's  guidance  in  that  way,  and  especially  to 
dictate  that  God  shall  guide  in  that  way. 


HOW  GOD  GUIDES  167 

V.  GOD  DOES  NOT  GUIDE  BY  CASTING  LOTS  IN  THIS 
DISPENSATION. 

In  Acts  1 : 24-26  we  learn  that  the  Apostles  sought 
guidance  in  a  choice  of  one  to  take  the  place  of  Judas, 
by  the  lot.  This  method  of  finding  God's  will  was 
common  in  the  Old  Testament  times,  but  it  belongs 
entirely  to  the  old  dispensation.  This  is  the  last  case 
on  record.  It  was  never  used  after  Pentecost.  We 
need  to-day  no  such  crude  way  of  ascertaining  the  will 
of  God,  as  we  have  the  Word  and  the  Spirit  at  our 
disposal.  Neither  should  we  seek  signs.  That  belongs 
to  the  imperfect  dispensation  that  is  past,  and  even 
then  it  was  a  sign  of  unbelief. 

VI.  GOD  GUIDES  BY  His  PROVIDENCE. 

God  has  still  another  way  of  guiding  us  beside  those 
already  mentioned,  and  that  is  by  His  providences, 
i.e.,  He  so  shapes  the  events  of  our  lives  that  it 
becomes  clear  that  He  would  have  us  go  in  a  certain 
direction  or  do  a  certain  thing.  For  example,  God 
puts  an  unsaved  man  directly  in  our  way  so  that 
we  are  alone  with  him  and  thus  have  an  opportunity 
for  conversation  with  him.  In  such  a  case  we  need 
no  vision  to  tell  us,  and  we  need  no  mighty  impulse 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  tell  us,  that  we  ought  to  speak 
to  this  man  about  his  soul.  The  very  fact  that  we 
are  alone  with  him  and  have  an  opportunity  for 
conversation  is  of  itself  all  the  Divine  guidance  we 
need.  We  do  need,  however,  to  look  to  God  to  tell 
us  what  to  say  to  him  and  how  to  say  it,  but  God 
will  not  tell  us  what  to  say  by  some  supernatural 


168  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

revelation,  but  by  making  clear  to  our  own  minds 
what  we  should  say. 

In  a  similar  way  if  a  man  needs  work  to  support 
himself  or  family,  and  a  position  for  honest  employ 
ment  opens  to  him,  he  needs  no  inner  voice,  no  direct 
leading  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  tell  him  to  take  the 
work,  the  opening  opportunity  is  of  itself  God's  guid 
ance  by  God's  providence. 

We  must,  however,  be  very  careful  and  very  prayer 
ful  in  interpreting  "the  leadings  of  providence." 
What  some  people  call  "the  leading  of  providence" 
means  no  more  than  the  easiest  way.  When  Jonah 
was  fleeing  from  God  and  went  down  to  Joppa  he 
found  a  ship  just  ready  to  start  for  Tarshish  (Jonah 
1:3).  If  he  had  been  like  many  to-day  he  would 
have  interpreted  that  as  meaning  it  was  God's  will 
that  he  should  go  to  Tarshish,  as  there  was  a  ship  just 
starting  for  Tarshish,  instead  of  to  Nineveh,  to  which 
city  God  had  bidden  him  go.  In  point  of  fact,  Jonah 
did  take  ship  to  Tarshish  but  he  was  under  no  illusion 
in  the  matter,  he  knew  perfectly  well  that  he  was 
not  going  where  God  wanted  him  to  go,  and  he  got 
into  trouble  for  it.  Oftentimes  people  seek  guidance 
by  providence  by  asking  God  to  shut  up  a  certain  way 
that  is  opening  to  them,  if  it  is  not  His  will  that 
they  should  go  that  way.  There  is  no  warrant  what 
ever  for  doing  that.  God  has  given  us  our  judgment 
and  is  ready  to  illuminate  our  judgment,  and  we 
have  no  right  to  act  the  part  of  children  and  to  ask 
Him  to  shut  up  the  way  so  we  cannot  possibly  go 
that  way  if  it  is  not  His  will.  Some  fancy  that  the 
easy  way  is  necessarily  God's  way,  but  oftentimes  the 
hard  way  is  God's  way.  Our  Lord  Himself  said,  as 


HOW  GOD  GUIDES  169 

recorded  in  Matt.  16:24,  ''If  any  man  would  come 
after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross 
and  follow  me."  That  certainly  is  not  the  easy  way. 
There  are  many  who  advise  us  to  "  follow  the  path  of 
least  resistance,"  but  the  path  of  least  resistance  is 
not  always  God's  way  by  any  means. 

Some  ask  God  to  guide  them  providentially  by  re 
moving  all  difficulties  from  the  path  in  which  He 
would  have  them  go,  but  we  have  no  right  to  offer 
such  a  prayer.  God  wishes  us  to  be  men  and  women 
of  character  and  to  surmount  difficulties,  and  He 
oftentimes  will  allow  difficulties  to  pile  up  in  the  very 
way  in  which  we  ought  to  go,  and  the  fact  that  we 
see  that  a  path  is  full  of  difficulties  is  no  reason  for 
deciding  it  is  not  the  way  God  would  have  us  go. 
Nevertheless,  God  does  guide  us  by  His  providence, 
and  we  have  no  right  to  despise  His  providential 
guidance.  For  example,  one  may  desire  to  go  to 
China  or  to  Africa  as  a  missionary  and  God  does  not 
give  them  the  health  requisite  for  going  to  China  or 
to  Africa.  They  should  take  that  as  clear  providen 
tial  guidance  that  they  ought  not  to  go,  and  seek 
some  other  opportunity  of  serving  God. 

There  are  many  people  asking  God  to  open  some 
door  of  opportunity  and  God  does  open  a  door  of 
opportunity  right  at  hand,  but  it  is  not  the  kind  of 
work  they  would  especially  like  to  do ;  so  they  decline 
to  see  in  it  a  door  of  opportunity.  The  whole  difficulty 
is  that  they  are  not  wholly  surrendered  to  the  will  of 
God. 

Before  we  close  this  subject  let  us  repeat  again 
what  cannot  be  emphasized  too  much  nor  too  often, 
that  all  leadings,  whether  they  be  by  the  Spirit,  by 


170 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 


visions,  by  providences,  by  our  own  judgment,  or 
advice  of  friends,  or  in  any  other  way,  must  be  tested 
by  the  Word  of  God. 

The  main  point  in  the  whole  matter  of  guidance  is 
the  absolute  surrender  of  the  will  to  God,  the  de 
lighting  in  His  will,  and  the  being  willing  to  do  joy 
fully  the  very  things  we  would  not  like  to  do  naturally, 
the  very  things  in  connection  with  which  there  may 
be  many  disagreeable  circumstances,  because,  for  ex 
ample,  of  association  with,  or  even  subordination  to 
those  that  we  do  not  altogether  like,  or  difficulties  of 
other  kinds,  doing  them  joyfully,  simply  because  it 
is  the  will  of  God,  and  the  willingness  to  let  God 
lead  in  any  way  He  pleases,  whether  it  be  by  His 
Word,  or  His  Spirit,  or  by  the  enlightening  of  our 
judgment,  or  by  His  providence,  or  whatever  way 
He  will.  If  we  will  only  completely  distrust  our  own 
judgment  and  have  absolute  confidence  in  God's  judg 
ment  and  God's  willingness  to  guide  us,  and  are  ab 
solutely  surrendered  to  His  will,  whatever  it  may 
be,  and  are  willing  to  let  God  choose  His  way  of 
guidance,  and  will  go  on  step  by  step  as  He  does 
guide  us,  and  if  we  are  daily  studying  His  Word 
to  know  His  will,  and  are  listening  for  the  still  small 
voice  of  the  Spirit,  going  step  by  step  as  He  leads,  He 
will  guide  us  with  His  eye ;  He  will  guide  us  with  His 
counsel  to  the  end  of  our  earthly  pilgrimage,  and 
afterwards  receive  us  into  glory. 


XIII 

GOD'S  KEEPING  AND  HOW  TO  MAKE  SURE 
OF  IT 

OUR  subject  this  morning  is  God's  keeping  and 
how  to  make  sure  of  it.  How  to  enjoy  or 
make  sure  of  God's  keeping  will  come  out 
when  we  come  to  a  consideration  of  whom  God  keeps. 
The  Bible,  both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  is  full 
of  passages  on  this  important  subject  of  God's  keep 
ing  and  we  shall  look  at  quite  a  number  of  these 
passages  this  morning,  but  no  one  of  them  can  properly 
be  considered  the  text  of  the  entire  sermon.  I  am 
going  to  give  you  a  Bible  reading  rather  than  a 
sermon.  Let  us  look  first  at  John  17:11  (This 
comes  nearer  being  the  text  of  the  whole  sermon 
than  any  other,  "And  I  am  no  more  in  the  world, 
and  these  are  in  the  world,  and  I  come  to  Thee. 
Holy  Father,  keep  them  in  the  name  which  Thou  hast 
given  me,  that  they  may  be  one  even  as  we  are." 
This  was  Jesus'  prayer.  I  am  glad  He  offered  it; 
for  the  Father  heareth  Him  always,  and  I  am  sure  of 
God's  keeping  because  the  Lord  Jesus  asked  that  I 
might  be  kept.  Most  wonderfully  does  this  prayer 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  bring  out  the  security  of 
those  who  belong  to  Him.  In  the  next  verse  He 
goes  on  to  say  that  while  He  was  with  His  disciples 

171 


172  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

He  kept  them  in  the  Father's  name.  Yes,  He  says 
more  than  that,  He  says,  "I  guarded  them,  and  not 
one  of  them  perished. ' '  The  son  of  perdition  perished 
and  he  was  one  of  the  apostolic  company,  but  he  was 
never  really  one  of  those  who  belonged  to  Christ,  he 
was  not  one  of  those  whom  the  Father  had  given 
to  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  Himself  declares  that  Judas 
was  a  devil  from  the  beginning  (John  6:70). 
But  now  our  Lord  was  leaving  His  disciples  and 
He  turned  their  keeping  over  to  the  Father,  and 
it  is  now  the  Father  who  keeps  us,  and  it  is  this 
keeping  which  we  are  to  study  this  morning.  What 
the  Bible  tells  us  of  God's  keeping  can  be  clas 
sified  under  fiva  main  heads:  (1)  Whom  God 
keeps;  (2)  What  He  keeps;  (3)  From  what  He 
keeps;  (4)  How  He  keeps;  (5)  Unto  what  He  keeps. 

I.  WHOM  GOD  KEEPS. 

We  look  first  at  whom  God  keeps,  and  by  discover 
ing  that  we  will  discover  how  any  one  of  us  may  be 
sure  of  His  glorious  keeping. 

1.  Whom  He  keeps  we  are  told  in  the  very  verse  that 
we  have  just  been  reading,  John  17 : 11,  12.  Here 
the  Lord  Jesus  prays  to  the  Father  to  keep  those 
whom  the  Father  Himself  hath  given  to  Christ,  and 
says  that  He  himself  during  His  earthly  life  had  kept 
these  whom  His  Father  had  given  Him.  Those 
whom  God  keeps  then  are  those  who  belong  to  Christ, 
those  whom  the  Father  has  given  to  Him.  The  clear 
teaching  of  these  verses  is  that  there  is  a  body  of 
persons  who  belonged  in  a  peculiar  way  to  God,  and 
whom  God  gave  to  His  Son.  This  company  of  people, 


GOD'S  KEEPING  173 

and  their  security  and  privileges,  are  frequently  men 
tioned  in  the  Gospel  of  John.  Those  whom  God  keeps 
are  those  who  belong  to  this  company.  The  way 
then  to  be  sure  of  God's  keeping  is  to  make  sure  that 
we  belong  to  this  company  whom  the  Father  has  given 
to  Christ.  But  who  are  these,  and  how  can  any  one 
of  us  tell  whether  or  not  we  belong  to  this  privileged 
company. 

(1)  This  question  is  answered  in  John  6:  37  where 
Jesus  is  recorded  as  saying,   "All  that  which  the 
Father  giveth  me  shall  come  unto  me;  and  him  that 
cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."    From  this 
it  is  clear  that  all  those  who  come  to  Christ  belong 
to  that  elect  company  whom  the  Father  has  given 
unto  Him.     Every  man  who  really  comes  to  Christ, 
comes  to  Him  as  his  Saviour,  as  his  Master,  as  his 
Lord,  and  commits  himself  unreservedly  to  Him,  for 
Christ  to  save  and  to  rule,  he  is  one  of  those  whom 
God  has  given  to  Christ,  and  whom  God  therefore 
keeps.    Are  you  one  of  this  number  ?    Have  you  come 
to  Christ  in  this  real  way  ?    If  you  are,  God  will  keep 
you.    If  not,  will  you  come  to  Christ  to-day  and  thus 
make  sure  that  you  will  be  kept? 

(2)  We  have  still  another  description  of  those  whom 
God  has  given  to  Christ,  in  John  17 :  6,  He  says,  ' '  I 
manifested   Thy   name   unto   the   men   whom   Thou 
gavest  me  out  of  the  world:  Thine  they  were  and 
Thou  gavest  them  to  me;  and  they  have  kept  Thy 
Word."    Here  we  are  told  that  those  whom  the  Father 
gave  to  the  Son  were  those  who  kept  God's  Word. 
Every  one  who  keeps  God's  Word  may  be  sure  that 
he  belongs  to  the  eleet  company  whom  God  the  Father 
Himself  will  keep.    Notice  carefully  Christ's  descrip- 


174 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 


tion  of  them:  "they  have  kept  Thy  Word."  That  is 
to  say,  they  not  only  hear  God's  Word,  not  only  obey 
it,  they  keep  God's  Word,  i.e.,  they  treasure  it,  they 
regard  it  as  their  most  precious  treasure  and  they  will 
not  give  it  up  for  any  gain  that  may  be  offered  them 
in  place  of  it.  These  are  those  whom  God  keeps.  // 
we  keep  God's  Words  God  Himself  will  keep  us. 
Are  you  keeping  God's  words? 

2.  Isa.  26 : 3  also  tells  us  whom  God  keeps.  Here 
the  prophet  says  in  speaking  to  God,  "Thou  wilt  keep 
him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee: 
because  he  trusteth  in  Thee."  God  keeps  the  one 
whose  mind  is  stayed  upon  Him,  the  one  who  looks 
not  at  self  but  at  Gody  looks  not  at  circumstances, 
but  at  God;  the  one  who  puts  confidence  in  God.  The 
keeping  of  this  passage  is  a  different  one  from  that 
which  is  spoken  of  in  John  17.  There  it  is  a  keeping 
from  perishing,  here  it  is  a  keeping  from  all  anxiety 
and  worry.  We  shall  see  this  more  clearly  when  we 
come  to  speak  of  from  what  God  keeps  us. 


II.  WHAT  GOD  KEEPS. 

Now  let  us  look  at  what  God  keeps.  Paul  tells  us 
in  2  Tim.  1:12  just  what  God  keeps.  He  says,  "I 
know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded 
that  He  is  able  to  keep  (guard)  that  which  I 
have  committed  unto  Him  against  that  day."  The 
word  translated  "keep"  in  this  passage  in  the  Ke- 
vised  Version  is  rendered  "guard,"  but  it  is  the 
same  word  that  is  used  in  John  17 : 2,  though  not  the 
same  word  that  is  used  in  John  17:11.  Here  we 
are  taught  that  God  keeps  (or  guards)  that  which  is 


GOD'S  KEEPING  175 

committed  unto  Him.  Some  commit  more  unto  God, 
some  less,  but  what  is  committed  unto  Him  He  keeps. 
Some  commit  the  keeping  of  their  souls  unto  God  (1 
Pet.  4:19),  some  commit  their  temporal  affairs  unto 
Him,  some  commit  their  health  unto  Him,  some  more, 
some  less,  but  whatever  is  committed  to  Him  He 
keeps.  Dorothea  Trudel,  a  German  woman,  tells  how 
her  mother  was  a  woman  of  great  faith  in  prayer, 
and  though  her  father  was  a  drinking  man  who  made 
little  or  no  provision  for  the  family,  and  the  children 
numbered  eleven,  and  their  straits  were  sometimes 
great,  they  always  were  saved  from  suffering.  She 
says :  ' '  There  were  times  when  we  had  not  a  farthing 
left  in  the  house.  None  but  God  knew  of  our  con 
dition,  and  He  who  feedeth  the  young  ravens  when 
they  cry  was  not  unmindful  of  the  petitions  of  His 
faithful  child.  He  ever  helped  us  in  our  time  of 
need.  It  was  on  this  account  that  our  mother's 
favorite  motto,  'Pray,  but  do  not  beg/  has  been  so 
impressed  upon  our  minds.  When  one  of  the  children 
was  asked  on  what  her  mother  relied  in  her  poverty, 
the  child  said,  'On  God  alone.'  She  never  tells  us 
how  God  is  going  to  help,  but  she  is  always  certain 
His  aid  will  come  at  the  right  time. '  '  '  The  experience 
of  this  German  woman  could  be  duplicated  in  the  ex 
perience  of  thousands  in  our  own  land  and  other 
lands.  It  was  related  of  Mrs.  Jane  C.  Pithey,  a 
member  of  the  Centenary  Methodist  Church  in 
Chicago,  that  for  years  she  was  disabled  by  the  shaking 
palsy  and  received  all  her  supplies  in  answer  to 
prayer.  When  her  husband  died  he  left  in  his  pocket- 
book  two  silver  quarters.  Besides  the  little  cottage, 
this  was  all  that  she  had  to  support  herself  and  a 


176 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 


bedridden  mother  of  nearly  ninety  years  of  age.  It 
is  said  "she  went  to  God  in  prayer  and  day  by  day 
each  want  was  met.  Each  needed  article  was  asked 
for  by  name  until  her  hired  girl  was  astounded  at 
the  constant  answers  given.  One  morning  as  Mrs. 
Pithey  was  rising  from  her  knees  at  the  family  wor 
ship,  the  girl  burst  out,  'You  have  forgotten  to  pray 
for  coal  and  we  are  entirely  out/  So,  as  she  stood, 
she  added  a  petition  for  the  coal.  About  an  hour 
after,  the  bell  rang,  she  went  to  the  door  and  there 
was  a  load  of  coal  sent  by  a  man  who  knew  nothing 
of  her  want,  and  who  had  never  sent  anything  before, 
nor  ever  has  since.  '  '  Many  other  instances  are  related 
regarding  her  of  God's  keeping  and  supplying  all  her 
needs.  Some  commit  their  work  to  God,  some  com 
mit  everything.  His  keeping  will  be  just  in  propor 
tion  to  our  committing. 


III.  FROM  WHAT  GOD  KEEPS. 

1.  First  of  all,  God  keeps  those  who  belong  to  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ  from  perishing.  This  comes  out  very 
plainly  in  the  passage  with  which  we  started,  John 
17:11,  12.  Our  Lord  prayed,  "Holy  Father,  keep 
them  in  Thy  name,  which  Thou  hast  given  me,  that 
they  may  be  one  even  as  we  are."  Then  He  goes  on 
to  say,  "While  I  was  with  them,  I  kept  them  in  Thy 
name  which  Thou  hast  given  me  :  and  I  guarded  them, 
and  not  one  of  them  perished,  but  the  son  of  perdi 
tion."  The  one  who  truly  comes  to  Christ,  the  one 
who  enters  with  his  whole  heart  in  the  fellowship  of 
Christ,  the  one  who  fully  receives  Christ  as  his  Saviour 
from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  the  one  who  whole- 


GOD'S  KEEPING  177 

heartedly  and  unreservedly  surrenders  to  Christ  as 
his  Master,  God  keeps  from  ever  perishing.  No  matter 
how  numerous,  how  subtle,  how  mighty  the  assaults 
of  Satan,  of  sin,  and  of  error  may  be,  God  will  keep 
him.  As  the  Lord  Jesus  puts  it  in  another  place 
(John  10:28,  29),  ''I  give  unto  them  eternal  life; 
and  they  shall  never  perish,  and  no  one  shall  snatch 
them  out  of  my  hand.  My  Father  which  hath  given 
them  unto  me,  is  greater  than  all  and  no  one  is  able 
to  snatch  them  out  of  the  Father's  hand."  This  is 
the  position  of  the  one  who  belongs  to  Christ,  the 
almighty  hand  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  underneath 
him,  the  almighty  hand  of  God  the  Father  over  him, 
and  there  he  is,  in  between  those  two  almighty  hands, 
perfectly  sheltered,  and  no  person  and  no  power  in 
heaven  or  earth  or  hell  can  ever  get  him. 

2.  But  it  is  not  only  from  perishing  that  God  keeps, 
He  also  keeps  from  falling.  As  we  read  in  Jude  24, 
He  "is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling  and  to  present 
us  faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with 
exceeding  joy."  The  word  translated  "falling"  in 
this  passage  is  translated  "stumbling"  in  the  Revised 
Version  and  this  is  the  exact  force  of  the  word.  One 
may  fall  without  perishing,  but  one  need  not  even 
fall,  indeed  he  need  not  even  stumble.  God  can  keep 
us  from  even  this,  and  will  keep  us  from  this  if  we 
look  to  Him  and  trust  Him  to  do  it.  But  when  we  get 
our  eyes  off  from  Him  down  we  go,  but  He  still  keeps 
us  from  perishing.  He  sees  to  it  that  we  get  up  again 
even  if  we  do  stumble.  Though  we  stumble  we  are 
still  kept,  just  as  Peter  was,  from  making  utter  ship 
wreck.  Peter  was  in  Satan's  sieve,  but  nevertheless 
he  was  still  kept  by  God  in  answer  to  Christ's  inter- 


178 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 


cessory  prayer,  and  Christ  always  lives  to  make  in 
tercession  for  us  and  so  "is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost"  (Heb.  7:25).  "What  comfort  there  is  in 
this  verse  to  the  one  who  hesitates  to  begin  the  Chris 
tian  life  because  he  knows  his  weakness  and  is  afraid 
that  he  will  stumble  and  fall.  If  you  will  only  put 
yourself  wholly  in  God's  hands  He  is  able,  no  matter 
how  weak  you  may  be  in  yourself,  to  keep  you  even 
from  stumbling. 

3.  But  it  is  not  only  from  perishing  and  from 
stumbling  that  God  keeps,  He  keeps  the  one  whose 
mind  is  stayed  upon  Him  in  perfect  peace.  This  glad 
gospel  we  find  in  that  book  in  the  Old  Testament 
which  is  so  full  of  the  gospel,  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah. 
We  read  in  Isa.  26 :  3,  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect 
peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee:  because  he 
trusteth  in  Thee."  Then  Isaiah  goes  on  to  say, 
"Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  forever:  for  in  the  Lord  Je 
hovah  is  everlasting  strength."  God  keeps  from  all 
anxiety  those  who  may  stay  their  minds  upon  Him. 
If  we  will  only  take  our  eyes  off  from  ourselves  and 
off  from  men,  and  off  from  circumstances,  and  stay 
our  minds  upon  God  and  upon  Him  alone  and  upon 
His  sure  promises,  He  will  keep  us  in  perfect  peace. 
These  are  precious  words  for  such  a  time  as  that  in 
which  we  live,  where  one  does  not  know  any  morning 
when  he  takes  up  his  paper  what  he  may  read.  No 
matter  how  perilous  our  position  may  seem,  no  matter 
how  unlooked  for  and  how  unwelcome  our  surround 
ings  may  be,  if  we  stay  our  minds  upon  the  Lord 
Jehovah  He  will  keep  us  in  perfect  peace.  We  have 
an  illustration  of  this  in  Caleb  and  Joshua  in  the 
Old  Testament  (Num.  13:17,  26,  28,  29,  30;  14:1,  3, 


GOD'S  KEEPING  179 

7-9).     The  ten  spies  that  accompanied  Caleb  and 
Joshua  into  the  land  looked  at  circumstances  and 
were  filled  with  dismay.     Caleb  and  Joshua  looked 
away  from  circumstances,  they  looked  right  over  the 
heads  of  the  giants,  they  looked  at  God  and  His  Word. 
They  stayed  their  minds  on  Him  and  He  kept  them 
in  perfect  peace.     It  was  so  with  Paul  also  in  the 
awful  storm  and  impending  shipwreck  on  the  Medi 
terranean.     The   crew   and   soldiers   were   cowering 
with  fear  as  they  heard  the  howling  of  the  wind  and 
saw  the  fierceness  and  force  of  the  dashing  waves, 
but  Paul  looked  over  the  waves  and  over  the  storm 
at  God  and  His  Word,  and  stayed  His  mind  on  Him, 
and  God  kept  Him  in  perfect  peace  so  that  Paul 
could  say  to  his  cowering  companions,  "Sirs,  be  of 
good  cheer:  for  I  'believe  God  that  it  shall  be  even 
so  as  it  has  been  spoken  unto  me"   (Acts  27:25). 
Oh,  we  need  men  and  women  of  just  such  imperturb 
able  calm  as  that  in  such  days  of  stress  and  storm 
as  those  in  which  we  are  now  living.     If  we  would 
only  stay  our  minds  upon  God,  if  we  would  only 
really  trust  Him,  if  we  would  only  really  believe  His 
Word  that  it  will  ~be  even  as  it  has  been  told  us,  we 
would  never  have  a  single  ruffle  of  anxiety.     There 
is  one  passage  in  the  Word  of  God  which  taken  alone 
would  be  able,  if  we  would  only  bear  it  in  mind  and 
believe  it,  to  banish  all  fears  and  all  anxiety  for  ever, 
that  passage  is  Rom.  8:  28,  "We  know  that  all  things 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to 
them  who  are  the  called  according  to  His  purpose." 
Whatever  comes  to  us  must  be  one  of  the  "all  things" 
and  if  we  believed  this  passage  we  would  know  that 
however  threatening  it  may  appear,  and  however  bad 


180  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

in  itself  it  may  really  be,  that  it  must  work  together 
with  the  other  things  that  God  sends  into  our  lives, 
for  our  highest  good.  How  then  can  we  ever  have 
a  moment's  worry? 

IV.  How  GOD  KEEPS. 

Now  let  us  turn  to  the  question  of  how  God  keeps. 

1.  We  are  told  in  Deut.  32 :  9,  10,  that  Jehovah 
keeps  His  people  "as  the  apple  of  His  eye."    The  eye 
is  the  most  wonderfully  protected  portion  of  the  body, 
and  "the  apple"  or  pupil  of  the  eye  is  the  most  im 
portant  part  of  the  eye,  the  lens,  and  is  especially 
provided  for  and  protected.     The  mechanism  of  the 
eye  and  the  provision  for  its  welfare  that  God  has 
made  has  always  awakened  the  wonder  and  admira 
tion  of  men  of  science.     It  is  shielded  and  guarded 
in  every  conceivable  way,  and  just  so  God  guards 
His  people  with  the  utmost  care,  with  every  conceiv 
able  and  inconceivable  safeguard  against  their  injury. 
Each  year  brings  into  view  some  new  provision  God 
has  made  for  our  safety. 

2.  We  are  taught  in  Gen.  28:15  that  God  keeps 
those  who  trust  and  obey  Him  "in  all  places  whither 
soever''  they  go.     He  kept  Joseph  in  his  father's 
house ;  He  kept  him  in  the  pit  in  the  wilderness ;  He 
kept  him  in  Potiphar's  house;  He  kept  him  in  the 
Egyptian  prison;  He  kept  him  in  the  palace.     God 
kept  David  from  the  fury  and  power  of  the  lion  and 
the  bear  as  he  watched  the  sheep  in  the  wilderness; 
He  kept  him  in  security  through  all  the  years  that 
Saul  hunted  him  like  a  partridge  in  the  mountains 
(1  Sam.  26:20);  He  kept  him  in  the  face  of  the 


GOD'S  KEEPING  181 

many  foes  that  arose  against  him  when  he  became 
king;  He  kept  him  everywhere,  so  that  David  could 
write,  "Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil,  for  thou  art 
with  me."  And  so  God  keeps  us  if  we  trust  and 
obey  Him,  in  all  places  whithersoever  we  go. 

3.  In  Ps.  121 : 3,  4  we  are  taught  God  keeps  His 
people  at  all  times.    He  that  keeps  us  never  "slumbers 
nor  sleeps."    We  are  not  only  kept  in  all  places,  but 
also  at  all  times.     God  is  never  off  guard,  He  never 
sleeps  at  His  post.     Satan  can  never  catch  one  of 
God's  children  when  their  watchman  is  sleeping.     I 
am  glad  of  this.     You  and  I  are  often  off  guard. 
Satan  can  often  catch  us  napping,  but  he  can  never 
catch  us  when  our  Watchman  is  napping. 

4.  But  there  is  another  thought  about  God's  keep 
ing  which,  if  possible,  is  even  more  precious,  and 
that  is  He  keeps  to  all  eternity.    Here  again  we  think 
of  John  10 : 28,  "I  give  unto  them  eternal  life :  and 
they  shall  never  perish,  and  no  one  shall  snatch  them 
out  of  my  hand."     Those  who  trust  in  Christ  shall 
"never  perish."     This  is  one  of  the  most  precious 
facts  about  God's  keeping,  it  never  ends.    We  may 
prove  unfaithful  but  He  ever  abideth  faithful,  He 
cannot  deny  Himself  (2  Tim.  2: 13).    He  keepeth  to 
the  end.    We  shall  never  perish,  or,  to  translate  more 
literally  as  well  as  more  expressively,  "in  no  wise 
(shall  we)  perish,  for  ever."     We  stand  to-day  and 
look  forward  into  the  never-ending  future.     If  we 
know  ourselves  well  and  look  at  ourselves  alone  we 
may  well  tremble  at  the  thought  of  how  utterly  we 
may  fail  some  time  in  those  ever  rolling  years;  but, 
if  we  look  up  to  God  and  know  Him,  we  will  not 


182  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

tremble,  for  He  never  faileth,  and  we  have  His  "Word 
for  it  that  He  will  ever  keep  us.  He  keeps  me  to-day 
"as  the  apple  of  His  eye,"  He  will  keep  me  in  all 
places,  He  will  keep  me  at  all  times,  He  will  keep  me 
to  all  eternity. 

V.  UNTO  WHAT  GOD  KEEPS. 

We  have  seen  whom  God  keeps ;  we  have  seen  what 
God  keeps;  we  have  seen  from  what  God  keeps;  we 
have  seen  how  God  keeps;  one  thought  remains,  unto 
ivhat  does  God  keep.  This  question  is  answered  in 
1  Pet.  1 : 5,  We  "are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  unto 
a  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time." 
Upon  this  we  have  no  time  to  dwell.  Simply  let  me 
say  this,  that  the  salvation  that  we  have  to-day,  no 
matter  how  complete  it  may  seem,  even  though  we 
know  not  only  the  forgiveness  of  sins  and  adoption 
into  the  family  of  God,  but  also  deliverance  from 
sin's  power,  a  life  of  daily  victory,  is  not  the  whole 
of  salvation.  Completed  salvation  lies  in  the  eternal 
future.  In  includes  not  merely  the  salvation  of  the 
spirit  and  the  soul,  it  includes  the  salvation  of  the 
body,  that  "  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last 
times, "  is  the  salvation  that  we  shall  possess  when 
the  wondrous  promises  about  our  being  transformed 
into  the  perfect  likeness  of  Jesus  Christ,  not  only 
spiritually  and  morally  and  mentally,  but  also  physi 
cally,  have  their  fulfilment,  and  unto  that  salvation 
God  keeps  us. 

Beloved  fellow  believer  in  God  and  in  Jesus  Christ 
His  Son,  have  you  realized  fully  what  God's  keeping 
means  ?  Have  you  enjoyed  the  security  that  is  yours, 


GOD'S  KEEPING  183 

and  the  rest  of  mind  that  might  be  yours  ?  Have  you 
put  as  much  into  His  hands  to  keep  as  He  is  willing 
to  keep?  Are  you  letting  Him  keep  you  in  perfect 
peace  in  the  midst  of  the  trial  and  uncertainty  and 
travail  and  turmoil  and  storm  and  stress  of  these 
trying  days  ?  If  not,  will  you  do  it  to-day  ? 

And  friends,  you  who  are  not  Christians,  do 
you  not  see  how  precious  a  thing  God's  keeping  is? 
Is  it  not  immeasurably  better  than  anything  this 
world  has  to  give?  Some  trust  in  riches,  some  in 
their  own  abilities,  some  in  powerful  friends,  some  in 
national  leaders  and  "preparedness,"  but  better,  in 
finitely  better  to  trust  in  God,  for  "He  will  keep  him 
in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  upon  Him, 
because  he  trusteth  in  Him."  Will  you  not  put  your 
trust  in  Him  and  have  a  share  in  this  wondrous  prayer 
of  the  Saviour,  "Holy  Father,  keep  through  Thine 
own  name  those  whom  Thou  hast  given  me." 


XIV 

THE   COMPLETE   AND   SYMMETRICAL  LIFE, 
AND  HOW  TO  ATTAIN  TO  IT 

"But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace, 
long  suffering,  gentleness  (kindness),  goodness,  faith 
(faithfulness),  meekness,  temperance." — Gal.  5 : 22, 23. 

THE  average  life  is  a  very  partial  life.  Even 
the  life  of  the  average  Christian  is  a  very 
partial  life,  a  one-sided  life,  it  is  a  life  in 
which  there  is  much  lacking.  There  may  be  many 
admirable  things  about  it,  but  there  is  a  deplorable 
lack  of  other  things — the  life  is  incomplete,  it  is  devoid 
of  balance  and  symmetry,  strong  in  some  directions, 
perhaps  amazingly  strong  in  those  directions,  but 
lacking,  perhaps  amazingly  lacking,  in  other  direc 
tions.  It  is  like  an  imperfect  rose,  perfectly  formed 
and  beautifully  tinted  in  one  part,  but  blasted  and 
withered  in  another  part.  "What  each  one  of  us  needs 
is  a  full  life,  a  well-rounded  life,  a  well-balanced  life, 
a  symmetrical  life.  There  is  a  passage  in  the  "Word 
of  God  that  wonderfully  pictures  such  a  life,  complete 
in  all  its  parts  and  symmetrical  in  its  every  detail. 
This  passage  not  only  pictures  this  life,  but  tells  us 
how  to  attain  to  it.  The  passage  is  Gal.  5:  22,  "But 
the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long  suffer 
ing,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temper- 

184 


THE  COMPLETE  LIFE— HOW  TO  ATTAIN  IT    185 

ance."  Some  years  ago  during  attendance  at  a  Bible 
Conference  in  St.  Louis,  I  was  entertained  at  a  private 
home.  When  I  awoke  in  the  morning  the  first  thing 
that  I  saw  as  I  opened  my  eyes  was  these  words 
looped  around  the  room  in  large  and  beautifully  col 
oured  letters,  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy, 
peace,  long  suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith, 
meekness,  temperance."  They  brought  a  blessing  to 
my  heart  that  morning  and  set  me  to  thinking  deeply 
upon  the  words.  From  that  day  to  this  I  have  had 
a  longing  to  preach  on  this  text  but  have  never  done 
it  until  this  hour.  The  text  presents  to  us  two  main 
thoughts,  the  complete  and  symmetrical  life  described, 
and  how  to  attain  to  this  complete  and  symmetrical 
life. 

I.  THE  COMPLETE  AND  SYMMETRICAL  LIFE  DESCRIBED. 


1.  The  first  characteristic  in  this  life  is  "LOVE." 
"The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love."  Paul  does  not  say 
whether  he  has  in  mind  love  to  God  or  love  to  man, 
he  just  says  "LOVE,"  without  definition  as  to  its 
objects,  so  love  as  here  spoken  of  includes  all  objects. 
The  complete  life  is  characterized  by  love  to  both  God 
and  man,  and  love  to  all  classes  and  conditions  of 
men.  It  obeys  the  first  and  great  commandment, 
"Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  with  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind, ' ' 
and  it  also  obeys  the  second  command,  "Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Yes,  it  goes  beyond 
the  second  commandment  and  obeys  the  new  com 
mandment  which  the  Lord  gave  to  His  disciples,  that 
they  love  one  another,  even  as  He  loved  us  (John 


186  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

13:34).  In  moral  attributes,  "love"  is  the  one  pre 
eminently  Divine  thing,  ' '  God  is  love  "  ( 1  John  4:8). 
If  love  is  lacking,  all  else  counts  for  nothing,  and 
the  life  is  not  only  incomplete,  it  is  worthless.  "If  I 
speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels,  but 
have  not  love,  I  am  become  sounding  brass,  or  a 
clanging  cymbal.  And  if  I  have  the  gift  of  prophecy, 
and  know  all  mysteries  and  all  knowledge;  and  if  I 
have  all  faith,  so  as  to  remove  mountains,  but  have 
not  love,  I  am  nothing.  And  if  I  bestow  all  my  goods 
to  feed  the  poor,  and  though  I  give  my  body  to  be 
burned,  and  have  not  love,  it  profiteth  me  nothing  (1 
Cor.  13:1-3).  "The  old  time  religion,"  as  the  son- 
goes,  "makes  me  love  everybody,"  and  the  complete 
life  is  the  life  of  the  one  who  "loves  everybody." 
There  is  absolutely  no  man  whom  the  Spirit-filled  man 
does  not  love.  No  matter  how  grievously  one  may 
have  wronged  us,  no  matter  how  grossly  they  may 
have  slandered  us,  no  matter  how  gravely  they  have 
injured  us,  if  we  are  filled  with  the  Spirit  we  will 
love  them. 

2.  But  while  "LOVE"  is  the  first  thing  and  the 
supreme  thing  in  the  complete  life,  it  is  not  the  only 
thing.  Following  "Lovs"  comes  "JOY."  "The 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy."  A  life  that  is  not 
a  radiantly  joyful  life  is  an  incomplete  life  and  un- 
symmetrical  life,  it  is  lacking  in  one  of  the  principal 
elements  that  go  to  make  up  the  complete  life,  it  is 
not  a  life  after  God's  pattern.  Even  if  our  lives 
were  given  up  wholly  to  serving  God  and  our  fellow 
men  with  utter  devotion  and  utter  forgetfulness  of 
self,  if  they  were  not  joyful  lives,  they  would  dis 
honour  God.  Jesus  was  called  upon  to  be  a  propitia- 


THE  COMPLETE  LIFE— HOW  TO  ATTAIN  IT    187 

tion  for  sins,  to  be  a  substitute  Saviour,  to  take  our 
sins  and  their  penalty  upon  Himself,  and  He  was, 
therefore,  "a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with 
grief,"  nevertheless,  He  was  a  joy-full  man.  On  the 
night  before  His  crucifixion,  only  an  hour  or  so  be 
fore  the  agonies  of  Gethsemane,  He  said,  "  These 
things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  my  joy  may  be 
in  you,  and  that  your  joy  may  be  filled  full"  (John 
15: 11).  To  have  His  joy  then  is  to  have  fullness  of 
joy,  and,  if  our  joy  is  to  be  "filled  full"  by  having 
His  joy,  He  must  Himself  have  been  a  joy-full  man. 
Constant  joy  is  the  commanded  duty  as  well  as  the 
promised  privilege  of  a  child  of  God,  a  believer  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  *  *  Kejoice  in  the  Lord  always, ' ' 
the  Holy  Spirit  commands  us  in  Phil.  4 : 4,  then  adds, 
' ' again  I  say,  Kejoice. ' '  When  Paul  wrote  these  words 
he  was  a  prisoner  under  most  distressing  circum 
stances,  and  awaiting  possible  sentence  of  execution, 
yet  the  whole  epistle  that  he  wrote  is  jubilant  from 
start  to  finish.  The  Spirit-filled  life  will  always  be 
joyful  and  jubilant,  nothing  can  disturb  its  joy.  No 
matter  how  adverse  its  circumstances,  its  joy  abideth ; 
for  its  joy  is  not  in  circumstances  but  in  Him  who 
is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever.  The  Holy 
Spirit  is  called,  in  Heb.  1:9,  "The  oil  of  gladness," 
and  when  God  pours  out  His  Holy  Spirit  upon  us, 
"He  anoints  us  with  the  oil  of  gladness,"  and  the 
oil  of  gladness  flows  down  over  us  and  suffuses  the 
whole  person. 

3.  But  even  "Lovs"  and  "JOY"  together,  won 
derful  as  they  are,  do  not  constitute  all  that  there  is 
of  the  complete  and  symmetrical  life.  Following 
"LovE"  and  "JOY"  comes  "PEACE."  "The  fruit 


188  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace."  Paul  does  not 
say  whether  he  means  peace  in  our  own  hearts  or 
peace  with  others.  The  reason  that  he  does  not  say 
which  he  means  is  because  he  means  both.  The  Holy 
Spirit  brings  peace  into  the  heart  in  which  He  rules, 
and  He  brings  peace  with  others  to  the  one  in  whose 
heart  He  rules.  In  the  verse  almost  immediately  fol 
lowing  the  command  to  "rejoice  always,"  the  Spirit 
of  God  goes  on  to  say,  "In  nothing  be  anxious;  but 
in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication,  with  thanks 
giving,  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God. 
And  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understand 
ing,  shall  guard  your  hearts  and  your  thoughts  in 
Christ  Jesus"  (Phil.  4:6,  7).  Oh,  how  wonderful 
is  the  deep,  serene,  unruffled  peace  with  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  fills  the  heart.  Some  years  ago  a  minister 
at  a  Bible  Conference  at  Grove  City  came  to  me  and 
said,  "Two  young  men,  college  students,  from  my 
church  were  at  the  Northfield  Conference  this  sum 
mer,  and  when  they  returned  from  the  Conference 
they  called  on  me  and  said,  'Pastor,  we  think  we  have 
heard  of  something  that  you  do  not  know/  "  This 
was  a  rather  presumptuous  thing  for  two  young  col 
lege  students  to  say  to  a  pastor  over  sixty  years  of 
age  who  was  well  known  for  his  knowledge  of  the 
Word  of  God  and  the  faithfulness  of  his  ministry, 
but  the  minister  showed  the  real  depth  of  his  earnest 
ness  and  spirituality  by  his  reply.  He  said,  "Well, 
young  men,  if  you  have  something  good  that  I  haven't 
I  want  to  know  about  it."  The  pastor  continued, 
"They  told  me  of  an  address  they  had  heard  on  the 
baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  how  the  baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  was  to  be  obtained.  When  they 


THE  COMPLETE  LIFE— HOW  TO  ATTAIN  IT    189 

left  my  study,"  the  pastor  continued,  "I  took  my 
hat  and  went  out  into  the  woods  and  sat  down  upon 
a  log  that  had  fallen  and  thought  over  what  they 
had  said,  and  then  I  looked  up  to  God  and  I  said, 
Oh,  God,  if  these  young  men  have  something  that 
I  have  not,  I  want  it.  Now,  oh,  God,  the  best  I 
know  how,  I  absolutely  surrender  my  will  to  Thee, 
to  be  whatever  thou  wishest  me  to  be,  to  go  wherever 
thou  wishest  me  to  go,  to  do  whatever  thou  wishest 
me  to  do.  Immediately  after  I  had  done  this,"  he 
continued,  "there  came  into  my  heart  such  a  won 
derful  peace  and  rest  as  I  had  never  known."  What 
was  the  explanation?  The  pastor  had  fulfilled  the 
conditions  of  receiving  the  Holy  Spirit  and  He  had 
come  to  do  His  work,  and  part  of  His  fruit  is 
"PEACE."  But  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  us  into 
peace  with  others  as  well  as  bringing  peace  into  us. 
He  saves  us  from  contentiousness.  I  knew  a  man 
who  was  naturally  a  man  of  war,  he  was  a  born 
fighter;  he  delighted  in  a  scrap  from  early  boyhood 
as  in  almost  nothing  else,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  got 
control  of  his  life,  and  in  so  far  as  the  Holy  Spirit 
did  gain  control  of  his  life  he  became  a  man  of 
peace.  Many  and  many  a  time  he  was  able  to  keep 
peace  under  most  aggravating  circumstances  without 
even  a  struggle.  Yes,  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  peace 
between  men,  especially  peace  between  brethren. 
This  is  the  immediate  thought  of  the  context  in  which 
we  find  our  text.  Going  back  in  the  chapter  to  the 
14th  and  15th  verses,  we  read,  "For  the  whole  law 
is  fulfilled  in  one  word,  even  in  this:  Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  But  if  ye  lite  and 
devour  one  another,  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  con- 


190  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

sumed  one  of  another."  Then  going  down  to  the 
19th  verse  we  read,  "Now  the  works  of  the  flesh  are 
manifest,  which  are  these:  fornication,  uncleanness, 
lasciviousness,  idolatry,  sorcery,  enmities,  strife, 
jealousies,  wraths,  factions,  divisions,  parties,  envy- 
ings,  drunkenness,  revellings,  and  such  like;  of  which 
I  forewarn  you,  even  as  I  did  forewarn  you,  that  they 
who  practise  such  things  shall  not  inherit  the  king 
dom  of  God."  Then  comes  our  text,  "The  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  etc."  Two  lives  are 
placed  in  vivid  contrast  to  one  another,  the  life  of 
the  flesh,  full  of  contention  and  strife  and  quarrelling, 
and  the  life  in  the  Spirit,  full  of  peace,  long-suffering, 
etc.  The  perfect  man  keeps  out  of  war,  even  under 
great  provocation.  As  the  Holy  Spirit  puts  it  through 
the  Apostle  James  in  Jas.  3:14-18,  "But  if  ye  have 
bitter  jealousy  and  faction  in  your  heart,  glory  not 
and  lie  not  against  the  truth.  This  wisdom  is  not 
a  wisdom  that  cometh  down  from  above,  but  is 
earthly  sensual,  devilish.  For  where  jealousy  and 
faction  are,  there  is  confusion  and  every  vile  deed. 
But  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above  is  first  pure,  then 
peaceable,  gentle,  easy  to  le  entreated,  full  of  mercy 
and  good  fruits,  without  variance,  without  hypocrisy. 
And  the  fruit  of  righteousness  is  sown  in  peace  for 
them  that  make  peace."  Oh,  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
ruled  among  nations  as  well  as  in  individuals  to-day, 
the  war  would  end  in  five  minutes,  and  when  the  Holy 
Spirit  rules  in  a  church,  church  quarrels  cease  in 
stantly. 

4.  But  "LOVE,"  "Joy,"  "PEACE/'  as  beautiful 
as  they  are,  do  not  constitute  the  whole  of  the  com 
plete  and  symmetrical  life.  Following  "LOVE," 


THE  COMPLETE  LIFE— HOW  TO  ATTAIN  IT    191 

"Joy,"  and  "PEACE"  come  "LONG-SUFFER 
ING."  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace, 
long-suffering."  This  fourth  characteristic  of  the 
complete  and  symmetrical  life,  the  Spirit-filled  life, 
is  closely  connected  with  the  third.  The  truly  strong 
man  does  not  quickly  resent  injuries  done  by  others. 
He  is  never  suspicious  nor  sensitive.  No  matter  how 
great  and  strong  a  man  may  be  in  other  respects,  if 
he  is  quick  to  imagine  that  others  are  wronging  him, 
or  quick  to  resent  the  insult  or  injury  which  is  not 
imaginary  but  very  real,  he  is  not  a  truly  strong 
man,  and  he  surely  is  not  a  Spirit-governed  man,  he 
is  governed  by  the  flesh  and  not  by  the  Spirit.  Oh, 
how  beautiful  is  the  attitude  of  long-suffering  in  an 
individual  or  a  nation,  what  a  mark  it  is  of  real 
strength.  The  nation  that  is  not  quick  to  take  um 
brage  nor  "defend  its  honour"  is  not  dishonoured, 
but  great  and  strong. 

5.  The  fifth  characteristic  of  the  complete  and  sym 
metrical  life  is  "GENTLENESS."  "The  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentle 
ness."  The  primary  meaning  of  the  adjective  from 
which  the  noun  translated  "gentleness"  is  derived 
is  "fit  for  use,"  or  "useful,"  then  it  comes  to  mean 
"mild,"  "pleasant,"  as  opposed  to  "harsh,"  "hard," 
' '  sharp , "  "  bitter. ' '  Then  it  comes  to  mean  ' '  gentle, ' ' 
' '  pleasant, "  "  kind, "  "  benevolent, "  "  benign. ' 7  How 
beautiful  it  is  when  a  great  man  is  also  a  gentle 
man,  a  gentleman  in  the  true  sense,  a  kindly  man. 
The  great  example  of  gentleness  or  kindness  is  Jesus 
Himself.  So  many  leading  men  in  the  church  in  our 
day,  gifted  men,  go  pushing  through  the  common 
crowd  regardless  of  the  slow  and  dull,  regardless  of 


192  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

whose  toes  they  step  on ;  they  are  brusque  and  push 
ing.  Not  so  was  Jesus,  "The  bruised  reed"  He  would 
"not  break"  and  "the  smoking  flax"  He  would  "not 
quench,"  and  not  so  is  the  Spirit-filled  man,  he  is 
"kindly."  The  Revised  Version  translated  the  word 
here  "kindness"  but  I  like  "kindliness"  better  than 
either  "gentleness"  or  "kindness."  Are  you  a 
kindly  man  ?  Jesus  was.  Are  you  a  kindly  woman  ? 
If  not,  you  have  not  entered  into  the  complete  and 
symmetrical  life,  not  yet. 

6.  The   sixth   characteristic   of  the   complete   and 
symmetrical  life  is  "GOODNESS."     "The  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentle 
ness,  goodness."     The  word  so  translated  is  a  word 
of  wide  meaning  and  is  difficult  of  exact  definition, 
but  the  thought  here,  as  determined  by  the  setting, 
is  that  attribute  that  leads  men  to  be  always  looking 
for  and  improving  opportunities  for  doing  any  kind 
of  good  to  anybody  and  everybody,  in  every  possible 
place,  and  at  every  possible  time.     The  tenth  verse 
of  the  following  chapter  gives  the  thought,  "So  then, 
as  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  work  that  which  is 
good  toward  all  men." 

7.  The  seventh  characteristic  of  the  complete  and 
symmetrical  life  is  "FAITH."     "The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness, 
goodness,  faith."    The  Revised  Version  reads  "faith 
fulness,"  but  without  any  warrant  whatever  either 
in  usage  or  context.     The  word  is  the  same  word 
which  is  translated   "faith"   238  times   out  of  the 
242  times  that  it  is  used  in  the  New  Testament,  and 
in  the  four  remaining  instances  it  is  translated  "be 
lief"  or  "believe/*  and  never  once  is  it  translated 


THE  COMPLETE  LIFE— HOW  TO  ATTAIN  IT    193 

"faithfulness."  True  faith  will  inevitably  lead  to 
faithfulness,  and  thus  implies  faithfulness,  but 
"faith"  is  what  Paul  wrote,  or  rather  the  Holy  Ghost 
wrote  through  Paul,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  meant  just 
what  He  wrote.  A  life  without  "FAITH,"  faith  in 
God  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  a  sadly 
incomplete  and  altogether  unsymmetrical  life.  The 
Holy  Spirit  begets  simple,  childlike,  imperturbable 
faith  in  the  heart  He  rules,  faith  in  God,  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ,  faith  in  the  Word  of  God.  Jesus  says 
in  John  7 : 17,  "If  any  man  willeth  to  do  His  (God's) 
will,  he  shall  know  of  the  teaching,  whether  it  be  of 
God,  or  whether  I  speak  from  myself."  He  here 
makes  obedience  the  condition  of  faith  in  the  "Word 
of  God,  but  in  Acts  5 : 32  we  are  told  that  God  gives 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  obey  Him.  Oh,  when 
a  man  submits  his  life  to  the  absolute  control  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  his  whole  thought  and  feeling  and  will 
are  irradiated  with  faith,  and  because  he  has  faith  in 
God  and  faith  in  God's  Word  he  has  great  expecta 
tions,  he  is  never  discouraged,  he  is  never  pessimistic, 
never  despondent,  he  marches  forth  confidently  every 
day  to  victory.  He  is  sure  he  will  win,  and  w'in 
he  will. 

8.  The  eighth  characteristic  of  the  complete  and 
symmetrical  life  is  "MEEKNESS."  "The  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentle 
ness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness."  The  exact  meaning 
of  the  word  rendered  "meekness"  in  this  passage  is 
that  attitude  of  mind  that  is  opposed  to  harshness  and 
contentiousness,  and  that  shows  itself  in  gentleness 
and  tenderness  in  dealing  with  others.  The  man  who 
has  attained  to  the  complete  life  is  never  harsh. 


194  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

Stern  and  severe  he  may  sometimes  have  to  be  out  of 
regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the  offender  himself, 
but  his  sternness  and  severity  are  aflame  with  gentle 
ness.  Read  the  first  verse  of  the  next  chapter  and 
you  will  get  the  exact  thought,  "Brethren,  even  if 
a  man  be  overtaken  in  any  trespass  (the  thought  is 
of  a  man  caught  in  the  act  of  wrong-doing,  wrong 
doing  even  of  the  grossest  kind),  ye  which  are  spir 
itual,  restore  such  a  one  in  a  spirit  of  meekness; 
looking  to  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted." 

9.  The  ninth  and  last  characteristic  of  the  complete 
and  symmetrical  life  is  "TEMPERANCE."  "The 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering, 
gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance." 
The  Revised  Version  says  "SELF-CONTROL,"  and 
that  gives  the  thought,  though  it  is  not  really  self- 
control,  but  Holy  Spirit  control,  but  it  is  self  that 
is  controlled.  It  does  not  mean  temperance  in  the 
narrow  sense  we  have  given  it  in  modern  parlance, 
as  applying  to  only  one  kind  of  excess,  excess  in 
alcoholic  drinks,  it  means  mastery  of  self  along  all 
lines.  The  highest  form  of  mastery  in  the  world  is 
self-mastery.  "He  that  ruleth  his  spirit  is  better 
than  he  that  taketh  a  city"  (Prov.  16:32).  This 
then  is  the  complete  life,  a  life  manifesting  love,  joy, 
peace,  long-suffering,  kindliness,  goodness,  faith,  meek 
ness,  self-mastery.  You  will  note  that  our  text  says 
that  these  things  are  "the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,"  not 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  They  are  the  many  delicious 
flavours  of  the  one  fruit.  Wherever  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  given  control,  not  some,  but  all  of  these  will  be 
seen. 


THE  COMPLETE  LIFE-HOW  TO  ATTAIN  IT   195 

II.  How  TO  OBTAIN  THE  COMPLETE  AND  SYMMETRICAL 
LIFE. 

We  come  now  to  the  very  practical  question  how 
to  obtain  this  life,  or  how  to  attain  to  it.    We  have 
but  a  few  minutes  to  answer  the  question,  and  we 
need  but  a  few  minutes.     The  verse  makes  the  way 
of  attainment  as  clear  as  day.    We  are  told  that  these 
things  are  "the  fruit  of  ihe  Spirit."    They  are  set 
over  against  "the  works  of  the  flesh"  described  in 
the  verses  that  immediately  precede.    In  other  words, 
the  things  described  under  "the  works  of  the  flesh" 
are  the  things  that  are  natural  to  us,  these  things 
are  what  the  Holy  Spirit  works  supernaturally  in 
us.    They  are  the  fruit  the  Holy  Spirit  bears  in  us, 
and  all  that  we  need  to  do  is  to  come  to  the  end  of 
ourselves  and  realize  our  own  utter  inability  to  at 
tain  to  the  complete  and  symmetrical  life  here  pic 
tured,  and  having  first  received  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
as  our  Saviour,  and  through  receiving  Him  as  our 
Saviour,  having  received  the  Holy  Spirit  to  dwell  in 
us   (for  He  does  dwell  in  every  believer)   just  sur 
render  the  entire  control  of  our  lives  to  His  dominion 
for  Him  to  work  in  us  what  He  will,  and  when  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  thus  given  complete  control,  the  result 
will  be  that  His  fruit  will  appear  on  the  tree  of  our 
own  lives.    There  will  be  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffer 
ing,  kindliness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  self-control. 
Wonderful  indeed  is  the  privilege  of  the  Spirit-filled 
life.    Will  you  to-day  give  up  your  fruitless  struggles 
after  holiness,  your  self  efforts  to  lead  a  "life  well 
pleasing  to  God,"  come  to  the  end  of  yourself  and 


196  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

realizing  that  in  you,  that  is  in  your  flesh,  dwelleth 
no  good  thing,  surrender  your  whole  life  to  the  control 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  then  on  your  life  will  hang  this 
"sun-kist"  fruit,  "love,  joy,  peace,  long  suffering, 
kindliness,  faith,  meekness,  self-mastery.'1 


XV 


THE  SECRET  OF  BLESSEDNESS  IN  HEART, 
BEAUTY  IN  CHARACTER,  FRUITFUL- 
NESS  IN  SERVICE,  AND  PROSPERITY  IN 
EVERYTHING. 

"Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  in  the  counsel 
of  the  ungodly,  nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners, 
nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful.  But  his  de 
light  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord;  and  in  his  law  doth 
he  meditate  day  and  night.  And  he  shall  be  like  a 
tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,  that  bringeth 
forth  his  fruit  in  his  season;  his  leaf  also  shall  not 
wither;  and  whatsover  he  doeth  shall  prosper." — 
Ps.  1:1-3. 

IN  these  verses,  God  speaking  through  the  Psalmist 
sets  before  us  the  secret  of  blessedness  in  heart, 
beauty  in  character,  fruitfulness  in  service,  and 
prosperity  in  everything.     Are  not  these  the  four 
things  that  we  all  desire  for  ourselves  ?    These  verses 
tell  us  in  the  plainest  sort  of  way  how  we  may  obtain 
them.    They  tell  us  that  if  we  will  not  do  three  things 
and  will  do  two  things,  we  shall  have  blessedness  in 
our  hearts,  beauty  in  our  characters,  fruitfulness  in 
our  service,  and  prosperity  in  whatsoever  we  do. 

197' 


198  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

I.  THE  THREE  THINGS  WE  MUST  NOT  Do. 

The  three  things  that  we  must  not  do  are,  First, 
Walk  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly;  second,  Stand 
in  the  way  of  sinners;  third,  Sit  in  the  seat  of  the 
scornful,  i.e.,  we  must  come  out  from  the  world  and 
be  separate  in  our  walk,  in  our  standing  and  in  our 
sitting.  As  to  our  walk,  we  must  not  walk  in  the 
counsel  of  the  ungodly;  we  must  get  our  directions 
as  to  our  walk  from  God  and  not  from  the  world. 
We  must  not  ask  what  the  world  does  or  advises,  we 
must  ask  what  God  tells  us  to  do.  As  to  our  stand 
ing,  it  must  not  be  in  the  way  of  sinners;  as  to  our 
sitting,  or  continuous  fellowship,  it  must  not  be  in 
the  seat  of  the  scornful.  We  will  not  dwell  on  these 
three  things  that  we  must  not  do  for  the  words  are 
so  plain  as  to  need  no  comment;  what  they  need  is 
not  so  much  to  be  expounded  as  to  be  obeyed,  and 
furthermore,  if  we  do  the  two  things  which  we  must 
do  we  will  be  sure  not  to  do  the  three  things  which 
we  must  not  do. 

II.    THE  Two  THINGS  WHICH  WE  MUST  Do. 

The  first  of  the  two  things  which  we  must  do  is 
"Delight  in  the  law  of  the  Lord."  The  Law  of  the 
Lord  is  God's  will  as  revealed  in  His  Word  and  these 
words  tell  us  that  it  is  not  enough  merely  to  read 
God's  Word;  indeed,  that  it  is  not  enough  even  to 
earnestly  study  God's  Word,  we  must  delight  in  God's 
Word.  We  must  have  greater  joy  in  the  Word  of 
God  than  in  any  other  book,  or  in  all  other  books  put 
together.  Now  doubtless  many  of  us  will  have  to 


SECRET  OF  BLESSEDNESS  199 

admit  that  we  do  not  delight  in  the  law  of  the  Lord. 
Probably  we  read  it,  quite  likely  we  study  it  dili 
gently,  but  we  read  it  and  study  it  simply  because  we 
think  it  is  our  duty.     As  to  delighting  in  it,  we  do 
not.     If  many  of  you  were  to  reveal  the  exact  facts 
about  yourself,  you  would  have  to  say,   "I  would 
rather  read  the  newspaper  than  the  Word  of  God. 
I  would  rather  read  the  latest  novel  than  the  Word 
of  God."    When  I  was  thirteen  years  of  age,  I  was 
told  that  if  I  read  three  chapters  in  the  Bible  every 
week-day  and  five  every  Sunday,  I  would  read  the 
Bible  in  a  year,  and  I  started  out  to  do  it,  and  I  have 
read  the  Bible  every  day  of  my  life  from  that  time 
to  this,  but  for  years  I  did  not  delight  in  it.     I  read 
it  simply  because  I  thought  I  ought  to,  or  because  I 
was  uneasy  if  I  did  not,  but  as  for  delighting  in  it, 
it  was  the  dullest,  stupidest  book  in  the  world  to  me. 
I  would  rather  have  read  last  year's  almanac  than 
the  Bible.    And  what  was  true  of  me  then,  and  re 
mained  true  for  years,  is  true  of  many  a  professed 
Christian  to-day.     They  may  study  the  Bible  every 
day  but  simply  do  it  from  a  sense  of  duty  or  because 
their  conscience  is  uneasy  if  they  do  not. 

What  shall  one  do  if  he  does  not  delight  in  the 
law  of  the  Lord?  The  answer  is  very  simple. 

(1)  First  of  all,  he  must  be  born  again.  The  one 
who  is  truly  born  again  will  love  the  Word  of  God. 
The  Lord  Jesus  says  in  John  8:47,  "He  that  is  of 
God  heareth  God's  words:  Ye  therefore  hear  them 
not,  because  ye  are  not  of  God."  The  little  Greek 
word  which  is  translated  "of"  in  this  passage  is  a 
very  significant  word.  It  really  means  and  should 
be  translated  "out  of,"  i.e.,  in  this  connection  "born 


200  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

of";  and  what  Jesus  said  was  that  the  one  that  was 
born  of  God  would  have  an  ear  for  God's  word,  and 
that  the  reason  that  the  Jews  did  not  really  have  an 
ear  for  God's  Word  was  because  they  were  not  born 
of  God.  One  of  the  clearest  proofs  that  a  man  is  born 
of  God  is  that  he  loves,  delights  in  God's  Word.  I 
have  seen  men  and  women  pass  in  a  moment  from  an 
utter  distaste  for  God's  Word  to  an  abounding  delight 
in  God's  Word  by  simply  being  born  again. 

"But,"  some  one  will  say,  "how  may  I  be  born 
again  ? ' '  God  Himself  answers  the  question  in  a  very 
simple  way  in  John  1:12.  "But  as  many  as  RE 
CEIVED  HIM,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the 
sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  His  name." 
According  to  these  words  the  way  to  be  born  again  is 
by  simply  receiving  Him,  receiving  the  Lord  Jesus. 
The  moment  any  man,  woman,  or  child  really  receives 
Jesus  to  be  to  themselves  all  that  He  offers  Himself 
to  be  to  anyone,  to  be  their  Saviour  from  the  guilt 
of  sin  by  His  death  upon  the  cross,  to  be  their  Saviour 
from  the  power  of  sin,  by  His  resurrection  power 
(Heb.  7 :  25)  and  to  be  their  Lord  and  Master,  to  whom 
they  surrender  the  entire  control  of  their  lives  (Acts 
2 :  36),  that  moment  that  man,  woman  or  child  is  born 
again  and  with  the  new  life  thus  obtained  they  will 
get  a  new  love,  a  love  for  God  and  a  delight  in  His 
Word. 

(2)  In  the  second  place,  in  order  to  delight  in  the 
law  of  the  Lord  we  must  feed  upon  it.  Jeremiah  says 
in  Jer.  15 : 16,  "Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat 
them ;  and  thy  word  was  unto  me  the  joy  and  rejoic 
ing  of  mine  heart."  The  reason  why  many  do  not 
delight  in  the  Word  of  God  is  because  they  do  not  eat 


SECRET  OF  BLESSEDNESS  201 

it.    They  read  it ;  they  skim  over  it,  they  smell  of  it, 
but  they  do  not  eat  it,  and  yet  they  wonder  why  they 
do  not  delight  in  God 's  Word.     What  would  you  think 
if  some  day  some  friend  came  to  visit  you  who  had 
never  eaten  strawberries,  and  you  should  get  for  him 
a  dish  of  our  wonderful  California  strawberries.    You 
tell  him  how  delicious  they  are  and  set  them  before 
him— you  are  called  away  but  in  an  hour  or  two  you 
come  back  and  you  say  to  your  friend,  "How  did  you 
like  those  strawberries?"    He  replies,  "I  did  not  care 
for  them.    I  have  seen  many  things  that  I  have  enjoyed 
more."    In  surprise  you  say,  "What,  did  not  care  for 
them  ? "    ' '  No,  they  seemed  very  ordinary  to  me. ' '  For 
a  moment  you  are  puzzled,  and  then  you  say  to  him, 
"Did   you   eat   the   berries?"     "No,"   he  answers, 
"I  did  not  eat  them.    I  smelled  of  them  and  I  have 
smelled  many  things  that  smell  better."    Well,  that 
is  the  way  that  many,  even  of  professing  Christians 
treat  the  Word  of  God.    They  just  smell  of  it,  they 
skim  over  a  few  verses,  or  many  verses,  or  many  chap 
ters,  but  they  do  not  stop  to  eat  a  single  verse.    They 
do  not  chew  the  words,  swallow  them  and  assimilate 
them.     Oh,  how  different  the  Word  of  God  becomes 
when  we  really  eat  it.     Take  for  example,  the  most 
familiar  passage  in  the  Bible,  the  verse  that  most  of 
us  learned  first  of  all,  Ps.  23:1,  "The  LORD  is  my 
shepherd;    I  shall  not  want."     It  sounds  beautiful 
even  when  we  merely  read  it,  but  how  sweet  it  be 
comes  when  we  stop  and  ponder  it,  weigh  the  meaning 
of  the  words,  chew  each  word  in  it.     When  we  ask 
ourselves  first  of  all,  "Who  is  my  shepherd?"   And 
then  stop  for  a  while  to  meditate  upon  the  fact  that  it 
is  JEHOVAH  who  is  our  Shepherd.    Then  ask  ourselves, 


202  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

" 'What  is  Jehovah?"  "My  Shepherd."  And  then 
stop  and  think  what  is  involved  in  being  a  shepherd 
and  what  it  means  to  have  Jehovah  as  our  SHEP 
HERD.  Then  ask  ourselves  "Whose  shepherd  is 
Jehovah — My  Shepherd."  Not  merely  the  Shepherd 
of  men  in  general  but  my  own  Shepherd.  A  stranger 
entered  a  Presbyterian  Church  one  day  and  was  shown 
to  a  pew.  The  congregation  rose  to  read  the  23rd 
Psalm.  A  young  lady  sitting  next  to  him,  handed  him 
one  corner  of  her  Bible  as  they  read.  As  they  read 
the  first  verse,  he  took  a  pencil  out  of  his  pocket  and 
drew  a  line  under  the  word  "My."  When  the  service 
was  over,  the  young  lady  said  to  him,  "Do  you  mind 
telling  me  why  you  drew  the  line  under  the  word 
'My'?"  "Well,"  he  replied,  "The  Lord  is  my  Shep 
herd.  I  was  wondering  if  He  were  yours."  Next 
dwell  on  the  word,  "I,"  then  on  the  word  "shall" 
with  all  the  certainty  that  there  is  in  the  word — then 
on  the  word  "not"  then  on  the  word  "want"  and  ask 
yourself  all  that  is  implied  in  the  statement,  "1  shall 
not  want."  Ah,  the  old  familiar  verse  becomes  so 
much  sweeter  as  we  eat  it,  chew  and  chew  it  and 
swallow  it  and  digest  it  and  assimilate  it.  If  we  thus 
eat  different  portions  of  the  Bible  day  by  day  we 
would  soon  find  a  joy  in  it  that  we  find  in  no  other 
book.  The  only  word  that  would  express  our  relation 
to  the  book  would  be  "DELIGHT."  The  second  of 
the  two  things  that  we  must  do  is  "meditate  in  the  law 
of  the  Lord  day  and  night."  These  words  tell  us  how 
to  study  the  Word  and  when  to  study  it. 

(1)  First,  How  to  study  it.  "MEDITATE"  therein. 
We  live  in  a  day  in  which  meditation  is  largely  a  lost 
art.  It  is  largely  a  lost  art  in  all  our  study.  We  send 


SECRET  OF  BLESSEDNESS  203 

our  children  to  school,  they  are  not  allowed  to  think; 
they  are  simply  crammed  and  crammed — we  cram 
them  with  physiology,  biology,  psychology  and  all  the 
rest  of  the  ologies ;  until  they  themselves  become  mere 
ape-ologies  for  real  thinkers.  We  try  to  see  how  many 
branches  we  can  cover  in  a  few  years  and  how  much 
of  each  branch  we  can  cram  in.  A  child  in  the  Gram 
mar  School  grade  has  twelve  studies ;  a  child  of  thir 
teen  will  be  set  to  writing  a  criticism  on  Tennyson's 
"In  Memoriam."  This  is  a  good  way  to  develop  con 
ceited  fools,  but  it  is  no  way  to  develop  thinkers. 
Set  a  child  of  thirteen  to  criticizing  Tennyson's  "In 
Memoriam"  and  by  the  time  she  is  eighteen  she  will 
be  criticizing  the  Word  of  God  itself.  But  cram,  cram, 
cram,  is  the  word  of  the  hour  in  modern  education.  If 
our  children  studied  fewer  subjects  and  really  studied 
and  mastered  those  they  did  study,  they  would  know 
more  and  be  of  more  use  in  the  world.  But  it  is  in 
Bible  study  especially  that  meditation  is  a  lost  art. 
We  try  to  see  how  many  chapters  we  can  study  in  a 
single  day.  We  get  up  a  chart  that  covers  the  whole 
plan  of  the  ages  and  all  of  God's  dealing  with  men, 
angels  and  devils,  from  the  eternity  back  of  us  to  the 
eternity  before  us  and  expect  to  master  it  in  thirty 
minutes  or  an  hour.  This  is  an  excellent  plan  for 
making  ourselves  think  that  we  are  very  wise — it  is 
a  miserable  plan  for  getting  the  real  nourishment  out 
of  the  Word  and  the  real ' '  honey  out  of  the  rock. ' '  We 
should  not  so  much  say, '  '  I  will  read  so  many  chapters 
in  a  day,"  as  "I  will  spend  so  much  time  each  day  in 
really  studying  and  feeding  upon  the  Book."  Some 
times  we  will  give  to  a  single  verse,  or  a  single  word, 
that  will  arrest  our  attention,  all  the  time  we  put  into 


204  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

Bible  study  that  day.  There  is  no  greater  enemy  to 
successful  study  than  hurry,  and  this  is  especially 
true  of  Bible  study.  One  night  I  was  teaching  a  Bible 
class  in  Minneapolis.  A  travelling  man  from  New 
York,  a  very  active  member  of  St.  George's  Episcopal 
Church,  dropped  into  my  class.  He  had  to  take  the 
train  for  the  Far  West  soon  after  the  class  and  I 
walked  down  to  the  station  with  him.  As  we  walked 
he  said  to  me,  "Tell  me  in  a  word  how  to  study  my 
Bible. "  That  is  a  pretty  large  contract  to  put  into 
a  single  word,  How  to  study  the  Bible,  and  I  replied, 
"If  I  must  put  it  into  one  word,  that  one  word  would 
be  Thoughtfully.  Think  on  what  you  study;  look 
right  at  it,  weigh  it,  weigh  every  word,  turn  it  over  and 
over  and  over — meditate  upon  it." 

But  the  words  of  the  Psalmist  tell  us  not  merely  how 
to  study  the  Word  but  when  to  study  it,  "DAY  AND 
NIGHT."  Many  people  are  asking,  "Must  I  study 
the  Bible  fifteen  minutes  every  day,  or  a  half  hour  a 
day  or  two  hours  a  day?"  "Day  and  night,"  replies 
the  Psalmist.  This,  of  course,  does  not  mean  that  we 
should  be  sitting  with  an  open  Bible  before  us  every 
moment  of  the  day  and  night.  But  it  does  mean  that 
having  had  some  regular  time  for  Bible  study,  that 
after  that  time  for  Bible  study  is  over  we  should  carry 
away  in  our  mind  and  heart  what  we  have  studied  and 
meditate  upon  it  as  we  go  about  our  business,  our 
household  duties,  or  whatsoever  we  have  to  do.  Oh, 
how  much  lighter  and  pleasanter  the  drudgery  of  life 
becomes  if  we  go  about  it  with  the  Word  of  God  in 
mind  and  heart,  meditating  thereon  in  the  midst  of 
our  wearing  toil.  I  know  of  nothing  else  that  will 
keep  one  in  such  perfect  peace  and  abounding  joy  in 


SECRET  OF  BLESSEDNESS  205 

these  days  of  war  and  gloom  and  agony  as  meditating 
on  the  Word  of  God  day  and  night. 


III.    THE  RESULT. 

And  now  what  will  be  the  result  of  our  separating 
from  the  world  in  our  walk,  in  our  standing,  in  our 
sitting  and  of  our  delighting  in  the  law  of  the  Lord 
and  meditating  thereon  day  and  night? 

1.  First  of  all,  we  will  have  blessedness  in  heart. 
"Blessed  is  the  man,"  says  our  text  that  "walketh 
not/'  etc.  The  Hebrew  word  translated  "blessed"  is 
a  very  peculiar  word  in  the  Hebrew.  It  is  not  a  par 
ticiple  at  all,  but  a  noun  and  a  noun  in  the  plural. 
Literally  translated  it  would  be  "blessednesses  of  the 
man,"  i.  e.,  how  manifold  and  varied  is  the  blessedness 
and  happiness  of  the  man  that  does  not  do  these  three 
things  and  does  do  these  two  things.  This  world  knows 
no  joy  so  varied,  so  full,  so  manifold,  so  wonderful  as 
the  joy  that  comes  to  the  one  who  is  separated  from 
the  world  and  who  meditates  on  the  "Word.  I  know 
all  about  the  joy  that  comes  from  reading  good  lit 
erature  ;  I  have  been  a  passionate  devourer  of  books 
from  early  childhood.  When  I  was  a  boy.  I  would 
get  a  book  and  hide  away  in  some  corner  and  devour 
it  until  my  mother  would  come  and  say,  ' '  Oh,  Archie, 
why  don't  you  take  your  gun  and  go  out  hunting?" 
But  all  the  joy  that  I  have  found  in  the  study  of  the 
best  literature,  in  the  study  of  science,  in  the  study 
of  philosophy,  can  never  for  a  moment  compare  to  the 
joy  that  I  have  found  in  meditating  on  the  Word  of 
God.  So  sweet  has  that  joy  become  that  oftentimes  I 
am  tempted  to  say  that  I  will  read  no  book  but  the 


206  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

Bible.  I  remember  one  night  the  first  winter  I  was 
in  Chicago.  I  had  been  very  busy  that  day,  answer 
ing  my  correspondence,  and  teaching  in  the  Bible 
Institute  in  the  morning,  studying  in  the  afternoon, 
and  preaching  that  night.  I  got  to  my  house  late, 
after  11  o'clock,  pretty  thoroughly  tired.  I  sat  down 
for  a  little  while  to  find  rest  in  Bible  study  before  I 
went  to  bed.  I  was  reading  the  Bible  through  in 
course  and  had  reached  the  last  book  in  the  Bible. 
In  those  days  I  did  not  care  as  much  for  that  book 
as  for  other  books — sometimes  I  had  even  been  tempted 
to  wish  that  the  book  was  not  in  the  Bible,  but  as  that 
was  where  I  was  in  my  reading  the  Bible  in  course, 
I  began  reading  the  llth  chapter  of  the  book.  When 
I  reached  the  15th  verse,  ' '  The  kingdoms  of  this  world 
shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His 
Christ,  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever, ' '  such  joy 
swept  into  my  soul  as  I  took  in  the  meaning  of  the 
words  that  I — do  you  know  what  I  did?  Of  course 
you  do.  I  shouted  aloud.  I  was  not  brought  up  to 
shout  in  meeting.  I  was  brought  up  in  the  Presbyter 
ian  and  Episcopal  churches.  I  never  heard  anyone  say 
"Amen"  except  where  it  came  in  the  regular  place 
in  the  service  until  after  I  was  in  the  ministry,  and 
the  first  time  a  man  said  "Amen"  when  I  was  preach 
ing  it  so  upset  me  that  I  nearly  lost  the  thread  of  my 
discourse.  I  cannot  shout  to  this  day  in  public,  but, 
oh,  when  alone  with  God  and  His  Book  sometimes 
such  a  joy  sweeps  into  the  soul  that  nothing  but  a 
shout  will  give  relief. 

2.  Second,  we  shall  have  beauty  of  character,  "He 
shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water." 
What  is  more  beautiful  than  a  well-watered  tree  in 


SECRET  OF  BLESSEDNESS  207 

full  leaf,  the  maples  and  the  oaks  and  the  beeches  in 
the  East,  our  palms  and  pepper  trees  and  umbrella 
trees  here  in  the  "West?  Well,  the  one  who  refrains 
from  doing  the  three  things  mentioned  above  and  does 
the  two  things  mentioned  will  be  just  like  that  tree 
in  full  leaf.  His  character  will  be  full  of  beauty.  If 
we  had  time,  I  could  show  you  from  the  Word  of  God 
how  every  grace  of  character  is  the  result  of  Bible 
study.  The  Psalmist  says  in  Ps.  119:9,  "Where 
withal  shall  a  young  man  cleanse  his  way?  by  taking 
heed  thereto  according  to  thy  word."  In  the  llth 
verse  he  says,  ' l  Thy  word  have  I  hid  in  my  heart,  that 

I  might  not  sin  against  thee."    Nothing  else  has  the 
power  to  keep  a  man  from  sinning  and  nothing  else 
has  the  power  to  adorn  a  man  with  all  possible  graces 
of  character  that  the  study  of  the  Word  of  God  has. 

3.  Third,    we   shall   have   fruitfulness   in    service. 

I 1  Bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season. "    Do  we  not 
all  long  to  be  fruitful  Christians  ?   So  many  of  us  are 
fruitless.     The  great  secret  of  being  fruitful  is  intel 
ligent  study  of  the  Word  of  God.    The  Apostle  Paul 
in  writing  to  Timothy  in  2  Tim.  3 : 16  says,  "All  Scrip 
ture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable 
for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruc 
tion  in  righteousness.     That  the  man  of  God  may  be 
perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works." 
The  Revised  Version  says,  "complete,  furnished  com 
pletely  unto   every  good  work."     How?     Through 
what  the  Apostle  has  just  said,  through  the  study  of 
the  inspired  Word  of  God.    A  man  may  study  every 
thing  else  in  the  world,  psychology,  philosophy,  peda 
gogy,  and  even  theology,  but  if  he  does  not  study  the 
Word  of  God  he  is  not  fitted  for  real  work  for  God. 


208  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

He  will  have  no  measure  of  success  in  winning  souls. 
But  a  man  may  be  quite  ignorant  of  other  branches  of 
knowledge  but  if  he  really  studies  and  understands 
his  Bible,  he  will  have  all  the  knowledge  one  needs 
to  be  a  fruitful  Christian  and  an  efficient  winner  of 
souls. 

4.  Fourth.  There  will  be  one  other  result  of  not 
doing  the  three  things  and  doing  the  two  things,  and 
that  is  prosperity  in  everything:  "whatsoever  he  doeth 
shall  prosper."  Are  we  not  all  seeking  for  prosper 
ity  ?  There  is  no  other  way  to  get  it  than  the  way  laid 
down  in  our  text,  but  this  road  to  prosperity  is  safe 
and  sure.  No  one  ever  walked  it  without  becoming 
prosperous  in  whatsoever  he  did.  This,  of  course,  does 
not  mean  necessarily  that  he  will  have  what  the  world 
calls  prosperity.  He  may  not  become  a  rich  man, 
but  he  will  have  real  prosperity  in  everything  he 
undertakes.  Some  years  ago  I  preached  in  Chicago 
a  sermon  on  "The  Power  of  the  Word  of  God,"  or 
"The  Advantages  of  Bible  Study."  I  had  in  my 
congregation  that  morning  a  young  man  who  was 
leading  a  rather  defeated  life.  He  was  a  Christian, 
but  not  a  very  effective  Christian.  He  was  a  married 
man  with  a  small  family  of  children  and  was  getting 
$12.50  a  week.  His  work  required  him  to  get  up  at 
two  or  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  go  on  the 
market  to  buy  for  the  house  for  which  he  worked.  As 
he  listened  to  the  sermon  that  morning  he  made  up 
his  mind  that  instead  of  getting  up  at  two  o'clock  or 
three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  he  would  get  up  at  one 
or  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  in  order  that  he  might 
have  a  solid  hour  for  Bible  study  before  going  to  his 
work.  He  came  on  in  his  Christian  experience  by 


SECRET  OF  BLESSEDNESS  209 

leaps  and  bounds  and  he  came  on  in  his  business 
relations  too.  "Within  a  year  he  went  into  business 
for  himself.  The  first  year  he  made  $5,000  in  his 
business,  the  next  year  I  have  been  told  that  he  made 
$10,000,  and  some  one  has  told  me  that  the  next  year 
he  made  $15,000,  and  he  has  gone  on  advancing  from 
that  day  until  this;  but  that  is  not  the  best  of  it, 
he  came  on  in  his  Christian  character  and  in  his  effi 
ciency  in  Christian  service.  He  is  to-day  one  of  the 
most  used  laymen  in  Chicago,  identified  with  and  a 
leader  in  every  aggressive  movement  that  is  taken  up 
by  the  Christians  of  the  city,  a  tower  of  strength  in 
his  own  church,  a  generous  giver  to  the  work  of 
Christ  at  home  and  abroad,  with  three  sons  and  one 
daughter  following  in  his  steps.  "Whatsoever  he 
doeth  prospers." 

Now  I  am  not  saying  that  if  anyone  will  begin  to 
study  the  Bible  an  hour  a  day  he  will  spring  from 
$12.50  a  week  to  $5,000  a  year,  but  I  am  saying,  and 
what  is  better,  God's  Word  says  it,  he  will  have  real 
prosperity  in  everything  he  undertakes.  Do  you  want 
blessedness  in  your  heart,  beauty  in  your  character, 
fruitfulness  in  your  service,  and  prosperity  in  every 
thing  you  do, — then  stop  walking  in  the  counsel  of 
the  ungodly,  stop  standing  in  the  way  of  sinners,  stop 
sitting  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful  and  begin  to  delight 
in  the  law  of  the  Lord  and  meditate  therein  day  and 
night. 


XVI 

LOVE  CONTRASTED,  DESCRIBED,  EXALTED 
1  COR.  13. 

OUR  subject  this  morning  is  Love  Contrasted, 
Love  Described,  Love  Exalted.  Our  text  is  the 
whole  of  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  First 
Corinthians.  This  chapter,  which  we  are  to  study  this 
morning  is  not  only  one  of  the  most  familiar,  but  also 
one  of  the  most  important  and  remarkable  in  the 
whole  Bible.  If  there  were  no  other  proof  of  Paul's 
inspiration,  this  chapter  would  go  far  toward  estab 
lishing  it.  The  translation  of  the  chapter  found  in 
the  Revised  Version  is  far  better  than  that  found  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  but  by  far  the  best  translation 
of  all  is  the  translation  into  life.  Every  Christian 
should  read  and  re-read  this  chapter  until  mind  and 
heart  and  will  are  saturated  with  it,  until  its  fragrance 
distils  itself  in  our  every  act  and  word  and  thought. 
The  chapter  naturally  divides  itself  into  three  parts; 
the  first  part,  verses  1-3,  Love  Contrasted,  or  the 
Absolute  Indispensability  of  Love;  the  second  part, 
verses  4-7,  Love  Described,  or  the  Everyday  Mani 
festations  of  Love ;  the  third  part,  verses  8  - 13,  Love 
Exalted,  or  the  Peerless  Pre-eminence  of  Love. 

I.  LOVE  CONTRASTED  OR  THE  ABSOLUTE  INDISPENSA 
BILITY  OP  LOVE. 

Let  us  first  look  at  Love  Contrasted,  or  the  Indis 
pensability  of  Love.    "If  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of 

210 


LOVE  211 

men  and  of  angels,  but  have  not  love,  I  am  become 
sounding  brass,  or  a  clanging  cymbal.  And  if  I  have 
the  gift  of  prophecy,  and  know  all  mysteries  and  all 
knowledge;  and  if  I  have  all  faith  so  as  to  remove 
mountains  but  have  not  love,  I  am  nothing."  Here 
love  is  contrasted  with  five  things  in  succession,  each 
of  which  was  held  in  great  esteem  in  Corinth,  and  each 
of  which  is  held  in  great  esteem  to-day.  But  Paul  says 
no  one  of  them,  nor  all  of  them  together,  will  supply 
the  lack  of  love. 

1.  The  'first  thing  that  Paul  contrasts  with  love  is 
the  gift  of  tongues,  and  the  gift  of  tongues  in  its 
highest  conceivable  form:  " Though  I  speak  with  the 
tongues  of  men  and  of  angels. ' '  How  the  world  would 
admire  and  applaud  a  man  who  could  do  that.  A 
man  upon  whom  the  Spirit  fell  in  such  mighty  power 
that  not  only  the  Pentecostal  wonder  would  be  re 
peated  and  Parthians  and  Medes  and  Elamites  and 
Libyans  and  Romans  and  Cretes  and  Arabians  hear 
men  talking  in  their  own  tongues,  but  also  the  man 
would  talk  with  the  tongue  of  angels  as  well  as  the 
tongues  of  men.  That  would  be  great  and  marvellous 
in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  but  Paul  says  that  even 
thought  that  should  happen,  if  that  man  had  not  love 
he  would  after  all  be  only  sounding  brass  or  a  clang 
ing  cymbal,  just  a  brazen  noise.  The  world  looks 
at  the  eloquence  on  a  man's  lips.  God  looks  at  the 
love  in  his  heart.  The  gifts  of  the  Spirit  are  greatly 
to  be  desired;  but  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  are  far 
more  to  be  desired,  especially  the  grace  of  love  (1  Cor. 
12:31).  We  look  oftentimes  in  wonder  and  admira 
tion  at  the  eloquent  preacher,  but  God  looks  down 
into  his  heart  and  sees  no  love  there,  and  says, 


212  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

"nothing  but  noise — sounding  brass  and  a  clanging 
cymbal. ' ' 

2,  Tlie  second  thing  Paul  contrasts  with  love  is  the 
gift  of  prophecy.    He  describes  this  gift  in  the  very 
highest  form  of  its  manifestation,  ' '  If  I  have  the  gift 
of  prophecy,  and  know  all  mysteries  and  all  knowl 
edge. "    Surely  this  is  something  to  be  much  coveted 
and  greatly  admired.    Surely  this  will  win  God's  ap 
plause.     The  man  of  great  theological  learning  and 
perfect  spiritual  vision  must  occupy  a  very  high  place 
in  God's  estimation.    Listen  to  what  God  says,  "even 
if  a  man  have  all  this   and  have  not  love,  he  is 
NOTHING."     Think  of  it,  just  nothing.     How  the 
world  applauds  the  seer  irrespective  of  what  he  is  in 
heart,  but  God  asks,  "Is  he  also  a  lover?"     If  not, 
he  is  nothing,  absolutely  nothing. 

3.  Noiu  Paul  brings  forward  a  third  thing  and  con- 
trasts    it    with    love — faith,    miracle-working    faith  f 
miracle-working  faith  in  the  highest  conceivable  form, 
faith  so  as  to  remove  mountains.     Surely  this  will 
count  for  something  with  God.    Surely  this  will  give 
a  man  eminence  in  His  sight.     Even  though  a  man 
is  very  faulty  in  character,  if  he  can  do  wonders  by 
the  power  of  faith,  he  must  stand  high  not  only  in 
the  estimation  of  man  but  God.    Listen  to  what  God 
says,  "If  I  have  all  faith,  so  as  to  remove  mountains, 
lut  have  not   love   I  am— NOTHING."     Think  of 
that — nothing!     There  are  those  in  these  days  who 
are  counting  upon  their  gifts  of  healing  and  their 
extraordinary   manifestations   of   faith  to   commend 
them  to  God.     They  would  better   ask  themselves, 
"Have  I  love?"    Some  of  them  do  not  seem  to  have 
according  to  the  description  given  in  verses  4-7. 


LOVE  213 

4.  Paul  next  brings  forward  a  fourth  thing  that 
men  count  much  on  as  commending  them  to  God — 
magnificent  giving,  ( l  If  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed 
the  poor."     Surely  a  man  who  does  that  is  a  great 
man  in  God's  sight.    Surely  he  will  get  rich  reward. 
But  the  inspired  Apostle  shakes  his  head,  "not  neces 
sarily,"  he  says,  "you  can  give  all  you  have,  every 
dollar,  every  cent,  and  that  too  for  the  most  philan 
thropic  purpose,  to  feed  the  poor;  but  if  you  have 
not  love,   you  will  gain  by  it  just  nothing.     How 
many  false  hopes  that  annihilates.     Men  with  hearts 
full  of  selfishness  are  building  great  hopes  for  time 
#nd  eternity  upon  the  fact  that  they  have  given  so 
much  to  the  poor  and  to  various  charitable  enter 
prises.    But  God  puts  the  very  searching  question  to 
you,  "Have  you  love?"     If  not,  your  gifts  will  do 
you  no  more  good  than  squandering  your  goods  in 
riot  and  folly  would.     It  will  all  profit  you  nothing. 

5.  And  now  Paul  takes  up  a  fifth  thing,  and  that 
which  above  all  others  is  supposed  to  entitle  one  to 
a  crown — martyrdom,   "If   I   give   my   body   to   be 
burned. ' '    Surely  we  have  at  last  found  one  for  whom 
God  will  have  words  of  unstinting  commendation — 
the  brave  martyr  who  marches  to  the  stake  for  con 
victions,  for  truth,  for  right.     For  him  there  must 
be  a  sure   and  great  reward,  the   martyr's   crown. 
Listen,  "and  if  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  but 
have  not  love  it  profieth  me — NOTHING."    Oh,  you 
who  think  so  much  and  talk  so  much  of  what  you 
have  suffered  for  Christ,  think  of  that.    It  all  counts 
for  nothing  if  you  have  not  love. 

There  is  nothing  then,  absolutely  nothing,  that  will 
take  the  place  of  love.    Gifts  of  speech,  great  knowl- 


214  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

edge  of  the  deep  things  of  God,  miracle  working 
faith,  the  greatest  possible  giving,  extreme  martyrdom, 
will  not  take  the  place  of  love.  Nay,  further,  they 
count  for  nothing  if  love  is  lacking.  One  question 
then  is  driven  home  with  tremendous  emphasis  to 
each  one  of  our  hearts, ' '  Have  you  love  f ' '  This  brings 
us  to  the  second  division  of  the  chapter. 

II.  LOVE  DESCRIBED  OR  THE  EVERYDAY  MANIFESTA 
TIONS  OP  LOVE. 

God  will  not  leave  us  in  any  self-deception  or  any 
doubt  as  to  whether  we  have  love  or  not.  He  gives 
a  very  plain  description  by  which  love  can  be  known, 
wherever  it  exists,  and  by  which  its  absence  can  be 
known  wherever  love  is  lacking.  Love  has  fifteen 
marks,  not  one  of  which  is  ever  wanting  where  love 
exists.  We  cannot  dwell  at  great  length  upon  each 
one,  nor  do  we  need  to. 

1.  The  first  mark  of  love  is  that  it  "suffereth  long." 
Love  endures  injury  after  injury,  insult  after  insult, 
wrong  after  wrong,  slander  after  slander,  and  still 
keeps  right  on  loving  and  forgiving  and  forgetting. 
It  wastes  itself  in  vainly  trying  to  help  the  unworthy 
and  ungrateful,  and  still  it  loves  on.    That  is  the  first 
mark  of  love.    Do  you  show  it? 

2.  The  second  mark  of  love  is,  it  "is  kind."    It 
knows  no  harshness.    It  may  be  severe  even  as  Jesus 
Himself  was  on  occasion,  but  its  necessary  severity  is 
shot  through  with  gentleness  and  tenderness  and  pity. 
That  is  love. 

3.  The  third  mark  of  love,  <(love   envieth  not." 
Love  knows  no  envy.    How  could  it  ?    He  that  really 


LOVE  215 

loves  is  as  much  interested  in  the  welfare  of  others 
as  in  his  own.  How  then  can  he  envy?  Does  a 
mother  ever  envy  the  prosperity  of  her  child?  Is  it 
not  her  chief  delight  ?  Love  never  envies,  never.  Do 
you  love?  Do  you  ever  secretly  grieve  over  and  try 
to  discount  another's  progress,  temporal  or  spiritual? 
Then  you  have  not  love.  You  may  speak  with  the 
tongues  of  men  and  of  angels,  you  may  have  the 
gift  of  prophecy,  know  all  knowledge,  you  may  have 
all  faith  so  that  mountains  are  disappearing  before 
your  onward  march,  you  may  be  giving  all  your 
goods  to  feed  the  poor,  you  may  be  ready  to  die  at 
the  stake  for  your  convictions,  but  you  have  not  love, 
and  you  are  nothing.  Oh,  friends,  how  often  when 
we  hear  of  another's  prosperity  or  the  great  work 
of  another  Christian  or  Church,  how  often  we  say, 
"Yes,  but — ah — er."  Or  if  we  do  not  say  it,  we 
think  it,  and  try  to  make  the  progress  of  the  person 
or  church  not  so  much  greater  than  our  own  after 
all.  Why  is  this?  Because  we  envy.  And  why  do 
we  envy?  Because  we  have  not  love,  and  not  having 
love  we  are  ciphers  in  God's  sight. 

4.  The  fourth  mark  of  love  is  that  it  " vaunt eth  not 
itself."    There  is  no  surer  mark  of  the  absence  of  love 
and  the  dominance  of  selfishness  than  that  we  talk 
about  ourselves  and  our  achievements.    If  we  really 
love,  the  achievements  of  others  will  be  more  important 
to  us  than  our  own,  and  it  is  about  them  we  will 
talk,  for  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
speaketh. 

5.  The  fifth  mark  of  love  is  that  it  is  {tnot  puffed 
up."    It  is  quite  possible  for  one  to  have  good  sense 
enough  not  to  vaunt  himself,  and  yet  in  his  heart  be 


216  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

puffed  up  over  his  own  virtues  or  victories.  But 
love  is  not  even  puffed  up.  Love  is  so  much  taken  up 
with  the  excellencies  of  others  that  it  will  not  even 
dream  of  being  inflated  over  its  own. 

6.  The  sixth  mark  of  love  is  that  it  "doth  not 
behave  itself  unseemly/'  i.e.  doth  not  do  rude,  ill- 
mannered,  boorish  things.    Love  is  considerate  of  the 
feelings  of  others  and  therefore  avoids  all  that  might 
offend  or  shock  them.     Nothing  else  will  teach  good 
manners  and  true  etiquette  as  love  will.    Those  pro 
fessed  Christians  who  delight  in  trampling  all  con 
ventionalities  under  foot  and  playing  the  boor  are 
utterly  lacking  in  one  essential  thing,  love. 

7.  "Love  seeketh  not  its  own."    These  words  need 
little  comment.     They  demand  exemplification  rather 
than  elucidation.     It  does,  however,  suggest  a  ques 
tion.    The  question  is  a  personal  one:  Are  you  seek 
ing  your  own,  or  others'  good?     You  haven't  time 
to  think  it  out  now,  but  I  hope  you  will  get  your 
Bible  and  think  it  out  when  you  get  home. 

8.  "Love  is  not  provoked."     The  translators  of 
the  King  James  Version  seem  to  have  staggered  at 
this  statement,  and  so  inserted  a  qualifying  word, 
1  'love  is  not  easily  provoked."    But  that  is  not  what 
God  said.     ''Love  is  not  provoked"  was  the  state 
ment.    Love  knows  no  irritation.    It  is  often  grieved, 
deeply  grieved,  but  never  irritated.     How  searching 
these  words  are!     We  get  so  hot  over  the  unkind 
words  that  are  spoken  to  us.    I  think  some  of  us,  as 
we  read  these  words,  will  ask,  "Have  I  any  love? 
Am  I  not  sounding  brass  or  a  clanging  cymbal?" 

9.  "Love  taketh  no  account  of  evil."    Love  never 
puts  the  wrong  done  it  down  in  its  books  or  in  its 


LOVE  217 

memory.  Some  of  us  do.  Some  one  does  us  an  in 
justice  or  a  wrong  of  some  kind  and  we  store  it 
away  in  mind,  and  whenever  we  think  of  that  person 
we  think  of  the  wrong  they  did  us.  That  is  not  love. 
Love  takes  those  pages  of  memory  on  which  the  wrongs 
done  us  are  written  and  tears  them  up.  If  wrong 
is  done  it,  it  keeps  no  account  of  it. 

10.  Love  "rejoiceth  not  in  unrighteousness/'    It  is 
not  for  ever  telling  and  glorying  in  the  wrong  that 
exists  in  individuals  and  church  and  state.    Brethren, 
why  is  it  that  some  of  us  are  so  fond  of  dwelling  on 
the  evil  that  exists  in  church  and  state?     I  will  tell 
you,  we  do  not  love. 

11.  Love  "rejoiceth  with  the  truth."     Oh,  if  we 
love  how  our  hearts  will  bound  when  we  discover 
truth  in  others.     How  gladly  we  will  call  attention 
to  it.     This  is  a  sure  mark  of  love.     Let  me  ask  a 
question,  Are  you  much  given  to  that  sort  of  thing? 
Some  of  you  come  and  tell  me  this  wrong  and  that 
wrong  that  you  see  in  others.     Don't  you  think  it 
would  be  well  to  come  occasionally  and  tell  me  of 
this  excellence  or  that  that  you  have  discovered  in 
others?    Paul  says  that  is  the  way  love  behaves. 

12.  "Love  beareth  all  things."     The  word  trans 
lated   "beareth"   means   primarily   "covereth"   and 
may  mean  so  here,  though  the  New  Testament  usage 
is  against  it.    That,  however,  will  be  quite  true,  love 
is  always  covering  evil  up.    We  are  told  in  1  Pet. 
4:8  that  "love  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins."     The 
word  translated  covereth  in  this  case  is  an  entirely 
different  one,  however,  from  the  one  used  in  the  pas 
sage  before  us.     Love  does  not  go  round  telling  all 
the  sin  it  has  discovered  in  men,  it  hides  it.    That  is 


218  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

a  manifestation  of  love  greatly  needed  in  our  day. 
But  the  words  before  us  seem  to  mean  more  than 
that.  They  seem  to  mean  that  no  matter  what  evil 
is  done  love,  love  bears  it  without  revenge  or  com 
plaint  or  bitterness  or  resentment. 

13.  "Love  believeth  all  things."    How  proud  some 
of  us  are  of  our  powers  to  see  through  men  and  of 
the  impossibility  of  gulling  us.    But  that  is  not  love, 
that  is  selfish  shrewdness.     Love  is  far  greater  than 
shrewdness.    Love  is  very  easily  gulled.    Indeed  love 
would  rather  be  gulled  a  hundred  times  than  to  mis 
judge  once.     "Love  believeth  all  things/'  and  when 
love  has  been  deceived  once  it  goes  right  on  believing 
next  time.    We  have  heard  it  said  of  some  men  that 
they  were  forever  being  taken  in  by  designing  per 
sons.    Well,  that  speaks  well  for  them,  for  "love  be 
lieveth  all  things." 

14.  "Love  hopeth  all  things."    When  it  gets  beyond 
believing,  when  one  has  proved  a  deceiver  so  often 
and  is  so  manifestly  a  deceiver  still  that  believing  is 
simply  impossible,   then  love   hopes   for  the   future. 
Love  does  not  look  at  the  bad  as  they  now  are,  but 
as  they  may  become  by  the  transforming  grace  of 
God.     When  love  looks  at  a  drunkard,  it  does  not 
see    that    poor,    bloated,    vile,    enslaved    thing    that 
now  is.    It  sees  the  clean,  upright,  intelligent,  Christ- 
like  man  of  God  that  is  to  be.     When  love  looks  at 
the  troublesome  Sunday  School  scholar  it  does  not 
see  the  shameless,  vicious,  unreasonable,  almost  idiotic 
boy  that  now  is,  but  the  attentive,  obedient,  gentle 
manly  boy  that  is  to  be.    I  tell  you,  friends,  love  is  a 
great  thing,  but  I  fear  it  is  a  rare  commodity. 

15.  Now  comes  the  fifteenth  and  last  mark  of  all, 


LOVE  219 

"Love  endureth  all  things."  When  believing  is  im 
possible,  when  even  hoping  seems  utterly  out  of  the 
question,  love  endures.  It  does  not  get  angry,  it 
does  not  give  up,  it  loves  on,  works  on,  endures  on. 
Let  Jesus  serve  as  an  illustration.  How  long  Jesus 
has  borne  with  men,  but  for  love  He  has  gotten  back 
only  reproach  and  sneers  and  spitting  and  blows  and 
crucifixion.  Reproach  has  broken  His  heart,  and  He 
is  fast  dying,  but  He  summons  all  His  waning 
strength,  and  cries,  "Father  forgive  them,  for  they 
know  not  what  they  do"  (Luke  23:24).  That  was 
love. 

Friends,  let  me  ask  you  a  question  again.  Exam 
ined  in  the  light  of  the  fifteen  marks  of  love  Paul 
gives,  have  you  much  love  ?  Have  you  any  ?  If  not, 
whatever  else  you  may  have,  you  are  nothing. 

III.  LOVE  EXALTED,  OR  THE  PEERLESS  PRE-EMINENCE 
OF  LOVE. 

We  have  no  time  left  for  the  third  division  of  the 
chapter,  Love  Exalted,  or  the  Peerless  Pre-eminence 
of  Love.  To  sum  it  all  up  in  a  few  words,  prophecies, 
tongues,  knowledge,  have  their  day,  love  is  eternal. 
God  is  love,  and  love  partakes  of  His  eternal  nature. 
"Love  never  faileth."  If  you  want  something  that 
will  last,  get  love.  All  other  things  are  partial,  love 
is  complete,  perfect.  There  are  three  abiding  things, 
faith,  hope  and  love,  but  even  of  these  thre^,  the 
greatest  is  love.  V  •« 


XVII 
A  CHRIST-LIKE  MAN 

THERE  is  one  man  who  is  pictured  to  us  in 
the  Bible  who  appears  to  be  more  like  Christ 
than  any  other  man  of  whose  life  we  have  an 
account.  That  man  is  Stephen,  the  first  deacon  in 
the  Christian  church,  and  the  first  Christian  martyr. 
There  is  no  fairer  life  recorded  in  history  than  that 
of  Stephen,  excepting,  of  course,  the  life  of  Him  of 
whom  Stephen  learned  and  after  whom  he  patterned. 
The  character  of  Stephen  presents  a  rare  combination 
of  strength  and  beauty,  robustness  and  grace.  Stephen 
occupies  small  space  in  the  Bible,  two  chapters,  Acts 
6  and  7,  and  two  verses  in  other  chapters,  Acts  11 : 19 
and  22 : 20,  yet  in  this  short  space  a  remarkably  com 
plete  analysis  of  his  character  and  the  outcome  of  it 
is  given. 

1.  STEPHEN'S  CHARACTER 

Let  us  look  first  at  Stephen's  character.  One  word 
occurs  again  and  again  in  the  description  of  Stephen. 
It  is  the  world  "full"  He  was  a  remarkably  full 
man. 

1.  First  of  all  he  was  "full  of  faith."  The  record 
reads,  "They  chose  Stephen,  a  man  full  of  faith" 
(Acts  6:5).  Stephen  had  unbounded  confidence  in 
God  and  in  His  Word;  he  believed  implicitly  in  the 

220 


A  CHRIST-LIKE  MAN  221 

certainty  of  every  statement  in  the  Word  of  God  re 
garding  the  past,  and  he  believed  implicitly  in  its 
promises  regarding  the  future.  He  had  no  fear  of 
consequences  when  God's  Word,  or  God's  Spirit  bade 
him  do  anything,  he  simply  did  it  and  left  the  conse 
quences  with  God.  It  was  God's  to  promise  and  to 
command,  it  was  his  simply  to  believe  and  obey  what 
God  said,  and  leave  the  outcome  with  God.  Even  in 
that  awful  moment  when  he  was  surrounded  by  a 
howling  mob  with  gnashing  teeth,  when  the  pitiless 
rocks  were  crushing  his  body  and  face  and  brain,  he 
quietly  looked  up  and  said,  "Lord  Jesus,  receive  my 
spirit,"  and  then  kneeling  down  uttered  a  mighty 
prayer  for  his  enemies,  and  gently  "fell  asleep." 
Oh,  that  we  had  more  men  and  women  of  Stephen's 
faith,  men  and  women  who  believe  all  God  says  and 
do  all  He  commands  in  His  Word  and  leave  the 
results  entirely  with  Him ;  men  and  women  who  walk 
straight  on  with  childlike,  unwavering  confidence  in 
Him  in  the  path  He  marks  out.  There  was  never  a 
day  when  men  and  women  of  that  sort  were  more 
needed  than  to-day.  Our  power  and  our  accomplish 
ment  will  be  proportionate  to  our  faith  in  God  and  in 
His  Word.  Faith  is  the  outstretched  hand  that  helps 
itself  to  all  God 's  fullness.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  ever 
saying,  "According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you" 
(Matt.  9:29),  and  of  many  of  us  it  must  be  said 
that  Jesus « '  could  do  no  mighty  work  there  because  of 
their  unbelief"  (Mark  6:5;  Matt.  13:58). 

2.  In  the  next  place  Stephen  was  "full  of  grace." 
This  we  find  in  verse  8,  B.  V.  The  Authorized  Ver 
sion  reads  that  he  was  "full  of  faith  and  power," 
but  the  Kevised  Version  reads  that  he  was  "full  of 


222  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

grace  and  power."  It  is  true,  as  already  seen,  that  he 
was  full  of  faith,  but  he  was  full  of  something  be 
sides  faith— "full  of  grace."  His  faith  in  God  and 
His  Word  brought  the  grace  of  God  into  his  heart 
and  life.  He  not  only  had  grace,  he  was  full  of  it — 
"full  of  grace."  He  was  completely  emptied  of  self, 
of  his  own  will,  of  his  own  plans,  of  his  own  goodness, 
of  his  own  thoughts,  of  his  own  strength,  and  the 
grace  of  God  had  just  come  in  and  taken  complete 
possession  of  his  heart  and  affections  and  will  and 
character  and  life.  This  was  the  reason  why  he  was 
so  much  like  Christ  Himself,  Christ  was  just  living 
His  own  life  over  again  in  Stephen.  As  we  look  at 
Stephen  with  his  face  shining  like  an  angel's  (Acts 
6 : 15),  and  listen  to  the  words  that  fall  from  his  lips, 
it  seems  as  if  Jesus  Himself  had  come  back  to  earth 
again,  and  so  He  had:  He  had  come  back  into 
Stephen's  heart  and  was  manifesting  Himself  in 
Stephen's  life.  And  in  the  same  way  Jesus  Christ  is 
ready  to  come  back  again  in  your  life  and  mine  if 
we  are  only  willing  to  be  emptied  of  the  self-life  and 
filled  with  grace.  Then  we  can  say  with  the  Apostle 
Paul,  "I  have  been  crucified  with  Christ;  and  it  is 
no  longer  I  that  live,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me:  and 
the  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  in  faith,  the 
faith  which  is  in  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and 
gave  Himself  for  me"  (Gal.  2:20,  B.  V.).  Ah! 
friends,  most  of  us  have  some  grace,  but  let  us  be 
full  of  grace,  let  us  allow  grace  to  fill  every  corner 
of  our  lives. 

3.  Stephen  was  also  "full  of  power!"  Grace  and 
power  are  not  one  and  the  same  thing,  though  all 
real  power  comes  from  grace,  i.e.,  it  is  a  gift  of  God's 


A  CHRIST-LIKE  MAN  223 

grace.  However,  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  are  different 
from  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  "Love,  joy,  peace,  long 
suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  and 
self  -control' '  are  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  5:  22). 
The  various  gifts  of  power  for  service  are  the  gifts 
of  the  Spirit.  Many  a  man  has  the  graces  of  the 
Spirit  in  rich  measure  who  has  not  much  of  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  in  his  work.  Others  have  very  much  of 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  some  directions,  but  are 
greatly  lacking  in  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  but  Stephen 
was  full  of  faith,  grace,  and  power,  and  so  ought  we 
to  be.  The  graces  of  the  Spirit  ought  to  be  richly 
revealed  in  our  lives;  the  power  of  the  Spirit  ought 
to  be  mightily  manifested  in  our  work.  It  is  the 
privilege  of  every  believer  to  be  a  man  of  power  in 
service.  Grace  and  power  are  both  at  our  disposal, 
grace  for  living  like  Christ,  power  for  working  like 
Christ.  (John  14: 12).  The  men  and  women  needed 
to-day  are  the  men  and  women  who  live  graciously 
and  work  mightily. 

4.  Stephen  was  also  full  of  the  Word  of  God. 
There  is  but  one  sermon  of  Stephen's  reported.  You 
will  find  it  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles.  But  what  a  sermon  that  one  sermon  is. 
It  is  Bible  from  beginning  to  end.  When  Stephen 
opened  his  mouth  to  speak  the  Scripture  just  flowed 
forth.  As  it  is  "out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart 
that  the  mouth  speaketh"  (Matt.  12:  34),  it  is  evident 
that  Stephen's  heart  was  full  of  God's  Word.  He  had 
pondered  the  Word  of  God  deeply ;  he  had  discovered 
the  deeper  meanings  of  its  precepts,  promises,  history, 
and  prophecies ;  he  had  hidden  the  Word  of  God  in 
his  heart;  he  was  full  of  the  Word.  This  goes  far 


224  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

toward  explaining  why  he  was  also  full  of  faith  and 
grace  and  power.  It  is  vain  for  one  to  pray  to  be 
full  of  faith  if  he  neglects  the  Word  of  God,  for 
' 'faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word 
of  God"  (Rom.  10:17).  I  remember  a  time  when 
I  longed  for  faith,  and  tried  hard  to  get  it,  but  I 
never  succeeded  until  I  began  feeding  upon  the  Word 
of  God.  It  is  vain  to  seek  for  grace  in  the  life  and 
neglect  the  Word  of  God,  for  the  Bible  is  ' '  the  Word 
of  His  grace,  which  is  able  to  build  you  up"  (Acts 
20:  32).  It  is  vain  to  pray  for  power  and  neglect  the 
Word  of  God,  for  it  is  when  "the  Word  of  God  abid- 
eth  in  you"  that  "ye  are  strong  and  overcome  the 
wicked  one"  (1  John  2:14).  Faith  and  grace  and 
power  all  come  from  the  Word  of  God,  and  in  order 
to  be  full  of  them  we  must  be  full  of  it.  How  much 
we  need  to-day  men  and  women  like  Stephen  who  are 
full  of  the  Word  of  God,  who  have  such  a  command 
of  the  Bible  that  none  are  "able  to  resist  the  wisdom 
by  which"  they  speak,  and  men  also  who  have  the 
Word  of  God  not  only  upon  their  lips,  but  in  their 
hearts  and  lives.  But  we  cannot  be  full  of  the  Word 
of  God  if  we  do  not  study  it,  study  it  long  and  ear 
nestly  and  prayfully,  study  it  (really  study  it)  every 
day  of  our  lives. 

5.  But  Stephen  was  full  of  something  else  yet,  he 
was  "full  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Acts  6:5).  Being  full 
of  the  Word  of  God  and  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
go  hand  in  hand.  In  Eph.  5 : 18,  19,  R.  V.,  Paul  says, 
"Be  filled  with  the  Spirit;  speaking  one  to  another  in 
psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  singing  and 
making  melody  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord."  And  in 
Col.  3:16  he  says,  "Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in 


A  CHRIST-LIKE  MAN  225 

you  richly  in  all  wisdom ;  teaching  and  admonishing 
one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs, 
singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to  the  Lord."    By 
the  comparison  of  these  two  passages  we  see  that  what 
in  one  place  is  attributed  to  being  full  of  the  Spirit, 
is  in  the  other  place  attributed  to  being  full  of  the 
Word  of  God.     The  two  go  naturally  together,  but 
they  are  often  divorced.    I  know  men  who  are  full  of 
the  Word,  i.e.,  they  have  a  very  large  technical  and 
formal  knowledge  of  the  Word,  but  who  are  not  full 
of  the  Spirit.    They  are  well  instructed  but  they  have 
no  unction.     They  are  dry  as  chips.     Indeed,  I  have 
known  men  who  were  once  full  of  the  Spirit,  but 
they  have  lost  the  manifestation  of  His  presence  and 
of  His  power.     As  far  as  the  form  of  knowledge  of 
the  Word  goes,  they  know  as  much  as  they  ever  did, 
but  the  power  has  gone  out  of  their  words.     But 
Stephen  was  "full  of  the  Spirit "  of  God  as  well  as 
full  of  the  Word  of  God.    His  enemies  were  not  able 
to  resist,  not  only  "the  wisdom/'  but  also  "the  Spirit 
by  which  he  spake"  (Acts  6: 10).    Let  us  seek  to  be 
full  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    Without  this  our  lives  will 
be  graceless  and  our  efforts  will  be  powerless.     The 
Holy  Spirit's  power  was  manifested  in  Stephen,  as 
we  have  already  seen,  in  a  twofold  way :  in  his  life, 
and  in  his  work. 

6.  Stephen  was  also  full  of  love.  In  Acts  7 : 57-60 
we  see  how  absolutely  his  whole  inner  and  outer  life 
were  under  the  control  of  love.  In  no  other  man, 
"perhaps,  except  Christ,  has  love  shone  out  as  it  did 
in  Stephen.  Look  at  Stephen  as  he  falls  beneath  the 
stones  hurled  at  him  by  his  infuriated  antagonists 
and  assassins.  He  can  no  longer  stand,  and  he  sinks 


226  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

to  his  knees.  His  crushed  forehead  is  throbbing  with 
pain,  his  strength  is  fast  waning,  but  he  summons  all 
his  remaining  strength  and  utters  a  loud  cry.  What 
is  it  ?  Is  it,  ' '  Lord  curse  these  my  murderers ' '  ?  No, 
"Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge. "  Here  we 
see  love  for  enemies  triumphant  even  in  death.  There 
is  perhaps  no  lesson  of  Stephen's  life  harder  to  learn 
than  this,  and  yet  there  is  no  other  lesson  that  we 
more  need  to  learn  than  this,  and  there  was  never  a 
time  when  we  more  needed  to  learn  it  than  to-day, 
when  we  are  face  to  face  with  a  mighty  foe  who  may 
do  us  or  our  loved  ones  awful  harm.  Let  us  never 
forget  to  be  full  of  love.  Love  is  the  one  Divine 
thing.  "If  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of 
angels,  but  have  not  love,  I  am  become  sounding 
brass,  or  a  clanging  cymbal"  (1  Cor.  13:1,  K.  V.). 
Ah !  it  is  easy  to  love  the  lovely,  in  fact  it  is  not  hard 
to  have  a  certain  sentimental  love  for  the  unlovely, 
provided  they  have  never  crossed  our  path  in  any  \vay ; 
but  to  love  the  one  who  lies  about  you,  as  these  did 
about  Stephen,  to  love  the  one  who  does  you  harm, 
seeking,  it  may  be,  your  very  life,  as  they  did  the 
life  of  Stephen,  this  is  the  hard  thing,  this  is  the 
supreme  test  of  whether  the  Lord  Jesus  be  indeed 
dwelling  in  us  or  not.  There  are  many  of  us  here 
to-day  who  have  coveted  earnestly  that  we  might  be 
full  of  faith  and  grace,  and  power,  and  the  Word  of 
God,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  are  you  full  of  love? 
Do  you  really  wish  to  be  full  of  love?  Remember  in 
answering  that  question  that  while  love  is  the  divin- 
est  thing  in  the  world,  it  is  also  the  most  costly. 

7.  Stephen  was  not  only  full  of  love,  he  was  also 
full  of  courage.     Many  men  seem  to  be  'forgiving 


A  CHRIST-LIKE  MAN  227 

simply  because  they  have  not  sufficient  energy  of  char 
acter  to  be  vengeful,  but  Stephen's  forgiveness  was  not 
of  that  kind.  He  was  a  man  of  almost  matchless 
energy  and  fearless  courage ;  he  knew  the  Jews,  he 
knew  what  they  had  done  to  his  Lord,  and  yet,  know 
ing  their  history,  he  faces  his  angry  antagonists  and 
boldly  says:  "Ye  stiffnecked  and  uncircumcised  in 
heart  and  ears,  ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost; 
as  your  fathers  did,  so  do  ye.  Which  of  the  prophets 
have  not  your  fathers  persecuted  ?  and  they  have  slain 
them  which  shewed  before  of  the  coming  of  the  Just 
One"  (Acts  7:51,  52),  and  then  when  they  gnashed 
upon  him  with  their  teeth,  he  beat  no  retreat;  but 
looking  up  steadfastly  into  heaven,  and  seeing  the 
glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing  on  the  right  hand 
of  God,  he  says,  ' '  Behold,  I  see  the  heavens  open,  and 
the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God" 
(Acts  7:56).  Do  we  not  sorely  need  courage  like 
that  to-day,  courage  to  face  the  enemies  of  Christ,  and 
give  our  uncompromising  testimony  for  Him?  How 
unlike  this  is  to  the  timid,  cringing,  sentimentality 
and  gush  that  passes  for  Christianity  to-day.  We 
need  Stephens  in  business,  we  need  Stephens  in 
society,  we  need  Stephens  in  public  affairs,  we  need 
Stephens  in  the  home  and  in  the  church. 

There  was  then  this  seven-fold  fullness  in  Stephen : 
he  was  "full  of  faith,"  "full  of  grace,"  "full  of 
power,"  full  of  the  Word  of  God,  "full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  full  of  love,  full  of  courage. 

8.  There  was  one  more  thing  about  Stephen's  char 
acter  that  needs  to  be  noted,  he  was  a  man  of  prayer. 
Prayer  was  the  spontaneous  utterance  of  his  heart 
in  the  hour  of  trouble.  The  last  two  utterances  of  his 


228  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

life  were  prayers  (Acts  7:59,  60)  just  as  were  two 
of  the  last  utterances  of  his  Master,  and  Stephen's 
prayers  were  closely  modelled  after  those  of  his  Mas 
ter.  No  man  can  be  a  man  of  power  who  is  not  a  man 
of  prayer.  No  man  can  be  full  of  grace  who  is  not  a 
man  of  prayer.  No  man  can  be  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  is  not  a  man  of  prayer.  Of  all  the  sad  neglects 
in  present  day  Christian  living  there  is  perhaps  none 
so  sad  and  fatal  as  the  neglect  of  prayer.  Why  is 
there  so  much  striving  after  holiness  and  so  little  ob 
taining  of  it?  Neglect  of  prayer.  Why  is  there  so 
much  machinery  in  the  church  and  so  little  real  work 
turned  out?  Neglect  of  prayer.  Why  is  there  so 
much  preaching  and  so  few  conversions?  Neglect  of 
prayer.  Why  is  there  so  much  Christian  enterprise 
and  so  little  Christian  progress?  Neglect  of  prayer. 
What  the  church  of  Christ  needs  to-day  above  all  else, 
as  in  the  day  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  is  a  call  to 
prayer.  What  the  individual  church  and  the  individ- 
nal  Christian  needs  to-day  is  a  call  to  prayer.  Oh, 
that  some  mighty  voice  might  be  heard  sounding  from 
the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  and  then  around  the  world : 
LET  US  PRAY.  Our  nation  to-day  is  at  the  great 
est  crisis  in  its  history,  and  what  our  nation  needs  to 
day  above  all  else  is  prayer,  real  prayer,  prayer  by 
multitudes  of  men  and  women  who  know  how  to 
pray.  The  great  majority  of  our  statesmen  are  right 
when  they  say  that  the  great  need  of  our  day  is  pre 
paredness,  but  the  preparedness  that  we  need  is  not 
the  preparedness  that  is  wrought  out  by  Germanizing 
our  land,  building  up  a  vast  military  system;  it  is  the 
preparedness  that  is  wrought  out  by  prayer. 


A  CHRIST-LIKE  MAN  229 

II.  THE  OUTCOME  OF  STEPHEN'S  CHARACTER 

There  is  little  time  left  to  dwell  upon  the  outcome  of 
Stephen's  character  and  life. 

1.  His  face  shone  like  an  angel's   (Acts  6 : 15).  The 
face  of  any  man  who  is  full  of  faith,  and  grace,  and  of 
the  Spirit,  and  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  of  power, 
and  of  love,  will  shine. 

2.  He  preached  with  unanswerable  wisdom  and  re 
sistless  power  (Acts  6:10). 

3.  He  "wrought  great  wonders  and  signs"  (Acts 

6:8). 

4.  "The  Word  of  God  increased,  and  the  number 
of  the  disciples  multiplied  in  Jerusalem  exceedingly" 
(Acts  6:7).    The  "Word  of  God  is  bound  to  increase, 
and  the  number  of  disciples  is  bound  to  multiply  ex 
ceedingly  when  we  have  deacons  and  workers  like 
Stephen. 

5.  Men  were  "cut  to  the  heart"  by  his  preaching 
(Acts  7 :  54) .  The  preaching  of  such  a  man,  full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  is  sure  to  bring  deep  conviction.  Our  Lord 
told  His  disciples  that  when  the  Holy  Ghost  was 
come  He  would  "convict  the  world  in  respect  of  sin." 
There  will  be  convicting  power  in  the  preaching  and 
personal  work  of  any  man  or  woman  who  is  full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

6.  But  this  conviction  in  Stephen's  case  did  not 
result  in  conversion.     As  men  could  not  gainsay  the 
truth  of  what  he  said,  they  took  to  lying  about  the 
preacher  (Acts  6 : 13) .    But  they  did  not  stop  at  that, 
they  gnashed  upon  him  with  their  teeth  (Acts  7 :  54), 
and  they  did  not  stop  at  that,  they  stoned  and  killed 
him  (Acts  7 :  58-60).  This  is  the  sort  of  treatment  that 


230  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

a  man  like  Stephen  may  expect  from  a  God-hating 
and  Christ-hating,  and  truth-hating  world.  In  all 
probability  there  will  be  conviction  of  sinners  and  con 
version  of  sinners,  but  sooner  or  later  there  will  be 
hatred  and  persecution  and  suffering,  and  it  may  be 
death. 

7.  But  there  was  another  outcome  of  Stephen's 
character,  Stephen  had  his  exceeding  great  reward, 
a  reward  that  far  more  than  compensated  for  the 
cruel  treatment  that  he  suffered.  The  heavens  were 
opened  and  he  saw  Jesus  and  the  glory  of  God  (Acts 
7:  55),  then  he  gently  fell  asleep  and  departed  to  be 
with  Christ,  which  was  "very  far  better"  (Acts 
7:  59,  60;  cf.  Phil.  1 : 23),  and  out  of  that  seemingly 
fruitless  sermon  and  triumphant  death  there  sprang 
the  prince  of  Apostles,  Paul.  Paul  and  all  his  mighty 
ministry  and  all  the  results  of  that  wonderful  minis 
try  were  the  outcome  of  what  Stephen  was. 


XVIII 
WALKING  AS  JESUS  WALKED. 

"He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  Him,  ought  himself 
also  to  walk  even  as  He  walked." — I  John  2:6. 

THE  one  great  secret  of  a  life  full  of  blessedness 
is  abiding  in  Christ.  Abiding  in  Christ  is 
the  one  all-inclusive  secret  of  power  in 
prayer :  our  Lord  Jesus  says  in  John  15 : 7,  "If  ye 
abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ask  what 
soever  ye  will  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  Abid 
ing  in  Christ  is  also  the  secret  of  f ruitfulness :  our 
Lord  Jesus  says,  ' '  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches : 
he  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same  beareth 
much  fruit:  for  apart  from  me  ye  can  do  nothing." 
And  abiding  in  Christ  is  the  secret  of  fullness  of 
joy:  in  the  same  chapter  to  which  we  have  referred 
twice,  the  Lord  Jesus  says,  "  These  things  have  I 
spoken  unto  you  (i.e.,  these  things  about  abiding  in 
Him),  that  my  joy  may  be  in  you,  and  that  your 
joy  may  be  made  full,"  a  clear  statement  that  our 
joy  is  made  full,  or  filled  full,  when  we  abide  in  Him, 
and  then  alone.  But  according  to  our  text  this  morn 
ing  the  one  proof  that  we  do  abide  in  Him  is  that  we 
walk  even  as  He  walked.  The  great  test  of  whether 
we  are  abiding  in  Christ  or  not  is  not  some  ecstatic 
feeling,  but  our  daily  conduct.  If  we  walk  as  He 

231 


232  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

walked  that  is  proof,  conclusive  proof,  that  we  are 
abiding  in  Him  whether  we  have  ecstatic  feelings  or 
not.  On  the  other  hand  if  we  do  not  walk  as  He 
walked,  that  is  conclusive  proof  that  we  are  not  abid 
ing  in  Him,  no  matter  how  many  ecstasies  and  rap 
tures  we  may  boast  of.  So  the  practical  question  that 
faces  each  one  of  us  this  morning  is,  Am  I  walking 
as  Jesus  walked?  This  brings  us  face  to  face  with 
the  question,  How  did  Jesus  walk? 

I.  How  JESUS  WALKED. 

Some  years  ago  Charles  Sheldon  brought  out  a  book 
named  "In  His  Steps,"  in  which  he  tried  to  imagine 
how  Jesus  would  act  in  various  imaginary  relations 
of  life ;  how,  for  example,  He  would  conduct  a  news 
paper,  etc.  The  book  awakened  a  great  deal  of 
interest,  but  was  necessarily  not  very  satisfactory. 
We  are  not  left  to  our  own  imaginations  in  this 
matter.  Far  more  practical  than  the  question  of 
what  Jesus  would  do  in  various  imaginary  relations 
of  life  is  to  find  what  He  actually  did  when  He  was 
here  on  earth,  and  find  out  how  He  really  walked. 
How  did  Jesus  walk? 

1.  First  of  all  He  walked  with  an  eye  absolutely 

single  to  the  glory  of  God.     He  says  in  John  8:50, 

seek  not  mine  own   glory."     In  no   act   of  His 

whole  life  did  He  have  regard  to  His  own  honour 

or  glory,  He  was  entirely  absorbed  in  the  glory  of 

lim  that  sent  Him.     In  the  prayer  which  He  offered 

the  night  before  His  crucifixion  He  said,   "Father 

the  hour  is  come:  glorify  thy  Son."    Now  that  looks 

at  the  first  glance  as  if  He  were  seeking  His  own 


WALKING  AS  JESUS  WALKED  233 

glory,  but  listen  to  the  rest  of  the  petition:  "that  the 
Son  may  glorify  Thee."  It  was  not  His  own  glory 
that  He  was  seeking,  but  altogether  the  Father's,  and 
He  simply  asked  the  Father  to  glorify  Him  that  the 
Father  Himself  might  be  glorified.  In  the  fourth 
verse  of  the  same  chapter  we  hear  Him  saying,  "I 
glorified  Thee  on  the  earth,  having  accomplished  the 
work  which  Thou  gavest  me  to  do."  His  own  glory 
was  a  matter  about  which  He  was  entirely  uncon- 
cerneci;  the  glory  of  the  Father  was  the  one  thing  that 
absorbed  Him.  In  every  act  of  His  life,  small  or  great, 
He  was  simply  seeking  the  glory  of  God.  He  had 
an  eye  absolutely  single  to  the  glory  of  God.  Even 
in  the  eternal  world  before  He  became  incarnate, 
when  He  was  existing  in  the  form  of  God,  when  the 
whole  angelic  world  saw  by  His  outward  form  that 
He  was  a  Divine  person,  and  when  He  might  have 
retained  that  Divine  glory,  He  thought  it  not  a  thing 
to  be  grasped  to  be  on  an  equality  with  God,  but 
emptied  Himself  and  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a 
servant  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men,  and 
being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man  He  humbled  Him 
self,  becoming  obedient  even  unto  death,  yea,  the 
death  of  the  cross  (Phil.  2:5-8),  because  by  this 
giving  up  His  own  Divine  glory  and  taking  upon 
Himself  humility  and  shame,  greater  glory  would 
come  to  the  Father.  And  now  may  I  put  the  ques 
tion  to  you,  and  to  myself  as  I  put  it  to  you,  are  you 
walking  with  an  eye  absolutely  single  to  the  glory 
of  God?  Is  there  but  one  thing  that  concerns  you 
in  determining  upon  any  course  of  action,  viz.,  will 
I  glorify  the  Father  more  by  doing  this  than  by  not 
doing  it?  I  heard  two  Christian  women  discussing 


234  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

the  other  day  the  relative  merits  of  the  East  and 
West  as  a  place  to  live.  One  spoke  about  the  maples 
and  the  oaks  and  the  beeches  of  the  East,  about  the 
various  social  and  other  advantages.  The  other  dwelt 
upon  the  fruits  and  flowers  of  Southern  California, 
upon  the  air  and  the  cleanliness.  But  if  we  are  to 
walk  as  Jesus  walked  we  will  not  determine  our 
home  by  such  considerations  as  these,  the  whole  ques 
tion  will  be  will  it  be  more  to  God's  glory  for  me  to 
live  in  the  East  or  the  West  ? 

2.  In  the  second  place,  we  find  from  a  study  of 
the  walk  of  Jesus  as  recorded  in  the  four  Gospels,  that 
He  walked  in  whole-hearted  surrender  to  and  delight 
in  the  will  of  the  Father.  Not  only  could  He  say, 
"I  do  always  the  things  that  are  pleasing  to  Him," 
but  He  even  went  so  far  as  to  say,  "My  meat,"  i.e., 
His  sustenance  and  delight,  "is  to  do  the  will  of  Him 
that  sent  me,  and  to  accomplish  His  work. ' '  The  cir 
cumstances  under  which  He  said  this  were  significant ; 
He  was  tired,  hungry,  and  thirsty,  so  tired  that  when 
His  disciples  went  into  the  neighbouring  village  to 
buy  food  for  Him  and  them,  He  was  unable  to  go 
along,  but  rested  wearily  upon  the  well  at  Sychar. 
As  he  rested  there  He  looked  up  the  road  and  saw 
a  sinful  woman  coming  toward  Him.  In  His  joy  in 
an  opportunity  of  doing  the  Father's  will  in  winning 
that  lost  woman  He  entirely  forgot  His  weariness 
and  His  hunger,  and  step  by  step  led  her  to  the 
place  where  she  knew  Him  as  the  Christ.  At  that 
moment  His  disciples  again  appeared  and  wondered 
that  He  was  talking  with  a  woman,  and  then  urged 
Him  to  eat  of  the  food  which  they  had  brought  from 
the  village,  saying,  "Kabbi,  eat."  He  looked  up  at 


WALKING  AS  JESUS  WALKED  235 

them  almost  in  wonder  and  said,  "I  have  meat  to 
eat  that  ye  know  not."     In  other  words,  He  says, 
"I  am  not  hungry;  I  have  been  eating."     The  dis 
ciples    were    filled   with    surprise    and    said    one    to 
another,  "Hath  any  man  brought  Him  aught  to  eat?" 
Then  Jesus  answering  their  thought  said,  "My  meat  is 
to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  me,  and  to  accom 
plish  His  work."    All  the  joy  He  asked,  all  the  grati 
fication   He   asked   was   an   opportunity   to   do   the 
Father's  will.     He  not  only  did  His  Father's  will 
always,  but  He  delighted  in  doing  it,  it  was  His 
chief  gratification,  the  very  sustenance  of  His  inner 
most  being.    Are  you  walking  as  Jesus  walked?    Are 
you  walking  in  whole-hearted  surrender  to  the  will 
of  God,  studying  His  Word  daily  to  find  out  what 
that  will  is,  doing  it  every  time  when  you  find  it, 
finding  your  chief  delight  in  doing  the  will  of  the 
Father,  no  matter  how  disagreeable  in  itself  that  will 
may  be?     This  is  the  way  Jesus  walked.     Are  you 
walking  as  He  walked? 

3.  Furthermore,  He  walked  in  utter  disregard  of 
self.  This  is  involved  in  what  we  have  already  said, 
but  we  mention  it  separately  in  order  to  make  it  clear. 
His  own  interests,  His  own  ease,  His  own  comfort, 
His  own  honour,  His  own  anything  were  nothing  to 
Him.  "Though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  He 
became  poor,  that  we  through  His  poverty  might  be 
come  rich"  (2  Cor.  8:9).  Not  His  own  interests,  but 
those  of  others  were  His  sole  consideration.  What 
riches  did  He  give  up?  The  greatest  that  any  one 
ever  knew;  all  the  possessions  and  glory  of  God. 
How  poor  did  He  become?  The  poorest  man  the 
world  ever  saw.  He  not  only  became  a  man,  taking 


236  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

all  a  man's  dishonour  upon  Himself,  He  became  a  poor 
man,  a  despised  man.  When  He  went  out  of  this 
world  He  went  out  of  it  stripped  of  everything.  He 
had  not  had  food  for  many  long  hours;  every  shred 
of  clothing  was  torn  from  Him  as  they  nailed  Him 
to  the  cross;  He  was  stripped  of  all  honour  and 
respect,  lifted  up  on  the  cross  as  a  condemned  felon, 
while  jeering  mobs  passed  by  mocking  Him,  and  this 
end  He  Himself  chose  because  by  thus  emptying  Him 
self  of  everything  He  secured  eternal  life  and  an  in 
heritance  incorruptible,  undefiled  and  that  passeth 
not  away,  for  others.  His  own  interests  were  nothing, 
the  interests  of  others  were  everything.  Are  you 
walking  as  Jesus  walked?  Are  you  living  your  life 
day  by  day  in  utter  disregard  of  your  own  interests, 
your  own  reputation,  your  own  authority,  your  own 
comfort,  your  own  honour,  doing  the  things  that  will 
bring  blessing  to  others,  no  matter  what  loss  and  dis 
honor  the  doing  of  them  may  bring  to  you  ?  "He  that 
saith  he  abideth  in  Him,  ought  himself  also  to  walk 
even  as  He  walked." 

4.  Furthermore,  He  walked  with  a  consuming  pas 
sion  for  the  salvation  of  the  lost.  He  Himself  has 
defined  the  whole  purpose  of  His  coming  into  this 
world ;  in  Luke  19 : 10  He  says, ' '  The  Son  of  man  came 
to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  He  had 
just  one  purpose  in  leaving  heaven  and  all  its  glory 
and  coming  down  to  earth  with  all  its  shame,  that 
was  the  seeking  out  and  saving  of  the  lost.  The  sav 
ing  of  the  lost  was  the  consuming  passion  of  His  life. 
For  this  He  came,  for  this  He  lived,  for  this  He 
prayed,  for  this  He  worked,  for  this  He  suffered, 
for  this  He  died.  Are  you  walking  with  such  a 


WALKING  AS  JESUS  WALKED  237 

consuming  passion  for  the  salvation  of  the  lost?  Oh, 
how  many  are  there  of  us  who  indeed  are  doing 
something  for  the  salvation  of  the  lost,  but  what  we 
do  is  perfunctory;  we  do  it  simply  because  we  think 
it  is  the  thing  we  ought  to  do,  not  because  there  is  a 
consuming  passion  within  that  will  not  let  us  rest 
without  doing  everything  in  our  power  to  save  the 
lost,  to  bring  the  lost  to  a  saving  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ.  If  the  professedly  Christian  men  and  wo 
men  walked  with  such  a  consuming  passion  for  the 
salvation  of  the  lost  as  Jesus  walked,  how  long  would 
it  be  before  hundreds  and  thousands  were  turning 
to  Christ  here  in  Los  Angeles. 

5.  He  walked  in  a  life  of  constant  prayer  fulness. 
In  Hebrews  5 : 7  we  read  that  in  the  days  of  His 
flesh  He  "offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with 
strong  crying  and  tears."  His  whole  life  was  a  life  of 
prayer.  The  record  that  we  have  of  His  life  in  the  four 
gospels  is  very  brief,  only  eighty-nine  very  short  chap 
ters  in  all,  and  yet  in  this  very  brief  account  of  the  life 
of  our  Lord  the  words  "pray"  and  "prayer"  are  used 
in  connection  with  Him  no  less  than  twenty-five  times, 
and  His  praying  is  mentioned  in  places  where  these 
words  are  not  used.  People  wonder  what  Jesus 
would  do  in  this  relation  or  that,  but  the  Bible  tells 
us  plainly  what  He  actually  did  do,  He  prayed. 
He  spent  much  time  in  prayer.  He  would  rise  a 
great  while  before  day  and  go  out  into  the  mountain 
to  pray  alone.  He  spent  whole  nights  in  prayer. 
If  we  are  to  walk  as  Jesus  walked  we  must  lead  a 
life  of  prayerfulness.  The  man  who  is  not  leading  a 
life  of  prayer,  no  matter  how  many  excellent  things 
he  may  be  doing,  is  not  walking  as  Jesus  walked. 


238  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

6.  He  also  walked  a  walk  characterized  by  a  dili 
gent  study  of  the  Word  of  God.  We  see  this  in  many 
things.  His  whole  thought  and  the  things  that  He 
said  showed  that  He  was  saturated  with  Old  Testa 
ment  Scripture.  He  met  each  one  of  the  three  as 
saults  of  Satan  in  His  temptation  in  the  wilderness 
with  a  quotation  from  the  Old  Testament,  and  we  read 
in  Luke  24 :  27  that  * '  beginning  from  Moses  and  from 
all  the  prophets,  He  interpreted  to  them  in  all  the 
Scriptures,"  conclusively  showing  that  He  had  pon 
dered  long  and  deep  all  parts  of  the  Old  Testament, 
the  only  written  Word  of  God  then  existing,  and  in 
the  forty-fourth  verse  of  the  same  chapter  we  read 
that  He  said,  "All  things  must  be  fulfilled  which  are 
written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  and  the  prophets,  and  the 
Psalms,  concerning  me."  He  himself  was  the  incar 
nate  Word  of  God,  neverthless,  He  diligently  studied 
and  steeped  Himself  in  the  written  Word  in  so  far 
as  it  then  existed.  Are  you  in  this  matter  walking 
as  Jesus  walked?  Are  you  digging  into  the  Bible? 
Are  you  saturating  yourself  with  the  Word  of  God? 
Are  you  permitting  your  whole  thought  and  the  very 
language  you  use  to  be  saturated  with  Scripture? 
It  was  thus  that  Jesus  walked,  with  an  eye  absolutely 
single  to  the  glory  of  God,  in  whole-hearted  sur 
render  to  and  delight  in  the  will  of  the  Father,  in 
utter  disregard  of  self,  with  a  consuming  passion 
for  the  salvation  of  the  lost,  with  a  life  of  constant 
prayerfulness,  in  diligent  study  of  the  Word  of  God. 
Are  you  thus  walking?  Many  of  us  doubtless  will 
have  to  say  this  morning,  "I  am  not,"  and  that 
brings  us  to  the  next  question. 


WALKING  AS  JESUS  WALKED  239 


II.  How  CAN  WE  WALK  AS  JESUS  WALKED  ? 

It  is  a  very  practical  question,  and  the  all-sufficient 
answer  to  it  is  in  our  text:  "He  that  saith  he  abideth 
in  Him,  ought  himself  also  to  walk  even  as  He 
walked."  It  is  clear  from  this  that  there  is  only  one 
way  by  which  we  can  walk  as  He  walked,  and  that 
is  by  abiding  in  Him.  But  what  does  that  mean? 
Our  Lord  Himself  has  explained  this  in  John  15 : 1-5. 
In  these  verses  He  tells  us  that  He  is  the  vine  and  we 
are  the  branches,  and  that  if  we  would  have  fruitage 
and  power  in  prayer,  and  joy,  we  must  abide  in  Him, 
just  as  the  branch  that  bears  fruit  must  abide  in  the 
vine.  That  is  to  say,  abiding  in  Him  is  maintaining  the 
same  relation  to  Him  that  a  fruitful  branch  of  a  grape 
vine  bears  to  the  vine ;  it  has  no  life  of  its  own,  all  its 
life  is  the  inflow  of  the  life  of  the  vine,  its  buds  and 
leaves  and  blossoms  and  fruit  are  not  its  own,  but 
simply  the  outcome  of  the  life  of  the  vine  flowing 
into  it  and  bearing  fruitage  through  it,  so  that  if  we 
are  to  abide  in  Him  and  bear  fruit  we  must  seek 
to  have  no  life  of  our  own,  we  must  renounce  all  our 
self-efforts  after  righteousness,  not  simply  renounce 
our  sins,  but  renounce  our  own  thoughts,  our  own 
ambitions,  our  own  purposes,  our  own  strength,  our 
own  everything,  and  cast  ourselves  in  utter  depend 
ence  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  for  Him  to  think  His 
thoughts  in  us,  to  will  His  purpose  in  us,  to  choose 
His  choice  through  us,  to  work  out  His  own  glorious 
perfection  of  character  in  us.  Many  try  to  be  like 
Christ  by  imitating  Christ.  It  is  absolutely  impossible 
for  us  to  imitate  Christ  in  our  own  strength.  The 


240  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

most  discouraging  thing  that  any  earnest-minded  man 
can  attempt  is  to  imitate  Christ.  Nothing  else  will 
plunge  a  man  in  deeper  despair  than  to  try  to  imitate 
Christ  in  his  own  strength.  Instead  of  imitating  Him 
we  should  open  our  hearts  wide  for  Him  to  come  in 
and  live  His  own  life  out  through  us.  Christ  in  us 
is  the  secret  of  a  Christian  life.  The  only  Christ  that 
many  professed  Christians  know  is  the  historic  Christ, 
that  is  the  Christ  who  lived  nineteen  centuries  ago 
on  this  earth  and  died  on  the  cross  of  Calvary,  an 
atoning  sacrifice  for  sin.  They  only  know  the  Christ 
who  died  for  us  on  the  cross.  Oh,  we  need  to  know 
something  further  than  that  if  we  are  to  be  like 
Him ;  we  need  to  know  a  living  Christ  to-day,  a  Christ 
who  not  only  arose  and  ascended  to  the  right  hand 
of  the  Father,  but  a  Christ  who  has  come  down  and 
dwells  in  us,  the  hope  of  glory  (Col.  1:27).  From 
the  bottom  of  my  heart  I  praise  God  for  Christ  for 
us  on  the  cross.  All  my  hope  of  acceptance  before 
God  is  built  upon  Him  bearing  my  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  cross,  and  I  do  praise  God  for  Christ 
for  us.  But,  oh,  how  I  praise  God,  not  only  for 
Christ  for  me  on  the  cross,  but  for  Christ  in  me,  a 
living,  personal  Christ  in  me  to-day,  living  His  life 
out  through  me,  and  causing  me  to  walk  even  as 
Jesus  walked.  How  we  may  thus  have  Christ  in  us 
Paul  tells  us  in  Gal.  2:20,  A.R.V.  He  says,  "I 
have  been  crucified  with  Christ/'  i.e.,  when  Christ 
was  crucified  on  the  cross  He  was  crucified  as  our 
representative  and  we  were  crucified  in  Him,  and  we 
must  see  ourselves  where  God  put  us  on  the  cross 
in  the  place  of  death  and  the  curse,  and  thus  cease 
to  live  in  our  own  strength.  Then  he  goes  on  to  say, 


WALKING  AS  JESUS  WALKED  241 

"It  is  no  longer  I  that  live,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me ;" 
i.e.,  as  he  had  been  crucified  with  Christ  he  counted 
himself  what  he  really  was  in  his  standing  before 
God,  dead,  and  as  a  dead  man,  no  longer  sought  to 
live  his  own  life,  but  let  Jesus  Christ  live  His  life 
out  through  him.  And  then  he  goes  on  still  further 
to  say,  "That  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live 
in  faith,  the  faith  which  is  in  the  Son  of  God,  who 
loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  The  whole 
secret  of  being  like  Christ  is  found  in  these  words. 
We  must  count  self  dead;  we  must  give  up  our  self- 
efforts  after  likeness  to  Christ;  we  must  distrust  our 
own  strength  as  much  as  we  distrust  our  own  weak 
ness  and  our  own  sin,  and  instead  of  striving  to  live 
like  Christ,  let  Christ  live  in  us,  as  He  longs  to  do. 
Of  course  we  cannot  thus  have  Christ  in  us  until  we 
know  Christ  for  us,  making  a  full  atonement  for  our 
sins  on  the  cross.  Paul  explains  the  whole  secret  of 
it  in  another  way  in  Eph.  3 : 16-20.  Here  he  prays 
for  the  believers  in  Ephesus  that  they  "may  be 
strengthened  with  power  through  His  Spirit  in  the 
inner  man;  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts 
through  faith."  The  thought  is,  it  is  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  form  an  indwelling  Christ  within  us, 
and  the  way  to  know  Christ  in  us  is  to  let  the  Holy 
Spirit  form  Him  within  us. 

Are  you  walking  as  Jesus  walked?  Do  you  wish 
to  walk  as  Jesus  walked,  cost  whatever  it  may?  Well 
then,  realize  that  you  have  not  been  walking  as 
Jesus  walked,  and  that  the  reason  you  have  not 
walked  as  Jesus  walked  is  because  you  have  been 
trying  to  do  it  yourself,  and  give  up  your  own  at 
tempts  to  do  it  and  just  look  up  to  the  Risen  Christ, 


242 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 


through,  whose  death  on  the  cross  you  have  found 
pardon  and  justification,  and  let  Him  come  and  dwell 
in  you  and  live  His  life  out  through  you ;  to  have  His 
perfect  will  in  you,  and  just  trust  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
form  this  indwelling  Christ  in  your  heart. 


XIX 

r 

THE  SECRET  OF  ABIDING  PEACE,  ABOUND 
ING  JOY,  AND  ABUNDANT  VICTORY  IN 
WAR  TIMES  AND  AT  ALL  TIMES. 

"Enoch  walked  with  God:  and  he  was  not;  for 
God  took  him."— Gen.  5:24. 

OUR  subject  this  morning  is  The  Secret  of 
Abiding  Peace,  Abounding  Joy,  and  Abun 
dant  Victory  in  "War  Times  and  at  All 
Times.  You  will  find  the  text  in  Gen.  5 :  24,  "Enoch 
walked  with  God:  and  he  was  not;  for  God  took 
him."  In  this  description  of  Enoch's  walk  we  find 
the  secret  of  abiding  peace,  abounding  joy,  and 
abundant  victory  in  war  times  and  at  all  times.  To 
my  mind  the  text  is  one  of  the  most  fascinating  and 
thrilling  verses  in  the  entire  Bible.  It  sounds  more 
like  a  song  from  a  heavenly  world  than  a  plain  state 
ment  of  historical  facts  regarding  a  humble  inhab 
itant  of  this  world  of  ours,  but  such  it  is,  and  it  is 
possible  for  each  one  of  us  to  so  live  and  act  that  it 
may  be  recorded  of  us,  "He  walked  with  God,"  and 
later,  "and  he  was  not;  for  Go.d  took  him."  The 
position  of  this  verse  in  the  Bible  is  significant  and 
suggestive.  There  has  been,  in  the  verses  immediately 
preceding,  a  very  prosaic,  monotonous,  and  at  first 
sight  tedious  recital  of  how  one  man  after  another 
of  the  olden  time  lived  so  many  years,  begat  a  son, 

243 


244 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 


continued  to  live  so  many  years  and  begat  sons  and 
daughters  and  then  died.  Then  suddenly  Enoch  is 
introduced  and  the  story  begins  just  as  the  other 
stories  begin  and  goes  on  just  as  the  other  stories  go 
on,  and  seems  about  to  end  just  as  the  other  stories 
end,  but  no,  there  is  this  fresh  breath  from  heaven  and 
these  melodious  tones  sound  out:  "And  Enoch  walked 
with  God:  and  he  was  not ;  for  God  took  him."  Then 
the  story  goes  on  again  in  the  same  old  strain.  Re 
member  that  this  account  belongs  to  a  far-away  time, 
thousands  of  years  before  Christ,  and  about  a  thou 
sand  years  before  the  flood,  and  yet  what  depth  of 
truth  and  beauty  there  is  in  it.  Are  there  not  lessons 
for  us  to  learn  from  that  far,  far  away  olden  time? 
The  entire  authentic  history  of  Enoch  is  contained  in 
nine  verses  in  the  Bible,  six  in  the  Old  Testament, 
three  in  the  new.  History  outside  of  the  Bible  is 
utterly  unacquainted  with  him,  yet  he  stands  out  as 
one  of  the  most  remarkable  and  admirable  men  of 
whom  history  speaks,  a  man  whom  God  honoured  as 
He  has  but  one  other  member  of  the  entire  race. 
His  greatness  was  of  the  kind  that  pleases  God.  We 
are  told  in  the  llth  chapter  of  Hebrews  and  the 
fifth  verse  that  "he  hath  had  witness  borne  to  him 
that  before  his  translation  he  had  been  well  pleasing 
to  God. ' '  Quite  likely  his  greatness  did  not  win  very 
hearty  commendation  from  his-  contemporaries.  How 
ever,  that  was  not  of  much  consequence.  His  great 
ness  did  not  consist  of  military  renown,  political 
power,  profound  scholarship,  successful  statesmanship, 
splendid  artistic  or  architectural  genius,  nor  even 
magnificent  philanthropic  achievement.  It  was  great 
ness  of  a  more  quiet  and  less  pretentious  and  visible 


SECRET  OF  ABIDING  PEACE  245 

nature,  but  of  a  far  more  real  and  lasting  nature ;  it 
was  greatness  of  character,  "he  walked  with  God," 
arid  God  so  enjoyed  his  society  that  he  took  him  to  be 
with  Himself  permanently. 

I  wish  to  make  clear  to  you  all  to-day  three  things : 
first,  what  it  is  to  walk  with  God;  second,  what  are 
some  of  the  results  of  walking  with  God;  third,  how 
we  may  get  into  such  a  walk  ourselves, 

I.  WHAT  Is  IT  TO  WALK  WITH  GOD? 

First  of  all  then  what  is  it  to  walk  with  God?  I 
think  I  may  safely  say  that  with  some  of  us  here  this 
morning  that  question  needs  no  answer,  God  Himself 
has  answered  it  to  us  in  blessed,  unspeakably  blessed 
experience.  But  with  some  of  us — yes,  many  of  us — 
it  does  need  an  answer.  We  have  read  the  words  of 
the  text  before,  perhaps  we  have  read  them  often. 
Thy  have  charmed  us,  soothed  us,  thrilled  us,  and  yet 
often  the  question  has  arisen  in  our  hearts,  just  what 
do  they  mean.  This  question  admits  of  a  very  plain 
and  simple  answer:  to  walk  with  God  means  to  live 
one's  life  in  the  consciousness  of  God's  presence  and 
in  conscious  communion  with  Him,  to  have  the 
thought  constantly  before  us,  ' '  God  is  beside  me, ' '  and 
to  be  every  now  and  then  speaking  to  Him,  and  still 
more  listening  for  Him  to  speak  to  us.  In  a  word,  to 
walk  with  God  is  to  live  in  the  real,  constant,  con 
scious  companionship  of  God.  We  read  that  Enoch 
walked  with  God,  not  on  a  few  rare  occasions  of 
spiritual  exaltation,  such  perhaps  as  most  of  us  have 
known,  but  for  three  hundred  consecutive  years  after 
the  birth  of  Methuselah  (Gen.  6:22).  It  is  possible 


246  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

for  us  to  have  this  consciousness  of  the  nearness  and 
fellowship  of  God  in  our  daily  life,  to  talk  with  Him 
as  we  talk  to  an  earthly  friend;  yes,  as  we  talk  to 
no  earthly  friend,  and  to  have  Him  talk  to  us,  and 
to  commune  with  Him  in  a  silence  that  is  far  more 
meaningful  than  any  words  could  be.  I  would  gladly 
linger  here  in  this  sweet  and  holy  place,  but  let  us 
pass  on  to  the  results  of  walking  with  God. 

II.  THE  RESULTS  OF  WALKING  WITH  GOD. 

1.  The  first  result  of  walking  with  God  is  great 
joy,  abounding  joy.  "In  thy  presence,"  sings  the 
Psalmist,  "is  fullness  of  joy"  (Ps.  16: 11).  There  is 
no  greater  joy  than  that  which  comes  from  right 
companionship.  Who  would  not  rather  live  in  a  hut 
with  congenial  companions  than  in  a  palace  with 
disagreeable  associates.  Who  would  not  rather  live 
on  a  bleak  and  barren  isle  among  real  Christians  than 
in  the  fairest  land  the  sun  ever  shone  upon  among 
infidels,  blasphemers,  drunkards,  ruffians  and  liber 
tines.  The  most  attractive  feature  of  heaven  is  its 
society,  especially  the  society  of  God  and  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Well  might  Samuel  Rutherford  say :  I  would 
rather  be  in  hell  with  Thee  than  in  heaven  without 
Thee:  for  if  I  were  in  hell  with  Thee  that  would  be 
heaven  to  me,  and  if  I  were  in  heaven  without  Thee 
that  would  be  hell  to  me."  But  when  we  have  the 
conscious  presence  and  companionship  of  God  on 
earth,  "we  have  two  heavens,  the  heaven  to  which 
we  are  going  and  a  heaven  to  go  to  heaven  in."  In 
one  of  the  loneliest  hours  of  His  lonely  life  Jesus 
looked  up  with  radiant  joy  and  said,  "Yet  I  am  not 
alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  me"  (John  6:32). 


SECRET  OF  ABIDING  PEACE  247 

Can  you  not  remember  some  ecstatic  hour  of  your 
life  when  you  walked,  and  sometimes  talked  and 
sometimes  were  silent,  with  an  earthly  companion 
whom  you  loved  as  you  loved  no  other?  Oh,  happy 
hour!  but  only  faintly  suggestive  of  the  rapture  that 
comes  from  walking  with  God,  for  He  is  an  infinitely 
dearer  and  better  and  more  glorious  companion  than 
any  earthly  one  could  be.  How  the  homely  details 
of  everyday  life  are  transfigured  if  we  have  the 
constant  fellowship  of  God  in  them.  There  lived  in 
the  Middle  Ages  a  lad  named  Nicholas  Hermann. 
He  was  a  raw,  awkward  youth,  breaking  all  things 
that  he  touched,  but  one  day  the  thought  was  brought 
to  his  mind  with  great  force  that  God  was  every 
where  and  that  he  might  have  the  constant  thought 
of  His  presence  with  him  and  do  all  things  to  His 
glory.  This  thought  transformed  his  life.  He  soon 
went  to  a  monastery.  His  duty  there  was  of  the  most 
menial  character,  in  the  kitchen,  washing  pots  and 
kettles,  but  to  use  his  own  way  of  putting  it,  he 
11  practised  the  presence  of  God"  in  the  midst  of  his 
humble  toil.  That  kitchen  became  so  holy  a  place  that 
men  took  long  journeys  to  meet  Nicholas  Hermann 
and  to  converse  with  him.  Some  of  his  conversations 
and  letters  have  been  published  under  the  title  "The 
Practise  of  the  Presence  of  God." 

2.  The  second  result  of  walking  with  God  is  a 
great  sense  of  security,  abiding  peace.  In  the  Psalm 
already  quoted  the  Psalmist  sings  again :  "  I  have  set 
the  Lord  always  before  me,  because  He  is  at  my  right 
hand  I  shall  not  be  moved"  (Ps.  16:7).  Certainly 
not.  How  can  we  be  moved  if  God  is  with  us,  what 
harm  can  befall  us?  How  often  God  says  to  His 


248  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

servants  as  they  begin  to  tremble  before  approaching 
danger:  "Fear  not,  I  am  with  thee"  (Isa.  41:10). 
How  safe  the  trusting  child  feels  with  father  or 
mother  by  its  side.  A  little  girl  was  once  playing  in 
a  room  below  while  her  mother  was  above,  busy 
about  household  duties.  Every  little  while  the  child 
would  come  to  the  foot  of  the  stairs  and  call  up : 
"Mamma,  are  you  there?"  "Yes,  darling,  what  is 
it?"  "Nothing,  I  only  wanted  to  know  if  you  were 
there."  Then  again  a  little  while:  "Mamma,  are 
you  there  ? "  "  Yes,  darling,  what  is  it  ? "  "  Nothing, 
I  only  wanted  to  know  you  were  there. ' '  Ah !  is  not 
that  all  we  want  to  know,  that  God  is  here,  right 
here  by  our  side?  There  may  be  pestilence,  there 
may  be  war,  there  may  be  famine,  there  may  be 
thugs  upon  the  street,  there  may  be  burglars  in  the 
house,  there  may  be  haunts  of  sin,  and  unprincipled 
men  arid  women  on  every  hand ;  yes  our  wrestling  may 
not  be  with  flesh  and  blood  but  "against  the  prin 
cipalities,  against  the  powers,  against  the  world  rulers 
of  this  darkness,  against  the  spiritual  hosts  of  wicked 
ness  in  the  heavenlies, ' '  but  what  does  it  matter  ?  God 
is  with  us.  Oh,  if  we  only  bore  in  mind  at  every 
moment  the  thought  of  His  presence  with  us,  if  we 
could  only  hear  Him  saying,  "Fear  thou  not,  for  I 
am  with  thee;  be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy  God: 
I  will  strengthen  thee;  yea  I  will  help  thee;  yea  I 
will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteous 
ness,"  there  would  never  be  one  single  tremor  of 
fear  in  our  hearts  under  any  circumstances.  No  mat 
ter  .how  the  war  increases,  no  matter  how  near  it  may 
come  to  our  own  doors,  there  would  be  unruffled 
calm,  abounding  peace,  we  could  constantly  say  under 


SECRET  OF  ABIDING  PEACE  249 

all  circumstances,  ' '  The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  sal 
vation  ;  whom  shall  I  fear  ?  The  Lord  is  the  strength 
of  my  life;  of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid?  When  the 
wicked,  even  my  enemies  and  my  foes  came  upon  me 
to  eat  up  my  flesh,  they  stumbled  and  fell.  Though 
a  host  should  encamp  against  me,  my  heart  shall  not 
fear:  though  war  should  rise  against  me,  in  this  will 
I  be  confident."  No  wonder  the  Psalmist  wrote  in 
this  connection,  "One  tiling  have  I  desired  of  the 
LORD,  that  will  I  seek  after;  that  I  may  dwell  in  the 
house  of  the  LORD  all  the  days  of  my  life,  to  behold  the 
beauty  of  the  LORD,  and  to  inquire  in  His  temple." 
The  conscious  companionship  of  God  is  the  great 
secret  of  abiding  peace. 

3.  The  third  result  of  walking  with  God  is  spiritual 
enlightenment.  Communion  with  God  rather  than 
scholarship  opens  to  us  the  mind  and  thought  of  God. 
There  is  no  hint  that  Enoch  was  a  man  of  science  or 
letters.  I  am  very  sure  he  was  not  a  higher  critic, 
and  yet  this  plain  man  by  walking  with  God  and 
talking  with  God  got  such  an  insight  into  the  pur 
poses  of  God  as  no  other  man  of  his  time  had.  In 
the  epistle  of  Jude,  the  14th  and  15th  verses,  we  learn 
that  even  in  that  far-away  day,  a  thousand  years  be 
fore  the  flood,  Enoch  got  hold  of  the  great  truth 
of  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  So  to-day  some  old 
washerwoman,  some  humble  cobbler,  who  walks  with 
God  may  know  more  of  the  mind  of  God  than  many 
an  eminent  college  professor,  or  even  professor  in  a 
theological  seminary.  The  important  question  con 
cerning  points  in  dispute  in  religion  and  spiritual 
life  is  not  what  do  the  scholars  say,  but  what  do  the 
men  and  women  who  walk  with  God  say.  If  one  is 


250  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

considering  going  to  some  one  for  spiritual  instruc 
tion,  the  first  question  is  not  how  much  of  a  scholar 
is  he,  not  how  much  does  he  know  of  Latin  and 
Hebrew  and  Greek  and  Syriac  and  philosophy  and 
psychology,  but  does  he  walk  with  God.  This  is  the 
great  condition  of  spiritual  insight,  wisdom  and  un 
derstanding. 

4.  The  fourth  result  of  walking  with  God  is  purity 
of  heart  and  life.  Nothing  else  is  so  cleansing  as  the 
consciousness  of  God's  presence.  Things  that  we 
have  long  tolerated  become  intolerable  when  we  bring 
them  into  the  white  light  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
One.  How  many  things  we  do  in  the  darkness  of  the 
night,  yea,  even  in  the  broad  light  of  day,  that  we 
could  not  for  a  moment  think  of  doing  if  we  realized 
God  was  right  there  by  our  side — looking.  Many 
deeds  we  now  do  would  be  left  undone  if  we  realized 
this.  Many  words  we  now  speak  would  be  left  un 
spoken,  many  thoughts  and  fancies  we  now  cherish 
would  be  speedily  banished.  There  are  certain  things 
that  we  do  in  the  absence  of  certain  holy  friends  that 
we  would  not  for  a  moment  do  in  their  presence,  but 
God  is  always  present  whether  we  know  it  or  not, 
and  if  we  walk  in  the  consciousness  of  His  presence, 
if  we  walk  with  God,  our  lives  and  hearts  will 
speedily  whiten.  I  have  a  friend  who  in  his  early  life, 
though  he  professed  to  be  a  Christian,  was  very  pro 
fane.  He  tried  hard  to  overcome  his  profanity,  but 
failed.  He  felt  he  must  give  up  his  attempt  to  be  a 
Christian,  but  one  day  a  wise  Christian  to  whom  he 
appealed  for  help,  said  to  him,  "Would  you  swear  if 
your  father  were  present?"  "No."  "Well,  when 
you  go  to  your  work  to-morrow  remember  that  God  is 


SECRET  OF  ABIDING  PEACE  251 

with  you  every  moment.  Keep  the  thought  of  God's 
presence  with  you."  At  the  end  of  the  day  to  his 
amazement  he  had  not  sworn  once.  He  had  had  the 
thought  of  God  with  him  through  the  day  and  he 
could  not  be  profane  in  that  presence.  The  conscious 
ness  of  the  presence  of  God  will  keep  us  from  doing 
all  the  things  that  we  would  not  dream  of  doing  in 
His  presence.  Herein  lies  the  secret  of  a  holy  life. 

5.  The  next  result  of  walking  with  God  is  closely 
akin  to  this,  beauty  of  character.  We  become  like 
those  with  whom  we  habitually  associate.  How  like 
their  parents  children  become.  How  many  mothers 
and  fathers  have  been  startled  by  seeing  their  own  im 
perfections  and  follies  mirrored  in  their  children. 
Husband  and  wife  grow  strangely  like  one  another, 
thus  also  the  one  who  associates  with  God  becomes  like 
God.  John  Welch,  a  spiritual  hero  of  the  16th  century 
(1590  A.D.),  son-in-law  of  John  Knox,  is  said  to  have 
"  reckoned  that  day  ill  spent  if  he  stayed  not  seven 
or  eight  hours  in  prayer. ' '  One  who  well  remembered 
his  ministry  said  of  him:  "He  was  a  type  of  Christ." 
Association  with  God  made  him  like  God.  If  we 
walk  with  God,  more  and  more  will  his  beauty  illu 
mine  and  reflect  itself  in  our  lives.  Moses'  very  face 
shone  as  he  came  down  from  the  forty  days  and  forty 
nights  of  converse  with  God.  So  will  our  whole  life 
soon  shine  with  a  heavenly  glow  and  glory  if  we 
habitually  walk  with  God.  "With  unveiled  faces 
reflecting  as  a  mirror  the  glory  of  God"  we  shall  be 
"transformed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  unto 
glory"  (2  Cor.  3:18). 

6.  The  next  result  of  walking  with  God  will  be 
eminent  usefulness.    Our  lives  may  be  quiet  and  even 


252  THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

obscure,  it  may  be  impossible  to  point  to  what  men 
call  great  achievement,  but  the  highest  usefulness 
lies  not  in.  such  things  but  in  the  silent,  almost  un 
noticed  but  potent  and  pervasive  influence  of  a  holy 
life,  whose  light  illumines,  whose  beauty  cheers,  and 
whose  nobility  elevates  all  who  come  in  contact  with 
it.  Enoch  has  wrought  out  immeasurably  more  good 
for  man  than  Nebuchadnezzer,  who  built  the  marvel 
lous  structures  of  Babylon,  than  Augustus  who  ''found 
Rome  brick  and  left  it  marble, "  than  the  Egyptian 
monarchs  who  built  the  pyramids  to  amaze  and  mys 
tify  the  world  for  thousands  of  years  to  come;  and 
to-day  the  man  or  woman,  no  matter  how  humble 
or  obscure,  who  walks  with  God  is  accomplishing  more 
for  God  and  man  than  Morse  with  his  telegraph,  Ful 
ton  with  his  steamboat,  Stevenson  with  his  locomotive, 
Cyrus  Field  with  his  Atlantic  cable,  Roebling  with 
his  marvellous  bridges,  Marconi  with  his  wireless  tele 
graphy  and  telephony,  Edison  and  Tesla  with  their 
electric  and  electrifying  discoveries,  or  any  of  the 
renowned  political  reformers  of  the  day,  with  all  their 
futile  schemes  for  turning  this  world  into  a  terrestrial 
paradise.  Friends,  if  you  wish  to  be  really,  per 
manently,  eternally  useful,  walk  with  God. 

7.  But  there  is  a  still  better  result  than  this  from 
walking  with  God,  we  please  God.  Before  his  transla 
tion  Enoch  had  this  testimony  borne  to  him  that  he 
"was  well  pleasing  to  God"  (Heb.  11:5,  R.V.), 
This  is  more  than  to  be  useful.  God  wants  our  com 
pany,  God  wants  us  to  walk  with  Him,  and  He  is  well 
pleased  when  we  do.  God  is  more  concerned  that  we 
walk  with  Him  than  that  we  work  for  Him.  Martha 
was  taken  up  with  her  service  for  her  Lord,  but  Mary 


SECRET  OF  ABIDING  PEACE  253 

was  taken  up  with  her  Lord  Himself  and  He  testified 
that  Mary  had  chosen  the  better  part.  It  is  quite 
possible  to-day  to  be  so  occupied  with  our  work  for 
God  that  we  forget  Him  for  whom  we  work.  If  we 
would  please  Him  we  should  first  see  to  it  that  we 
walk  with  him. 

8.  There  is  one  result  of  walking  with  God  still 
left  to  be  mentioned,  that  is,  God's  eternal  companion 
ship.  " Enoch  walked  with  God:  and  he  was  not; 
for  God  took  him."  The  man  who  walks  on  earth 
with  God,  God  will  sooner  or  later  take  to  be  with 
Himself  for  ever.  "If  any  man  serve  me,"  says 
Christ,  "let  him  follow  me;  and  where  I  am  there 
shall  also  my  servant  be."  If  we  do  not  walk  with 
God  on  earth  we  are  not  likely  to  live  with  God  in 
Heaven.  If  we  do  not  care  to  cultivate  His  society 
now,  we  may  be  sure  that  He  will  not  take  us  to  be 
in  His  society  for  ever. 

III.  How  TO  ENTER  INTO  A  WALK  WITH  GOD. 

These  eight  immeasurably  precious  results  come 
from  walking  with  God:  abounding  joy,  abiding 
peace,  spiritual  enlightenment,  purity  of  heart  and 
life,  beauty  of  character,  eminent  usefulness,  pleas 
ing  God,  God's  eternal  companionship.  Do  we  not 
all  then  long  to  walk  with  Him?  To  come  then  face 
to  face  with  the  great  practical  question,  what  must 
we  do  that  we  ourselves  may  enter  into  this  joyous, 
blessed  walk  with  Him.  The  question  can  be  plainly 
and  simply  answered. 

1.  First  of  all  we  must  trust  in  the  atoning  blood 
of  Christ.  "By  faith/*  the  record  reads,  "Enoch 
was  translated"  (Heb.  11:5;  cf.  v.  4).  Comparing 


254 


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 


this  with  what  is  said  immediately  before  about  Abel, 
we  see  that  the  faith  by  which  he  pleased  God  and 
was  translated  was  faith  in  what  God  said  about  the 
blood.  God  is  holy  and  we  are  sinners.  Sin  separates, 
as  a  deep  and  impassable  chasm  between  us  and  Him. 
There  can  be  no  walk  with  Him  until  sin  is  put  away 
and  the  chasm  thus  bridged,  and  it  is  the  blood,  and 
the  blood  alone,  that  puts  away  sin  (Heb.  9:22). 
It  is  vain  for  us  to  attempt  to  cultivate  the  presence 
of  God  until  we  have  accepted  the  provision  that 
God  Himself  has  made  for  putting  away  sin  from 
between  us  and  Himself.  Indeed,  if  we  have  any  real 
thought  of  God's  holiness  and  our  sinfulness  there 
could  be  no  joy,  but  only  agony,  in  fellowship  with 
Him,  unless  our  sin  was  covered  up,  washed  away, 
blotted  out  by  the  blood.  There  are  many  to-day  who 
are  spurning  the  blood  and  still  attempting  to  walk 
with  God.  Vain  attempt!  It  is  utterly  impossible. 

2.  If  we  would  walk  with  God  we  must  obey  God. 
Jesus  said,  ' '  If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  word : 
and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto 
him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him"   (John  14:23, 
R.V.).    Obedience  to  God,  absolute  surrender  to  His 
will,  is  necessary  if  we  are  to  walk  with  Him.    We 
cannot  walk  with  God  unless  we  go  His  way.     Two 
cannot  walk  together  unless  they  be  agreed   (Amos. 
3:3).     There  are  many  who  once  knew  the  presence 
of  God  every  day  and  every  hour.     They  know  it 
no  longer.    The  old  and  heavenly  joy  has  faded  from 
their  lives.    They  wonder  why  it  is.    Ah !  there  is  no 
mystery — disobedience.     Come  back,  get  right  with 
God,  surrender  anew  absolutely  to  His  will. 

3.  There  is  but  one  thing  more  to  say.    //  we  would 


SECRET  OF  ABIDING  PEACE  255 

walk  with  God  we  must  cultivate  the  thought  of  His 
presence.  As  Nicholas  Hermann,  or  Brother  Law 
rence,  put  it,  we  must  "practise  the  presence  of 
God"  constantly.  Call  to  mind  the  fact  that  God  is 
with  you  when  you  are  about  your  work.  Often  say 
to  yourself,  "God  is  with  me."  When  you  lie  down 
at  night  say,  "God  is  with  me."  If  you  wake  at 
night  remember  ' '  God  is  here  with  me. "  So  in  all  the 
relations  and  experiences  of  life.  There  are  four 
great  aids  to  this:  First,  the  study  of  God's  Word. 
When  we  open  this  book  we  realize,  or  ought  to  real 
ize,  that  God  Himself  is  speaking  to  us.  Second, 
prayer.  In  prayer  we  come  face  to  face  with  God. 
Third,  thanksgiving.  In  intelligent  and  specific 
thanksgiving  to  God  He  is  more  real  to  us  than  even 
in  petition.  Fourth,  worship.  In  worship  we  bow 
before  God  and  contemplate  Himself.  Oh,  how  near 
He  gets  at  such  a  time.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit  who 
will  make  our  walk  with  God  true  and  real.  It  is  in 
connection  with  the  coming  of  the  Spirit  that  Christ 
speaks  of  His  own  manifestation  of  Himself  to  us 
and  of  the  coming  of  the  Father  and  of  Himself  to 
be  with  us  (John  14: 16,  17,  18,  21,  23).  Look  then 
to  God  Himself  by  His  Spirit  to  make  His  presence 
known  and  felt. 

Brethren,  shall  we  walk  with  God?  God  is  saying 
to  each  of  us  to-day,  "Come,  take  a  walk  with  me." 
If  we  accept  the  wondrous  invitation  He  will  lead 
us  on  as  long  as  we  will  let  Him,  and  some  day  it  will 
be  true  of  us,  as  some  one  has  quaintly  said  of  Enoch, 
we  will  walk  so  far  with  God  we  will  not  come  back, 
and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord. 

Printed  in  the  "United  States  of  America 


